



-I 




'•'iu.. 






V-'i, 









;g?s 






• /'r 


- 


m 





I 




% 


m&m. 


-irr 


■ l. 




S£! 


.: 




:V ?: i 




i -» 


jr &4 





-V • 




m 


. 


M 




Sri- 



r- •:, 




■Mmm 




m 












Ift' 


: S' 


■ 



;x.v„--,_' £. vv. 


* 








^. .'Vrr' ■' •■ 










■ 


i 


■ ■ 

’iviaUi "■*• •'! 


s&ifcs 


SM 


g®i$lf|pl 


; ? >r 



■ 


'■'/Wf'S'ik * 

- 





' 


: 







i 




&&ks! 


tM 


' • • -<. ■ • ••• •; - • 

u " : r % r- ^-r ■ fp 

5“ i§ jHWM 4 K9K1V 9 9BMgfict V » * t §1 5 EZ ™j9f^ tm 

> .aj,-v . ' ksisfat tm ■ i m • \ m mom ■■«•*•■ mjas& 

■ . • 

i 3; iiii||p|i|i 
fit H ICHi HI'- ' M i 




iiiff »MU 






£1 C > 




- 

i : 


II ' 

3 .#-' -- . 





H 

& 1 

S' 

? >VK‘ 

?? 




■* •• 

f, / . 

0 
1 

%f ■ 

?#■ : 

IX (f 


* .- ..- ■ 

r .. 

t ■ - 
“* ■ 

s .. /• 

J ' .-■■ 

v "i-- 

■ v$r%- 

-3 

- 


sv ; ^i:srr v ^r ; f* r 

: : ■ ••• “C v /' >' " £4 ii#T'f - 

''•, V—' - ! - ’ •K. 4 » 



















Beginning with a kaleidoscopic picture of the 
general condition of North India, in the 6th century 
B.C., this second volume for the History and 
Culture of the Indian People depicts in full detail 
the growth of the Magadhan empire and the 
Persian and Macedonian invasions; and surveys 
the-sway of the various dynasties like the 
Mauryas, the S ungas,: the Yavanas, the Sakas; the ' 
Pahlavas, the Kushanas, the Saka Satraps, the 
Satavahahas, .the Chedis and the Vakatakas. New 
light is thrown on interesting old problems such 
as the Kanishka era, the Vikrama and Saka 
•Samvat. The history of South India and Ceylon 
during this period is treated at length. The special 
feature is the detailed treatment given to language 
and literature, political theory and administrative 
systems, law and legal institutions, social and 
economic conditions education and architecture, 
sculpture and fine arts. The rise of Buddhism, 
Jainism, Vaishnayism, Saivism and minor 
religious sects and the evolution of the different 
philosophical system are adequately described. 
The history of the period is rounded off with a 
chapter on India and the Western World, and 
Colonial and Cultural Expansion. 


Law; Dr. R. K. Mookerji; Dr. H. C. Raychaudhun; 
Dr D. C. Sircar; Dr. R. C. Majumdar; the late Df. 
S.* It, Aiyangar; Dr. M.A, Mehendale; Prof. H. D., 
VAlanfcfcn Dr. K. R. * T the* Dtp. Or Rem 


>. U. N. Ghoshai; Dr. N. Dutt; Dr. J. N. 

Dr. V. M. Apte; Dr. T. M. P. Mahadevan; Prof. H. 

p BhaUacharya; Prof. U. C. Bhattr 





















3TT ^ 


Let noble thoughts come to us from every side 

— Rigveda, I-89-i 


BHAVAN’S BOOK UNIVERSITY 

General Editor 

S. RAMAKRISHNAN 

THE HISTORY AND CULTURE OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE 

VOLUME II 


THE AGE OF 

IMPERIAL UNITY 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
Public.Resource.Org 





https://archive.org/details/ageofimperialuni07bhar 


BHAVAN’S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


The History and Culture of the Indian People 

Volume II 


THE AGE OF 

IMPERIA 

UNITY 



Foreword 

K. M. MUNSHI 

B.A. LL.B. D.L1TT 

Founder President, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 
General Editor 

R. C. MUJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D., F.R.A.S.B. 
Ex-Vice-Chancellor and Professor of History 
Dacca University 

Hon. Head of the Department of History 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

Assistant Editors 

A. D. PUSALKER 

M.A. LL.B., PH. D. 

Assistant Director and Head of the 
Department of Sanskrit 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

A. K. MAJUMDAR 

M.A. D.PHIL. 

Joint Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 



2001 

BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 

Kulapati K. M. Munshi Marg, 
Mumbai - 400 007. 




All Rights reserved by the Publishers 


© Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 
Kulapati Munshi Marg, Mumbai - 400 007 


1st Edition 

1951 

2nd Edition 

1953 

3rd Edition 

1960 

4th Edition 

1968 

5th Edition 

1980 

6th Edition 

1990 

7th Edition 

2001 


Price Rs. 500.00 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

By Atul Goradia at Siddhi Printers, 13/14, Bhabha Building, 
13th Khetwadi Lane, Mumbai - 400 004, and Published by 
S. Ramakrishnan, Executive Secretary, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 
Kulapati Munshi Marg, Mumbai - 400 007. 



CONTRIBUT ORS 


B. C. LAW 
M.A., B.L., PH.D., D.LITT. 

Editor, “ Indian Culture, ” Calcutta 

RADHAKUMUD MOOKERJI 
M.A., PH.D. 

Emeritus Professor, Lucknow University, Lucknow 

H. C. RAYCHAUDHURI 
M.A., PH.D. 

Carmichael Professor of Ancient Indian History and Culture, Calcutta University 

D. C. SIRCAR 
M.A., PH.D. 

Assistant Superintendent for Epigraphy, Government of India, Ootacamund 

R. C. MAJUMDAR 
M.A., PH.D., F.R.A.S.B. 

Principal, College of Indology, Banaras Hindu University, Banaras 
Ex-Vice-Chancellor, Dacca University 

S. KRISHNASWAMY AIYANGARy 

M.A., P.H.D. 

Retired University Professor, University of Madras, Madras 

M. A. MEHENDALE 
M.A., P.H.D. 

Reader in Sanskrit, Deccan College Post-graduate and Research Institute, Poona 

H. D. V E L A N K A R 
M.A. 

Professor of Sanskrit, Wilson College, Bombay 

K. R. SRINIVASA IYENGAR 
M.A., D.LITT. 

Professor and Head of the Department of English, Andhra University, Waltair 

BENI PRASADf 
M.A., PH.D., D.SC; 

Professor of Politics, Allahabad University, Allahabad 

U. N. GHOSHAL 
M.A., PH.D. 

Formerly Professor of History, Presidency College, Calcutta 


N. DUTT 

M.A., B.L., PH.D., D.LITT. 

Professor of Pali, Calcutta University, Calcutta 


CONTRIBUTORS 


J. N. BANERJEA 
M.A., PH.D. 

Head of the Department of Ancient Indian History and Culture, University of Calcutta, 

Calcutta 


A. D. PUSALKER 
M.A., LL.B., PH.D. 

Assistant Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay 


A. M. GHAT AGE 
M.A., PH.D. 

Professor of Ardhamagadhi, Rajaram College, Kolhapur 


V. M. A P T E 
M.A., PH.D.(Cantab.) 

Professor of Sanskrit, Ismail Yusuf College, Jogeshwari, Bombay 

T. M. P. MAHADEVAN 
M.A., PH.D. 

Professor of Philosophy, University of Madras, Madras 

H. D. BHATTACHARYYA 

M.A. 

Professor of Indian Religion and Philosophy, Banaras Hindu University, Banaras 


U. C. BHATTACHARJEE 

M.A. 

Formerly Professor of Philosophy, Presidency College, Calcutta 


S. K. SARASWATI 
M.A. 

Librarian, Asiatic Society, Calcutta 


NIHAR RANJAN RAY 
M.A., D.LITT. 

Bagishwari Professor of Fine Arts, University of Calcutta, Calcutta 


FOREWORD 


By the Hon’ble Dr. K. M. Munshi 

This second volume, unlike the first, has been printed in India 
and published by the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, as the President of 
which I have planned and organised the publication of this series 
of ‘History and Culture of the Indian People’ in eleven volumes. On 
account of printing difficulties in England, the arrangements with 
Messrs. George Allen and Unwin Ltd. were terminated by mutual 
agreement. Since the Bhavan as the sponsoring institution has 
undertaken the publication of the series, it has become unnecessary 
to interpose the Bharatiya Itihasa Samiti which, in fact, was a part 
of the Bhavan, between the sponsor and the publisher. It is hoped 
that under this arrangement further volumes will be published 
expeditiously. 

This volume deals with the history and culture of India from 
the beginning of what is termed ‘The Historic Period’. It furnishes 
us with the basis for the structure of early Indian chronology like 
the dates of the death of Buddha, the rise of Chandragupta and the 
reign of Asoka. Just as a dynastic treatment of history gives but 
an incorrect historical perspective, so, to some extent, does any 
treatment which arbitrarily cuts history into sections of time. The 
history of a people having a common culture, I believe, flows as a 
running stream through time, urged forward by the momentum of 
certain values and ideas and must be viewed as such. It is neces¬ 
sary, therefore, that I should give my reading of this section of the 
flowing stream. The attempt by its very nature would be open to 
the charge of over-simplification; but without such an attempt, the 
past would have no message and the future no direction. 

I 

Long before the dawn of the ‘Historic Period’, the land, as we 
know it now, had been formed. For millions of years, the Hima¬ 
layas and the Hindu Kush had risen; mighty rivers had brought 
down deposits to form the rich alluvial belt of the Sindhu and the 
Gahga; geographical determinants had been stabilized. Early man 
had wandered on the banks of some of the great rivers and 
disappeared. 


i 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Over five thousand years ago, aboriginal dwellers generally 
lived in forests; some of them, however, were slowly driven to 
the valleys before the pressure of more civilised migrants. Then a 
numerically vast people, with a culture of which the Mohenjo-daro 
ruins are the physical relics and the base of the Tamil language 
perhaps the intellectual trace, over-spread the country. 

In this land the Aryans, with their Nature Gods, their sacrifices, 
their cows and horses and their conquering zeal, came into conflict 
with the Dasas and Dasyus. They were invincible; for they had 
what their forerunners had not—cultural cohesiveness, powerful 
social institutions like the patriarchate, and a faith in their superio¬ 
rity. These bonds were further strengthened by a race of intellec¬ 
tuals who sang in sacred chants, worshipped their Gods through 
varied sacrifices and pursued the quest of higher things. The cohesive 
force in this community was furnished by the basic idea of an all- 
pervading law— Rita —which sustained the universe and regulated 
the conduct of men; and the law was presided over by mighty god 
Asura—‘the Great’—Varuna. 

Vast conflicts were waged by the Aryan tribes with the non- 
Aryans. During their victorious march through the country the 
races mingled^ customs and beliefs were adjusted, a new harmony 
was evolved. Despite the fusion, the collective consciousness that 
the Aryans—whether by descent or by adoption—were the elect and 
their ways God ordained, and hence unalterable, persisted. ‘The 
Aryanisation of the entire world’ remained the inspiring urge. 

An unshakable collective consciousness had already taken deep 
roots in the racial mind, when Vasishtha and Visvamitra—partici¬ 
pants in the Dasartijna, the Battle of Ten Kings, the echoes of which 
are found in the Rigveda ,—lived on the banks of the holy Sarasvatl; 
when Parasurama led the Aryans to the banks of the Narmada; when 
Agastya and Lopamudra crossed the Vindhyas and the seas; when 
Bharata, possibly the eponymous ancestor of the main tribes who 
fought in the Bharata War, held sway and gave his name to the land. 

The several centuries, from the Battle of Ten Kings to the 
Bharata War (c. 1500 B.C.), the central theme in the Mahdbhdrata, 
were filled with incessant Aryan activities. The Aryans spread 
far and wide in the country. They opened up jungles, established 
large-scale settlements, and founded cities. Before the Bharata War, 
the Aryan Tribes, ethnically mixed, had already established power¬ 
ful kingdoms. Their culture had become a conscious instrument 

viii 


FOREWORD 


of providing a social pattern based on a kind of traditional common 
law, elaborate rituals, a background of heroic tradition preserved in 
epic recitals, a powerful language and literature and a philosophy of 
thought and of life. The fundamental law Rita —now called Dharma 
—however, continued by the general acceptance of the people to 
be recognised as supreme; for Esha Dharmah Sandtanah in the 
Manu-smriti is an echo of an ancient, unalterable principle; this law 
was eternal. The race of rishis, Aryan intellectuals, multiplied. 
They founded their dsramas or hermitages all over North India; 
some pushed their way even to the trans-Vindhyan South. They 
settled in forests, preached Dharma; interpreted it afresh wherever 
necessary; laid down canons of conduct. They taught the funda¬ 
mental values of Aryan culture wherever they went, their character 
and moral influence being their only source of power. They enrich¬ 
ed literature, ethics and philosophy. The most aspiring of them 
continued in the quest of the ‘Absolute’, often in the wilderness or 
on mountain tops. With the growth of kingdoms, a section of these 
intellectuals, the Brahmanas, became priests, ritualists, men of learn¬ 
ing, ministers, even generals and social and political mentors. But 
at all times, the law prescribed that a true Brahmana should learn 
and teach, and not hanker after possessions; if he did, he fell from 
his high status. The kings were the protectors of the Dharma. 
They were invested with the right to conquer and destroy enemies, 
but there was no right to destroy what they willed. Their duty to 
protect the people was inalienable; if they failed to fulfil it, they 
forfeited the people’s allegiance. 

Of the peoples with whom the Aryans came in conflict, the most 
powerful were the Nagas in the West and Magadhas in the East. 
The Haihayas, perhaps of mixed descent, broke the Naga power in 
the West, and in their turn were broken by the Aryans under 
Parasurama. Later, when the Aryah tribe of Bharatas dominated 
the Madhyadesa, the Magadhas aspired to hegemony; the break-up 
of the Magadha Kingdom is possibly symbolised by the death of 
Jarasandha, its king, by Bhlma the Bharata, who was assisted by 
Sri Krishna. To the latter more than to anyone else, if the Mahdbhd- 
rata records facts, belongs the honour of being ‘the worshipful amqng 
men’, and the credit of achieving for his friends, the Pandavas, the 
overlordship over North India. Thus, a little before the Bharaxa 
War the way was cleared for the Aryanisation of the eastern 
provinces. 

Then came the Bharata War (c. 1500 B.C.). All the kings in 
North India with their armies congregated in the Punjab to partici- 


IX 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


pate in this fratricidal war between the members of the most in¬ 
fluential royal house in Madhyadesa. In a battle lasting for 
eighteen days, they mingled their blood and created for the first 
time an all-India consciousness. At the end, Yudhishthira was ac¬ 
claimed by the whole of North India as a Chakravartin. 

This struggle left a tremendous impression on the collective 
consciousness of the people. Racial memory, through text, sermon, 
story and epic recital, was focussed on two great personalities of the 
time who became shining lights illumining the Indian mind for 
all time; Vyasa, the learned and venerable Brahmana, the seer and 
ascetic, the saviour of the Vedas, and Sri Krishna, the warrior and 
statesman, the ever-triumphant Kshatriya, the Superman. One 
taught Dharma, the other upheld it. 

From these memories sprang the Mahdbhdrata, destined to be¬ 
come the expression and the instrument of India’s will to unity and 
collective strength. 

Between the Bharata War (c. 1500 B.C.) and the rise of Magadha 
(seventh century B.C.), when the dawn of recorded history begins, 
the social elements were fusing fast. Large kingdoms, like that of 
Janamejaya Parikshita, had been founded and dissolved. Elaborate 
rituals, observed for years, had strengthened the sacerdotal class. 
Sacred literature had been assiduously developed. The quest of the 
Absolute was continued by ardent rishis. 

From the Nature Gods of the Aryans, Indians had travelled 
very far. Their intellectual audacity had ranged over the meaning 
and purpose of life and expressed itself in the Upanishads. These 
aspirations moulded values, ideas and forms of discipline which per¬ 
colated through religious teachings, and epic recitals and a well- 
regulated system of education. They were taught and learnt in a 
hundred schools of learning, moulding life in all its aspects, for they 
were the urge behind Dharma, which upheld life. 

Long before the dawn of the ‘Historic Period’ a central idea was 
already becoming clear from a mass of incoherent urges which went 
under the generic name of Dharma. Man was not a struggling worm 
but a ‘self’, of an essence with a supraphysical destiny, which can 
only be attained by a mastery over the misery which was man’s lot 
on earth; this mastery, in its turn, can only be achieved by integrat¬ 
ing personality by self-discipline so as to raise the ‘self’ above the 
flux of passing sense-experience. The discipline implied a double 
process, the relinquishment of the greed for life and the broadening 


x 


FOREWORD 


of the personal self into a universal self. The end of this discipline 
was variously named,—self-realisation (Siddhi), emancipation (Mukti , 
Moksha) } freedom (Nirvana), enlightenment (Jnana), bliss (Ananda). 
In substance it was absolute integration of human personality 
(Kaivalya) freed from the limitations of attachment and fear. 

Before this Age began, the Vedic cults had begun fading away 
and giving rise in turn to new and powerful religious currents. The 
first current was dominated by the resuscitation of a pre-Vedic God, 
Pasupati, honoured even in the days of the Sindhu Valley Civiliza¬ 
tion and accepted by the Brdhmanas as the great god ‘Isana*. 
Invested with the majesty which later generations saw in a godhead, 
he retained his original unsophisticated and loving character, but 
without losing the awesomeness which evoked terror in unlettered 
hearts in bygone ages. 

The second was the emergence of a personal God, with many 
characteristics of the Vedic gods, individualised and yet universal, 
and surrounded by a halo of rich magnificence. 

The quest of the Absolute which was pursued before the dawn 
of the ‘Historic Period’ had led to a great idea, which was to become 
predominant in Indian culture. The Absolute descended on earth 
in human form; the aspirant, by absolute surrender, attained Him. 
Narayana, an ancient sage, who ‘became all beings’ had come to be 
worshipped as God Himself. Slowly as the Vedic God, Vishnu, 
attracted to Himself the characteristics of the other gods, the new 
conception of Avatar a identified Vishnu with the sage Narayana. 
Similarly, Vasudeva, who was till then just a hero, was accepted as 
God, descended on earth— Avatdra. Later, Narayana, Vasudeva and 
Vishnu, all three became Hari, the ‘Deity Eternal and Supreme 
Lord’, the Supreme Spirit; ‘Vasudeva comprehending all’. 

The apocalypse in Canto XI of the Bhagavadgitd which, follow¬ 
ing some scholars, I consider part of its original and pre-Buddhistic 
version, was of this ‘God of gods’, Sdsvata Dharmagoptd , the 
Protector of Eternal Dharma, born to' re-establish Dharma, who 
over-shadowing all older gods, except perhaps Siva, emerged as ‘God 
Himself’. Vasudeva Krishna, the hero of the Mahabharata and a deity 
of the Yadava cult, was identified with this earlier Vasudeva, pos¬ 
sibly by the end of this period. 

Social relations and the duties arising from them were integral 
parts of the Dharma. Nothing was a greater negation of Dharma 


xi 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


or a greater danger than social chaos and a sweeping denial of social 
duties. About the close of the Vedic period, as a result of racial and 
cultural adjustment, Varnasrama Dharma was conceived as the 
divinely ordained social framework. Chaturvarnya, the Four-fold 
Order of society, ensured to some extent the supremacy and purity 
of the Aryan way of life. In that age of tribal struggles and in later 
ages as well, it gave to society both solidarity and resilience. It envi¬ 
saged: first, the division of society into two classes—(i) the dvijas, the 
twice-borns, those who conformed to the Aryan way of life; and 
(ii) the Sudras, that is the Rest, the yet-to-be-reclaimed. The dvijas 
had three functional groups, the Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and the 
Vaisvas. Besides, a well-conducted individual life was divided 
into four states, viz., that of a student, a householder, a detached 
onlooker pursuing a high purpose, and lastly, an ascetic. Though 
often disregarded in practice, this aspect of Dharma shaped life, 
philosophy and institutions throughout the centuries that followed. 

For such a planned social life stability was essential. Stability 
implied protection but without slavery. Power also was therefore 
conceived as moving and having its being within the framework of 
Dharma. Kingship was to be a religious trust. Rajadharma, 
Smriti and tradition, interpreted from time to time, were to regulate 
life. The learned and the pure, vowed to poverty, were to be the 
indispensable guides. The ambition and rapacity of kings were, 
therefore, controlled by a fundamental law, the bases of which were: 
first, the Smriti or tradition codified; second, Parishad, the Assembly 
of the learned, the interpreter. And lastly, a military overlord was 
considered necessary as the country grew larger, a Rajadhiraja or 
Chakravartin—the protector of Dharma. The last in reality was tb 
come in the succeeding epoch. 


II 

During the dawn of the ‘Historic Period’, placed between the 
tenth and the seventh centuries before Christ, there was a mighty 
upheaval of the human spirit. Waves of intense activity passed over 
many lands where man had emerged from the Bronze Age. Zoro¬ 
aster gave a new creed to Iran; Confucius and Lao-tse taught in 
China; Jews in their Babylonian captivity developed their tena¬ 
cious faith-in Jehova; Greece emerged as the pioneer of European 
culture, and her philosophers began tackling the problems of life; 
Rome was founded. At this time, a highly complex civilization and 
a noble culture had already been flourishing in India for centuries. 



FOREWORD 


The Age of Imperial Unity from the seventh century before 
Christ to A.D. 320, covered by this volume, falls into two distinct 
period: (i) the period of organisation (seventh century before Christ 
to 150 B.C.) in which there was an aggressive upheaval of strength 
and spirit, an all-sided efflorescence, when the fabric of Indian cul¬ 
ture was well and truly woven; and (ii) the period of international 
contacts and cultural expansion (150 B.C. to A.D. 320), during 
which the culture first assimilated the foreign elements and then re¬ 
asserted its values with new vigour and intensity. 

The first period was the age of Magadhan Imperialism; it saw 
the realization of the dream of centuries, the political unification of 
India under a Chakravartin. When the process began, the sixteen 
mahajanapadas were organised either into monarchies like Magadha 
and Avanti or republics like the Liehchhavis and the Yaudheyas, 
all struggling for survival, fighting each other, absorbing weaker 
states. 

So far, there was India, the geographical unit, but as yet no 
India as a well-accepted unit of homogeneous life and culture. To 
Iran and the outside world, India represented an undefined terri¬ 
tory across the Sindhu. Aryavarta was a small part of Madhyadesa. 
A distinct sense of unity had already been born in the popular mind. 
In the later injunction ‘Declare Dharma wherever the black antelope 
flourishes,’ there is an echo of the much earlier recognition of the 
territory in which Dharma prevailed and life was one; and it 
stretched from the boundaries of Iran to the boundaries of Assam. 
It included parts of the Deccan too. Here, Dharma was taught in 
centres established in ever-widening frontiers by Brahmanas as 
priests, linguists and literary men, physicians, philosophers and 
ministers, and by large groups of wandering ascetics seeking and 
imparting the meaning of life. And inspired by the vast literature 
and tradition which had accreted to the story of the Bharat a War, 
men’s minds were slowly being impressed with the dictum that 
wherever Dharma prevailed, there was Bharatavarsha. 

Magadha, now Aryanised for well nigh eight hundred years, 
was virile with the energy of unsophisticated power. Through a 
succession of powerful monarchs from 544 B.C. to 150 B.C., it 
gave the land of Dharma a series of Chakravartins, who made of 
India a single unit, ‘alike the ideal and despair of later ages’ as 
Dr. Majumdar aptly puts it, and willed into being its collective 
consciousness. 


Xlll 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Bimbisara (c.544-493 B.C.) the first of these Chakravartins, by 
conquest and matrimonial alliances, enlarged his influence and 
power. Ajatasatru (c.493-462 B.C.) the strong and implacable, crush¬ 
ed the great republic of Lichchhavi after sixteen years of struggle, 
vanquished Kosala and annexed Kasi. 

This period is lit up by the personality of two great reformers, 
Buddha and Mahavira. Both were Kshatriyas; both organised 
wandering ascetics; both ignored God and denied the Vedas; and 
while admitting the fourfold order of society, both led a revolt 
against the superiority of Brahmanas over the Kshatriyas and 
derided the four stages of life, stressing only the life of an ascetic. 

Buddha’s was a flaming personality; and a vast canonical litera¬ 
ture has presented to posterity its faithful portraiture. But he was 
not a solitary peak of greatness and grandeur in an arid desert. 
Sankhya and Yoga, the Upanishads, were the sources of his inspira¬ 
tion; the goal of integrated personality by the conquest of human 
weaknesses, the gospel of freedom from misery and even the theory 
of Karma were borrowed by him from contemporary religious 
thought and merely systematised. He was undoubtedly the product 
of Aryan culture and represented the ascetic orders against the social 
ideals of those who took life as a whole. The lure of renunciation 
or other-worldliness was very much in the air at the time. 

He proclaimed the supremacy of Dharma; but stressed only the 
pre-eminence of the positive, heart-moving message of universal com¬ 
passion, which was already an integral part of it. He assumed the 
role of wielding the Dharma-chakra as a Chakravartin of the world. 
Buddhism was not a church standing apart as in later times; it was 
a protestant movement within the fold of Dharma; its ready sym¬ 
pathy for suffering was its refreshing attraction. The large majority 
of the people followed their ancestral creed and culture, only their 
interpreters being influenced by the leaders of the new revolt. 
Asoka alone appears to have been deeply influenced by Buddha’s 
teachings; but the attempt of Buddhists to make of him a bhikkhu 
is a patent exaggeration. Within a few years of Asoka’s death, 
under Pushyamitra, the old cultural forces are found in full vigour 
all over the country. 

Buddha, in spite of his heterodoxy, however, left a lasting in¬ 
fluence on Dharma. First he was revered as an ascetic reformer; in 
the process of general acceptance by the masses, he became a divi¬ 
nity. Vasudeva Krishna was ‘Sdsvata Dharmagoptd ’, the Protec¬ 
tor of Eternal Dharma; Buddha also proclaimed the Dharma and 


XIV 


FOREWORD 


asked people to surrender themselves to it. Sri Krishna of the 
Mahabharata wielded no sceptre and yet was worshipped by the 
rulers of the day as the ‘worshipful among men’. Buddha assumed 
without royalty the role of a Chakravartin ruling by Dharma. 

Buddha made no break in cultural continuity. By his influence 
the older creeds were revitalised and purified; at the same time 
Buddhism had to develop its Mahayana .aspect to win the people’s 
hearts. Later still, the process of absorption was completed when 
Buddha became an avatar a of Vishnu, and Mahayana Buddhism was 
absorbed in Vaishnavism and Saivism. 

Buddha made little impression on the power and strength of 
contemporary Magadha. Its rulers upheld the Dharma as prevalent 
and went on enlarging their empire. 

&isunaga (c.430 B.C) and his successors followed Bimbisara and 
Ajatasatru, and annexed Kosala, Avanti and other important states 
in North India to Magadha. 

Mahapadma Nanda (c.364 B.C.) inherited the power of Magadha, 
but disowned the supremacy of Dharma. By destroying Aryan 
kings he earned the appellation of a ‘Second Parasurama’. Ruth¬ 
less, miserly, regardless of the sacred tradition or Dharma though 
he was, he was the first great historical emperor of North India. 
But hated or despised by his people, he sat on a volcano. Old 
values were breaking up completely. Kshatriyas of high birth re¬ 
pudiated the Brahmanas and founded sects, Sudras established an 
empire on the ruins of Kshatriya kingdoms, while the ancient cul¬ 
ture and its protagonists, reintegrated and possessed of fresh vigour, 
were waiting round the corner. 


Ill 

Since the days of Cyrus (558-530 B.C.) parts of India to the 
west of the Sindhu and some parts of the Punjab off and on formed 
part of the Achaemenian empire. During Mahapadma’s time in 
326 B.C. Alexander, the Macedonian, with his thundering legions, 
entered North-West India, the erstwhile satrapy of the Iranian 
empire. In a few months, however, he retreated from India. He 
could neither face the Nanda empire nor leave any impression on 
the people. The Indians fought him heroically; yielded for the time 
being only to the superior military organisation of the Macedonians; 
and soon after under Chandragupta drove out the Greeks from the 
Punjab in a brilliant war of liberation. The successful war against 


xv 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the Greeks awoke Chandragupta (c.324-300 B.C.) to a consciousness 
of his strength. To Chandragupta and to his master, the Brahmana 
Chanakya, we owe a gorgeous phenomenon—a swift war of libera¬ 
tion; a vast empire; India politically and administratively unified; 
the re-establishment of Dharma as the supreme law; and the orga¬ 
nisation of life on which was founded the invulnerable culture-con¬ 
sciousness of Indians in succeeding ages. Consolidating his position 
in the Punjab, and inspired by his teacher Chanakya, Chandragupta 
marched on Pataliputra; killed Dhana Nanda, assumed the sove¬ 
reignty of Magadha; vanquished Seleucus, the Greek, who was 
moving towards India to recapture Alexander’s lost possessions; and 
started on a career of becoming the architect of an all-India empire. 
For the first time the writ of one emperor ran in the country through 
a hierarchy of centrally appointed officers. 

Asoka (c. 273-236 B.C.), the grandson of Chandragupta, styled 
‘the beloved of the gods’ and ‘of lovable appearance,’ succeeded to 
the throne of Pataliputra by winning a fratricidal war. Nine years 
after his accession he rounded off the empire which he inherited 
from his grandfather by annexing Kalinga. 

The Kalinga war brought to the emperor a violent reaction, no 
doubt under the influence of Buddha’s teachings. He regretted the 
vast numbers of men killed^ or taken prisoner; he bemoaned the 
lot of pious men and women to whom befell ‘personal violence, 
death or banishment from loved ones’; and he eschewed for ever 
war as an instrument of governance. ‘If any one does him wrong, 
the “beloved of the god” must bear all that can be borne.’ He 
embarked on a career of Dharma Vijaya, conquest through Dharma. 
He set up a network of missions to preach Dharma; declared that 
all men were his children; ‘and what little effort I make,—what is 
it for?—(in order) that I may be free from debt to the creatures, 
that I may render some happy here and that they may gain heaven 
in the next world’, said he. The Emperor constituted himself as the 
guardian of the moral and material welfare of the world. From 
Afghanistan to Mysore and Kurnool District, and from Saurashtra 
to the boundaries of Assam, the Dharma-Chakra was proclaimed. 
Dharma-Mahamatras were in charge of Dharma; a Stri-Adhyaksha- 
Mahamatra looked after women; other officers were in charge of 
cattle and birds. Ordinances proclaiming the importance of family 
as the basis of morality, liberality and charity towards all, the tole¬ 
ration of all religious sects, the sanctity of all life and the organisation 
of international relation for enduring peace, were promulgated. 


FOREWORD 


Asoka was the first founder of a welfare state, not a godless 
state, but a state permeated by a broad-minded approach to all 
religions. He insisted, as his inscriptions show, that all religions 
were to be respected; that criticism of religion was to be for¬ 
borne; that the divinity of all religious truths was to be recognised; 

> 

that religions of all sects were to be studied. No higher gospel of 
tolerance has been propounded since the dawn of the world and no 
greater harm has been produced than by its neglect. And in pur¬ 
suance of his tolerant policy he did not try to subvert social order 
or the religious belief in the interest of the teachings of Buddha 
which had so impressed him. 

The material achievements of the Mauryan era and particularly 
of the reign of Asoka were in no way less important. Stone was 
substituted for wood in important structures. Art assumed a form 
and grandeur not known before; engineering reached a high level 
of perfection. The royal palace of Pataliputra was recognised by 
posterity as ‘the work of superhuman hands.’ Great cities grew up; 
gigantic stupas and cave chaityas were carved out of massive stone, 
expressing power and majesty. The Mauryan column is a piece of 
precision, accuracy and power unsurpassed even in ancient Athens; 
one of them, later, required 8,400 men pulling a 42-wheeled cart 
for transport. The sculptures like the Sarnath lion or the Dhauli 
elephant or the Rampurwa bull exhibited living naturalism. Irriga¬ 
tion projects like the well-known Sudarsana lake were carried out 
with enduring thoroughness. 

But welfare states, which eschew armed coercion of recalcitrant 
elements, are not known to survive. As soon as Asoka, ‘the greatest 
of kings’, as H. G. Wells called him, died, his Buddhistic leanings and 
pacific policy evoked open resistance. Due to lack of a vigorous 
military policy, the outlying provinces rose in revolt. The Greeks 
invaded India and advanced into the country up to Ayodhya and 
Chitor. Further disintegration was halted only when Pushyamitra 
(187-151 B.C.), the Brahmana minister of Sunga dynasty, took over 
what was left of the empire. 

Pushyamitra and his successor carried forward the pre-Asokan 
tradition of Magadha. Dharma Vi jay a was no longer to be achieved 
by abjuring war but by building up military strength; politics be¬ 
came real. The Sungas maintained their hold over a vast part of 
North India, vanquished Greek invaders and were respected by 
foreign kings. They fostered a revival of art, literature and archi¬ 
tecture. In Madhyadesa and among the wise and the intellectual, 

xvii 

A.I.U.—B 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the ascetic outlook lost its attraction; Dharma was strengthened; the 
authority of the Smriti law was completely restored. The new wave 
of collective enthusiasm found its expression in a combative atti¬ 
tude against Buddhism in a search for a fuller and richer life; in 
the cult of Karttikeya, the god of war;'in the resurgence of Bhaga- 
vata cult; and in the unchallenged supremacy of Vasudeva Krishna 
in the Hindu Pantheon. 

IV 

The second period from 150 B.C. to A.D. 320 divides itself into 
two epochs. The first era saw the rise of the North-West and Wes¬ 
tern India and the adjoining regions of Madhyadesa as an empire 
under foreign conquerors. The foreign Kushana power, which held 
sway over nearly the whole of North India as also considerable terri¬ 
tories beyond as far as Central Asia, shifted the centre of political 
gravity from Pataliputra to Peshawar. In the second period, Indian 
powers inspired by a giant wave of resistance, overthrew foreign 
rule and influenced and re-established the Dharma; though called 
Sanatana it was in fact a renaissant Order, which, while it retained 
the fundamental values of Aryan culture including the social pattern, 
had a new meaning, content and modes of expression. 

During this period, Buddhism was evidently influential in the 
North-West. Its freedom from the rigid rules of social conduct had 
an appeal for the foreigners, who soon came under its heterodox but 
humanistic influence. But, once the resistant mind was softened, 
the varied richness of Sanatana Dharma and its social inhibitions 
which provided every fresh group with qualified autonomy, a secure 
place in the social framework, were found irresistible. 

While the Bactrian Greeks and Parthian rulers quarrelled among 
themselves, the people led their own lives; the social pattern accept¬ 
ed as of divine origin, persistently reorganised social groups; the 
orthodox cults, revivified by a resistance to heterodoxy, were active. 
In the end, social and religious tenacity developed a mighty absorp¬ 
tive power. 

The power and influence of these cults can easily be traced in 
Kadphises I, the first Kushana king, who was a Buddhist; in his son 
Kadphises II, who was a Saivite; in Kanishka, the founder of the 
Kushana Empire (A.D. 78-101), who was a devout Buddhist; and 
his son or successor who was a Bhagavata. 

By the middle of the second century of the Christian era, the 
Kushana imperial power disintegrated. Western and Central India 


xvm 


FOREWORD 


threw off its yoke. Many Governors of Provinces declared inde¬ 
pendence. The tribes which in Alexander’s time lived in the Punjab 
had slowly moved southwards, possibly under pressure of fresh 
arrivals. They had retained their autonomy and independence, yet 
submitted occasionally to the might of some powerful conqueror. 
When the empire of the Kushanas grew weak, the tribal states like 
those of Arjunayanas, Uddehikas, Malavas, Sibis, Rajanyas and 
Yaudheyas became independent. The Saka Satraps ruled consider¬ 
able parts of Western India as independent rulers and so did the 
Abhlras. 

In North-West India where the ‘contemptible and fierce’ 
foreigners held sway, cultural purity was more than diluted and in 
consequence, there was absence of a collective consciousness domi¬ 
nated by Aryan values. The focus of Aryan culture had shifted 
southwards. The royal Naga houses, descended from serpent¬ 
worshipping, pre-historic non-Aryan tribes which had bowed before 
conquerors but never submitted, rose to power as the protagonists 
of resurgent Dharma. The confederacy including the Bharasivas 
ruled over considerable parts of North India. Their guardian god, 
Siva, became the great national deity, and they revived epic glory 
by performing Asvamedha sacrifices to celebrate their suzerainty. 

The Andhras were an equally ancient tribe who once lived on 
the southern fringes of North India. The last king of the Kanva- 
yana dynasty of Magadha was, by about 30 B.C., overthrown by the 
Andhra king Sirnuka of the Satavahana dynasty, which claimed 
Brahmanical descent. Their strength grew in a hundred years. 
Gautamiputra (A.D. 106-130) extended his sway from Ujjain to the 
Krishna and from sea to sea, claiming suzerainty over the whole 
trans-Vindhyan India. He vanquished the Scythians, the Indo- 
Greeks and the Parthians; and his descendant, YajnasrI, eliminated 
the Sakas from Western India and Saurashtra completely. Dharma 
was vindicated and re-established wherever the Andhras held sway. 

About the same time, Kalinga (Orissa), under the great con¬ 
queror Khar a vela, developed a crusading spirit and played a great 
part in diffusing Indian culture in the lands beyond the seas. 

In the Vindhya region arose Vindhyasakti, a name mentioned 
with great respect in the Puranas. His son Pravlra allied himself 
with the Bharasiva Nagas, who had founded an imperial power on 
the ruins of the Satavahana Empire. Riding on the wave of a re¬ 
surgent neo-Hinduism, he extended his sway from Bundelkhand to 
the Krishna in the South. 


XlX 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


In the south of the Krishna, the three kingdoms—Chola, Pan^ya 
and Chera, had accepted the culture of the North. Ceylon, which 
had generally friendly relations with India, was already colonised 
about the time Buddha attained Nirvana (483 B.C.). At one time, 
the Chola conqueror Karikala had invaded the island. But at the 
close of the epoch, India and Ceylon had been united by intimate 
bonds. 

With the foreign rulers vanquished and foreigners absorbed, the 
country was ripe for a mighty national revival—military, political 
and religious. 


V 

During the whole period, there were several outstanding 
achievements in the different spheres of life—political, religious, 
philosophical, literary and artistic. The political unity under 
Magadha produced a consciousness of solidarity which laid the 
foundation of the fundamental unity of India. The Maury an ad¬ 
ministrative system, the political theories of Kautilya, the social 
system of Manu, in one form or the other, endured in some or the 
other part of India till the advent of the British. The Aryan, Dravi¬ 
dian and the aboriginals intermarried at all levels. Collective con¬ 
sciousness was created by common tradition, the growing supremacy 
of Sanskrit, the social pattern of Chaturvarnya and the epic great¬ 
ness which flowed from the memory of the Mahabharata War. 

This period produced celebrated poets and scholars like 
Asvaghosha, the famous Buddhist poet and author of Sariputra- 
prakarana ; Panini, the renowned grammarian, who stabilised Sans¬ 
krit and indirectly influenced the growth of the languages of India; 
Katyayana; Patanjali, the grammarian who stylised Sanskrit; Bhasa, 
the dramatist; Bharata, the dramaturgist; and Manu, Yajnavalkya, 
Narada and Brihaspati, the authors of Smritis, the sacred texts. 
Above all, it was the age of the Mahabharata , which has ever re¬ 
mained for India the ‘Book of Life’, and Ramayana , the noblest epic 
in the world’s literature. 

The Mahabharata was never a single book. It had been growing 
into a wide literature of epic heroism; of legends of kings and rishis, 
sacred rivers and holy places; of wise lessons in practical wisdom 
and philosophic thought; of theories of society and politics; of man’s 
efforts to attain the divine. The war it described was a mighty oc¬ 
casion; every royal house found in it heroes whom they claimed as 
ancestors, whether real or adopted. As the Mahabharata grew into 


xx 


FOREWORD 


a ‘scripture of a lakh of verses’ the Gita became the greatest of 
scriptures. 

The Bharata War had been fought about 1500 B.C. Since then, 
the work growing with every generation had permeated the collec¬ 
tive consciousness of the race and has ever remained its principal 
formative influence. 

In the thousand years under review, the social code, prescribed 
by the Dharma Sutras, came to be harmonised and elaborated into 
the Smritis. While they gave continuity to social order, they ab¬ 
sorbed or altered usages to make them suitable to changing condi¬ 
tions. The Manu-smriti, the oldest work of this class and the most 
well-known, is respected even today all over India. Reputed to be of 
divine origin and considered to be the source of law from time 
immemorial, it proclaimed: ‘Esha Dharmah Sandtanah the Law 
Eternal, the fundamental law of social relations. Yajhavalkya 
systematised it, and his work continues to be the authoritative text 
even today. This basic conception of eternal law which prescribed 
social institutions, laid down a code of social conduct; while it made 
society slow-moving, it prevented chaos; while foreigners were after 
some time absorbed and their ways adopted, it provided a firm 
foundation to social institutions and ensured the continuity of cul¬ 
tural values. 

But the castes were by no means static. New sub-castes were 
brought into the framework by absorption, fusion or sub-division: 
many of them rose or fell in status. 

The Brahmana was the head of the hierarchy, but a Sudra 
could become a Brahmana and a Brahmana devoid of his culture could 
sink into a &udra. In those as in later days, neither Brahmanas nor 
Kshatriyas stuck, one and all, to their prescribed functions. A 
BrJahmana sometimes did the job of a soil-digger, a hunter or a 
menial, a wagon-driver and also a snake-charmer; a Kshatriya was 
a potter; a Vaisya a tailor. Yet Chaturvarnya retained the charac¬ 
ter of a divine pattern of life and influenced organisation and law, 
custom and social philosophy. Under the Sihritis, caste was not 
merely an inter-connubium group; its function had a purpose, an 
ethical and religious motive of uplifting the individual and making 
him fit for his ultimate destiny. Individuality drew its significance 
from the service it rendered to the group as a whole, and, therefore, 
group duties were emphasized. 

Because of Chaturvarnya, social control was not concentrated 
in one body, nor subordinated to the State. Control was distributed 


xxi 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


among a variety of autonomous groups or associations within a 
great cohesive framework. Arjuna expressed the dominant mood 
when he expressed his dread of chaos, the destruction of Varnlasrama. 
The Arthasastra set its face against renunciation of the world by 
making it dependent on State permission. This sweeping movement 
against other-worldliness and social instability found expression in 
the religious movements of which Vishnu with his spouse Lakshml, 
Vasudeva Krishna with his brother Baladeva, and Siva and the 
members of his family, were the central deities. 

At the mass level, minor divinities continued to be worshipped 
as ever. Sri or Lakshml, an ancient Goddess, was, after many trans¬ 
formations, worshipped as the Goddess of fortune, just as Sarasvatl, 
the sacred Vedic river, came to be worshipped ultimately as the 
national Goddess of learning. The Vedic tire worship in a simpli¬ 
fied form was part of every ritual. The pre-historic worship of the 
snakes, popular in the Sindhu Valley and the days of Yajurveda and 
Atharvaveda, was another national cult which found an honoured 
place in every new religious movement. Perhaps the rise of the 
Naga power gave this cult a fresh stimulus. Trees were again 
divinities and living shrines universally worshipped from the Sin¬ 
dhu Valley civilization onwards. Later, they were semi-divine sym¬ 
bols associated with great religious figures, as in the case of the Bodhi 
Tree and the Tulsi plant. The Vedic belief that Gandharvas and 
Apsarases lived in trees was replaced by the universal belief that 
they were divinities themselves. 

Intellectual audacity continued to search for higher truths but 
the problems of knowledge and reality were unchanged. The 
central idea of human destiny before all the aspiring speculative 
minds remained the same. Life was full of ills; escape from it was 
the highest good; this escape could only be secured by meditation 
on the highest truth; and the highest truth was reached by bhakti 
or yoga and the conquest of human limitations like attachment, 
wrath and fear. 

The old menace of renunciation and other-worldliness was met 
by a new powerful gospel of living in the present; it proclaimed that 
man can attain his destiny—self-realization, integration or freedom 
—not in a forest or a cave but in the battle-field of life. In this way, 
the Bhagavadgitd, finally put into its present shape a century or two 
before the commencement of this period, was accepted not merely as 
a gospel of life but as a triumphant message that the highest destiny 
of man can be fulfilled only in the performance of the duties of 
life. 


XXII 


FOREWORD 


Literary tradition continuously accepted by the elite and pro¬ 
viding continuity of aesthetic outlook provides one of the greatest 
forces of creating and maintaining collective consciousness in a 
people. The Drama and the Kavya in Sanskrit literature, traceable 
to the Rigveda and the Mahdbhdrata, provided this cohesive force. 
Ramdyana was accepted as the formal epic, par excellence. Reli¬ 
gious and philosophic literature grew in depth and richness. The 
vast mass of the canonical texts of the Buddhists was again a litera¬ 
ture in itself. Folk stories were collected and composed and pro¬ 
vided entertainment to people of all grades throughout the country. 

The major distinction between those who accepted the Vedas 
and those who rejected them tended to be narrowed down during 
this period. At the end of this period, the Vedas, as the ultimate 
source of all knowledge and truth, won. 

VI 

The post-Mauryan art gave up the motive of impressing people 
with power and grandeur; it became natural. The Kushana art of 
ihe North-West, exemplified in the art of Gandhara particularly, 
was however, a colourless imitation of Greek art. Elsewhere, art 
was the expression of the popular impulse towards beauty. Isolated 
objects were bound in one harmonious stream of life and scrupulous 
exhaustiveness became the main characteristic of the technique. 
Elephants, deers, antelopes, lotus-creepers, trees and plants added to 
the beauty and by displaying naturalness, provided the background. 
The human figure, in every conceivable position and attitude, was 
the principal object. The body was no longer an integration of 
limbs; it was portrayed as a living entity; in the hands of the Sanchi 
artists, it expressed both freedom and joy. The human figure of 
Yaksha at Sanchi expresses a free, proud, stately and heroic man. 
Later, this figure was perhaps transformed by the devout artist into 
the Bodhisattva of Mathura; the figure and expression were im¬ 
pressed with not only beauty but a spirit of calm transcending 
physical attractiveness. But art which painted the legendary cycle 
of Buddha’s life aimed at no sublimation or ethical perfection. The 
Yakshinls as Vrikshakas and dancing girls with well-developed 
breasts and hips were carved with infinite love and grace, exhibiting 
a pagan love of life; their almost living flesh glows with sheer sen¬ 
suousness; their lineaments express the delicate shades of violent 
passion or thrilling emotion. 

Painting, long in vogue, reached a very high level, as in the 
Ajanta frescoes. Terracotta and pottery were also a medium of high 

xxiii 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


art. India had from the earliest times given rise to guilds of master 
craftsmen in gold and jewellery, in carpentry and ivory carving. 

The family, as a fundamental unit, continued to be accepted as 
the foundation of social structure. The ideal of a devoted wife was 
held up as the highest value and in spite of widespread lapses, it was 
indissolubly connected with the sanctity of the family. Women 
enjoyed a high status in life, though not the same as in the Vedic or 
epic days; perhaps the narrow outlook of the less advanced com¬ 
munities was corrupting the circles of the cultured. Some women 
were students of sacred texts and philosophies; some were teachers; 
others studied till they married; and yet others were trained in fine 
arts. The lure of renunciation also attracted women and many high 
born ladies renounced the world in search of salvation. Women 
rode horses, drove chariots, wielded weapons and some queens acted 
as regents. About the beginning of the Christian era, however,— 
perhaps it was under the influence of the foreigners—the spiritual 
disenfranchisement of women began. Rituals came to be performed 
for them without the Vedic mantras; Vedic sacrifices were tabooed 
to the wife. Widow-remarriage and divorce were discouraged. On 
the other hand, Kautilya, in matters of divorce, places man and 
woman on equal footing. Narada prescribes punishment for the 
husband who leaves his wife. Manu in his original version even 
favours the levirate. But as people with lax morals came into the 
social framework on account of the expanding frontiers of Dharma, 
the marital tie assumed great sanctity, and in later verses Manu 
condemns levirate. Heterae were a highly, respected class. Amra- 
pali, the mistress of Bimbisara and later a disciple of Buddha, had 
a high status in society resembling that of Aspasia in ancient 
Athens. 

The foreigners introduced a sort of trousers, over-coats and 
blouses. Stitched cloth came into fashion. Even shoes of white 
leather were in demand; the soles were made extra thick to make 
the wearer look taller! The people adorned themselves with orna¬ 
ments and elaborate dresses; with garlands, scents, perfumes and 
unguents. The body was painted too. Vermilion was placed in 
the middle of the hair by ladies as they do now in Bengal. Beards 
and heads were shaved. Houses were furnished with screens, cur¬ 
tains, cup-boards, chairs and sofas with or without arms. Mats, of 
course, were there and so were bedsteads. Couches were covered 
with canopies; divans were in fashion too and so were sun-shades, 
mosquito-curtains, filters, mosquito-fans, flower-stands, and fly- 
whisks. In spite of Jainism and Buddhism, fish and meat, not 


XXIV 


FOREWORD 


excluding beef, were consumed extensively by the people. Fruit 
juice and juice of herbs and of course various kinds of liquor were 
freely taken. Singing, dancing and dramatic performances, entertain¬ 
ment by buffoons, mimics, rope-dancers, jugglers and wandering 
bards entertained the people. Gardening was a favourite pastime. 
Hunting, chariot-races, archery contests, wrestling, boxing, shooting 
marbles with fingers and ploughing with mimic ploughs were the 
common enjoyments of life. 

Though India’s contact with the outside world was established 
since prehistoric and proto-historic times, it was during this age that 
we find definite expansion of Indian culture and influence in Central 
and South-East Asia and the Pacific Islands. After Asoka’s mis¬ 
sionary activity, it was through the Kushanas that Indian culture 
and religion penetrated Central Asia. Colonization became popular. 
From the southern and eastern ports, however, emanated wave after 
wave of enterprising colonisers whose efforts resulted not only in 
influencing cultural and religious fields but also in establishing 
Hindu kingdoms in Annam, Fu-nan and other places. 

With the rise of Vindhyasakti of Puranic fame, this Age ends, 
and a new age begins—the Classical Age of the Guptas—taking India 
a stage higher in many respects. 

VII 

My thanks are due to Dr. R. C. Majumdar, the General Editor, 
and Dr. A.D. Pusalkar, the Asst. Editor, for their indefatigable and 
conscientious labours; to the scholars who have supplied their learned 
contributions for this volume and to Dr. Rawlinson, who revised the 
MS. of the volume. My thanks are also due to Prof. S. K. Saraswati 
of the Calcutta University who has taken immense pains in prepar¬ 
ing photographs and properly arranging them for publication, as also 
to the Director-General of Archaeology, New Delhi; the Director of 
Archaeology, Hyderabad; the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey 
of India, Western Circle, Poona; the authorities of the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta; the Government Museum, Madras; Sarnath 
Museum; Mathura Museum; Patna Museum; Gwalior Museum; 
Provincial Museum, Lucknow; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; 
British Museum, London; Musee Guimet, Paris; Municipal Museum, 
Allahabad; Asutosh Museum of Indian Art, Calcutta University; 
Indian Institute, Oxford; National Museum of Pompei and Ercolano; 
the G.I.P. Railway; the Delegation Archeologique Frangaise en 
Afghanistan; Prof. S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta; Dr. R.C. Majumdar, 
Banaras; and Dr. Radha Kumud Mookerji, Calcutta; who have 


xxv 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


supplied blocks and photographs for the different illustrations in this 
Volume. Details of the materials lent by them are given in the 
separate ‘Acknowledgment’ page. I am specially indebted to the 
Associated Advertisers & Printers who have, in such a short time, 
seen the volume through the press, and to the staff of the Bhavan 
and the Press who looked after the preparation and printing of this 
volume with care and zeal. It is difficult to express adequately the 
deep debt of gratitude to the Trustees of the Krishnarpan Trust 
who have so liberally financed the preparation of these volumes. 


XXVI 


CONTENTS 


Page 

Foreword by the Hon’ble Dr. K. M. Munshi . . . . vii 

Acknowledgments . . . . .. . . xli 

Preface by Dr. R . C. Majumdar . . . . xliii 

List of Maps lv 

List of Plates .. . . . . . lvii 

Abbreviations .. .. . . lix 

CHAPTER I 

NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 

By B. C. Law, m.a., b.l., ph.d., d.ihtt. 

I. Sixteen Great States . . . . . . . . 1 

Anga .. . . . . 3 

Magadha . . . . . . . . 3 

Kasi .. . . . . 4 

Kosala . . . . . . . . 4 

Vriji . 6 

Malta .. . . . . . . 7 

Chedi . . . . . . 9 

Vatsa .. .. .. .. 9 

Kuru . . . . 10 

Panchala . . . . 11 

Matsya . . .. . . . . 11 

6urasena . . . . . . 12 

Asvaka . . . . *. 12 

Avanti . . 13 

Gandhara . . . . 14 

Kamboja . . . . . . . . 15 

II. The Autonomous Clans . . . . . . 16 

Sakyas . . .. . . . . 16 

Koliyas . . 16 

Bhaggas . . . . 17 

Moriyas 17 

CHAPTER II 

RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

By Radha Kumud Mookerji, m.a., ph.d. 

Emeritus Professor in the University of Lucknow 

1. Puranic and Buddhist Texts . . . . . . 18 

2. Bimbisara .. .. .. 19 

3. Ajatasatru . . . . . . 22 

4. Successors of Ajatasatru . . . . . . 28 

5. The Nandas . . . . 31 

6. The Magadhan Empire* . . . . 35 

7. Chronology* . . . . . . 36 

Date of Buddha . . . . 36 

Date of Mahavira . . . . 36 

Date of the different royal dynasties . . . . 37 

xxvii 























THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


CHAPTER III 

FOREIGN INVASIONS 

By Radha Kumud Mookerji 

Page 

I. Persian Invasion .. .. .. .. 39 

II. Macedonian Invasion .. .. . . . . 43 

1. Advance to the Sindhu .. . . . . 43 

2. From the Sindhu to the Beas . . . . . . 47 

3. The Retreat .. .. . . . . 50 

4. General Review .. .. .. .. 51 

CHAPTER IV 

CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 

By Radha Kumud Mookerji 

I. Life and Reign (324-300 B.C.). 54 

II. Extent of Empire . . . . .. .. .. 61 

III. System of Administration . . .. . . . . 62 

IV. Court-life . 66 

V. Life of the people .. .. .. . . 67 

VI. Bindusara (c. 300-273 B.C.) . 69 

CHAPTER V 

ASOKA, THE GREAT 

By Radha Kumud Mookerji 

I. General Review .. .. .. .. 71 

Inscriptions .. .. .. .. . . 71 

Early Life . . . . . . . . 72 

Kalinga War . . .. . . . . . . 73 

Conversion to Buddhism .. . . 74 

Ideals and high sense of duty . . . . .. 76 

II. The Extent of Asoka’s Empire . . . . . . 77 

Findspots of Inscriptions . . . . . . . . 77 

III. The Administration .. .. .. .. 78 

IV. Dharma or Law of Piety .. .. .. 82 

V. Missionary Activity .. .. .. 84 

VI. Benevolence of Asoka .. .. .. . . 85 

VII. Art and Architecture .. .. .. .. 86 

VIII. Personal and Family Life .. .. .. 87 

IX. The Chronology* .. .. .. .. 88 

X. Successors of Asoka .. .. . . .. 89 

XI. Causes of the Downfall of the Maurya Empire* .. 90 

Appendix: The Date of Asoka .. 92 

By H. C. Raychaudhuri, m.a., ph.d. 

Carmichael Professor of Ancient Indian History and 
Culture in the University of Calcutta. 

xxviii 
























CONTENTS 


CHAPTER VI 

THE FALL OF THE MAGADHAN EMPIRE 

By Radha Kumud Mookerji 

Page 

I. The Sungas (187-75 B.C.) . 95 

Pushyamitra . . 95 

II. Kanvas (75-30 B.C.) .. .. .. 99 

III. The successors of the Kanvas* .. .. . . 100 

CHAPTER VII 

THE YAVANAS 

By D. C. Sircar, m.a., ph.d. 

Asstt. Superintendent for Epigraphy, Government of India, 
Ootacamund; formerly Lecturer in Ancient Indian History 
and Culture in the University of Calcutta. 

I. The Yavanas in India .. .. 101 

II. The Bactrian Greeks .. .. .. 103 

1. Diodotus I and Diodotus II . . . . .. 103 

2. Euthydemus .. .. .. 104 

3. Demetrius . . . . . . 106 

4. Eucratides .. .. .. .. 108 

5. End of Yavana rule in Bactria . . 110 

6. lndo-Greek Rulers .. .. .. Ill 

7. Menander .. .. .. .. 112 

8. Antialcidas .. .. .. 115 

9. End of Yavana rule in India .. .. .. 116 

Yavana rulers known from coins .. . . . . 117 

Hermaeus, the last Yavana ruler . . 118 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE SAKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 

By D. C. Sircar 

I. Saka Settlements .. . . . . 120 

II. Vonones and His Family .. .. .. 123 

III. Maues and His Successors . . . . . . 125 

Azes and Azilises .. . . 126 

IV. Gondophernes .. 128 

V. The Satrapal Families .. .. .. .. 132 

Satraps of Taxila . . . . 133 

Satraps of Mathura .. . . . . 134 

CHAPTER IX 

THE KUSHANAS 

By D. C. Sircar 

I. Origin and Early History . . . . 136 

Kujula Kadphises .. .. .. 138 

Wema Kadphises .. .. .. .. 139 

xxix 














THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Page 


II. Kanishka . . . . . . . . . . 141 

The Extent of Empire . . . . 141 

Kushana chronology . . . . . . 143 

Kanishka, a patron of Buddhism . . . . . . 146 

Kanishka’s coins . . . . . . . . 147 

III. Kanishka’s Successors . . . . . . . . 149 

Vasishka . . . . . . . . 149 

Huvishka . . . . . . . . 150 

Kanishka II . . . . . . . . 150 

Vasudeva . . . . . . . . 151 

IV. Later Kushanas . . . . . . . . . . 151 

Kushanas and Sassanians . . . . . . 152 

V. The Age of the Kushanas .. .. .. .. 153 


CHAPTER X 

THE VIKRAMA SAMVAT AND SAKABDA 

By R. C. Majumdar, m.a., ph.d., f.r.a.s.b., 

Principal, College of Indology, Banaras Hindu University; 
formerly Vice-Chancellor, University of Dacca. 


I. 

Vikrama Sarhvat 

• • • • • • 

154 


Jain Traditions 

• • • • • • 

154 


So-called peculiarities 

• • • • • • 

157 

II 

Saka Era 

CHAPTER XI 

NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE 

By D. C. Sircar 

• • • • • • 

KUSHANAS 

• 

158 

I. 

General Review 


159 

II. 

The Tribal Republics 


162 


1. The Arjunayanas 


162 


2. The Malavas 


163 


3. The Yaudheyas 


165 

III. 

The Monarchical States 


168 


1. The Nagas 


168 


2. Ahichchhatra 


171 


3. Ayodhya 


173 


4. Kausambi 


174 


The Magha or Megha Dynasty 

CHAPTER XII 

THE 6AKA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 

By D. C. Sircar 

176 

I. 

Scythians in Western India 

• • • • • • 

178 

II. 

Kshaharata Satraps 

• • • • • • 

179 


1. Bhumaka 

• • • • • • 

179 


2. Nahapana 

• • • • • • 

180 


xxx 




















CONTENTS 


Page 

III. Kardamakas .. .. .. .. .. .. 182 

1. Chashtana . . . . . . . . 182 

2. Rudradaman .. .. .. .. 184 

3. Successors of Rudradaman . . .. .. 185 

DamajadasrI I, Jivadaman . . . . . . 185 

Rudrasimha I, Rudrasena I, Sanghadaman, Damasena 186 
Yasodaman, Vijayasena, DamajadasrI III . . . . 188 

Rudrasena II, Bhartridaman . . .. . . 189 

CHAPTER XIII 

THE SATAYAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 

By D. C. Sircar 

I. Satavahanas .. .. .. .. .. .. 191 

1. Territories of the Early Satavahanas . . . . 191 

2. The Name of the Family .. .. .. .. 192 

3. The Andhras before the Rise of the Satavahanas 193 

4. Chronology of the Satavahanas . . . . . . 195 

5. Rise of the Satavahanas under Simuka .. .. 196 

6. Krishna and Satakarni I . . . . . . . . 197 

• • • 

7. Temporary Eclipse of the Satavahana Power . . 199 

8. Gautamiputra Satakarni . . . . . . . . 200 

9. The Successors of Gautamiputra . . . . . . 204 

10. Decline of the Satavahanas . . . . . . . . 206 

11. Branches of the Satavahana Dynasty and the 

Viceregal Families . . . . . . . . . . 207 

II. The Chedi (Maha-Meghavahana) Dynasty of Kalinga 211 

1. Kalinga and the Chedis . . . . . . . . 211 

2. Kharavela . . . . . . ., . . 213 

CHAPTER XIV 

THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 

By D. C. Sircar 

1. The Early Vakatakas . . . . . . . . 217 

2. The Abhiras . . . . . . . . 221 

3. The Bodhis . . . . . . . . . . 223 

4. The Ikshvakus . . . . . . 224 

5. The Brihatphalayanas . . . . . . . . 226 

CHAPTER XV 

SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 

By the late Dewan Bahadur S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, m.a., ph.d. 

Retired Professor of Indian History and Archaeology, 

University of Madras 

I. South India . . . . . . . . 228 

1. The Tamil Land . . . . . . . . . . 228 

2. Contact with the Outside World . . . . 228 

xxx i 











THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


3. 

The Three Kingdoms 



Page 

230 

4. 

The Pallava ascendancy 



233 

Ceylon* 



.. 234 

1 . 

Colonisation by the Aryans 



234 

2. 

History 



236 


Devanarhpiyatissa 



236 


Tamil usurpation . . • 



237 


Dutthagamani 



238 


Vattagamani 



238 


Ilanaga 



. . 239 


Lambakanna Dynasty founded by Vasabha 

239 


Gajabahu - . . 



239 


Tissa 



. . 240 


Mahasena 



241 


CHAPTER XVI 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

\ 

A. Sanskrit Language and Literature 

By M. A. Mehendale, m.a., ph.d. 

Reader in Sanskrit in the Deccan College Post-graduate and 

Research Institute, Poona. 


Part I. Literature 

I. The Epics .. .. . . . . . . 243 

1. Origin .. . . . . . . .. . . 243 

2. The Mahabharata .. . . . . . . 245 

3. The Ramayana . . . . . . . . . . 252 

II. The Dharma-sastras or Smritis* . . . 254 

Manava Dharma-sastra or Manu-smriti . . . . 255 

Vaishnava Dharma-sastra or Vishnu-smriti . . . . 256 

Other Smritis . . . . . . . 256 

III. Drama . . . . . . . . . . . . 257 

1. Origin . . . . . . . . . . 257 

2. Asvaghosha . . . . .. . . . . 258 

3. Bhasa . . . . . . . . . . 260 

4. ^udraka .. .. .. .. . . . . 264 

JV. Sanskrit Secular Poetry .. . . 265 

1. Origin of the Sanskrit Kavya . . . . . . 265 

2. Asvaghosha .. . . .. .. 266 

3. Arya Sura and other minor poets . . . . 267 

V. The Avadana Literature * . . . . 267 

VI. Scientific Literature .. . . . . . . 268 

1. Grammar .. .. .. . . . . 268 

2. Dramaturgy . . .. 269 

3. Metrics (By H. D. Velankar, M.A., Professor of 

Sanskrit in the Wilson College, Bombay) . . . . 271 


xxx ii 


















CONTENTS 


4. Science of Polity 

• • • • • • 

Page 

274 

5. Medicine 

• • •• •• •• 

.. 276 

General Review 

• • •• •• •• 

. . 277 

Part. II. Language 

I. Sanskrit 

• • •• •• •• 

.. 278 

II. Prakrit* 

• • • • • • •• 

.. 281 

Appendix: Note on 

the date of Arthasastra 

285 


By IT. C. Raychaudhuri 
B. Dravidian Languages and Literature 

By K. R. Srinivasa Iyengar, m.a., d.litt. 


Professor and Head of the Department of English 

in Andhra University. 


I. General Review 

• • • • 

. . 287 

11. ‘Tamil’ and ‘Tamilakam’ 

• • • • 

. . 289 

HI. The £angams 

• • • • 

291 

IV. The Third Sangam 

• • • • 

. . 294 

1. The Ten Idylls 

• • • • 

. . 294 

2. The Eight Collections 

• • • • 

296 

3. The Eighteen Minor Didactic Poems 

297 

V. The Epics 

• • • • 

300 

1. Silappadikaram 

• • • • 

. 301 

2. The Other Epics 

• • • • 

302 


CHAPTER XVII 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


By the late Dr. Beni Prasad, m.a., ph.d., d.sc. 

Professor of Politics in the University of Allahabad 

and R. C. Majumdar 
(Sections marked with asterisk) 

I. Study of Political Science* /. . . .. 303 

II. Political Theory . . . . .. .. .. 304 

1. The King and State—Their Origin and Nature* 304 

2. Scope of State Activity .. .. . . . . 307 

3. Forms of Government .. . . . . .. 310 

4. Inter-State Relations* . . . . .. 313 

III. System of Administration . . . . . . .. 319 

1. Monarchy . . .. . . . . .. 319 

(i) The King .319 

(ii) Ministers* .. .. .. 320 

(iii) Other Officers* .322 

(iv) Sources Other than Arthasastra . . 324 

(v) Taxation .. . . . . . . 328 

IV. Non-Monarchical Constitution* . . . . . . 330 

Lichchhavi Constitution . . . . .. . . 331 


xxxiii 


A.I.U.— C 















THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


CHAPTER XVIII 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 
Section I 

By the late Dr. Beni Prasad and R. C. Majumdar 

Sections II-IV 

By U. N. Ghoshal, m.a., ph.d. 

Formerly Professor of History in the Presidency 

College, Calcutta. 


I. Manu-smriti 

1. Sources and Topics of Law 

2. Criminal Law and Punishment 

3. Civil Law 

4. Administration of Justice 

5. Evidence 

II. Yajnavalkya-smriti 

1. Judicial Procedure 

2. Civil Law 
Law of Debt 
Laws of Inheritance 
Stridhana 

3. Criminal Law 

III. Narada-smriti 

1. Judicial Procedure 

2. Civil Law 
Law of Debt 
Partition and Inheritance 

3. Criminal Law . . 

IV. Brihaspati-smriti 

1. Courts of Justice 

2. Judicial Procedure 

3. Evidence 
Witnesses 
Documents 

4. Civil and Criminal Law 
Debt and Interest 
Partition and Inheritance 
Penal Law 

CHAPTER XIX 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 
A. General Introduction 

By R. C. Majumdar 
B. Buddhism 

By Nalinaksha Dutt, m.a., b.l., ph.d., d.litt. 

Professor of Pali in the University of Calcutta. 

I. The Buddha 

1. Early Life 


Page 

335 

335 

337 

340 

340 

341 
343 
343 
346 
346 

346 

347 

347 

348 
348 
351 
351 
351 

351 

352 

353 

354 

355 

355 

356 

357 

358 
358 
358 


360 


365 

365 


XXXIV 










CONTENTS 


Page 

2. Missionary Life . . . . . . . . . . 368 

II. Dhamma . . . . . . . . . . . . 370 

III. Sangha .. .. . . . . . . 374 

1. Ordination . . 374 

2. Monastery .. .. 375 

3. Dress, Food and Medicine . . . . . . 375 

4. The Uposatha or Fortnightly Assembly . . . . 375 

5. The Vassavasa or Rainy Season Retreat . . 376 

6. Special Rules for Nuns 376 

7. Constitution . . . . . . . . 376 

IV. History of Buddhism . . . . . . 377 

1. First Council—Close of the First Stage . . 377 

2. Second Stage . . . . . . . . 378 

3. Third Stage . . . . . . 381 

4. Fourth Stage . . . . . . . . 383 

5. The Rise of Mahayanism . . . . . . . . 385 

V. Buddhist Images and Buddhist Sculpture . . 391 

By J. N. Banerjea, m.a., ph.d. 

Head of the Department of Ancient Indian History and Culture 

in the University of Calcutta. 

Symbolic Representations of Buddha . . 391 

Buddha Figures . . . . 392 

Bodhisattva Images . . . . . . 394 

Yaksha Vajrapani ~ ~ . . . . . . 395 

VI. The Pali Canon . . .. . . . . 396 

By A. D. Pusalkar, m.a., ll.b., ph.d. 

1. Vinaya Pitaka . . . . . . . . . . 396 

2. Sutta Pitaka . . .. . . 398 

Digha Nikaya .. . . . . . . .. 398 

Majjhima Nikaya . . . . . . . 399 

Samyutta Nikaya . . . . . . . . 399 

Anguttara Nikaya . . . . 400 

Khuddaka Nikaya . . . . . . 401 

Dhammapada . . . . . . . . 401 

Sutta Nipata . . . . . . 402 

Theragatha and Therigatha . . .... 403 

Jatakas . . . . . . . . . . . . 407 

3. Abhidhamma Pitaka . . . . . . 407 

4. Chronology of Canonical Pali Literature . . 407 

5. Non-canonical Pali Literature . . . . . . 409 

Milinda-panha .. . . . . . . 409 

C^ Jainism 

By A. M. Ghatage, m.a., ph.d. 

Professor of Ardhamagadhi in the Rajaram College, Kolhapur. 

1. Parsva and Mahavira .. .. .. 411 

2. Jainism after Mahavira . . . . . . 415 

3. Jain Doctrines .. .. .. .. 419 


xxxv 

























THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


4. The Jain Canon 

5. Jain Philosophy 

6. Jain Icons (By J. N. Banerjea) 

D. Vaishnavism 
By D. C. Sircar 

1. The Origin 

2. The Evolution of Vaishnavism 

3. Progress of Vaishnavism 

4. Bhagavadgita or Gita 

By V. M. Apte, m.a., ph.d. (Cantab) 

Professor of Sanskrit in the Ismail Yusuf College, 

Jogeshwari 

5. The Doctrine of the Four Vyuhas (Chatur-vyuha) 

6. Relation of Bhagavatism with other creeds 

7. The Worship of Images (By J. N. Banerjea) 

E. Saivism 


Page 

421 

423 

425 


431 

435 

437 

440 


447 

450 

452 


By T.M.P. Mahadevan, m.a., ph.d. 


Professor of Philosophy in the University of Madras 


1 . 

The Pasupatas 


453 

2. 

Saivism as a Popular Cult 


456 

3. 

Saivism in South India 

• • 

459 

4. 

Saiva Images (By J. N. Banerjea) 

• • 

459 


F. Minor Religious Sects 


By II. D. Bh ATTACH ARY YA, M.A. 


Professor of Indian Religion and Philosophy, Banaras Hindu 


University; formerly Head of the Department of Philosophy, 

University of Dacca. 


1. Ajivikas 

2. Prajapati-Brahma 

3. Surya 

4. Saiva gods 

5. Sri or Lakshml 

6. Naga or Serpent Worship 

7. Miscellaneous Deities 


G. General Development of, Philosophy 
By U. 0 . Bitattacharjee, m.a. 


463 

464 

465 

466 
469 
471 
473 


Formerly Professor of Philosophy in the Presidency College, 

Calcutta. 


1 . Philosophical Sutras .. .. 475 

2. The Lines of Thought and the Problems . . 473 


xxxvi 










CONTENTS 


Page 

(i) Astika and Nastika (Orthodox and Heterodox) 

Philosophy .. 478 

(ii) Source of Knowledge .. .. 479 

(iii) Reality in Orthodox Philosophy: The World 481 

CHAPTER XX 

ART 

A. Architecture 
By S. K. Saraswati, m.a. 

Librarian, Asiatic Society, Calcutta; formerly Lecturer in History 

in the University of Calcutta. 


I. Cities .483 

II. Religious Architecture 487 

1. The Stupa 487 

2. The Chaitya Hall 494 

3. The Sangharama (Monastery) 502 

B. Sculpture 


By Niiiar Ranjax Ray, m.a., d.phil. et D.Lett. (Leiden) 

Bagisvari Professor of Fine Arts in the University of Calcutta. 

I. Mauryan Art 

II. Suhga-Kanva Art: Madhyadesa and Eastern India 

1. Sanchl: Railing of Stupa II; Bharhut; Bodh-Gaya 

2. Sanchl: Gateways of Stupas I and III 

3. Orissa: Udayagiri and Khandagiri reliefs 

4. Western India: Bhaja and Karle 

5. Yaksha Primitives 

6. Cult Images 
Gandhara Art 
Mathura 

Vengi: Jaggayyapeta, AmaravatT, Nagarjunikoiida, 

Goli, etc. 

General Review 

C. Painting and Other Arts 

By Nihar Ranjan Ray 

Painting 
Terracotta 

Coins, Seals, Intaglio Gems etc. 

Pottery 
Minor Arts 

CHAPTER XXI 

SOCIAL CONDITION 

Sections I and II 

By Radii a Kumud Mookerji and R. C. Majumdar 

Sections III to IX 
By R. C. Majumdar 

(A few short paras on the Social Condition in the Epics contributed 
by Dr. V. M. Apte are included in these sections) 

xxxvii 


III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 
V. 


506 

510 

511 

514 

515 

516 
516 
518 
518 
522 

524 

526 


528 

531 

534 

536 

540 













THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Page 


I. Caste . . . . . . . . . . 542 

II. Orders or Stages of Life .. . . 551 

III. Family Life 556 

IV. Marriage and Position of Women 558 

V. Slaves 570 

VI. Dress and Ornaments . . . . . . 571 

VII. House and Furniture . . . . . . . . 576 

VIII. Food and Drink . . . . 577 

IX. General Life .... 579 



CHAPTER XXII 



EDUCATION 



By Radha Kumud Mookerji 


1 . 

Pupils and Teachers 

582 

2. 

Art of Writing* 

584 

3. 

Subjects of Study 

585 


Industrial Education 

587 


Medical Education 

587 

4. 

Asramas or Hermitages 

589 

5. 

Buddhist Vihara 

590 

6. 

Education in the Jatakas 

591 


CHAPTER XXIII 



ECONOMIC CONDITION 

By Radha Kumud Mookerji 


1 . 

Agriculture 

595 

2. 

Trade and Industry 

599 


Guilds 

601 


State Control . . , . . 

604 

3. 

Trade-routes and Transport 

606 

4. 

Coinage* 

607 

5. 

Influence of Canon Law upon Economic 
Development (by U. N. Ghoshal) 

608 


CHAPTER XXIV 

INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 
By R. C. Majumdar 

I. Intercourse between India and the Western Countries 611 

1. The Pre-Achaemenid Period .. .. 611 

Trade relations between India and the Western World 611 
Archaeological Evidence . . . . 612 

Trade Routes: Overland and by Sea . . . . 613 

2. The Achaemenid Period . . . . 614 


xxxviii 
























CONTENTS 


Page 


3. India and Greece .. . . 615 

4. India and Egypt . . 616 

Sea-routes .. .. 617 

Trade with Egypt 618 

Direct Sea-trade with India . . 619 

5. India and Roman Empire . . 620 

Roman Coins in India . . . . . . 621 

New Trade Routes through Palmyra and Petra . . 624 

6. India in Western Literature . . . . . . . . 625 

II. The Effects of the Intercourse . . . . 627 

1. Influence of the West on India 627 

2. Influence of India on the West 629 

Literature and Sciences . . . . 629 

Philosophy . . . . . . 630 

Religion . . . . 632 


CHAPTER XXV 

COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

By R. C. Majumdar 


A. Central Asia and China 

635 

I. Afghanistan 

635 

II. Central Asia 

636 

III. China 

645 

IV. Tonkin 

650 

B. South-East Asia 

652 

I. Early Trade Intercourse and the Beginning of 
Colonisation 

652 

II. Early Colonies 

655 

1. General Review 

655 

2. Fu-nan (Cambodia) 

657 

3. Champa (Annam) 

658 

List of Bibliographies 

660 

General Bibliography 

661 

Chronology 

699 

Genealogy 

704 

Index 

710 

Maps 1-4 and Plates I-XXXVII 

. . at end 


XXXIX 


















































■ 










» 







■ 






• 























































































:'j : 


























... . ■ 






















' 










. 

, . 

1 X* 

- 


















. 







































ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


We are indebted to the following institutions and individuals for permission 
to reproduce illustrations noted against each. While expressing our sincere thanks 
for such courtesies we should add that reproduction in each case is prohibited 
without the permission of the authority .concerned, the copyright being reserved. 

1. Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi: Nos. 1-3, 5-9, 12-26, 30-31, 
38-40, 42-49, 64, 70-71, and XXXVII (e). 

2. Indian Museum, Calcutta: Nos. 11, 27-28, 32-37, 51-52, 58, 65-66 and 69. 

3. Government Museum, Madras: Nos. 4, 72-73, 75-77. 

4. Sarnath Museum, Sarnath: Nos. 29, 55, 81. 

5. Mathura Museum, Mathura: Nos. 50, 57, 59-62. 

6. Patna Museum, Patna: Nos. 53, 85. 

7. Gwalior Museum, Gwalior: Nos. 54, 56. 

8. Provincial Museum, Lucknow: No. 63. 

9. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston: Nos. 67-68. 

10. British Museum, London: No. 74. 

11. Musee Guimet, Paris: No. 78. 

12. Sri S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta: No. 82 and PI. XXXVII (f, g). 

13. Municipal Museum, Allahabad: No. 83. 

14. Asutosh Museum of Indian Art, Calcutta University: No. 84. 

15. Indian Institute, Oxford: No. 86. 

16. National Museum of Pompei and Ercolano: Nos. 87-88. 

17. Delegation Archeologique Frangaise en Afghanistan: Nos. 89-90. 

18. The Superintendent, Archaeological Survey of India, Western Circle, Poona: 
Nos. 14-15, 18-19. 

19. The Publicity Department, Central Railway. 

Nos. 79 and 80 have been reproduced from Yazdani’s Ajanta, PI. Ill, Pis. XVI(b) 
and XXX(c) by kind permission of the Department of Archaeology, Hyderabad. 

We are further indebted to the following individuals and institutions who 
kindly helped the publication by supplying photographs and blocks for the 
illustrations: 

1. Dr. R. C. Majumdar, Banaras: Nos. 63, 65 , 69, 83-84. 

2. Sri S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta: Nos. 2-9, 11-13, 16-17, 20-40, 42-62, 64, 
66-68, 70-78, 81-82, 85-90 and XXXVII (a-g). 

3. Dr. Radha Kumud Mookerji, Calcutta: No. 1 (Block). 


xli 










































• ' 

. 

• ■ • 

■ 

•X • t 4 - ■ 

. 

- 














'? '• v 

. • - ... 

1 































































PREFACE 

By Dr. R. C. Majumdar 

The period with which this volume deals <600 B.C.-A.D. 320) 
offers a great contrast in many ways to the preceding one. We are 
no longer dependent upon religious literature of a single denomina¬ 
tion and uncertain date as the sole source of our historical informa¬ 
tion. Instead, we have not only literary works of different reli¬ 
gious sects which supplement and correct one another, but also valu¬ 
able literary records of a secular character, both Indian and foreign, 
of known dates, and the highly important evidence furnished by 
coins, inscriptions and monuments. In addition, we have a conti¬ 
nuous traditional account of states and ruling dynasties whose gene¬ 
ral authenticity is beyond question. All these enable us to draw 
an outline of the political history of North India and the Deccan for 
nearly the whole of the period. They also furnish a mass of highly 
valuable data for the reconstruction of the social, religious and eco¬ 
nomic life of the people of the whole region. 

As regards South India, however, the position still is far from 
satisfactory, for we have neither coins, nor inscriptions, nor historical 
traditions, enabling us to draw even a rough outline of political his¬ 
tory. And though the brilliant Sangam age of Tamil literature falls 
within this period, even if it is not wholly covered by it, we can 
glean from it only the names of a few isolated kings and their 
heroic achievements without any connecting link. While the lite¬ 
rature and other sources give us glimpses of social, economic and 
religious conditions of the people, and particularly of their exten¬ 
sive maritime trade with the West, we miss the framework of poli¬ 
tical history against which alone they can be studied in their true 
perspective. 

South India, therefore, necessarily plays a comparatively in¬ 
significant part in this volume. But subject to this limitation, the 
history and culture of the Indian people unfolded in the following 
pages may be regarded as unique in many respects, marked both 
by brilliance and variety for which we look in vain during sub¬ 
sequent ages. First and foremost, the age saw the beginning and 
culmination of that political unification of India which has been 
alike the ideal and despair of later ages. We can trace the succes¬ 
sive steps by which Magadha, a petty principality in South Bihar, 


xliii 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


gradually extended its authority till, in the course of two centuries, 
under the Mauryas, it became the mistress of extensive dominions 
stretching from beyond the Hindu Kush in the west to the hills of 
Assam in the east, and from Kashmir in the north to Mysore in the 
south. The royal edicts of this mighty realm still lie scattered 
throughout India from the North-West Frontier Province to Nepal 
Terai and the heart of Madras. 

The political history of this empire reaches almost an epic 
grandeur as we trace the story of its growth from stage to stage, till 
our vision extends over the whole of India and even beyond. Then 
follows the story of its fall, imbued with a dramatic interest and 
pathos of almost equal depth. Religious fervour and pacifist ideals 
lead away a mighty emperor from the policy of blood and iron 
which created the empire and which alone could sustain it. Then 
follows an orgy of greed, ambition and lust for power which saps 
the vitality of the state. The commander of the imperial army 
seizes the opportunity to strike the final blow at his royal master. 
The coup succeeds, but the traitor wears only a crown of thorns. 
Nemesis appears in the shape of foreign invaders on the horizon of 
the distant West. They are lured by the gorgeous wealth of Ind, 
which treachery and dissensions place within their easy reach. 
The Greeks, the Parthians, the Sakas and the Kushanas move 
on the chess-board of Indian politics, but leave no permanent 
traces behind. India, stunned by the blow but not killed, reco¬ 
vers herself. The mighty Satavahana rulers bar the gates of the 
Deccan to the further advance of the foreigners, and the sturdy re¬ 
publican tribes of the north once more unfurl the banner of free¬ 
dom and uphold the dignity of their motherland. It is at this 
juncture, when the ground is finally prepared for the foundation 
of another great Indian Empire, that we close this volume. 

The rise and fall of the Empire of Magadha is thus our central 
theme, and the climax of its imperial pomp and power and the 
anti-climax of its decline and fall form a drama of intense human 
interest. This interest is further heightened by the career of the 
great emperor Asoka who shines in the dark firmament of Indian 
history as a bright star whose lustre increases as he recedes 
further and further into the course of time. His humanism and 
aversion to warfare cannot fail to strike a sympathetic chord in the 
heart of a generation, which has passed through two Armageddons 
shaking the human civilization to its very foundation and is now 
quailing in fear of a third which threatens to engulf it altogether. 


xliv 


PREFACE 


The Maurya empire, which brought about the political unity 
of India, perished, but left a rich legacy behind it. Though India 
had to wait for nearly two thousand years for a similar achieve¬ 
ment under a foreign yoke, the example of the Mauryas was never 
lost upon her and inspired successive royal dynasties to emulate 
it with varying degrees of success. Besides, the political unity 
ushered in by the Mauryas led to a cultural unity which mani¬ 
fested itself through the development of a uniform type of lang¬ 
uage, literature, art and religion all over India; and this left a 
deep impress which the lapse of time has not been able to efface. 
The age of imperial unity, the title given to this volume, thus 
fittingly describes the essential characteristic of the period with 
which it deals. 

But the dazzling brilliance of the political achievements of the 
period should not blind us to its cultural attainments, which are of 
an unusually high order. It was predominantly an age of that 
freedom of thought which is now regarded as a peculiar virtue, if 
not the monopoly, of the West. It led to an outburst of intellec¬ 
tual activity such as has rarely been witnessed in later ages. 
Although many of the channels through which this activity flow¬ 
ed were dried up or lost in the sands of time, a few broad streams 
have survived down to our age fertilising, for more than two 
thousand years, men’s minds and hearts over a considerable part 
of the globe. These comprise Buddhism and Jainism, the theistic 
religions Vaishnavism and &aivism, and the six systems of philo¬ 
sophy which may be regarded as the permanent contributions of 
Indian culture to the civilization of the world. The influence of 
all these upon the growth of civilization in India and the outside 
world has been described in the following pages, and more will 
be said in the succeeding volumes. For the student of human 
culture they perhaps constitute a theme of more abiding interest 
than even the evolution of an all-India empire under the Mauryas. 

There are also other aspects of the intellectual activity which 
characterise the age. These are the developments in language, 
literature and art. The period saw the rise of Classical Sanskrit 
as well as the various forms of Prakrit which are the grand-parents 
of the numerous modern regional languages of India. It almost 
brought to perfection the analytical study of languages in the gram¬ 
matical works of Panini, Katyayana and Patanjali, which still 
remain the standard works on the subject. As regards literature, 


xlv 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


it was the age of the two great epics, the Rdmayana and the 
Mahabharata, which have moulded the character and civilization 
of Indians in a way which perhaps no other literary work can 
claim in any part of the world. This period also saw the 
beginnings of drama and poetry whose efflorescence cast a glamour 
on the succeeding age. Above all, it saw the evolution of the art of 
writing, which must be regarded as the principal instrument of the 
advancement of learning and the diffusion of knowledge for all 
times. There was also a notable advance in the study of medical 
science whose influence spread far beyond the borders of India. But 
perhaps the greatest advance was made in the study of political 
science and administrative organisation. The Arthasastra of Kaut- 
ilya, the classical work on this subject, which has cast into shade all 
other texts of this class, was undoubtedly written during this 
period. It may be regarded as the high watermark of the progress 
of Indian political thought. 

The history of Indian art really begins in this period. There 
were undoubtedly artistic activities in the preceding age, but no 
memorials have survived (except those of the Sindhu valley civili¬ 
zation), mainly because they were built of perishable materials like 
wood or brick. It is in this age that we first come across architec¬ 
ture and sculpture in stone, whose further progress we can trace in 
detail without any gap till our own time. The most curious thing, 
however, is that some of these first products of Indian art are also 
the finest, a peculiarity pithily expressed by Fergusson in his famous 
dictum that “the history of Indian art is written in decay.” But 
although the monolithic pillars of Asoka with their wonderful lustre 
and superb animal figures as capitals still remain unsurpassed as 
works of art, in India or elsewhere, scholars no longer view the 
later progress of Indian art as merely a gradual process of decline 
from its pristine grandeur. Attention has been drawn in the 
following pages to varieties of later Indian art and their excellence, 
and a rational view has been put forward to explain their difference 
from, and inferiority to, the highly developed Asokan art. Apart 
from its technical excellence there is one characteristic which dis¬ 
tinguishes the art of this period. It fully reflects the life and acti¬ 
vities and thoughts and beliefs of the people at large, and may thus 
be regarded as an integral part of Indian culture. 

India’s contact with the outside world is another great charac¬ 
teristic feature of the age. Trade and maritime enterprise mark 

xlvi 


PREFACE 


the beginning of this contact, which was further developed by mis¬ 
sionary activity. Ultimately we find Indians spreading over a great 
part of the known world, not only in the mainlands of Asia as 
far as Syria and China, but also to distant lands across the sea,— 
over Africa and Europe on the west and Indo-China and the islands 
of the Indian Archipelago on the east. We also see the beginnings of 
Indian colonies which developed into flourishing empires and led to 
the growth of a Greater India in later ages. 

At home, Indians came into contact with successive bands of 
foreigners—Greeks, Parthians, Scythians and Turks (Kushanas)— 
who came as invaders and were ultimately absorbed in the vast popu¬ 
lation of India. They were completely merged in Indian society and 
adopted the language, religion and customs of the land, without re¬ 
taining any trace of their foreign origin. This reveals to us the 
catholicity of Hindu society of the period, in sad and striking contrast 
to the narrow rigidity and exclusiveness which characterised it at a 
later age. There are other evidences to show that the Hindu society 
of this age was a living organism which could adapt itself to new 
environment and changing circumstances. The rise of Buddhism, 
Jainism and other heterodox religious sects was a great challenge 
to the old Vedic faith and practices and, as a result, these underwent 
an almost complete transformation. Although the final form of the 
new religion is not yet clearly perceptible, its beginnings were 
marked in this age by the adoption of theistic Vaishnavism and 
Saivism within the fold of Brahmanical religion. The neo-Brahmani- 
cal literature in the form of Dharma-sastras or Smritis, which deve- 
loped in this age, still forms the bed-rock of modern Hinduism in 
spite of the accretion of silt deposits of later ages. 

As a matter of fact the Brahmanical religion, as it developed at 
the end of this period more than 1,500 years ago, is far more akin to 
modern Hinduism than it is to the Vedic cult which immediately 
preceded it. The age is therefore not merely important for the 
rise of new sects like Buddhism and Jainism, but also for the growth 
and development of what is now generally known as Hindu reli¬ 
gion. It is interesting to note that, like Buddhism, this neo-Hin¬ 
duism had also its proselytising aspect and was carried to remote 
lands, even beyond the seas, by missionary activities. Hinduism 
was not yet a monopoly or accident of birth, and did not lose its 
purity by crossing the “black water”. 


xlvii 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Reference may now be made to some of the difficulties with 
which this volume has had to contend. The first and foremost is 
the chronological problem, which may be regarded as the chronic 
weakness of Indian history. There is undoubtedly a great advance 
over the preceding age, for which we have nothing but the vaguest 
idea of a few general dates that may be wrong by centuries or even 
millennia. So far as the present volume is concerned, the chrono¬ 
logy of the first period depends upon the date of Buddha’s death, 
which has been fixed at either 544 or about 486 B. C. by two schools 
of opinion which alone deserve serious consideration. The latter 
date has been adopted in this work for reasons stated on pages 36-38. 
This volume has also to deal with the vexed problems of the origin 
of Vikrama Samvat and the Sakabda, the two leading Indian eras 
which started respectively in 58 B.C. and A.D. 78 and are even now 
widely used all over India. Indian tradition ascribes the founda¬ 
tion of the first to the hero-king Vikramaditya, around whose 
memory succeeding ages have woven a long string of legends and 
romances. The vitality of the Vikramaditya tradition is vouched 
for by the recent celebration of the bimillenary of the Vikrama era. 
Nevertheless sober history still refuses to recognise the existence 
of a king Vikramaditya in 58 B.C. for lack of positive evidence. 
Even eminent scholars treat him as a myth and attribute the founda¬ 
tion of the so-called Vikramaditya era to a foreign ruler. As regards 
the &akabda or &aka era, modern authorities accept the Indian tradi¬ 
tion that it was founded by the 6aka king or commemorates the date 
of his accession. But in the case of both these eras there is no una¬ 
nimity as to the identity of the foreign rulers who founded them. 
As regards the &aka era, there is a consensus of opinion that it 
commemorates the accession of the Kushana king Kanishka, though 
this view is open to serious objections and is rejected by some. As 
regards the foundation of the Vikrama era, it would hardly be an 
exaggeration to say that no two scholars agree on any point except 
in denying that any king of the name of Vikramaditya had anything 
to do with it. 

In view of these wide differences of opinion the Editor has 
thought it best to state the general position briefly in Chapter X 
and then give wide latitude to individual contributors to express 
their views, sometimes even more firmly than the facts would justify. 
But as the date of Kanishka is a landmark in the history of this 
period, the general view that he ascended the throne in A.D. 78 has 
been accepted as a working hypothesis. 


xlviii 


PREFACE 


The question of the foundation of the so-called Kalachuri era 
which started in A.D. 248-49 is beset with similar difficulties, though 
they are less serious as the era was confined to a small locality. The 
general view that it was founded by an Abhira chief has been 
adopted in this work, though it is not altogether free from doubt. 

Leaving aside the general question of eras, we are also con¬ 
fronted with difficulties in settling the dates of some dynasties and 
individual kings. The dates, for example, of most of the foreign 
rulers of Greek or Parthian descent can only be fixed within cer¬ 
tain limits, and there have been strong differences of opinion about 
Menander and Azes. The dates of the &aka satraps alone are fairly 
well known, thanks to the series of dated coins and inscriptions 
issued by them. 

As regards indigenous royal dynasties, serious differences of 
opinion exist only about the date of foundation of the Satavahana 
power. The theory associated with the name of Bhandarkar— 
father and son—has not been accepted in this work, and the first 
Satavahana king has been placed in the first century B.C. instead 
of the third century B.C. as advocated by them. As a corollary to 
this, Kharavela, the famous warrior king of Kalinga, has also been 
assigned to the first century B.C. 

In order to give a clear idea of the chronological scheme adopt¬ 
ed in this work, a chronological table has been added at the end 
of the volume. To facilitate comparison, the dates of a few Roman 
and Chinese emperors as well as of Syrian and Parthian kings have 
been added in the table, particularly as India came into close con¬ 
tact with all these countries during the period under review. While 
even approximate dates of important kings have been added, those 
of minor or local rulers have been included only when they are 
known with certainty. 

The chronology of literary works has been a baffling problem 
almost throughout the course of Indian history, and we have had 
more than a fair share of it in the present volume. The dates of the 
various Dharma-sastras or Smritis, as well as of the original Sutras 
of the six systems of philosophy, are among the knottiest problems 
of the history of Indian literature on which widely divergent views 
are held by scholars. The date of Kautilya’s Arthasdstra has been a 
source of polemic discussion, which has grown into a voluminous 
literature. While some scholars stoutly maintain that it was written 

xlix 

A.I.U.—D 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


by Kautilya, the minister of the Maurya Emperor Chandragupta 
(324-300 B.C.), others with equal vehemence relegate it to a date as 
late as the third century A. D. Even a brief discussion of the merits 
of the different views on these all-important works, not to speak of 
lesser ones, would Jiave considerably increased the bulk of this 
volume without a corresponding advantage. Headers interested in 
these questions should consult special treatises or articles, of which 
a select list has been giveU under General References or Foot-notes. 
In general, only the different important views have been stated 
without discussion. In the case of Dharma-sastra literature, the 
views of P. V. Kane, the latest writer on the subject, have been 
accepted as working hypotheses in preference to those of J. Jolly 
which hitherto held the field, for some idea of the dates of the differ¬ 
ent Smriti texts is necessary in order to utilise their data for the 
reconstruction of the social and legal system which is principally 
based upon them. In view of the uncertainty of date, the Kautiliyci 
Arthasastra has not been used as a source for the Maurya or any 
specific period, but the political theory and administrative organisa¬ 
tion envisaged by it has been treated as a separate picture complete 
in itself. This picture must be true of some part of the period be¬ 
tween 300 B.C. and A.D. 300, treated in this volume, though we 
are unable to specify it within still narrower limits. 

A special interest attaches to the problem of Kalidasa, the 
greatest poet of India. While orthodox section still clings to the 
view that he flourished in the court of king Vikramaditya of Ujja- 
yin! in the first century B.C., modern scholars generally, though by 
no means unanimously, regard him as a contemporary of a Gupta 
Emperor, most probably Chandra-gupta II (c. A.D. 376-414) who 
assumed the title Vikramaditya. 

The practical difficulty caused by such differences of opinion 
was well illustrated in course of the preparation of this historical 
series. On reading the MSS. of the two chapters on literature in this 
and the next volume of the series, covering the period 600 B.C. 
A.D. 750, the Editor found to his utter dismay that there was no re¬ 
ference to the great poet Kalidasa in either of them. On enquiry it 
was learnt that the scholar who wrote for this volume held that 
Kalidasa flourished in the Gupta age and should therefore figure in 
the next volume, while the writer for the latter was of opinion that 
the poet flourished in the first century B.C. and as such must have 
been dealt with in the preceding volume. Ultimately it was decided 
to accept the general view and treat Kalidasa as belonging to the 


I 


PREFACE 


Gupta age. But the curious omission referred to above shows that 
scholars are even now strongly divided in their opinion as to the 
age of Kalidasa, and no definite opinion can be hazarded until more 
positive evidence is forthcoming. 

As regards the other great dramatist Bhasa, the difficulty is not 
confined to the uncertainty of date, bad as it is from every point of 
view. Doubts have been entertained whether the 13 dramas pub¬ 
lished from Trivandrum are really the works of Bhasa, who is men¬ 
tioned with respect even by Kalidasa. This problem also defies any 
final solution, but following the general view, the above-mentioned 
plays have been accepted as genuine works of Bhasa. 

The whole history of literature is beset with similar difficulties, 
though of a less serious nature, to which references have been made 
in the relevant chapters. 

Next to the chronological difficulty is the one caused by the 
wide differences between the Puranas and Buddhist texts regarding 
the genealogies of royal dynasties. The discrepancy is of a funda¬ 
mental nature in the case of the Puranic Sisunagas, who are not only 
split into two separate dynasties in the Sinhalese Chronicles, but 
their chronological order is also reversed. The genealogical 
arrangement of these Chronicles has been adopted in this work. 
There are similar differences in the case of Nandas and later Maurya 
kings, but as they do not very much affect the general course of 
history, the different views have been merely stated without showing 
preference for any of them. 

Among other difficulties of a more serious nature may be men¬ 
tioned the diversity of opinion on the origin of Indian art, especially 
Mauryan art. The theory of Marshall that the highclass artistic pro¬ 
ducts of the Asokan age were really the works of foreign artists 
provoked a strong challenge at the time it was originally propound¬ 
ed. But, gradually scholarly opinion is veering towards it, though 
in a modified form. Here again, no dogmatic view, one way or the 
other, is either possible or desirable, and the treatment of the sub¬ 
ject in Chapter XX will perhaps meet with general approbation, if 
not with general acceptance. The same remarks apply to the per¬ 
plexing question of the origin of Buddha images on which a more 
pronounced view has been taken on the basis of data that have ac¬ 
cumulated since the time when the Greek artists were credited with 
their introduction in India. 


li 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


This brief survey of the characteristic features of the age and 
the difficulties and uncertainties that its history involves would give 
the readers a fair idea of the contents of this volume as well as of 
the great importance of the period covered by it. The necessity of 
dealing with the beginnings of so many new developments, parti¬ 
cularly in the domains of religion, literature and art, has increased 
the bulk of this volume much beyond the average fixed for each, 
but some of the subsequent volumes will be considerably shorter. 

The general remarks in the Preface to Volume I about the way 
in which the Editor has tried to deal with the conflicting views of 
different contributors are applicable to this volume also. In ad¬ 
dition, the Editor has occasionally found it necessary to make con¬ 
siderable additions and alterations, partly in order to complete the 
picture of a subject as he conceived it, and partly to avoid dupli¬ 
cation and inconsistency between chapters dealing with the same or 
allied topics but written' by different persons. It has not always 
been possible to indicate the additions made by the Editor, but in 
important cases an asterisk has been added to ‘sections’ in the Table 
of Contents and at the end of ‘paragraphs’ in the body of the text 
to show that the authors are not responsible for the views and in¬ 
formation contained in those parts of the chapters contributed by 
them. Sometimes portions of one chapter have been transferred to 
another written by a different person, and in all important cases the 
authorship has been indicated in the foot-notes. 

In general, the Editor naturally conceived the idea of the work 
as a whole and was guided by the sole consideration of the suitabi¬ 
lity, relevance and due proportion of the different subordinate parts 
to the main structure. But he has not always succeeded in eliminat¬ 
ing duplication, or even inconsistency, to a certain extent, as both 
were more or less inherent in the arrangement of topics or the 
nature of the subject. Thus, while the chapter on literature has 
necessarily to deal with works bearing on law, politics, religion, 
philosophy, etc., these had again to be dealt with in connection with 
those topics treated in different chapters. 

A typical and extreme instance is furnished by the history of 
Tamil literature of the period A.D. 300-750. It almost exclusively 
deals with the religious works of the £aiva and Vaishnava saints, 
which again figure prominently in the history of these two religions. 
It would have been perhaps more logical to omit the separate 


lii 


PREFACE 


chapter on Tamil literature and distribute its contents among the 
sections dealing with the history of gaivism and Vaishnavism in 
South India. Apart, however, from the fact that such an omission 
would disturb the general framework of the volume, it was thought 
desirable to view these works separately as literary works. But as 
this can hardly be done without some reference, however brief, to 
their religious contents, a certain amount of duplication could hardly 
be avoided. To minimise these difficulties as far as possible, purely 
sectarian literature, such as Buddhist and Jain canons, has been 
included in the chapters dealing with those two religions. 

It has not been possible to follow any uniform procedure about 
foot-notes. Some of the chapters have detailed foot-notes citing 
authorities for the views and statements contained in them. In 
other cases it has been thought sufficient to indicate, under general 
references, the sources from which most of the information is de¬ 
rived, and to add foot-notes only to deal with a few important points 
or to indicate sources not covered by general references. In parti¬ 
cular references for individual specimens of architecture and sculp¬ 
ture have not always been given in foot-notes. But a select biblio¬ 
graphy has been added at the end of the volume which covers all 
chapters and should enable readers to make a special study of the 
different topics included in each. 

A genealogical list of royal dynasties and a chronological table 
of important persons and events have been added to facilitate the 
study of political history, though a great deal, in both of these, is 
involved in doubt. 

The method of transliteration and spelling of proper names re¬ 
mains unchanged. “Ganga”, “Yamuna” and “Sindhu” have been 
used in place of the hitherto common “Ganges”, “Jumna” and 
“Indus”. The index-volume of the Imperial Gazetteer of India has 
been generally followed in the spellings of geographical names, most 
of which have been put with proper diacritical marks. New spell¬ 
ings such as Banaras, and new territorial divisions such as Madhya 
Pradesh, Madhya Bharat, etc. have also been employed. 

The Editor expresses his deep obligations to the scholars who 
have contributed to this volume. Two of them, Dr. Beni Prasad 
and Dr. S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, died before the publication of 
this volume and the Editor takes this opportunity to place on record 
his deep sorrow at their death and his appreciation of the services 

liii 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


rendered by them to the cause of Indian History. As neither of 
them could revise the chapters in their final form, the Editor had to 
take the onerous responsibility of making suitable additions and 
alterations to them without having the benefit of their advice or 
opinion. 

The Editor also likes to place on record the ungrudging services 
rendered by Dr. A. D. Pusalker at every stage of the preparation 
of this series. He has worked very hard in checking references and 
seeing the volume through the press, and has made many valuable 
suggestions for improving the quality of the book and making it 
more useful to the public. 

Dr. B. K. Ghosh, one of the contributors to Vol. I, who had seen 
his chapters in proof, passed away while the book was in press. In 
his death Indian Linguistics hn stained a serious loss. The 
Editor takes this opportunity to convey his condolence to the 
bereaved family. 


liv 


LIST OF M APS* 

1. Sixteen Mahajanapadas 

2. Alexander's Indian Campaign 

3. Asoka’s Empire 

4. India and V/estern Asia 


* Deleted. 


Iv 














; 



■ 


















. 












































. 


, ) 


\ 




- 




























* 











• 




































































v * 


■ 









- 









.. . 




' 






s 










1 . 

2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5 . 

10 . 

6 

7 . 

8 . 

9 . 

11 . 

12 

13 . 

14 

15 . 

16 

17 , 

18 

19 

20 

21 , 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 


LIST OF PLATES 


Description 

Bharhut: Ajatasatru pillar. 

Rajgriha: Rampart walls of cyclopean masonry. 

City of Jetuttara—relief on the north gate of the great Stupa at 
Sanchl. 

City of Kusinagara—relief from Amaravatl. 

Palace facade—Karle, Chaitya cave, right end of verandah. 
Sanchl, Great Stupa: View of the North torana. 

Pleasure palace with stairway—from a relief from Mathura. 
Pleasure palace, General view—from a relief from Mathura. 
Bulandibagh, Patna: View of excavations. 

Sanchl, Great Stupa: General view. 

Gandhara: Votive stiipa. 

Amaravatl: Replica of a stupa on a casing slab. 

Barabar, Lomasa Rishi cave: Fagade. 

Bhaja, Chaitya cave: Fagade. 

Kondane, Chaitya cave: Fagade. 

Nasik, Chaitya cave: Fagade. 

Bedsa, Chaitya cave: Interior view. 

Karle, Chaitya cave: Interior view. 

Karle, Chaitya cave: Details of the pillars of the aisle. 

Karle, Chaitya cave: Verandah. 

Udayagiri, Rani gumpha: General view. 

Nasik, Ushavadata vihara: Front view. 

Nasik, Gautamlputra Satakarni vihara: Front view. 

Junnar, Ganesa lena: Front view. 

Lauriya Nandangarh: Asoka pillar. 

Basarh-Bakhira: Pillar. 

Rampurwa: Lion capital. 

Rampurwa: Bull capital. 

Sarnath: Lion capital. 

Dhauli: Forepart of an elephant. 

Sanchl, Stupa No. II: Ground balustrades. 

Bharhut: Prasenajit pillar—outer face. 

Bharhut: Bodhi Tree shrine. 

Bharhut: Dream of Mayadevl.. 

Bharhut: Sirima devatd. 

Bharhut: Sudarsana yakshint. 

Bharhut: Warrior. 

Bodh Gaya: Square balustrade, partial view. 

Bodh Gaya: Rail medallions. 

Bodh Gaya: Rail medallions. 

Sanchl, Great Stupa: East gateway. 

Sanchl, Great Stupa: Guardian figure on east gateway. 

lvii 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Plate 

Fig. 


43. 


44. 

XIX 

. 45. 


46. 


47. 

XX 

. 48. 


49. 

XXI 

. 50. 


51. 


52. 


53. 

XXII 

. 54. 


55. 


56. 

XXIII 

. 57. 


58. 

XXIV 

. 59. 


60. 


61.. 


62. 

XXV 

. 63. 


64. 

XXVI 

. 65. 


66. 


67. 


68. 

XXVII 

. 69. 


70. 

XXVIII. 

71. 


72. 


73. 

XXIX 

. 74. 


75. 


76. 

XXX 

. 77. 


78. 

XXXI 

. 79. 

XXXII. 

80. 

XXXIII 

. 81. 


82. 

XXXIV 

. 83. 


84. 

XXXV 

. 85. 


86. 

XXXVI 

. 87. 


88. 


89. 


90. 

XXXVII 

. 91. 


Description 

Sanchi, Great Stupa: North gate, architrave support. 
Sanchl, Great Stupa: East gate, detail of carvings. 
Sanchl, Great Stupa: West gate, middle architrave. 
Sanchl, Great Stupa: Same—another face. 

Sanchl, Great Stupa: West gate, lowest architrave. 
Sanchl, Great Stupa: East gate, Bodhi Tree shrine. 
Bhaja: Surya on wall of the vihara. 

Parkham: Yaksha. 

Besnagar: Yakshinl. 

Patna: Yaksha. 

Didarganj: Yakshinl. 

Pawaya: Manibhadra yaksha—Front. 

Sarnath: Bodhisattva of Friar Bala. 

Pawaya: Manibhadra yaksha—Back. 

Katra, Mathura: Bodhisattva. 

Mathura: Bachhanalian scene. 

Mathura, Bhutesar pillar: Yakshinl. 

Mathura: Statue of Kanishka. 

Mathura: Maitreya Bodhisattva. 

Mathura, Bhutesar pillar: Yakshinl. 

Mathura: Jain Ayagapatta. 

Karle: Donors. 

Loriyan Tangai: Buddha. 

Gandhara: Buddha. 


1 

j 


Gandhara: Buddha head—front and profile. 


Gandhara: Buddha among disciples. 

Udayagiri, Rani gumpha: Sculptures in upper storey. 

Udayagiri, Rani gumpha: Sculptures in upper storey. 

Jaggayyapet: Relief carvings. 

Jaggayyapeta: Plaster figure. 

Amaravati: Sculptured jamb. 

^ Amaravati: Sculptured jamb—outer and inner sides. 

J 

Amaravati: Coping stone. 

Amaravati: Fragment of a sculptured jamb. 

Ajanta, Cave IX: Group of votaries approaching a stupa. 

Ajanta, Cave X: Shad-danta Jataka—the fainting of the queen at 
the sight of the tusks. 

Sarnath: Male head. 

Birol: Terracotta head. 

KausambI: Terracotta figurine. 

Bangarh: Terracotta figurine. 

Patna: Terracotta figurine. 

Tamluk: Terracotta figurine. 

1 

Pompei: Indian ivory figurine—front and back. 


j 

t 

J 


Begram: Indian ivory relief carving. 


Coins and intaglios. 


lviii 


ABBREVIATIONS 


A.B. 

ABIA. 

ABORI. 


Anab. 


Anc. Ind. or 
Ancient India. 

Angu. 

Ap. Dh. S. 

ASI. 

ASR. 

ASS. 

BDCRI. 

BEFEO. 

Bhag. P. 

Bharata-Kaumudl. 


BI. 

BSOS. 

BSS. 

Bull. M.F.A. 
CAH. 

CHI. 

Chv. 

CII. 

CL. 

CLAI. 


After the Buddha. 

Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology, 
Leyden. 

Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona. 

Anabasis by Arrian. Ed. A. G. Roos, Leipzig, 

1907. 

Ancient India as described in Classical Litera¬ 
ture. Translated and copiously annotated 
by J. W. McCrindle, Westminster, 1901. 
A.nguttara Nikdya. 

Apastamba Dharma-sutra. 

Archaeological Survey of India. 

Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey 
of India. 

Anandasrama Sanskrit Series, Poona. 

Bulletin of the Deccan College Research 
Institute, Poona. 

Bulletin de Vtcole Francaise d’Exteme Orient, 
Hanoi. 

Bhagavata Purdna. 

Studies in Indology in honour of Dr. Radha 
Kumud Mookerji. Allahabad, 1945. 
Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta. 

Bulletin of the School of Oriental (and 
African) Studies, London. 

Bombay Sanskrit Series. 

Bulletin of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 
Cambridge Ancient History. 

Cambridge History of India. 

Chullavagga (of Vinaya Pitaka). 

Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. 

Carmichael Lectures. 

Corporate Life in Ancient India. By Dr. R. C. 
Majumdar. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1922. 


lix 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


CR. 

D'hammap. 

Dialogues. 

Digha. 

Div. 

DKA. 

EB. 

EC. 

EHAC. 

EHD. 

EHI. 

El. 

ERE. 

GIL. 

GOS. 

HBR. 

HC. 

HCSL. 

HIEA. 2 


HIIA. 

HIL. 

HOS. 

HSL. 

IiTB. 


Calcutta Review. 

Dhammapada. 

Dialogues of the Buddha. Translated from the 

Pali by T. W. Rhys Davids. 

Digha Nikdya. 

Divyavadana. 

Dynasties of the Kali Age. By F. E. Pargiter. 

Londan, 1913. 

Encyclopaedia Britannica. 

Epigraphia Carnatica. 

Early History of the Andhra Country. By K. 
Gopalachari. Madras, 1941. 

Early History of the Dekkan. By Sir R. G. 
Bhandarkar. 

Early History of India. By Vincent A. Smith. 

4th Edition. Oxford, 1924. 

Epigraphia Indica, Delhi. 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. Edited 
by J. Hastings. 

Gaschichte d.er indischen Litteratur. By M. 
Winternit z. 

Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, Baroda. 

History of Bengal (Vol. I). Edited by Dr. R. C. 

Majumdar. Dacca, 1943. 

Hindu Civilization. By Dr. Radha Kumud 
Mookerji. London, 1936. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature. By 
M: Krishnamachariar. Madras, 1937. 

History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. 
By J. Fergusson. 2nd Edition. London, 
1910. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. By A. 

K. Coomaraswamy. London, 1927. 

History of Indian Literature. 

Harvard Oriental Series. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. 

Si-yu-ld. Buddhist Records of the Western 
World. Translated from the Chinese of 
Hiuen Tsang (A.D. 629) by Samuel Beal. 
2 Vols. London, 1884. 

lx 


ABBREVIATIONS 


HTW. 


Hv. 

IA. 

IAL. 

IC. 

IHQ. 

Invasion. 


JA. 

JAOS. 

JASB. 

Jat. 

JBBRAS. 

JBHU. 

JBORS. 

JDL. 

JGIS. 

JGJRI. 

JIH. 

JISOA. 

JNSI. 

JRAS. 

JRASB (L). 

KA. 


KAT. 


Kane Comm. 


On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, A.D. 629- 
645. Translated by Thomas Watters. Edited 
by T. W. Rhys Davids and S. W. Bushell. 
2 Vols. London, 1904-05. 

Harivamsa (Bombay Edition). 

Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

Indian Art and Letters, London. 

Indian Culture, Calcutta. 

Indian Historical Quarterly, Calcutta. 

Invasion of India by Alexander the Great as 
described by Arrian, Q. Curtius, Diodoros, 
Plutarch and Justin. Tr. by J. W. McCrindle. 
Westminster, 1896. 

Jornmal Asiatique, Paris. 

Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
Calcutta. 

Jdtaka (or Jatakas). 

Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, Bombay. 

Journal of the Banaras Hindu University. 

Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research 
Society, Patna. 

Journal of the Department of Letters, Calcutta 
University. 

Journal of the Greater India Society. 

Journal of the Ganganath Jha Research Insti¬ 
tute, Allahabad. 

Journal of Indian History. 

Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art. 

Journal of the Numismatic Society of India, 
Bombay. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland, London. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
Letters, Calcutta. 

Kautiliyam Arthasdstram. Edited by R. 
Shamasastry, Mysore, 1919. 

English Translation of KA. By R. Shamasastry. 
Bangalore, 1915. 

Vol. A Volume of Studies in Indology Presented to 
Prof. P. V. Kane. Poona, 1941. 

lxi 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


KHDS. 

History of Dharmasdstra, By P. V. Kane. 

Majjh. 

Majjhima Nikaya. 

Manu. 

Manu-smriti. 

♦ 

MASI. 

Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of 
India. 

Mbh. 

Mahdbhdrata (Bombay Edition, unless speci¬ 
fically stated otherwise). 

Mbh (Cr. Ed.). 

Critical Edition of the Mahdbhdrata. Publish¬ 
ed by the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona (used for Parvans hitherto 
published). 

Megasthenes. 

Ancient India as described by Megasthenes 
and Arrian. By J. W. McCrindle. Calcutta, 
Bombay, London, 1877. 

Mem. N.S.I. 

Memoirs of the Numismatic Society of India. 

Mv. 

Mahdvagga (of Vinaya Pitaka). 

NHIP. 

New History of the Indian People (Vol. VI. 
Edited by R. C. Majumdar and A. S. Altekar. 
Lahore, 1946). 

NIA. 

New Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

Num. Chron. 

Numismatic Chronicle. 

OST. 

Original Sanskrit Texts. By J. Muir. 

P. 

Purdna. 

P.E. 

Pillar Edict. 

Periplus. 

Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. Translated 
and annotated by W. H. Schoff. London, 
1912. 

PHAI. 

Political History of Ancient India. By H. C. 
Raychaudhuri. 4th Ed. Calcutta, 1938. 

PIHC. 

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress. 

PO. 

Poona Orientalist, Poona. 

POC. 

Proceedings of the All-India Oriental Con¬ 
ference. 

Proc. N.S.I. 

Proceedings of the Numismatic Society of 
India. 

PTS. 

Pali Text Society. 

QJMS. 

Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society. 
Bangalore. 

Raj. 

Rajatarangini by Kalhana. 

Ram. 

Rdmdyana. 

R.E. 

Rock Edict. 

Sam. 

Samyutta Nikaya. 


lxii 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Sat. Br. 

SBB. 

SBE. 

SBH. 

SD. 

Satapatha Brdhmana. 

Sacred Books of the Buddhists, London. 

Sacred Books of the East, Oxford. 

Sacred Books of the Hindus, Allahabad. 
Sanskrit Drama. By A. B. Keith. Oxford, 
1924. 

Sel. Ins. 

Select Inscriptions bearing on Indian History 
and Civilization. By D. C. Sircar. Calcutta, 
1942 . 

Sumangala V. 
Thomas Comm. 

Vol. 

Vinaya. 

Sumangala Vildsini (Comm, on the Dlgha). 

A. Volume of Eastern and Indian Studies in 
honour of F. W. Thomas. Bombay, 1939. 
Vinaya Texts, SBE, Vols. 13 and 17: 

Translated from the Pali by T. W. Rhys 
Davids and H. Oldenberg. 

VS. 

Vaishnavism, Saivism and minor religious 
systems. By. R. G. Bhandarkar. 

WZKM. 

Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Morgen - 
landes. 

ZDMG. 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen 
Gesselschaft. 

ZII. 

Zeitschrift fiir Indologie und Iranistik. 


Ixiii 





























■ 






' 




’ 
































V 








. 










. 































/ 

■ 

























































/ 



























CHAPTER I 


NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH 
CENTURY B. Q 

I. THE SIXTEEN GREAT STATES 

It would appear from what has been said above in Vol. I, Ch. 
XV, that at the beginning of the sixth century B.C. there was no 
paramount power in North India, which was divided into a large 
number of independent states. These were the three important 
kingdoms of Magadha, Kosala, and Vatsa, and a host of minor ones 
such as Kuru, Panchala, Surasena, Kasi, Mithiia, Anga, Kalinga, 
Asmaka, Gandhara and Kamboja. Two other kingdoms, those of 
the Haihayas and the Vltihotras, are also mentioned in the Puranas, 
but their location is uncertain. One of them probably represents 
Avanti, and the other the Chedi kingdom. 

The same political condition is reflected in the stereotyped list 
of sixteen great countries (Solasamahajanapada) which, according 
to Buddhist texts, 1 flourished shortly before the time of Gautama 
Buddha. They are as follows according to the Anguttara Nikdya :— 
Anga, Magadha, Kasi, Kosala, Vriji (Vajji), Malla, Chedi, Vatsa 
(Vaihsa), Kuru, Panchala, Matsya (Machchha), Surasena, Asvaka or 
Asmaka (Assaka), Avanti, Gandhara and Kamboja, each being 
named after the people who settled down there or colonised it. The 
Janavasabha Suttanta ( Digha Nikdya , II) refers to some of them 
in pairs, viz. Kasi-Kosala, Vriji (Vajji)-Malla, Chedi-Vaihsa, Kuru- 
Panchala and Matsya-Surasena. The Chullaniddesa adds Kalinga 
to the list and substitutes Yona for Gandhara. The Mahdvastu list 
agrees with that in the Anguttara Nikdya save that it omits Gandhara 
and Kamboja and mentions Sivi and Dasarna instead. 

The Jain Bhagavatl Sutra (otherwise called Vydkhyd-Prajnapti) 
also mentions sixteen countries, though it gives a somewhat differ¬ 
ent list:—Anga, Vanga, Magaha, Malaya, Malava, Achchha, Vachchha, 
Kochchha, Padha, Ladha (Radha), Bajji (Vajji), Moll* Kail, Kosala, 
Avaha and Sambhuttara. 2 

1. Anguttara , I, 213; IV, 252, 256, 260; Mahdvastu , I, 34, II, 3; Vinaya Texts II, 
146 fn; Ni ddesa II, 37. 

2. Saya XV, Uddessa I (Hoernle—the Uvdsagadasdo, II, Appendix). 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

The Mahagovinda Suttanta 1 tells us that Mahagovinda, the 
Brahmin chaplain to king Renu, divided his empire into seven sepa¬ 
rate kingdoms with their respective capitals as named below:— 


1 . 

Kalinga 

capital 

Dantapura. 

2. 

Assaka 

>> 

Potana. 

3. 

Avanti 

»> 

Mahishmatl (Mahissatl). 

4. 

Sovlra 

»> 

Roruka. 

5. 

Videha 

>> 

Mithila. 

6. 

Anga 


Champa. 

7. 

KasI 

>> 

VaranasS. 


In spite of striking resemblances, especially between the Puranic 
and Buddhist lists, there are also important differences. This leads 
to the assumption that the lists were originally drawn up at different 
times, and they reflect the difference in their author’s knowledge of, 
interest in, or intimacy with, the different parts of the country. This 
is best illustrated by the mention in the Buddhist and Jain texts of 
the Vriji or Vajji and Malla which are omitted in the Puranas; for it 
is well known that these two states were the strongholds of both the 
heterodox religious sects. 

The mention of these states is of special importance for, as will 
be presently shown, they were autonomous clans with a non- 
monarchical (republican or oligarchical) form of government. The 
Puranas do not indicate in any way the existence of such states in 
this period. But these formed a distinctive feature in Indian politics 
in the sixth century B.C., for the Buddhist texts reveal the existence 
of many such clans at the time of Gautama Buddha. These are the 
Sakiyas or Sakyas of Kapilavastu, the Mallas of Pava and Ku&nara 
(Kuslnagara), Lichchhavis of Vesali (Vaisall), the Videhas of Mithila, 
the Koliyas of Ramagama, the Bulis of Allakappa, the Kalamas of 
Kesaputta, the Moriyas of Pipphalivana and the Bhaggas with their 
capital on Surhsumara Hill. The Buddhist account is fully supported 
by the Ashtadhyayi of Panini who, according to Sir R. G. Bhandar- 
kar, lived about 700 B.C. and, according to Professor A. Macdonell, 
about 500 B. C. Panini, in his grammar, mentions both classes of 
States, viz. the Republics, to which he applies the term Sarhgha or 
Gotia, and the kingdoms called Janapadas. Some of the leading 
Republics mentioned by him were the Kshudrakas (Greek Oxy- 
drakai), MSlavas (Malloi), Ambashthas (Abastanoi), Hastinayana 

1. Dxgha II, 235. 

2 



NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 

(Astakenoi), Prakanva (Parikanioi or modern Ferghana), Madras, 
Madhumantas (modern Mohmands), Aprltas (Greek Aparytai = 
modern Afridis), Vasati (Ossadii), Bhaggas, Sibis (Sibai), Aivayana 
(Greek Aspasioi) and Asvakayana (Greek Assakenoi with their 
capital at Massaga = Masakavatl). Most of these continued up to 
the time of Alexander’s invasion which they stoutly resisted. As 
regards the J anapadas or kingdoms, Panini mentions, among others, 
Gandhara, Avanti, Kosala, Usinara, Videha, as also Magadha, Anga 
and Vahga, which he designates as Prdchya J anapadas (IV, 1, 170). 1 
Baudhayana in his Dharma-Sntra mentions states like Surashtra, 
Avanti, Magadha, Anga, Pundra, and Vahga. The existence of non- 
monarchical clans can be traced throughout the period under review. 
They are expressly referred to by Megasthenes and Kautilya, and 
names of many of them occur in epigraphic records of the fourth 
century A.D. 

We may thus reasonably conclude that there were in the sixth 
century B.C. a large number of states, both great and small, and 
many of these were not ruled by kings but formed petty republics 
or oligarchies. This political condition of North India—for all the 
states so far mentioned, except perhaps Asmaka, belonged to this 
region—thus resembled that of Greece in the same period, though 
naturally the size of the kingdoms as well as of some of the non- 
monarchical states in India was much bigger. The location, origin, 
and early history of most of these states have been discussed above 2 
on the basis of traditions contained in Brahmanical texts. The 
Buddhist and other texts, which testify to their existence in the 
sixth century B.C., only incidentally refer to them and do not give 
any connected history except in the case -of Magadha. We have, 
therefore, to confine ourselves to a few isolated facts that may be 
gleaned from them about these states, reserving a detailed history 
of Magadha for the next chapter. 

Anga 

The Jain Prajndpana ranks Anga and Vahga in the first group 
of Aryan peoples. Anga, as described in the Mahdbhdrata, seems to 
have comprised the districts of Bhagalpur and Monghyr. The river 
Champa (probably modern Chandan) formed the boundary between 
Anga in the east and Magadha in the west. The kingdom of Anga 
was bounded by the Gahga on the north. Its capital Champa, 

1. TheTcitations from Pariini are taken from Chapter III of this volume written 
by Dr. R. K. Mookerji (Ed.). 

2. Vol. I, Chapters XIII-XV. 


3 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


formerly known as Malini, stood on the right bank of the Gahga, 
near its junction with the river Champa and was at a distance of 60 
yojanas from Mithila. 1 It was one of the most flourishing cities. The 
LHgha Nilcdya refers to it as one of the six principal cities of India. 
It was a great centre of trade and commerce and its merchants sailed 
to distant Suvamabhumi. There was a famous tank called Gaggara 
in the neighbourhood of Champa. Bhaddiya and Assapura were 
the other towns of the Anga kingdom. Its long rivalry with, and 
Anal conquest by, Magadha has been mentioned above. 2 

Kdsi 

The kingdom of Kasi, wdiose extent is given in the Jatakas as 
three hundred leagues, was wealthy and prosperous. The rivers 
Varuiia and Asi by which the city was bounded respectively on the 
north and south gave rise to the name of its capital city Varanasi, 
modern Banaras, eighty miles below Allahabad on the north bank 
of the Gahga. The Jatakas speak of a long rivalry between the two 
kingdoms of Kasi and Kosala for supremacy. There also existed 
occasional rivalries between Kasi and Anga and between Kasi and 
Magadha. Kasi, which was once an important state, was conquered 
by Kosala some time before Buddha. 3 

Kosala 

The kingdom of Kosala roughly corresponded to modern Oudh. 
It was probably bounded by the Sadanira (Gandak) river on the east, 
Panchala on the west, the Sarpika or Syandika (Sai) river on the 
south, and the Nepal hills on the north. The country of Kosala pro¬ 
per was divided into north and south, evidently by the river Sarayu. 
£ravasti was the capital of northern Kosala, and Kusavatl, the capital 
of southern Kosala. Besides the three important cities, Sravasti, 
Saketa and Ayodhya, mentioned above, 4 Kosala had some minor 
towns like Setavya, Ukkattha, and Kitagiri. 

The conquest of Kasi made Kosala a powerful state. It soon ex¬ 
tended its supremacy over the Sakyas of Kapilavastu, probably also 
over the Kalamas of Kesaputta, and other neighbouring states. Its 
king Prasenajit or Pasenadi, 5 a contemporary of Buddha, figures as 

1. According to Cunningham the modern villages called Champanagara and 
Champapura near Bhagalpur represent the site of the ancient city of Champa; 
Law, Geography of Early Buddhism, p. 6. 

2. Vol. I, p. 328; 4th impression (1965), p. 332. 

3. Vol. I, p. 327; 4th impression (1965), p. 331. 

4. Vol. I, Ch. XIV. 

5. This is the Pali form of the name, as is the case with the other alternative 
forms of names of persons and localities in this chapter. 


4 



NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 

one of the most important rulers of the time. He carried on a pro¬ 
tracted struggle with Ajatasatru, king of Magadha, as will be des- 
cribed later. 

Although not definitely converted to Buddhism, Prasenajit was 
a great admirer of the Buddha, and the Buddhist texts record many 
conversations between the two. His admiration extended also to the 
Sakya clan, in which the Master was born, and he asked for a daughter 
of a Sakya chief as his wife. The &akyas, too proud of their lineage 
to enter into such an alliance, but too weak to refuse openly the 
request of such a powerful potentate in their immediate neighbour¬ 
hood, had resort to a trick. The offspring of a i£akya chief by a slave 
girl was passed off as the legitimate daughter of the Sakya race and 
married to Prasenajit. A son, Vidudabha, was born of this marriage, 
and when he paid a visit to his maternal grandfather the true origin 
of his mother came to light. It naturally created a great sensation, 
and Prasenajit discarded both his queen and son. But the great 
Buddha told him that whatever might have been the origin of the 
queen, the son belonged to the caste of his father, and on his advice 
Prasenajit restored both the queen and the prince to favour. 

Whether it was a repercussion of this incident or not, Prasenajit 
was involved in domestic troubles. In his last interview with the 
Buddha, which took place in the 6akya country, he contrasted the 
dissensions in his own household and government with the perfect 
peace maintained in the Buddhist Order. But even while he was 
talking with the Buddha, the minister, who was left in charge of the 
kingdom, proclaimed prince Vidudabha as king. Prasenajit, being 
deserted by his people, proceeded towards Raj agriha to secure the 
help of Ajatasatru. But weary and worn out, he reached that city 
only to die outside its gates. Such was the miserable end of a great 
career highly extolled in the Buddhist texts. It is not altogether 
impossible that his attachment to Buddhism alienated his people and 
brought about his tragic end, though some texts represent him as a 
great patron of the Brahmanas to whom he granted territory in the 
royal domains with extensive powers. 

Of all the kings of this period, Prasenajit is the only outstanding 
personality, thanks to the detailed references in the Buddhist texts. 
The summing up of his character by Mrs. Rhys Davids is worth 
quoting. “He is shown combining, like so many of his class all the 
world over, a proneness to affairs of sex with the virtues and affec¬ 
tion of a good ‘family man*, indulgence at the table with an equally 


5 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


natural wish to keep in good physical form, a sense of honour and 
honesty, shown in his disgust at legal cheating, with a greed for 
acquiring wealth and war indemnities, and a fussiness over lost pro¬ 
perty, magnanimity towards a conquered foe with a callousness over 
sacrificial slaughter and the punishment of criminals. Characteristic 
also is both his superstitious nervousness over the sinister significance 
of dreams, due, in reality, to disordered appetites, and also his 
shrewd politic care to be on good terms with all religious orders, 
whether he had testimonials to their genuineness or not.” 1 

Vi^u^abha, who succeeded him, invaded the Sakya country 
and massacred the Sakya clan, sparing neither men nor women 
and children. Though many escaped, it was the virtual end of the 
famous autonomous clan which produced one of the greatest 
teaehefs the world has seen. The fraud practised by the Sakyas 
in respect of his mother is represented to be the cause of his wrath, 
though there might have been political reasons or other factors. 
Nothing else is known of Vidudabha or the kingdom of Kosala after 
him. 

VHji 

The Vfijian (Vajjian) confederacy consisted of eight 2 or nine 3 
clans of which Videhans, the Lichchhavis, the Jnatrikas and the 
Vajjis were the most prominent. Vrijigama was a locality near Vai- 
sall. Vaisali (the modern Basarh in the Muzaffarpur District of North 
Bihar) was the capital of the Lichchhavis and the headquarters of 
the powerful Vrijian confederacy. It seems to have been formerly 
under a monarchical form of government. 4 Visala mentioned in 
the Rdmdyana was an excellent town (uttama purl). The city was 
rich, prosperous, and populous, being surrounded by three walls at 
a distance of a gavuta from one another, each provided with gates 
and watch-towers. It had high buildings, pinnacled houses, lotus 
ponds 5 etc. Videha (modern Tirhut), which was once a very 
powerful monarchy with Mithila as its capital, was bounded by the 
Kausiki in the east, the Ganga in the south, the Sadanlra in the 
west and the Himalayas in the north. Cunningham identifies 

1. Bhandarkar Com. Vol., p. 134. 

2. Sumahqala V., II. 519: an inference drawn from the expression atthakulika. 

3. KalpasHtra, sec. 128; Nirayavali Sutra; an inference drawn from the expression 
‘Nine Lichchhavis.’ 

4. Cf. Vol. I, Ch. XIV, pp. 272, 276; 287, 291ff, 4th impression (1965). pp. 277, 
280, 291, 296ff. 

5. For an account of the city, cf. Vinaya Texts in Gilgit Manuscripts Vol. Ill, 
Part 2. 


6 





NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 

Mithila with Janakapura, a small town within the Nepal border. 
According to early Jain texts the Jnatrikas, to whom belonged 
Siddhartha and his son Mafia vira, had their seats at Kundapura or 
Kun^agrama and Koliaga, which were suburbs of Vaisali. Ukka- 
chela was a Vrijian town on the left bank of the Ganga. Panini 
(IV, 2, 131) mentions the Vrijis or Vajjis. In Kautilya’s Artha- 
sastra, the Vrijikas or Vajjis are distinguished from the Lichchhi- 
vikas or Lichchhavis. As regards the remaining confederate clans, 
we have no definite information as yet. 

Some scholars are of opinion that the Lichchhavis were of 
foreign origin, but this view is not supported by evidence. 1 Indian 
tradition represents them as Kshatriyas. The ruling clan of the 
Lichchhavis was firmly established during the days of Mahavlra 
and Gautama Buddha, and the latter gave eloquent expression to 
his great admiration for their unity, strength, noble bearing and 
republican constitution. The Lichchhavis were on friendly terms 
with king Prasenajit of Kosala. Their relation with the neighbour¬ 
ing Mallas was on the whole friendly, and the Jain books speak 
of the nine Lichchhavis as having formed a confederacy with nine 
Mallas and eighteen gana-rtijas of Kasi-Kosala. But the great rival 
of Vaisali was Magadha. According to tradition, the Vaisallans 
sent an army to attack Magadha at the time of Bimbisara. 2 The 
Nirayavall Sutra informs us that Bimbisara married a Lichchhavi 
princess named Chellana, daughter of king Chetaka of Vaisali, 
whose sister was the mother of Mahavlra. This matrimonial alliance 
was, according to D. R. Bhandarkar, the result of the peace con¬ 
cluded after the war between Bimbisara and the Lichchhavis. But 
it was also instrumental in bringing about the ruin of the Lichchha¬ 
vis as will be related in the next Chapter. 

Malla 

The Mallas are often mentioned in Buddhist and Jain works. 
They seem to have been a powerful tribe dwelling in Eastern India. 
Bhlmasena is said to have conquered the chief of the Mallas in the 
course of his expedition to Eastern India. The BhTshmaparva of the 
Mahdbhdrata similarly mentions the Mallas along with such peoples 
of Eastern India as the Angas, Vangas, and Kalingas. The kingdom 
of the Mallas consisted of nine territories, 3 one of each of the nine 

1. Cf. Law, Some Kshatriya Tribes of Ancient India , pp. 26 fT. 

2. HTB, II, 166. 

3. Kalpasutra , Sec. 128; Niraydvalx Sutra. 

7 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


confederate clans. The territories of two of these confederate clans 
were prominent at the time of the rise of Buddhism, one with its 
headquarters at Kusinara and the other with PaVa as its chief town. 
The first abutted on the Sakya territory and the second on the Vriji. 
The river Kakustha (Kakuttha) formed the boundary between the 
two territories. The sala grove of Kusinara was on the river 
Hirahnavati. 

According to tradition, Kusinara was built on the site of the 
ancient city of Kusavatl, which was the capital of king Maha- 
sudassana. In the neighbourhood stood an extensive forest called 
Mahavana. There were some other Malla towns, viz., Bhoganagara 
lying between Jambugrama and Pava, Anupiya between Kusinara 
and the river Anorna, and Uruvelakappa. Of the two cities of Pava 
and Kusinara, the second has been identified with Kasia on the 
smaller Gandak about 35 miles to the east of Gorakhpur, and the 
first with the village called Padaraona, 12 miles to the north-east 
of Kasia. 1 


The Mallas, like the Lichchhavis, are mentioned by Manu as 
Vratya Kshatriyas. They are called Vasishthas (Vasetthas) in the 
Mahaparinibbana Suttanta. Like the Videhas, the Mallas had ori¬ 
ginally a monarchical form of government, Okkaka (Ikshvaku) being 
mentioned in the Kusa Jataka (No. 531) as a Malla king. The 
Mallas were a sangha or corporation, of which the members called 
themselves rajas. Buddhaghosha also calls them rajas. The 
Mallas and Lichchhavis became allies for self-defence, though the 
Bhaddasala Jataka (Jataka No. 465) offers us an account of a conflict 
between them. The Mallas retained their independence till the death 
of Buddha, for we find both the main sections of the Mallas claiming 
a share of his bodily remains. 

Jainism and Buddhism found many followers among the Mallas. 
From the Jain Kalpaswtra we learn that the nine Mallakis or Malla 
chiefs were among those that instituted an illuminaton on the day 
of the new moon saying, “since the light of intelligence is gone, let 
us make an illumination of material matter.” 2 

The Mallas appear to to have lost their independence not long 
after Buddha’s death and their dominions were annexed to the 
Magadhan empire. 3 

1. While the identification of Kusinara may be regarded as reasonably certain 
that of Pava is very doubtful (Ed.). 

2. SBE, XXII, p. 266. 

2. Bhandarkar, CL, 1.79. 


8 



NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 


Chedi (Cheti) 

The Chedis or Chetis had two distinct settlements, of which 
one was in the mountains of Nepal and the other in Bundelkhand 
near Kausambl. D. R. Bhandarkar thinks that Cheta or Chetiya 
corresponds roughly to the modern Bundelkhand. 1 According to old 
authorities the country of the Chedis lay near the Yamuna, mid¬ 
way between the kingdoms of the Kurus and the Vatsas. Sotthivatl- 
nagara, probably identical with Sukti or &uktimatl of the Mdha- 
bharata, was its capital. Sahajati was a town of the Chedis which 
stood on the right bank of the Yamuna. 

The Chedis were one of the most ancient tribes of India and 
their early history has been discussed above. 2 A branch of the 
Chedis founded a royal dynasty in the kingdom of Kalihga, according 
to the Hathigumpha Inscription of Kharavela, to which reference 
will be made later. 

Vatsa 

The country of Vatsa was very rich and prosperous and noted 
for the high quality of its cotton fabrics. Kausambl, which was its 
capital, is now represented by the village of Kosam on the right 
bank of the Yamuna. The village of Pabhosa is about two and a 
half miles north-east of Kosam. In a modern Jain dedicatory 
inscription the hill of Pabhosa is placed just outside the town of 
Kausambl. 

The migration of the Kurus or Bharatas to the Vatsa country 
and their history up to king Udayana, the contemporary of the 
Buddha, have been narrated above. 3 Udayana (Udena) was a very 
powerful king and a number of interesting legends centre rounds his 
rivalry with king Pradyota of Avanti. The latter, although very 
jealous because Udayana surpassed him in glory, was unwilling to 
risk an open campaign against him, and hit upon a device to capture 
his hated rival. Knowing Udayana’s passion for catching elephants, 
he had one made of wood, with sixty soldiers concealed inside, and 
set it up in a forest near the boundary of the two kingdoms. Udayana 
fell into the trap and was taken prisoner. He knew a wonderful 
secret for taming elephants, and Pradyota offered him his liberty 
in exchange for revealing it. But Udayana would teach him the 
secret only if he received due salutation as a teacher from his pupil. 
Being unwilling himself to offer salutation, Pradyota made Udayana 

1. CL, 1. 52. 

2. Vol. I, Ch. XIV. 

3. Vol. I, Ch. XV, p. 321. 


9 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


agree to teach it to someone else on the same condition. Lest an 
outsider would learn the precious secret, he engaged his own 
daughter Vasuladatta (Vasavadatta) for the purpose, but told Uda- 
yana that a hunch-backed woman behind a curtain would pay him 
salutation and learn the secret from him. It was not long, how¬ 
ever, before the inevitable took place; Udayana fled with the princess 
and made her his queen. 

Udayana is said to have had many other queens, one of whom 
was a daughter of a Kuru Brahmana (worth citing as an instance 
of a pratiloma marriage) and the other a sister of king Darsaka of 
Magadha. He is the hero of three dramas, Svapna-Vasavadatta of 
Bhasa and Priyadarsika and Ratnavali of Harsha, and we know 
from Meghaduta of Kalidasa, that even in the time of this poet 
many stories about Udayana were widely current in Avanti. An 
account of his conquest or digvijaya is given in the Kathasarit - 
sdgara . According to the Priyadarsika he conquered Kalinga and 
restored his father-in-law Dridhavarman to the throne of Anga. 
The latter is probably the same as Dadhivahana w T ho, according to 
another legend, was defeated by Udayana’s father. 1 How far these 
legends contain a kernel of historical facts is, of course, difficult to 
say. 

Udayana was at first not favourably inclined towards Buddhism, 
and it is said that in a fi f of drunken rage he tortured Pindola, a 
famous member of the Buddhist order, by tying him down in a nest 
of brown ants. Later, however, the same Pindola made him a 
devotee of Buddha. 

Udayana survived Buddha. He had a son named Bodhi, about 
whom some details are given in Buddhist texts. But we do not 
definitely know anything about Vatsa after Udayana, not even 
whether Bodhi ever succeeded his father on the throne. According 
to a Jataka story (No. 353) prince Bodhi dwelt in Sumsumaragiri 
and this proves that the Bhagga (or Bharga) state referred to above 
was a dependency of Vatsa. 

Kuru 

According to the Jatakas, the capital of the Kurus was Indra- 
prastha (Indapatta) near modern Delhi, which extended over seven 
leagues. In Buddha^s time, the Kuru country was ruled by a titular 
chieftain named Koravya and had very little political importance 
of its own. The Kurus continued to enjoy their ancient reputation 
for deep wisdom and sound health. The Jain Uttarddhyayana 

1. Vol. I, pp. 321, 327 f. 


10 



NORTH iNDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C, 


Sutra 1 refers to a king named Isukara who was the ruler of the 
ancient, wealthy, famous and beautiful town of Isukara ( the Arrow- 
maker). 

The Kurus had matrimonial relations with the Yadavas, the 
Bhojas and the Panchalas. The Jatakas contain an account of king 
Dhanahjaya introduced as a prince of the race of Yudhishthira. 

The earlier monarchical constitution of the Kurus subsequently 
gave place to a republic. They, however, continued the monarchical 
form of government in the Vatsa country. 

Panchala 

Originally Panchala was the country, north and east of Delhi, 
from the foot of the Himalayas to the river Chambal, and the ‘Ixahga 
divided it into North and Sout^ 1 Panchala. It roughly corresponds 
to the modern Baduan, Farrukhabad and the adjoining districts of 
the Uttar Pradesh. The division of the country into northern or 
Uttara-Pahchala and southern or Pakshina-Panchala is supported 
by the Mahabhdrata , the Jatakas and the Divydvadana (p. 435). 
The Northern Panchala had its capital at Ahichchhatra or Adhich- 
chhatra or Adisadra of Ptolemy or Chhatravati (identical with 
modern Ramnagar in the Bareilly District) while Southern Psh- 
chala had its capital at Kampilya, that is, Kampil in the Farrukha¬ 
bad District. King Chulani Brahmadatta of Panchala finds mention 
in the Ramdyana , Maha-Ummagga Jataka (No. 546), the Uttard- 
dkyayana Sutra , and the Svapna-Vdsavadatta . The famous city of 
Kanvakubja or Kanauj was situated in the kingdom of Panchala. 
Originally a monarchical clan, the Panchalas formed a sangha or 
republican corporation in the sixth and fifth centuries B.C. 

Matsya 

The Matsya or Machchha country corresponds to the modern 
territory of Jaipur. It included the whole of the present territory 
of Alwar with a portion of Bharatpur. The capital of the Matsya 
country was Viratanagara (modern Bairat) named after its founder 
king Virata. 

In Pali literature the Matsyas as a people are usually associated 
with the Surasenas. The Apara Matsya (Western Matsya) w r as 
probably the hill tract on the north bank of the Chambal. In the 
Rdmayana, we find a similar reference to VIra Matsya A branch 
of the Matsyas is similarly found in later days in the Vizagapatam 


1. SBE, XLV, 62. 


If 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


region. The Matsyas had no political importance of their own during 
the time of Buddha. King Sahaja ruled over the Chedis and the 
Matsyas. 1 Matsya thus once formed a part of the Chedi kingdom. 

Siirasena 

The gurasena country had its capital at Madhura or Mathura 
on the Yamuna. The ancient Greek writers refer to it as Sourasenoi 
and its capital as Methora. From Sankissa to Mathura it was a 
distance of four yojanas. Avantiputra, king of the Surasenas, was 
the first among the chief disciples of Buddha through whose help 
Buddhism gained ground in the Mathura region. It may be inferred 
from the epithet Avantiputra that there existed a matrimonial 
alliance between Avanti and Surasena. The Andhakas and Vrishnis 
of Mathura are referred to in Panini’s Ashtddhydyi. 2 In Kautilya’s 
Arthasdstra the Vrishnis are described as a Sangha , i.e., a republican 
corporation. The Vrishnis, Andhakas and other allied tribes form¬ 
ed a Sangha and Vasudeva (Krishna) is described as a ‘Sangha- 
mukhya The name of the Vrishni corporation is also found on, a 
coin. 3 Mathura, the capital of the Surasenas, was also known at 
the time of Megasthenes (300 B.C.) as the centre of Krishna wor¬ 
ship, and the Siirasena kingdom then became an integral part of 
the Magadhan empire. 

Asvaka 

Assaka, Asmaka or Asvaka was originally a country in the 
basin of the Sindhu. It may be identified with the kingdom of 
Assakenoi of the Greek writers in the Swat Valley. The Asmakas, as 
noted above, are also mentioned by Panini. They are placed in the 
north-west in the Mdrkandeya Puvdna and the Brihat-samhita. The 
early Buddhist texts refer to Assaka as a Mahajanapada, the capital 
of which was Potana or Potali corresponding to Paudanya of the 
Mahdbhdrata . This Assaka of Buddhist literature was a south Indian 
country. The river Godavari flowed between the two neighbour¬ 
ing kingdoms of Assaka and Mulaka or Alaka. The latter had 
Pratishthana or Paithan as its capital and Assaka lay immediately to 
its south. A Brahmin named Bavarl settled near a village on the 
Godavari in the Assaka territory in the Dakshinapatha after having 
left the Kosala country. According to the Commentary on the Sutta - 
Nipdta, the two kingdoms of Assaka and Mulaka are represented 

1. Mbh. (Cr. Ed.) V, 72, 16. 

2. IV, 1, 114; VI, 2, 34. 

3. CLAP, 279. 

12 




NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 

as two Andhaka or Andhra territories. Bha^tasvami, the commen¬ 
tator of Kau^ilya’s Arthasdstra, identifies Asmaka with Maharashtra. 
The Assaka country of the Buddhists, therefore, whether it be iden¬ 
tical with Maharashtra or located on the Godavari, lay outside the 
pale of the Madhyadesa. 1 

Asmaka and Mulaka appear as scions of the Ikshvaku family. 
Brahmadatta, a king of the Assakas, was a contemporary of the 
king of Anga and KasI named Dhritarashtra (Dhatarattha). Another 
king of Assaka named Aruna won a victory over the king of Kalihga. 
At the time of Buddha the ruler of Assaka was a king whose son was 
Prince Sujata. 

Avanti 

Avanti was an important kingdom of western India. It was 
one of the four great monarchies in India when Buddhism arose, the 
other three being Kosala, Vatsa and Magadha. It appears to have 
been divided by the river Vetravatl into north and south. It fell 
to the share of Vessabhu, one of the seven contemporary kihgs of 
the line of Bharat a. 2 Mahissati (Sk. Mahishmatl) was then the 
capital of Avanti. But the Pali canonical texts mention Ujjeni 
(Sk. UjjayinI) as the capital of king Chanda Pradyota (Pajjota) of 
Avanti in the time of Mahavlra and Buddha. D. R. Bhandarkar 3 
seeks to account for this discrepancy by the assumption that the 
country of the Avantis was divided into two kingdoms, one placed 
in the Dakshinapatha having Mahishmatl for its capital, and the 
other, i.e., the northern kingdom, having its capital at Ujjayani. 
The country or kingdom of Avanti may be taken to have corresponded 
roughly to modern Malwa, Nimar and the adjoining parts of the 
Madhya Pradesh. Both UjjayinI and Mahishmatl stood on the 
southern high road extending from Raj agriha to Pratishthana. 
Vidisa (Bhilsa in old Gwalior State) lay on the road to UjjayinI. 
Dasama has been mentioned in the Mahdbhdrata 4 as well as in 
the Meghaduta of Kalidasa (24-25) and is generally identified with 
Vidisa or Bhilsa region in the Madhya Bharat. Two other cities of 
Avanti are known from Buddhist and Jain literature. These were 
Kuraraghara and Sudarsanapura. The Mahdbhdrata 5 also speaks 
of Avanti and Mahishmatl as two different countries. UjjayinI, 

1. According - to Bhandarkar (CL, 53-54) Assaka at one time included Mulaka 
and thus its territory abutted on Avanti. 

2. Digha II, 236. 

3. Op. cit. p. 54. . 

4. Bombay Ed. II. 29. 4; Cr. Eld. II. 26. 4. 

5. Cr. Ed. II, 28. 10-11. 


13 







THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the capital of Avanti, was built by Achchutagami. 1 Avanti was an 
important centre of Buddhism. Some of the leading theras and 
theris were either born or resided there. 

According to the Puranas, as mentioned above, 2 Pulika (Punika) 
killed his master and placed his own son Pradyota on the throne of 
Avanti. Pradyota was a powerful king and a contemporary of 
Buddha. In his time the kingdom of Avanti was in rivalry with the 
neighbouring kingdoms of Vatsa, Magadha, and Kosala. Pradyota's 
relation with Udayana, king of Kausambi, has been related above.’ 
According to a Buddhist text, Ajatasatru fortified his capital Raja- 
griha as he apprehended an invasion by Pradyota. The Puranas 
refer to him as having subjugated the neighbouring kings, but des¬ 
cribe him as ‘destitute of good policy’. The Buddhist text Maha- 
vagga also says that he was cruel. All this is borne out by his 
epithets Chanda and Mahasena. 

According to the Puranas, Chanda Pradyota Mahasena, to give 
the king his full name, ruled for 23 years, and was followed by four 
kings, Palaka, Visakhayupa, Ajaka and Nandivardhana who ruled 
respectively for 24, 50, 21 and 20 years. The last ruler was defeated 
by Sisunaga, and Avanti was incorporated with the growing king¬ 
dom of Magadha, as will be related in the next chapter. 


Gandhara 

Gandhara I'Gandharva-vishaya) denotes the region comprising 
the modern districts of Peshawar (Purushapura) and Rawalpindi. 
Its capital Takshasila or Takkasila (modern Taxila) was both a 
centre of trade and an ancient seat of learning. Gandhara some¬ 
times also included Kasmlra (Jataka No. 406) and Heeataeus of 
Miletus '549-468 B.C.) refers to Kaspapyros (Kasyapapura i.e., 
Kashmir) as a Gandaric city. The city of Takshasila was 2000 
leagues from Banaras. 

King Pukkusati or Pushkarasari in , the ruler of Gandhara in the 
middle of the sixth century B.C-., was a contemporary of king Bimbi- 
sara of Magadha. He sent an embassy and a letter to his great 
Magadhan contemporary as a mark of friendship. He waged war 
on king Pradyota of Avanti who was defeated. 4 

1. Dlpavarkra (Ed. Oldonberg), p. 57. 

2. VoL J, p. 323; 4l.h impression (1965). p. 327. 

3. See above pp. 9-10. 

4. Essay on Gunddhya, p. 176. 


14 







NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 


Kamboja 

Kamboja is included in the Uttarapatha. It is generally asso¬ 
ciated with Gandhara in ancient literature and in the Edicts of Asoka. 
The Kambojas occupied roughly the province round about Rajaori 
or ancient Rajapura, including the Hazara District of the North- 
West Frontier Province and probably extending as far as Kafiristan. 
Rajapura was the home of the Kambojas, and may be identified 
with Rajapura mentioned by Hiuen Tsang which lay to the south 
or south-east of Punch. 1 In the Petavatthu Commentary Dvaraka 
occurs along with Kamboja or Kamboja. From this Rhys Davids 
concludes that Dvaraka was the name of the capital of the Kambojas 
during the early Buddhist period. This view does not appear to be 
correct, because Dvaraka is nowhere mentioned as the capital of 
the Kamboja country. 2 During the earlier period the Kambojas were 
ruled by kings, but in Kautilya’s time they had a non-monarchical 
form or the sangha type of government. 

That the sixteen states mentioned in the Anguttara Niktiya, and 
discussed above, flourished before c. 550 B.C. is proved by the inclu¬ 
sion of Kasi, as it was absorbed in the kingdom of Kosala about or 
some time before that date. The mention of Vriji shows that the 
states must have flourished after the fall of the Videha monarchy. 
Though the date of this event is not known with certainty it was 
not likely to have taken place long before 600 B.C. We may there¬ 
fore regard the Buddhist list of sixteen great states as true of the 
first half of the sixth century B.C., if not somewhat earlier. 

The list in the Jain Bhagavatl Sutra 3 contains some common 
names such as Anga, Magadha, Vatsa, Vriji, Kasi and Kosala. 
Malava evidently corresponds to Avanti and Moll probably stands 
for Malla. Of the rest, Vanga and Ladha (Radha or W. Bengal) are 
well known, while Sambhuttara and Kochchha probably stand for 
Suhmottara and Kachchha. This list therefore shows acquaintance 
with a more extensive region both in the east as well as in the west. 
If, as has been suggested, Padha is taken as Pandya, and Malaya as 
the name of the well-known country in the south, the author of the 
list was acquainted with the whole of India, an assumption which is 
hardly compatible with the inclusion of Vriji, which ceased to exist 
in the fifth century B.C., and the absence of all reference to any 

1. THAI, 126. 

2. Law, The Buddhist Conception of Spirits, p. 102. 

3. Agamodaya Samiti Edition, Vol. Ill, p. 679. 

15 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


other kingdom in the Deccan or South India. On the whole, 
the Jain list is less reliable and was probably compiled at a later 
time. 1 


II. THE AUTONOMOUS CLANS 

As we have seen above, 2 there were many small non-monarchi- 
cal states ruled by autonomous or semi-independent clans in addition 
to those mentioned above. The chief of these was the Sakya state 
of Kapilavastu. It naturally derives its great importance from the 
fact that Gautama Buddha was a Sakya by birth, but politically it 
was of no great power. It acknowledged the suzerainty of Kosala 
in the latter half of the sixth century B. C. and was practically 
exterminated by Vidu^abha, the Kosala king, as mentioned above. 

The Sakyas claimed to belong to the solar race and Ikshvaku 
family^ and regarded themselves as people of Kosala, and that is 
why the great king Prasenajit took pride in describing himself as 
a fellow-citizen of Gautama Buddha. The Sakya state was bounded 
on the north by the Himalayas, on the east by the river Rohinl and 
on the west and south by the Rapti. The capital Kapilavastu is most 
probably represented by the ruins at Tilaura Kot, in Nepal Terai, 
about 10 miles north-west of Piprahwa in Basti District, U.P., 
though some locate it in Piprahwa itself, where a vase containing 
Jhe relics of Buddha has been found. 3 The Sakyas possessed a num¬ 
ber of towns besides the capital, and nine of them are specifically 
mentioned in the Buddhist texts. 4 The Sakyas are said to have 
comprised 80,000 families which probably means half a million 
people. 5 

The Koliyas of Ramagrama were the eastern neighbours of the 
Sakyas, on the other side of the river Rohinl. It appears that the 
water of this river was used for irrigation by both the clans, and 
was not unoften a cause of dispute between them. A Buddhist text 
records in detail one such quarrel in the course of which the Koliyas 
taunted the Sakyas with the custom, prevalent among them, of 
marriage with sisters. According to some texts, however, the 
Koliyas were closely related to the Sakyas by blood. The Koliyas 
possessed several towns besides the capital, and had a common sur¬ 
name, Vyagghapajja, like Gautama of the Sakyas. The police force 

l PHAI, 82. 

2. See pp. 2-3. 

3. EHI, a 167; JRAS, 1906, 180; CAGI, 711-712. 

4. For the names of these and other details, cf. CHI, I. 175 ff. 

5. Ibid , 176. 


16 



NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 

of the Koliyas had a special head-dress, as a distinctive uniform, 
and were notorious for extortion and violence. 1 

Of the other clans little is known. The Bhaggas were probably 
an old clan as a Bhargayana prince is mentioned in the Aitareya 
Brahmana (VIII. 28). As mentioned above, they are also mentioned 
in the Ashtddhydyi of Panini. The Mahabharata and the Harivamsa 
refer to close connection between the Vatsas and the Bhaggas and, 
as noted above, the latter had to acknowledge the supremacy of the 
former. 

The Moriyas were destined to rise to the greatest height of 
power, for there is hardly any doubt that they were the same as the 
Imperial Mauryas of the fourth century B. C. But we know little of 
their history in the sixth century B.C. Their capital Pipphalivana 
probably lay about 50 miles to the west of Kusinagara. 2 

The republican constitution of the Lichchhavis and &akyas, of 
which alone we know some details, will be discussed in Ch. XVII. 
It will suffice here to state that each of them possessed a central 
popular assembly as its supreme governing body, and both young 
and old were members of it and took part in discussions of affairs 
of state. This probably may be taken as^ typical of the constitution 
of the other clans. 

It is important to note that most of these clans were originally 
ruled by kings. Megasthenes also makes a general statement to 
the effect that monarchies were “dissolved and democratic govern¬ 
ments were set up in the cities.” 3 This change from monarchy to 
an aristocratic or republican constitution has an exact parallel in 
Greece, and it is not unlikely that the same causes produced the 
same change in both the countries. The misrule or tyranny of the 
king must be regarded as the principal of these causes, and this 
proves that neither the development of royal power nor the theory 
of divine right of kings could altogether extinguish the innate 
strength of the popular element and the natural desire of the people 
to rule themselves. Unfortunately, this spirit seems to have been 
confined to a few clans only. But it is significant that the heterodox 
religious tenets like Buddhism and Jainism grew among these auto¬ 
nomous clans and found in them their chief supporters and patrons. 
It illustrates the great principle that political freedom is the great 
nursery of freedom of thought. 4 

1. CH/, 178; Samyutta, IV, p. 341. 

2. PHAI , 160; Law, Tribes in Ancient India, p. 288. 

3. McCrindle’s Tr., pp. 37-38. 

4. The Editor alone is responsible for the last two paras- 

17 


A.I.U.— 2 




4*. co ro *-* 


CHAPTER II 


THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

1. PURANIC AND BUDDHIST TEXTS 

Of ail the states that flourished in the sixth century B.C., the 
kingdom of Magadha was the first to make a successful bid for 
supremacy and establish its suzerainty, according to the unanimous 
testimony of different sources—Brahmanical, Buddhist, and Jain. 
The Brahmanical sources, the Puranas, are indeed obsessed by the 
history of Magadha as the paramount power. They present its 
history in as many as eight successive dynasties of rulers, mentioning 
not only the number of years covered by each dynasty but also by 
the reign of each king—details which are not given for any other 
kingdom. 

But, as we have seen above, 1 the Puranas give a distorted 
account of the political vicissitudes that took place in Magadha 
after the fall of the Barhadratha dynasty. According to them this 
dynasty was succeeded by the Pradyotas, who were again ousted 
by Sisunaga, king of Banaras. Sisunaga was followed by his three 
successors, and then came Bimbisara. Although this view is accept¬ 
ed by some, 2 most of the scholars 3 now hold that the Pradyotas 
ruled in Avanti and not in Magadha, that Bimbisara occupied the 
throne of Magadha immediately after Ripunjaya, the last Barhad¬ 
ratha king, was killed by his minister, and that &isunaga came a few 
generations after and not before Bimbisara. The grounds in support 
of this theory have been stated above, 4 and we propose to treat the 
history of Magadha on the basis of the Buddhist texts, notably the 
Sinhalese Chronicle Mahdvamsa, rather than the Puranas. 

The Mahtivamsa list gives the names of the following kings 
before the Nandas:—(1) Bimbisara (2) Ajatasatru (3) Udayabhadra 

Vol. I, Ch. XV. 

EHI, Ch. II. 

PHAI, 98, 178; Bhandartar, CL, I, 67 ff. 

Vol. I, p. 324; 4th impression (1965), p. 328. 


18 




THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

(4) Anuruadha (5) Munda (6) Nagadasaka (7) Susunaga (8) Kala* 

soka (Kakavarnin according to Asokavadana ) (9) Ten sons of 

Kalasoka. 1 

On the other hand the Puranas give the following list 2 :— 
(1) Sisunaga (2) Kakavarna (3) Kshemadharman (4) Kshatraujas 

(5) Bimbisara (6) Ajatasatru (7) Darsaka (8) Udayin (9) Nandivar- 
dhana (10) Mahanandin. 

2. BIMBISARA 

According to the Mahdvamsa, Bimbisara was fifteen years old 
when he was anointed king by his own father. This would show 
that he was not the founder of the royal dynasty. Dr. Bhandarkar 
has inferred from his epithet Seniya (or Srenika) that Bimbisara 
was originally a Sendpati, probably of the Vajjis who held sway 
over Magadha, and ultimately made himself king. This, however, 
is in conflict with the statement made in the Mahdvamsa. 

The Mahdvamsa does not state the name of Eimbisara’s father 
but, according to other authorities, he was named Bhaftiya or Maha- 
padma. Dr. Bhandarkar thinks that Bimbisara belonged to the 
Great Naga dynasty as distinguished from &isu-Naga (or Susunaga) 
who, as the name shows, belonged to the Little Naga dynasty. But, 
according to Asvaghosha’s Buddhacharita (XI. 2), Bimbisara was a 
scion of Haryanka-kula. 

According to the Mahdvagga Bimbisara had 500 wives. Whatever 
we might think of this number, there is no doubt that he was helped 
in his political career by his matrimonial alliances. His first wife 
was a sister of Prasenajit, the king of Kosala w who gave him the 
dowry of a village in KasI with a revenue of 100,000. His second 
wife was Chellana, daughter of the Lichchhavi Chief Chetaka. 3 
He had a third wife named Vaidehi Vasavl who served and saved 
her husband, when imprisoned by Ajatasatru, by carrying food to 
him. 4 A similar story of loyalty to her husband is also told of queen 
Chellana who is sometimes identified with Vasavi. His fourth wife 
was Khema, daughter of the king of Madra 5 (Central Punjab). 

He had several sons who troubled him with their conflicting 
politics carried from their maternal homes. These are thus 

1. Introduction to translation of Mahdvamsa. For t,he Puranic account, ef. DKA. 
For the Buddhist view, cf. Geiger, also Bhandarkar, CL, I. 67 ff. 

2. DKA, 68-9. 

3. SEE, 1, xii-xv. 

4. SBE , XXII, 193, 25G. 

Thcriuatha Comm, on 139-43. 


10 







THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


enumerated in Jain texts: Kunika—Ajatasatru, Halla and Vehalla 
(sons of Chellana), Abhaya (son of Lichchhavi courtesan Ambapali), 
Meghakumara, and others. Some Buddhist tradition makes Ajata¬ 
satru a son of a Kosala princess and mentions his other sons as 
Vimala Kondahha, son of Ambapali, and Vehalla and Silavat. 1 2 Some 
texts, however, mention Ajatasatru as Vedehl-putto? 

Bimbisara had at first his capital at Girivraja (Rajagriha). The 
engineer who planned the town and designed its palace is called 
Mahagovinda. 3 The gate of the city was closed in the evenings after 
which even the king was not admitted in. 4 

According to some authorities, Bimbisara’s father was defeated 
by Brahmadatta, king of Ahga. 5 It was probably to avenge this 
defeat that Bimbisara led a campaign against Ahga. He was com¬ 
pletely successful and enlarged Magadha by conquering and annex¬ 
ing this powerful and prosperous kingdom. Its capital Champa 
was one of the six chief cities of the Buddhist world, and here he 
posted as governor his son Kunika. 6 With the conquest of Ahga 
and the peaceful acquisition of Kail began that expansion of 
Magadha which was ultimately destined to embrace nearly the 
whole of India. Bimbisara maintained friendly intercourse even* 
with distant powers. The embassy of Pukkusati, king of Gandhara, 
and Bimbisara’s marriage with the Madra princess have been refer¬ 
red to above. Nearer home, he seems to have had good relations with 
Pradyota, king of Avanti, for he sent his famous physician Jivaka 
to cure the latter when he fell ill. His diplomatic and matrimonial 
relations must have helped him considerably in the aggressive policy 
initiated by him. 

The kingdom of Bimbisara is stated to have been 300 leagues 
in extent, to which an addition of 200 leagues was made by Ajata- 
satru’s conquests. It was full of prosperous settlements or villages 
numbering 80,000, 7 of which the texts single out, as more important, 
Senanlgama, probably a recruiting ground for the army, Ekanala, 

1. Psalms of the-Brethren, pp. 65, 269 and commentary , p. 536, Psalms of the 
Sisters , p. 120. 

2. Sumahgala V , I. 139; Dialogues, II, 78. According to the recently discovered 
Vinaya Texts of the Mulasarvastivadas, Ajatasatru was the son of Chellana 
(named here Chela) who was named Vaidehl as she was brought from Videha 
country. 

3. Vimanavatthu Commentary, p. 82. 

4. Vinaya, IV, 116 f. 

5. See above, Vol. I, Ch. XV, p. 328; 4th impression (1965), p. 332; PIIAI, p. 94. 

6. Bhagavati Sutra, 300; Digha I, 111. 

7. This number stated in Mahdvagga seems to be a stock phrase and should not 
be taken literally. 


20 



THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

famous as the home of the learned Brahmana Bharadvaja, whom 
the Buddha had converted, Khanumata, another Brahmana village, 
and Nalakagama where a discourse was delivered by Sariputta. 1 
Bimbisara’s kingdom included in it a number of republican or semi¬ 
independent communities, the chief of which was called Raja - 
kumdra 2 

The Buddhist texts throw some light on the administration of 
this vast territory. The villages were governed by their own 
Assemblies under their chiefs called Grdmakas . The Mah&vaqga 
refers to a great assembly of the chiefs ( Grdmakas) of the 80,000 
villages. The important officials at headquarters called Mahdmndtras 
were divided into three classes viz., (1) the Executive (Sabhdtthaka), 
administering all affairs and interests; (2) the Judicial (Vohdrika); 
and (3) the Military ( Sendrvdyaka ). The Penal Code included as 
punishments imprisonment in jails (Kara), mutilation of limbs and 
the like. 3 Bimbisara maintained a strict control over them all. 

Both Jainism and Buddhism claim Bimbisara, as their follower. 
The TJttarddhyayana Sutra relates how Bimbisara, “the lion of 
kings”, visited to other “lion of homeless ascetics” (anagdra-siham), 
Mahavlra, at a Chaitya, “with his wives, servants and relations, and 
became a staunch believer in the Law.” His Jain leanings may have 
been due to his wife Chellana. Hemachandra tells the story that 
“when the country was under a blight of cold, the king accompanied 
by Devi Chellana went to worship Mahavlra.” 4 

The Buddhist texts similarly tell of his devotion to the Buddha. 
He first met Gotama at Girivraja about 7 years before the latter 
attained Buddhahood. 5 He was even then so much impressed by 
him that he offered to settle Gotama as a chief with a gift of neces¬ 
sary wealth. Their second meeting took place at Rajagjriha, which 
Gotama visited as full-fledged Buddha with a large and distinguished 
following of disciples, including the far-famed Brahmanical ascetics, 
the Kassapas, and their thousand Jatila adherents, all of whom 
proclaimed the Buddha as their “Lord” At this, Seniya Bimbisara 
embraced the doctrine and discipline of the Buddha and celebrated 
his conversion by treating the Buddha and his band of disciples to 

1. Majjhima, I, 166; Sam, IV, 251 f; Digha, I, 127; Sam, IV, 251. 

2. Sumangala V, I, 279, 294. 

3. Vinaya, VII, 3, 5. 

4. Trithashf i £aldk&, X, 6, 10, 11. 

5. Sutta Nipata, verse 408; Dialogues, II, 2. 

21 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


meals, which he himself served at the palace, and then by announc¬ 
ing his donation of the park called Veluvana to the Buddha and the 
Sangha. 1 Even his wife Khema was so proficient in the new faith 
that she is stated to have given instruction in it to the king. 2 Later, 
as another proof of his devotion to Buddhism, Bimbisara lent his 
own personal physician JIvaka to work as medical adviser in attend¬ 
ance on the Buddha and his Order. At another time, when the 
Buddha had no money with which to pay the ferry-man who carried 
him across the Ganga, the emperor granted remission of these ferry 
charges to all ascetics out of his regard for the Master. 

According to Buddhist tradition, Bimbisara lost his life at the 
hands of his son Ajatasatru, who was instigated to the crime by the 
Buddha’s wicked and jealous cousin Devadatta His first attempt 
to kill his father straightway with his sword was foiled by the 
ministers to whom he confessed his guilt. They advised Bimbisara 
to kill all the conspirators, but he pardoned his son and even resign¬ 
ed to him the throne for which he was so impatient. But Devadatta 
went on inciting Ajatasatru to the crime by reminding him that life 
was short and the throne would be long in coming. “So do you, 
Prince, kill your father and become Raja.” 3 It is also stated that 
Ajatasatru confessed his crime to Buddha that “for the sake of king¬ 
dom he deprived his righteous father of his life.” 

But Jain tradition is more charitable to Ajatasatru. It does 
not represent him as a parricide. It relates that in his eagerness for 
the throne he put his father in prison, though the latter had already 
declared Kunika as his successor in preference to his other sons 
In prison, Bimbisara was served by his devoted queen Chellana, who 
once even sucked “his swollen finger, streaming with matter, to 
relieve him of his pain.” This very much moved Ajatasatru Kunika 
who said: “A sorry return have I made to my father,” and then 
immediately dashed off to break his father’s fetters with an iron 
club. Bimbisara, fearing his son’s advance, took poison and killed 
himself. 4 


3. AJATASATRU 

Ajatasatru added largely to the extent of the kingdom by his 
conquests. He started with a war against Kosala. Its king Prasenajit 


1. Vinaya , I, 39. 

2. Sam, IV, 374. 

3. Vinaya, II, 190; Dtgha, I, 86; Sumangala V, 1, 133-6; Peta Comm. 105. 

4 . Avasyaka-sutra, pp. 682-3 etc. 



THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 


could not brook the inhumanity of Ajatasatru who had killed his 
father and, indirectly, also the widowed princess of Kosala, who 
could not stand the death of her husband and died of grief. King 
Prasenajit thereupon revoked his gift of the Kasi village which was 
granted to Bimbisara as a dowry on his marriage with the princess 
of Kosala, and there was a war between the two States. At first 
Ajatasatru won, driving back his aged uncle to Sravastl. But very 
soon the tables were turned; Ajatasatru was entrapped in an ambush 
and had to surrender with his whole army to Prasenajit. In the 
end, peace was concluded between the two by Prasenajit restoring 
to Ajatasatru his liberty, army and the disputed village of Kasi, and 
even giving his daughter Vajira in marriage to him. 1 

The Jain texts present Ajatasatru as the conqueror of the power¬ 
ful political confederacy which dominated Eastern India and com¬ 
prised 36 republican states, viz. 9 Mallaki, 9 Lichchhavi, and 18 
gana-rajycLs of Kasi and Kosala. 2 

The overthrow of this confederacy was the consequence of 
Ajatasatru’s conquest of its most powerful member, the Lichchhavi 
republic. The cause of the conflict between the two is differently 
stated in different texts. According to the Buddhists, a jewel-mine 
was discovered at the foot of a hill at a port on the Ganga, on which 
it was agreed that Ajatasatru and the Lichchhavis should have an 
equal share of the gems. The Lichchhavis violated this aggreement 
and so brought on the conflict. 3 According to Jain version, 4 the 
bone of contention was the Magadha State elephant, Seyanaga 
( Sechanaka , “Sprinkler”), and a huge necklace of 18 strings of pearls 
which were given by Bimbisara to his sons Halla and Vehalla. They 
carried off the elephant and the necklace t6 Vaisall and sought the 
protection of their grandfather, king Chetaka, against Ajatasatru 
claiming them. Kunika, having failed to obtain the extradition of 
the fugitives peacefully, declared war on Chetaka. 5 It is also stated 
that his wife Padmavati incited Ajatasatru to this conflict. 

It was not easy to conquer the Lichchhavis, who were then at 
the zenith of their power as the head of a vast confederacy and could 
draw upon its pooled resources. In fact, king Chetaka actually 
assembled this confederation, including the Gana-rtijas (republican 

1. Sam , I, 84-6, Jit, IV, 342, Dhammap. Comm. Ill, 259. 

2. Bhagavati, Sutra, 300. 

3. B. C. Law’s Buddhaghosa, p. 111. 

4. Hoernle, Uvasayadasao , II, App. p. 7. 

5. Hoernle, lb. Avasyaka-sutra, p. 684; na dcdydstadd yuddhasajjo bhavamiti. 


23 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


chiefs) of Kasi and Kosala, to ask whether they should surrender to 
Ajataiatru or fight him. 1 It would thus appear that Ajatasatru was 
opposed by a powerful combination of hostile rulers of the east, 
including his old rivals, the chiefs of Kasi and Kosala. The issue at 
stake was the Magadhan suzerainty over Eastern India and this was 
clearly realised by both sides. On the eve of this great conflict, which 
created a first class political sensation in the country, even the 
Buddha, detached in his religious eminence from all worldly affairs, 
felt it his duty to take his proper part in the larger politics of the 
country. As a born democrat and a champion of republican interests, 
he assured the Lichchhavis, who formed the leading democratic state 
in the country, that it could not be defeated even by a mighty king 
like Ajatasatru provided it maintained unimpaired all its strong 
points and factors of national efficiency, such as “holding full and 
frequent assemblies, maintaining internal concord in assembly and 
administration, avoiding revolutionary laws and measures, following 
old traditions, honouring the elders of the community, old institu¬ 
tions, and shrines, saints and women.” 

Ajatasatru realised that the only way by which he could con¬ 
quer the Lichchhavis was by destroying their inner unity. For this 
purpose he deputed his minister Vassakara on the nefarious mission 
of sowing seeds of disunion among the Lichchhavis at Vaisail. His 
work after three years bore fruit. Infected by jealousy between 
different classes, between the rich and the poor, and the strong and 
the weak, the Lichchhavis became a changed people lacking their 
old social cohesion. 2 Thus the stage was set for Ajatasatru^ opera¬ 
tions against the Lichchhavis. 

The king declared: “I will root out and destroy these Vajjians, 
mighty and powerful though they be, and bring them to utter 
ruin.” 3 But he had to plan his military preparations for the con¬ 
quest on a large scale. The Lichchhavi republic was on the other 
side of the Ganga, while his capital Raj agriha was too far inland and 
remote to serve as an efficient base of operations. He had to con¬ 
struct a new base, a fort at a convenient site on the river, and thus 
was laid the foundation of the new capital, Pataliputra. It was 
constructed under the supervision of his chief ministers named 
Sunldha and Vassakara. When the construction was completed, the 
two ministers invited the Buddha to dinner at their house and named 

1. Niray&valx-sutra. 

2. Dialogues , II, 78; B. C. Law’s Buddhaghosa , p. 112. 

3. Mah&paiinibbana-Sutta. 


24 




THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

the gate through which the Buddha went out of the city as the 
Gotama Gate, and the gha £ (landing) from which he was ferried 
across the Ganga was commemorated as the Gotama Ferry. It was 
on this unique occasion that the Buddha is said to have made his 
pregnant prophecy that Pataliputra would one day grow to be the 
chief city of Aryan India and the centre of trade, business and eco¬ 
nomic prosperity. 

The construction of the fort was followed by the expedition 
against Vaisall. As soon as their territory was invaded, the Lich- 
chhavis, now torn by disunion, argued among themselves as to who 
should first oppose the invader, the more cowardly ones saying, 
“Let the strong Lichchhavis go forward and crush the enemy.” 
Ajatasatru thus found it easy to subdue a people who had given 
themselves to a wordy warfare among themselves when they should 
have combined to combat a common enemy. 

The' Jain texts give some interesting details of the military ope¬ 
rations of Magadhan forces. Ajatasatru for the first time made use 
of two secret weapons of war. The first, the Mahasilakantaka , was 
a kind of catapult hurling heavy pieces of stone. The other was the 
Rathamusala, a chariot which created havoc by wheeling about and 
hurling destruction by its attached rods. “It seems to have been 
provided with some kind of self-acting machinery to propel it, as 
it is described to have moved without horses and driver; though 
possibly, as in similar contrivances in the Middle Ages, it was pro¬ 
pelled by a person concealed inside who turned the wdieels*” 1 It 
has been compared to the tanks used in the two great World Wars. 

These elaborate preparations show that the war between 
Magadha and the Lichchhavi Republic was a protracted one. The 
aggressor had first to undertake the costly construction of a new fort 
on the Ganga, which must have taken some time—at least two years. 
Next, there was the three years’ plan of secret work done by the 
Magadhan spies quartered on the Lichchhavis at Vaisall to sow the 
seeds of dissension among them and undermine their national soli¬ 
darity. Thirdly, Magadha had to fight not a mere isolated and indi¬ 
vidual republic but a large and powerful confederation of 36 repub¬ 
lics under its chief Chetaka of great political influence, strengthened 
by matrimonial alliances with several kings, viz. those of Sindhu- 
Sauvlra, Vatsa, and Avanti, who married his daughters. 2 

1. Hoemle, Uvasagadasao, II, App. pp. 59, 60, quoting Bhagavatx. 

?.. HC, 235, 236. 


25 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The Jain texts indicate a period of more than 16 years for this 
war. We are told that Gosala, the great religious leader and rival 
of Mahavira who died in c. 484 B.C., saw this war in progress, while 
the confederation of these Republics was still going strong up to 
468 B.C., the date of Mahavira’s death, which they celebrated by a 
joint illumination to mark the disappearance from their midst of 
the light that was in their Lord Mahavira. 1 The war, which must 
therefore have lasted from at least 484 to 468 B.C., ended in a com¬ 
plete victory for Ajatasatru and he destroyed the freedom of the 
city-state of Vaisall, which had given birth to his mother. 

These conquests, by which Ajatasatru was establishing his 
suzerainty in Eastern India, roused the hostility of his equally ambi¬ 
tious rival of Central India, king Chanda Pradyota of Avanti. We 
hear that as the latter was planning an attack upon his capital at 
Raj agriha, Ajatasatru applied himself to the task of strengthening its 
fortifications. 2 He must have been hard put to it in having to meet 
at the same time the double menace—from Avanti in the west and the 
Lichchhavis in the north—and to alternate betw r een his two fortified 
posts, Raj agriha and Pataliputra, to look after the defences of his 
empire. But he attained complete success. While he humbled 
Kosala and other eastern powers and absorbed Vaisall and the whole 
or part of KasI, the king of Avanti could do nothing against him. He 
thus extended the boundaries of his kingdom and laid the founda¬ 
tions of the Magadha empire on a solid basis. 

As is the case with Bimbisara, Ajatasatru is represented in Jain 
texts as a Jain and in Buddhist texts as a Buddhist. We have already 
seen how the Jain texts are partial towards him in absolving him 
of the heinous crime of parricide, of which he is accused in the 
Buddhist texts. They tell how Kunika was a frequent visitor to 
Mahavira with his queens and royal retinue. He had intimate con¬ 
tact with him both at Vaisall and Champa and expressed his high 
opinion of Jain monks. 3 In the Aupapdtika Sutra (30), he openly 
declares before Mahavira and his disciples his faith in him as the 
true teacher who has made clear the true path of religion based on 
renunciation and non-violence. 

His relations with the Buddha began with enmity and ended 
in complete devotion. The enmity was instigated by the villain 

1. Nirayavali-sutra cited by Hoemle, ib., p. 7; Kalpa Sutra in SBE XXII 266. 

2. Majjhima , HI, 7. 

3. Aupapatika-sutras, 12, 27, 30; Hemachandra, Parisishtaparvan, Canto IV; 

Avasyaka-sutra, pp. 684, 687. 

26 



THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 


Devadatta, who one day “went to Prince Ajatasatru and said ‘Give an 
order, O King, to our men that I may deprive Samana Gotama of 
life,’ and Ajatasatru, the Prince, gave orders to his men, ‘whatso¬ 
ever the worthy Devadatta tells you, that do.’ ” l The Buddha also 
knew of his true character and stated: “Monks, the king of 
Magadha, Ajatasatru, is a friend to, an intimate of, mixed with, what¬ 
ever is evil.” Their relations, however, soon changed. As already 
stated, after murdering his father, Ajatasatru approached the 
Buddha in his remorse and prayed to him: ‘May the Lord accept 
my transgression as transgression that I may be restrained in the 
future/ Once his physician Jivaka induced him to pay a visit to 
the Buddha in his mango-grove on a full-moon night. Its deep 
silence made him suspect an ambush and he asked Jivaka: “You 
are playing me no tricks, Jivaka? You are not betraying me to my 
foes? How can it be that there should be no sound at all, not a 
sneeze nor a cough, in so large an assembly, among 1250 of the 
brethren?” Jivaka assured him that he should not suspect any foul 
play but should go straight on. Then the king arrived at the 
assembly, calm as a clear lake, and burst out: “Would that my 
son Udayi Bhadda might have such calm as this assembly o'f the 
brethren has!” 2 

It may be noted that Ajatasatru’s visit to the Buddha is repre¬ 
sented in one of the sculptures of Bharhut (c. 2nd century B.C.) and 
this goes a great way towards proving the truth and popularity of 
the Buddhist story. The sculpture bears the inscription*: “Ajata¬ 
satru salutes the Lord”, and seems to translate in stone the very 
words of the Buddhist text: Mdgadho Ajdtasattu Vedehiputto 
Bhagavato pdde sirasa vandati (bows down with his head at the feet 
of the Lord). The sculpture shows (a) the king on an elephant 
followed by women on elephants in procession; (b) his dismounting 
from the elephant and standing with his right hand raised as if to 
speak; and (c) his obeisance before the Bodhimanda, the throne of 
the Buddha bearing his foot-print (PI. I). 

Ajatasatru’s visit to the Buddha marked a turning point in his 
religious life. It seems that he first sought a salve for his conscience, 
tormented by his sense of grievous sin as a parricide, from each one 
of the six principal teachers of the times such as Makkhali Gosala 
and Niggantha Nataputta (Mahavlra), on the advice of his six 
ministers, but none of them could give to his soul the peace he 

1. Vinaya Texts, Part III, p. 243. 

2. Digha, I, 50. 

27 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


sought, and then he came to the Buddha as his last resort. 1 Next 
we see him, on hearing of the Buddha’s death, hurry to Kuslnara as 
an ardent Buddhist to claim a share of the relics of his sacred body, 
sending in advance a messenger to say on his behalf: “The Lord 
was a Kshatriya; I too am a Kshatriya; I am worthy of a share of 
the relics of the Lord. I will erect a stupa over the relics of the 
Lord and make a feast.” 2 

The story goes that Buddha’s chief disciple Mahakassapa, who 
took charge of his Master’s body and subsequently of its relics, 
thought that it would not be safe and proper to have them distribut¬ 
ed among their eight claimants and enshrined by them in eight 
different stupas, as was first stipulated. He changed his mind and 
asked Ajataiatru, as the fittest of the co-sharers of the relics, to 
have the bulk of them enshrined in a single stupa at his capital of 
Raj agriha, leaving only portions for the rest. 3 

According to the Mahdvamsa, Ajatasatru built Dhatu-chaityas 
all round the capital. He further showed his devotion to Buddhism 
by repairing, at Raj agriha, 18 Mahdvihdras which were deserted by 
the Buddhists after Buddha’s death. Lastly, Ajataiatru is immor¬ 
talised in the history of Buddhism by his association with its first 
General Council or Samgiti. It was attended by 500 eminent 
bhikkhus and theras who, travelling through the country, betook 
themselves to Raj agriha as the best place for their meeting, as it was 
“richly provided with their four requisites of clothing, food given as 
alms, dwelling places and drugs”, thanks to the hospitality and ame¬ 
nities of Ajatasatru’s city. Ajatasatru then readily made his per¬ 
sonal contribution to the success of the Council by giving it full faci¬ 
lities. “He with all expedition had a magnificent hall constructed 
by the side of the Vebhara rock in which it was excavated by the 
entrance of the Sattapanni cave. It was like the Assembly-Hall of 
the gods themselves. When it was adorned in every way, he caused 
precious rugs to be spread according to the number of the Bhik¬ 
khus. For the presiding monk was prepared a lofty and noble seat 
(Therasana) while for the reciting monk was placed another high 
seat (Dhammasana) in the middle of the Hall.” ( Mahdvamsa , III). 

4. SUCCESSORS OF AJATAsATRU 

The Buddhist tradition, which has been accepted as the best 
working hypothesis, strangely enough represents all the four kings 

1. Sabhiya-sutta; S&mannaphala Sutta. 

2. Dxgha , II, 166. 

3. Mahapari* Commentary; cf. Div. 380. 


28 



THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 


following Ajatasatru as parricides. After their rule of 56 years the 
people awoke to the fact that they were living under a dynasty of 
murderers, and they at once supplanted it by electing the Minister 
Sisunaga 1 as king. Ajatasatru was succeeded by Udayabhadra, who 
is undoubtedly the same as Udayin of the Puranic genealogy. A 
Jain text 2 takes him to be the son of Kunika and Padmavati. Jain 
tradition does not like Buddhist, regard Udayabhadra as a parricide. 
On the contrary, he is represented as the devoted son of his father 
who was serving as his viceroy at Champa and overwhelmed with 
grief at his death. 3 


He was called to the throne by the assembly of chiefs and 
nobles. He then left Champa and proceeded to Pataliputra where 
he built a new town called Kusumapura, as stated in the Vayu 
Pur ana, and a Jain shrine (Chdity agriha) at its centre. He was a 
devout Jain, fasting on 8th and 14th tithis* On one such day, 
whiJe he was listening to the discourse of a teacher with a novice, the 
latter fell upon him and killed him with his concealed dagger. It is 
stated that this assassin was engaged by his political rival, Palaka, 
the king of Avanti and son of Ajatasatru’s enemy, Pradyota, who had 
become very powerful by the conquest of Kausambl. Palaka had, 
however, been previously defeated many times by Udayabhadra. 5 

The next two kings were Anuruddha and Munda. The Anguttara 
(III, 57-63) refers to king Munda as staying at Pataliputra. When his 
queen Bhadda died in that city he was overpowered with grief and 
refused to cremate her body until he was consoled by a Thera named 
Narada, who lived at the Vihdra known as Kukkutdrama . 6 


The succeeding ruler Nagadasaka may be identified with king 
Darsaka of the Puranas. Darsaka figures as contemporary of Udayana 
in the Sanskrit drama Svapna-Vdsavadattd, attributed to Bhasa. 
This agrees with the Puranic, but not with the Sinhalese genealogy 
adopted here. 


Sisunaga is the next in the Buddhist list. According to the 
Puranas, Sisunaga came to the throne after destroying the power of 
the Pradyotas. He made Girivraja his abode and posted his son in 
charge of Varanasi. The Buddhist tradition, as already related, dates 


1. 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 


Mahdvamsa , Ch. VII. 

Kathakosha, p. 177. , _ 

Hemachandra, Parisishtaparvan, VI, 32-180; Trishashtisaldka, X, 426, Tawney 
Kathakosha, p. 177; Avasyaka-sutra, p 687. 

Avasyaka-sutra, p. 690. 

Ibid; Tawney’s Kathasaritsagara, II, 484. 

HTW, II, 98-9; Sam, V, 171; Anguttara , V, 342; Majjhima, I, 350. 


s 


‘29 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the hostility of Avanti to Magadha from the time of Ajatasatru, and 
counts Kasi as a province of Magadha, also from his time. 1 This in¬ 
directly supports the Buddhist view that Sisunaga ruled after Ajata¬ 
satru. Probably, he kept up the old capital of Girivraja against the 
continued menace from Avanti, as his son defended the frontiers in 
Kasi against Kosala. But Sisunaga finally destroyed the power of 
the Pradyotas of Avanti and added it to the growing kingdom of 
Magadha. Probably both the kingdoms of Vatsa and Kosala were 
also annexed and thus Magadha absorbed almost all the important 
states in North India that flourished in the time of Gautama 
Buddha. 2 

Kalasoka, the son and successor of Sisunaga, probably corres¬ 
ponds to Kakavarna of the Puranas. It was during his reign that the 
second Great Buddhist Council was held. He had a tragic end which 
is referred to in later literature. A passage in Bana’s Harshacharita 
(of seventh century A.D.) records the story, presumably handed 
down through the centuries, that the king named Kakavarnl Saisu- 
nagi was killed by a dagger thrust into his throat. An earlier refer¬ 
ence to some such event is made by the Greek writer Curtius. Refer- 

... .. *, M ‘i-tf V-i >- •; ' -i. '. -■ I- ; V . ti 1 -■ .. . 

ring to the founder of the Nanda dynasty, he says: “He was a barber 
who became the paramour of the queen, and being by her influence 
advanced to too near a place in the confidence of the reigning 
monarch, treacherously murdered him, and then under the pretence 
of acting as guardian to the royal children, usurped the supreme 
authority and having put the young princes to death begat the pre¬ 
sent king.” 

The murderer of Kalasoka or Kakavarnl Saisunagi was thus pos¬ 
sibly the founder of the next dynasty of kings—that of the Nandas. 
The “young princes” slain by him may be taken to be the ten sons 
of the murdered king who, according to the Mahtivamsa, ruled, pro¬ 
bably jointly, for a period of ten years. These are named in the 
Mahfibodhivamsa and include Nandivardhana, who is mentioned in 
the Puranas as the ninth king among the ten kings of the Saisunaga 
dynasty. 

The Puranas add another king, Mahanandin, but his existence 
must be regarded as very doubtful unless we suppose that he was 
another of the ten sons of Kalasoka. 

The Saisunaga dynasty thus came to an ignoble end. Whatever 
we might think of the particulars related in different sources, there 

1. Majjhima , III, 7. 

2. See pp. 1-2. 

no 



THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

is no doubt that its downfall was brought about by a palace conspi¬ 
racy instigated by a faithless queen. 

5. THE NANDAS 

The founder of the new dynasty was a man of low origin. The 
account of him, as given by Curtius, has been noted above. The Jain 
work Parisishtaparvan describes him as the son of a barber by a 
courtesan. The Avasyaka Sutra calls him a Ndpitaddsa —“slave of 
barber.” The Puranas also brand the founder of the Nanda dynasty 
as ‘the son of king Mahanandin by a Sudra woman’ and Nanda kings 
as immoral ( adhdrmxka ). The Buddhist texts (e.g. Mahdvarhsa-tikd ) 
regard the Nandas as anndtakula —‘of unknown lineage.’ 

It will thus appear that all traditions are agreed as to the dis¬ 
reputable origin of the Nanda dynasty. The Puranas trace it to a 
Sudra mother, but Greek account traces it to a Sudra father, a bar¬ 
ber. Thus one source fastens the original sin on the father and the 
other on the mother. But it is the caste of the father that determines 
that of his progeny. And so the Nandas may be taken to be the off¬ 
spring of a Sudra father. 

The name of the founder and first king of the Nanda dynasty is 
differently given in different texts. The Puranas call him Maha- 
padma, presumably either with reference to his military strength as 
‘lord of an infinite host’ ( Mahapadmapati ) or immense wealth 
amounting to 100,000 millions (mahdpadma). According to the 
Mahdbodhivamsa, his name was Ugrasena. The term Ugrasena may 
have suggested the Greek name Agrammes(=' Augrasainya, i.e. son 
of Ugrasena) for the Nanda king who ruled at the time of Alexander. 
The different authorities agree in giving the total number of 
Nanda kings as nine (Nava-Nanda). The Puranas take the first 
Nanda as the father and the other eight as his sons. The Buddhist 
texts, however, take all the Nine Nandas as brothers. They are 
named in the Mahdbodhivamsa as follows: (1) Ugrasena (2) 
Panduka (3) Pandugati (4) Bhutapala (5) Rashtrapala (6) Govi- 
shanaka (7) Dasasiddhaka (8) Kaivarta and (9) Dhana. The Puranas 
name only the father and one of his sons, Sumalya. Jain texts also 
know of nine Nandas. 1 In the face of all this evidence regarding 
nine Nandas, we have to give up a theory once held that the word 
nava should be taken to mean new, and the two last rulers of the 

I. Avasyaka-sutra, p. 693 (navame Nande). 

si 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Puranic Sisunaga dynasty, viz . Nandivardhana and Mahanandin, 
should be treated as the old Nandas who were replaced by new ones. 

We owe to the Mahavamsatikd some details of the first and the 
last of the nine Nanda brothers who ruled one after another accord¬ 
ing to seniority. The eldest brother who founded the dynasty is 
called Ugrasena, as already stated. He was a man of the frontier 
( pachchanta-vasika ) who fell into the hands of robbers and became 
one of them and later their leader He then, with his gang, started 
raiding the neighbouring kingdoms and their cities, giving them the 
ultimatum: ‘Either yield your kingdom or give battle.’ Fired with 
success, they aimed at sovereignty. The text, however, is silent as 
to the actual steps by which it was achieved. It simply insinuates 
that the conquest of Magadha marked the culmination of a career of 
violence and brigandage on the part of a gang of outlaws whom the 
Mahfibodhivamsa describes as Chorapubbas, ‘daeoits of old’. So this 
Buddhist tradition represents the Nandas as openly conquering 
Magadha by force and not by any secret conspiracy or cowardly 
assassination of the reigning king by intrigues with the queen. 

The Puranas give a more reliable account of the founder of the 
Nanda dynasty whom they call Mahapadma. He is described as a 
second Parasurama, ‘the exterminator of the entire Kshatriya race,’ 
and as one who made himself the sole sovereign in the country and 
brought it under the umbrella of one auhority which was not chal¬ 
lenged. The Kshatriya dynasties, which were thus uprooted, com¬ 
prised the following: Aikshvakus, Panchalas, Kasis, Haihayas, Kalih- 
gas, Asmakas, Kurus, Maithilas, ^urasenas, and Vitihotras. This 
detailed and specific statement in the Puranas seems to be partially 
corroborated by independent evidence. The Katha-sarit-sagara men¬ 
tions the camp of King Nanda in Ayodhya, thereby implying the 
inclusion of Kosala in the Nanda empire. The conquest of Kalihga 
by a Nanda king has been inferred from a passage in the Hathi- 
gumpha inscription of Kharavela, which will be referred to in a 
later chapter. The existence of a city called “Nav Nand Dehra” 
(Nander on the Godavari) has been taken by some scholars to indi¬ 
cate Nanda supremacy over a considerable part of the Deccan. Ac¬ 
cording to some early inscriptions of Mysore, the Nandas ruled over 
Kuntala (southern part of Bombay and north-western part of 
Mysore ). 1 

Although all these pieces of evidence, particularly the last, can¬ 
not be regarded as conclusive, they undoubtedly support the Puranic 
statement. But its best corroboration is offered by the statement of 


1. Rice, Mysore and Coorg , p. 3. 


32 




THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

the classical writers who refer to the extensive domains of his suc¬ 
cessor, to be noted later. The general picture given in the Puranas 
of the great empire, which Mahapadma Nanda had built up by exter¬ 
minating the numerous Kshatriya principalities, may thus be regard¬ 
ed as historically accurate. We may also conclude from the classi¬ 
cal accounts that the Nanda empire was not a loose federation but 
was built on solid foundation. 

Mahapadma Nanda was thus the first great historical emperor 
of Northern India. His low origin proves the end of the age-long 
tradition of the political supremacy of the Kshatriyas. The old 
orthodox ideas were thus rapidly giving way, and the history of 
Buddhism and Jainism shows that this was as true in religion as in 
politics. Perhaps both were inspired by a common spirit of revolt 
against the conservative hierarchy which had hitherto dominated 
Church and State. An unorthodox spirit in religion, which was al¬ 
ready launched in its triumphant career, was ably seconded by an 
equally heterodox view of politics. In any case the sixth and fifth 
centuries B.C. hold out strange phenomena before us,—Kshatriya 
chiefs founding popular religious sects which menaced the Vedic 
religion, and Sudra leaders establishing a big empire in Aryavarta 
on the ruins of Kshatriya kingdoms. These two events might not 
have been altogether isolated or unconnected. 

Unfortunately, we know very little of the subsequent history of 
the Nanda dynasty until we come to the last king. He is not named 
in the Puranas but must have maintained intact his imperial inheri¬ 
tance of territory and army. As he was ruling at the time of 
Alexander’s invasion of 327-325 B.C., the Greek writers record some 
facts of his power, position, and popularity. He is called by them 
Agrammes or Xandrames, and described as the king of powerful 
peoples beyond the Beas, “the Gangaridae and the Prasii”, with his 
capital at Pataliputra. The Gangaridae, according to Megasthenes, 
were the people occupying xhe delta of the Ganga, and the Prasii 
were the Prdchyas or Easterners living to the east of the Middle 
Country ( Madhyadesa ) such as the Panchalas, Surasenas, Kosalas, 
Kasls and Videhas. His empire seems to have extended up to the 
frontiers of the Punjab, for it is stated that king Porus the younger 
escaped from Alexander into the adjoining territory of the Nanda 
king. 1 

Curtius credits Agrammes with an army of 20,000 cavalry, 
200,000 infantry, 2,000 four-horsed chariots, and 3,000 elephants. 

1. McCrindle, Invasion , p. 273. 

33 


A.I.U.—3 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


According to other Greek writers the number of elephants was 4,000 
or even 6,000. 

With all his military might and mastery of a large empire, he 
lacked the strength of popularity by which alone they could be 
maintained. Chandragupta Maurya, who was fated to overthrow 
him, already reported to Alexander’s followers that he could easily 
conquer the Nanda empire, because its king was so much “hated and 
despised by his subjects for the wickedness of his disposition and the 
meanness of his origin.” This report was also confirmed by king 
Porus (Paurava) of the Punjab who “added that the king of the 
Gangaridae was a man of quite worthless character and held in no 
respect, as he was thought to be the son of a barber.” 

Much of his unpopularity was also due to his miserliness, 
avarice, and love of wealth which he accumulated at the expense of 
his people by means of excessive taxation and exactions. He is 
nicknamed Dhana Nanda, the worshipper of Mammon. The Kathd- 
sarit-sdgara preserves the tradition of his wealth computed at 990 
millons of gold pieces. 1 Its Buddhist version is thus stated: “The 
youngest brother was called Dhana Nanda from his addiction to 
hoarding treasure. . . .He collected riches to the amount of 80 kolis 
in a cave in the bed of the river (Gahga). Having caused a great 
excavation to be made, he buried the treasure there. .. .Levying 
taxes, among other articles, even on skins, gums, and stones, he 
amassed further treasure which he disposed of similarly.” 2 This 
story of his hoarded and hidden wealth is hinted at in a Tamil poem 
stating how the wealth of the Nandas “having been accumulated first 
in Patali hid itself in the floods of the Ganga.” 3 The tradition of the 
fabulous wealth of Nanda was also heard by the Chinese traveller 
Hiuen Tsang in the seventh century A.D. He mentions five stupas 
of Pataliputra as symbols of “the five treasures of king Nanda’s 
seven precious substances.” 4 

We owe to Jain tradition 5 some new facts about the Nandas, 
who are stated to have had Jain ministers with their leanings 
towards Jainism. The minister of the first Nanda was Kalpaka 
upon whom the office was forced. He is stated to have egged the 
king on to the prosecution of his military programme for the con¬ 
quest and extermination of all the Kshatriya states of the time. It 

1. Tawney, Tr., 1, 21. 

2. Tumour, Mahawanso, p. xxxix. 

I*. Aiyanf»ar, Beginnings of South Indian History, p. 89. 

4. IITW., II, 96. 

5. Avasyaka-sulra, pp. 435-36, 693-95. 

in 






THE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

was instigated by the spirit of vengeance taken by a lower caste 
against the pride and pretensions of the higher. The Nanda kings 
made the office of minister hereditary. The ninth Nanda had as his 
minister Sakatala, who had two sons, Sthulabhadra and griyaka. On 
Sakatala’s death, the king offered his place to Sthulabhadra who de¬ 
clined it and became a Jain monk. His place was taken by Sriyaka. 
Jain influence spread from the ministers to both court and society. 
Chunakya in the Mudrdrdkshasa finds a Jain to act as his chief agent 
in his political scheme. Jainism seems to be a factor in the social 
background of the drama, which ended in the overthrow of the king 
and the end of his dynasty as will be related in a subsequent chapter. 

6. THE MAGADHA EMPIRE 

In spite of the tragic end of the Nandas, to them belongs the 
credit of founding the first great empire in Northern India on the 
foundations laid by Bimbisara and his son. The great Magadha 
empire which they built up survived them and gradually embraced 
nearly the whole of India. Even when this came to an end, it left 
behind a rich legacy, and a second empire, only inferior in import¬ 
ance to the first, arose out of its ruins nearly five centuries later. 

It is tempting to seek in the history of Magadha evidence 
of the existence of certain permanent factors whose interplay 
enabled it to rise to the zenith of political greatness more than once 
and retain this position for a much longer period than most other 
empires that flourished in India. Its geographical position was 
undoubtedly an important factor. The mighty Ganga with its* feed¬ 
ers, the Son on the south and the Gandak and Gogra on the north, 
served as admirable means for defence and communication both 
with Upper India and the sea. The older capital city Rajagriha, 
surrounded by seven hills, and the later and more famous Patali- 
putra, at the junction of the Ganga and the Son, were both well 
protected by nature. 

Next to its strategic position, the comparative freedom from 
orthodoxy and the consequent commingling of diverse cultures in 
Magadha may be regarded as an important factor in its development. 
As noted above, Magadha and the countries to the east of it lay al¬ 
most outside the pale of Vedic culture. Perhaps the Vedic polity, 
along with Vedic culture, had spent its force, and it was now the 
turn of the sturdy peoples of the east, comparatively unaffected by 
the Aryan invasion, to play their part. When the Puranas lament 
the wholesale destruction of the Kshatriya power by the Sudra king 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

or- 

Mahapadma Nanda, they seem instinctively to refer to the end of 
one epoch and the rise of another. The laxity of social restrictions 
imposed by the orthodox Brahmanical culture and the universal 
aspect of Buddhism and Jainism which found a congenial home in 
Magadha must have considerably widened the political outlook of 
this region and contributed to make it the nucleus of a mighty 
empire. 


7. CHRONOLOGY 

It is difficult to -fix any reliable chronology for this remote pe¬ 
riod of history.^ According to the unanimous tradition of the Bud¬ 
dhists, the Buddha died in the 8th year of the reign of Ajatasatru, 
and this synchronism is accepted by all scholars. The date of the 
Buddha’s death is thus the crucial point in fixing the chronology of 
the rulers of Magadha and other contemporary dynasties of the pe¬ 
riod. Although there is no unanimity on this, we may broadly dis¬ 
tinguish two different schools of views. 1 One, relying on the Sin¬ 
halese reckoning of the Nirvana era, fixes the date of Buddha’s death 
at 544 B. C. It is, however, pointed out by the other that this can¬ 
not be reconciled with the early Sinhalese tradition that Asoka’s 
coronation took place 218 years after the death of Buddha. As 
will be shown later, we can fix the date of the coronation of Asoka 
with a tolerable degree of certainty in 269 B.C. or within a few 
years of it. If it took place 218 years after Buddha’s death, the date 
of this event may be fixed at c. 487 B.C. This view is supported 
by the Chinese tradition of ‘the dotted record.’ It is said that a 
record was kept in which a dot was put each year after the death 
of Buddha, and this was continued in Canton up to the year A.D. 
489, when the number of dots amounted to 975. This gives 486 
B. C. as the date of Buddha’s death. Although no finality attaches 
to this or any other conclusion, 486 B.C; may be accepted as a work¬ 
ing hypothesis, and most scholars now place Buddha’s death within 
a few years of this date. 

It may be noted in this connection that Mahavira’s death, ac¬ 
cording to Jain tradition, took place in 528 B.C. But this date can 

1. Cf. PHAl, 186 for a brief review of the different theories on the subject. Cf. 
also Geiger, Tr. of Mahdvamsa, p. XII; EHI* pp. 49-50; CHI, I, 171. Recently 
Dr. E. J. Thomas has pointed out (B. C. Law Volume If, 18-22) that according 
to the Sarvastivadins Asoka flourished one century after the Nirvana of Buddha, 
and this tradition may be traced even in the Sinhalese Chronicles. According 
to this date Jfirvana falls in the 4th century B.C. and a Japanese scholar, 
quoted by Thomas, places this event in 386 B.C. 


86 



TOE RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 

hardly be reconciled with 486 B.C. as the date of Budha’s death if 
we accept the Jain and Buddhist tradition that Mahavira and 
Buddha died within a few years of each other. Accordingly the 
scholars, w r ho accepted 486 B.C. (or thereabouts) as the date of 
Buddha’s death, take 468 B.C. as the date of the death of Mahavira 
on the authority of the great Jain author Hemachandra. 1 

On the basis of 486 B.C. as the date of Buddha’s death, the acces¬ 
sion of Bimbisara falls in 545 B.C., as he ruled for 52 years and the 
Buddha died in the eighth year of his son’s reign. It has been sug¬ 
gested by some that the so-called Nirvana era of Ceylon “originally 
started from the coronation of Bimbisara and was later on con¬ 
founded with the era of the Great Decease .” 2 We may accordingly 
accept 544 B.C. as the date of accession of Bimbisara. 

The accession of Chandragupta Maurya, who overthrow the last 
Nanda king, took place, as we shall see later, about 324 B.C. • The 
reigns of the kings dealt with in this chapter, viz. Bimbisara and 
Sisunaga groups and the Nandas, therefore, fall between 544 and 
324 B. C., a period of 220 years for eleven cr twelve generations. 

The first Nanda king Mahapadma Nanda ruled, according to the 
Puranas, for 88 years, but some scholars regard it as a mistake foy 
28 which is found in some manuscripts of the Puranas. 3 The other 
eight kings are said to have ruled for 12 years. The Sinhalese 
Chronicles assign only 22 years to the nine Nandas. 

As regards the kings belonging to Bimbisara and Sisunaga 
groups, their total reign-period is given as 200 years in the Sinha¬ 
lese Chronicles and 360 or 163 years in the Puranas. The Puranas 
give the reign-periods for each king, but they differ so widely in the 
different texts that it is impossible to check the total period of the 
reign with their help. 

In view of these differences it is difficult to assign dates to indi¬ 
vidual kings or even to the different groups. The 22 years assigned 
to the Nandas seem to be too small and we may accept 40 years, de¬ 
duced from the Puranas, as a more reasonable figure. We may thus 
put the Nanda kings as ruling from 364 to 324 B.C. 

According to the Sinhalese Chronicles, Bimbisara and Ajata- 
satru ruled respectively for 52 and 32 years. The corresponding 
dates in the Puranas are 28 (or 38) and 25 (or 27). To Sisunaga is 
assigned a reign of 18 years in the Sinhalese Chronicles and 40 years 

. ■■■-= ---——— T-* -■- -- ■ ■ ■umu.inu.iuj.wi - 

1. CHI , I, 156. 

2. PHAI, 186. 

3. Ibid , 189; DKA, 69, fn. 17. 

37 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


in the Puranas. It may not be a pure accident that the reign-periods 
of these kings vary in the two authorities according to the import¬ 
ance they attach to them. It is in any case impossible to rely 
implicitly on any of these sources. It is, however, likely that the 
Sinhalese Buddhists had a more or less correct tradition about the 
dates of Bimbisara and Ajatasatru, as these were intimately asso¬ 
ciated with Buddha. We may therefore provisionally accept the 
following chronology: 


544—493 B.C. 
493—462 B.C. 
462=—430 B.C. 


Bimbisara 
Ajatasatru 
Next four kings 
Sisunaga and his 


430—364 B.C. 
364—324 B.C. 


successors 
Nanda Dynasty 


It should be remembered, however, that these dates are calcu¬ 
lated on the hypothesis that Buddha’s death took place in 486 B.C. 
If, however, we accept the Sinhalese reckoning of 544 B.C. for th: : s 
event, the dates proposed above will have to be considerably modi¬ 
fied. Bimbisara’s accession would then fall in 604 B.C. and that of 
Ajatasatru in 552 B.C. The remaining 25 kings, belonging to nine 
generations, will have to be placed between 532 and 324 B.C., a 
period of 208 years. There is no incongruity far less absurdity, in 
this chronological scheme, or in the assumption on which it is based, 
viz . that the Buddha died in 544 B.C. The only difficulty is the 
statement in the Sinhalese Chronicles that Asoka’s coroation took 
place 218 years after Buddha’s death, which cannot be reconciled 
with the date 544 B. C. given for the latter event in the same chro¬ 
nicles. Thus we have to make a choice between one or the other 
statement, and there is no valid reason why we should reject the 
latter and not the former. Besides, the earliest Sinhalese Chronicle, 
the Dipavamsa, puts the interval of 218 years between the death of 
Buddha and the coronation of Priyadarsana. Although this epithet 
was borne by Asoka and is generally taken to refer to him, it is also 
applied to his grandfather Chandragupta in the drama MudrcL - 
rakshasa (Act VI). If applied to Chandragupta, this statement would 
fix the year of his coronation as 326 B.C., which is surprisingly 
close to the truth. 1 Thus the date 544 B.C. for Buddha’s death, as 
testified to by the Sinhalese reckoning of the Nirvana era, cannot be 
pronounced to be definitely wrong. 

1. This has been pointed out by Dr. H. C. Raychaudliuri (1C. II. 560). 




CHAPTER III 


FOREIGN INVASIONS 

I. THE PERSIAN INVASION 

While the interior of India had been undergoing a process of 
political unification under Magadha, her undefended and insecure 
frontiers on the north-west invited foreign invasions. The first of 
these was the Persian invasion. 

The relations between Old Persia, or Iran, and India have been 
describe above. 1 We do not possess any definite information re¬ 
garding the contact between the two in the later Vedic age. Some 
scholars find in the Avestan passages indication of a political hold 
which old Iran had obtained on Northern India in pre-Achaemenian 
times. But corroboration of details of this political connection are 
Jacking. 

With the sixth century B.C., however, we tread upon more solids 
ground. From classical sources we gather that the Medo-Persian 
kingdom, which was supreme in western Asia during that century, 
came into contact with India through the eastern campaigns of its 
emperor Cyrus (558-530 B.C.). Information on this subject may be 
derived from Herodotus, Ctesias, and Xenophon along with Strabo 
and Arrian. Most of the references of Herodotus, however, are je- 
lated to the time of Darius and Xerxes. It is generally held that the 
eastern conquest of Cyrus included the districts of Drangiana, 2 Sat- 
tagydia 3 and Gandaritis (Gandhara) (Herodotus I, 153, 177) which 
were located in the north-western regions forming the boundary 
between India and Iran. According to Ctesias (Fragment 37 ed. 
Gilmore), Cyrus died of a wound inflicted in battle by ‘an Indian’, 
a battle which “the Indians were fighting on the side of Derbikes 
whom they supplied with elephants.” These Derbikes might have 
been a frontier tribe. According to Xenophon ( Cyropaedia , I. 1, 4), 
Cyrus “brought under his rule Bactrians and Indians” and extended 
his sway up to the Erythraean sea, i.e the Indian Ocean. He further 

1. Vol. I, pp. 218-224; 4th impression (1965), pp. 222-228. 

2. Drangiana corresponds to a part of Seistan. 

3. The Sattagydia cannot be definitely located. It has been placed in Ghazni and 
Ghilzai by some and Hazara country further to the north-west by others. 
There are other views also (cf. CHI , I, 328, fn. 1). 


39 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


records (Ibid, VI, 2, 1-11) the despatch to Cyrus by an Indian king 
of an embassy conveying money, probably in payment of tribute. It 
has been held on the basis of these references that Cyrus conquered 
the borderland between Iran and India and won for himself a posi¬ 
tion which gained him a tribute from a king of Northern India, if not 
his vassalage. 

The Greek writers on Alexander’s campaigns do not, however, 
agree as to the conquest of any portion of India by Cyrus. Accord¬ 
ing to Nearchus, as reported by Arrian ( Anab ., VI, 24, 2-3), Cyrus 
came to grief in trying to invade India through the inhospitable de¬ 
sert of Gedrosia (Baluchistan) where the greater part of his army 
died. Megasthenes states that “the Indians had never engaged in 
foreign warfare, nor had they ever been invaded and conquered by a 
foreign power, except by Heracles and Dionysus and lately by the 
Macedonians.” He refers to Semiramis, the Assyrian queen, as 
having died before her projected invasion of India. He further states 
that “the Persians, although they hired mercenary troops from India, 
namely the Hydrakes (Oxydrakai=Kshudrakas), did not make an 
expedition into that country.” Arrian (Indica, IX, 10) repeats the 
statement of Megasthenes that none before Alexander invaded India 

It will thus appear that both Nearchus and Megasthenes agree 
that Cyrus never reached India. But these Greek writers take the 
Sindhu to be the western limit of the country, and it may be that the 
conquests of Cyrus were made in the Indian borderland to the west 
of the Sindhu. Pliny actually refers to Cyrus’s conquest of Kapisa 
in the Ghorband valley. We may also consider in this connection 
the statement of Arrian ( Indica, I, 1-3) that the Indians between the 
river Sindhu and Kabul (Cophen) “were in ancient times subject to 
the Assyrians, the Medes, and, finally, to the Persians under Cyrus 
to whom they pay tribute he imposed upon them.” Probably the 
conclusion of the matter is best given by Ed. Meyer who states: 
“Cyrus appears to have subjugated the Indian tribes of the Paropa- 
nisus (Hindu Kush) and in the Kabul valley, especially the Ganda- 
rians; Darius himself advances as far as the Indus.” 1 Cambyses (530- 
522 B.C.), who succeeded Cyrus, was too much occupied by rebellions 
in his own empire to think of engaging in any movement towards 
India. 

For the reign of his successor Darius (522-486 B.C.) we have the 
reliable evidence of his own inscriptions, from which we can infer 

l. Geschichte des Altertums, III, 97. 


40 




FOREIGN INVASIONS 


the extent of the Persian dominion in India. The first of these is 
what is known as the Behistun inscription (c. 520-518 B.C.) which 
lists the twenty-three provinces making up his empire, but does not 
mention India as one of these. But the two later inscriptions at Per- 
sepolis (c. 518-515 B.C.) and at Naksh-i-Rustam (c. 515 B.C.) mention 
Hx(n)du or the northern Punjab as a part of his domain. Darius 
must therefore have conquered this part of India by about 518 B.C. 

It is, however, to be noted that Behistun inscription of Darius 
(Darayavaush Khshayathiya=Dharadvasu Kshathyah, i.e. Sasakah 
or Raja) mentions as one of the provinces of his empire a region 
named Gadara=Gandhara (modern Rawalpindi and Peshawar Dis¬ 
tricts), along with the neighbouring regions named Suguda (Sogdi- 
ana), Saka (Scythia) and Bakhtrish (Bactria, Balkh, Balhika) 
The Susa palace inscription of Darius states that in the construction 
of the palace, “teak was brought from Gadara.” 

These references indicate that very probably it was Cyrus who 
conquered Gandhara which was inherited by Darius as a part of his 
empire, while for himself he pushed his Indian conquest farther into 
the region called Sindhu . The Persepolis inscription mentions both 
Gandhara and Sindhu as provinces of his empire, as also his Naksh- 
i-Rustam inscription. There is also a fourth inscription of Darius 
known as Hamadan Gold and Silver Tablet inscription which men¬ 
tions Sindhu as a province of the empire. 

Herodotus (III, 94) states that India counted as the twentieth 
satrapy of the empire of Darius, to which, however, it contributed a 
third of his revenue, 360 talents of gold dust, equivalent to over a 
million pounds sterling. All this gold must have come from the 
washings of the upper Sindhu beds, which, according to geologists, 
were distinctly auriferous in those days, 1 and also from what Hero¬ 
dotus calls “the gold-digging-ants”, supposed to be the Tibetan 
mastiffs who guarded the gold mines of Dardistan (the Dardicae), 
mentioned in the Mahabharata (II, 1860). 

Herodotus (IV, 44) also tells of a naval expedition despatched 
by Darius in 517 B. C. under Scylax to explore the Sindhu. This was 
only possible after Darius had established his hold on the Sindhu 
valley. It may be useful to indicate the limits of Persian dominion 
in India. None of the sources refers to the kingdom of Magadha 
under Bimbisara and his contemporaries further west who were 
ruling at this time. Herodotus (III, 98, 102) seems to exclude from 


I. V. Ball in I A, August 1884. 


41 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Persian domination the regions towards the south of the Sindhu and 
also the deserts of Sind and Rajputana towards the east. At the 
same time, a part of India was included in it under the name of 
Sindhu, which must have meant a portion of the Punjab to the east 
of the Sindhu, as distinct from the provinces known as Gandhara, 
Aria (Herat) or Arachosia (Kandahar), as far as the river-mouth. 

In order to give a more comprehensive view of the extent of 
the Persian dominions on the Indian border, we may mention the 
provinces which are now parts of Afghanistan and also those which 
adjoin the region of the Sindhu. These are thus mentioned in the 
Achaemenian inscriptions: (1) Yauna=Yavana=Ionia; (2) Par- 
thava=Parthia; (3) Zaranka=Zranka=Drangiana; (4) Haraiva 
(Sarayu)=Aria=:Herat; (5) Bakhtrish=rBactria=:Balkh; (6) 
Suguda—Sogdiana; (7) §aka=Sakasthana=Seistan; (8) Phata- 
gush—Satagu^Sattagydia; (9) Harauvatish=rSarasvati=Ara- 
chosia—Kandahar; and (10) Maka=Makran. 

Darius I was succeeded by Xerxes (468-465 B.C.). That the 
Indian provinces continued under his empire is attested by the fact 
that he claimed and obtained the military service of an Indian contin¬ 
gent to fight his battles in Greece. This was the first time in history 
that an Indian expeditionary force fought on the soil of Europe. 
The Indians recruited by Xerxes for his army are called by the two 
names “Gandharians and Indians,” implying that the former were 
from the province of Gandhara, and the latter from the provinces con¬ 
trolled by the Persian empire to the east of the Sindhu and described 
as Sirftlhu in the Achaemenian inscriptions already noticed. 

Of the Indian soldiers and their equipment Herodotus gives the 
following interesting account (VII, 65): “The Indians, clad in gar¬ 
ments made of cotton, carried bows of cane and arrows of cane, the 
latter tipped with iron; and thus accoutred the Indians were mar¬ 
shalled under the command of Pharnazathres, son of Artabates.” The 
Gandharian soldiers carried “bows and short spears” which were 
meant for fighting at close quarters, while the “Indians” were evi¬ 
dently used for skirmishing at long range. Besides infantry, India 
also supplied Xerxes with cavalry and chariots, riding horses, and 
also horses and wild asses to draw the chariots, together with a very 
large number of dogs. The cavalry had the same equipment as the 
infantry (Herodotus, VII, 86). 

It may be noted that these Indian troops who fought for the first 
time in Europe had to experience a terrible ordeal in storming the 


42 


FOREIGN INVASIONS 


bloody defiles of Thermopylae. The heroism they displayed on this 
occasion created a further demand for their services. The result 
was that after the retreat of Xerxes from Europe, Indian soldiers 
look part in the Boeotian campaign under the Persian Commander 
Mardonius. 

The Persian hold on India continued up to 330 B.C. when we 
find Darius III, the last of the Achaemenian emperors, indenting 
upon India for a supply of troops to resist Alexander’s invasion. 
According to Arrian (Anab, III, 8, 3-6), one contingent of Indian 
soldiery fought at Gaugamela under the satrap of Bactria, along 
with the Bactrians and Sogdians, while another, the “Indian moun¬ 
taineers”, fought under the satrap of Arachosia. India also sent 
a small force of elephants. The fact that the Indians fought under 
satraps of ether provinces probably shows that there was no longer 
a Persian satrap of India proper, and the hold of Persia over this re¬ 
gion was becoming relaxed. 1 

II. THE MACEDONIAN INVASION 
1. The Advance to the Sindhu 

Nearly two centuries after Cyrus, India fell a victim to a second 
foreign invasion, the Macedonian invasion from Europe, which'was 
led by the great conqueror, Alexander. Alexander embarked on a 
far-reaching scheme of campaigns and conquests in the east. His 
first conquest was that of Persia. He defeated its emperor, Darius 
III, and burnt his capital Persepolis in 330 B.C. 

P’rom Persia, he continued his advance towards the eastern ancL 
north-eastern provinces of the Persian empire. His military plan 
was to secure his rear by a chain of outposts occupied by garrisons 
along the route of his conquests. Thus were constructed the cities 
of “Alexandria-among-the-Arachosians,” i.e. Kandahar; “Alexandria- 
under-the-Caucasus,” i. e. at the foot of Hindu Kush, where three 
routes to Bactria converge, which probably occupied the site of 
modern Charikar; Cartana (Begram), Cadrusi (Koratas?), and Nicaea 
between Alexandria and the Cophen or Kabul river. From the 
Kabul valley Alexander proceeded towards the north up the Panjshir 
valley and through the Khawak Pass. At the beginning of 327 B.C. 
he had completed the conquest of Eastern Iran beyond the Hindu 
Kush by overrunhing Bactria and the region now known as Bokhara, 

** ^ i i ■ ■ ■■■ ■ ■ ■ i -- ■■■■ — . . 1 — ~ m r~. 

1 For a very different view on this subject, cf. JHQ. XXV, 153. 

43 







THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


as far as the Syr Daria (Jaxartes). In May 327 B.C. he advanced 
towards India. 

He returned through the Kushan Pass and made a descent upon 
Alexandria, where he deposed the satrap for misgovernment. Thence 
he moved to Nicaea. From Nicaea, as the outpost nearest to India, 
he dispatched emissaries to the king of Taxila (Takshasila) and 
other princes to the west of the Sindhu, informing them of his 
intentions and inviting them to meet him to discuss terms which 
might obviate his contemplated invasion. 

Even before this invitation Ambhi (Omphis), son of the old 
king of Taxila, had sent envoys to Alexander while he was still in 
Bokhara, offering his help to the invader provided his kingdom was 
spared. Curtius records that he sent to Alexander useful presents 
of “65 elephants, great many sheep of extraordinary size, and 3,000 
bulls of a valuable breed.” This is the first recorded instance of an 
Indian king proving a traitor to his country; what is worse, his trea¬ 
chery was instigated by a petty spirit of local hostility to his power¬ 
ful neighbour Porus (Paurava), the ruler of the territory between 
the Hydaspes (Jhelum) and the Hydraotes (Ravi), who was bidding 
for supremacy in that region by pushing his conquest beyond the 
Ravi in the east and threatening the frontiers of Taxila on the west. 
Thus the king of Taxila, jealous of Paurava, took recourse to foreign 
intervention to curb his rival’s growing power. 

Alexander was also similarly helped at the very beginning of 
his invasion of India by the treacherous submission offered in 
advance by another Indian king, Sisikottos (Sasigupta). He was 
probably the ruler of one of the frontier hill-states who originally 
even helped the Bactrians and Iranians against Alexander, but now 
changed his allegiance and joined Alexander. 

Thus securing his rear Alexander now found the path of his 
advance towards India free of obstacles. He was marching with an 
army modestly estimated at 30,000 men, but one of its weak points, 
which told in the long run, was its heterogeneous composition, not 
unified or animated by the national spirit and sense of patriotic mis¬ 
sion which inspired its leader. The army was made up of the 
heavily armed Macedonian infantry, carrying the long spear; Mace¬ 
donian cavalry; mercenaries from Greek cities; highlanders from the 
Balkans. Agrianes, and Thracians equipped with slings, javelins, and 
bows; some eastern tribes such as horsemen from Iran, Pashtus and 


44 


FOREIGN INVASIONS 


men from the Hindu Kush; Central-Asiatics, good at shooting from 
horse-back; skilled Phoenician boatmen, and Egyptians proud of 
their ancient ancestry. 

This expeditionary force was divided by Alexander into two 
columns under his plan of campaign. One division was led by 
Alexander himself up the Kunar or Chitral river to the hilly region 
in the north and east. The other marched along the south bank of 
the Kabul river under two Macedonian commanders, Hephaestion 
and Perdiccas, passing through the Khyber Pass, towards the 
Sindhu, and emerging upon the plains of Peshawar, with the king of 
Taxila as its escort. 

Here, however, contrary to all expectations, Astes, the king of 
the small state of the Astakenoi, with his capital at Peucelaotis, 
defied Alexander and stood siege of his walled capital by the Greeks 
for full thirty days till he fell fighting. It seems that Astes is the 
Greek equivalent of the Indian name Ashtakaraja, whose people 
were known as Ashtakas and his capital as Pushkalavatl (Charsadda). 
McCrindle suggests that Ashtakaraja may be connected with what 
Cunningham calls Hashtanagar or eight cities situated on the eastern 
bank of the lower Swat river, one of which was Pushkalavatl, the 
capital of Gandhara. A henchman of the traitor king of Taxila, 
whom the Greeks call Sangaya (=Sanjaya), was rewarded for his 
loyalty to Alexander by the gift to him of this Ashtaka kingdom. 

The other division of the army which was campaigning in the 
hilly regions in the valleys of the Kunar, Panjkora and Swat, under 
Alexander himself, encountered much opposition from the free peo¬ 
ples of these districts. These are termed by the Greeks Aspasioi and 
Assakenoi (from Iranian Aspa = Sanskrit Asva). Their Indian 
names may be taken to be Asvtiyana and Asvakdyana, as mentioned 
by Panini (IV. 1, 110, 99). The coins known as Vatasvaka are 
attributed to these people, who might be identified with the Asvakas 
(=Asmakas) mentioned by Panini (IV. 1, 173). 1 The capital of 
Assakenoi is called by the Greeks Massaga, which corresponds to the 
Sanskrit MasakavatL These hill tribes fought bravely and offered a 
stubborn resistance in many of their strongholds. At one of these 
encounters, Alexander, while trying to scale the walls of the citadel, 
received a serious wound. In retaliation, the whole population was 
put to the sword. Another centre of resistance was the city named 
Andaka. In the end Alexander was able to overcome these heroic 

I. JRAS, 1900, pp. 98-106. 

45 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


peoples who, however, died to a man in defence of their hearths and 
homes. As many as 40,000 were taken prisoners of war from the 
Aspasians alone. The loot in cattle amounted to 230,000 oxen, show¬ 
ing how well-stocked this hill-state was in agriculture and live-stock 

Still more severe was the resistance offered by the Assakenoi, 
the inhabitants of the eastern part of this region (the modern Kafiri- 
stan). They opposed Alexander with an army of 30,000 cavalry, 
38,000 infantry (as stated by Curtius) and 30 elephants, together 
with 7,000 mercenaries recruited from the plains, who were all 
stationed in a fortress named Massaga. This army was led by the 
late king’s mother, queen Cleophes. The city was strong in natural 
fortifications, built on a hill with inaccessible sides, treacherous 
morasses on two sides, a rivulet on the third, and artificial ramparts 
of brick, stone and timber on its fourth side. The fortress was fur¬ 
ther protected by a deep moat dug along its entire circumference of 
4 miles. The example of the queen-commander leading the struggle 
for freedom in person brought the entire womanhood of the locality 
into the fight, while their heroism also infected the mercenaries 
whose initial vacillation was replaced by a determination to prefer 
death to dishonour. 

To strengthen further his defence, the chief, Assakenos, though 
a republican, entered into an alliance with the neighbouring monarch 
of “the Indians of the hill country” named Abhisara, who sent him 
a military contingent. After a heroic resistance of several days, the 
chief fell fighting, his mother and daughter were made prisoners, and 
his city capitulated. The massacre of the entire body of mercenary 
troops, numbering 7,000, by Alexander forms a memorable, but 
tragic, episode of this campaign, and throws a blot on the great 
soldier. 

Alexander found a little respite from his arduous campaign in 
this hostile country in the conciliatory attitude of the neighbouring 
city-state of Nysa, which sent him a contingent of 300 horsemen. He 
constituted this hilly country and the lower Kabul valley into a new 
satrapy under Nicanor. Further west was the satrapy of the Paro- 
panisadae under Tyriespes with his capital at Alexandria-under- 
the-Caucasus. 

He then descended to Pushkalavatl (Charsadda) where he plant¬ 
ed a Greek garrison under Philip. The lower Kabul valley was fur¬ 
ther secured by seizing small towns between Pushkalavatl and the 
Sindhu. In this Alexander was aided by two Indian chiefs called 


FOREIGN INVASIONS 


“Cophaeus”, ruler of the valley of the Cophen or Kabul, and “Assa- 

getes,” the king of the Assakenoi who had succeeded the king killed 
at Massaga. 

The next stage in Alexander’s campaign was the siege of the 
strong hill fort known as Aomus, corresponding to Sanskrit Varava 
as mentioned by Panini. It was apparently not far from the junction 
of the Kabul and Sindhu rivers. The Greeks attached the greatest 
importance to the capture of this mountain citadel as there was a 
tradition that even Heracles had failed to storm it; and they describe 
the exploit at great length. 1 After reducing this fort, Alexander 
posted here a garrison under his Indian ally Sisikottos (ga£igupta). 

The problem now facing Alexander was the crossing of the 
Sindhu. He fixed on a point near a forest which would supply the 
timber necessary for building craft for the purpose. A part of his 
army was floated down the river on these boats, and joined the other 
part waiting at Ohind 16 miles above Attock, to be transported across 
the river by a bridge already constructed by Hephaestion. 

2. From the Sindhu to the Beds 

It was in the spring of 326 B.C. that the Macedonian invader first 
set foot on Indian soil proper. His army crossed over to the other 
side of the Sindhu, accompanied by an Indian contingent of 5,000 
from the king of Taxila and other chiefs, squadrons of Indian horse, 
and thirty elephants. The invading army, on crossing, was warmly 
welcomed by Ambhi, the new king of Taxila. 

Alexander held a Durbar at Taxila, receiving homage and pre¬ 
sents from the smaller chiefs of the locality. These gifts were 
returned by Alexander on a lavish scale in the shape of vessels of 
gold and silver and embroideries which he had obtained in Persia. 

Beyond Taxila, between the rivers Jhelum and Chenab, lay the 
kingdom of Porus, the great rival of the king of Taxila, as mention¬ 
ed above. But Porus or the Paurava king was made of a different 
stuff. True to the tradition of his ancient lineage, reaching back to 
the Vedic period, he determined to defend, at all costs, the honour 
of his family and the independence of his kingdom. He heard with 
resentment, perhaps with dismay, of the submission of the rulers 

1. The great controversy over the identification of Aornus, a solitary rock about 
7,000 ft. high washed by the Sindhu, has been set at rest by Sir Aurel Stein. 
He has proved by local investigation that it corresponded to Pir Sar range 
(On Alexander’s Track to the Indus , p. 104). For a detailed account of the 
fort and its siege and the different theories on its identification, cf, EHI, 2nd 
Edition, Appendix D; 3rd Edition, pp. 56-58. 


47 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


t>f Taxila and other localities, including another Paurava, one of his 
own kinsmen ruling further east beyond, the Chenab. Even the king 
of Abhisara, who offered to help him, was playing a double game, 
and sent his own brother to Taxila with presents for Alexander and 
offer of submission. But although hemmed in by enemies, cowards, 
and traitors, both in front and rear, his undaunted spirit refused to 
submit. When the enemies’ envoys came to summon him to meet 
Alexander, he proudly replied that he would indeed meet him, but 
at his own frontiers and in arms. 

Both sides now made active preparations i'or the inevitable 
war. Alexander did not wait till after the rains when the rivers 
would be fordable, probably because he was unwilling to give Porus 
time to strengthen his position by fresh alliances. Having left a 
Macedonian garrison and his satrap Philip as a “Resident” in the 
kingdom of Ambhi, he moved on to the banks of the Hydaspes (Jhe- 
lum) which was then (May 326 B.C.) in flood. Porus was also ready 
with his full strength on the opposite bank to oppose his passage of 
the river. For some time the two armies watched each other. 
Alexander then took recourse to a stratagem. He made his army 
move up and down the river in search of a convenient point for cross¬ 
ing and kept the Indians in dark about his movement. At last the 
crossing was effected one morning after a night of torrential rain 
and storm at a point 17 miles up the river from the original camp. A 
bridge of boats, which was moved up to that point and was kept hid 
den behind a wooded island, enabled the Macedonian army to cross 
the river unobserved. 

Alexander crossed over v/ith only a small part of his army, 
about 11,000 men and a cavalry. Porus sent his son to oppose him 
v/ith 2,000 mounted troops and 120 chariots. But these could not 
withstand the charge of the Macedonian cavalry led personally by 
Alexander, and the gallant lad was slain. 

Porus now offered battle with his whole army which Arrian 
estimates at 30,000 foot, 4,000 horse, 300 chariots and 200 elephants. 
The elephants were placed in front flanked by infantry on both sides. 
The flanks of the infantry were again guarded by cavalry which was 
protected by chariots in front. 

From the outset, the battle went against Porus. The rains over¬ 
night rendered the ground slippery, and the chariots kept sticking 
in the slush. The archers could not fix their long bows on the 


48 


FOREIGN INVASIONS 


muddy ground, Alexander began the battle with a charge of 1,000 
mounted archers from Central Asia and the picked Macedonian 
cavalry, making a breach in the lines of the Indian cavalry and in¬ 
fantry. The army of Porus was thrown into complete confusion. 
Fresh Greek soldiers arrived across the river under Craterus, and 
the Indian army was completely routed; thousands were slain in¬ 
cluding the two sons and all the great generals of Porus. But Porus 
bravely fought up to the last. When all was lost, he left the field 
with nine wounds on his body. Then a man with a message from 
Alexander galloped aftdr him. Recognizing him to be the traitor 
king of Taxila, he threw a javelin at him. Probably this encounter 
is represented on a well-known coin. Other envoys came up to him, 
including his friend Meroes. Then he offered his surrender. He 
was conducted to Alexander who asked him how he should like to 
be treated. He made the famous reply which has become classic: 
“Act as a king.” When Alexander asked him to be more precise, he 
replied: “When I said ‘as a king’, everything was contained in that.” 

Alexander reinstated Porus in his kingdom to which he added 
further territories towards the east, the domains of fifteen republi¬ 
can peoples with their 5,000 considerable cities and villages with¬ 
out number. 1 He next marched into the interior of the country 
and conquered the republic of the Glauganikai (=Glachukayanaka, 
mentioned by Kasikci on Panini IV, 3, 99) with its 37 towns each of 
which had a population between 5,000 and 10,000. Alexander had 
this country annexed to the kingdom of Porus. His further advance 
was now impeded by reports of revolts from regions conquered by 
him. Kandahar rose with the help of an Indian Chief Damaraxus. 
The Asvakas rebelled, killing the satrap Nicanor. Sisikottos, then 
the “satrap of Assakenians” (eastern Asvakas), asked for urgent 
help. z 

The situation was somewhat improved by the arrival of Thra¬ 
cian reinforcements from Iran, with whom Alexander crossed the 
next river Acesines (Asikni, Chenab). The king of that region was 
Porus II, who left his realm to its fate and fled for shelter “to the 
nation of Gandaridae,” i.e. to the territories of the Nanda king. The 
whole region between the Chenab and the Ravi was annexed to the 
kingdom of Porus. 

Alexander next marched up to the Hydraotes (Ravi) and be¬ 
yond and invaded the territories of republican peoples. Of these, 
the Adraistai (Adhrish^as? or Arattas, Ardshprakas, ‘kingless’— 

1. Plutarch, Alexander, LX. 

49 


A.I.U.—4 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


republican peoples) offered submission to Alexander. But the 
Kathaioi (=Kathas) defied him from their fortified town named 
Sangala (=Samkala = Jandiala), though without success. Their 
casualties amounted to 17,000 killed, and 70,000 captured. Porus 
helped Alexander with elephants and 6,000 troops in this battle. 
The entire republican region was, as usual, made over to him. 
Alexander next received the submisson of two neighbouring kings 
named Sophytes (=Saubhuti) and Phegelas (=Bhagala). He then 
came to the fifth river Hyphasis (Beas). 

3. The Retreat 

Alexander’s progress was here brought to a halt by the mutiny 
of his troops, who refused to proceed further (end of July 326 B.C.). 
Alexander appealed to his soldiers, but in vain. At last he decided 
on retreat. He went back by the road by which he came up to the 
bank of the Jhelum. Then he sailed down the Jhelum and the Sindhu 
to the ocean in a fleet of 1,000 boats made ready beforehand, includ¬ 
ing “luggage-boats, horse-transports, and war-galleys.” 

He left Porus to rule over the entire territory between the Beas 
and the Jhelum and over fifteen republican nations with more than 
5,000 cities; Ambhi to rule to the west of the Jhelum; and the king 
of Abhisara to rule in Kashmir with the state of Arsaces (Urasa = 
Hazara) added to his kingdom. 

Alexander started on his voyage in November 326 B.C. with 
troops protecting him on either bank of the river and his satrap 
Philip following three days later to protect his rear. The armada 
floated down the Jhelum and reached its confluence with the Chenab 
in 10 days. Here Alexander had to face determined opposition orga¬ 
nised by a confederacy of republican peoples led by the Mailoi 
(Malavas) and the Oxydrakai (Kshudrakas) who between them 
mustered an allied army of 90,000 foot, 10,000 horse, and 900 chariots. 
All the Malava cities became centres of resistance. One of these 
was a town of Brahmins who exchanged the pen for the sword and 
died fighting. They numbered about 5,000, of whom but few were 
taken prisoner. In trying to scale the wall of another stronghold 
Alexander was severely wounded. When it fell, his infuriated sol¬ 
diers massacred all the inhabitants, sparing neither woman nor 
child. The Kshudrakas lost heart after the defeat of the Malavas 
and submitted. 

There were other republican peoples to resist Alexander. The 
Sibae (Sivis) submitted, but not the Agalassoi (Arjunayanas?) who 


50 


FOREIGN INVASIONS 


fought with an army of 40,000 foot and 3,000 cavalry. In one of their 
towns, the citizens numbering about 20,000, after a brave resistance, 
cast themselves with their wives and children into the flames, antici¬ 
pating the Rajput jauhar of later days. 

Down the river Alexander passed by other tribes; the Abastanes 
(Ambashthas), who had an army of 60,000 foot, 6,000 horse and 500 
chariots; the Xathri (Kshatriyas); and the Ossadii (Vasati). These 
did not, however, choose to fight. 

Alexander reached the last confluence of the Punjab rivers with 
the Sindhu in the winter at the beginning of 325 B.C. Further down 
the Sindhu he passed through the country of the Sogdi, also called 
Sogdri (=Sudras), which was then under Brahmin supremacy; of 
king Musicanus (king of the Mushikas?); and of Oxycanus also 
called Porticanus (from Sanskrit Partha?). 

The Brahmins of this region who dominated its politics resolved 
upon opposition to the foreign invader as a part of their dharma, 
denounced the princes who submitted as traitors, and goaded the 
republican peoples into resistance. Musicanus revoked his submis¬ 
sion to Alexander. Oxycanus also followed suit. They were all 
defeated and put to the sword together with the militant Brahmins. 
Alexander next came to the large city of Pattala where the Sindhu 
divided into two branches. It was then ruled by two kings and a 
Council of Elders. It was deserted at the approach of Alexander. In 
September 325 B.C. Alexander left Pattala on his homeward journey 
and proceeded towards Babylon through Gedrosia. Two years later 
he died at Babylon. 

4. General Review 

The nature and effect of Alexander’s raid on India are some¬ 
times overstated. The adventure was no doubt highly creditable, but 
cannot be regarded as a brilliant military achievement, as he had 
never been brought face to face with any of the great nations of 
Hindustan. Hence, there was really never a fair test between Euro¬ 
pean and Asiatic military skill, as held by some scholars. 1 Nor was 
Alexander’s campaign a political success, for it did not result in any 
permanent Macedonian occupation of the Punjab. It left no per¬ 
manent mark on the literature, life or government of the people. 

1. Cf. e.g. the curious, if not ludicrous, observation of V. A. Smith that “the 
triumphant progress of Alexander from the Himalaya to the sea demonstrated 
the inherent weakness of the greatest Asiatic armies when confronted with 
European skill and discipline” (EHI/ 112). 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


What remained of the foreign occupation after Alexander’s retreat 
from India and his death in 323 B.C. was wiped out in the war of 
liberation fought successfully by the Indian leader Chandragupta 
Maurya, who became ruler of the Punjab about that time. 

It may also be noted that the course of Alexander’s campaigns 
was by no means easy or smooth. His own followers were not in¬ 
variably loyal to him, and reluctantly followed him in an apparently 
fruitless adventure in a foreign land. Some of the Greeks, whom he 
settled in his new cities marking the path of his invasion, did not 
take kindly to a life of exile and were anxious to get back home at 
the earliest opportunity. 

His invasion was greatly facilitated by the treacherous sub¬ 
mission tendered by some of the kings. But there was a striking set¬ 
off against their treachery in the heroic resistance offered by Porus 
and most of the free or the republican peoples of the Punjab, as we 
have seen. These clans fought the foe to a man, but they failed for 
lack of leadership, resources, and organisation against the superior 
military .organisation of Alexander. What further contributed to the 
success of Alexander was his strategy in breaking the centres of 
Indian resistance one by one, so as to prevent them from forming a 
united front against him. It was left to the Malavas and the Kshu- 
drakas to form such a combined front and pool their resources against 
their common enemy. But it came too late. 

Alexander had really no chance of permanent success against 
the inherent difficulties of the Indian situation. In any case his 
dream of including the Punjab and Sind in, his world-empire was 
doomed to disappointment. It was not feasible, owing to the lack 
of communications to prosecute campaigns in lands so remote from 
the base of operations. Some of the Indian sages whom Alexander 
interviewed pointed out to him the futility of his ambitions by show¬ 
ing how, as he trod on a piece of a dried-up hide, and pressed on one 
end, the rest would fly up. By this symbol it was hinted that 
Alexander could not consolidate his conquests so far away from the 
centre of his empire. 

Alexander’s own administrative arrangements betray a correct 
apprehension of the situation. He divided his Indian conquests into 
seven satrapies. Two of these were outside India proper, between 
the Hindu Kush and the Sindhu; the lower Kabul valley under 
Philip, the son of Machatas, and the region beyond it under Oxyartes, 
father-in-law of Alexander. In India proper, the region round the 


52 


FOREIGN INVASIONS 


confluences of the Punpjab rivers formed the satrapy of Philippus, 
and Sind, that of Pithon, the son of Agenor. The territories fur¬ 
ther north in the Punjab formed the satrapies of Ambhi (the king 
of Taxila) and Porus, the Jhelum forming the boundary between 
the two. The king of Abhisara was left in charge of his old princi¬ 
pality and the neighbouring region. Although strong Macedonian 
garrisons were left at different centres it was inevitable that the 
Indian satraps would be de facto sovereigns from the very begin¬ 
ning, and it would not be long before they would throw off even the 
nominal suzerainty of Alexander. 

But Alexander’s invasion affected Indian politics in another 
way. It promoted the political unification which the country so 
badly needed. Smaller states were now merged in larger ones such 
as those of Porus, Abhisara or Taxila, thus paving the way for the 
growth of the Indian empire which was shortly to be founded by 
Chandragupta Maurya. 

The general Indian position with reference to the Macedonian 
invasion is well expressed by Matthew Arnold: 

“She let the legions thunder past 
And plunged in Thought again.” 

The only permanent result of Alexander’s campaign was that 
it opened up communication between Greece and India and paved 
the wav for a more intimate intercourse between the two. And this 
was achieved at the cost of untold sufferings inflicted upon India,— 
massacre, rapine and plunder on a scale till then without a prece¬ 
dent in her annals, but repeated in later days by more successful 
invaders like Sultan Mahmud, Tamerlane, and Nadir Shah. In spite 
of the halo of romance that Greek writer^ have woven round the 
name of Alexander, the historian of India can regard him only as 
the precursor of these recognised scourges of mankind.* 

* See Preface. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

I. PERSIAN INVASION 

For the Achaemenian inscriptions, cf. D. C. Sircar, Select Inscriptions bearing 
on Indian History and Civilization, Calcutta, 1942, and Sukumar Sen, Old Persian 
Inscriptions. 

Herodotus, History (Eng. Tr. by G. Rawlinson or G. C. Macaulay). 

Cambridge History of India, Vol. I, Ch. XIV. 

II. MACEDONIAN INVASION 

J. W. McCrindle. The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great. West¬ 
minster, 1896. 

V. A. Smith. Early History of India, 4th Edition, Chs. II-IV. 

Cambridge History of India, Vol. I, Ch. XV. 


53 




CHAPTER IV 


CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA 

EMPIRE 

I. LIFE AND REIGN (324-300 B.C.) 

While Alexander was carrying fire and sword through the length 
and breadth of the Punjab, the emperor Dhana Nanda was ruling over 
the rest of Northern India. Whether he took any effective steps to 
stem the tide of invasion, we do not know. What would have been 
the result of a conflict between the two, we cannot say. Alexander 
had hitherto conquered only minor Indian tribes and states piece¬ 
meal and the Greek writers were more impressed by the strength 
of their individual opposition than that of any other opponent of 
Alexander, not excluding the great Achaemenian monarch. It is, 
therefore, permissible to hold that Alexander would not have found 
it an easy task to subdue the mighty Nanda Empire. 1 Although 
most of the Greek writers represent his retreat from almost the very 
gate of that empire as due to the mutiny of his soldiers, at least one 

ancient Greek historian records that it was caused bv the terror of 

•/ 

the mighty power of the Nandas. This cannot be altogether dis¬ 
missed as fictitious, and we shall perhaps never know the part play¬ 
ed by the Nanda emperor in those critical days of India. It is certain, 
however, that his vast dominions were unaffected by the ruthless 
havoc and destruction caused by Alexander in the Punjab. 

But the empire was not destined to enjoy peace for long. An 
internal rising took place almost immediately after th£ departure of 
Alexander from India, and Dhana Nanda met his doom in the hands 
of Chandragupta, as will be related later. The career of Chandra- 
gupta, the founder of the Maurya dynasty, sheds lustre on the 
history of ancient India, for to him belongs the credit of freeing this 
country from the Macedonian yoke and securing, for the first time, 
the political unification of the greater part of India under one sceptre. 
It was a remarkable achievement, specially when we remember 

1. V. A. Smith is of opinion that if Alexander had advanced further his force 
“might have been overwhelmed by the mere numbers of his adversaries,’’ 
and the rebellious troops “may be credited with having prevented the anni¬ 
hilation of the Macedonian army.” (EHI/ p. 12 k 


54 





CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURY A EMPIRE 

that Chandragupta did not inherit a throne, but was bom in humble 
circumstances. Chandragupta’s rise to greatness is indeed a 
romance of history. 

Like that of many other great figures in history the early career 
of Chandragupta is involved in obscurity. According to the Greek 
writer Justin, he was a man of low origin. The Jain tradition also 
represents him as a son of a village headman’s daughter, and adds, 
by way of explaining the title Maurya, that the village was inhabited 
by peacock-tamers (mayura-poshaka). But neither of these sources 
furnish any further particulars about his early life. The Brahmani- 
cal and Buddhist traditions supply more details, but differ widely 
about his origin. The former describe him as base-born, while the 
latter represent him as belonging to a Kshatriya ruling clan. 

We can trace a gradual growth of the Brahmanical tradition. 
The Puranas, which are our earliest available Brahmanical source, 
do not contain even any hint of it. They simply mention that the 
Nandas were uprooted by the Brahmana Kautilya, who anointed 
Chandragupta as king. It was left to a commentator on the Vishnu 
Purana. first to suggest that Chandragupta was base-born by way of 
explaining his title Maurya. He sought to derive it from Mura, sup¬ 
posed to be a wife of king Nanda and mother of Chandragupta. But 
the commentator is guilty both of fictitious history and bad grammar. 
The derivative from Mura is Maureya. Maurya can only be derived 
from the masculine Mura which is the name of a gotra in the Ga$a- 
pa^ha of Panini. The commentator is more anxious to find a mother 
for Chandragupta than to follow grammatical rules. But it is to.be 
noted that he does not cast any slur upon her. He does not state, 
like some later authorities, that Mura was a Sudra woman or the 
king’s mistress. 

The story of Chandragupta’s base origin is reproduced in the 
drama Mudrardkshasa which is of a much later date. It calls 
Chandragupta both Vrshala and Kulahina, which have been taken 
by some to mean a Sudra and outcaste. It has been suggested, how¬ 
ever, that the term Kulahtna means that he was only of lowly or 
humble birth, while the term Vrshala is sometimes used in the sense 
of a Vfisha or chief among kings. 

Like that on the Vishnu Purdna , a later commentator on the 
drama starts the story that Chandragupta was the son of Maurya 
and his wife Mura who was a Sudra. The play also ends by acclaim¬ 
ing Chandragupta as Mauvyaputra and a scion of the Nanda family. 


55 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


This connection by blood between Chandragupta and Nanda is, as 
we have seen above, also affirmed in the commentary of the Vishnu 
Purana, though the Puranas themselves are silent about it. 

The Buddhist tradition, however, gives us an altogether differ¬ 
ent picture. The Divydvaddna refers to Bindusara, son of Chandra¬ 
gupta, as an anointed Kshatriya. According to the Mahavariisa Chan- 
dragupta was a scion of the Kshatriya clan called Moriya. The 
existence of a Kshatriya clan of this name, even as early as the time 
of Gautama Buddha, is vouched for by Mahdparinibbdnasutta , one 
of the most authentic and ancient canonical texts of the Buddhists. 
According to this text the Moriyas, the ruling clan of Pipphalivana, 
sent a messenger to the Mallas, claiming a portion of the relics of 
the Buddha, saying: “The Blessed One belonged to the Kshatriya 
caste, and we, too, are of the Kshatriya caste.” 

It is now generally agreed that the old clan-name Moriya offers 
a more satisfactory explanation of Maurya, the name of the dynasty 
founded by Chandragupta, than the supposed derivation from his 
mother named Mura or father named Maurya. We may therefore 
readily accept the view that Chandragupta belonged to the Kshatriya 
clan called the Moriyas originally ruling over Pipphalivana which 
probably lay in U.P. as stated above. 1 

According to the tradition preserved in the Buddhist texts, 
Chandragupta’s father was the chief of the Moriya clan, who died 
in a border-fray, leaving his wife destitute. She had to seek safety 
at far-off Pushpapura (=Kusumapura=:Pataliputra) where she gave 
birth to a child, Chandragupta. The boy was brought up, first by a 
cowherd, and then by a hunter. He grew up in the village and 
asserted his predominance among his rural companions by playing 
the king with them (Rdjakilam). This attracted the notice of Cha- 
nakya who happened to pass through that village, and seeing the 
promise of greatness in the boy, took him away to his native city of 
Taxila. There he gave him a thorough education in all the arts and 
sciences to fit him for his appointed task. 

That task was not an easy one. It was to liberate the country 
from alien domination and also to rid the country of the tyranny of 
the Nanda king who had insulted Chanakya. Kautilya in his Artha - 
sdstra gives expression to the national hatred of foreign rule. He 
points out how a foreign conqueror drains the country of its wealth 
(apavdhayati), and squeezes out of it as much as possible by exac¬ 
tion and taxation (karshayati ). Thus the task of Chandragupta was 

1. See p. 17. 

56 







CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


carefully to mobilize the military resources of the country and spe¬ 
cially its morale, and to awaken its spirit of resistance, depressed by 
Alexander’s campaigns, in a national struggle for freedom. Accord¬ 
ing to the classical writers, Chandragupta had visited Alexander in 
the Punjab, and greatly offended him. In his wrath Alexander gave 
orders to kill Chandragupta, who somehow effected his escape and 
was later encouraged by various miracles to aspire to sovereignty. 
Whatever we might think of these stories, it is probable that the 
youthful Chandragupta noted the military potentialities of the re¬ 
publican peoples of the Punjab like Astakenoi, Oxydrakai or the 
Malloi who fought Alexander to a man in defence of their freedom, 
but whose resistance failed for want of proper leadership and orga¬ 
nisation. Curtius describes them as fierce nations who fought 
Alexander with their blood. The Pali work Mahdvamsatika describes 
how both Chanakya and Chandragupta set out for collecting recruits 
(balam) from different places until they were made into a large 
army (mahdbalakayam ). Justin describes these recruits by a term 
which may mean ‘robbers’ or mercenaries; 1 he evidently means the 
republican peoples of the Punjab. 

It is interesting to note that, according to the Arthasdstra, the 
army is to be recruited from the five following classes; (1) Choras or 
Pratirodhakas of the day, robbers and bandits, (2) Mlechchhas such 
as the Kirata highlanders, (3) Choraganas , organised gangs of 
brigands, (4) Atcivikas , foresters, and (5) Sastropajivi-Srenis , warrior 
clans, who were most heroic ( pravlra). Elements like these probably 
formed the army of Chandragupta. 

The Mudrarfikshasa as well as the Jain work Parisisktaparvan 
refers to Chandragupta’s alliance with the Himalayan king Parva- 
taka. This Himalayan alliance gave to Chandragupta a composite 
army made up of Sakas, Yavanas, Kiratas, Kambojas, Parasikas and 
Balhlkas, as stated in the Mudrarakshasa. 

A factor that helped Chandragupta in his enterprise was the 
growing difficulty of the Greek position in the Punjab. Alexander’s 
own followers did not share his enthusiasm for foreign conquests. 
As we have seen above, they refused to follow him beyond 
the Beas. Unrest was springing up at other centres. Kandahar 
rebelled under an Indian chief. The Assakenoi killed the Greek 
satrap Nicanor. Then followed the assassination, in 325 B.C., of 
Philippus who, as the satrap in the Upper Sindhu valley, held the 


57 


1. IC, II, 559. 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


key-position of Greek rule in the country. The immediate cause of 
the assassination was the jealousy between the Greeks and Macedo¬ 
nians which was undermining the strength of these foreigners. Then 
came the death of Alexander in 323 B.C., leading to the disruption 
of his empire. 

Chandragupta evidently took full advantage of the situation. 
The two years, 325-323 B.C., that intervened between the death of 
Philippus and that of his master, were eventful years of his prepara¬ 
tion for the final blow. His work is thus summed up by Justin: 
“India, after the death of Alexander, had shaken off the yoke of ser¬ 
vitude and put his governors to death. The author of this liberation 
was Sandrocottos.” This Sandrocottos was undoubtedly Chandra¬ 
gupta. A careful analysis of the details given by Justin indicates 
that Chandragupta, having collected an army, first installed himself 
as king. He then fought with the prefects of Alexander and defeat¬ 
ed them. This task was not probably completed* before 317 B.C., 
for Eudemus, the commander of the garrison in Western Punjab, 
who had treacherously murdered his colleague, the Indian ruler, 
probably Porus, left India in that year with all his forces to join the 
coalition of the Eastern satraps, never to return again. 

Chandragupta’s fight against the Macedonians, however, must 
have begun considerably earlier. It is significant that at the parti¬ 
tion of Alexander’s empire at Triparadisus in 321 B.C. nothing is said 
of Sind, the satrap of which, Pithon, son of Agenor, was transferred 
to the north-west, but no one else was appointed in his place. At the 
time of this arrangement the ruler of Taxila and Porus were practi¬ 
cally left supreme in their domains with added power and territory. 
This virtual surrender of Indian possessions in 321 B.C. was due to 
the feeling, freely expressed, that “it would be dangerous to circum¬ 
scribe the jurisdiction of the Indian rulers except with the support 
of an expedition equipped on a scale of the first magnitude and com¬ 
manded by a general of the highest capacity.” 1 There is thus no 
doubt that the Indian situation had materially changed for the worse 
in 321 B.C. and possibly as early as 323 B.C. when the first partition 
was made of Alexander’s empire. The most reasonable explanation 
seems to be that Chandragupta had begun the war of liberation, pro¬ 
bably in the Lower Sindhu valley, before 321 or even before 323 B.C. 
His date of accession may be provisionally fixed at 324 B.C. 2 He 

1. CHI, I, 428; cf. also, 1C, H, 557 ff. 

2. For the date 324 B.C. and other views on the date of Chandragupta Maurya, 
ef. PHAI, 242 and IHQ, XI. 211. 




CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


arose like the great avenger to whose strong arms “the earth long 
harassed by outlanders now turned for protection and refuge.” 

He ably fulfilled his task. Justin indicates that such of the 
Macedonian prefects as still held their posts were ruthlessly put to 
the sword. This obviously refers to a sanguinary war to a finish 
between Chandragupta and the Macedonian army some time, pro¬ 
bably long, before Eudemus regarded discretion as the better part 
of valour and thought it politic to leave India quietly in 317 B.C. 
without challenging the claims of Chandragupta. Although details 
are lacking, we can accept it as a historical fact that the army of 
occupation left behind by Alexander was thoroughly defeated by 
Chandragupta and he made himself master of the Punjab and Sind. 

Chandragupta’s next task was to rid the country of the internal 
tyranny of king Nanda. It has been suggested that Chandragupta 
visited Alexander with the definite object of inducing him to conquer 
Magadha. Of this we have no definite evidence. But according 
to Indian tradition both he and his adviser Chanakya bore a great 
grudge against the Nanda king who did great wrongs to both of 
them. Unfortunately definite details of the conquest of Magadha by 
Chandragupta are not preserved. The Mahfivamsatika tells a story 
about the initial mistake of his compaigns. The mother of a boy, 
eating the centre of a cake ( chapati ) and throwing away the crust, 
compares his conduct to “Chandragupta’s attack on the kingdom”. 
The Jain tradition similarly compares the advance of Chandragupta 
to a child putting his finger into the middle of a hot pie, instead of 
starting from the edge which was cool. All this explains' how 
Chandragupta, without beginning from the frontiers, and taking the 
towns in order as he passed, invaded the heart of the country, only 
to find that his army was ‘surrounded and destroyed.* 

But Buddhist tradition ascribes to him another error of strategy. 
This time he commenced operations from the frontiers and conquer¬ 
ed many rashtras and janapadas on the way, but failed to post gar¬ 
risons to hold his conquests so as to secure his rear which was later 
attacked. Then the proper course dawned on him. He besieged 
Pataliputra and killed Dhana Nanda. The Milinda-panha gives an 
exaggerated account of the slaughter attending the destruction of 
the army of Magadha. 

The Brahmanical traditions regard Kautilya ( alias Chanakya), 
rather than Chandrgupta, as the chief actor in the great drama 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


which ended in the extermination of the Nandas. The Puranas 
credit* Chanakya with having destroyed the Nandas and anointed 
Chandragupta as king. The same view is reflected in Kautiliya 
Arthasdstra and other treatises in ancient India. In the drama 
Mudrdrdkshasa, the figure of Chandragupta is almost cast into shade 
by the brilliant and masterful personality of Chanakya. Stories are 
also told of the insult offered by the Nanda king to Chanakya and the 
grim resolve of the latter to uproot the royal dynasty; how he moved 
about in search of a suitable means to accomplish his ends and at 
last discovered Chandragupta and made use of him for this purpose. 
Even if there be any truth in these stories, it is difficult to apportion 
the credit for destroying the Nandas between Chanakya and Chan¬ 
dragupta. At the most we may hold that the astute diplomacy of 
Chanakya played a no less prominent part in it than the bravery 
and military skill of Chandragupta. The final discomfiture of the 
Nanda king was also probably due, in part at least, to his own per¬ 
sonal character. We are told by the classical writers that he was a 
worthless king, detested and held cheap by his subjects. The story 
of his enormous wealth also probably indicates the extortion which 
alienated the royal house from the loyalty of its subjects. 

While Chandragupta was busy laying the foundations of his 
empire in India, the Greek king Seleucus, who had succeeded Alex¬ 
ander in the eastern part of his empire, was moving towards India 
to recover the lost possessions of the late emperor. But while Alex¬ 
ander had to fight against a divided India, split up into a multitude 
of states, his successor had to face a united and a much stronger India 
organised by an able leader. Seleucus rea'ched the Sindhu about 305 
B.C. The Greek writers do not give the details of his conflict with 
Chandragupta, but merely record the result. Seleucus had to pur¬ 
chase peace by ceding to Chandragupta territories then known as 
Aria, Arachosia, and Paropanisadae (the capitals of which were res¬ 
pectively the cities now known as Herat, Kandahar and Kabul), and 
probably also a part of Gedrosia (Baluchistan). In return Chandra¬ 
gupta presented him with 500 war elephants. The terms of the 
peace leave no doubt that the Greek ruler fared badly at the hands 
of Chandragupta. His defeat and discomfiture at the hands of an 
Indian ruler would naturally be passed over by Greek writers, and 
their silence goes decidedly against Seleucus. The peace was rati¬ 
fied by a matrimonial alliance between the rival parties. This has 
been generally taken to mean that Chandragupta married a daughter 
of Seleucus, but this is not warranted by known facts. Henceforth 


60 


CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


Seleucus maintained friendly relations with the Mauryan Court and 
sent Megaslhenes as his ambassador who lived in Pataliputra for a 
long time and wrote a book on India. 

Nothing definite is known of the subsequent career of Chandra- 
gupta. The wide extent of his empire leaves no doubt that his life 
was mostly spent in military campaigns, but of this we have no 
authentic account. According to very late Jain traditions, Chandra- 
gupta, in his last days, renounced the world and followed the Jain 
migration led by Bhadrabahu to a place in Mysore, known as Sra- 
vana Bclgcla, where some local inscriptions still perpetuate the 
memory of Chandragupta and Bhadrabahu living together as saints. 
The hill where he lived is still known as Chandragiri, and a temple 
erected by him as Chandraguptabasti. It is said that Chandragupta, 
in true Jain fashion, fasted unto death in this place. 

II. THE EXTENT OF THE EMPIRE 

Chandragupta undoubtedly ruled over a vast empire. According 
to Plutarch, he overran and subdued the whole of India with an 
army of 600,000 men and Justin also refers to his mastery over the 
country. This is indirectly supported by other available evidences 
on the subject. Asoka’s inscriptions credit him with only one con¬ 
quest, viz . that of Kalinga. But the geographical distribution of 
these inscriptions as well as their internal evidence shows that his 
empire extended up to Mysore in the south and beyond the natural 
boundaries of India up to the borders of Persia in the north-west. 
Asoka’s father Bindusara is not known to history as a conquerer.* 
It thus stands to reason that the empire over which Asoka ruled was 
mostly the creation of his grandfather -Chandragupta. 

Some Tamil texts refer to an invasion of the South led by the 
people called the ‘Vamba Moriyar’ or the Maurya upstarts, who sub¬ 
dued the king of Mohur with the help of their allies called the Kosar 
and Vadukar. The Mauryas are said to have advanced with a large 
army as far as the Podiyil Hill in the Tinnevelly District, passing 
from Konkan through the hills north of Cannanore and the king¬ 
dom of Kongu (Coimbatore) on their way. From the epithet ‘up¬ 
starts’ applied to the Mauryas we may infer that the Tamil poets 
referred to the times of Chandragupta. 

Lastly, the inscription of Rudradaman I at Junagarh shows that 
Saurashtra was a province of the Maurya Empire. It was ruled by 
Chandragupta’s provincial governor Pushyagupta, described as a 


61 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


VaiSya, and in Aioka’s time by Yavana (Greek) Raja Tushaspha. 
Saurash^ra was then joined with the region called Anarta to form 
the Maurya province of Western India. The location of an Asokan 
inscription at Sopara in modern Thana District shows that the region 
round Sopara, or Surparaka of old texts, was also a province of the 
Maurya empire under Chandragupta, 

III. SYSTEM OF ADMINISTRATION 

It was a highly difficult task to devise an appropriate system to 
administer efficiently an extent of territory stretching from Persia 
to Southern India with its extremities separated by long distances; 
for in those days, when communication between the different parts 
of a far-flung empire was not quick or easy, it was difficult to control 
it from a single centre or metropolis like Pataliputra. Chandragupta 
solved the problem by a device of political ingenuity, which was first 
adopted by the Achaemenian emperors, viz. by splitting up the un¬ 
wieldy area into convenient and manageable units, each of which 
was placed under a provincial governor and governed after a com¬ 
mon pattern. Thus the difficulties of distance and communication 
were solved by a decentralised scheme of administration. It was 
difficult in those days of primitive transport to aim at a centralised 
administration. The governing authority had to be distributed into 
a hierarchy of jurisdictions from top to bottom. Even within the 
limited local area, much of the sovereign authority had to be shared 
with the various self-governing groups of the country. The village 
community functioned like a self-governing corporation or a republic 
giving to the village healthy scope and exercise in art of govern¬ 
ment and of managing their own local concerns and affairs. Thus 
the Indian polity of those days was broad-based upon truly demo¬ 
cratic foundations. 

/ 

Glimpses of Chandragupta’s administration are given by Megas- 
thenes, the Greek ambassador to the court of Chandragupta who 
wrote a book containing a very full and fair account of the geo¬ 
graphy, products, and social and political institutions of India. 
Although this book is lost, many extracts from it are preserved in 
quotations by later classical authors who regarded it as the standard 
authority on India. The information supplied by these extracts, 
though meagre, is highly interesting, and being recorded by an eye¬ 
witness, is of great historical value, as its authenticity is beyond 
question. 


6*2 


CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 


The king was the supreme head of the state and had military, 
judicial, executive, and legislative functions. We learn from Megas- 
thenes a great deal of the king’s own part in administration. He was 
a very hard-worked official. Megasthenes states that “the king 
does not sleep in day-time but remains in the court the whole day 
for the purpose of judging causes and other public business which 
was not interrupted even when the hour arrived for massaging his 
body. Even when the king has his hair combed and dressed, he has 
no respite from public business. At that time he gives audience to 
his ambassadors.” 

As noted above, the empire was divided into a number of pro¬ 
vinces, ruled over by Governors and Viceroys, who were sometimes 
princes of royal blood. The central and eastern parts were ruled by 
the emperor himself. He was assisted in his administration by a 
Council. The later Greek writers like Diodorus, Strabo and Arrian 
repeat what was recorded by Megasthenes regarding ‘the Coucillors 
and Assessors’ who advised the king in the management of public 
affairs. They were small in number but very influential. “They 
choose Governors, Chiefs of provinces, Deputy Governors, Trea¬ 
surers of the State, Generals of the Army, Admirals of the Navy, 
Judges who settle disputes, Chief Magistrates and other high officers 
like the Director of Agriculture.” 

The king also employed a large body of spies whom Megasthenes 
calls Overseers. They reported secretly to the king important mat¬ 
ters concerning the city and the army. The ablest and most trust¬ 
worthy men were appointed to fill these offices, and they employed 
courtezans as their coadjutors. 

Megasthenes also describes the working of Mauryan muncipal 
administration. He calls the town officials Astynomoi and describes 
their duty as follows:— 

“Those who have charge of the city are divided into six bodies 
of five each. The members of the first look after everything relating 
to the industrial arts. Those of the second attend to the entertain¬ 
ment of foreigners. To these they assign lodgings, and they keep 
watch over their modes of life by means of those persons whom they 
give to them for assistants. They escort them on the way when 
they leave the country, or in the event of their dying, forward their 
property to their relatives. They take care of them when they are 
sick, and if they die, bury them. The third body consists of those 
who inquire when and how births and deaths occur, with the view 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

not only of levying a tax, but also in order that births and deaths 
among both high and low may not escape the cognizance of Govern¬ 
ment. The fourth class superintends trade and commerce. Its mem 
bers have charge of weights and measures, and see that the products 
in their season are sold by public notice. No one is allowed to deal 
in more than one kind of commodity unless he pays a double tax. 
The fifth class supervises manufactured articles, which they sell by 
public notice. What is new is sold separately from what is old, and 
there is a fine for mixing the two together. The sixth and last class 
consists of those who collect the tenths of the prices of the articles 
■sold. Fraud in the payment of this tax is punished with death. 

“Such are the functions which these bodies separately discharge. 
In their collective capacity they have charge both of their special 
departments, and also of matters affecting the general interest, as 
the keeping of public buildings in proper repair, the regulation oi 
prices, the care of markets, harbours, and temples.’' 

Megasthenes also throws light upon district administration under 
the officials called the Agronomoi. He refers to various classes of 
officers “who superintend the rivers, measure the land, and inspect 
the sluices by which water is let out from the main canals into their 
branches so that every one may have an equal supply of it.” Besides 
these officers in charge of land and irrigation, Megasthenes also men¬ 
tions those in charge of Agriculture, Forestry, Timber works, Metal 
Foundaries, Mines, and Roads. 

Megasthenes also gives details of Maury an military adminis¬ 
tration which was so important to the security of the newly founded 
empire. Chandragupta maintained a vast standing army of more 
than 600,000 men. It was controlled by a War-office constituted by 
thirty members distributed among six Boards of five members each. 
One of these Boards was to co-operate with the Admiral of the Fleet. 
The remaining five Boards were in charge of the different depart¬ 
ments of the army viz. I. the Infantry, II. the Cavalry, III. the 
War-Chariots, IV. the Elephants of War, V. Transport, Commissa¬ 
riat, and Army Service, including the provision of drummers, grooms, 
mechanists, and grass-cutters. The duties of Board V are thus des¬ 
cribed: “They co-operate with the superintendent of the bullock- 

trains which are used for transporting engines of war, food for 
the soldiers, provender for the cattle, and other military requi¬ 
sites. They supply servapis who beat the drum, and others who 
carry gongs; grqpms also for the horses, and mechanists and their 


64 


CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 

assistants. To the sound of the gong, they send out foragers to 
bring in grass, and by a system of rewards and punishments ensure 
the work being done with despatch and safety.” 

According to Megasthenes, the soldiers formed the most nume¬ 
rous class in society, next only to husbandmen. They received a 
regular salary from the state which also * supplied their arms and 
equipments. They led a “life of supreme freedom and enjoyment.” 
They had to perform only military duties, and when not required to 
fight, they could “abandon themselves to enjoyment.” Their pay 
was so liberal that “they could with ease maintain themselves and 
others besides.” Even while in camp they had attendants, who 
“took care of their horses, cleaned their arms, drove their elephants, 
preoared their chariots and acted as their charioteers.” 

As regards the equipment of the. soldiers, the following descrip¬ 
tion of Nearchus must have been generally true of this period, though 
Nearchus adds that ‘it is not the only one in vogue’: “The foot- 
soldiers carry a bow made of equal length with the man who bears 
it. This they rest upon the ground, and pressing against it with 
their left foot thus discharge the arrow, having drawn the string far 
backwards: for the shaft they use is little short of being three yards 
long, and there is nothing which can resist an Indian archer’s shot,— 
neither shield nor breastplate, nor any stronger defence, if such 
there be. In their left hand they carry bucklers made of undressed 
ox-hide, which are not so broad as those who carry them, blit are 
about as long. Some are equipped with javelins instead of bows, 
but all wear a sword, which is broad in blade, but not longer than 
three cubits; and this, when they engage in clpse fight (which they 
do with reluctance), they wield with both hands, to fetch down a 
lustier blow. The horsemen are equipped with two lances like the 
lances called saunia, and with a shorter buckler than that carried by 
the foot-soldiers. But they do not put saddles on their horses, nor do 
they curb them with bits like the bits in use among the Greeks or the 
Kelts, but they fit on round the extremity of the horse’s mouth a 
circular piece of stitched raw- ox-hide studded with pricks of iron 
or brass pointing inwards, but not very sharp; if a man is rich he 
uses pricks made of ivory. Within the horse’s mouth is put an iron 
prong like a skewer, to which the reins are attached. When the 
rider, then, pulls the reins, the prong controls the horse, and the 
pricks which are attached to this prong goad the mouth, so that it 
cannot but obey the reins.” 

65 


A.I.U,—5 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Reference will be made later 1 to the comprehensive picture of 
administration presented in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra . This book is 
taken by some as a work belonging to the time of Chandragupta and 
written by Chanakya to whom he owed his throne. Many scholars, 
however, regard the present text as of a much later date. It is 
doubtful, therefore, how far we may regard the system of adminis¬ 
tration depicted in it as applicable to the Maurya period. The date 
of the Arthasdstra will be discussed in Chapter XVI. 

IV. COURT LIFE 

The Greek writers throw interesting light on the court and life 
of the king in those days. The royal court was marked by pomp 
and magnificence. The king’s public appearance was a social event. 
Curtius states that he is conveyed in a golden palanquin garnished 
with pearls and is robed in fine muslin embroidered with purple 
and gold. Behind his palanquin follow his soldiers and body-guards, 
of whom some carry rows of trees on which live birds are perched. 

The care of the king’s person is entrusted to women. Surround¬ 
ed by his wcmen-hunters he goes out to hunt, driving in chariots or 
riding on horseback or on elephants. It may be noted that one of 
the Bharhut sculptures represents the figure of a woman riding a 
horse fully caparisoned and carrying a standard. When hunting, 
the king always had by him two or three armed women. The Greek 
writers speak of the king hunting lions with dogs. Next to hunt¬ 
ing, the royal pastime was races,—races of trotter breeds of oxen 
which ‘equalled horses in speed.’ Sometimes races were arranged 
of chariots driven by a mixed team of two such oxen with a horse 
between. Another royal pastime was animal fights, fights of wild 
bulls, tame rams, rhinos, and elephants. 

The royal procession was seen at its best on religious occasions. 
It included many elephants adorned with gold and silver, four-horsed 
chariots, attendants carrying various vessels of gold or copper set 
with precious stones; wild beasts such as buffaloes, leopards, tamed 
lions, and varieties of birds. At the annual ceremonial washing of 
his hair, the king received presents of animals like deer, antelopes, 
or rhinos, tamed tigers and panthers, oxen fleet of foot, yaks, hunt¬ 
ing hounds, apes, and birds like cranes, geese, ducks and pigeons. 
The king had usually a guard of twenty-four elephants when he 
came out of the palace on public business. There were tame parrots 
trained to hover about the king and wheel round him. 

1. Chapter XVII. 


66 






CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 

Chandragupta’s palace was in keeping >#41h all its 
and pageantry. The Greek writers describe how it was ‘adorned 
with gilded pillars clasped all round with a vine embossed in gold and 
decorated with silver images of birds. It was located in an exten¬ 
sive park full of shady groves and ever green trees, both native to 
the soil and imported from abroad. There were artificial tanks full 
of fish of enormous size with boats for cruising. Palaces of neither 
Susa nor Ecbatana could vie with it. 

The capital of the empire was at Pataliputra at the confluence 
of the two rivers, the Gahga and the Son. It had the shape of an 
oblong with a length of 80 stades (9-1/5 miles) and a breadth of 15 
stades (1 mile and 1,270 yards). It was surrounded by a moat 60 
feet deep and 200 yards wide, filled from the waters of the Son, and 
receiving the sewage of the city. The city was further protected by 
a massive timber palisade running along the moat and providing for 
loopholes through which archers could shoot. The city wall had 
64 gates and was adorned with 570 towers. 

Lastly, we may note the interesting reference made by the 
Greek writers to the royal road leading from the north-west frontier 
to Pataliputra the precursor of the modern Grand Trunk Road, with 
a length of 10,000 stades—about 1,150 miles. Megasthenes must have 
travelled down this road in joining his duties at Pataliputra as 
ambassador. ‘Every mile of this road was marked by a stone indicat¬ 
ing the by-roads and distances.’ As stated by Pliny, the road was in 
charge of officers who were responsible for its upkeep, repairs, 
erection of milestones and sign-posts at every 10 stades. 

V. LIFE OF THE PEOPLE 

The account of Megasthenes leaves no doubt that peace, pros¬ 
perity, and contentment prevailed throughout the empire. This was 
mainly due to the fertility of the land and its great mineral wealth. 
Megasthenes observes: 

“The inhabitants, in like manner, having abundant means of 
subsistence, exceed in consequence the ordinary stature, and are 
distinguished by their proud bearing. They are also found to be 
well-skilled in the arts, as might be expected of men who inhale a 
pure air and drink the very finest water. And while the soil bears on 
its surface all kinds of fruits which are known to cultivation, it has 
also under ground numerous veins of all sorts of metals, for it con¬ 
tains much gold and silver, and copper and iron in no small quantity. 


67 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


and even tin and other metals, which are employed in making articles 
of use and ornament, as well as the implements and accoutrements 
of war.” 

Megasthenes then refers in details to the fertility of land due to 
“the profusion of river-streams” and the growth of various kinds of 
cereals and plants useful for food. The double rainfall enabled the 
people to gather two harvests annually, while the fruits and esculent 
roots of spontaneous growth afforded abundant sustenance for man 
“It is accordingly affirmed,” says Megasthenes, “that famine has 
never visited India and that there has never been a general scarcity 
in the supply of nourishing food.” Megasthenes adds that, apart 
from the fertility of land, certain usages observed by the Indians 
contribute to prevent the occurrence of famine among them; for 
whereas “among other nations it is usual, in the contests of war, to 
ravage the soil, and thus to reduce it to an uncultivated waste, among 
the Indians, on the contrary, by whom husbandmen are regarded as 
a clsss that is sacred and inviolable, the tillers of the soil, even 
when battle is raging in their neighbourhood, are undisturbed by 
any sense of danger, for the combatants on either side in waging 
the conflict make carnage of each other, but allow those engaged in 
husbandry to remain quite unmolested. Besides, they neither ravage 
an enemy’s land with fire nor cut down its trees.” 

Megasthenes’s observation about the absence of famine cannot 
be literally true for all periods of Indian history, for various literary 
works refer to famines and specially to one that occurred a few years 
after he left India. But it certainly shows that at the time he wrote 
there was plenty and prosperity, and famine was a very uncommon 
thing; at least it did not occur within living memory. The usage 
which according to Megasthenes saved husbandmen from molestation 
in times of war is also referred to in a Buddhist text which says that 

“ ..kings, while destroying the soldiers of their enemies, respect 

the field-labourer who is th£ common help of both armies.” 1 This 
is a unique principle of international law which would do credit to 
any age or country. 

On account of agricultural prosperity, the husbandmen formed 
the most numerous class in society. But the amenities of urban life 
were also sought by many. According to Megasthenes the num¬ 
ber of cities was so great “that it cannot be stated with precision.” 
The cities built on the banks of rivers or on sea were built of 


1. 1HQ, I, 369. 


08 






CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 

wood, as they were meant to last only for a short time, being liable 
to destruction by floods and heavy rains. But cities built on lofty 
eminences or in places free from ravages of flood and rains were 
built of brick and mud. The administration of these cities has 
been described above. 

Chandragupta effectively maintained the security of life and 
property which is essential for economic prosperity. Theft was of 
very rare occurrence, even though houses and property were, as a 
rule, generally left unguarded. Although Indians generally lived 
frugally they were fond of finery and ornament and this fostered 
trade and industry. The growth of art and industry was also faci¬ 
litated by the state. Megasthenes refers to traders as a large body, 
forming a social group. A large number was employed in making 
weapons of war and building ships for the government, and they 
received wages and victuals from the state. The admiral of the 
fleet let out ships on hire for the transport both of passengers and 
merchandise. The sailors employed in the navigation of rivers were 
also paid by the state. There were other handicraftsmen and retail 
dealers but no details are given. 

The herdsmen, both shepherds and neatherds, formed a class 
by themselves, who lived neither in cities nor in villages, but on the 
hills. They scoured the country in pursuit of fowl and wild beasts, 
and paid royal taxes in cattle. 

VI. BINDUSARA (c. 300-273 B.C.) 

According to Strabo, the son and successor of Sandrocottos 
(— Chandragupta) was Allitrochades whom Athenaeus calls Amitro- 
chates ( — Sanskrit Amitraghata ‘slayer of foes’). The Jain work 
Rajavalikathe calls him Siihhasena. We owe to the Puranas the 
name Bindusara, which is generally adopted. We know very little 
of his reign. According to the literary evidence of a later date, 
Chanakya continued for some time as minister under Bindusara. 
According to the Tibetan writer Taranatha, Chanakya was instru¬ 
mental in achieving “the destruction of nobles and kings of sixteen 
towns and helped the king to make himself master of all the territory 
between the eastern and western seas.” Some scholars have taken 
this as an evidence that Bindusara conquered the Deccan, but there 
is no reliable evidence in support of this. The first part of the state¬ 
ment of Taranatha may be taken to refer to some kind of popular 
revolt which was subdued. According to the Divydvadana, a revolt 


69 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


broke out in Taxila, and in order to quell it Bindusara sent his son 
Asoka as his Viceroy there. When Asoka approached Taxila with 
his troops, he was met in advance by the people who explained: 
“We are not opposed to the prince nor even to king Bindusara, but 
only to the wicked ministers who insult us.” Thus Asoka entered a 
peaceful city from where he extended -his conquest to the kingdom 
of the Khasas. 

Bindusara maintained intact the vast empire which he had 
inherited from his father and also the friendly relations with the 
Greek rulers of the west. Deimachos succeeded Megasthenes as the 
ambassador sent by the Syrian king to the court of Bindusara. Pliny 
tells us that Ptolemy II Philadelphus, king of Egypt (285-247 B.C.), 
also sent an ambassador named Dionysus to the Indian court, but it 
is not stated whether the Indian king was Bindusara or his successor 
Asoka. We owe to Athenaeus the story of friendly correspondence 
between Bindusara and the Syrian king Antiochus I Soter on terms 
of equality. Hegesander records that Amitrochates asked Antiochus 
to buy and send him sweet wine, dried figs and a sophist, and that 
Antiochus sent the following reply to his. *equea|$ “We shall send 
you the figs and the wine, but in Greece th£ laws £07 bid a sophist to 
be sold.” 

We know from Buddhist tradition that prince Asoka, at the age 
of eighteen, was sent out by his father to rule as viceroy in the 
province of Avanti with his headquarters at Vidisa. Later he was 
deputed to Taxila as noted above. It is certain that Bindusara had 
other sons besides Asoka, for the latter states in his fifth Rock Edict 
that he had several brothers and sisters. Two of these brothers are 
named in the Dxvyavaddna as Susima and Vigatasoka whom the 
Sinhalese Chronicles name Sumana and Tishya. 

The Puranas give Chandragupta and Bindusara reign-periods 
respectively of 24 and 25 years. But according to the Buddhist tradi¬ 
tion Bindusara ruled for 27 or 28 years. Assuming that Chandra¬ 
gupta became king in 324 B.C., we may place his reign between 
that date and 300 B.C. and that of Bindusara between 300 and 
273 B.C. 


GENERAL REFERENCES 


1. 

2 . 

3. 


II. K. Mookerji. Chandragupta Maurya and his times. 

J. W. McCrindle. Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian. 
Cambridge History tff India. Chapters XVIII and XIX. 


TO 


CHAPTER V 


ASOKA THE GREAT (c. 273-236 B.C.) 

I. GENERAL REVIEW 

Bindusara was succeeded by his son Asoka who is one of the 
greatest figures in history. H. G. Wells in his Outline of History 
describes him as ‘the greatest of kings’ and that not because of the 
physical extent of his empire, extensive as it was, but because of his 
character as a man, the ideals for which he stood, and the principles 
by which he governed. As a king, he ruled over the greatest empire 
known in Indian history. The vast territory extending from Persia 
to Southern India was bequeathed to him by his predecessors. He 
himself made an addition to it by his conquest of Kalihga. 

A unique feature of his history is that he has himself left a 
record of it in a permanent form in inscriptions engraved on natural 
rocks as well as monolithic pillars constructed by him which stand 
to this day as remarkable monuments of Indian architecture and 
engineering skill. These inscriptions, along with the traditions 
recorded in literary texts in both Pali and Sanskrit, help to give a 
concrete and comprehensive picture of his life and work. Asoka 
was the first Indian king to issue edicts in order to proclaim his ideals 
and record his exploits. It is not unlikely that in this respect he 
imitated the practice of the Achaemenian Emperors like Darius I, as 
in those days there was a close cultural and commercial contact 
between Persia and India. 

The principal inscriptions of Asoka may be divided into three 
classes. 

I. The Fourteen Rock Edicts: These comprise a set of fourteen 
inscriptions found incised at eight different places. Two of these are 
replaced by two different inscriptions in two places, Dhauli and 
Jaugada, both in ancient Kalihga (and modern Orissa), and hence 
they are usually referred to as Kalihga edicts. 

II. The Minor Rock Edicts: This is a set of two inscriptions 
one of which is incised at ten different places. 

III. The Seven Pillar Edicts: This set of seven inscriptions is 
engraved on a pillar originally situated at Topra, but now at Delhi. 


71 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Six of these inscriptions are incised on other pillars found in five 
different places, one of which, at Delhi, was removed there from 
Meerut. 

The remaining inscriptions, mostly engraved on pillars and 
cave-walls, are records of a miscellaneous character which do not 
fall into distinct groups like the above. 

These inscriptions on “rocks of Ages” supply valuable data for 
the reconstruction of the life and career of the great emperor. 
Although they do not record many events, they contain in an abun¬ 
dant degree the measures adopted and regulations issued by him, and 
the delineation of the noble principles and high ideals that inspired 
him ’as almost an autobiographical touch. 

Unfortunately, the inscriptions do not supply any information 
regarding his early life for which we have to depend solely upon 
Buddhist texts like the Divyavadana and the Sinhalese Chronicles. 
They depict Asoka as a cruel and ferocious tyrant, who seized the 
throne after his father’s death by a fratricidal war in the course of 
which he slew ninety-nine of his brothers. There is no independent 
evidence of such a struggle. The story can be hardly credited as true 
and was obviously intended to glorify Buddhism by drawing a glaring 
contrast between the careers of Asoka before and after his conver¬ 
sion. The Chronicles further state that Asoka’s formal coronation 
took place four years after his accession. As the inscriptions of 
Asoka date the events of his reign with reference to his coronation, 
most scholars have accepted that statement as historical. It should 
be remembered, however, that no satisfactory explanation is given 
of his very unusual course, and it is a mere gratuitous assumption 
that ‘the long delay may have been due to disputed succession in¬ 
volving much bloodshed.’ 1 The Sinhalese Chronicles, far from 
giving this explanation, expressly state that the coronation took 
place ‘four years after Asoka had won for himself the undivided 
sovereignty.’ Besides, the inscriptions of Aioka’s grandson Dasaratha, 
the only other official records of the Maurya period available to us, 
also give the date with reference to his coronation. There is hardly 
any valid ground, therefore, for assuming an interval of four years 
between Asoka’s accession to the throne and formal coronation, 
though almost all the scholars, with the exception of Dr. D.R. 
Bhandarkar, tacitly accept this view. 2 

1. V. A. Smith, Asoka, p. 20. 

2. V. A. Smith points out that “though the Puranas assign 137 years to the 
Maurya dynasty, the total of the lengths of reigns according to the Vayv 



ASOKA, THE GREAT 


Although we may not accept the legend of the horrible murders 
perpetrated by Asoka, there may be some truth in the Buddhist 
tradition that there was a contest for the throne and Asoka succeeded 
against his step-brother Susima with the help of Radhagupta whom 
he appointed his chief minister. But whatever truth there may be 
in it, it is interesting to note that in his Rock Edicts IV and V Asoka 
condemns unseemly behaviour to relatives, and refers with loving 
care to his brothers, sisters, and other relatives, according to one 
interpretation, or their households according to another. If the first 
interpretation be correct it gives the lie direct to the tradition that 
he murdered all his brothers. 

Except in the Minor Rock Edicts of Maski and Gujarra, Asoka is 
throughout referred to as Devanampiya and Piyadasi , which may be 
literally translated as ‘Beloved of the gods’ and ‘One of amiable look’. 
These were mostly used together, though sometimes only one of them 
occurs. Both of these are usually regarded as conventional epithets. * 1 
For Asoka uses ( R.E . VIII) the term Devanampiya to denote kings in 
general (something like His Gracious Majesty) and we know that 
it was also used by his grandson (and other kings). The other 
epithet, in the form Priyadarsana, was used by his grandfather. So 
far as the royal designation is concerned, the greatest emperor of 
India only used the title raja (king)—a striking contrast to the 
grandiloquent titles assumed by imperial rulers in later times. 

Even as a prince Asoka gave evidence of his ability as a soldier 
and a statesmen. He was Viceroy of Ujjain, and, as noted above, 
was appointed Viceroy of Taxila and sent with an army to suppress 
a revolt there. It is quite likely that after ascending the throne he 
followed in the footsteps of his illustrious grandfather and carried 
on a policy of conquest and aggression. A Buddhist text Divyd - 
vadana, relates that he conquered the Svasa (Khasa?) country. But 
the only incident of this type referred to in the inscriptions is the 
conquest of Kalinga in the eighth 2 year after his coronation. The 
severity of the resistance put up by Kalinga and the resulting horrors 

Purtina is only 133, and the difference of four years may be accounted for by 
the supposed interval between Asoka’s accession and coronation” ( EHI* 207). 
But one version of the Vayu Parana gives a much bigger total of 240 years, 
and in view of the great discrepencies in the different versions, it is unwise to 
place any weight on the total of 133. It may be pointed out that the reign- 
periods of Bindusara and Asoka are given as 28 and 37 in the Sinhalese Chroni¬ 
cles and 25 and 36 in the Puranas, and this may equally well account for the 
difference of four years. (For Puranic dates, cf. DKA, pp. 27-29. 70). 

1. It is, however, contended by some that PriyadarsI (Piyadasi) was the original 
name of the king and he was called Asoka or Dharmasoka after his conver¬ 
sion to Buddhism (Journal Asiatique, Vol. CCLII, pp. 143-6). 

2. Some place the event in the ninth year after his coronation. 

73 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


of the war are thus pithily described in Rock Edict XIII: “One 
hundred and fifty thousand were therefrom (i.e. from Kalinga) 
captured, one hundred thousand were there slain, and many times as 
many died.” Kalinga was completely conquered, and Asoka’s vast 
dominions were rounded off and secured a more suitable frontier in 
the south-east. But instead of increasing his appetite for conquest, as 
normally happens, the Kalinga war brought a complete reaction in his 
mind. Herein lies the greatness of Asoka, and as this incident marks a 
turning point in his career, it may be described at some length. 

According to Buddhist tradition Asoka was converted to 
Buddhism by the venerable monk Upagupta shortly after the 
Kalinga war. This is, to a large extent, corroborated by his edicts. 
In the Rock Edict XIII, Asoka expresses genuine remorse for the 
sufferings caused by the war in the most touching language, reflect¬ 
ing such a deep sincerity and conviction that it has been generally 
held that the record was drafted by the emperor himself. He realis¬ 
ed to the full the sufferings of the war. Apart from the huge num¬ 
ber killed and taken prisoner, there were many pious men and 
women to whom befell “personal violence, death, or banishment 
from loved ones.” Even where a person himself is unaffected, his 
‘friends, acquaintances, companions and relatives meet with a mis¬ 
fortune, and that becomes a personal violence to him.’ His Majesty 
therefore felt “remorse on having conquered Kalinga”, and declared 
that “even one-hundredth or one-thousandth part of those who were 
slain, died, or were captured in Kaliiiga is to-day considered regret¬ 
table by the Beloved of the gods.” 

Even as a mere pious sentiment this is hard to beat; at least no 
victorious monarch in the history of the world is known to have ever 
given expression to anything like it. But it was more than pious 
sentiments to Asoka, and led him to adopt two solemn resolutions as 
a logical consequence,—resolutions to the carrying out of which he 
consecrated the whole of his personal energy and the vast resources 
of his mighty empire during the remaining years of his life. 

The first of these was to eschew all war in future. “If any one 
does him wrong the Beloved of the gods must bear all that can be 
borne”. Henceforth his policy would be one of conciliation towards 
all, even to the people of the forests, and exhortation to good deeds. 

This exhortation to good deeds was the foundation for his second 
resolution, viz., the inculcation of his Dharma (Dhamma or Law of 
Piety) not only among the peoples of his own dominions but all over 
the world, so that all may enjoy the blessings of “non-injury, self- 
control, equable conduct, and gentleness”. 


74 


ASOKA, THE GREAT 


His sincerity in adopting these pious resolves, and translating 
them to action, is manifest throughout his numerous records. He 
gave up the conquest by arms and substituted for it ‘conquest 
through Dharma* as the guiding principle of his life. He even en¬ 
joined it upon all his descendants. So far as our evidence goes 
Asoka, true to his principles, did not carry on any further war. 

In spite of some uncertainty, owing to the difficulty of interpret¬ 
ing certain expressions used in the inscriptions, there are good 
grounds to believe that Asoka was formally converted to Buddhism 
in or before the tenth year of his coronation. There can thus be 
hardly any reasonable doubt that the remorse which he felt at the 
carnage of the Kalinga war was the direct and immediate cause of 
his conversion to a religious faith which preached, as its fundamental 
principles, non-injury to all living beings and piety and compassion 
towards them. Asoka was attracted more by the ethical than the 
philosophical aspect of Buddhism and laid stress upon the practical 
benevolent activities and pious thoughts inculcated by it. He him¬ 
self tells us that for one year after he had adopted Buddhism he did 
not exert himelf strenuously for its propagation. Then he entered, 
visited or lived with the Buddhist Sangha (community of monks) for 
over a year and seriously took up his missionary activities, the task 
of propagating the Dharma, which, though based on Buddhist 
doctrine, was as we shall see later, of such universal quality as to 
appeal to humanity at large. 

It is difficult to understand what Asoka exactly intends by the 
expression sanghe upete which has been translated above to mean 
that he lived with, entered, or visited the Sangha, and the opinion of 
scholars is sharply divided on this point. Some scholars hold that 
Asoka actually became a Buddhist monk (bhikkhu). Others, however, 
take the expression simply to mean that Asoka made a state visit to 
the Sangha and publicly proclaimed his faith, as the Sinhalese Chro¬ 
nicle informs us. The former view is, however, supported by the 
statement of I-tsing that he actually saw a statue of Asoka dressed 
as a monk. A third possibility is that Asoka lived with the Sangha 
for more than a year, without taking orders. 

Among those who assume that Asoka became a monk, there is, 
again, a difference of opinion. Some hold that during the period 
Asoka was a monk he must have ceased to be a monarch, for monastic 
life is hardly-compatible with royal duties. Others, however, point 
out actual examples of kings who were monks at the same time, 
and find no reason for the assumption that Asoka, even temporarily, 
abdicted the throne. 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Whatever may be the right interpretation of his association 
with the Sangha, there is no doubt that since this event Asoka exert¬ 
ed himself with unflagging zeal for the propagation of Buddhism, or 
at least that part of it which he accepted as his Dharma. He not only 
set up a network of missions to preach the doctrine both in and out¬ 
side India, but himself undertook tours for this purpose, and took 
various other steps to the same end. He practised what he preached 
in order that others might follow, and in his various records gives a 
list of his own benevolent activities. But in doing all this he did 
not neglect his primary task of governing his kingdom. Rather his 
high ethical outlook gave him a new conception of his royal duties. 
He set before himself the loftiest ideal that ever inspired a king. “All 
men are my children”, says he, “and, just as I desire for my children 
that they may obtain every kind of welfare and happiness both in 
this and the next world, so do I desire for all men”. 

Thus proper and adequate measures for the security of life and 
property were as necessary in his eyes as those for the moral and 
spiritual uplift of the people. His conception of royal duty was 
broadbased on the welfare of his subjects in the widest sense of the 
term, embracing both material and moral good. But his vision 
extended far beyond the horizon of his own kingdom, vast as it was. 
He informs us in Rock Edict VI that he was always ready and will¬ 
ing to carry on his work of administration, for “the welfare of the 
whole world is an esteemed duty with me, and the root of that again 
is the exertion and dispatch of business” “This, therefore, I have 
done, namely that at all hours and in all places,—whether I am eat¬ 
ing or am in the closed (female) apartments, in the inner chamber, 
in the royal rancho, on horseback or in pleasure orchards, the 
Reporters may report people’s business to me.” 

But far from taking any credit for this unceasing toil, Asoka 
regards it as a simple duty he owes to his subjects. “There is no 
higher duty than the welfare of the whole world”, so runs the royal 
edict, “and what little effort I make,—What is it for?—(in order) 
that I may be free from debt to the creatures, that I may render 
some happy here and that they may gain heaven in the next world”. 
Never was a nobler sentiment uttered from the throne as an ex¬ 
pression of king’s duty towards his people, and Asoka engraved it 
on rock “in order that it may endure for a long time and that my 
sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons may similarly follow me for 
the welfare of the whole world.” 


70 


ASOKA, THE GREAT 


Having.thus made a brief sketch of the chief events of Asoka s 
career and the moral ideals and the high sense of royal duty that 
inspired his activities, we shall now proceed to a somewhat detailed 
survey of his life and reign under a few broad heads. 

II. THE EXTENT OF AsOKA’S EMPIRE 

While we know only in a general way the extent of the Maurya 
Empire as established by Chandragupta, the inscriptions of Asoka 
enable us to obtain a more precise and definite idea of it. Apart 
from the details contained in them, their find-spots are of great help 
in this respect. For, it may be presumed that, as they contained pro¬ 
clamations and messages for his subjects, they were located at cnosen 
centres of population in different provinces. Some of these are to 
be found at their borders in various directions. Thus two sets of his 
fourteen Rock Edicts are located at Shahbazgarhi and Manselfi& res¬ 
pectively in the Peshawar and Hazara districts in Western Pakistan; 
another is at Kalsi in the north at the confluence where meet the 
waters of the Tons and Yamuna; the fourth is at Girnar in Kathia¬ 
war and the fifth at Sopara in the Thana District of Maharashtra; 
the sixth is at Dhauli in Puri District; the seventh at Jaugatfa tn 
Ganjam District of Orissa; and the eighth at Yerragudi in Kumool 
District. An Asokan inscription in Aramaic characters has also 
been discovered at Taxila, the capital of the north-western Province 
of the empire, and another near Jalalabad (E. Afghanistan). ‘A 
bilingual inscription of Asoka written in Greek and Aramaic and 
another only in Greek (containing the end of the 12th and the be¬ 
ginning of the 13th Rock Edict) have been discovered near the old 
city of Kandahar in Afghanistan. 1 These support the view, mentioned 
on p. 78, that the provinces ceded by Seleucus still belonged to the 
Maury an Empire’. 

The inclusion of the far south in his empire is indicated by three 
groups of Minor Rock Edicts in the Chitaldroog District of Mysore. 
The interior of the country is represented by Minor Rock Edicts 
installed at places like Rupnath in Jubbulpore District, Bairat in 
Rajputana, Sasaram in Bihar, Maski in Raichur District, Gavimath 
and Palkigundu in the Kopbal Taluk in Mysore, Gujarra in Datia 
District in Madhya Pradesh, Ahraur in Mirzapur District in U.P., 
Amarapuni Colony in New Delhi, and Rajula Mandagiri and Yerra¬ 
gudi, both in Kurnool District, Andhra Pradesh. There are two 
edicts in each of the two places mentioned last as well as in each 

1. These inscriptions have been published in Ep. Indica, Vol. XXXIV>-PP* 1 ff-> and 
Journal Asiatique, Vol. CCLII, pp. 137-157. 


77 







THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

of the Chitaldroog groups mentioned first. The second edict is not 
found in the other localities. 

A group of the Pillar Edicts seems to have been meant to mark 
stages in the Pilgrims , Progress towards the holy places of Buddhism 
by their location at Lauriya Araraj, Rampurwa, Nandangarh and 
Nigliva leading up to LumbinI, the birth-place of the Buddha. 1 
Other inscribed pillars were set up in the north in the Districts of 
Ambala and Meerut, at Kausambi near Allahabad, at Sarnath and at 
Sanchl. A fragment of a pillar found at Amaravatl (near Bezwada 
on the Krishna) contains parts of five lines of an inscription which 
has been attributed by some scholars to Asoka. 2 Only two inscrip¬ 
tions, the Minor Rock Edicts at Maski and Gujarra, mention Asoka 
by his name. In the rest he is referred to as “Beloved of the Gods” 
(Devdnam p iya Piyadasi). 

The distribution of the inscriptions clearly indicates that Asoka’s 
empire embraced the major part of India, including the North-West 
Frontier Province, but excluding the Indian Peninsula to the south 
of approximately 14° of latitude. This conclusion is corroborated 
by the mention of the independent frontier kingdoms of (‘Chodas, 
Pa^wjyas, Keralaputra, Satiyaputra, as far as the TamraparnI in the 
south and that of the Greek king Aihtiyaka (Antiochus II) on the 
West (R.E. II). As Antiochus is not known to have ruled to the 
east of Herat, we may assume that the provinces ceded by Seleucus 
still belonged to the Maury an empire. The first three southern states 
mentioned in the inscriptions of Asoka correspond to the Cholas, 
Pan^yas and Chera. The use of the plural number perhaps indi¬ 
cates that there was more than one Chola or Pan<Jya kingdom. 
Although the limits of these kingdoms cannot be exactly defined, we 
may reasonably hold that the Chola kingdom or kingdoms compris¬ 
ed the eastern part of the Peninsula from Arcot to Trichinopoly, the 
Partly as occupied the Districts of Ramnad, Madura and Tinnevelly, 
and southern Travancore, and Keralaputra included South Kanara, 
Coorg, Malabar, the northern part of Travancore and southern part 
of Mysore. The location of Satiyaputra or Satyaputra is uncertain. 
But the position of the other three confirms the southern limit as 
deduced above from the find-spots of inscriptions, with the probabi¬ 
lity that on the eastern side it might have extended a little further 
to the south as far as 13° of latitude. 


1. The discovery of the Asoka pillar at a place still called Rumindei has fixed the 
site of the LumbinI garden where the Buddha was bom. For Asoka says in the 
inscription engraved on this pillar: “Here Buddha was bom”. 

2. Ep. Ind., Vol. XXV, pp. 40 ff. 


78 




A60KA, THE GREAT 
III. THE ADMINISTRATION 

An expression in R. E. XIII has led some scholars to believe that 
there were certain tribal areas within the empire which were not 
directly ruled by Asoka but enjoyed a certain degree of autonomy. 
“Here in the king’s dominions”, so runs the passage, “among the 
Yavanas and Kaihbojas, the Nabhakas and Nabhapamtis, the heredi¬ 
tary Bhoja rulers, Andhras and Parimdas, everywhere they follow 
the teaching of the Beloved of the gods in respect of Dhamma”. Now 
the statement is ambiguous so far as the enumeration of the locali¬ 
ties is concerned: it may mean either among the Yavanas etc., in 
the king’s dominions or in the areas under royal rule and among the 
Yavanas etc. (also within the royal domain) If we accept the 
second interpretation, we must admit that they were not under his 
direct rule. This interpretation is to be preferred as, otherwise, it is 
difficult to explain why these states are separately mentioned. 

The Yavana and Kamboja states were probably situated in N.- 
W. Frontier Province. The mention of the Yavanas as one such 
tribal state is interesting as it proves the existence of a small Greek 
principality within the empire. The Bhojas were probably on the 
western coast or in Berar, and the. Andhras perhaps dccupied the 
coastal region between the Krishna and the Godavari, as they did in 
later days. 1 It is not possible to locate the rest. The R. E. XIII 
testifies to the existence of Atavyas or the people of the forest coun¬ 
try (in or near Kalinga) as forming such an autonomous state. 
There were probably a few other such tribal states such as the 
Rashtrikas and Pitenikas, but some scholars interpret them 
differently. 

Even excluding these states it was a hard enough task to ad¬ 
minister effectively an empire made up of parts so widely separated 
as Peshawar, Mysore and Orissa. As in the days of Chandragupta, 
the difficulty of the situation was solved by multiplying centres of 
authority in a number of local administrations of different grades 
and sizes. The king had probably a Deputy ( Upardja) like his 
brother Tissa. He was further assisted by the Yuvardja or Crown 
Prince and by his Chief Minister or Agramdtya, Radhagupta. The 
king also shared the burden of administration with the Princes 
(Kumaras or Aryaputras), who were deputed to serve as his Vice¬ 
roys in the outlying provinces of his empire which they could be 
trusted to rule loyally. The inscriptions mention four such Viceroys 

1. It is not, however, unlikely that the Andhras occupied at this time the region 
round Paithan and only later moved to the coastal region (See Ch. XIII). 

79 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


ruling at Taxila, Ujjain, Tosali and Suvarnagiri. The Divydvadana 
mentions Asoka’s son Kunala as his Viceroy at Taxila. The Chinese 
traveller Fa-hien records the tradition that he was known as Prince 
Dharmavivardhana, Viceroy of the Gandhara Province. 

Next to the Viceroys were the Provincial Governors, termed 
Pradesikas in the Edicts. The Junagarh inscription of Rudradaman 
(c. A.D. 150) has preserved the names of two such Provincial Gover¬ 
nors of the Maurya empire: Pushyagupta, Rdshtrlya or Governor of 
Western India or Saurashtra under Chandragupta, and Raja 
Tushaspha holding the same office under Asoka. The king, and 
possibly also the Viceroys and Governors, had their Parishat. This 
Pai'ishat was probably a Council of Ministers and other high officials 
such as is described in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra and to which reference 
will be subsequently made. 

Next to the Pradesikas Asoka’s inscriptions refer to three classes 
of high officials, viz, Rajukas, Yutas, and Mahamatras. The Rajuka 
was an important official who was appointed over ‘many hundred 
thousand men’ and had wide powers of ‘awarding rewards or punish¬ 
ments.’ They were enjoined to take deep concern in all matters 
affecting the moral and material good of the people. As Asoka so 
pithily puts it: “Just as (a person) feels confident after making over 
his offspring to a clever nurse .. . even so have I appointed the 
Rajukas for the welfare and happiness of the country people ( Jana - 
pada).” The Rajukas were probably in charge of districts and cor¬ 
responded to the district magistrates of the present day. 

The Yutas, also mentioned in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra as Yuktas, 
along with their assistants, the Upayuktas, were probably district 
treasury officers, whose m^in function was to manage the king’s pro¬ 
perty, receive and spend the revenue, and keep accounts. 

The Mahamatras were probably heads of special departments. 
A new class of these officials was instituted by Asoka in the 14th 
year after his coronation. These were Dharma-Mahamatras, that is 
Religious Censors or Inquisitors, who were employed among all sects 
—Buddhists, Brahmanas Ajlvikas and Nirgranthas—and both asce¬ 
tics and householders. Their principal object was the establishment 
and promotion of the Dharma and the welfare and happiness of 
those devoted to Dharma. They concerned themselves with the un¬ 
fettering (unrestricted movement) of the virtuous among the Yava- 
nas, Kambojas, Gandharas and other peoples, and particularly with 
the welfare and happiness of wage-earners, the destitute and the 
aged. They provided a person kept in prison with his ransom and 


80 


A60KA, THE GREAT 


arranged for his release, particularly if he had a large family to main¬ 
tain, was subjected to oppression or had grown old. “They are 
occupied,” says Asoka “in all my households and those of my 
brothers and sisters, and everywhere in my domain, working for 
piety.” 1 

The interests of womanhood were looked after by the depart¬ 
mental head called Strf-Adhyaksha-Maha7ndtra . The frontiers were 
in the keeping of the Anta-Mahamdtras. Municipal administration 
of the city was the charge of the Chief Executive Officer or Mayor, 
called Nagaraka or Nagara-vyavaharaka, of the rank of a minister or 
Mahdmatra . There were also some special officers and departments. 
The empire’s foreign relations were the charge of Ambassadors 
called Dutas who had to go abroad for their work (R. E. XIII). The 
Intelligence Department was manned by the secret agents of the 
government aptly called the Gudhapuriishas by Kautilya. The king 
depended particularly upon special officers, called Prativedakas 
(Reporters or Informers) in one of the Edicts, whose duty was to keep 
him acquainted with the conditions of the people and of the coun¬ 
tryside, and who had therefore access to the king at all hours and 
places as noted above. 

There was an important special officer called the Vrajabhumika 
(R. E. XII) who was in charge of what is called by the general term 
Vraja, probably denoting all works of public utility with which the 
empire was so lavishly equipped, such as Kupa (R.E. II) or Udapdna 
(P. E. VII), i.e. wells for supply of drinking water, Udydna (R.'E. 
VI) or parks, shade-giving banyan trees, mango-groves (P. E. VII) 
and travellers’ rest-houses (P. E. VII) planted along the public roads 
(R. E. II). Rock Edict II mentions the state botanical gardens for 
the cultivation of medicinal plants which were procured by import 
from outside, if necessary, so that the indigenous medical system 
(Ayurveda ) should not suffer for want of supplies of herbs ( ausha - 
dha) f roots ( mula) or fruits (phala), from which medicines could be 
extracted for the treatment of both men and cattle. These extensive 
arrangements for the relief of suffering of both man and beast must 
have depended upon an adequate medical service. Lastly, the edicts 
also refer to special forests for the breeding of elephants (ndgavana) 
under an officer whom Kautilya calls the Hastyadhyaksha (P.E. V). 

Asoka’s administration was also conciliatory, though strict, in 
its dealings with the forest-folk ( atavi in R. E. XIII) or the primitive 

1. The interpretation of the passage is somewhat difficult; I have followed partly 
Barua’s translation rather than that of Bhandarkar. 


a.I.U.—c 


81 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


tribes on the frontiers of his kingdom who were not his subjects 
(avijita-antas ), so that they might not violate the moral code. 

Asoka introduced a great innovation in administrative system 
by instituting a quinquennial and triennial anusamyana or circuit 
of high officials, such as Pradesikas, Rajukas, Yutas and Mahamatras, 
In addition to routine duties of inspection this was also meant for 
purposes of propaganda so that the message of the Dharma might 
reach the remotest corners of the empire. The Mahamatras had spe¬ 
cially to satisfy themselves that justice was administered fairly and 
efficiently, and nobody suffered oppression at the hands of sub¬ 
ordinates. 

The Viceroys had an official hierarchy modelled on that of the 
central government and they were also enjoined by the Emperor to 
follow the same procedure in regard to circuits. 

IV. DHARMA OR LAW OF PIETY 

Asoka worked for the moral uplift of his people by preaching in 
his Edicts the fundamental principles and practices of Dharma or 
moral life. He insisted on the family as the basis of morality. His 
view was that religion, like charity, should begin at home in the 
cultivation of proper relations in the domestic sphere with father 
and mother, elders, teachers, and seniors in status or age, to whom 
strict obedience is enjoined. Respect must be shown by pupils 
towards their teachers or gurus . There should also be considerate 
treatment of all those with whom a householder comes into contact 
in his social life, such as ascetics, Brahmans and Sramanas; relations 
of all degrees; friends, acquaintances and companions; servants and 
dependents and the poor and the afflicted. Lastly, liberality and 
charity should be practised towards ascetics, friends, comrades, and 
relatives, and those who are disabled by age. 

Thus the starting point of religious and moral life in Asoka's 
scheme was the purification of the home, family, and domestic life by 
the cultivation of proper relations with all those with whom it is 
directly concerned. Character, conduct and behaviour counted 
more in this view of religion than rituals or ceremonies. Asoka 
defines the practice of morality and right conduct as the true cere¬ 
monial (R. E. XII). 

When the basis of religion was thus laid in the establishment of 
proper relations between individuals in the domestic circle, it was 
extended beyond the home and family to communities. Asoka was 


82 


AAOKA, THE GREAT 


anxious for the concord of communities, and harmony of creeds. His 
Twelfth Rock Edict is a passionate appeal not only for the toleration 
of all religious sects but also for developing a spirit of reverence for 
them. He sought the solution of the communal problems of his time 
by insisting on the*following measures and practices: (1) promotion 
of what constitutes the essence of all religions as their common 
ground or root (mula); (2) cultivation of this sense of unity of all 
religions by the practice of vachaguti or restraint of criticism of other 
religions and 3ects; (3) the coming together ( samavdya ) of expo¬ 
nents of different religions in religious assemblies; (4) learning the 
texts of other religions so as to become bahusruta or proficient in 
the scriptures of different religions. As was usual with Asoka, he 
himself set an example to this by honouring all sects and making 
gifts to them. His dedication of Barabar hill caves to the Ajivikas 
is a noble monument to his catholic spirit of religious toleration far 
in advance of his age. 

Above all, Asoka stood for the religion of Ahimsti or non¬ 
violence (to men and animals) which he preaches in many of his 
Edicts. He insisted on the recognition of the sanctity of all (life. 
He set the example himself. The unrestricted slaughter of animals 
for the royal table was first limited to one deer and two peacocks, 
and was later totally abolished. But the principle of non-violence 
was not merely limited to food and private life. It was extended to 
the wider sphere of politics and international relations. He purified 
his national policy by proclaiming war as an unmitigated and abso¬ 
lute evil. He now dedicated himself not to the extension of terri¬ 
tory by conquest and force but to the extension of Dharma and 
conversion of people to a moral life by love. Thus, instead of orga¬ 
nising military expeditions against other countries, he was busy 
organising peace missions under his Dutas for purposes of humani¬ 
tarian work in those foreign countries (R. E. XIII). Silenced was 
the war-drum (bhert-ghosha ), which was replaced by the Dharma - 
ghosha: there was no longer any summons to war or call to the 
colours but only a call to moral life (R. E. IV). Thus Asoka stands 
out as the pioneer of peace and universal brotherhood in history, 
and was far ahead not merely of his own times, but even of the 
modern age, still struggling to realize his ideals. Alas! the ascent 
of man seems to be ordained to be bloody! 

One important consequence of his non-violent pacific politics 
was that, instead of completing his grandfather’s scheme of con¬ 
quering the whole of India and establishing his authority over it as 


83 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the sole sovereign or eka-rdt, he on principle left unsubdued the 
smaller and weaker peoples and states of India, including the primi¬ 
tive aboriginal tribes and foresters ( dtavya ), and established all 
states, great and small, on a footing of equal sovereignty. Of 
some of these he makes honourable mention in his inscriptions, as 
we have seen, as his neighbours whose welfare he seeks. There 
were also left patches of autonomous states in the interior of his 
empire as noted above. 

V. MISSIONARY ACTIVITY 

According to the Mahavamsa, the Third Buddhist Council met 
in the time of Asoka at his capital Pataliputra and was presided 
over by the monk Moggaliputta Tissa (Upagupta in the northern 
texts). This Council deputed missionaries to different countries 
which are named below. 

Missionary Country 


1 . 

Majjhantika 

Kashmir and Gandhara. 

2. 

Maharakshita 

Havana or Greek country. 

3. 

Majjhima 

Himalaya country. 

4. 

Dharmarakshita 
(a Yavana)- 

Aparantaka. 

5. 

Mahadharmarakshita 

Maharashtra. 

• 

6. 

Mahadeva 

Mahishamandala (Mysore or Man- 
dhata). 

7. 

Rakshita 

Vanavasi (North Kanara). 

8. 

Sona and Uttar a 
• 

Suvarnabhumi (Far East or 
Burma). 

9. 

Mahendra and others 

Lanka (Ceylon). 


Some of the names of these missionaries are corroborated by 
epigraphic evidence. In his inscriptions, Asoka tells of the foreign 
missions which he sent abroad not only for the work of preaching 
the Dharma but also for humanitarian work. These missions he 
sent to the peoples on his frontiers, as stated in R.E. II and V. Some 
of these were at work in distant foreign states under Hellenistic 
kings beginning with Antiochus (II) Theos of Syria, who was Asoka’s 
immediate neighbour. They also visited other Greek kings who 
ruled in Egypt, Macedonia, Cyrene and Epirus (or Corinth). They 
all carried Asoka’s message of non-violence coupled with measures 
for the relief of suffering of all living creatures—men and cattle 
(R. E. XIII). We have no information about the result of these 


84 


AS OKA, THE GREAT 


missions, but Buddhism was well known in Alexandria. Asoka 
tells us that the Dharma was practised not only in these countries, 
but also through them in other foreign lands not visited by his 
envoys. 


VI. BENEVOLENCE OF ASOKA 

Asoka also became a puritan in other ways. His was a total pur¬ 
suit of non-violence in every sphere. He abolished all public pas¬ 
times and popular sports of the country which were tainted with 
blood and which included the slaughter of animals and eating of 
meat, or the cruel fights between animals. He also curtailed the 
slaughter and sacrifices of animals in the name of religion. He abo¬ 
lished the time-honoured royal sport of hunting in which his grand¬ 
father used to indulge with so much pomp and magnificence (R. E. 
VIII). He replaced royal pleasure-trips ( Vihdra-ydtrds ) by Dharma - 
ydtrds, i.e. by pilgrimages to holy places like Bodh-Gaya or Lumbiru 
and tours on duty to out-of-the-way and neglected villages and the 
countryside, the home of the dumb millions and masses whom it was 
the king’s duty to see and help with gifts of money and moral 
instruction. The royal example had to be followed by the superior 
administrative officers, the Mahamatras, and also the princely 
Viceroys (Kumar as ), who had to go out periodically on such tours 
and missions of social service (anusamydna in R. E. Ill) to the rural 
populations, and convey to them messages of morality and means of 
relief in their distress. 

His religion of non-violence led Asoka to enforce by law the 
sanctity and security of all living creatures. A piece of com¬ 
prehensive legislation was enacted by him^ in the 26th year 
of his reign, to restrict the slaughter and injury of specified 
creatures. Those that were not economically useful to man, as 
a source of food or service, such as parrots, wild geese, bats, 
ants, tortoises, squirrels, porcupines, lizards, rhinos, pigeons, and 
all quadrupeds ‘which are neither used nor eaten’ were declared 
protected and inviolable (avadhya). The list of Asoka’s protected 
animals shows that he did not ban the eating of animal food by the 
general public to the extent to which he banned it for the royal house¬ 
hold. Other provisions of the law prescribed that husks containing 
living things were not to be burnt, nor forests, the abode of living 
creatures, to be set on fire. The living were not to be nourished 
with the living. Fish must not be killed, sold, or eaten on specified 
days numbering 56 in the year. The castration of animals was pro¬ 
hibited on certain holy days together with the branding of horses. 


85 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Prisoners were released one day in the year, probably the king’s 
birthday (P.E.V). A grace of three days was allowed to criminals 
who were condemned to death (P.E.IV). This shows that ASoka 
was unable to abolish capital punishment for practical reasons, and 
did not evince as much concern for the sanctity of human life as 
for that of the lower animals. The. reason probably was that man 
who can distinguish between right and wrong is less innocent than 
the inarticulate creatures whose life is thus more deserving of pro¬ 
tection than that of convicted murderers. 

VII. ART AND ARCHITECTURE 

ASoka was also pre-eminent in his artistic activities and achieve¬ 
ments. His great innovation was the substitution of stone for wood 
and brick. He decorated the country with structures and artistic 
monuments of different types. He was an artificer of cities and 
palaces, of stupas and vihdras, of rock-cut caves and monolithic 
pillars. 

Fa-hien, seeing Asoka’s palace at Pataliputra, thought that it 
was the work not of men, but of “spirits which piled up the stones, 
reared the walls and gates, and executed the elegant carving and 
inlaid sculpture-work in a way which no human hand of this world 
could accomplish. ,, 

Tradition credits Asoka with the building of 84,000 stupas or 
vihdras, which were constructed by all “his subordinate kings in 
84,000 towns selected all over India” (Mahdvamsa, V, 78-80). Fa-hien 
records the tradition that Asoka opened out the original eight 
stupas in which were enshrined the relics of the Buddha’s body and 
distributed them among 84,000 stupas of his own construction. We 
learn from one of his inscriptions that Asoka enlarged to twice its 
size the stupa of one of the previous Buddhas, Konakamana (Kanaka- 
- muni) by name. Asoka may also be taken to be the builder of the 
nucleus round which was built up, at a later age, the great stupa of 
Sanchl. The Divyavadana describes his stupas as “high as hill-tops”. 

The walls of the halls at the rock-cut caves at Barabar and 
Nagarjuni Hills are still shining like mirrors. The polish of Asoka’s 
pillars is the despair of modem craftsmen. They were so shining 
that English travellers like Tom Coryate and Whittaker confidently 
described one of them as a pillar of brass, Chaplain Terry as a pillar 
of marble, and Bishop Heber as “cast metal”. 

86 


# 


ASOKA, THE GREAT 


The pillars also exhibit to perfection the art of dressing, chisell* 
ing and shaping stone. The capitals of the columns were crowned 
with figures of bulls and lions, which are considered by Sir John 
Marshall as “masterpieces in point of both style and technique, 
examples of the finest carving.” The artistic merits of A&oka’s caves 
and pillars will be discussed in Chapter XX. 

The pillar was also a problem of engineering. It involved the 
handling of monolithic shafts with a weight of 50 tons and height 
of more than 30 feet, which were hewn out of the quarries of Chunar 
hills, probably fashioned there or at the central workshops at Patali- 
putra, and transported to distances of five to six hundred miles to 
be located at a place like Meerut. The removal of a pillar from 
Topra near Ambala to Delhi by Sultan Firuz Shah Tughlak required 
for its haulage the labour of 8,400 men pulling at the 42 wheels of 
the cart on which it was carried as stated in the Tdrikh-i-Firuz Shdhi. 
But, according to another contemporary account in the Sirat-i-Firiiz 
Shdhi of A.D. 1370, elephants were first tried, and then 20,000 men, 
for carrying the pillar to the bank of the Yamuna, placing it on boats, 
and for subsequent operations ending in its re-erection near the 
Jumma Mosque at Firozabad. Firuz Shah also removed to Delhi 
another pillar from Meerut. “The fabrication, conveyance, and erec¬ 
tion of these pillars bear eloquent testimony to the skill and resources 
of the stone-cutters and engineers of the Maurya age.” 

Asoka is also associated with a remarkable feat of Mauryan 
engineering in the field of irrigation. It was the construction of a 
reservoir called Sudarsana on the mountains Raivataka and Urjayat, 
near Girnar or Junagarh, by artificially damming up some of their 
streams. This irrigation work was undertaken by Chandragupta and 
was improved by Asoka who equipped the lake “with well-provided 
conduits, drains, and means to guard against foul matters”. 

VIII. PERSONAL AND FAMILY LIFE 

We may conclude this sketch by giving a few details of Asoka’s 
personal life and family. As mentioned above, Asoka refers in his 
Edicts to his brothers, sisters and other relatives or their household 
(R.E. V.), and also expresses solicitude for the welfare of all his rela¬ 
tives, however distant. Some of these were settled at Pataliputra, 
some in other provincial towns (R.E. V). It appears from P.E. VII 
that A£oka had many queens and sons. A Minor Pillar Edict refers 
to his second queen named Karuvaki and her son Tivara. The lite¬ 
rary texts give him four other wives. They also record the interest- 


87 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


ing fact that his eldest son was Mahendra and eldest daughter 
Sahghamitra, both offspring of his first wife, Sakyakumarl. A£oka 
deputed both Mahendra and Sahghamitra to work as Buddhist 
missionaries in far off Ceylon in a rare spirit of self-sacrificing ser¬ 
vice to his religion. According to some literary tradition, however, 
Mahendra was the brother of Asoka. 

As Vincent Smith rightly points out, Asoka must be credited 
with a sea-going fleet as means of carrying on these colonial enter¬ 
prises and cultural missions to foreign countries such as Ceylon. 

His Edicts at Sarnath and Sanchl give us a glimpse of the posi¬ 
tion of the king as head of the Buddhist Church. Both the Edicts 
refer to the chance of schism breaking out in the Sangha (congrega¬ 
tion) of monks and nuns. The Edicts sternly rebuke those who would 
promote or help such schism and proclaim the punishments to be 
meted out to them. The very possibility of these schisms showed 
that the Sanghas or the vihdras, both at Sarnath and Sanchl, and 
probably in other places, had to deal with a large number of monks. 
One of the duties of the Mahamatras or Inquisitors was the extirpa¬ 
tion of heresy in the Sangha . 

IX. THE CHRONOLOGY 

According to the chronology adopted above, 1 the accession of 
Asoka may be placed 'n c. 273 B.C. This date, derived from 
literary texts and tradition, is in a way confirmed by the Edicts. In 
his Rock Edict XIII, Asoka mentions as his contemporaries the fol¬ 
lowing Hellenistic kings: (1) Antiochus (H) Theos of Syria (261-46 
B.C.); (2) Ptolemy (II) Philadelphus of Egypt (285-247 B.C.); (3) 
Antigonus of Macedonia (278-239 B.C.); (4) Magas of Cyrene and (5) 
Alexander of Epirus (?). Of these the date of the fourth king and 
the identity of the fifth are somewhat uncertain. According to some 
scholars Magas of Cyrene died about 250 B. C., while others push back 
the date by at least 8 years. This point has been fully discussed in 
an Appendix to this Chapter where good grounds have been shown 
for accepting 258 B.C. as the lower limit for the death of Magas. As 
regards Alexander, there were two contemporary rulers of that name, 
one in Epirus (272-c. 255 B.C.) and the other in Corinth (252-247 
B.C.). But if we accept the earlier date of Magas, Alexander can 
only refer to the king of Epirus. Thus all these kings were jointly 
alive up to 258 B.C. in or before which one of them died. If the 
news of his death reached Asoka two years after the event in, say, 

1. See pp. 36-38. 


88 





ASOKA, THE GREAT 


256 B.C., Rock Edict XIII, which contains this reference and is stated 
to have been issued in the 13th year of his coronation, could not have 
been issued later than 256 B.C., in which case the coronation should 
be dated not later than 256+13=270-269 B.C. If the coronation 
had taken place four years after the accession, the latter event must 
have taken place not later than 273 B.C. On the whole it may be 
assumed that Asoka succeeded his father about 273 B.C., a date 
which may be derived from literary tradition also. As the Buddhist 
texts assign a reign of 37 years to him, the end of his reign may be 
placed about 236 B.C. 

X. SUCCESSORS OF ASOKA 

While the history of Asoka is illuminated by so many facts and 
details, that of his successors is shrouded in obscurity. The reason 
seems to be the disintegration of Asoka’s empire, which was too large 
to be kept together by his unworthy successors. Truly, Asoka’s 
sceptre was like the bow of Ulysses which could not be wielded by 
a weaker hand. The post-Asokan age is a dark age in Indian history. 

As we have seen above, Asoka had no paucity of sons. The 
inscriptions name only one, viz. Tivara, but he is not known from 
other sources. On the other hand, literary tradition mentions as more 
important his three sons Mahendra, Kunala and Jalauka. The Vdyu 
Purdna gives to Kunala a reign of eight years and names five of his 
successors, the last of whom was Brihadratha. The Matsya Purdna, 
however, gives the following list of Asoka’s successors: Dasaratha, 
Samprati, Satadhanva and Brihadratha, although it puts the total 
number of kings as ten. The Vishnu Purdna has its own list of seven 
kings, after Asoka, including Dasaratha, Salisuka, and the last king 
Brihadratha. The Divydvadana gives other names which include 
Samprati and Pushyamitra. The Rdjatarangim mentions Jalauka as 
Asoka’s successor in Kashmir. 

It is difficult to evolve correct history out of these divergent 
details. The Puranas and Buddhist works agree as to Kunala, 
together with the Jain writers Hemachandra and Jinaprabhasuri. 

The reality of Dasaratha, the grandson of Asoka, is established 
by three short dedicatory inscriptions incised on the walls of the 
rock-cut caves which Dasaratha bestowed upon the Ajlvikas on the 
heights of the Nagarjuni hills. Dasaratha uses Asoka’s title Deva- 
nampiya in the inscriptions. 

Jain texts treat Samprati as a patron of Jainism almost in the 
same light as Buddhist texts treat Asoka. According to Jinaprabha- 


89 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


suri, he ruled at Pataliputra as “lord of Bharata with its three conti¬ 
nents, and was the great Arhanta to establish Vihdras for £ramanas 
even in non-Aryan countries.” The dominions of Samprati probably 
also included Avanti and Western India. The name £dlisuka is 
known to the Gdrgl-samhitd. 

The Puranas agree as to Brihadratha being the last of the Maurya 
dynasty. His historicity is confirmed by the statement of Bana in the 
Harshacharita to the effect that he was assassinated by his general 
Pushyamitra. With Brihadratha ended the famous Maurya dynasty, 
about 187 B.C., after reigning for 137 years. The progressive disinte¬ 
gration of the Maurya empire during the half century that followed 
Asoka’s death is marked by several facts. According to the Rajataran- 
ginT, Asoka’s son Jalauka set himself up as an independent ruler in 
Kashmir and conquered the country up to Kanauj. He is said to 
have ‘crushed the invading Mlechchha horde,’ 1 which probably refers 
to an invasion by the Bactrian Greeks. According to Taranatha 
another successor of Asoka, Vlrasena by name, set up at Gandhara. 
Vidarbha also seems to have asserted its independence according to 
the Malavikdgnimitra of Kalidasa. The Greek writer Polybius, writ¬ 
ing about 206 B .C., refers to an independent Indian king on the north¬ 
western frontiers, Sophagasenus (Subhagasena) by name. He, or 
one of his predecessors, was probably a Viceroy of a Maurya Empe¬ 
ror, and later declared himself an independent king. 

The disintegration of the Maurya empire was further speeded 
up by the Yavana invasions referred to in Sanskrit texts such as the 
Yuga Purdna section of the Gdrgi-samhitd and the Mahdbhashya of 
Patanjali, to which detailed reference will be made later. The final 
blow was struck at the empire by^the revolt of Pushyamitra, the 
Commander-in-Chief of Brihadratha, who killed his master, while 
reviewing the army, and ascended the throne. 

XI. CAUSES OF THE DOWNFALL OF THE 

MAURYA EMPIRE 2 

The decline of the Maurya empire, almost immediately after the 
death of Asoka, and its tragic end within half a century of his glo¬ 
rious rule, have tempted scholars to speculate on the possibility of 
finding out important factors which can sufficiently account for such 
unusual happenings. According to the view of one school of writers 
the religious policy of Asoka was the main cause of the debacle. It 
is urged by them that Asoka’s patronage of Buddhism and deliberate 

1. R&jatarangini, I, 115-17. 

2. The Editor alone is responsible for the views expressed in this section. 


90 








A&OKA, THE GREAT 


humiliation of the Brahmanas led to a reaction promoted by the 
latter, and they “clearly see the hands of the Brahmanas in the great 
revolution” headed by Pushyamitra. As against this it has been 
pointed out that there is no adequate ground to believe that AAoka 
ill-treated the Brahmanas, and there is also no evidence that the 
Brahmanas in a body rose against, far less fought with, the successors 
of Aioka. It is true that Pushyamitra who led the revolution was 
himself a Brahmana, but we must remember that he was also the 
Commander-in-Chief of the Maurya army. His successful revolution 
can be much better accounted for by his hold over the army than his 
headship of a band of discontented Brahmanas. Besides, the fact 
remains that the dynasty founded by Pushyamitra was ousted by a 
successful rebellion of the Brahmana minister of the last king. Here 
we have an exact parallel to the earlier revolution, which shows 
what little ground there is to ascribe it to Brahmanical influence 
from the simple fact that its leader belonged to that caste. 

Another class of writers trace the root-cause of the downfall of 
the Maurya Empire to the doctrine of Ahimsa or non-injury adopted 
by A£oka as a policy of state. According to them the martial ardQur 
of imperial Magadha was bound to vanish when A&oka gave up the 
aggressive militarism of his forefathers and disbanded his army. 
As noted above, he eschewed all wars and enjoined upon his sons 
and grandsons to do so, and this naturally impaired the military 
efficiency of his empire. Theoretically this view appears plausible 
enough, but it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which the weak¬ 
ness of the empire is to be attributed to this cause alone. We cannot 
forget the fact that, considering the circumstances of those days, it is 
a far greater wonder that so vast an empire should have been govern¬ 
ed continuously by a central authority for nearly a century, than 
that it should have fallen to pieces within the next fifty years. Many 
other empires, far less in extent, rose and fell in India both before 
and after Aioka, and there must have been some natural causes at 
work in all these cases. Among them we may reckon the spirit of 
local autonomy, the difficulty of communication with distant pro¬ 
vinces, the oppressive rule and rebellious disposition of their gover¬ 
nors, palace intrigues and official treachery. Foreign invasion is 
another such factor, which invariably accelerates other causes. In 
the case of the Mauryas we have positive evidence that some, if not 
all, of these causes were at work. The repeated revolt of the distant 
province of Taxila, due mainly to the oppression of local officials, is 
perhaps typical of what was happening in other parts of the empire. 


91 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The Kalihga Edicts show that Asoka himself knew of the oppression 
of his officials and vainly tried to stop them. That the officials at the 
capital were not all loyal and devoted servants is proved by the 
treacherous conduct of Pushyamitra. 

There are also good grounds to believe that the Maurya court 
was divided into two factions, one headed by Pushy amitra, the 
Commander-in-Chief, and the other by the Minister, who managed 
to make their sons respectively governors of Vidisa and Vidarbha. 
The immediate causes that brought about the end of the Maurya 
dynasty were no doubt, the invasion of the Bactrian Greeks, to 
which a detailed reference will be made later, and the assassination 
of king Brihadratha by Pushyamitra. It is not unlikely that this 
coup d’etat was helped, if not prompted, by the foreign invasion. 
It is also equally likely that the weakness caused by internal dissen¬ 
sions invited’ foreign aggression. On the whole these natural causes 
might have been sufficient to bring about the decline and downfall 
of the Maurya Empire. It is not necessary, therefore, to postulate 
that the pacific policy of Asoka was responsible for this catastrophe, 
though this cannot be altogether ignored as a possible factor. 

But even if Asoka’s policy brought about the downfall of the 
Mauryan Empire, India has no cause to regret the fact. That empire 
would have fallen to pieces, sooner or later, even if Asoka had fol¬ 
lowed the policy of blood and iron of his grandfather. But the moral 
ascendancy of Indian culture over a large part of the civilized world, 
which Asoka was mainly instrumental in bringing about, remained 
for centuries as a monument to her glory and has not altogether 
vanished even now after the lapse of more than two thousand years. 

APPENDIX 
THE DATE OF ASOKA 

The date of Asoka has sometimes been determined on the basis of Buddhist 
tradition regarding the Nirvana and the interval of 218 years between that memor¬ 
able event and the coronation of the Maurya monarch. But as the date of NirvaruL 
or Buddha’s death is itself uncertain (pp. 36-38), and the correctness of an interval 
of 218 years between that event and Asoka’s coronation is also doubted (p. 38), we 
cannot solve the problem of Asoka’s date in this way. 

The really important clues to the riddle are furnished by the Greek synchro¬ 
nisms, and the chronology of the first three Mauryas hinges on two crucial dates, 
viz. (1) 326 B.C. when, according to Plutarch and Justin, Chandragupta met 
Alexander, shortly before his accession, and (2) the date of the death of Magas of 
Cyrene, one of the kings visited by Asoka’s missionaries. 

The date of Asoka’s coronation can hardly be pushed back beyond 277 B.C., 
because his grandfather, according to all the chronicles, whose evidence carries 
weight, died after a reign of 24 years, and the next king Bindusara, the father 

92 


ASOKA, THE GREAT 


and immediate predecessor of Asoka, ruled for at least 25 years (326-24-25 = 277 
B.C.). 

For a lower limit, we have to turn to the evidence of Asoka’s own inscriptions. 
The R. E. XIII refers to the emperor’s Hellenistic contemporaries whose names and 
dates have been mentioned .above. 

Hultzsch takes the date c. 250 B.C. for the death of Magas from Bloch ( Corpus, 
I, p. xxxi and n. 8). But his views have been challenged by several writers in¬ 
cluding Tarn (Antigonus Gonatas, pp. 449 ff). To enable one to understand the facts 
relevant to our enquiry, it is necessary to draw attention to the sequence of some 
of the events since the death of Magas. 

1. Death of Magas. 

2. Demetrius the Fair sent by his step-brother Antigonus of Macedon as an 
aspirant to the throne of Cyrene, to charm by his presence the heart of Berenice, 
the heiress of Magas. 

3. Demetrius’s rule for a time in Cyrene. 

4. Demetrius put to death by Berenice in her mother’s chamber. 

5. Ascendancy of Ptolemy Philadelphus in Cyrene and the betrothal of Bere¬ 
nice to the Egyptian prince, the future Ptolemy III Euergetes. 

6. Coins of Berenice without the married woman’s veil—issued apparently 
when, though still a virgin, she acknowledged the suzerainty of the House of 
Ptolemy. 

7. A free Cyrenean republic or Koinon to which Polybius (X, 22) and coins 
bear testimony. 

8. Berenice’s marriage with Ptolemy III in 247-46 B.C. 

Not long after his marriage Ptolemy III set out for the war in Syria (245 B.C.). 
On the departure of her husband Berenice vowed to the gods, for his safety, a lock 
of her hair, which upon his return was dedicated in the temple of Arsinoe Aphro¬ 
dite. But it mysteriously disappeared. The incident forms the theme of the Lock 
oj Berenice by the contemporary poet Callimachus (translated by Catullus). Its 
genuineness has been proved by the discovery of some fragments in 1928 (Whibley, 
Companion to Greek Studies, p. 169). The relevant passage in the poem of Calli¬ 
machus runs thus: “You weep not for yourself, but for your husband (gone to the 
Syrian war immediately after the marriage in 247-46 B.C.); but of a truth I had 
known that you had a fine spirit ever since you were a small maiden. Do you not 
remember the noble deed (killing of Demetrius) through which you won your 
royal wedlock?” 

The passage suggests, as pointed out by Tarn, that some considerable time 
must have elapsed since the action performed by Berenice as a ‘parvo virgo’, which 
it is feared, may have passed out of her memory. The Berenice coins without the 
veil and the numismatic evidence regarding the Koinon also lend support to the 
view that the interval between the death of Magas and the Syrian campaigns of 
Ptolemy III could not have been so short as Bloch’s suggestion would lead us to 
believe. Under these circumstances the tradition recorded by Porphyry, which 
puts Demetrius’s death in 259-58 B.C., cannot be lightly brushed aside. The accep¬ 
tance of this date implies that Rock Edict XIII of Asoka cannot be dated later 
than 259-58 B.C., as it speaks of Magas, whose death preceded that of! Demetrius, 
as alive. Attention may be drawn in this connection to a passage of Justin (XXVI, 
3.2) where the death of Magas is put at about the same time as the attack of Alex¬ 
ander of Epirus upon Antigonus, during the Chremonidean war, i.e., after. 264 and 
before 261 B.C. As rescripts of morality contained in R.E. XIII began to be written 
when Asoka had been anointed 12 years, his coronation could not have taken place 
after 270-69 B.C. Pausanias and Suidas, on whom Bloch relies, are not clear enough 
to set up against the contemporary Callimachus. Pausanias’s statement that Cyrene 
rose in revolt after the death of the elder Antigonus and that Magas captured it 
in the fifth year of the rebellion (I, 6. 8), if taken too literally, would place the 
death of Magas (after a reign of 50 years according to Agatharchides) not earlier 


93 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


than 301-5-50 = 246 B.C., a result which would be unacceptable even to Bloch and 
Hultzsch. According to Suidas, Ptolemy subjugated Cyrene in 308 B.C. If this is 
identical with the event referred to by Pausanias when he speaks of the suppres¬ 
sion of the Cyrenean- revolt by Magas, then the rule of the latter must have termi¬ 
nated about 259-58 B.C. The result would accord with the tradition recorded by 
Porphyry. Asoka’s coronation thus must have taken place between 277 and 270 B.C. 


GENERAL REFERENCES 

1. D. R. Bhandarkar— Asoka (The English translation of Asoka’s inscriptions 
given in Ch. VIII of this book has been generally followed in the text.) 

2. B. M. Barua, Inscriptions of Asoka. 

3. V. A. Smith, Asoka, 3rd Edition, Oxford, 1920. 

4. R. K. Mookerji, Asoka. 

5. H. C. Raychaudhuri— Political History of Ancient India, 5th Edition, pp. 302 
ff. (Some of the inscriptions of Asoka, discovered after the publication of 
Bhandarkar’s Asoka, are noticed in this book.) 

6. Cambridge History of India, Vol. I, Ch. XX. 


94 


CHAPTER VI 


THE FALL OF MAGADHAN EMPIRE 

I. THE &UNGAS (187-75 B.C.) 

We owe to Bana ? s Harshacharita some details of the story of 
the overthrow of the Maurya power by Pushyamitra. Bana, who 
flourished eight centuries after the event, relates how Pushyamitra, 
the Sendpati or Commander-in-Chief, assembled the entire Maurya 
imperial army, evidently on the pretext that he was anxious that 
his sovereign should see for himself with his own eyes what a fine 
fighting force he could put into the field of battle, and then assassi¬ 
nated him at the military parade and review. This incident shows 
that already Pushyamitra was carefully preparing the ground for 
his coup d'etat by seducing his army from its loyalty to the Maurya 
king. 

According to the Puranas, Pushyamitra belonged to the Sunga 
family. Panini (IV, 1, 117) traces the Sungas to the Brahmana clan 
of Bharadvaja. There are many references to Sunga teachers in 
Vedic texts. The Brihaddranyaka Upanishad also mentions Saungi- 
putra as a teacher. A Bharhut inscription refers to two gateways 
being erected in the reign of the Suhgas. Kalidasa, however, in his 
drama Malavikagnimitra, describes Agnimitra, son of Pushyamitra, 
as a scion of the Baimbika family of the Kasyapa lineage. But the 
Suhga origin of Pushyamitra is generally accepted. 1 

As has been stated above, Pushyamitra’s dominion covered only 
the central portion of the old Maurya empire. In the south and 
south-east, the Andhras and Kalingas, together with parts of north¬ 
ern India, had already asserted their independence. 

Pushyamitra’s empire included the cities of Pa^aliputra, Ayo- 
dhya, Vidisa, and, according to the DivydvaMna and Taranatha, Jalan- 
dhara and siikala in the Punjab. Pa^aliputra continued as the capital. 

We learn from the Malavikagnimitra that the crown-prince 
Agnimitra served as his father’s Viceroy at Vidisa. There was 

1. PHAl, 307; 1C. IV. 363. 

95 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


probably another Viceroy in Kosala. An inscription discovered at 
the door of a temple at Ayodhya mentions the construction of a 
ketana (abode) by a Kosaladhipa (ruler of Kosala) who was sixth in 
descent from Senapati Pushyamitra. Again, Agnimitra’s brother- 
in-law (his wife’s brother) named Virasena was placed in charge of 
a fortress on the frontier on the banks of the Narmada. 

The Mdlavikdgnimitra also refers to an independent kingdom 
which had been recently established in the region of Vidarbha or 
Berar. Yajnasena, the king of Vidarbha, is stated to have been a 
relation (sister’s husband) of the Sachiva (minister) of the Mauryan 
emperor, and thus a natural rival of Pushyamitra. The relations 
between Vidarbha and Vidisa became strained. The poet relates how 
Agnimitra’s friend Madhavasena, who was a cousin of Yajnasena, 
was arrested by an Antapala (governor of the frontier) of Yajnasena. 
on his way to Vidisa. Agnimitra at once called upon Yajnasena for 
his release. The latter agreed to do so on condition that his rela¬ 
tion, the Maurya minister, was released first. Agnimitra at once 
gave orders to Virasena to invade Vidarbha. Virasena defeated 
Yajnasena and released Madhavasena, Eventually, Vidarbha was 
divided between the two cousins, Yajnasena and Madhavasena, under 
Pushyamitra as their suzerain. 

Pushyamitra had to face a Greek invasion. This is revealed by 
the grammarian Patanjali in the two following passages in his Maha- 
bhdshya. The first, lha Pushyamitram Ydjaydmah, “Here we per¬ 
form the sacrifices for Pushyamitra,” shows by the use of the pre¬ 
sent tense that the sacrifice was begun but not yet finished, and that 
Patanjali was therefore a contemporary of Pushyamitra. The use of 
the past tense in the other passage: “arimad Yavanah Saketam: 
arunad Yavano Madhyamikdm ” shows that Saketa or Ayodhya and 
the other town called Madhyamika (near Chitor) were beseiged by 
a Yavana or Greek invader within living memory. This invasion 
might have taken place while Pushyamitra was yet a general of the 
Mauryas, and it is not unlikely that his success against the Yavanas 
gave him a position, status, and power which enabled him to make 
a successful bid for the throne. 

But Pushyamitra also came into conflict with the Greeks after 
he had ascended the throne. Kalidasa in his Mdlavikdgnimitra refers 
to the conflict between Prince Vasumitra, son of Agnimitra and 
general of Pushyamitra, and a Yavana on the southern or right bank 
of the river ‘Sindhu’ which may be taken to be either the river in 


96 


THE FALL OF THE MAGADHAN EMPIRE 

the Punjab or its namesake in Central India. 1 According to Kalida¬ 
sa, this conflict took place in connection with the horse-sacrifice of 
Pushyamitra when his troops, escorting the horse under Vasumitra, 
were stopped by the Yavanas on the south bank of the Sindhu. The 
Yavanas were defeated and the horse brought back safely home. 

These Greek invaders were no doubt the Bactrian princes 
whose history will be dealt with in another chapter. The Sanskrit 
passages probably refer to Greek invasions led by Demetrius, 
Menander or Eucratides, who are all known to have carried on cam¬ 
paigns in India. They also show that Pushyamitra ultimately 
triumphed over the Greeks and drove them out of Magadha, per¬ 
haps even beyond the Sindhu. His task was probably facilitated by 
the internecine dissensions among the Greeks themselves, which will 
be referred to later. The performance of two horse-sacrifices by 
him was probably meant as a proclamation of his double victory 
over the Greeks, and in any case it indicates that he was a powerful 
king and ruled over extensive dominions. They also prove the re¬ 
vival of the Brahmanical sacrificial cult involving the slaughter of 
animals which was put down by Asoka. The Buddhist tradition is 
not complimentary to Pushyamitra and describes him as a cruel 
persecutor of Buddhism. He is said to have destroyed monasteries 
and killed the monks in course of his march to Sakala (Sialkot in the 
Punjab) where he declared a prize of one hundred gold coins on the 
head of each monk. 2 But though the Sungas were strong adherents 
of Brahmanical religion, there is no independent evidence to show 
that they were intolerant of Buddhism. It is interesting to note in 
this connection that the great Buddhist stupa at Bharhut was erect¬ 
ed during the reign of the £uhgas. 

Pushyamitra ruled for about 36 years (c. 187-151 B.C.) and was 
succeeded by his son Agnimitra. Agnimitra is the hero of Mdlavik - 
agnimitra, which gives us some account of his viceroyalty at VidiiS 
mentioned above. He was succeeded by Sujyeshtha 3 of whom noth¬ 
ing is known The fourth king was Vasumitra who, as a young 
prince, fought with the Yavanas to rescue the sacrificial horse of his 
grandfather and was probably posted to guard the north-west fron¬ 
tier of Pushyamitra’s empire. He may be identical with Sumitra, 
son of Agnimitra who, according to Bana, was killed in the course of 
a theatrical performance by one Mitradeva. The murderer might 

l. IHQ, L 215. 

2 Divyavadana, pp. 429-34. For other references, cf. IHQ, XXII, 81 ft. 

3. Also called Vasujyeshtha. For the Puranic list of 6uhga kings, cf. DKA- 70. 

97 


\.1.U— 7 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


have been a scion of the Brahmana ministerial family which later 
overthrew the Sungas. 

An inscription records the excavation of a cave at Pabhosa near 
Allahabad by Ashadhasena, maternal uncle of king Bj-ihatsvatimitra 
(probably not, as is usually read, Brihaspatimitra), in the tenth year 
of a king whose name is read as Udaka. He has been identified by 
some with the fifth Sunga king whom the Puranas call variously 
Andhraka, Antaka, Ardraka, Odruka, or Bhadraka. It has been held 
that Ashadhasena, whom we know from another inscription to have 
belonged to the royal family of Ahichchhatra, was a feudatory of 
the Sungas. But this view is not generally accepted. 

Another inscription found at Besnagar (Bhilsa) records the erec¬ 
tion of a Garuda Pillar by a Yavana named Heliodorus who des¬ 
cribes himself as a native of Taxila and as a Bhagavata. He was 
deputed as ambassador by the Greek king Antialcidas to the Indian 
king named Bhagabhadra Kasiputra ‘who was prospering in his four¬ 
teenth regnal year.’ This Bhagabhadra was most probably the fifth 
Sunga king Bhadraka. His identification with the ninth Sunga king 
named Bhagavata in the Puranas cannot be upheld, as a second 
Garuda Pillar at Besnagar is dated in the twelfth regnal year of king 
Bhagavata, and the Bhagabhadra of one pillar cannot be taken to 
be the Bhagavata of the other. The tenth or last Sunga king ac¬ 
cording to the Puranas was Devabhuti or Devabhumi. According to 
Bana he was the victim of a conspiracy engineered by his Brahmana 
minister Vasudeva and was killed by a slave-girl who approached 
him in the guise of his queen. Altogether ten Sunga kings ruled for 
a period of 112 years, from c. 187 to 75 B.C. 

Although we know very little of the history of the Sunga 
dynasty, it played an important part in history. Pushyamitra stem¬ 
med the tide of foreign invasion and maintained his authority over 
a large part of the empire. He thus arrested, for the time being, 
the disintegration of the Magadha empire which, throughout the 
century of Sunga rule, extended as far as Bhilsa in Madhya Bharat, 
if not further to the west. The Bactrian Greeks maintained friend¬ 
ly relations with them. The Sunga period saw the revival of the 
Brahmanical influence and the growing importance of the Bhagavata 
religion which counted even the cultured Greeks among its votaries. 
It also witnessed a revival in art and literature specially in Central 
India. The great grammarian Patanjali, born at Gonarda in Central 
India, was most probably a contemporary of Pushyamitra, as noted 


98 


THE FALL OF THE MAGADHAN EMPIRE 


above. The Bharhut stupa is the most famous monument of this 
period. There was also an important school of art in Vidi6a which, 
according to some scholars, was the capital of the later Sunga kings. 
They were responsible for the fine gateway railings which surround 
the Sfinchi stupas built by A£oka. 

II. KAiyVAS (75-30 B.C.) 

The minister Vasudeva, who had his royal master Devabhumi 
killed by a slave-girl, usurped the throne and founded a new royal 
dynasty in Magadha. It was known as the Kanva or Kanvayana 
after his family or gotra name, and consisted only of our kings, viz . 
Vasudeva, Bhumimitra Naraya^a and Susarman, who ruled respec¬ 
tively for 9, 14, 12 and 10 years. Although the Puranas make a 
general statement to the effect that they will keep the neighbouring 
kings in subjection and will rule righteously, we really know 
nothing of their history. The dynasty was overthrown by the 
Andhrabhfityas or Andhras. 

The chronology of the Kanvas and Sungas is rendered some¬ 
what uncertain by the statement in the Puranas that the Andhra 
king not only destroyed the Kanvayanas but also ‘whatever was left 
of the power of the Sungas.’ Sir R. G. Bhandarkar 1 concluded from 
this that ‘when the princes of the Suhga family became weak, the 
Ka$vas usurped the whole power and ruled like the Peshwas in 
modern times, not uprooting the dynasty of their masters but reduc¬ 
ing them to the character of nominal sovereigns’. He therefore held 
that the period of 112 years, assigned in the Puranas to the rule of 
the &u$ga dynasty, also included the 45 years’ rule of the Kanvas. 
In other words, the Kanvas were the de facto rulers during the last 
45 years of the Sunga rule. This view has not, however, found gene¬ 
ral acceptance, and is opposed to the categorical statement in the 
Puranas that the tenth Sunga king was killed by the first Kanva 
king. The Puranic statement probably indicates that even after the 
death of Devabhumi and the overthrow of the Sunga dynasty, some 
members or scions of the family continued to rule somewhere, such 
as the VidiSa region or that the Kanvas, while exercising de facto 
authority, allowed some rois faineants of the Sunga dynasty after 
Devabhumi to continue nominally as kings. The Andhras finally 
extinguished their power along with that of the Kanvas. We may 


l. EHD, Section VL 


99 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


therefore hold that the four Kanvayana kings, named above, ruled 
for 45 years, i.e. from 75 B.C. to 30 B.C.* 

III. THE SUCCESSORS OF THE KANVAS 

Although, according to the Puranas, the Andhras succeeded the 
Ka$vas, we have no independent evidence that the former ever ruled 
as far north as Magadha. The history of Magadha, from the end of 
the Kanva rule to the rise of the Guptas, three hundred years later, 
is very obscure. Reference may be made in this connection to a 
large number of coins which are supposed to be associated with 
sopie of the Sunga and Kanva kings. A number of copper coins (of 
the so-called Mitra kings) have been found in Rohilkhand with the 
names of kings Agnimitra, Bhadra-ghosha, Jethamitra and Bhumi- 
mitra. The first may be identified with the Suhga king of that name, 
and the next two may be identified with two Puranic Sunga kings, 
namely, Ghosha, the seventh king, and Vasu-Jyeshtha or Su-Jyesh- 
tha, the successor of Agnimitra. Bhumimitra was probably the 
second Kanva king. But these identifications, though plausible, are 
not quite certain. 

The so-called Mitra coins of Panchala have been found in re¬ 
gions outside Panchala, in Oudh, in Basti District and even in Patali- 
putra. The names of two Mitra kings, Brahmamitra and Indra- 
mitra, are inscribed on two pillars at Bodh Gaya as also on coins 
found at places like Mathura, Panchala, and Kumrahar (Patna). 
Thus the Mitra rulers of Panchala were not a local dynasty of North 
Panchala, as was thought by Cunningham, but probably held sway 
over extensive regions in Northern India, and if some of these kings 
were identical with kings of the Kanva or £unga dynasty, we must 
hold that there was the semblance of an empire during the rule of 
these two dynasties. Some, if not all, of these kings might have 
ruled in Magadha after the Kanvas. * 1 But in any case we must 
hold that a large number of independent states flourished in North 
India during their rule, as will be described in Chapter XI. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

H. C. Raychaudhuri. Political History of Ancient India, 4th Edition, pp. 306 ff 

326-335. 

For Section HI, see references under Ch. XI. 


• See Preface. 

1. The Jain works refer to Balamitra and Bhanumitra as successors of Pushy a- 
mitra. We know from epigraphic records that Indragnimitra and possibly also 
Brihatsvatlmitra (or Brihaspatimitra) ruled over Magadha 


100 




CHAPTER VII 


THE YAVANAS 

I. THE YAVANAS IN INDIA 

One of the factors that led to the extinction of the dynasty of 
the imperial Mauryas was the advent of the Yavana invaders 
through the north-western gate of India.. Indeed the most interest¬ 
ing feature of the post-Maurya period of Indian history is the esta¬ 
blishment of foreign supremacy in Uttarapatha, Aparanta (Paschad- 
desa) and the adjoining region of Madhyadesa, 1 successively by 
several alien powers, and the Yavanas were the first among them. 

The word Yavana was used in medieval Indian literature as a 
synonym of mlechchha and indicated any foreigner. 2 But as late as 
the early centuries of the Christian era it meant, to an Indian, the 
Greeks only. The word was derived from the Old Persian form 
Yauna , signifying originally the Ionian Greeks, but later, all people 
of Greek nationality. The Greeks of Ionia in Asia Minor, between 
the Aegean Sea and Lydia, and the people of north-western India 
certainly came into contact with each other as subjects of the Achae- 
menian emperors of Persia since the time of Darius I (522-486 B.C.). 

The story of the employment of Scylax of Caryanda (in Caria) 
by Darius about the end of the sixth century B. C. for the exploration 
of the route from the Punjab rivers to Persia as well as of the Indian 
archers who formed an important element in the army of Xerxes 
and shared the Persian defeat at the battle of Plataea in 479 B.C. 
no doubt suggests that the people of Uttarapatha at least had direct 

1. India had five traditional divisions, the largest of which was Dakshinatya or 
Dakshinapatha, indicating that part of the country which lies to the south of 
the Vindhyan range or of the Narmada. Madhya-desa comprised the central 
part of northern India lying between the Himalayas and the Vindhyas and 
between Allahabad or Banaras in the east and some locality like Prithudaka 
(Pehoa) in the eastern Punjab in the west. North-western India including the 
adjoining region of Central Asia v/as called Uttarapatha, which was sometimes 
used in a wider sense to indicate the whole .of Aryavarta or northern India. 
Prachya or Purvadesa lay to the east of Allahabad or Banaras, while Aparanta 
or Paschaddesa was the land to the west of Devasabha, which is the same as 
modern Dewas, about 25 miles to the south-east of Ujjain. In a narrow sense 
Aparanta indicated only the northern part of the Konkan with its capital at 
Surparaka, modern Sopara in Thana District. 

2. The Muslim rulers of India are often called Yavana, but sometimes also §aka 
or even Yavana-Saka in medieval inscriptions. 


101 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


knowledge of the Greeks as early as the sixth and fifth centuries B.C. 
It is not improbable that officers of Greek and Indian origin in the 
service of the Achaemenian Government as well as merchants of 
the empire belonging to both the nationalities often met one another 
at the metropolis and the provincial headquarters. 1 There is there¬ 
fore no wonder that the very word Yauna, meaning the Greeks, used 
for the first time in the records of Darius I, was borrowed by the 
Indians without any modification (cf. Mahdbhdrata, XII, 207, 43). 
The earliest use of the Sanskritised form Yavana can be traced in 
the Ashtadhydyl of Panini (c. fifth century B.C.) and that of the Pra¬ 
krit form Yona in the inscriptions of Asoka. 

The conquest of north-western India in 327-325 B.C. by Alex¬ 
ander and the foundation by the Macedonian king of such cities as 
Alexandria sub-Caucasum (modern Charikar or Opian near Kabul), 
Alexandria amongst the Arachosians (modern Kandahar), 2 Buce- 
phala and Nicaea (on the banks of the Jhelum not far from the 
modern city of that name), Alexandria (at the conflunce of the 
Chenab and the Sindhu), and Sogdian Alexandria (in northern Sind), 
peopled partially by some of the Greek followers of the conqueror, 
must have led to an intimate association between the Yavanas and 
the Indians. Of these the Greek element in the population of Alex¬ 
andria sub-Caucasum seems to have remained conspicuous even after 
its inclusion in the Maurya empire. 

The story of the Maury an occupation of north-western India, of 
the foundation of the Seleucid monarchy on the ruins of the Achae- 
menid empire that had been shattered by Alexander, and of the 
surrender of the Kabul region to Chandragupta Maurya by Seleucus 
has already been told in a previous chapter. For a century from 
c. 305 B.C., when Seleucus measured his strength with Chandra¬ 
gupta, down to c. 206 B.C. when Antiochus III led an expedition 
against north-western India, the relations of India with the Seleucid 
emperors were very friendly. The Yona subjects of Asoka referred to 
in his own records as well as his viceroy of Surashtra, who was a 
Yavana prince according to an inscription of the middle of the second 
century A.D., appear to have been inhabitants of the district round 

1. Greek soldiers and officials are actually known to have been a very important 
element in the Achaemenian administration. The traditions of the fourth 
century B.C. regarding ancient Greek colonists at Nysa may probably be ex¬ 
plained by assuming the appointment of Greeks in the Indian districts of file 
Achaemenian empire. 

2. The name of Kandahar is a corruption of Greek Alexandria and has nothing 
to do with Gandhdra as is sometimes believed. 


102 





THE YAYANAS 


Alexandria near Kabul, which is often mentioned in the Pali lite¬ 
rature as the dipa (dinpxi ) or Doab of Alasanda. Some versions of 
the Thirteenth Rock-edict of Asoka say that there were no Brah- 
manas and &ramanas in the Yona country. The Buddhist canonical 
work Majjhimanikdya (II, 149) also says that in the land of the Yo- 
nas and the Kambojas there existed only two vartias or social grades, 
viz, tivya and dasa, instead of the traditional chatur-vairria division of 
the society prevalent in other parts of India. As early, however, as 
the time of Patanjali’s Mahdbhashya, the Yavanas as well as the 
Sakas found a place in the Indian society as aniravasita (pure) Sudras 
while the Manu-samhitd regards them as degraded Kshatriyas. 
Although there is an apparent discrepancy between the views of the 
two authorities, the social position of a pure £udra and a degrad¬ 
ed Kshatriya would practically be the same. The Mahdbhashya and 
the Manu-samhitd appear^ to speak of the Greeks of Bactria and 
Afghanistan who established themselves in India in the early years 
of the second century B.C. These Yavanas gradually became India- 
nised by adopting Indian names, religious beliefs and customs, and 
were ultimately absorbed in the Indian population. 

II. THE BACTRIAN GREEKS 

Parthia (Khurasan and the adjoining region to the south-east of 
the Caspian Sea) and Bactria (district round Balkh, ancient Bahlika, 
in northern Afghanistan beyond the Hindu Kush) were two districts 
of the Seleucid empire. Some time about 250 B.C. both the coun¬ 
tries revolted against their Seleucid overlord Antiochus (II)-Theos 
(261-246 B.C.) Parthia under a native of unknown origin named 
Arsaces and Bactria under its Greek governor Diodotus. Neither 
Antiochus II nor any of his immediate successors, Seleucus II (246- 
226 B.C.) and Seleucus III (226-223 B.C.), was powerful enough to 
suppress the rebellious provinces. The next emperor, Antiochus 
(III) the Great (223-187 B.C.), was engaged for some years in an 
attempt to regain both Parthia and Bactria, but, having found the 
subjugation of the newly founded kingdoms quite hopeless, he con¬ 
cluded peace with them and practically acknowledged the indepen¬ 
dence of both the countries. 

1. Diodotus I and Diodotus II 

Diodotus, the founder of the independent Hellenic kingdom of 
Bactria, appears to have ruled over that country probably along with 
Sogdiana for a long time, first as governor of Seleucid emperors 


103 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


and then as an independent monarch. It has been suggested that he 
was the satrap of Bactria who, according to certain Chaldean docu¬ 
ments, sent twenty elephants to assist Antiochus I in his struggle 
with Ptolemy Philadelphus of Egypt about 274-273 B.C. He was a 
powerful king who was feared by his neighbours. According to 
Justin, Diodotus was not on friendly terms with Arsaces of Parthia 
who, after he had conquered Hyrcania on the Caspian, was compelled 
to keep a large army on a war-footing for fear of the Bactrian 
enemy. 

The statement of Justin that Diodotus was succeeded by his 
son of the same name seems to be supported by numismatic evi¬ 
dence. Diodotus II reversed the anti-Parthian policy of his father 
and made an alliance with the king of Parthia. This enabled the 
Parthian monarch to concentrate his forces against the emperor 
Seleucus II when he attacked Parthia some time between 240 and 
235 B.C. The frustration of the Seleucid attempt by the Parthians 
not only saved their own land but also the kingdom of Bactria. The 
foreign policy of Diodotus II was thus eminently successful. The 
duration of the rule of this king cannot be determined with precision 
According to Polybius, when Antiochus III appeared in the east 
about 212 B.C., the Bactrian throne had for sometime been occupied 
by a Greek named Euthydemus who was a native of one of the 
cities called Magnesia in' Asia Minor. The Bactrian king is said to 
have represented to the Seleucid emperor that he happened to be 
king after having put to death the children of those who actually 
rebelled and thht he, who was not a rebel, should not be interfered 
with. From this it seems that Diodotus II, son of Diodotus I, was 
revolted against Seleucid authority, was overthrown by Euthydemus. 
The fact, however, that Agathocles and Antimachus of the Euthy- 
demian house claimed descent from ‘Diodotus, the Saviour* may sug¬ 
gest that Euthydemus was related to Diodotus I or II at least by 
marriage. 

2. Euthydemus 

After conclusion of his struggle with Parthia, Antiochus III 
turned his arms against Bactria about 208 B.C. and soon besieged 
Euthydemus in his capital city called Bactra or Zariaspa which has 
been identified with the modern Balkh. The siege lasted for two 
years, but neither side gained any decisive victory. At last, Teleas, 
whom the Bactrian king sent to the emperor to negotiate a 
settlement, was successful in convincing Antiochus III about the 


104 


THE YAVANAS 


encouragement that the struggle might give to the barbarian hordes 
hovering about the northern fringe of Bactria, to fall upon the 
country and destroy all traces of Hellenic civilization. The Seleucid 
emperor, whose presence in the western part of his dominions had 
by that time become an urgent necessity, was too glad to be out of 
the embarrassing situation. 

Ultimately Demetrius, the young son of Euthydemus, was sent 
to the emperor’s camp as an official envoy of the Bactrian king, and 
a formal alliance was concluded (c. 206 B.C.). Antiochus III agreed 
to the use of the royal title by Euthydemus and also to give one of his 
daughters in marriage to Demetrius. 1 Soon after he crossed the 
Hindu Kush, marched down the valley of the Kabul river, and reach¬ 
ed the country ruled by Sophagasenus (probably Sanskrit Subhd - 
gaseria), king of the Indians, who is not known from any other source. 
It has been noted above how, after the death of Asoka about 236 
B.C. the unifying power of the Maurya empire declined, and the 
provinces, especially the outlying ones, were assuming independence 
one after another under ambitious provincial governors, one of whom 
was probably Subhagasena himself or one of his predecessors. Antio¬ 
chus III went back to Mesopotamia after having accepted the sub¬ 
mission of the Indian king, who paid an indemnity and surrendered 
a number of war elephants. 

The abundance of Euthydemus’s coins and the great variety of 
his portraits on them suggest that he had a fairly long reign over an 
extensive territory. He is usually supposed to have died about 190 
B.C. His silver coins have been found in large numbers in Balkh 
(Bactria) and Bukhara (Sogdiana), to the north of the Hindu Kush; 
but they are less common in the regions of Kabul, Kandahar, and 
Seistan, where his bronze issues are very common. Scholars believe 
that towards the end of his reign, possibly after 197 B.C. when 
Antiochus III became hopelessly involved in his struggle in the west 
and was unable to interfere in the affairs of the east, Euthydemus 
extended his sway over southern Afghanistan and the adjoining area 
of Iran and also over parts of north-western India. But the man who 
established Greek supremacy on Indian soil seems to have been his 
son Demetrius whose early expeditions in India he may have led 
as commander of his father’s armies. 


1 This marriage seems to have actually taken place, as king Agathocles (a son of 
Demetrius?) of the house of Euthydemus and Demetrius is known to have 
claimed descent from ‘Antiochus the conqueror’. 








THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


3. Demetrius 

According to Strabo (c. 54 B.C.—A.D. 24), who refers to the 
authority of Apollodorus of Artemita, the Greeks of Bactria became 
masters of Ariana, a vague term roughly indicating the eastern dis¬ 
tricts of the Persian empire, 1 and of India. It is said that the Bac- 
trian chiefs, particularly Menander, conquered more nations than 
Alexander and that these conquests were achieved, partly by 
Menander and partly by Demetrius who was the son of Euthydemus, 
king of the Bactrians. Strabo further says: “They (i.e. the chiefs 
of the Bactrians) got possession not only of Patalene (the Sinclhu 
delta) but also of the kingdoms of Saraostos (Surashtra i.e. Kathia¬ 
war or South Kathiawar) 2 and Sigerdis (probably Sagaradvlpa 
meaning Cutch), which constitute the remainder of the coast. They 
extended their empire even as far as the Seres (i.e. the land of the 
Chinese and Tibetans in Central Asia) and Phryni (probably another 
Central Asian tribe).” The statement regards Menander and Deme¬ 
trius as the greatest of the Yavana kings of Bactrian origin, but un¬ 
fortunately does not specify the individual achievements of the two 
rulers. 

The mention of Demetrius, king of Bactria, Afghanistan, and the 
western part of northern India, after Menander, who actually 
flourished later than Demetrius and had nothing to do with Bactria, 
seems to go against chronological sequence and partially mars the 
historical value of the statement. But Indian literature also appa¬ 
rently refers to the exploits ofxthe Bactrian Greeks under Demetrius 
about the beginning of the second century B.C. The Yuga-purana 
section of the Gargi-samhita speaks of Yavana expeditions against 
Saketa (near Ayodhya in the preseht Fyzabad District, U.P.), Pan- 
chala (Rohilkhand in a narrow sense), Mathura and Kusumadhvaja 
or Pushpapura (the same as Pataliputra) after the reign of the 
Maurya king Salisuka (c. 200 B.C.) who, according to the Vishnu - 
purana. was the fourth in descent from Asoka and third in ascent 

1. The name Ariana appears to be associated with Iran and apparently also 
with Aria (modern Herat region). Ariana usually embraced the provinces of 
Parthia (Khorasan), Aria, the Paropanisadae (Kabul region), Arachosia 
(district round Kandahar), Drangiana (Seistan), Gedrosia (Baluchistan) and 
Carmania (Kirman). Some writers think that by Ariana only Aria and 
Arachosia were meant. 

2. While describing these regions the author of the Periplus says: “In these places 
there remain even to the present time signs of the expedition of Alexander 
such as ancient shrines, walls of forts and great wells”. Although Alexander 
did not penetrate so far south as Kathiawar, this region came into contact with 
the Greeks as early as the time of Aioka’s Yavana governor Tushaspha. The 
author of the Periplus also speaks of later Indo-Grcek rulers such as 
Apollodolus and Menander whose coins were in use in his time at Broach, 

100 




THE YAVANAS 


from the last Maurya king Brihadratha, overthrown by Pushyamitra 
about 187 B.C. 

Evidently, the Yavana invasion of Saketa and Madhyamika 
(modern Nagarl near Chitor, Rajputana), referred to in the Mahd- 
bhdshya as events that happened during the lifetime of the gram¬ 
marian Patanjali, should be assigned to the same epoch. Though 
the Mahdbhdshya seems to contain some later interpolations, Patan¬ 
jali was probably a contemporary of Pushyamitra and presumably 
also of some later Maurya rulers who suffered defeats at the hands 
of the Bactrians. The overthrow of Brihadratha by Pushyamitra 
seems to have been one of the consequences of the success of the 
Yavanas against the Mauryas. According to the Gdrgi-samhita, the 
Yavanas who besieged Pushpapura 1 did not stay for a long time in 
Madhyadesa because of “internal dissensions” leading to “a cruel and 
dreadful war in their own kingdom which arose amongst them¬ 
selves.’’ The Greeks appear to have lost Madhyadesa and temporarily 
parts of the Punjab and the lower Sindhu valley to Pushyamitra. 2 

Demetrius’s association with India is proved by literary as well 
as archaeological evidence. He issued some coins of square shape 
with Greek legend on the obverse and KharoshthI on the reverse. 
Scholars have identified him with king Dattamitra of the Mahd- 
bhdrata , the “grete Emetrius, the King of Ynde” mentioned in Chau¬ 
cer’s Knightes Tale , and Timitra of a seal found at Besnagar. 3 The 
extent of his Indian possessions, after his withdrawal from Madhya¬ 
desa, cannot be determined with certainty; but he seems to have held 
sway over considerable parts of the Uttarapatha and Aparanta (Pas- 
chaddesa) divisions of India and probably reasserted Greek authority 
in the Sakala region. We have seen that, according to Apollodorus 
and Strabo, the Indo-Greek power extended over the lower Sindhu 
valley and Kathiawar. It is interesting in this connection to note 
that certain Sanskrit grammatical works mention a city called Datta- 
mitri which belonged to the country of Sauvira (lower Sindhu valley 
to the east of the river). 4 

1. The passage seems to indicate that the Yavanas blockaded the city by a mud 
wall and confusion set in throughout the dominions. 

2. The expulsion of the Greeks from the eastern part of the Punjab and the 
adjoining region is indicated by references in the Malavikagnimitra and Dxvya- 
vadana mentioned above (pp. 96-97). 

3. Dr. P. C. Bagchi equates Demetrius with Krimisa. the Yaksha, who destroyed 
Pushyamitra, according to a story in the Divyavaddna (IHQ XXII, 81 ff). 

4. Inhabitants of this famous city which seems to have been founded in the vici¬ 
nity of the ancient Pa tala, capital of Patalene, near modern Brahmanabad (six 
miles to the west of Mansuriya in Sind), are often referred to in Indian literary 
and epigraphic texts as Dattdmitriyaka (Ddtdmitlyaka in Prakrit). 

107 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Some other cities in India and Afghanistan appear to have been 
named after Demetrius and his father Euthydemus. There was a 
city called Demetriaspolis in Arachosia according to Isidor of Cha- 
rax, while Ptolemy’s Geography recognises Euthymedia, usually be¬ 
lieved to be a mistake for Euthydemia (a city supposed to be named 
after Euthydemus), as another name of Sagala or Sakala, modern 
Sialkot in the Punjab. According to Indian Buddhist traditions, 
&akala was the capital of the Indo-Greek king Milinda (Menander) 
who either belonged to, or was intimately associated with, the house 
of Demetrius. 

4\ Eucratides 

The Indian conquests and struggles of Demetrius, necessitating 
no doubt a long stay in this country, must have loosened his hold on 
Bactria which soon after revolted under an exceptionally vigorous 
leader named Eucratides. The occupation of the Bactrian throne 
by Eucratides, who founded the city of Eucratidaea in Bactria, 
seems to have taken place about 171 B.C. Justin, whose work is 
a compilation from that of Pompeius Trogus (a contemporary of 
Augustus), says: “Almost at the same time that Mithradates (the 
first Parthian king of that name who reigned, according to many 
scholars, from 171 to 136 B.C.) ascended the throne among the 

Parthians, Eucratides began to reign among the Bactrians . 

Eucratides carried on several wars with great spirit and, though 
much reduced by his losses in them, yet when he was besieged by 
Demetrius, king of the Indians, with a garrison of only 300 soldiers, 
he repulsed by continuous sallies a force of 60,000 enemies” Being 
harassed for about four months Demetrius was compelled to raise 
the siege. Strabo (a contemporary of Augustus) says that Eucra¬ 
tides made himself master of the thousand cities, possibly those of 
Bactria, while Justin says that “he reduced India (probably the land 
on the Sindhu) to subjection”. ‘India’ seems to have been subjugated 
after the death of Demetrius that may be roughly assigned to about 
165 B.C. 

Some scholars have pointed out that Timarchus, satrap of Baby¬ 
lon, who revolted against the Seleucid emperor in 162 B.C., issued 
coins in imitation of the Indian coinage of Eucratides and that there¬ 
fore ‘India’ must have been conquered by Eucratides some time be¬ 
fore the above date. But Eucratides’s success in India was only 
partial and. in regard to some areas, temporary. There is evidence 

I os 



THE YAYANAS 


to show that he had to light hard with several princes of the Euthy • 
demian house who maintained their hold on parts of India and 
Afghanistan. Certain copper coins of a king named Apollodotus 
Soter were restruck by Eucratides and no doubt point to the latter’s 
victory over the former. The reverse of these coins representing 
Zeus enthroned with the symbols of a mountain and elephant’s head 
and containing the KharoshthI legend Kavisiye ncigara-devata (city 
divinity of KapisI) shows that Apollodotus was actually ousted by 
Eucratides from the Kapisa country, i.e. Kafiristan and the valleys 
of the Ghorband and Panjshir. He is also supposed to have been 
deprived of Arachosia and Drangiana by Eucratides. Two other 
members of the house of Demetrius are known to have issued com¬ 
memorative medals claiming relation with earlier kings (which was 
far-fetched in some cases) either to point out that Eucratides was a 
usurper who had no claim for kingship like themselves or to counter¬ 
act his claim of Seleucid blood. We have medals issued by king 
Agathocles in the name of ‘Alexander son of Philip’, ‘Antiochus the 
conqueror’, ‘Diodotus the saviour’, ‘Euthydemus the Divine’, and 
‘Demetrius the unconquered’. Similar medals of another king named 
Antimachus issued in the names of Diodotus and Euthydemus have 
also been discovered. 

Agathocles and another ruler named Pantaleon, who appear to 
have been closely related to each other, issued coins of square shape 
(in imitation of the Indian punch-marked coins) with the reverse 
legend in Brahmi instead of the usual KharoshthI prevalent in Uttara- 
patha and the adjoining region. Although the coins are found, in 
Afghanistan, they apparently point to the claim of these rulers to 
have been successors of Demetrius, especially in regard to some dis¬ 
tricts of northern India with which they may have been associated 
during the latter’s reign. It is possible that Eucratides had to fight 
with all these champions of the cause of the Demetrian house. As 
if to give a reply to the commemorative medals of his rivals, Eucra¬ 
tides issued some propaganda coins in the name of Heliocles and 
Laodice. Numismatic evidence suggests that Heliocles was the son 
and successor of Eucratides. It was therefore supposed by Droysen 
and Von Sallet that the commemorative issues of Eucratides were 
struck to celebrate the marriage of his son with Laodice, who was 
probably the daughter of Demetrius by his Seleucid wife, the 
daughter of Antiochus III. Cunningham and Gardner, however, be¬ 
lieved that Heliocles was the father, and Laodice the mother of 
Eucratides. The fact that, in the representation on the coins, Helio- 


109 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


cles appears with a bare head but Laodice with a diadem shows that 
she belonged to a royal family, probably the imperial house of the 
Seleucids. 1 It is not improbable that Eucratides came to Bactria as 
a champion of the Seleucid cause. 

According to Justin, even during the early part of his reign, 
Eucratides had not only to fight with Demetrius but also with the 
Sogdiani (people of Sogdiana or the Bokhara region to the north 
of the Oxus). It is probable that Sogdiana was then under the bar¬ 
barian hordes (vaguely called Scythians by classical authors) about 
which Teleas spoke to Antiochus III. When Eucratides was totally 
exhausted owing to continuous wars, the Parthians under the great 
king Mithradates I (c. 171—136 B.C.) attacked the Bactrian kingdom 
and permanently annexed two districts of the country. The names 
of these districts are given as Aspionus and Turiva, supposed by some 
scholars to be meant for Aria (Herat) and Arachosia (Kandahar) 
About this time it had become difficult for Eucratides to attend to the 
administrative necessities of his big empire and he had made his son 
a colleague in the kingship. Justin records that when Eucratides 
was on a march homewards to Bactria, he was murdered (c. 150 
B.C.) by his son. The name of the parricide is unknown; but he may 
be no other than Heliocles who next ascended the throne. 2 

5. The End oj Yavana Rule in Bactria 

Heliocles was the last Greek king who held sway over Bactria. 
Justin says: “The Bactrians harassed by various wars lost not only 
their dominions but their liberty; for having suffered from conten¬ 
tions with the Sogdians, the Drangians and the Indians, they were 
at last overcome, as if exhausted, by the weaker Parthians.” The 
reference to the struggle of the Bactrian Greeks with the Indians and 
Drangians, especially the latter over whose land also they had ex¬ 
tended their power, is interesting. 

It is evident that the anti-Bactrian policy of the Parthians, intro¬ 
duced by Mithradates I with the occupation of two districts of Bac- 
triana,*was pursued with vigour. A Roman historian named Orosius 

1. Tam, with his usual power of imagination, conjectures that Laodice, mother 
of Eucratides, was a daughter of Seleucus II and a sister of Antiochus III. He 
further assumes that Eucratides was originally the governor of the Upper 
satrapies under his first cousin Antiochus IV and fought with the Euthydemians 
on the latter's behalf. 

2. Tam’s conjecture that Eucratides was killed by a son of Demetrius may not be 
unwarranted. Cf. certain medieval European traditions regarding Eucratides’s 
death quoted in JRAS, 1950, pp. 7-13. 


110 




THE YAYANAS 


(c. A.D. 417) says that Mithradates I conquered all the peoples wiio 
lived “between the Hydaspes and the Indus.” This Hydaspes is pro¬ 
bably not the Jhelum, but the Persian stream called Medus Hydaspes 
by Virgil. Thus we have probably a reference to the expansion of 
Parthian power to the lower Sindhu from their bases in East Iran. 
According to Strabo, “the best known of the nomad tribes are those 
who drove the Greeks out of Bactria—the Asii, the Pasiani, the 
Tochari and the Sacarauli, who came from the country on the other 
side of the Jaxartes, over against the Sacae and Sogdiani, which 
country was also in occupation of the Sacae.” The lost history of 
Pompeius Trogus, according to its Prologue, is reported to have des¬ 
cribed how “the Saraucae and the Asiani (probably the same as the 
Sacae and the Asii) seized Bactria and Sogdiana.” According to some 
writers, the Saraucae-Sacae and the Asii-Asiani were respectively 
the §akas and the Yueh-chi. 

Whatever be the correctness of these identifications, it seems 
that the Bactrian kingdom was occupied partly by the Parthians and 
partly by the northern nomads. We learn from the Chinese sources 
that some time after 165 B.C. the Yueh-chi occupied the Saka larfd 
to the north of the Jaxartes and also the whole of Sogdiana lying to 
the south-west and south of the river, driving the Sakas before them 
into Ta-hia or Bactria to the south of the Oxus. Some years later 
the Yueh-chi crossed the Oxus, dispersed the Sakas and conquered 
the whole land up to the Hindu Kush in the south. According to 
Chinese evidence, therefore, parts of the Greek kingdom of Bactria 
were occupied by the Sakas who were later overthrown by the Yueh- 
chi. Heliocles, the last Greek king of Bactria, had apparently to 
fall back, after the loss of Bactria, on his dominions in the Kabul 
Valley and India (c. 125 B.C.). His success in India is believed to 
be indicated by the fact that the coins jointly issued by Agathocleia 
and Strato I, who belonged to the house of Demetrius, are sometimes 
found restruck by a king named Heliocles. 

III. INDO-GREEK RULERS 

After the loss of Bactria, the Yavanas continued to rule in cen¬ 
tral and southern Afghanistan and in north-western India. The 
history of Yavana rule in these regions is characterised by interne¬ 
cine fighting amongst the various princes belonging to the houses of 
Demetrius and Eucratides. More than thirty names of the Indo- 
Bactrian Greek rulers are known from the coins, most of them being 


11J 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


unknown from any other source. Thus we have the names of Agatho- 
cleia, Agalhoclcs, Amyntas, Antialcidas, Antimachus, Apollodotus, 
Apollophancs, Archebius, Artemidorus, Demetrius, Diodotus, Diome- 
des, Dionysius, Epander, Eucratides, Euthydemus, Heliocles, Her- 
maeus, Hippostratus, Lysias, Menander, Nicias, Pantaleon, Peucolaus, 
Philoxenus, Plato, Polyxenus, Strato, Telephus, Theophilus and Zoi- 
lus. Of these the names Antimachus, Apollodotus, Demetrius, Dio¬ 
dotus, Eucratides, Euthydemus, Strato and Zoilus are believed to 
have been borne by two kings, a father and a son or a grandfather 
and a grandson. All these rulers are assigned to a date earlier than 
the establishment of the suzerainty of the Scytho-Parthians and the 
Kushanas in north-western India and Afghanistan. 

The fact that about thirty rulers, who flourished after Demetrius 
and Eucratides, have to be placed in the comparatively short period 
of less than two centuries suggests that some of them ruled contem¬ 
poraneously with others in different parts of the Yavana dominions. 
It thus appears that the Puranic estimate of Yavana rule in India is 
much near the truth. “There will be Yavanas here,” observe the 
Puranas, “by reason of religious feeling or ambition or plunder; they 
will not be kings solemnly anointed but will follow evil customs by 
reason of the corruptions of the age. Massacring women and children 
and killing one another, the (Yavana) kings will enjoy the earth at 
the end of the Kali age.” 

1 . Menander 

We have seen that Strabo, on the authority of Apollodorus, re¬ 
gards Menander and Demetrius as the greatest of the Indo-Greek 
kings. The author of the Periplus (c. A.D. 70—80) says that “to the 
present day ancient drachmae are current in Barygaza (Broach) 
bearing inscriptions in Greek letters and the devices of those who 
reigned after Alexander, namely, Apollodotus and Menander.” The 
Broach region possibly formed part of the Yavana dominions during 
the rule of Demetrius, Apollodotus and Menander. Apollodotus and 
Menander are also mentioned as Indian kings in the title of the lost 
forty-fourth book of Justin’s work. Plutarch tells us that Menander 
was noted for justice and enjoyed great popularity with his subjects 
and that upon his death, which occurred in a camp, diverse cities 
contended for the possession of his ashes (cf. the story of the distri¬ 
bution of Buddha’s ashes). Curiously enough, of all the Yavana kings 
of India, Menander alone has found a prominent place in Indian 


112 


THE YAVANAS 


Buddhist tradition as a scholar and patron of Buddhism. He is identi¬ 
fied with king Milinda who is one of the two leading characters in the 
Milmda-panha, ‘Questions of Milinda/ a famous Buddhist text written 
in the form of a dialogue between the king and the Buddhist monk 
Nagasena. The monk is represented as solving all puzzles put to 
him by the king and as ultimately suceeding in converting the latter. 
The Indian form of the king’s name is given as Milindra in Kshe- 
mendra’s Avaddncikalpalatd and the Tibetan Bstan-hgyur collection, 
while the Shinkot inscription gives it more correctly as Menadra (i.e. 
Menamdra, Menandra) , which is found on the coins. According to 
the Milinda-panha tradition, Menander was born at a village called 
Kalasl-grama in the dvlpa or Doab of Alasanda (Alexandria near 
Kabul), and had his capital at Sakala, the modern Sialkot in the 
Punjab. It is said that Menander handed over the kingdom to his 
son, retired from the world, and became not only a Buddhist monk 
but an Arhat. This fits in with Plutarch’s story about his ashes. 
Kshemendra refers to Menander a story which is sometimes also 
told about Kanishka, while an Indo-Chinese tradition associates him 
with the most famous statue of Buddha in Indo-China. Of course 
such legends are not always authentic; but the most interesting thing 
in this connection is the impression the foreign king must have 
made on the Indian mind. 

Menander is usually assigned to the middle of the second century 
B.C., but he seems to have ruled at a later date, probably about 
115-90 B.C. Some scholars, perhaps relying on the vague tradition 
ascribed to Apollodorus, believe that Menander was the Yavana ruler 
who invaded Saketa and Madhyamika during the lifetime of Patahjali, 
a contemporary of Pushyamitra. They apparently ignore the fact 
that the Gargi-samhitd assigns the Greek invasion of Madhyadesa 
and eastern India to a date soon after the reign of the later Maurya 
king Salisuka and probably before the accession of Pushyamitra about 
187 B.C. As Menander’s reign is unanimously placed by scholars 
after Demetrius’s death which took place about 165 B.C., he may have, 
at best, been a later contemporary of Pushyamitra, and could not have 
been the Yavana king invading Madhyadesa and eastern India in the 
first quarter of the second century B.C. It may of course be suggest¬ 
ed that Pushyamitra had (y fight with the Yavanas, first under Deme¬ 
trius before and soon after his accession, and for a second time under 
Menander about the close of his reign. There is, however, an Indian 
tradition which seems to assign Menander to a date later than the 
end of Pushyamitra’s rule. According to the Buddhist traditions of 

118 


A.I.U.—H 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


north-western India as recorded in the Milinda-panha, Menander 
flourished 500 years after the Parinirvana, i.e. in the sixth century 
after Buddha’s death. 1 

Other authorities have suggested that Menander was a later con¬ 
temporary of Eucratides, because “some of their square copper coins 
are so similar in style that they may reasonably be assigned not only 
to the same general period, but also to the same region—a region 
which must have passed from one rule to other.” But similarity or 
dissimilarity of coin types appears to be due more to local and other 
reasons than to contemporaneity. As Menander probably flourished 
after the immediate successors of Demetrius, namely, Apollodotus, 
Agathocles and Antimachus, who fought with Eucratides, the begin¬ 
ning of his rule has to be assigned to a date later than the middle of 
the second century B.C. If it be true that he succeeded in establish¬ 
ing his suzerainty over all other Indo-Greek potentates of his time, 
the absence of Bactrian issues would rather place his reign after the 
Yavanas had lost Bactria and probably also Drangiana and parts of 
Arachosia. 

The wide extent of Menander’s dominions is indicated by the 
great variety and wide distribution of his coins which are found in 
large numbers not only in the valleys of the Kabul and the Sindhu 
but also in the western districts of the U. P. His coins again are known 
to have been current in Kathiawar in the first century A.D. Accord¬ 
ing to a tradition ascribed to Apollodorus of Artemita, Menander 
“crossed the Hyphanis to the east and reached the Isamus.” The 
Hyphanis is very probably the same as the Hyphasis or the Beas, 
while Isarmis seems td be the Greek corruption of Prakrit Ichchumal 
(Sanskrit Ikshumati ), a river of the Panchala country often identified 
with the modern KallnadI running through Kumaun, Rohilkhand and 
the Kanauj region. 

The Shinkot steatite casket containing two groups of KharoshthI 
inscriptions, the earlier of them referring to the reign of Menander, 
was discovered in the Bajaur tribal territory about twenty miles to 

1. Hiuen Tsang speaks of four different traditions about the epoch of the Pari¬ 
nirvana, viz. (1) about the end of the 3rd century B.C., (2) about the middle 
of the 6th century B.C., (3) about the middle of the 7th century B.C. and 
(4) about the middle of the 9th century B.C. The first, second and fourth 
epochs are either too early or too late for Menander. The third epoch would 
place the Yavana king between the middle of the second and the middle of 
the first century B.C. It is interesting to note in this connection that Kiel- 
horn suggested an epoch of the Parinirvana falling in 638 B.C.'with which the 
astronomical details of the date of an inscription (List of Northern Ins. No. 575) 
work out satisfactorily. 


114 



THE YAVANAS 


the west ot the confluence of the Panjkora and the Swat. Some relics 
of Sakyamuni Buddha are said to have been installed in the casket 
for worship first by a prince named Viyakamitra, apparently a feuda- ‘ 
tory of Menander, and afterwards by a chief named Vijayamitra who 
may have been the son or grandson of Viyakamitra. 1 The discovery 
of the Shinkot record points to Menander’s hold over the Peshawar 
region and possibly also over the upper Kabul valley. There could 
therefore have been no independent Yavana ruler at Takshasila and 
Pushkalavati during this period. Member’s dominions appear to 
have comprised the central parts of Afghanistan, North-West 
Frontier Province, the Punjab, Sindh, Rajputana and Kathiawar, 
and probably also a portion of the western U.P. 

2. Antialcidas 

Besides Menander another Indo-Greek king is prominently men¬ 
tioned in an Indian epigraphic record found at Besnagar. The in¬ 
scription records the erection of a garuda-dhvaja (a column with its 
capital adorned by the figure of Garuda) in honour of Lord Vasudeva, 
by a Yavana of Taxila named Heliodorus who had become a bhaga - 
vata (devotee of Vasudeva or Vishnu) and had come to the court of 
Rajan Kautslputra Bhagabhadra in his 14th regnal year as an envoy 
of Maharaja Arhtalikita, no doubt the same as Antialcidas known 
from coins. It is usually believed that the Indo-Greek king Antialci¬ 
das had his headquarters at Taxila which was the home of his am¬ 
bassador. He is also supposed to have belonged to the Eucratidian 
house and to have been the successor of Eucratides in Kapisa region 
as he is known to have issued coins with the type of the city divinity 
of Kapisi, 2 with which Eucratides restruck the coins of Apollodotus. 
It may be pointed out in this connection that the dominions of the 
Eucratidian princes are supposed to have comprised a number of 

1. EL XXIV, 7; Sel. Ins. I, pp. 102-04; N1A, January 1940, pp. 639-48; Num- 
Chron. 1944, pp. 99-104. The intervening period between the establishment of 
the relics by Viyakamitra and its re-establishment by Vijayamitra was esti¬ 
mated by N. G. Majumdar to be about half a century and by the writer of these 
pages to be only a few years. But the recent discovery of coins of Indra- 
varman, son of Vijayamitra, and his identification with Xndravarman, father of 
Aspavarman who was a feudatory of Azes II (c. A.D. 35-79), suggest that 
Majumdar is right. Sten Konow’s theory' that the relics were established by 
Menander and that Viyakamitra and Vijayamitra are identical is quite un¬ 
convincing. 

2. The KdpisI coins of Eucratides have on the reverse the legend Kavisiye nagara- 
devata and the representation of enthroned Zeus with the forepart of an ele¬ 
phant in the left and a mountain symbol in the right. Zeus in this case no 
doubt stands for the Indian god Indra, who was therefore the tutelary deity 
of the capital city Kapisa. In Indian tradition, Indra is associated with the 
elephant called Airavata and the mountain of gold known as the Sumeru. 


115 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


kingdoms including Kapisa, Pushkalavatl and Takshasila, which have 
been identified from their coin types. 1 

Antialcidas’s relation with Heliocles, son of Eucratides, is indicat¬ 
ed by the common coin-type—bust of king on the obverse and ele¬ 
phant on the reverse—with which Heliocles restruck the coins of 
Agathocleia and Strato I. Sometimes it is even conjectured that 
Antialcidas was the son.of Heliocles and grandson of Eucratides. But 
on some coins, whose origin is attributed to the Takshasila region, 
Antialcidas is associated with a senior ruler named Lysias who was 
probably his father. Lysias’s rule seems to have intervened between 
the reign of Heliocles and that of Antialcidas. Although it is often 
suggested that these princes may have been ruling at the same time 
(about the middle of the second century B.C.) in different provinces 
like Kapisa, Pushkalavatl and Takshasila, there is reason to believe 
that Antialcidas has to be assigned to a little later date. 

We have seen that an embassy of Antialcidas was received at 
the court of Vidisa in the fourteenth regnal year of king Bhaga- 
bhadra. As this corresponds to about 113 B.C., 2 the Indo-Greek 
king seems to have been reigning about this time. It is not im¬ 
probable that Antialcidas sought the friendship of the Indian king in 
his struggle against the contemporary Euthydemian monarch Menan¬ 
der who, as we have seen, must have subdued the Eucratidian princes 
in the Taxila and Pushkalavatl regions. 

3. End of Yavana Rule in India 

There is an interesting group of Yavana rulers known only 
from their coins. They very probably belonged to the house of 
Euthydemus and Demetrius. Some of the coins were issued by a 
queen named Agathocleia jointly with a king of junior rank called 
Strato. Scholars have suggested that these coins were struck when 
the queen was ruling as regent during the minority of Strato who 
was probably her son. Strato, called So ter, afterwards ruled alone 
and issued coins with his' own name only; but at the fag end of his 
long life, he is found associated on some coins with another ruler 

1. While the ‘city goddess and Indian bull’ is the type of the Pushkalavatl coins, 
the ‘pilei (caps) of the Dioscuri’ is associated with the city of Takshasila. 
Similarly ‘ox-head’ is regarded as the type of Bucephala and ‘Nice to right’ 
that of the city of Nicaea. 

2. As, according to the Puranas, the first four kings of the 6unga dynasty 
ruled for 61 years, the fifth king Bhagabhadra, called Bhadraka in some Puranic 
texts, seems to have ascended the throne 61 years after Pushyamitra’s accession 
(about 187 B.C.), i e. about 126 B.C. His fourteenth regnal year thus seems to 
correspond to c. 113 B.C. See above, p. 98. 


116 



THE YAVANAS 


of inferior rank called Strato Philopater who was his potra (Sanskrit 
pautra ), i.e. son’s son. It has been suggested on the basis of the simi¬ 
larity of names and coin-types Jhat Agathocleia, mother of Strato I 
Soter, was the daughter of king Agathocles and the wife of king 
Menander. Although there is nothing absurd in the suggestion 
itself, it has to be admitted that even if it were not irreconcilable 
with the date of Menander accepted in these pages, it would go 
against the evidence of the coins of Agathocleia and Strato I restruck 
by Heliocles with his own devices. This Heliocles is usually be¬ 
lieved to have been the son of Eucratides who, however, seems to 
have ruled earlier than Lysias and Antialcidas and probably also 
Menander. But the difficulty is explained if we regard Heliocles, 
contemporary of Agathocleia and Strato I, as a later Eucratidian 
prince, probably a successor of Antialcidas, and not the same as 
Eucratides’s son who ruled about the third quarter of the second 
century B.C. A king named Archebius, sometimes associated with 
the Taxila region, was connected with or ruled contemporaneously 
with Heliocles who may have been the earlier or later prince of that 
name. 

After Menander’s death, his descendants probably lost their h61d 
on Gandhara and Afghanistan. Agathocleia and Strato I appear to 
have ruled only over the eastern part of the Punjab. The facts 
that Strato I possibly began to rule as a minor and that his latest 
coins represent him as a very old man with sunken cheeks go to 
suggest that his reign covered a period of more than half a century. 
Thus Strato I appears to have ended his rule not much earlier than 
30 B.C. The later Euthydemian princes, viz. Dionysius, Zoilus, 
Apollophanes, Hippostratus and Apollodotus (II or IH) may be 
roughly assigned to the latter half of the first century B.C., and 
Hippostratus and Apollodotus, whose coins were restruck by the 
Saka king Azes I (c. 5 B.C.-A.D. 30) may have actually been des¬ 
cendants of Strato I. 

The debased style of the latest issues of Strato I and the joint 
issues of Strato I and Strato II point to the evil days that befell the 
princes of the Euthydemian house. The ‘Athene Promachos* type of 
the coins of the rulers of this family was imitated not only by 
Scythian satraps like Ranjuvula but also by Indian kings like Bha- 
drayasas, who may have had some share in the overthrow of the 
Yavanas of the eastern Punjab. A Yavana-raja, whose name is 
sometimes doubtfully read as Dimita in the Hathigumpha inscription 
of Kharavela, seems to have flourished about the close of the first 


117 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


century B.C. The record refers to Mathura which probably formed 
a part of his kingdom. Nothing definite is known about the Yavana 
possessions of western India during this period; but large parts of 
those regions must have been overrun by the Sakas of East Iran 
before the closing years of the first century B.C. Gandhara and 
Afghanistan were apparently in the possession of princes of the 
Eucratidian house. Amongst them Diomedes, Epander, Philoxenus, 
Artemidorus and Peucolaus may probably be associated with the city 
of Pushkalavatl, which seems to have been the provenance of coins 
with the humped bull on the reverse. 

An interesting coin-type actually represents on the obverse the 
city goddess of Pushkalavatl ( pakhalavadi-devada ) wearing a mural 
crown and holding a lotus ( pushkala ) in her right hand, and on the 
reverse the Indian bull. The Eucratidian princes of the Takshasila 
and Pushkalavatl regions were ousted by the Sakas of the lower 
Sindhu valley under their king Maues (c. 20 B.C.-A.D. 22) about 
the beginning of the first century A.D. Maues imitated the ‘Artemis: 
Indian bull 5 type of the coins of king Artemidorus, probably of 
Pushkalavatl. 

Another branch of the house of Eucratides was possibly repre¬ 
sented by Amyntas and Hermaeus who appear to have held sway 
over the Kafiristan and Kabul regions. Hermaeus is found associated 
on some coins with his wife Calliope whose marriage, if she was 
really an Euthydemid princess, may have been the result of a peace 
ending the struggles between the houses of Euthydemus and Eucra¬ 
tides. On some other coins of Hermaeus, he is found to be in asso¬ 
ciation with the Yueh-chi or Kushana chief Kujula Kadphises, who 
probably acknowledged, during the earlier part of his eventful 
career, the suzerainty of the Yavana king. We have already referred 
to the occupation of Bactria first by the &akas and then by the Yueh- 
chi. It will be seen from our subsequent discussion on the Kushanas 
that, about the time of Kujula Kadphises, the Yueh-chi were in 
actual possession of parts of the Kabul District. Hermaeus who 
flourished in the first half of the first century A.D. was the last 
Yavana king of the Kabul valley which soon passed to the Parthians 
and then to the Kushanas. 

Reference has already been made to the extension of Parthian 
power up to the lower Sindhu during the reign of Mithradates I 
about the middle of the second century B.C. About a century later 
eastern Iran (the Drangiana or Seistan country), originally governed 


THE YAVANAS 


by the viceroys of the Parthian emperors, became an independent 
kingdom. Arachosia (Kandahar region in southern Afghanistan) 
formed a province of this new kingdom and must have passed from 
the Greeks to the Parthians long before the time of Hermaeus, pro¬ 
bably in the reign of Mithradates I himself. As will be shown in the 
next chapter, the Parthian king Gondophemes (c. A.D. 21-50), origi¬ 
nally a ruler of Arachosia, extirpated Yavana rule from the Kabul 
region; but soon after the Parthians were themselves overthrown 
by the Kushanas about the middle of the first century A.D. 

We have traced above the gradual disappearance of Yavana 
suzerainty from Bactria, north-western India and Afghanistan. 
But the relation of the Yavanas with Indian politics did not end 
with the establishment of Scytho-Parthian and Kushana supremacy. 
There is evidence to show that the services of qualified Yavanas were 
gladly accepted by the new lords of the land. There must have also 
existed numerous petty principalities under Yavana chiefs acknow¬ 
ledging the suzerainty of the Scytho-Parthians and the Kushanas. 
The Satavahana king Gautamlputra Satakarni (c. A.D. 106-30) 
claims to have come into conflict with the Sakas, Yavanas and 
Pahlavas. The territory of these Yavanas probably lay not far from 
Kathiawar and Malwa, which formed the northern provinces of 
Gautamiputra’s dominions. The same Yavana principality is prob¬ 
ably referred to in the Raghuvamsa by Kalidasa who lived in the 
fourth and fifth centuries A.D. While describing Raghu’s dig-vijay a, 
Kalidasa places the country of the Yavanas on the land-route from 
Aparanta (northern Konkan) to the land of the Parasikas (i.c. Persia), 
probably in the lower valley of the Sindhu. A Nagarjunikon<Ja 
inscription of the second half of the third century A.D. refers to the 
Yavana country which, among other lands, was visited by some 
Ceylonese nuns; but in this case we cannot be sure that the reference 
is not to the Graeco-Roman colonies that existed in the Far South 
of India in the early centuries of the Christian era. 1 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Camb. Hist. India, Vol. I., Chaps. XVII, XXII. 

E. J. Rapson, Ancient India. 

H. G. Rawlinson, Bactria. 

W. W. Tarn. The Greeks in Bactria and India. 


1. Rajasekhara’s Kavyaimmamsu (first half of the tenth century) locates the 
Yavanas in the western division of India near about Brahmanavaha (Brahmana- 
bad in Sind). Whether, however, the reference is to the inhabitants of an 
ancient Greek settlement or to the Arab conquerors of Sind and Multan can¬ 
not be definitely determined. 


119 



CHAPTER VIII 


THE SAKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 

I. SAKA SETTLEMENTS 

In the lists of foreigners who played an important part in Indian 
politics, the literary and epigraphic texts of ancient India often 
mention the Sakas (Scythians) and the Pahlavas (Parthians) toge¬ 
ther with the Yavanas (Greeks). As a result of tribal movements 
as well as of the aggression of neighbours, the Scythians, who were 
originally a tribe of Central Asian nomads, appear to have founded 
various settlements in different regions even in very ancient times. 
In the records of the early emperors of the Achaemenid dynasty 
of Persia, reference is made to no less than three settlements of the 
Sakas who were subjects of the Achaemenids. These were the Saka 
Tigrakhauda (Sakas with pointed helmets), Saka Haumavarga and 
Saka Taradaraya (Sakas over, or beyond, the sea). The Sakas with 
pointed helmets are probably also referred to in the Achaemenian 
records as those who lived beyond Suguda or Sogdiana (modern 
Bukhara region) and in the work of Herodotus as the neighbours of 
the Bactrians. 1 They are supposed to have lived in the plains of 
the Jaxartes or Syr Darya “of which the modern capital is the city 
of Turkestan.” 2 The Saka Haumavarga have been identified by 
Thomas with the Scythian settlers of Drangiana in the Helmund 
valley, which afterwards came to be known as Sakastan (the land 
of the Sakas; Sanskrit Sakasthdna; medieval Sijistan ; modern 
SeAstdn) The Sakas of the land beyond the sea are usually believed 
to have been those who dwelt in the Russian steppes to the north 
of the Black Sea. 

As regards the Saka settlement in eastern Iran, some scholars 
believe that after the dispersal of the Saka tribes from the Oxus 
valley by the Yueh-chi, their main movement, checked by the Greek 
kingdom of Kabul, went westwards in the direction of Herat and 
thence southwards to Seistan. It is further pointed out that the 
tide must have been actually flowing from the time when the Sakas 

1. According to Arrian, a chief named Mauaces or Mavaces (i.e. Maues) who 
led the Sacians (Sakas), a Scythian tribe dwelling in Asia not far from 
Bactria and Sogdiana, was an ally of Darius III. 

2. PHAI. 358. 


120 



THE 6AKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 


had been displaced by the Yueh-chi from their home beyond the 
Jaxartes in the second century B.C. The Parthian emperors who 
were then in possession of eastern Iran struggled hard with the 
Scythians, and Phraates II (138-128 B.C.) and Artabanus I (128-123 
B.C.) lost their lives in the strife. It was Mithradates II (123-88 
B.C.) who finally subdued the &akas. The tide of Scythian move¬ 
ment, thus checked by the Parthians, ultimately flowed towards the 
valley of the Sindhu But many of the &aka chiefs appear to have 
accepted the suzerainty of Parthia. It is again probable that some 
of the Saka chieftains entered the Parthian army and came to eastern 
Iran in the train of the Parthian governors of those regions. 

There is no doubt that £aka occupation of the western part of 
Northern India was principally the work of the Sakas of eastern 
Iran. It is interesting to note that the name of Sakastan in Iran 
and of its capital, the city of Min, which are mentioned by Isidor 
of Charax about the beginning of the first century A.D., are both 
found also in India. The Periplus (c. A.D. 70-80) mentions the dis¬ 
trict of Scythia, from which flows down the river Sinthus (Sindhu), 
and its capital Min-nagara. 1 The same district is also known from 
the Geography of Ptolemy (c. A.D. 140) as Indo-Scythia, i.e. the 
Indian Sakastan, which comprised Patalene (the Sindhu delta), 
Abiria (Abhira country between Scythia on the lower Sindhu and 
the coast country of Surastrene according to the Periplus) and 
Surastrene (Saurashtra). 

The nomenclature of the early Sakas in India shows an admix¬ 
ture of Scythian, Parthian and Iranian elements. This no doubt sug¬ 
gests that the Sakas, before their entry into India, lived for a con¬ 
siderable period of time in the Iranian Sakastan under Parthian 
rulers, when they must have also received a good deal of admixture 
of blood. In India the Scythians soon adapted themselves to their 
new environs and began to adopt Indian names and religious beliefs. 
They are also known to have contracted matrimonial relations with 
Indian families. It is therefore no wonder that as early as the 
time of Patanjali’s Mahdbhdshya, 2 the &akas, like the Yavanas or 

1. The Periplus refers to another Min-nagara which was the capital of the 
Scytho-Parthian king Mambarus. For this ruler, see the section, on the 
Scythian rule in western India. 

2. Patanjali was a contemporary of Pushyamitra Sunga (c. 187-151 B.C.); but 
his work, which appears to have undergone revisions at the hands of later 
grammarians of the same school, probably contains some interpolations. As the 
&akas could have got a place in Indian society only some time after their 
advent into India, the Mahdbhdshya passage in question may be a later addi¬ 
tion to Patanjali’s work. See IHQ. March, 1929, pp. 38 ff. 

121 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Greeks, found a place in the Indian society as the aniravasita (clean) 
dr a. The Manusamhita recognises not only the Yavanas and Sakas 
but also the Pahlavas and Paradas 1 as degraded Kshatriyas. 

For the early history of Sakas we are specially indebted to 
the Chinese and classical writers. The Chinese encyclopaedia of 
Ma-twan-lin (thirteenth century) observes: “In ancient times the 
Hiung-nu having defeated the Yueh-chi, the latter went to the west 
to dwell among the Ta-hia, and the king of the Sai (the 6akas) went 
southwards to live in Ki-pin. The tribes of the Sai divided and dis¬ 
persed, so as to form here and there different kingdoms.” According 
to the Ts’ien-Han-shu (History of the First Han Dynasty) also, 
“formerly when the Hiung-nu conquered the Ta-Yueh-chi (the 
Great Yueh-chi) the latter emigrated to the west and subjugated the 
Ta-hia; whereupon the Sai-wang (the Saka king) went to the south 
and ruled over Ki-pin.” 

The suggestion of scholars that by Ta-hia the Chinese indicated 
the kingdom of Bactria seem to be justifiable; but the Chinese name 
might actually represent the Tukhara country, which probably for¬ 
med a northern province of Bactria. 2 The &akas were thus succes¬ 
sively driven by the Yueh-chi from the valley of the Jaxartes to that 
of the Oxus, and thence to Ki-pin. 3 The location of Ki-pin is difficult 
to determine, some scholars favouring its identification with Kapisa 
(Kafiristan) and others with Kashmir. It is not improbable that 
Ki-pin of the Chinese vaguely indicated the wide region known in 
earlier times as the Maha-janapada of Kamboja which, as noted 
above, 4 seems to have extended from the Rajauri valley in Kashmir 
in the east to Kafiristan in the west. As, however, Ki-pin is placed 
to the south of Ta-hia, the land actually indicated appears to be in 
the Kafiristan region. 

The earliest &aka ruler of Ki-pin known from Chinese sources 
is Wu-t’ou-lao whose son was ousted, with Chinese help by Yin-mo- 
fu, son of the prince of Yung-kli. Yin-mo-fu, the Scythian king 
of Ki-pin, was a contemporary of the Chinese emperor Hsiian-ti 
(73-48 B.C.) and Yiian-ti (48-33 B.C.). His successor seems to have 
sought without success the help of the Chinese emperor against the 

1. The Pahlavas (from old Persian Parthava ) are regarded as the Parthians; but 
when the Paradas (apparently, the Parthians) are separately mentioned, the 
term Pahlava possibly indicates the Sassanians or Persians in general. 

2. According to early Muslim authors, Tukharistan usually indicated the old 
Bactria to the south of the Oxus; but, properly speaking, it was the mountai¬ 
nous country on both sides of the river as far as Badakhshan. See J. Well- 
hausen, The Arab Kingdom and its Fall, Calcutta, 1927, p. 470. 

3. See above, Ch. VII, §5. 

4. See p. 15. 


122 



THE &AKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 

Yueh-chi. The relations of the &akas of the Ki-pin country, men¬ 
tioned by the Chinese, with India proper as well as with the gakas 
of eastern Iran, who occupied wide regions of western and north¬ 
western India, are unknown. 

II. VONONES AND HIS FAMILY 

We have already referred to the Parthian conquest of eastern 
Iran and the adjoining parts of India under Mithradates I. Direct 
control of these lands by the government of Ctesiphon (the Parthian 
capital on the left bank of the Tigris not far from modern Baghdad), 
however, lasted only for a short time. The struggle of the Parthians 
with the Scythians, in which two of their emperors lost their lives, 
must have led to relaxation of the grip of the central Parthian gov¬ 
ernment on the remote provinces. This naturally led to the estab¬ 
lishment of independent or semi-independent states in the eastern 
part of the empire under the leadership of governors of Parthian 
or Scythian or mixed Scytho-Parthian nationality. 1 

The earliest local Parthian ruler of east Iran, who known 
from his coins to have assumed the imperial title “great king of 
kings’’, was Vonones (Persian Vandna). It has been pointed out that 
amongst the Parthian emperors the above title was for the first 
time assumed by Mithradates II (123-88 B.C.) 2 and that, therefore, 
Vonones, who may have originally been the viceroy of Drangiana 
(east Iran), must have flourished after that monarch. The name of 
Vonones is Parthian, but his brothers (probably step-brothers by 
the Scythian wives of his father) bore names having Persian and 
Scythian features. Vonones seems to -have ruled southern Afgha¬ 
nistan and the eastern parts of his dominions through viceroys. 

An interesting feature of the coins of Vonones’ family is the 
association of the suzerain, the “great king of kings”, whose name is 
given in the Greek legend on the obverse, with the viceroy whose 
name occurs in the Kharoshthi legend on the reverse. Sometimes 
two subordinate rulers are similarly associated, the name of the 
senior one occupying the obverse of the coins and that of the junior 
the reverse. The family relations between the king whose name 

1. Thomas says: “It would seem probable that the tribes from eastern Iran who 
invaded India included diverse elements mingled indistinguishably together, 
so that it is not possible to assert that one dynasty was definitely Parthian 
while another was 6aka.” (JRAS, 1906, p. 215.) 

2. Cf. CHI, I. 567. 


1*28 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


occupies the obverse and the ruler who is mentioned on the reverse 
are often indicated in the coin-legends. Vonones, the great king of 
kings, is seen to have ruled conjointly with his brother or step¬ 
brother Spalahora and his nephew Spalagadama, son of Spalahora. 
Spalahora and his son probably ruled over Arachosia (southern 
Afghanistan). On the early coins of another ruler named Spalirises 
(Spalirisha) the prince is described, without any royal title, as the 
brother of the king who is usually identified by numismatists with 
Vonones. 

If this identification is to be accepted, Spalirises was another 
brother or step-brother of Vonones and ruled as the latter’s viceroy 
over a territory (probably about South Afghanistan) where the 
‘Zeus standing’ coin-type of Heliocles prevailed. In another series 
of coins of the same type Spalirises, as the senior using the Greek 
legend on the obverse, is associated with a ruler named Aya (Azes) 
as the junior using the Kharoshthi legend on the reverse. Both of 
them bear the subordinate or viceregal title ‘the great king’ and were 
probably ruling under Vonones. Spalirises later issued coins of the 
type ‘Zeus enthroned’ (known from the issues of Heliocles Hermaeus 
and others) as the successor of Vonones in the suzerainty of east 
Iran. This type of Spalirises is sometimes found restruck on some 
coins of Vonones. This fact probably indicates that Vonones, in 
his old age, was overthrown by his younger brother or step-brother 
Spalirises. It is interesting to note that Spalirises is also known 
to have restruck some coins issued jointly by Spalyris (identified 
by some scholars with Spalahora) and Spalagadama, who were 
probably ousted by Spalirises because they were loyal to the cause 
of Vonones and did not submit to the usurper of his throne. 

The easternmost districts of the old empire of Mithradates I 
appear later to have been under rulers of Saka nationality, who 
were probably either semi-independent viceroys owing allegiance 
to Vonones or subordinate allies of that king, but appear to have 
assumed complete independence by disregarding Spalirises’ claim 
of suzerainty after his usurpation of Vonones’ throne. The earliest 
independent Scythian king of Indo-Scythia seems to have been 
Mauses (Moa, Moga) who is not only known from his coins but also 
from a Taxila inscription dated in the year 78 of an era apparently 
of Scytho-Parthian institution. There is reason to believe that the 
origin of the era was associated with Vonones, the founder of an 
independent kingdom in Drangiana, and that it was carried to India 
by the Scythians and ultimately after many centuries came to be 


124 


THE 6AKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 


known as the Vikrama-Sarhvat. 1 Vonones seems to have begun 
his viceregal career in 58 B.C., the epoch of this era, quite early in 
life. Later he assumed independence and probably ended his career 
about 18 B.C. He was succeeded in the sovereignty of eastern Iran 
by his brother or step-brother Spalirises (c. 18-1 B.C.). 


III. MAUES AND HIS SUCCESSORS 

The Saka ruler Maues (c. 20 B.C.-A.D. 22) not only severed 
his relations with the Great King of Kings of east Iran soon after 

1. Early Indian rulers used to date their records according to their own regnal 
reckoning, which fact points to the absence of any popular era in ancient India. 
The use of an era is first noticed in India in the records of the Scytho-Par- 
thians and the Kushanas who were no doubt responsible for its popularisation 
in this country. It is interesting to note that these foreigners entered India 
through lands where the use of two of the earliest eras in the history of the 
world—the Seleucid era of 312 B.C. and the Arsacid (Parthian) era of 248 B.C. 
—must have been quite familiar. 

As, moreover, the name of the month in the date of the Taxila inscription 
of 78 is Parthian, it has been suggested that the era is of Parthian origin and 
that it probably marks the establishment of a new kingdom in east Iran 
(cf. CHI, I, 570). It is therefore quite probable that the first year of the reign 
of Vonones, the earliest independent Parthian ruler of Drangiana, came to be 
regarded as the beginning of a new reckoning that was instituted to oust tfte 
imperial Parthian era of 248 B.C. As Vonones seems to have flourished about 
the middle of the first century B.C., it is not unreasonable to place his acces¬ 
sion in 58 B.C. which is the epoch of the earliest extant Indian reckoning of a 
historical character. 

It is thus possible that the Scytho-Parthian era starting from the acces¬ 
sion of Vonones about the middle of the first century B.C. is no other than 
the so-called Vikrama-Samvat of 58 B.C., which was known in early times as 
the Krita era or the reckoning associated with the republic of the Malava 
tribe. The Malavas originally lived in the Punjab and apparently submitted to 
the Greek and Scytho-Parthian conquerors of that land. Under foreign pres¬ 
sure, they gradually migrated to Rajputana and ruled over the district round 
Nagar (ancient Malava-nagara) in old Jaipur State. Ultimately they gave their 
name to Malwa (Malava) in Madhya Bharat. It was therefore the Malavas 
who probably carried the Scytho-Parthian era of 58 B.C. from the Punjab to 
Rajputana and Madhya Bharat. The era came to be known in these regions 
as the reckoning associated with the Malavas and with Krita who seems to have 
been an illustrious leader of the Malava tribe. See infra, section on the 
Malavas. In some parts of central and western India the Scytho-Parthian era 
became a rival of the reckoning of 78 A.D. used by the 6aka rulers of those 
regions, who were ousted by Chandragupta II Vikramaditya about the begin¬ 
ning of the fifth century A.D. 

With the development of the legend of Vikramaditya 6akari, the rival of 
the Saka era became, about the eighth century A.D., associated with the name 
of Vikramaditya, the extirpator of the foreigners. As we shall presently see, 
the identification of the old Scytho-Parthian reckoning of Drangiana with the 
Vikrama-Samvat of 58 B.C. is remarkably supported by the Takht-i-bahi in¬ 
scription of Gondophernes dated in the year 103, apparently of the same era. 
The progressive career of the Scytho-Parthian era was checked in north¬ 
western India by the establishment of a new reckoning from the accession of 
Kanishka; but it did not die out because of its popularity with some of the 
Scythian families that often used it even during the sovereignty of the 
Kushanas of Kanishka’s house. 


125 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the usurpation of Spalirises, but extended Saka suzerainty over 
large parts of north-western India and himself assumed the dignified 
title of ‘great king of kings,’ 1 The coins of Maues are copied from 
those issued by princes of both the Indo-Greek houses, the Eucra- 
tidians ruling in the upper Kabul valley and the Euthydemians in 
the eastern Punjab, The occupation of Gandhara by Maues, as sug¬ 
gested by the Taxila inscription of the year 78 of the Scytho-Parthian 
era, corresponding to A.D. 21 according to the system of chronology 
followed by us, show T s that by his conquests Maues drove a wedge 
between the two Indo-Greek kingdoms. Although the extirpation of 
the Indo-Greek kingdom of the eastern Punjab seems to have been 
left for his successor, the &akas extended their power, during Maues’ 
rule, as far as Mathura in the east. The Mathura region was con¬ 
quered long before the year 72, corresponding to A.D. 15, which is 
the date of an inscription of the time of the 6aka Mahdkshatrapa 
Sondasa. 


Numismatic evidence suggests that Maues was succeeded by 
Azes (c. 5 B.C.-A.D. 30). This Azes seems to be no other than the 
ruler of that name who was a colleague of Spalirises in the rule of 
a territory about southern Afghanistan. As the conjoint rule of a 
king and a sub-king, of a senior and a junior ruler, and of a governor 
and a subordinate governor was an important characteristic of 
Scythian rule in India, and as the relation was not usually indicated 
when the junior or subordinate ruler was the son of the senior ruler 
or sovereign, it has been suggested that Azes was the son of Spali¬ 
rises. If this suggestion is accepted, it has to be assumed that Azes 
became the ‘great king of kings’ of the Saka possessions in India 
after Maues, by virtue of conquest or more probably by some rela¬ 
tionship that may have existed between himself and Maues. It is 
not improbable that Azes, son of Spalirises, was the son-in-law 
of Maues. Azes is known to have restruck the coins of the Euthy- 
demian kings Apollodotus II and Hippostratus and imitated some 
of their distinctive monograms. The most noteworthy of his coin¬ 
types is ‘Athene Promachos’ on the reverse, which was, again, 
characteristic of the coins of Menander and his successors in the 
eastern Punjab. It has therefore been supposed by numismatists 
that Azes not only ruled over the empire of Maues but extirpated 
the independent rule of the Euthydemian house. 

I. The earliest coins of Maues have the legend Basileos Mauou in Greek, some¬ 
times with Maharajasa Moasa in Kharoshthl. But his later issues have 
Basileos Basileon Megalou Mauou and Rajadirajasa Mahatasa Moasa. 


120 



THE SARAS' AND THE PAHLAVAS 


Some coins were issued by Azes jointly with another king 
named Azilises. Both the rulers are styled the ‘great king of kings’, 
but the name of Azes as the senior is given in the Greek legend on 
the obverse and that of Azilises as the junior in the Kharoshfhi 
legend on the reverse. Thus Azilises (c. A.D. 28-40), who was prob¬ 
ably the son of Azes, ruled for some time conjointly with the latter 
whom he ultimately succeeded on the throne. There is another 
group of coins on which the name of Azilises occupies the place of 
honour in the Greek legend on the obverse and that of Azes is given 
in the Kharoshthi legend on the reverse. Most scholars now believe 
that this Azes (c. A.D. 35-79) was a second ruler of that name who 
was probably the son and successor of Azilises and ruled for some 
time conjointly with his predecessor. Thus, according to the chro- 
nology and order of succession followed above, the Indo-Scythian 
kings may be represented in a table like the following:— 

1. Maues (Moa, Moga), c. 20 B.C.-A.D. 22. 

2. Azes (Aya) I, c. 5 B.C.-A.D, 30; son (?) of Spalirises of east 

Iran and son-in-law (?) of No. 1. 

3. Azilises (Ayilisha), c. A.D. 28-40; son (?) of No. 2. 

4. Azes (Aya, Aja) II, c. A.D. 35-79; son (?) of No. 3. 

Some numismatists believe that Azes and Azilises are two forms 
of the same name, while another group of scholars suggests that 
Azilises I was succeeded by Azes whose successor was Azilises II. 
But these theories are not quite convincing. According to some 
writers, Azes I was the founder of the Vikrama-Samvat of 58 B.C. 
It is, however, more probable that the Vikrama era is identical with 
the Drangian reckoning that may have been started to indicate the 
independent status of east Iran and to oust the Arsacid era starting 
from 248 B.C., when Parthia itself threw off both the Seleucid yoke 
and the Seleucid era of 312 B.C. 

Azes I, even if he was the son of Spalirises, seems to have little 
to do with the kingdom of east Iran. It is probable that after he 
had succeeded Maues in India, the relations of Azes I with Spali- 
ries became unfriendly. The hostile relations between the two 
neighbouring kingdoms of Drangiana (including Seistan and Ara- 
chosia) under the Parthians (or Scytho-Parthians) and Indo- 
Scythia under the Scythians are indicated by numismatic and other 
evidences. According to some scholars, the ‘Heracles seated’ type 
coins of Azilises point to his direct control over the district of 


127 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


southern Afghanistan. Epigraphic and numismatic records of 
Gondophernes (c. A.D. 21-50), the Parthian ruler of Arachosia, 
prove that he conquered large parts of north-western India prob¬ 
ably during the reign of Azes II. 

About the beginning of the first century A.D., when Isidor of 
Charax wrote, the easternmost provinces of the Parthian empire 
are said to have been Aria (Herat), the country of Anauoi (Farrah), 
Drangiana and Sakastan (the districts between the Hamun and the 
Helmund), and Arachosia (Kandahar), although these territories 
had formed a separate kingdom about the middle of the first cen¬ 
tury B.C. It is not known whether Sakastan in this case indicated 
the wide regions then under the sway of the Sakas. In A.D. 43-44, 
however, when Apollonius of Tyana visited Taxila, that region 
was occupied by Phraotes, no doubt a Parthian. The Periplus 
(c. A.D. 70-80) refers to the Parthian occupation of Min-nagara, the 
capital of Indo-Scythia. 

\ 

IV. GONDOPHERNES 

Gondophernes (Persian Vindaphama, ‘Winner of Glory*) seems 
to have been originally the Parthian viceroy of Arachosia under 
the ‘Great King of Kings* Orthagnes (Persian Verethragna, ‘the vic¬ 
torious*), who was probably the successor of Spalirises on the throne 
of Drangiana. 1 As a viceroy Gondophernes was associated with 
another subordinate ruler named Guxja or Gudana whose name some¬ 
times appears alone on some coins of Orthagnes. Gondophernes 
gradually extended his power in different directions and became an 
emperor. He used some of the coin-types of Orthagnes, which may 
point to his control over east Iran. The distinctive sign of Gondo¬ 
phernes found on his coins is sometimes found countermarked on 
the issues of the Parthian emperors Orodes I (57-38 B.C.) and 
Artabanus III (A.D. 10-40), This has been taken to indicate that 
he conquered certain districts of the Parthian empire. 

In the north, Gondophernes seems to have ousted Hermaeus, the 
last Greek king of the upper Kabul valley, in spite of the help the 
latter received from his Kushana ally, Kujula Kadphises. As re¬ 
gards the Parthian occupation of Kabul, we have seen that Isidor, 
about the beginning of the first century, does not include that region 
in the list of the eastern provinces of the empire of the Parthians, 

1. It is not improbable that Orthagnes was a Parthian and that he ousted Spali¬ 
rises who may have had Scythian blood in his veins. 

128 





TIIE SAKAS AND THE PAIILAVAS 


although Philostratus refers about A.D. 43-44 to the extension of 
Parthian rule to this land. The Chinese historian Fan-ye seems 
to refer to the Parthian conquest of Kabul before its occupation by 
the Kushanas, i.e. about the middle of the first century A.D., when 
he says: “whenever any of the three kingdoms of Tien-chou (India 
proper) Ki-pin (Kafiristan and the adjoining eastern region) and 
Ngan-si (Parthia) became powerful, it brought Kabul under subjec¬ 
tion. When it grew w r eak it. lost Kabul.Later Kabul fell 

under the rule of Parthia.” It seems that the rulers of the eastern 
provinces of the Parthian empire, even after their assumption of in¬ 
dependence, were sometimes regarded as nominal subordinates of 
the Parthian emperors. 

The success of Gondophernes in the Upper Kabul Valley was, 
however, short-lived. According to Fan-ye, Kujula Kadphises, the 
first Kushana king of the Yueh-ehi, occupied Kao-fu (Kabul), appa¬ 
rently about the middle of the first century A.D. Numismatic evi¬ 
dence suggests that Kujula Kadphises also extended Kushana rule 
over southern Afghanistan. 

Gondophernes’ success against the Sakas in India was more 
conspicuous. The discovery of a record of his reign at Takht-i-bahi 
in the Yusufzai territory near Mardan in the Peshawar District, 
coupled with the tradition of a Parthian named Phraotes ruling in 
Taxila in A.D. 43-44, point to the Parthian occupation of Gandhara. 

King Gondophernes is associated on his coins not only with his 
nephew Abdagases (who never ruled independently but only as a 
viceroy, probably of Seistan and Kandahar), but also with his gov¬ 
ernors Sapedana and Satavastra and his stratega (Greek strategos 
corresponding to Sanskrit Sendpati ) or military governors Aspa- 
varman, son of Indravarman, and Sasa, son of Aspavarman’s brother. 
The style of Sapedana and Satavastra, viz. ‘great king, king of kings’, 
possibly shows that even during the lifetime of Gondophernes, 
‘the great king, supreme king of kings’, the allegiance of the gover¬ 
nors was becoming nominal. Indravarman is known from his own 
coins on which he is described as the son of Vijayamitra, probably 
the chief of that name mentioned in the Shinkot or Bajaur casket 
inscriptions. His son Aspavarman (Sanskrit Asvavarman) is no 
doubt the governor of that name who is associated on some coins 
with Azes, apparently Azes II. It is clear that Aspavarman first 
ruled over a district in north-western India as a Viceroy of the Saka 
king Azes II and next transferred his allegiance to the Parthian con¬ 
queror Gondophernes, and that he was succeeded in the viceroyalty 

129 

A.I.U.— 9 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


by his nephew Sesa (Sanskrit Sasan), who later served Pacores, the 
successor of Gondophernes. It, however, cannot be said that the 
entire Indian possession of Azes II was conquered by Gondophernes. 

But the loss of the western provinces may have encouraged the 
feudatories ruling over other parts of the empire of Azes II to be¬ 
come practically independent. In this critical time, the Saka king 
seems to have sought the help of the Kushanas, then established 
in Afghanistan after having ousted the Pahlava successors of the 
Greeks. The Kushanas possibly gave shelter to Azes II and gra¬ 
dually drove out the Parthians from the Gandhara region. Kushana 
war-lords made extensive conquests in the western parts of northern 
India and the conquered lands were soon consolidated and annexed 
to the Kushana empire. Azes II, the protege of the Kushanas, was 
probably never again in actual possession of his lost kingdom. 

The above outline of events leading to the establishment of 
Kushana domination over the Scythian possessions in India appears 
to be the most probable in the light of the scanty data available to 
us. Although it cannot be regarded as a definitely established fact, 
it is supported by evidence that will be more elaborately discussed 
in the next chapter. 

The Takht-i-bahi inscription of Gondophernes is dated in the 
year 103 of the Scytho-Parthian or Vikrama era and in the year 26 
of his own reign. The king thus ruled from A.D. 21 to at least up 
to A.D. 46. According to Christian tradition, Gudnaphar (Syriac 
version) or Goundaphoros (Greek vesion) was “the king of India” 
at whose court the Apostle Thomas was received shortly after the 
Crucifixion in A.D. 29 or 33, that is to say about the middle of the 
first century A.D. Scholars have identified this king with Gon¬ 
dophernes (Guduhvara of the Takht-i-bahi inscription) who has to 
be assigned exactly to the above epoch, if the date (year 103) of 
his record is referred to the Vikrama era. The Kushana occupation 
of the Gandhara region is indicated by the Panjtar (on the borders 
of the Peshawar and Hazara Districts) inscription of the year 122, 
and the Taxila (Rawalpindi District) inscription of the year 136, 
both the dates being referable to the Scytho-Parthian era and cor¬ 
responding respectively to A.D. 65 and A.D. 79. The Kushanas thus 


1. The story of the conversion of Gondophernes to Christianity and the martyr¬ 
dom of St. Thomas is given in detail by V. A. Smith but though current as early 
as the 3rd century A.D., its truth is doubted by many, cf. EHI\ 246-50; CHI, I. 578. 

130 




THE 6AKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 


appear to have driven out the Parthians from the Gandhara region 
before A.D. 65. But the most important thing to be considered in 
this connection is that the records do not mention any Kushana 
ruler by name, the Panj tar inscription referring to the rdjya, prob¬ 
ably of a governor styled Mahdrdja Gushana (Kushana), and the 
Taxila inscription to a king or a semi-independent governor desig¬ 
nated Mahdrdja Rajdtirdja Devaputra Khushana (Kushana). 

It is also to be noted that the Taxila inscription is dated in the 
year 136 of Aya, just as the Kalawan epigraph, which does not refer 
to the Kushanas, is dated in the year 134 of Aja. Aya and Aja 
are both Indian forms of the name Azes, who in these cases must 
be Azes II. The name of Azes II occupies the same position in these 
dates as does that of Moga (Maues) in the Taxila inscription of the 
year 78, the only difference being that, while the name of Moga is 
endowed with royal titles, Azes II is mentioned without any marks 
of royalty. The omission of the Kushana ruler from the Kalawan 
record and of the personal names of the Kushana rulers in the 
Pan j tar and Taxila epigraphs, coupled with the mention of Azes II 
in two of the above epigraphs without any royal title, no doubt 
points to an indefinite political situation. Probably the Kushanas 
conquered the land behalf of Az ^ II who was now living with 
them as their protege; but they did not for some time formally 
claim to have been the actual lords of the territories. The Panjtar 
inscription uses the word rdjya to indicate the de facto rule of the 
Kushanas; but the fiction of the de jure reign of Azes II may have 
been restricted to certain localities and to Scythian families devoted 
to the Saka king. By A.D. 79, the Kushanas must have become 
absolute masters of large parts of northern India not only at the 
expense of Pacores, the successor of Gondophernes, but also of a 
number of independent or semi-independent Scythian and Indian 
princes. 

A remarkable hoard of coins from Taxila was found to contain 
two types of Gondophernes, one of Pacores, and one of Wema 
Kadphises, son of the Kushana king Kujula Kadphises. The first 
two types bear the portrait and symbol of Gondophernes with the 
names respectively of his viceroys Sapedana and Satavastra who, 
as already noticed, are styled ‘great king, king of kings’ and were 
apparently reigning practically as independent rulers. The coins 
of Pacores have on the reverse the name of the ‘great king’ Sasa, 
son of Aspa’s brother, who had originally been a viceroy of Gon¬ 
dophernes, the predecessor of Pacores. The find of the coins of 


131 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Wema Kadphises, “the great king, supreme king of kings, the 
Kushana chief”, along with those of Gondophernes and Pacores may 
be regarded as indicating the extirpation of Parthian rule from the 
Taxila region by the Kushanas. 

The exact relation of Gondophernes with Phraotes, apparently 
a Parthian whom Apollonius of Tyana is said to have seen, according 
to Philostratus, in possession of Taxila in A.D. 43-44, is unknown. 
Phraotes was not only independent of the Parthian emperor Var- 
danes (c. A.D. 39-47) but was himself powerful enough to exercise 
suzerain power over the satrap of the Sindhu valley. It seems that 
Phraotes was for some time the semi-independent governor of Gan- 
dhara under Gondophernes. Philostratus refers to the perpetual 
quarrel of the “barbarians” (no doubt the Kushanas) with the Par¬ 
thian king of the Indian -borderland. That Parthian rule continued 
in the lower Sindhu valley as late as the eighth decade of the first 
century A.D. is evidenced by the Periplus which says: “Before it 
(Barbaricum on the principal mouth of the Sindhu) there lies a small 
island and inland behind it is the metropolis of Scythia, Min-nagara; 
it is subject to Parthian princes who are constantly driving each 
other out.” 

A Parthian king, known from his coins with a purely Greek 
legend, was Sanabares, who probably ruled in east Iran as a suc¬ 
cessor of Pacores. Some coins discovered in the Jhelum District 
have been attributed to the son of a chief named Bagapharna, prob¬ 
ably an Indo-Parthian. Numismatic source discloses the name of 
an Indo-Scythian king called Athama who is supposed to have be¬ 
longed to the family of Azes II. Athama, however, w T as a subordi¬ 
nate ruler. Some other rulers known from their coins may be 
mentioned in this connection. They are Miaus or Heraus, Arsaces 
Theos, Arsaces Dicaius, Hyrcodes, Sapaleizes and Phseigacharis. But 
nothing definite is known about their history and nationality. 

V. THE SATRAPAL FAMILIES 

The word Satrap, meaning a provincial governor, is derived 
from pseudo-Sanskrit Kshatrapa (Prakrit Chhatrava , Chhatrapa , 
cf. the pseudo-Sanskrit royal title Chhatrapati) , which is the same 
as old-Persian Kshathrapdvan. In India a more dignified title Malu- 
kshatrapa, Great Satrap, was coined in the same way as Rajan and 
Maharaja. In the Indo-Scythian administration there is reference 
not only to the joint rule of two kings, but also of two Kshatrapas 
as well as of a Maha-kshatrapa and a Kshatrapa (cf. the joint rule of 


132 


THE 6AKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 


the Rdjan and the Yuvamja in ancient Indian administration). 
Some of the satraps who may have been military governors were 
styled Stratega (Greek Strategos; cf. the other satrapal title 
Meridarkha, Greek Meridarch), 

We have already referred to the Satrap Aspavarman, son of 
Indravarman, serving under Azes II and Gondophernes, and to 
Aspa’s nephew Sasa who served under Gondophernes, and Pacores. 
Mention has also been made of Sapedana and Satavastra who ruled 
over an Indian district as semi-independent viceroys of Gondo- 
pheres. All these satraps are usually assigned to the Taxila re¬ 
gion, although the provenance of coins can hardly be regarded as 
a very satisfactory evidence in this respect. 1 

An earlier satrap, Associated with Taxila, is toe Kshatrapa 
Liaka Kusuluka, who probably belonged to the Kshaharata family 
and ruled over the district of Chukhsa (modern Chach, north-west 
of Taxila) as a viceroy of Moga (Maues) in the year 78 (A.D. 21). 
His son was the Maha-ddnapati Patika. A Mahakshatrapa named 
Kusulaa Padika (he. Patika Kusuluka) and a Kshatrapa nam^d 
Mevaki Hiyika are mentioned in the Mathura Lion Capital inscrip¬ 
tions of the time of Mahakshatrapa Ranj uvula and his son Kshatrapa 

Sondasa. 2 
• • 

As Sondasa is styled a Mahakshatrapa (to which position he 
must have attained after his father’s death) in another Mathura 
inscription of the year 72 (A.D. 15), the Lion Capital epigraphs*have 
to be assigned to a slightly earlier date. Probably about A.D. 10* 
The Mahakshatrapa Patika Kusuluka, known from the Lion Capital 
records, therefore, cannot be identified with the Mahadanapati 
Patika, son of the Mahakshatrapa Liaka Kusuluka mentioned in the 
Taxila inscription of A.D. 21, even if the Mahadanapati became a 
Mahakshatrapa after his father’s death. It is not improbable that 
Patika Kusuluka of the Mathura inscriptions was the father of Liaka 
Kusuluka and the grandfather of Patika of the Taxila record. The 
satrapal houses of Taxila and Mathura were possibly related to each 
other. 

Another Kshatrapa, connected with the western Punjab, was 
Zeionises (Jihunia), son of the Kshatrapa Manigula, who is known 

1. The Shinkot inscription of the grandfather of Aspavarman suggests that the 
territory ruled by Aspa and Sasa included the Bajaur tribal area. 

2. The nasal sound in the names R'ahjuvula and Sondasa has often been ignored. 
Another form of Ranjuvula’s name was Rajula. 


133 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


from his coins and is supposed on numismatic grounds to have been 
a contemporary of Azes II. A Taxila inscription of the year 191 
(A.D. 134), refers to a Kshatrapa of Chuksha named Jihonika 
(Zeionises) who was probably the son of a Maharaja, whose name 
cannot be read. Sten Konow’s suggestion that Jihonika was the 
son of a brother of Azes II is based on a conjectural restoration of 
a defaced portion of the inscription. Zeionises of the Taxila record 
was probably a grandson of Zeionises, son of Manigula. An inscrip¬ 
tion from Manikiala mentions a Kshatrapa. probably of Kapisi 
(capital of Kaisa in Kafiristan) He was the son of another 
Kshatrapa whose name, sometimes read as Granavhryaka, is doubt¬ 
ful. A Kshtrapa named §ivasena is known from a copper seal dis¬ 
covered in the Punjab. His ascription to the city of Abhisara- 
prastha is based on a conjectural reading. It is probable that these 
satraps were all viceroys of the Kushanas. 

Another Kshatrapa named Kharaosta or Prakharaosta, son of 
Arta is known from his coins. He is usually identified with the 
Yuvardja Kharaosta who was related to the satrapal house of 
Mathura and is mentioned in the Mathura Lion Capital inscriptions. 
He was probably the son of a daughter of Maha-kshatrapa Ranju- 
vula. Sten Konow’s suggestion that Kharaosta was the father-in-law 
of Ranjuvula and that he was inheritor to the position of ‘king of 
kings’ after Moga does not appear to be convincing. 

Mathura, capital of the ancient Surasena Mahd-janapada, pro¬ 
bably became the headquarters of a satrapal family of Sakas as early 
as the time of Maues. The earliest Scythian Kshatrapa of Mathura 
seems to have been Ranj uvula who first ruled as a Kshatrapa, and 
then as a Mahakshatrapa jointly with his son Sondasa as Kshatrapa. 1 
The Kshatrapa Soncjasa became a Mahakshatrapa after his father’s 
death. A Mathura inscription of the time of the Mahakshatrapa 
Sondasa is dated in the year 72 of the Scytho-Parthian or Vikrama 
era corresponding to A.D. 15. Some scholars refer the date to the 
Saka era of A.D. 78. But this is improbable if the Saka-kala is 
identified with Kanishka’s reckoning. 

1. Ranjuvula’s earlier coins bear legends in Greek and Kharosh{,hi, but later 
issues have legends only in Brahml, which was the script prevalent in Mathura. 
His son Sondasa as well as the other Kshatrapas of Mathura used Brahml only 
in their coin-legends. The facts that Ranj uvula’s coins were found in the 
Punjab and in the western part of the U.P. and that his commonest type is 
copied from the coins of Strato I and II, while his rarest issues are imitated 
from the coins of the local rulers of Mathura, show that the &aka chief, who 
seems to have been a semi-independent general of Maues, established himself 
at Mathura late in life. For the local rulers of Mathura, see infra, Ch. XI. 

134 



THE gAKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 


An interesting fact about Rahj uvula and Son^lasa is that no 
overlord is mentioned in the records of their time. On his coins 
Ranj uvula is represented in the Kharoshth! legend as the apratihata- 
ckakra Kshatrapa and in the corrupt Greek legend as Basilei 
Basileds Soteros, probably indicating ‘king of kings, the saviour*. 
These satraps therefore appear to have ruled the easternmost pro¬ 
vince of the Saka empire as semi-independent chiefs. On coins 
issued by Sondasa as a Kshatrapa he is represented as the son of 
Ranj uvula or of the Mahakshatrapa. 

There are some coins of a Kshatrapa named Taranadasa or 
Bharanadasa. who was also the son of a Mahakshatrapa. This ruler 
may have been a son of §on<Jasa. A later Kshatrapa of Mathura was 
Hagana who issued coins jontly with another Kshatrapa named 
Hagamasha. Coins issued by Kshatrapa Hagamasha alone are fairly 
common. A satrap named Ghataka, who belonged to the Ksha- 
harata family, is known from an inscription found at Ganeshra near 
Mathura. His relations with other satraps of the locality are un¬ 
known. We have also coins of two Kshatrapas named Sivaghosha 
and Sivadatta, who were probably Hinduised Sakas. The Scythian 
satrapal dynasty of Mathura seems to have been overthrown by the 
Kushana king Kanishka about the beginning of his career. 

The suzerainty of the Kushanas in India, who supplanted that 
of the Scytho-Parthians, however, did not totally uproot the nume¬ 
rous Saka principalities under subordinate chiefs. We have already 
seen that even in the second quarter of the second century A.D. 
when Ptolemy wrote his Geography, the principal Indo-Scythian 
possessions, apparently under the sovereign rule of the Kushanas, 
covered large parts of Western India including the lower Sindhu 
valley and Saurashtra. The Saka satraps of Western India, owing 
allegiance to the Kushanas, continued to rule in those regions for a 
long time after the decline of the Kushana imperial power in India. 
It will, therefore, be convenient to discuss their history in a later 
chapter along with that of the other states that flourished on the 
ruins of the Kushana empire. 


185 


CHAPTER IX 


THE KUSHANAS 

I. ORIGIN AND EARLY HISTORY 

The Kushanas, who played such a dominant part in Indian poli¬ 
tics, were a branch of the famous Yueh-chi tribe whose early history 
is noticed in several Chinese historical works. 1 The Yueh-chi origi¬ 
nally dwelt in the land between the Tsenn-hoang or Tun-huang 
country and the K’i-lien or Tien-shan range in Chinese Turkestan, in 
the province of Kan-su according to some scholars. There they were 
defeated and expelled from the land, about 165 B.C. according to 
most authorities, by a neighbouring tribe called the Hiung-nu, who 
killed the leader of the Yueh-chi horde and made a drinking vessel 
out of his skull. The widow of the slain ruler now came to power 
and guided the tribe in the course of its westward migration. 

While the Yueh-chi were passing through the land to the north 
of the Taklamakan desert, they came into conflict with a horde 
known as the Wu-sun who occupied the valleys of the Ili river and 
its southern tributaries. After having defeated the Wu-sun and 
slain their chieftain, the Yueh-chi marched on westwards, beyond 
Lake Issiq Kol, in search of a suitable home. A small section of 
the people, however, went to the south to settle on the Tibetan 
frontier and became known as the Little Yueh-chi. The main 
branch of the tribe, the Ta-Yueh-chi or Great Yueh-chi, in the course 
of their westward march, met the Sse, Sai or Sek (&aka) dwelling 
in the plains on the northern bank (both the northern and southern 
banks, according to some writers) of the Jaxartes or Syr Darya. 

The Sakas were defeated and dispersed 2 and the Great Yueh- 
chi settled in their country. But the Yueh-chi occupation of the 
Saka land did not last long. The son of the slain king of the Wu- 
sun, who had now grown to manhood under the protection of the 
Hiung-nu, attacked the Yueh-chi with Hiung-nu help and drove 
them out of the land which they had wrested from the Sakas. The 
Yueh-chi, thus forced, moved further west and south to the valley 
of the Oxus or Amu Darya, defeated the Sakas and settled in the 

1. Some of these have been mentioned above, p. 122. For other Chinese passages 

cf. IA. 1908, pp. 26 ff; JDL, 1920, pp. 71 ff; Num. Supp. XLVII. 

2. Ante , p. 122. 


136 



THE KUSHAtf AS 


country called Ta-hia, which is usually identified with Bactria. The 
natives of this country, who were unskilled in war 1 and devoted 
to commerce and were wanting in cohesion, were easily subjugated 
and the Yueh-chi established their capital in the modern Bokhara 
region (ancient Sogdiana) to the north of the Oxus. The Chinese 
envoy Chang-kien visited the Yueh-chi capital in that locality about 
125 B.C. 

From Pan-ku’s history of the first Han dynasty dealing with 
the period down to A.D. 24, we learn that the Yueh-chi capital to 
the north of the Oxus was Kien-chi or Kien-she and that Ki-pin 2 
lay on the southern border of the Yueh-chi kingdom. We also know 
that the Yueh-chi were no longer nomads and that their country 
had become divided into five principalities, 3 one of them being the 
Kuei-shuang or Kushana. 

According to Fan-ye’s history of the later Han dynasty, more 
than hundred years after this division “the Yabgou (chief; the same 
as Yavuga of the coin legends) of Kouei-chouang named K’ieou- 
tsieou-k’io attacked and vanquished the four other Yabgous and 
called himself king ( ivang ); he invaded Ngan-si (the Arsacid king¬ 
dom of Parthia) and took possession of the territory of Kao-fu 
(Kabul), overcame Po-ta (not far from Kabul) and Ki-pin (Kafiri- 
stan and the adjoining eastern region) and became completely mas¬ 
ter of these kingdoms. K’ieou-tsieou-k’io died at the age of more 

1. The Periplus which describes the Bactrians as a warlike nation possibly refers 
to the Greek population of the country. As has already been suggested, Ta-hia, 
probably represented, in a narrow sense, the Tukhara country which seems 
to have been a northern province of Bactria. The fact that the Yueh-chi are 
said to have had their capital to the north of the Oxus, possibly after their 
settlement in Ta-hia, may suggest that the Ta-hia country, as known to the 
Chinese, lay on both sides of that river. It is often believed that the 6akas 
had been driven only from Sogdiana by the Yueh-chi before Chang-kien’s 
visit to the Yueh-chi capital, CHI. I. p. 566. But cf. C1I, Vol. II, Pt. I. xxii. 

2. Ante, p. 122. 

3. These were Hieou-mi or Heo-mi (supposed to be the same as Wakhan), Chou- 
angmi or Shuang-mi (often identified with Chitral), Kouei-chouang or Kuei- 
shuang (the Kushana principality sometimes located in the land between Chi¬ 
tral and the Panjshir), Hi-tun or Hi-thoun (identified with Parwan on the 
Panishir) and Kao-fu (Kabul). The Hou-Han-shu or ‘Annals of the Later 
Han Dynasty’ (dealing with the history of the period from A.D. 25 to 220) by 
Fan-ye, who died in A.D. 445, gives an account of the Great Yueh-chi and some 
other western powers, chiefly based on the report of Pan-young (c. A.D. 125), 
We learn from it that Kuei-shuang or Kushana was the name of one of the 
five Yueh-chi sub-tribes and that Kao-fu is a mistake for Tou-mi. This 
authority assigns the Yueh-chi or Kushana occupation of Kabul to a later date. 
The discrepancy between the two accounts as regards the extension of Yueh- 
chi or Kushana rule over Kabul, however, vanishes if it is held that Tou-mi 
originally formed a part of the Kabul District still under the Greek king and 
that Pan-ku only refers to the partial occupation of the Kabul country by 
the Yueh-chi before A.D. 24. This is probably suggested by the fact that 
Fan-ye refers to the later mastery of the Kushanas over three kingdoms 
including Kao-fu as complete. 


137 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

than eighty. His son Yen-Kao-tchen succeeded him as king. In 
his turn he conquered T’ien-tchou (India proper, probably indicating 
the Punjab region) and established there a chief for governing it. 
From this time the Yueh-chi became extremely powerful. All the 
other countries designated them Kushana; but the Han retained the 
old name and called them Ta-Yueh-chi.” 

K’ieou-tsieou-k’io is apparently the same as Kujula (i.e. Kusu- 
luka), 1 a distinguishing title of Kadphises I who is known from coins 
struck in the land to the south of the Hindu Kush. On some coins 
the name of Hermaeus, the last Greek ruler of Kabul, is mentioned 
in the Greek legend on the obverse and that of Kadphises I in the 
KharoshthI legend on the reverse, which runs: Kujula-kasasa 
Kushdna-yavugasa dhrama-thidasa, “of Kujula Kasa, the Kushana 
chief who is steadfast in the faith.” In some cases we have sacha - 
dhrama-thita (steadfast in the true faith) instead of dhrama-thida. 
This seems to refer to his adoption of a new religion, probably 
Buddhism. The fact that the Kushana chief is mentioned in the 
KharoshthI legend without any royal title no doubt points to his 
subsidiary position to the Greek ‘king of kings’ of Kabul during the 
early part of his life. It is to be noted that the Kushana chief is en¬ 
dowed with dignified royal titles in the legends of some of his 
later coins, which run: maharajasa mahatasa kushana-kuyula- 
kaphasa (of the great king, the great Kuyula Kapha, the Kushana) and 
maharajasa rajatirajasa kuyula-kaphasa (of the great king, the king 
of kings,. Kuyula Kapha). 2 It is not improbable that Kadphises 1 
subdued the four other Yueh-chi principalities with Hermaeus’ help. 
As has already been suggested, Hermaeus was overthrown by the 
Parthians in spite of the help he might have received from Kadphises 
I who however extirpated Parthian rule from both the Kabul and 
Kandahar regions after a short time. 3 

1. Cf. Kusuluka, the name of a Scythian satrapal family of Taxila (ante, p. 133), 
with which K’ieoh-tsieou-k’io may have been related on his mother’s side. 

2. The identification of Kadphises I with the early Kushana ruler Kujula-kara 
Kadphises known from his coins with the Kharoshfiri legends maharayasa raya- 
rayasa devaputrasa Kuyulu-Kara-Kaphasasa (of Kujula-kara Kaphas the great 
king, the king of kings, the son of Heaven) and Kuyula-kara-Kapasa maharayasa 
rayatirayasa (of Kujula-kara-Kapa, the great king, the king of kings), is now 
usually rejected. See infra. 

3. Some scholars believe that Hermaeus was dead long before Kadphises I occu¬ 
pied Kabul and that coins bearing his name were continued to be struck for a 
long time after he had passed away. Whatever, however, be the length of the 
interval between the overthrow of Hermaeus and the Kushana occupation of 
Kabul, there seems to be little doubt that Kadphises I began His long life as a 
subordinate ally of Hermaeus and that success against the Parthians of Afgha¬ 
nistan was achieved by him as a champion of the cause of his dead overlord. 


138 



THE KUSHAtfAS 


We have seen that, during the reign of Kadphises I, Kushaga 
rule extended over Ki-pin and other lands, but not over T’ien-chou. 
As the exact boundaries of both Ki-pin and T’ien-chou are un¬ 
known, it is difficult to determine whether the Panj tar inscription 
of the year 122 (A.D. 65) belongs to the reign of Kadphises I 
himself or of his son and successor. Fan-ye places his reign as 
a ivang or king more than a century after the division of the Yueh- 
chi kingdom in Bactria into five principalities, which again has to^e 
assigned to a date later than c. 125 B.C. when Chang-k’ien visited 
the Yueh-chi capital. Thus the reign of Kadphises I cannot be 
placed earlier than the first century A. D. Numismatists have pointed 
out that the Roman head on his coins was directly imitated from 
the issues of Augustus (27 B.C.-A.D. 14). Tiberius (A.D. 14-37) or 
Claudius (A.D. 41-54). The reign of Kadphises I, who died at the 
ripe old age of more than eighty, may be assigned roughly to the 
period A.D. 15-65. Konow’s suggestion that he is mentioned in the 
Takht-i-bahi inscription of the year 103 (A.D. 46) is, however, based 
on a fanciful reading and its unwarranted interpretation. 

Kadphises I was succeeded by his son, who is called Yen-Kao- 
tchen by Fan-ye, and is identified with Wema (Yen) Kadphises 
(Kao-tchen) known from coins. According to Chinese evidence 
Wema (Vima) or Kadphises II was the first Kushana king to extend 
his rule over Tien-tchou or India proper, identified by most writers 
with the Punjab region watered by the Sindhu. There seems to be 
no evidence in support of the suggestion that Wema began to rule 
in A.D. 78 and started the Saka era. The institution of an era 
requires the continuation of the regnal reckoning of a king by his 
successors and this is quite inapplicable in Wema’s case. 1 

Kadphises II established a gold coinage‘suggested by the Roman 
aureus (124 grains or 8.035 grammes, the Roman weight-standard) 
He also issued an extensive copper or bronze coinage. Some of the 
coins of Wema are of the weight of two aurei . Only a few coins of 
gold struck in India in the two centuries before the time of this 
monarch have so far been discovered. But the gold currency of 
Wema Kadphises was continued not only by his Kushana successors 

1. No epigraphic record of this king has so far been discovered. The ascription 
of the Khalatse (Ladakh District, Kashmir) inscription of the year 184 (A.D- 
127) or 187 (A.D. 130) of Kadphises II rests on the extremely doubtful read¬ 
ing of the name of the Maharaja, referred to in that record, as Uvima Kavthisa. 
The ruler mentioned in the Khalatse epigraph seems to be a Scythian governor 
of parts of Kashmir under the Kushanas of Kanishka’s house. As has already 
been suggested, the use of the Scytho-Parthian era was popular with certain 
Indo-Scythian families even after the establishment of the Kanishka era. 

139 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


but also by the Guptas when the supremacy of northern India passed 
to them. This extensive gold coinage has been attributed by scho¬ 
lars to the influx of Roman gold into India during the Kushana 
period. 1 

On the reverse of the coins of Kadphises II is often found a re¬ 
presentation of the gold Siva with two arms, hair in spiral top-knot, 
and tiger’s skin over left arm, grasping combined trident and battle- 
axe in right hand. The KharoshthI legend on these coins reads 
maharajasa rajadirajasa sarva-loga-isvarasa mahisvarasa wima 
kathphisasa tratarasa, ‘of Wima Kathphisa the great king, the king 
of kings, the lord of the whole world, the Mahisvara, the Saviour.’ 
The word mahisvara, if it is equated with Sanskrit mahisvara, ‘lord 
of the earth’, seems to be rather tautological in view of the expres¬ 
sion sarva-loga-isvara , in spite of the fact that the word loga 
(Sanskrit loka) may be taken in the sense of ‘man.’ Probably the 
epithet mahisvara stands for the Sanskrit mdhesvara. ‘devotee of 
Mahesvara (Siva)’. It therefore seems that Kadphises II was a 
Saiva, unlike his father who was probably a Buddhist. 

A large number of coins found “all over the Punjab as well as 
in Kandahar and in the Kabul valley” bears a particular symbol 
and a corrupt Greek legend Besileus Basileudn Soter Megas, ‘the 
king of kings, the great saviour,’ sometimes with the Kharo¬ 
shthI legend maharajasa rajadirajasa mahatasa tratarasa ‘of the 
great king, the king of kings, the great saviour.’ The issuer of these 
coins is associated with Wema Kadphises by the use of the nomi¬ 
native instead of the more usual genitive in the Greek inscription, 
and of the title Soter Megas, as well as by the similarity in form 
between certain letters both in the Greek and KharoshthI in- 
scriptions. 

This nameless king, as he is usually styled, is further to be asso¬ 
ciated with the nameless Kushana ruler or rulers mentioned in the 
Panjtar inscription of the year 122 (A.D. 65) as maharaja Gushana 
(the great king, the Kushana) and in the Taxila inscription of the 
year 136 (A.D. 79) as maharaja-rajatiraja-devaputra-Kushana (the 
great king, the king of kings, the son of Heaven, the Kushana) The 
title Devaputra, again, connects the unnamed Kushana ruler of the 
Taxila inscription not only with Kujula-kara Kadphises, known 
from his coins, but also with the emperors of Kanishka’s house. 
It is not altogether impossible that the issuer of the Soter Megas 

l. Cf. Ch. XXIV. 


140 






THE KUSHANAS 


coins was the semi-independent governor of the Indian possessions 
of Wema and is mentioned in the Panjtar inscription of A.D. 65, 
and that Kujula-kara Kadphises, probably identical with the Kushana 
ruler mentioned in the Taxila inscription of A.D. 79, was the 
governor’s son and successor. For a short time after the death of 
Wema, Kujula-kara, and possibly also his father, about the closing 
years of his life, appear to have ruled independently and to have 
even extended their influence over the KAbul and Kandahar regions. 


II. KANISHKA 

Kanishka was the greatest of the Kushana emperors. His rule 
extended over the Madhyadesa, Uttarapatlia and Aparanta divisions 
of ancient India. His empire seems to have stretched from Bihar in 
the east to Khorasan in the west, and from Khotan in the north to the 
Konkan in the south. It is usually believed that Kadphises II was 
succeeded by Kanishka, although the date of Wema’s death and his 
relations with Kanishka are unknown. There is no evidence that 
Kanishka was the sole ruler of the Kushana possession in Bactria, 
Afghanistan and India at his accession. The most interesting'fact 
about Kanishka’s rule seems to be that his earliest records have been 
discovered in the U.P., the inclusion of which in the dominions of 
Kadphises II may only be conjectured but cannot be proved in the 
present state of our knowledge. Kanishka may have originally been 
one of the several Kushana chieftains who tried to make their for¬ 
tune in India and may have come out successful in the struggle for 
supremacy that seems to have followed the death of Wema. If these 
suggestions and those offered above as regards the Soter Megas and 
Kujula-kara Kadphises are to be accepted, we have possibly to as¬ 
sign Wema’s death to a date earlier than the extension of Kanishka’s 
power over north-western India and the adjoining regions. Kanishka 
seems to have conquered those territories from Kujula-kara Kad¬ 
phises whose title Devaputra he is known to have appropriated. 

4 Epigraphic records of the reign of Kanishka himself prove 
his control over the U.P., Punjab, N.W.F.P. and the Bahawalpur 
region north of Sindh. Officers like the Dandanciyaka Lala and the 
Kshatrapas Vespasi and Liaka were serving in north-western India 
while parts of eastern U.P. were under the joint rule of the 
Mcihfi-kshatrcipa Kharapallana and the Kshatrapa Vanasphara. The 
discovery of a large number of Kanishka’s records at Mathura, with 
one from Sui-vihar 16 miles from Bahawalpur and of an epigraph of 


141 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


one of his immediate successors at Sanchl (former Bhopal State, Cen¬ 
tral India) near Vidisa, the ancient capital of East Malwa, as well as 
the establishment of a satrapal house of the Sakas in Western India 
about his time seems to suggest that Sind, Rajputana, Malwa and 
Saurashtra also came under the sphere of Kanishka’s influence. The 
find of an inscription of another of Kanishka’s immediate succes¬ 
sors near Kabul and a tradition recorded by Alberuni point to 
Kanishka’s rule over Afghanistan and the adjoining parts of Central 
Asia. 

The name of Kanishka (sometimes Sanskritised as Kanishtha) 
is very famous in Buddhist traditions which, however, may have 
confused the activities of more than one king of that name. He is 
said to have led an expedition against the Parthians. Chinese and 
Tibetan writers refer ta Kanishka’s successful expeditions against 
Soked (Saketa) and Pataliputra, which may suggest the extension of 
Kushana influence over Bihar. The discovery of Kushana coins in 
Bengal and Orissa and the possibility of the Kanishka era being 
used by the Lichchhavis of Nepal may not, however, indicate any 
political subjection of these territories. The Rajatarahginl and 
some Buddhist traditions refer to Kanishka’s rule- in Kashmir. 
Hiuen Tsang speaks not only of this king’s hold over Gandhara with 
Purushapura (Peshawar) as the capital but also of his control over 
the territory to the east of the Tsung-ling mountains and of a Chi¬ 
nese prince detained as a hostage at his court. 1 This tradition no 
doubt points to Kanishka’s relations with Central Asia and China. 

In his old age Kanishka seems to have led an unfortunate expe¬ 
dition in the north, probably against the Chinese in Central Asia. 
In an interesting legend about his death the Kushana king is report¬ 
ed to have exclaimed: ‘ : I have subjugated three regions; all men 
have taken refuge with me; the region of the north alone has not 
come to make its submission.” This tradition regarding Kanishka’s 
failure in the north no doubt suggests his identification with the 
Yueh-chi king, who w T as defeated by the Chinese general Pan-chao 

1. It is said that the king of one of the vassal states of the Chinese empire 
lying to the west of the Yellow river sent his son as a hostage. The prince 
and his attendants spent the summer in Kapisa (Kafiristan), the winter in India 
(in a district called Chinabhukti in the Punjab) and the spring and autumn in 
Gandhara. The inclusion of Kafiristan in Kanishka's empire and the separation 
of ‘India’, he. India proper, from Gandhara arc to bo noted. 

2. ’The KharoshthI records discovered in Chinese Turkistan bear traces of Kushana 
rule in names like Kushanasena and in the royal titles like Devapulra. The 
KharoshthI script and the Prakrit language appear to have been introduced in 
those regions during the rule of the Kushanas. 


142 







THE KUSHANAS 


and was compelled to pay tribute to the emperor Ho-ti (A.D. 89-105). 
Chinese intercourse with the ‘western’ kingdoms, which ceased in 
A.D. 8, was revived in the eighth decade of the first century as a 
result of the victories of Pan-chao who, between A.D. 73 and 94, sub¬ 
dued the kings of Khotan and Kashgar, reduced Kucha and Kara- 
shahr, and almost reached the shores of the Caspian Sea and confines 
of the Roman empire. The success of the Chinese induced the 
Kushana king to assert his equality with the Chinese emperor by 
demanding in A.D. 87 or A.D. 90, a Chinese princess in marriage. 
The proposal being considered by Pan-chao an affront to his master, 
the Kushana king dispatched a force of 70,000 cavalry under his 
viceroy Si, across the Tsung-ling range or Taghdumbash Pamir. 
Sufferings during the passage of the mountains, however, so much 
shattered the Kushana army that it reached the plain below only to 
be defeated by the Chinese under Pan-chao. 1 

Kanishka must have flourished after, but not long after, Kad- 
phises II who, according to Chinese evidence, extended Kushana rule 
for the first time over India proper. As the reign of Kadphises II, 
who succeeded his father about the middle of the first century A.D., 
may be roughly assigned to the period A.D. 65-75, Kanishka should 
probably be ascribed to a date not earlier than the last quarter of the 
first century A. D. He was the founder of an era in the sense that his 
regnal reckoning was continued by his successors. 2 As Kanishka’s 
rule may be assigned to the close of the first century A.D., it is highly 
probable that the Kanishka era is no other than the Saka-kala of 


1. Some scholars, who are inclined to identify the Kushana king defeated by 
Pan-chao with Kadphises II, point out that Kanishka “must have been a 
monarch of some celebrity and if the Chinese had come into victorious contact 
with him, their historians would have mentioned it.” But the weakness of the 
argument is satisfactorily demonstrated in the following comment: “If we 
identify Pan-chao’s Kushana contemporary with Kadphises II, the silence of 
the Chinese becomes still more mysterious and inexplicable, because he was 
certainly well-known to the annalists. On the other hand, Kanishka (who be¬ 
came famous in Chinese Buddhist literature probably after importation of for¬ 
eign legends to that country) was not known to them and the non-mention of 
his name, if he were Pan-chao’s contemporary, cannot be more surprising than 
that of his predecessor Wema. In favour of Kanishka’s identity with Pan- 
chao’s antagonist we may urge that Kanishka is known to have come into con¬ 
flict with the Chinese, but the same cannot be said in regard to Wema, the 
events of whose reign, as recorded by the Chinese annalists, do not include 
any first class war with China.” ( PHAI ., 396). 

2. In the records of the time of the Kushana kings of Kanishka’s house the reign 
of Kanishka is associated with the years 2-23, of Vasishka with 24-28, of Huv- 
ishka with 28-60, of Kanishka, son of Vajishka, with 41, and Vasudeva with 
67-98. The reading of the date of the Peshawar casket inscription, sometimes 
believed to be year 1 of Kanishka’s reign, is extremely doubtful. For a Mathura 
inscription of Vasudeva dated in the year 67, see P1HC., Hyderabad, 1941, p. 164, 


143 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


A.D. 78, which is connected by its very name with foreigners and 
is the second popular era in the history of India. 1 


If the identification of the Kanishka era with the Saka-kala of 
A.D. 78, supported by many scholars, is to be accepted. Kanishka 
ruled from A.D. 78 to A.D. 101 or 102. It must, however, be admit¬ 
ted that there is a good deal of controversy on this point. According 
to some writers, notably Fleet, Kanishka was a predecessor of Kad- 
phises I and Kadphises II and was the founder of the era of 58 B. C., 
which ultimately came to be known as the Vikrama-Sarhvat. This 
view about the chronology of the Kushanas is not favoured by more 
recent authorities. 2 There are two theories ascribing Kanishka to 




2 . 


As has already been suggested (ante, p. 125 n. 1) the use of an era was introduc¬ 
ed and popularised in India by foreign rulers. The Saka satraps of western India 
appear to have been originally feudatories of Kanishka and his successors and 
naturally used the era of their overlords. The continued use of the Kanishka 
era by these Sakas for a long time even after the decline of Kushana power in 
India was apparently at the root of its being famous as “the era of the Saka 
rulers” in Central and Western India and the adjoining territories. That of all 
the historical and popular eras of ancient India only the Vikrama-Sarhvat (the 
Scylho-Parthian era originated in Drangiana) and the Saka-kala are still in 
use is probably due partially to the fact that both of them came to be used in 
the region about West Malwa where the city of Uijayim became one of the 
strongest centres of astronomical studies in India, presumably under the patro¬ 
nage of Saka and Gupta rulers. The Persian priests (Magi) who migrated to 
India and were known as the Maga-Brahxnanas of Saka-dvlpa (Seislan) appear 
to have contributed to the growth of the Ujjain school of astronomy in the 
age of the Sakas. The spread of the use of the Saka era over South India was 
to a considerable degree due to the Jains whose principal centre was in the 
Gujarat-Saurashtra region within the dominions of the Sakas. It is interesting 
to note in this connection that the Jains have largely contributed to the deve¬ 
lopment of the legends about Saka-Salivahana and Vikramaditya who are asso¬ 
ciated respectively with the Saka-kala (later £alivaliana-Saka, the word 6aka 
in this case signifying ‘an era’) and the Vikrama-Sarhvat. 

Fleet’s theory seems to go against Chinese evidence which makes Kujula or 
Kadphises I the first Kushana king of the Ta-Yueh-chi, and Kadphises II the 
first Kushana ruler whose dominions included some interior districts of India. 


Kadphises I coined little gold; his coinage therefore could have hardly interven¬ 
ed between the extensive gold issues of Kanishka and Wema Kadphises. 
Kanishka was responsible for the innovation of issuing coins with Greek legends 
in both obverse and reverse in place of bilingual issues of the earlier foreign 
rulers of India with Greek legend on the obverse and Kharoshfhl on the 
reverse. Another interesting feature of Kanishka’s coinage is the diversity of 
gods represented on the reverse. The coinage cf Kadphises I and Kadphises II, 
which is bilingual and without the diversity of gods, is thus rather out of place 
niter Kanishka and, for the matter of that, after Vasudeva, there being no 
break in the succession between Kanishka arid Vasudeva. 

It has also been pointed out in this connection that at the excavations at 
Taxila, coins of the Kanishka group of Kushana kings were found in the upper 
(i.e. later) strata of the earth and those of the Kadphises group in lower (i.e. 
earlier) strata. Some numismatists believe that Kanishka’s gold coinage was 
suggested by the Roman sclidus and that, therefore, he could not have flourished 
earlier than Titus (A.D. 79-81) and Trajan (A.D, 98-117). The title Kaisara 
(Caesar) adopted by Kanishka of the Ara inscription of the year 41 also points 
to a dale considerably later Gian Augustus who died in A.D. 14. The unmistak¬ 
able influence of Sassanian coins on the coinage of the later Kushanas shows 
that Kanishka’s accession cannot be assigned to such an early date as 58 B.C. 


144 










THE KUSHANAS 


the third century A.D. One of them assigns Kanishka’s accession to 
A.D. 278, while another suggests that Kanishka ascended the throne 
in A.D. 248 and was the founder of the era used by the rulers of the 
Traikutaka and other dynasties. 1 Neither of these views has re¬ 
ceived any support from scholars. 

There is, however, an important group of Indologists who believe 
that Kanishka began to rule shortly before A.D. 130. Certain Tibe¬ 
tan and Chinese documents are cited as placing Kanishka’s reign in 
the second century A.D. and the Kushana king Vasudeva, who ended 
his rule about a century after the accession of Kanishka, is supposed 
to be no other than the Ta-Yueh-chi king Po-t’iao who sent an ambas¬ 
sador to China in A.D. 230. Another argument in favour of this date 
for Kanishka’s accession (as well as of the date A.D. 248) is believed 
to be furnished by Yu-houan, author of the Wei-lio, a history of the 
Wei dynasty (A.D. 220-64), which was composed between A.D. 239 
and A.D. 265 but covers the period of the Wei down to the reign of 
the emperor Ming (A.D. 227-39). According to this authority Ki-pin, 
Ta-hia, Kao-fu and T’ien-tchou were all subject to the Ta-Yueh-chi 
during the period of the three kingdoms, which indicates the period 

1. Both the suggestions have been criticised by scholars who have shown that 
even the earlier of the two dates is too late for the first of the Kushana rulers 
bearing the name Kanishka. The Kushana king Vasudeva is known to have 
held sway over Mathura up to the year 98 of the Kanishka era which, if it is 
identified with the Traikutaka era of A.D. 248, would prove Vasudeva’s rule at 
Mathura in A.D. 346. The earliest Gupta record at Mathura is an inscription 
of Chandra-gupta II dated in the Gupta year 61 corresponding to A.D. 380, 
although the locality seems to have been conquered from a ruler of the Naga 
dynasty by Samudra-gupta, father of Chandra-gupta II. The Puranas suggest 
the rule of no less than seven Naga kings at Mathura in the period intervening 
between the occupation of the Kushanas and that of the Guptas. 

The considerable period of Naga rule at Mathura before the conquest of 
the Guptas probably indicates for Vasudeva a date much earlier than the 
middle of the fourth century A.D. It should be noted in this connection that 
the Allahabad pillar inscription of Samudra-gupta mentions several Naga kings 
of Aryavartta as extirpated enemies of the Gupta monarch, but the Daivaputra- 
Shahl-Shahanushahl (i.e., the contemporary Kushana king) only as his sub¬ 
ordinate ally. It has also been pointed out that, according to traditions, 
Kanishka was a contemporary of king Vijayaklrti of Khotan (2nd century A.D.) 
and that his successor Huvishka was a contemporary of the Buddhist philo¬ 
sopher Nagarjuna and therefore of a Satavahana emperor who could not have 
flourished much later than the second century A.D. Then, again, according to 
the catalogues of the Chinese Tripitaka, Anshi-kao (A.D. 148-70) translated the 
Mdrgabhumi-sutra of Samgharakstia who was the chaplain of Kanishka. The 
earliest of the kings with the name Kanishka thus must have flourished long 
before A.D. 170. If Kanishka ascended the throne in A.D. 248, it is difficult to 
find a place amongst his predecessors for Po-t’iao (probably Sanskrit Vasudeva ) 
the king of the Ta-Yueh-chi, who sent an ambassador to China in A.D. 230 
according to Chinese sources. The fact that the later Kushanas had to acknow¬ 
ledge the suzerainty of the Sassanians at least about the close of the third cen¬ 
tury A.D. also goes against the ascription of Kanishka to the middle of that 
century. 

145 

A.I.U.—10 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


A.D. 221-77, though the statement may refer to the time earlier 
than A.D. 239. 

These arguments no doubt go strongly against the ascription of 
Kanishka’s accession to A.D. 78, which is mainly based on the proba¬ 
ble identification of the §aka and Kanishka eras. But the difficulties 
can be explained away. As to traditions placing the rule of 
Kanishka in the second century A.D., we have actually a Kanishka, 
son of Vajhishka, whose Ara inscription of the year 41 would give the 
date A.D. 119 if it is referred to the Saka era. Numismatic evidence 
points to the existence of a still later Kushana king named Kanishka 
who probably flourished in the third century A.D. The date of a 
Mathura inscription of Kanishka, written in a developed script almost 
resembling the alphabet of the Gupta records, has been read as the 
year 14. 1 If the reading of the decimal symbol is right, this is pro¬ 
bably a third century Kanishka who wanted to emulate his great 
predecessor and namesake by trying to establish a reckoning of his 
own. Thus it appears that the Kanishka legends absorbed the acti¬ 
vities of several kings of that name belonging to Kushana dynasty, 
just as the achievements of a number of Gupta emperors styled 
Vikramaditya seem to have contributed to the growth of the saga of 
king Yikrama. 

As to the identification of Po-t’iao with Vasudeva who ruled 
between the years 67 and 98 of the Kanishka era, it has to be remem¬ 
bered that numismatic evidence suggests the existence of a Kushana 
king named Vasu, i.e. Vasudeva who flourished much later than his 
namesake, probably in the third century A.D., although it is some¬ 
times believed that “coins bearing the name of Vasudeva continued to 
be struck long after he had passed away.” Thus Po-t’iao who ruled in 
A.D. 230 may not have been the first Kushana king of that name. As 
regards the evidence of the Wei-lio, it cannot be denied that, by the 
second quarter of the third century A.D., the successors of Vasudeva 
lost actual control over many parts of the original Kushana pos¬ 
sessions in India; but their nominal sovereignty seems to have been 
still acknowledged by all feudatories and governors. There is no 
reason to believe that they lost hold even on the Punjab, N. W.F.P. 
and Afghanistan by the middle of that century. Chinese and Tibetan 
evidence therefore does not preclude the possibility of Kanishka 
having begun to rule in A.D. 78 and being the founder of the 
Saka era. 

According to traditions which appear to be supported by epi- 
graphic and numismatic evidence. Kanishka was a Buddhist. Hiuen 

1. 3ut-cf. India Antiqua, 1947, pp. 296-303. 

146 





THE KUSHANAS 


Tsang and Alberuni have recorded legends that refer to the grand 
monastery built by Kanishka at Peshawar, which was not only 
famous throughout the Buddhist world, but is actually known to 
have been a centre of Buddhist culture from an epigraph of the ninth 
century A.D. Kanishka is said to have convoked, on the advice of 
Parsva or Parsvika, the great Buddhist Council held in Kashmir 
according to some traditions, but in Gandhara or Jalandhara accord¬ 
ing to others. The Buddhist theologians possibly met at a monas¬ 
tery called the Kundala-Vana-Vihara, chiefly for the purpose of 
collecting manuscripts and preparing commentaries on them. Vasu- 
mitra acted as the President of the Council, while the famous author 
Asvaghosha, who is said to have been carried off by Kanishka from 
Pataliputra, was appointed Vice-President. 

Kanishka was a great patron of learning. Not only the Bud¬ 
dhist philosophers Asvaghosha, Parsva and Vasumitra enjoyed his 
favour but another learned man named Sangharaksha is known 
to have been his chaplain. Nagarjuna, the great exponent of the 
Mahayana doctrine, as well as the celebrated physician Charaka pro¬ 
bably flourished at Kanishka’s court. Mathara, a politician of un¬ 
usual intelligence, was a minister of the Kushana emperor. These 
and other worthies like the Greek engineer Agesilaus “played a lead¬ 
ing part in the religious, literary, scientific, philosophical and artistic 
activities of the reign.” It is, however, unknown whether the 
Buddhist council was held under the guidance of the first Kanishka 
or one of his successors of that name. The worthies mentioned above 
may not also have all enjoyed the patronage of a single Kushana 
ruler named Kanishka. 

Although Kanishka is regarded as a Buddhist, the reverse of his 
coin types represents Greek, Sumerian, Elamite, Persian and Indian 
deities. Amongst these mention may be made of Oesho (Siva), 
Sakaymo Boddo (Sakyamuni Buddha), the wind god Oado (Persian 
Vado, Indian Vata ), the fire-god Athsho (Persian Atash), the moon- 
god Mao, the sun-god Miiro, or Miuro or Mioro (Persian Mithra, Mihr; 
Indian Miira, Mihira), the Elamite or Sumerian mother-goddess Nana, 
Nanaia or Nana-shao (cf. Blbl Nani of Baluchistan and Naina Devi 
of the Kulu valley), the war-god Orlagno (Persian Bahram), the 
fire-god Pharro (Persian FaVr), the Greek sun-god Helios (some¬ 
times with the moon-goddess Selene), etc. This diversity of deities 
appears to point to a sort of religious eclecticism, although it is usually 
believed that it rather reflects the various forms of religion that 
prevailed in the different parts of the vast empire of Kanishka. A 
striking feature of the coins of Kanishka and his successors, as 

147 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


already noticed, is that unlike the issues of the earlier foreign rulers 
of India, they have no Kharoshthi legend on the reverse. Although 
the script of the legends is a corrupt form of Greek, the language is 
sometimes Persian; cf. the title Shaonano Shao which is the same 
as the old Persian kshayathiya kshdyathiyanam , modern Persian 
Shg,h4n Shah and Indian Shdhdnushdhl. 1 


Kalhana’s Rajatarahgini (I, 168-73) seems to refer to the joint 
rule over Kashmir of three kings of the Turushka race named 
Hushka (probably Huvishka), Jushka (possibly Vajhishka who may 
be the same as Vasishka) and Kanishka, who founded respectively 
the cities of Hushkapura (modern Ushkur inside the Baramula 
Pass), Jushkapura (modern Zukur to the north of Srinagar) and 
Kanishkapura (modern Kanispor on the Baramula-Srinagar road). 
Jushka is also credited with the building of the town of Jayasvami- 
pura in Kashmir and all the three kings are said to have founded 
many Buddhist establishments styled matha and chaitya and to have 
given shelter to numerous wandering monks. As regards this tra¬ 
dition, it is interesting to note that Huvishka (years 28-60) actually 
ruled jointly with Vasishka (years 24-28) and Vajhishka’s son 
Kanishka (year 41). 2 Some scholars believe that Kanishka of the Ara 
inscription of the year 41 is identical with the Kushana king of that 
name known from his records of the years 2-23. The patronymic 
Vajhishka-putra, however, seems to be used to distinguish Kanishka 
of the year 41 from an earlier namesake. If Kanishka ruled from 
year 1 to 41, it is significant that his numerous records refer only to 
the early twenty-three years of the reign. It is not improbable that 
Kanishka I ruled, during the later years of his life, with Vasishka 
(the same as Vajhishka), probably his brother or son, as his junior 
partner 3 who, after his predecessor’s death, ruled for some time as 
the senior king with Huvishka, probably his brother or son, as the 
junior. The absence of Vasishka’s coins points to his short rule being 
practically under the domination of that of his partners. After 

1. The omission of the Kharoshthi legend is difficult to explain. It is not, how¬ 
ever, unlikely that Kharoshthi was given up, because it was not understood in 
all parts of the vast empire of Kanishka, especially in Madhyadesa where 
Brahml was the script in use.* The association of Kharoshthi with rulers of 
inferior rank in some of the joint issues may have, moreover, led Kanishka to 
omit it from imperial issues and reserve the use of local scripts only for the 
coins of rulers of subordinate rank. 

2. The date of Huvishka’s Mathura inscription of the Macedonian month of Gor- 
paius (corresponding to the Indian Bhadra) of the year 28 is earlier than that 
of the Sanchl inscription of Vasishka dated the fifth day of Hemonta, falling 
in the purnim-dnta month of Margaslrsha, of the same year. 

3. Vamatakshama (?) of the Mathura Ins. and Vaskushana of the Sanchl Ins. 
(year 22) may have been other junior partners of Kanishka I. 

148 




THE KUSHA^AS 


Vasishka’s death his son Kanishka II ruled as the junior partner of 
Huvishka. It may be that some of the coins attributed to Kanishka I 
were really issued by Kanishka II. 

The reference to the Kushana family as of Turushka or Turkish 
origin in the Kashmir chronicle is supported by a tradition recorded 
by Alberuni. According to this traditon the Hindus had kings re¬ 
siding in Kabul, who were said to be Turks of Tibetan origin. The 
first of them, Barha-takin, came into the country and entered a cave 
in Kabul. He wore Turkish dress, a short tunic open in front, a 
high hat, boots and arms. 1 Now people honoured him as being of 
miraculous origin, “who had been destined to be king, and in fact 
he brought those countries under his sway and ruled them under 
the title of a Shahiya of Kabul ” The rule remained among his des¬ 
cendants for about sixty generations. Alberuni was told that the 
pedigree of this royal family, written on silk, existed in the for¬ 
tress of Nagarkot (Kot Kangra in the Punjab) and that “one of this 
series of kings was Kanik, the same who is said to have built the 
Vihcira (Buddhist monastery) of Purushawar (Peshawar). It is 
called after him Kanik-chaitya.” There is little doubt that Kanik 
of Alberuni is the same as the Kushana king Kanishka who, accord¬ 
ing to another tradition recorded by the Chinese pilgrims, erected 
at Purushapura (Peshawar) a great stupa more than six hundred 
feet in height. 2 In that case Barha-takin may probably be identified 
with Kadphises I. 3 In Indian literature the Kushanas are proba¬ 
bly referred to as Tukhara, apparently because they had once 
settled in the Tukhara country, which seems to have originally been 
a northern district of Bactria. It is interesting to note that the 
Musalman conquerors of India mostly of Turkish origin, are men¬ 
tioned in medieval works like Vidyapati’s Kirtilatd as Turuk-Tokhdr, 
i.e. Turushka-Tukhara. 

III. KANISHKA’S SUCCESSORS 

Much of what we know about Vasishka, who succeeded 
Kanishka, I, has already been discussed. His inscriptions, dated in 

1. Barha-takln’s dress as described by Alberuni is remarkably similar to the dress 
of the Kushana emperors known from their representation on coins as well as 
from the headless statue of Kanishka discovered near Mathura. 

2. Fa-hien, Sung-yun and Hiuen Tsang have described the magnificence of this 
stupa. The relic casket which it contained has been found in situ in course of 
excavations. It bears an effigy and inscription of Kanishka. For descriptions 
of the stupa, cf. Ch. XX. 

3. It may be pointed out that barha is a Prakrit corruption of Sanskrit bri hat. 
while takxn is the Turkish tegin which means the same thing as the Pahlavi Kad 
‘chief’, often supposed to be the origin of the name Kadphises. 


149 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the years 24 and 28, corresponding respectively to A.D. 102 and A.D. 
106, have been discovered in the Mathura District of the U.P. and 
in the Bhopal State in Central India. He may be identified with 
Vajhishka, father of Kanishka II of the Ara inscription, and with 
Jushka, founder of Jushkapura, mentioned in the Kashmir chronicle. 
Vasishka ruled, for some time at least, conjointly with Huvishka 
whose dates range between the years 28 and 69, i.e. between A.D. 
106 and 138. The inscription at Wardak near Kabul proves 
Huvishka’s hold on Afghanistan. He is probably identical with 
Hushka of the Rdjatarangim , who founded the city of Hushkapura 
in Kashmir. A Mathura inscription refers to his pitdmaha (father’s 
father) who described as sacha-dhrama-thita, ‘steadfast in the true 
faith’ (probably indicating a true Buddhist), which, curiously enough, 
was an epithet of Kadphises I. In the present state of our know¬ 
ledge, however, we are not sure whether Huvishka is to be regarded 
as the grandson of Kadphises I. An interesting reference in this re¬ 
cord is to Huvishka’s pitamaha-devakula which may indicate a ‘royal 
gallery of portrait statues’ containing a statute of Huvishka’s grand¬ 
father. Huvishka was himself a patron of Buddhism and another 
Mathura epigraph refers to a Vihdra built by or named after maha¬ 
raja Rdjdtirdja Devaputra Huvishka. According to an interesting 
record, a certain lord of Kharasalera and Vakana (probably Wakhan 
in Central Asia), who may have been a viceroy of the Kushana king, 
made permanent endowments of 1,100 silver coins called purdcnas 
in favour of a Punyasald (an institution for free distribution of food) 
at Mathura for the religious merit of Shahi Huvishka. 

The reverse of Huvishka’s coin-types represents a number of 
interesting divinities, including some already noticed in connection 
with Kanishka’s coins. We have the figures of Roma, Heracles, 
Sarapo (Sarapis), Manaobago (Mao), the goddess of abundance 
Ardoksho, the sun-god Anio, the goddess Oanao or Oaninda, the 
war-god Shaoreoro (Persian Shahrewar) and the Indian gods 
Ooshna (Vishnu), Maaseno (Mahasena), etc. On some specimens 
we have Skanda, Kumara, Visakha and Mahasena, while others re¬ 
present Skanda, Kumara, and Visakha. On another interesting 
coin-type of Huvishka we have an Indian god with a bow and the 
conspicuous Brahmi legend reading ganesa, probably indicating &iva. 
A seal-matrix, generally attributed to Huvishka, represents the king 
as a devotee of Vishnu. 

Huvishka, as already pointed out, ruled conjointly with 
Vasishka or Vajhishka and with the latter’s son Kanishka II 


150 


THE KUSHANAS 


(A.D. 119'. The reign of Kanishka II may not have been so short 
as is suggested by the paucity of his records, as this may have been 
due to the fact that he for the most part ruled jointly with his senior 
partner Huvishka whose reign was naturally referred to by the 
people. Kanishka II assumed the title Kaisara, i.e. ‘Caesar’, in 
imitation of the contemporary Roman emperors. 

The next king Vasudeva has a purely Indian name that offers 
additional evidence of the naturalisation of the Kushana family in 
India. His known dates range between the years 67 and 98 cor¬ 
responding to A.D. 145 and 176. The religious eclecticism evidenced 
by the coinage of Kanishka and Huvishka is only partially noticed 
in Vasudeva’s coins. As most of his issues exhibit the figure of 
Siva with his bull Nandin, it has been suggested that, like Kadphises 
II, Vasudeva was a Saiva although his name points to the Vaishnava 
faith. 

IV. LATER KUSHANAS 

The history of the Kushanas after Vasudeva is obscure. Amongst 
the later Kushanas who ruled in the last quarter of the second cen¬ 
tury and the first half of the third, the most important appear to have 
been Kanishka (III?) and a Vasu or Vasudeva (II?) known from 
their coins. This Vasudeva is probably identical with the Yueh-chi 
king Po-t’iao of the Chinese annals, who sent an embassy to the Chi¬ 
nese court in A.D. 230. It is, however, possible that more than one 
Kanishka and Vasudeva adorned the Kushana throne in the third 
century A.D. Some of the later Kushana coins of the third century 
bear enigmatic symbols like Bha, Ga, Vi and Nu (either mint-marks 
or initials of viceroys) as well as names (probably of viceroys) like 
Pasana and Shilada. The influence of the issues of the earlier Sassa- 
nian kings is noticed on these coins, which will be discussed in detail 
in the next volume. 

There is no doubt that, in India, the Kushana power declined 
shortly after the reign of Vasudeva (A.D. 145-176). The Saka 
satraps originally owing allegiance to Kanishka I began to rule large 
parts of Western and Central India practically like independent 
monarchs. In different parts of the Kushana possessions in India, 
especially in the U.P. and Rajasthan, subordinate ruling houses and 
tribes gradually raised their head and Kushana power was eliminated 
even from Mathura, where rulers of a Naga family came to power. 


151 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


An account of the numerous Indian states that arose on the ruins of 
the Kushana empire will be given in Chapter XI. 

In spite, however, of the weakening of Kushana power in India, 
the successors of Vasudeva I appear to have been exercising com¬ 
plete control over the Punjab, N. W.F.P. and Afghanistan up to 
about the middle of third century A.D. This is suggested, as already 
indicated, by Yu-houan, author of the Wei-Uo, who speaks of Ta- 
Yueh-chi sovereignty over Ki-pin, Ta-hia, Kao-fu and T’ien-chou. It 
is, however, difficult to agree with some writers when they assert 
that “the power of the Kushana kings was at its climax” in the middle 
•of the third century in view of the fact that the Sassanians were ac¬ 
tually extending their power towards the east about that time. But 
the details of the tradition recorded by the medieval Muslim histo¬ 
rian Firishta, according to which Ardashir I Babagan (A.D. 226-41), 
founder of the Sassanian dynasty of Persia, conquered Balkh, 
Khorasan and Kabul and advanced as far as Sirhind beyond the 
Sutlej in the eastern Punjab cannot possibly be accepted in its en¬ 
tirety. The discovery of a coin of Ardashir I in the Jhelum District 
of the Punjab cannot be regarded as conclusive evidence in sup¬ 
port of Firishta’s tradition. In spite, however, of the evidence of 
the Wei-lio f it is not improbable that the first Sassanian monarch, 
about the end of his career, claimed the contemporary Kushan king 
as one of his subordinate allies. The Paikuli inscription, possibly 
to be assigned to the close of the third century, appears to refer to 
several Indian rulers including the kings of the Surashtras, Avantis, 
Kushanas Sakas and Abhlras, as subordinate allies, if not as feuda¬ 
tories, of the Sassanians. The Sassanian emperor Hormazd II (A.D. 
301-10) married a daughter of a Kaushana king. On some of his 
coins, he is called Kushan Malka (Lord of the Kushanas) and Kushan 
Malkan Malka (lord of the Kushana rulers). His coins, again, bear 
the figure of Siva and his bull as well as the Indian altar, which are 
found on most of the later Kushana coins. Some later Kushana issues 
are supposed to have been counter-struck with Sassanian device. A 
Persepolis inscription in Pahlavi, attributed to the early years of 
Shapur II (A.D. 310-79), refers to the Sassanian governor of Sakastan 
as the Sdkdn Shah (king of the Sakas) as well as the Dabirtin Dabir 
(minister of ministers) of Hind (India), Sakastan and Tukharistan. 
When Shapur II besieged Amida in A.D. 360, his victory over the 
Romans was won with the help of an aged king named Grumbates 
who is usually assigned to the Kushana dynasty. 


152 


THE KUSHANAS 


Certain coins of Sassanian type and fabric bearing legends in 
Nagarl, Sassanian Pahlavi and an undeciphered script (probably a 
modification of the Greek alphabet) are attributed to some Sassa¬ 
nian or Scythe-Sassanian families that probably ruled in the Sindhu 
valley. At the time of Cosmas Indicopleustes (c. A.D. 500) the 
western part of the Sindhu valley belonged to Persia. These facts 
no doubt suggest that the Kushanas for a time acknowledged the 
suzerainty of the Sassanian emperors. But the prominent mention 
of the Kushana king as the Daivaputra-Shdhi-Shdhdnushdi in a 
Gupta record of the middle of the fourth century A.D. shows that 
they were still regarded as a notable power in the Uttarapatha divi¬ 
sion of India. 

V. THE AGE OF THE KUSHANAS 

The Kushana period marks an important epoch in Indian his¬ 
tory. For the first time after the fall of the Mauryas there was a 
vast empire which not only embraced nearly the whole of North 
India, but also considerable territories outside it, as far as Central 
Asia. India was thus brought into close contact with the outside 
world. The period also witnessed important developments in reli¬ 
gion, literature and sculpture, especially the rise of Mahay ana 
Buddhism, Gandhara art, and the appearnce of the Buddha figure. 
It has been suggested that the Kushana king Vasudeva is probably, 
to be identified with a king of that name mentioned in Rajasekhara’s 
Kdvyamimdmsd as a patron of poets and as a sabhdpati (president 
of a society of learned men). An eminent writer has justly observ¬ 
ed: “That the Kushana age was a period of great literary activity 
is proved by the works of Asvaghosha, Nagarjuna and others. It 
was also a period of religious ferment and missionary activity. It 
witnessed the development of Saivism and the allied cult of Kartti- 
keya, of the Mahay ana form of Buddhism and the cults of Mihira 
and Vasudeva Krishna, and it saw the introduction of Buddhism into 
China by Kasyapa Matanga (c. A.D. 61-67). The dynasty of Kanishka 
opened the way for Indian civilization to Central and Eastern 
Asia . ,,1 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

Sten Konow, Kharoshthl Inscriptions (CII, Vol. II, Part I), Introduction. 

V. A. Smith, Early History of India, Fourth Edition (1924) & references there 

given. 

1. PHAI, 399-400. Also cf. infra, Chs. XXIV-XXV. 

153 



CHAPTER X 


THE VIKRAMA SAMVAT AND SAKABDA 

The two ancient eras still widely current in India are the 
Vikrama Samvat and Sakabda, starting respectively in 58 B.C. and 
A.D. 78. The origin of both these eras is shrouded in obscurity and 
naturally many theories are current on the subject. Some of these, 
now generally held, have been noted in the two preceding Chapters, 1 2 
and there are others besides, none of which can be regarded as more 
plausible than the rest. A special importance therefore attaches to 
the traditional account of the origin of these eras, which, though 
generally rejected by modern scholars, should not be altogether 
ignored, so long at least as we cannot arrive at any definite conclu¬ 
sion on the subject. 

I. VIKRAMA SAMVAT 

• 

The traditions about king Vikramaditya, the reputed founder of 
the Vikrama Samvat. fall into three distinct classes. Under one cate¬ 
gory we may include the legends found in the Vetdla Pafichavimsati, 
Dvatrimsat Puttalikd and other books of this nature describing his 
supernatural qualities of head and heart, particularly his charity, 
patronage of learning, and association with the renowned literary 
circle known as the Nine Gems or Nava-Ratna. These have hardly 
any historical value beyond proving that Vikramaditya was regarded 
as an ideal king long after his death. Possibly these legends origi¬ 
nally referred to more than one ruler of that name, and later grew 
round one semi-mythical figure.* This is best proved by the list of 
persons constituting the Nine Gems, all of whom certainly did not 
flourish during one reign. The second category includes the heroic 
achievements of Vikramaditya such as we find in the literature de¬ 
rived from the Brihatkatha? 

Par different, however, is the class of traditions which are con¬ 
tained partly in standard works of Jain literature and partly in nar¬ 
ratives connected with the history of Jain religion. Merutunga’s 

1. See pp. 125, 127, 144 ff. 

2. Dr. Pusalker has attempted to prove the historical character of these tales 
(C. Kunhan Raja Presentation Volume ) but without much success. 

154 



THE VIKRAMA SAMVAT AND 6AKABDA 

Theravail may be taken as a type of the first and Kalakacharya’s 
narrative as an example of the other. 

After referring to the reigns of Pradyota, king of Avanti, the 
Nandas, Mauryas and Pushyamitra, Merutunga continues his account 
of the kingdom of Ujjayini as follows: 1 

“Then came Balamitra and Bhanumitra, whose joint reign cov¬ 
ered 60 years, and Nabhavahana, who ruled for 40 years. Then 
came the Gardabhiila dynasty which was in power for 152 years. 
Gardabhilla reigned for 13 years and was then expelled by the &aka 
kings who ruled for 4 years. Vikramaditya, son of Gardabhilla, re¬ 
gained the kingdom of Ujjayini, commenced the Vikrama era and 
reigned for 60 years. His four successors ruled respectively for 40, 
11, 14, and 10 years. Then the 6aka era commenced.” 

The Kalakticharya-katha 2 gives the story of the Saka conquest 
of Ujjayini in fuller details. It may be summed up as follows: 

“Kalakacharya had a sister called Sarasvatl who joined the 
convent. King Gardabhilla of Ujjayini was fascinated by her beauty 
and ravished her. Kalakacharya, being enraged, went to the wpst 
of the Sindhu and lived with a Shah! (Saka) chief over whom he 
obtained great influence by means of his astrological knowledge. 
Gradually he came to learn that his patron and 95 other chiefs who 
lived in the same locality all obeyed a common overlord. Kalaka- 
charya persuaded his patron to invade the kingdom of Gardabhilla 
with the aid of his 95 fellow-chiefs and himself joined the army 
that marched along Sindh and Gujarat, and besieged Ujjayini. 
Ujjayini fell and the 6akas established their supremacy in Malava. 
After 17 years Vikramaditya, son of Gardabhilla, regained his king¬ 
dom by expelling the Sakas. Kalakacharya, after defeating Garda¬ 
bhilla and releasing his sister, went to the court of king Satavahana 
at Pratishthana.” 

The above story is related in various other works, and gath&s 
containing the incident have also been found. In some of them we 
get the additional information that “135 years after Vikrama having 
passed, again the Sakas expelled Vikramaputra (Vikrama’s son or 
descendant) and conquered the kingdom.” 

The Jain traditions have definite historical background. In spite 
of minor discrepancies in dates, the general account given above is 

1. JBBRAS, IX, 147 ff. 

2. Ibid , 139 ff; CII, II. xxvi ff; JBORS, XVI, 233, 293; Brown, The Strry of K&taJca. 
The Shahi chiefs in the story are said to belong to Sagakula and their over! urd 
is called Shahanushahi. 


155 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


fully in keeping with the known facts of history. For, as we have 
seen above, the invasion of Malava by the §aka chiefs from beyond 
the Sindhu on which the whole story rests, was undoubtedly a histo¬ 
rical fact. Further, the final establishment of the Saka power in 
Malwa in A.D. 78, the epoch of the §aka era, is supported by the fact 
that the early Saka rulers of Malwa flourished about that time and 
are known definitely to have used the £aka era in their records. It is 
true that we have as yet no definite evidence of the existence of a 
king Vikramaditya who defeated the Sakas in 58 B. C. But there is 
nothing to warrant the belief that is freely expressed that Vikrama¬ 
ditya of 58 B.C. is a myth and there was no such king in that period. 1 
Further, it should be remembered that the tradition about Vikrama¬ 
ditya is a long and complete story in definite historical setting, and 
not a mere vague statement that he defeated the Sakas and founded 
an era. To regard therefore one or other later historical king as the 
Vikramaditya of tradition simply because he defeated the Sakas (or 
Hirnas) or patronised learning can hardly be justified. 

The scholars who regard Vikramaditya as a myth rely chiefly 
on the fact that the era of 58 B.C. is not specifically associated with 
king Vikramaditya in the earlier period. The view may be summed 
up in the following words: 2 

“For the first five hundred years, the years of the era are simply 
referred to as Samvat. In the fifth century A.D. the era is for the 
first time called ‘the era of the Malavas’, and in the eighth century 
A.D. ‘the era of the Malava lord or lords’. The earliest use of the 
word Vikrama occurring in a date, we find in an inscription in which 
the year 898 is referred to the time called Vikrama. Had it been 
founded by king Vikramaditya it would indeed be more than strange 

1. In a thesis submitted to the Calcutta University in 1912, the writer of this 
chapter argued in favour of the old traditional view. A Bengali translation 
of the portion relating to Vikramaditya and the Vikrarna era was published in 
a Bengali Journal, Pratibha, in 1913. Since then MM. H. P. Sastri (El. XII, 
p. 319) and Sten Konow (Ibid. XIV, p. 294) have incidentally supported the old 
tradition, but without any detailed discussion. The present writer has recently 
discussed the problem in a paper contributed to the volume published on the 
occasion of the Vikrama Bi-Millennium celebrations. 

^ With the exception of the two scholars mentioned above, almost all are 
definitely of opinion that there was no king Vikramaditya in the first century 
B.C. Dr. Fleet, for example, remarks: “Later research, however, has shown that 
there was no such king Vikramaditya and that the story (of his founding an era 
in 58 B.C.) is nothing but a myth, dating from the ninth or tenth century 
A.D.” ( JRAS, 1913, p. 997). Other writers following him have held that “it 

has been established that there was no Vikramaditya in the 1st century B.C.” 
(7HQ. XI, p. 212). 

2. IA, XIX, XX. 


156 



THE V1KRAMA SAMVAT AND SAKABDA 


that no allusion should ever have been made to this for more than a 
thousand years.” 

It is not generally recognised that these facts and arguments 
may be urged equally well against the modern theories, according to 
which the era was founded by Vonones, Azes or Kanishka, for none 
of these names is ever found associated with the era. As a matter 
of fact, however, the arguments are of little weight as the exam¬ 
ple of the Saka era shows. Here also the era is not associated with 
the Sakas for the first five hundred years or more when it is simply 
called Varsha . After that came into use ‘the era of the takas’ and 
‘the era of the Saka king’ exactly corresponding to the ‘era of the 
Malavas’, and ‘the era of the Malava lords’, which we find in the case 
of Vikrama Saiiivat. The name of the Saka king who founded the 
era never occurs, even after the lapse of ‘more than a thousand 
years’. 

The case of the Gupta era is also similar. Of the first fifty dates 
in that era found in epigraphic records, only three refer to the era as 
Guptakala; the remaining forty-seven call it simply Varsha or abda, 
and none mentions the founder of the era. 

These analogies prove that the so-called peculiarities in the use 
of the Vikrama Sarhvat in earlier periods cannot be regarded as 
arguments against the historicity of Vikramaditya. On the other 
hand the fact that all the early records, definitely known to be dated 
in the era of 58 B.C., some of them going back to the third century 
of the era, have been found in Malwa and Rajasthan certainly sup¬ 
ports the Vikramaditya tradition. 

Many of these inscriptions use the word Krita along with the 
year of the era, and in some cases this occurs together with a 
reference to the Malavas. This word has not yet been satisfactorily 
explained. Some regard it as a technical astronomical term, while 
others think that it was the name of a king who founded the era. 1 
If the latter view be held, it goes a great way in supporting the Jain 
tradition, for we may easily hold that this was the king who assumed 
the title Vikramaditya, as many others did in later times. 

On the whole there is no reason to be dogmatic. The era might 
after all have been founded by a foreigner, as stated above. 2 But 
there is no inherent incongruity in the belief that king Vikramaditya 
founded it in 58 B.C. to commemorate his recovery of Ujjayinl by 
defeating the Sakas. 

1. For the different views on the subject cf. R. G. Bhandarkar Com. Vol. pp. 188 

ff.; El, XII, 319, XIV, 140, XXIII, 49; C/7, II, xxvi. See also ante, p. 125 n. 1. 

2. See p. 125, n. 1, 127, 144, n. 1. 


157 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


II. 6AKA ERA 

As regards the Saka era, there is a consensus of opinion in 
favour of the view that it was either founded by a Scythian ruler to 
commemorate his accession, or arose out of the continual reckoning 
of the regnal years of a Scythian king by his successors. The iden¬ 
tity of the Scythian king is, however, a matter of dispute. As the 
era was used from the very beginning by the 6aka satraps of Western 
India, there can be little doubt that it commemorates the reign of 
their Saka overlord. If it can be proved on independent evidence 
that Kanishka flourished about A.D. 78, he can certainly be regarded 
as this overlord and the founder of the era, a view that is now widely 
accepted. But, unfortunately, as noted above, 1 there is a great 
diversity of opinion regarding his date, and none of the views com¬ 
mand general acceptance. 

The question must therefore be left open until we have a more 
definite idea of the chronology of the Scythian rulers. As already 
mentioned above, the era is not associated with the §akas till more 
than five hundred years after its foundation. This proves that a 
continuous tradition about the origin of the Saka era was current, 
although there is no recorded evidence of it; and the same thing may 
be true of the Vikrama Samvat. 


1. See pp. 143 ff. 


158 





CHAPTER XI 


NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 


I. GENERAL REVIEW 

Numismatic evidence discloses the names of many tribal repub¬ 
lics and members of monarchical ruling families, which flourished in 
different parts of the central and western regions of northern India 
in the centuries immediately preceding and following the commence¬ 
ment of the Christian era. The dates of their coins are variously 
given by numismatists; but, since the fashion of mentioning the 
name of the ruling authority in the coin-legend was inspired and 
popularised in India by foreign kings beginning with the Indo- 
Greeks, most of the coins bearing such legends should preferably be 
assigned to a date later than the early decades of the second century 
B.C. This suggestion is supported by the palaeography of the 
legends on the coins in question. It is well known that stone inscrip¬ 
tions and coin-legends usually exhibit less developed forms of letters. 
Nevertheless, even the earliest inscribed coins do not appear to be 
earlier than the Besnagar inscription of the end of the second 
century B. C. The angular form of letters exhibited by most of these 
coins cannot be much earlier than the age of the Ayodhya inscrip¬ 
tion of Dhanadeva (end of the first century B.C.) and of the records 
of the Sakas of Mathura (beginning of the first century A.D.). 1 

In Rajasthan and the adjoining regions, the tribal states of 
the Arjunayanas, 2 Uddehikas. 3 Malavas, Sibis, 4 Rajanyas 5 and Yau- 


1. In the following pages we shall give our own views regarding the dates of the 
coins and their issuers. For other views referring these coins to somewhat 
earlier periods, see the various catalogues of coins cited under general reference. 
Most of the coins with Brahml legends show angular and developed forms of 
letters j, l, h, m, v, etc. 

2. The history of the Arjunayanas, Malavas, Yaudheyas and Nagas as well as of 
the kings of Ahichchhatra, Ayodhya and KausambI will be discussed in this 
section in some detail. The history of the powers will be briefly noticed 
in the foot-notes. 

3. The Uddehikas are located in Madhyadesa in the Brihat-samhita. According 
to Alberuni, their country lay near the city of Bazana, which lay to the south¬ 

east of Kanauj, the distance between the two places being the same as that 

between Kanauj and Mathura. Bazana, called the capital of Gujarat ( i.e . the 
Gurjara country), is no doubt modern Bayana in the Bharatpur State. Coins 
bearing the legend udehaki and udehaki Suyamitasa may be assigned to the 
second half of the first century B.C. 

159 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


dheyas, together with the Uttamabhadras 1 known from epigraphie 
sources, appear to have submitted to the Scythians and their succes¬ 
sors, the Kushanas. Some of these tribes, especially the Arjuna- 
yanas, Malavas and Yaudheyas, grew powerful with the decline of 
Kushana power in that area about the end of the second and the 
beginning of the third century A.D., but together with the Madrakas 2 
of the Punjab and the Abhlras 3 of Rajputana as well as with the 
Nagas of Padmavatl and other places and several tribes 4 of centra] 


4. The Sibi people, probably the same as the Sivas of the Rigveda, had their capital 
at Sibipura, modem Shorkot in the Jhang District oi the Punjab. Alexander 
met the Sibis, who had 40,000 foot soldiers, in that region in the fourth century 
B.C. They are said to have dressed themselves with the skins of wild beasts 
and had clubs for their weapons. After their Punjab homeland had been 
threatened by the foreigners, the Sibis migrated to Rajasthan and settled in the 
district around Madhyamika (modern Nagarl near Chi tor/, which was ancient 
city known to Palanjali’s Mahahhashya. Coins of the Sibi tribe found in this 
area have the legend majhamikdya-sibi-janapadasa, i.e. ‘coin of the Sibi State 
struck at Madhyamika’, in a script that cannot be earlier than the latter half of 
the first century B.C. A branch of the people probably settled in Sind. A 
Sibi -country is located in the Dasakumaracharita on the banks of the Kaverl; 
but in this case the reference may be to the land of the Cholas who probably 
claimed connection with the ancient tribe. It may be noted in this connection 
that we have an Ikshvaku family in the Krishna-Guntur region and a Kekaya 
family in Mysore. 

5. Coins of Rajanya janapada, with legends either in Brahml or in Kharoshfhi 
may be assigned to the latter half of the first century B.C. The Rajanyas 
probably lived somewhere in northern or north-western Rajasthan where both 
the scripts were in use. Brihat-samhiUi places them in the north along with 
the Yaudheyas and Trigartas. Certain coins of the first century B.C. with the 
legend trakata-janapadasa in Brahml and KharoshthI have been attributed to 
the Trigartas who inhabited the Jalandar region. Another republican tribe may 
have been Agratyas of Agrodaka, identified with modern Agroha in the Hissar 
District, Punjab ( JNSI, IV, 54). 

1. The Uttamabhadras were the neighbours of the Malavas in Rajasthan and 
probably lived in the neighbourhood of Pushkar near Ajmer. They were allies 
of the Sakas of Western India and received h§lp from the Saka chief Rishabha- 
datta (A.D. 119-23), son-in-law and viceroy of Nahapana, in their struggle 
against the Malvas. 

2. A branch of the Madrakas or Madras, known as the Uttara-Madras, were the 
neighbours of the Uttara-Kurus and lived in the Himalayan region. The Madras 
proper had their capital at 6akala (modern Sialkot in the Punjab), which later 
became the capital of the Indo-Greek empire under Menander. The Madras 
were probably subjects of the younger Porus (Paurava king) in the days of 
Alexander. The mention of the Madrakas in the list of tribes that came under 
the influence of Samudra-gupta suggests that, after many centuries of foreign 
subjection, the people acquired an amount of political importance after the 
decline of the Kush^pas. No coins of this tribe have so far been discovered. 

3. There were several Abhlra settlements in different parts of western, central 
and southern India. The most important section of the people lived in the 
northern Konkan and the adjoining part of the Maratha country. Their history 
will -be discussed elsewhere. The Abhlras, who came under Gupta influence 
about the middle of the fourth century, may, however, have been those of 
central or western India. 

4. These were the Prarjunas, Sanakanlkas Kakas and Kharaparikas mentioned 
in the Allahabad pillar inscription. They will be discussed in connection with 
the Guptas in Vol. III. 


160 






NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 


and western India, they had to acknowledge the suzerainty of the 
Guptas of Magadha about the second half of the fourth century. In 
the western part of the U.P. and the adjoining region of the Punjab, 
the indigenous ruling family of Mathura was subdued by the Sakas, 
while the Kuninda 1 and Kuluta 2 tribes that began to rule in¬ 
dependently in the Kangra area after the decline of Yavana power 
in the Punjab are believed to have been overthrown by the Kushanas. 

The Kushana king Kanishka I appears to have been responsible 
for the subjugation of the reigning dynasty of Almora, 3 the Audum- 
baras and Vemakis 4 of the land between the Upper Sutlej and the 

1. The distribution of the Kuninda coins suggests that the tribe “occupied a narrow 
strip of land at the foot of the Siwalik hills between the Yamuna and the Sutlej 
and the territory between the upper courses of the Beas and Sutlei.” A Maha¬ 
raja named Amoghabhuti, who was the Raja of the Kunindas, is known from 
coins of the Indo-Greek module with legends sometimes in both Brahmi 
and KharoshthI, but in some cases in Brahmi only. Another class of the 
Kuninda coins of the module of the Kushana copper money bears the figure 
of 6iva and the Brahmi legend bhagavatah chatresvara-mahatmanah. Siva in 
the form of Chatresvara (sic. Chhatresvara?), lord of Chatra or Chhatra (pro¬ 
bably the Kuninda capital or a contraction of its name; cf. Ahichchhatra and 
Chhatravatl), appears to have been the tutelary deity of the tribe in whose name 
the tribal coins were issued. It is usually believed that Amoghabhuti carved 
out a kingdom on the ruins of the Indo-Greek empire about the end of the 
first century B.C. and that the Chatresvara coins were issued after the fall of 
the Kushanas at the end of the second or in the third century A.D. The 
suggestion is not improbable; but it is also probable that the coins of both the 
types belong practically to the same period. It would not go against palaeo- 
graphic evidence, if Amoghabhuti, who had a long reign, is assigned to the 
second or third century A.D. The KharoshthI legend and Greek module of his 
coins may point to the extension of his power over territories where coins of the 
Greek period were still in use. There is evidence to show that in ancient and 
medieval India coins never became out of date. It seems that the Kunindas 
were overcome by the Kulutas some time after Amoghabhuti. 

2. The Kulutas who inhabited the Kullu valley of the Kangra District are men¬ 
tioned in the Brihat-samhita and the Mudrarakshasa. Hiuen Tsang visited the 
Kuluta country in the seventh century A. D. The Kuluta king VIrayasas, whose 
coins have been discovered, probably flourished about the latter half of the third 
century A.D. The Kuluta country may have been subjugated by the Guptas. 

3. Coins of three kings named Sivadatta, Sivapalita and Haridatta are known. 
They may be assigned to the beginning of the first century A.D. 

4. The Audumbaras are located in the area formed by the eastern part of the 
Kangra District as well as Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur Districts i.e. “the 
valley of the Beas or perhaps the wider region between the upper Sutlej and 
the Ravi.” They represented one of the six sections of the ancient Salva 
tribe, the others being the Tilakhalas, Madrakaras (or Bhadrakaras. probably 
related with the Madras), Yugandharas, Bhuliiigas and Saradantfas. The 
earliest Audumbara coins that were issued in the name of the god Mahadeva 
or Siva bear the Prakrit legend, in both Brahmi and KharoshthI, indicating 
bhagavato mahadevasya rajarajasya. On the coins of the early Audumbara 
rulers like Dharaghosha (whose issues bear the representation of Visvamitra), 
Sivadasa and Rudradasa, we have the legends indicating “of the king so-and- 
so, the Audumbari; of (the god) Mahadeva.” On some square copper coins 
of the Audumbaras there is the representation of a Saiva temple characterised 
by a dhvaja, a trident and a battle-axe ( JNSI , IV, 55 ff). Goins of a king named 
Rudravarman, who belonged to the Vemaki tribe associated with the Audum- 

1C1 

A.I.U.—11 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Ravi, as well as the royal families of Ahichchhatra, Ayodhya and 
KausambI. But Mathura, Ahichchhatra, Ayodhya and KausambI 
became centres of powerful monarchical states after the removal of 
the strong hand of the early emperors of Kanishka’s house. About 
the middle of the fourth century, however, all these re-animated 
kingdoms were gradually absorbed into the growing empire of the 
Guptas. 1 

A problem offered by the coins referred to above is that in some 
cases they lead to the attribution of a large number of rulers, asso¬ 
ciated with a particular locality, to a comparatively short period of 
time. It is, how r ever, not. improbable that some of the kings, usually 
assigned to the same place and family, were actually ruling contem 
poraneously over adjoining districts. It also seems that the Kushana 
emperors were not especially against' the circulation of viceregal 
money and local coinage for which the sarafs (bankers and money 
changers) were mainly responsible. We have actually coins of the 
Saka satraps of Western India as well as the rulers of the KausambI 
region which have to be assigned to the times of the successors of 
Kanishka I. If this may be regarded as the result of the weakening 
of the Kushana hold, after that monarch, on the outlying provinces 
of the empire, it may be suggested that local coinage, if it was 
effectively stopped at all, was stopped only for the duration of 
Kanishka’s rule. 

With these introductory remarks we may now proceed to give 
an account of the more important states, both republican and monar¬ 
chical, that played a part in Indian history during the period follow¬ 
ing the decline of the Kushana power. 

II. THE TRIBAL REPUBLICS 
1 . The Arjundyanas 

The Arjunayana people probably claimed descent from the 
Pandava prince Arjuna or from the Haihaya king of that name. They 
have been assigned to the region lying west of Agra and Mathura 
about the Bharatpur and Alwar States of Rajputana. Coins of the 

baras ( 1HQ, XX, 59 ft), have been discovered. All the coins referred to above 
may be assigned to the end of the first century B.C. and the first half of the 
first century A.D. Some other kings, known from their coins and often 
believed to have been Audumbaras, are Ajamitra (or Aryamitra) Mahlmitra, 
Bhumimitra and Mahabhutimitra. In this connection it may be pointed out 
that the name of the Adamvira or Admera section of the Johiya Rajputs 
resembles very closely that of the ancient Audumbaras. 

1. This point will be discussed in Vol. III. 


1C2 



NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 

tribal republic of the Arjunayanas bear the legend arjundyandnim 
jay ah in the Brahmi script of about the closing decades of the first 
century B.C. The Arjunayanas, like their neighbours the Yaudhe- 
yas appear to have begun to grow powerful with the gradual decline 
of the Indo-Greek power about the middle of the first century B.C., 
but were subdued by tiie §akas about the end of the same century. 
They recovered their political position after the decline of the 
Kushanas, but had soon to submit to the Guptas about the middle 
of the fourth century. In the sixth century, Varahamihira refers 
to the Arjunayanas as an important people of the northern or north¬ 
western division of India. 


2. The Malavas 

The name of the Malavas, like that of the Malaya mountain 
range, is probably derived from the Dravidian word malai , meaning 
hill. In literary and epigraphic records, the name Malava is applied 
to a number of communities and territories in different parts of cen¬ 
tral, western and north-western India. In the fourth century B.C. 
when Alexander invaded India, the Malavas lived in the land lying 
north of the confluence of the Ravi and the Chenab, and were probab¬ 
ly confederated with Kshudrakas who lived about the Montgomery 
District of the Punjab. The army of the two peoples consisted of 
90,000 foot soldiers, 10,000 cavalry and 900 war chariots. The asso¬ 
ciation of the Malavas and the Kshudrakas is also known to the 
Mahabhdrata and the early grammarians, who class these -tribes 
amongst the ayudha-jivins, ‘those who live by the profession of arms.’ 
From the Punjab, the Malavas, or at least a large section of the tribe, 
migrated to Rajputana. This movement may have begun during 
the Indo-Greek occupation of the Punjab, but seems to have con¬ 
tinued down to the Scythian conquest of that country. 

The Malavas are the earliest Indian people who are definitely 
known to have used an era which has been identified with the 
so-called Vikrama-Samvat of 58 B.C. According to some scholars, 
the Malavas themselves started the era to commemorate some im¬ 
portant event in their history, probably the foundation of their re¬ 
public in Rajasthan. But, as suggested above, 1 it is more probable 
that they adopted the use of the Drangian era of 58 B.C. from the 
Sakas in the Punjab and carried it to their settlement in Rajasthan. 
The Drangian era, used by the Malavas in Rajasthan, soon came to be 


1. See p. 125, n. 1. 


163 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


known as Krita probably after an illustrious Malava leader of that 
name, who secured the independence of his tribe frome foreign yoke. 1 

In Rajasthan the capital of the Malava republic was Malava - 
nagara 2 which has to be identified with modern Nagar or Karkota 
nagar in Uniyara in the former Jaipur State, lying about 25 miles to 
the south-south-east of Tonk and about 45 miles to the north-north¬ 
east of Bundi. As early as the beginning of the second century A.D. 
the Malavas of South Jaipur are known to have fought with their 
neighbours, the Uttamabhadras of the Ajmer region, as well as with 
the latter’s allies the Kshaharata-Sakas of Western India. But soon 
after the decline of the Kushanas, they appear to have extended 
their power in different directions. This is suggested by the use of 
the Krita era in the records of the third and fourth centuries, dis¬ 
covered in the Bharatpur, Kotah and Udaipur States. According 
to the Nandsa (Udaipur State) inscriptions of A.D. 226, freedom and 
prosperity had returned to the country of the Malavas before that 
date owing to the brilliant achievements of a Malava chief whose 
name has not been fully deciphered. The reference seems to be to 
the success of the Malava people chiefly against the Sakas. It is pro¬ 
bable that the Maukhari Mahdsenapati Bala, known from the Badva 
inscriptions of A.D. 238, owed allegiance to the Malava republic. 

There seems to have been a long-drawn struggle between the 
Malavas using the Krita era and the Kardamakas (Western satraps) 
using the Saka era, in the third and fourth centuries A.D. But both 
the powers had soon to submit to the Guptas. While, however, the 
Saka house was extirpated by the conquerors, the Aulikaras, appa¬ 
rently a Malava dynasty, flourished at Dasapura (modern Mandasor, 
formerly in the realm of the Kardamakas) under the vassalage of 
the Gupta emperors. It was probably the Aulikaras, especially the 
mighty Aulikara king Yasodharman (A.D. 532), who were respon¬ 
sible for the name Malava being applied to a wide region of Central 


1. For Krita as a personal name, see Mbh. XVIII, 91, 31; Hv. 1, 20, 42; Bhdg. P., 
IX, 24, 46; Vayu P., 96, 139 etc. For the origin of the era, see above, p. 157. If 
Krita was the Malava leader who secured the independence of his tribe from 
foreign yoke, it was easy to confuse his achievements with that of Vikra- 
maditya, ‘the exterminator of the §akas.’ Later the era was associated with 
Malava people or their republic, then with the Malava kings and ultimately 
with the king of Malava (i.e. king Vikramaditya of tradition). Cf. Ch. X. 

2. An inscription dated V.S. 1043 (A.D. 986) which has been recently discovered 
at Nagar, calls the place Malava-nagara and describes its prosperity (B/iarata- 
kaumudi, I. pp. 271-72). The name Karkota-nagar, often applied to the city, 
probably suggests that, for a time it passed to the Nagas. In fabric the later 
Malava coins are somewhat similar to the coins of the Nagas of Padmavatl 
with whom they may have been closely connected. 


164 




NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 


and Western India, including the old janapadas of Avanti (district 
round Ujjayim) and Akara or Dasarna (district round Vidisa). It 
may be noted that the kings, even when they were subordinate to 
the Guptas, used the Krita era (then also called the era of the Malava 
people or their republic) in preference to the era of the Guptas. 
The favour shown to the Malava family of the Aulikaras and to the 
Malava era in contradistinction to the attempt of Chandra-gupta II 
Vikramaditya, and probably also his father Samudra-gupta Vikra¬ 
maditya, to extirpate both the Sakas and their era might have con¬ 
tributed to the growth of the Sakari Vikramaditya saga attributing 
the foundation of the era of 58 B.C. to Raja Vikrama. 

Coins attributed to the Malava tribe have been discovered in 
large numbers at Nagar and its neighbourhood. At Rairh in the former 
Jaipur State some Malava coins have been found together with a 
lead stamp seal with the legend mdlava-janapadasa. Some of the 
Malava coins may be assigned to the first century B.C., but most of 
them are later. The coins are usually divided into two broad groups, 
the first of which seems to bear the legend jayo mdlavanam or 
mdlavdndm jayah. The second class of coins bears short legends 
such as Bhapamyana, Majupct, Mapojaya, Mapaya, Magajasa, Mago- 
java, Mapaka , Yama, Paclnha, Jamapaya, Jdmaku, etc. The real 
significance of these is unknown. They are sometimes taken to be 
names of chiefs of foreign origin. It has also been suggested that 
“they are not names, but in most cases meaningless attempts to re¬ 
produce parts of mdlavdndm jayah ” Nothing definite, however, can 
be asserted on this point. 

3. The Yaudheyas 

Although little is known of the detailed history of the republi¬ 
can tribe of the Yaudheyas, there are enough indications of their 
great power and authority and the vicissitudes of their political 
fortune. The forms Yodheya and Yaudheya are derived from 
Yodha and signify ‘a warrior’. In the Mahdhhdrata, Yaudheya ap¬ 
pears as the name of a son of Yudhishthira, and it is not improbable 
that the Yaudheya people claimed descent from the Pandava king. 
They are mentioned in Panini’s Ashtadhydyl and are often classed 
with the Trigarttas and other peoples amongst the dyudha-jivl 
Kshatriyas. Clay seals of the Yaudheyas have been found in the 
Ludhiana District, while their coins have been discovered in the 
area extending from Saharanpur to Multan. Yaudheya coins have 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


been recently found also in the Dehra Dun District. 1 Some inte¬ 
resting coin-moulds of the tribe have come from Rohtak. 2 The 
heart of the Yaudheya territory may have been the eastern Punjab, 
but they dominated also over the adjoining tracts of the U.P. and 
Rajasthan. 

The Yaudheyas, whose tutelary deity was Brahmanyadeva 
(Karttikeya), are probably to be identified with the Mattamayuraka 
people of Rohitaka (modern Rohtak District of the Punjab), which is 
described in the Mahdbharata as a place specially favoured by the 
god Karttikeya. A clue to the extent of the Yaudheya territory is 
given by the discovery of an inscription of this people at Bijay- 
garh lying about two miles to the south-west of Bayana in the 
Bharatpur State of Rajputana. Another indication is offered by the 
probable identification of the Yaudheyas with the Johiya Rajputs 
inhabiting the tract of land called Johiyabar along both banks of 
the Sutlej on the borders of the former Bahawalpur State. 

The Yaudheyas, like many of their neighbours, grew powerful 
with the decline of the Indo-Greek power; but they appear to have 
submitted to the Sakas and the Kushanas. As early, however, as 
the middle of the second century A.D., when a successor of the 
Kushatia emperor Kanishka I was ruling, the Yaudheyas were 
powerful enough tb challenge the authority of the mighty Saka 
satrap, Rudradaman. The Kushanas soon lost effective control over 
Western India, and the Yaudheyas, like the Kardamakas and Malavas, 
grew still more powerful in the third century A.D. They were 
subdued by the Guptas in the next century. 

We have seen that the ancient Yaudheyas were professionally 
warlike. In the Junagarh inscription of A.D. 150 they are described 
as untamable owing to their pride, resulting from the ascription of 
the title of “hero” to them amongst all the Kshatriyas. The Saka 
ruler Rudradaman claims to have defeated them. The Bijaygarh 
inscription of about the third century A.D. speaks of a Maharaja - 
Mahasendpati who was placed at the head of the Yaudheya republic 
(Yaudlieya-ganapuraskrita). 

It is interesting to note that the head of the Yaudheya tribe, 
like that of the Lichchhavis of earlier times, assumed an unpreten¬ 
tious viceregal title ( cf . also the style of the contemporary Karda- 
maka kings). A large Yaudheya clay seal from Ludhiana of about 

1. JNSI, II, 109 ff. 

2. Proc. N.S.l ., 1<)3G; Mem. N.S.I., No. 3. 

106 





NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 


the fourth century A.D. bears the representation of a bull and the 
legend Yaudheyanam jaya-mantra-dharanam, i.e., the seal of the 
Yaudheyas who were in possession of a victory-charm. In the 
Allahabad inscription of the middle of the same century, the 
Yaudheya people are mentioned as a subordinate ally of the Gupta 
- emperor. A later reference to the Yaudheyas is found in the 
Brihat-samhita which locates them in the northern or north-west 
ern division of India along with the Arjunayanas. They are also 
mentioned in the Puranas. 

The earliest Yaudheya coins, which may be attributed to a 
period about the end of the first century B.C., bear the legend 
bahudhdhake Yodheyandm , showing that they were struck by the 
Yaudheya people at Bahudhanyaka. The city of Bahudanyaka 
has probably to be located in the Rohtak region where the moulds 
of these coins have been discovered. Another type of the Yau¬ 
dheya coins, both in silver and copper, was issued in the name of 
Brahmanyadeva-Kumara (i.e., Skanda-Karttikeya), who was the 
tutelary deity of the people. The complete legend on these coins, 
which may be assigned to the second or third century A.D., appears 
to be bhagavatah svamino brahmanyadevasya kumdrasya: yau&he- 
ydndm. 

In some cases, the god is called Brahmanyadeva only, while on 
a few specimens the coins appear to be called the dramma (from 
Greek drachma ) of the deity. This class of coins, wdiich is connect¬ 
ed closely in style and type with the coinage of the Kuninda^, bears 
the representation of the six-headed god Skanda. On seme of the 
coins the god Skanda is found on the obverse, while a goddess with 
six heads is represented on the reverse. 1 This deity has been 
identified with Shashthl or Devasena, wife of Skanda. 

A third class of the Yaudheya coins in copper shows Kushana 
influence in style and types and may be assigned to the third and 
fourth centuries A.D. The legend on these coins runs Yaudheya - 
ganasya jay ah, ‘victory be to the republic of the Yaudheyas’; but in 
some cases we have either dvi or tri (or tri ) in addition. It has 
been suggested that dvi and tri are contractions respectively of the 
words dvitiya and tritiya indicating the second and third sections of 
llie Yaudheya tribe. One of these sections may have been the Matta- 
mayurakas of Rohtak. The present-day Johiyas are also divided 
into three tribes, viz. Langavira (Lakvira), Madhovira (Madhera) 
and Adamvira (Admera). 


1. .IN SI, V, pp. 2‘J IT. 


107 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


It has been recently suggested that the Yaudheyas were espe¬ 
cially responsible for extirpating Kushana rule from the Punjab, 
but the theory can only be partially true. There is no doubt that 
the rise of feudatories and subordinate allies is partly responsible 
for the decline of an imperial house, and also that the weakness of 
the imperial government is partially responsible for the rise of the 
subordinates. The known story of the decline and downfall of the 
Tlmurids in India, however, shows that the eclipse of an empire 
cannot always be attributed to the rise of a single feudatory. In 
the present state of our knowledge there is nothing to single out the 
Yaudheyas or any of their neighbours in the Punjab, U.P., and Raj 
asthan as having been solely responsible for the collapse of Kushana 
fule in India. 1 


III. THE MONARCHICAL STATES 


1. The Naga kingdoms 

The Nagas were serpent-worshipping non-Aryan tribes of 
ancient India. Their great power, culture and political prestige 
are hinted at in such epic legends as those relating to Vasuki and 
Takshaka, the death of Parikshit, and the serpent sacrifice of Jana- 
mejaya as well as in literary traditions like that of Nilanaga, the 
prehistoric protector of Kashmir. According to some scholars, one 
of the earliest historical Naga royal lines was the dynasty (or 
dynasties) represented by Sisunaga and Naga-Darsaka, kings of 
Magadha. Serpent-worship was a popular cult in all parts of 
ancient India. The existence of the Nagas in different parts of India 
in the early and medieval periods and of their descendants in the 
present time is evidenced not only by epigraphic, numismatic and 
literary records, but also by numerous localities named after the 
Nagas (e.g., Nagapura, Uragapura, Nagarakhanda, etc.) and a large 
number of families (including many royal houses) with the cogno¬ 
men Naga. In the present section we are concerned only with the 

1. The main cause of the decay of Kushana pov/er in India seems to have been 
the division of power between the joint rulers as well as the personal incapa¬ 
city of the successors of Kanishka I to exercise control over the outlying pro¬ 
vinces of the empire. Another strong factor must have been the foundation 
of a strong monarchy in Persia by the Sassanians who knocked at the western 
gates of the Kushana empire from about the middle of the third century A.D. 
But as we know from the Wei-lio , even about this time the Kushana 
emperor was regarded as the lord of T’ien-chou (probably the Punjab and the 
adjoining regions) and other countries. The importance of the Kushana ruler’s 
position in Uttarapatha in the fourth century A.D. is indicated by his prominent 
mention in the Allahabad inscription of Samudra-gupta. 


168 







NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 


Naga dynasties that became powerful at the expense of the later 
Kushanas and were ultimately suppressed by the Guptas of Magadha. 

According to the evidence of the Puranas, Naga kings flourish¬ 
ed, apparently after the decline of the Kushanas, at Vidisa, Kanti- 
puri, Mathura and Padmavatl. Mention is also made of the power¬ 
ful Naga rulers of Vidisa named Sesha, Bhogin and Sadachandra, 
surnamed Chandramsa, who is described as the second Nakhavat 
(i.e., Nahapana) and may have been associated with the §akas. 
The prevalence of Naga rule over considerable portions of north¬ 
ern India in the third and fourth centuries A.D. is also attested by 
epigraphic and numismatic evidence, and most of the Naga kings, 
known from these sources, have probably to be connected with one 
or other of the Naga centres mentioned in the Puranas. 

A Lahore copper seal of about the fourth century A.D. refers to 
prince Mahesvaranaga, son of Maharaja Nagabhatta; 1 but the land 
over which the Naga Maharaja ruled cannot be determined. The 
Vakataka records mention Maharaja Bhavanaga as the maternal 
grandfather of Rudrasena I, whose grandson was a contemporary 
of Chandra-gupta (A.D. 376-414). Bhavanaga, therefore, may be 
assigned to the end of the third or the beginning of the fourth cen¬ 
tury A. D. He is described as belonging to the family of the Bhara¬ 
sivas “whose royal line owed its origin to the great satisfaction of 
Siva that was caused by their carrying a Siva linga placed as a load 
upon their shoulders/’ and “who were besprinkled on the forehead 
with the pure water of the Bhaglrathl that had been obtained by 
their valour.” Thus the name of the Bharasivas, a family of Nagas 
who were usually Saivas, has been explained by their carrying a 
linga. It is also suggested that their home was away from the 
Bhaglrathl (Ganga) but that they extended their power as far as 
the valley of that river. 

The Bharasivas are further credited with the performance of 
no less than ten Asvamedha sacrifices. The suggestions that the 
Bharasivas were responsible for the overthrow of Kushana supre¬ 
macy in India and that the Dasasvamedha Ghat at Banaras owes its 
name to the celebration of the ten horse-sacrifices by the Bharasivas 
on that spot may be regarded as fantastic; but there is no doubt that 
the Bharasiva Nagas were one of the most important powers that 
flourished on the ruins of the Kushana empire. Some coins bearing 
the name of Bhavanaga (supposed to be styled Maharaja or Adhiraja) 

1. This seems to be the natural interpretation of the legend maharaja-nayabhatta- 
Vutra-mahesvaranaga. 


If>9 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


have been discovered at Padam Pawaya, the ancient Padmavatl near 
Narwar in old Gwalior State. 1 If this Bhavanaga was no other 
than the Bharasiva ruler of that name, the royal family of the 
Bharasiva-Nagas must have had its capital at that well-known 
centre of Naga power. The city of Padmavatl has been immortal¬ 
ised by Bhavabhuti (middle of the eighth century A.D.) who made 
this flourishing city the scene of his Mdlatimddhava . It was situat¬ 
ed in the old Gwalior State on the banks of the Sindhu (modern 
Sind), and other rivers in its vicinity were Para (modern Para or 
Parvati), Lavana (modern Luna) and Madhumatl (modern 
Madhuwar). 

The Gupta emperor Samudra-gupta claims to have ‘extirpated’ 
a number of Aryavarta kings about the middle of the fourth cen¬ 
tury; two of these rulers, viz. Ganapatinaga and Nagasena, were 
Nagas. That the Gupta emperors maintained friendly relations 
with the suppressed Naga houses is evidenced by the marriage of 
Samudra-gupta’s son with Kuberanaga who was a Naga princess. 
A Naga chief named £arvanaga was appointed a vishaya-pati (pro¬ 
vincial governor) and was ruling the AntarvedI district (between 
the Ganga and the Yamuna and between Prayaga and Hardwar) 
under Skanda-gupta in the year A.D. 466. Nothing is known about 
the particular families to which Kuberanaga and Sarvanaga belong¬ 
ed; but both the kings Ganapatinaga and Nagasena appear to have 
been scions of the house of Padmavatl. 

Some coins bearing the name of Mahdrdja Ganendra or Ganapa 
have been discovered at Padmavatl and also at Vidisa and Mathura. 
This king of Padmavatl, who may have extended his influence over 
the other Naga centres, has been identified with king Ganapatinaga 
extirpated by Samudra-gupta. No coins of Nagasena have as yet 
been discovered; but the Harshacharita refers to a tradition that the 
confidential deliberations of Nagasena of the Naga-kula having been 
divulged by a sdrikd bird led to his destruction at Padmavatl. It is 
not improbable that, after the overthrow of Ganapatinaga, Samudra- 
gupta placed Nagasena on the throne of Padmavatl as his vassal; 
but later Nagasena himself was also extirpated possibly as a result 
of an attempt on his part to assume independence. 

The Puranas refer to the rule of nine Naga kings at Padmavatl, 
and, as we have seen, three of them may have been Bhavanaga, 
Ganapatinaga and Nagasena. Some other Naga rulers are also 


l. JNS1, V. pp. 21 ff. 


170 







NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 

known from coins discovered in the neighbourhood of Padmavati. 
They are Maharaja Bhimanaga, Maharaja Skandanaga, Maharaja 
Brihaspatinaga and Maharaja Devanaga. A few Padmavati coins 
have been recently attributed to a Naga Maharaja named Vibhu- 
naga. 1 Certain rare coins of the same region with the legend 
vydghra have been assigned to a king Vyaghranaga. 

According to a Puranic statement, seven Naga kings ruled at 
Mathura apparently after the Kushanas. The issuers of the coins 
attributed to Mathura, however, had names that do not end in the 
word Naga. The earliest coins of Mathura appear to be those issued 
by Gomitra, Brahmamitra, Dritfhamitra, Suryamitra and Vishnu- 
mitra who are mentioned without any royal title. These coins may 
be roughly attributed to the first century B.C. Other early coins 
attributed to the locality bear the names of Purushadatta (without 
any royal title), Uttamadatta (sometimes called raja), Ramadatta 
(sometimes called raja ), Raja Kamadatta, Raja Seshadatta, Raja 
Bhavadatta and Raja Balabhuti. These rulers may have been 
vassals of the Kushanas and flourished about the second century 
A.D., after the extirpation of the &akas of Mathura. 

Besides the above rulers, a very powerful king named Virasena 
is known to have flourished after the Kushanas and held large tracts 
in the western parts of the U.P. It is not improbable that he was a 
Naga and had his capital at Mathura. The coins of Virasena have 
been found in Mathura and also in Bulandshahr, Etah and 
Farrukhabad Districts. A few specimens have come from the 
Punjab. An inscription of this king, probably dated in his 
thirteenth regnal year, was discovered at Jankhat in the south of 
the Farrukhabad District. King Virasena may be assigned to the 
third or fourth century A.D. One of his successors seems to have 
been ousted by the Guptas. 

2. Ahichchhatra 

Ahichchhatra (or -tra) or Adhichchhatra, sometimes also called 
Chhatravati, was the capital of North Panchala in early times when 
South Panchala to the south of the Ganga had its headquarters at 
Kampilya, modern Kampil, in the Farrukhabad District. Ahich¬ 
chhatra has been identified with modern Ramnagar near Aonla in 
the Bareilly District of the U.P. and North Panchala must have 
comprised Rohilkhand and the adjoining area. 


1. JNSI, V. pp. 26-27. 


171 








THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


A remarkable series of coins, characterised by a well-marked 
obverse incuse containing the issuer’s name without royal title be¬ 
neath a group of three symbols, is regarded by numismatists to 
have been issued by the kings of Ahichchhatra. As, however, the 
coins of a few of the rulers are common as far as the Basti District 
in the east, some writers prefer to call these kings ‘lords of Panchala 
and Kosala.’ Owing to the fact that many of the kings have names 
ending in the word mitra, they are often styled ‘the Mitra kings’. 
As mentioned above 1 , some of t;hese- kings are identified with the 
Sunga and Kanva kings of these names, but this cannot be regarded 
as certain. 

The sorCalled Ahichchhatra coins reveal the names of Bhadra- 
ghosha, Suryamitra, Phalgunlmitra, Bhanumitra, Bhumimitra, 
Dhruvamitra, Agnimitra, Vishnumitra, Jayamitra, Indramitra, 
Brihatsvatimitra (usually but rather inaccurately called Brihaspati- 
mitra), Visvapala, Rudragupta and Jayagupta. Recent discoveries 
have added to the list the names of Vangapala, Damagupta, Vasu- 
sena, Yajnapala, Prajapatimitra and Varunamitra. 2 Some coins of 
Vangapala are believed to have been counterstruck by Damagupta. 
The coins may be assigned to the three centuries following the 
middle of the first century B. C. An interesting feature of the coins 
is that often the reverse device refers to the issuer’s name; e.g., the 
issues of Agnimitra exhibit a personification of fire ( Agni) and those 
of Suryamitra and Bhanumitra have solar emblems. Apparently the 
issuers of the coins were inclined to identify themselves with the 
deities indicated on the reverse of the coins; but the feature may 
have been inspired by the variety of deities represented on the re¬ 
verse of the Kushana coins. 

Two kings of Ahichchhatra are known from the Pabhosa (near 
Kosam) cave inscriptions of prince Ashadhasena, son of the queen 
Gopalika-Vaihidarl. Asha<Jhasena’s father was the king Traivarnl- 
putra Bhagavata who was the son of Vangapala, king of Ahichchha¬ 
tra. It is very probable that Vangapala was the king of the same 
name known from coins. King Bhagavata’s daughter Gopali was 
married to a Kausambi king and was the mother of king Brihatsvati¬ 
mitra (probably not Brihaspatimitra) of Kausambi. 

There are two types of copper coins found at Ahichchhatra on 
which the name Achyuta is partially preserved. The reverses of 

1. See pp. 98, 100. 

2. JNSI, II, pp. 115-16; III, pp. 79; IV, pp. 17, 20; V, 17 IT. 


172 



NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 

both the types represent a wheel, probably the sudarsanachakra of 
the god Achyuta (Vishnu) The obverse of one of the two types 
has ‘head and neck of king to rights possibly imitated from the coins 
of the ^akas of Western India with whom Achyuta of Ahichchhatra 
may have had some relations. King Achyuta has been identified 
with the Aryavarta ruler of that name, who according to the 
Allahabad inscription, was ousted by Samudra-gupta about the 
middle of the fourth century A.D. 

3. Ayodhyd 

The city of Ayodhya was the earliest capital of the Kosala 
(Uttara-Kosala) janapada which roughly corresponded to modern 
Oudh. It stood on the river Sarayu (modern Ghaghra or Gogra), 
and has been identified with modern Ajodhya in the Fyzabad Dis¬ 
trict of the U.P. Saketa, which is often mentioned in early litera¬ 
ture as the capital of Kosala, is sometimes taken to be another name 
of Ayodhya, though it is probable that the two cities were adjoining 
like London and Westminster. Sravasti, modern Sahet-Mahet on 
the borders of the Gonda and Bahraich Districts, was possibly the 
capital of the janapada in the age of the Buddha; but Saketa seems 
to have been reinstated in its old position soon after. 

The early inscribed coins, that have been found near the site of 
the ancient city of Ayodhya, may be divided into two distinct classes 
issued probably by two different dynasties of rulers. * The first 
class is represented by square cast coins without any trace of 
foreign influence in the style and types. The obverse of these coins 
shows a bull (or rarely an elephant or the Gaja-lakshml) before a 
symbol, while the reverse type consists of a group of five or six 
symbols. The rulers represented by this series are Dhanadeva, 
Visakhadeva, Muladeva, Vayudeva, Naradatta and Sivadatta. 
Another ruler, whose name is not fully preserved on the coins, was 
probably Praushfchadatta (or -deva). None of these rulers has been 
called a king; but it is extremely probable that Dhanadeva of the 
coins is the same as the Dharmardja Dhana(deva), king of Kosala, 
who is mentioned in an Ayodhya inscription. 1 In this epigraph, 
which may be assigned on palaeographical grounds to the end of the 
first century B.C., king Dhanadeva is represented as the son of 
Phalgudeva (who has no royal title) and as the sixth in descent, 

1. Sel. Ins., I, p. 96. According to some scholars, the expression pushyamitrasya 
shasthena means ‘the sixth brother of Pushyamitra 6uhga.’ This view is quite 
incompatible with the palaeography of the record. 

173 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


probably on the mother’s side, from Senapati Pushyamitra, the per¬ 
former of two Asvamedhas. As this Pushyamitra is undoubtedly 
the Suhga king of that name, who ruled c. 187 to 151 B.C., his sixth 
descendant may be referred to the closing decades of the first cen¬ 
tury B.C. The kings represented by the above series of coins may 
be roughly assigned to the two centuries following the middle of 
that century. 

The second class of Ayodhya coins belongs to a later group of 
rulers who appear to have flourished after the end of Kushana rule 
in the eastern U.P. These coins, which are very distinct from the 
cast coins of the earlier epoch, are “round pieces struck from dies 
leaving the seal-like impression characteristic of early Indian struck 
coins.” The usual obverse type is the bull and the reverse type “a 
cock and a post.” The rulers represented by this series are Satya- 
mitra, Ayumitra (sometimes believed to the Aryamitra), Sangha- 
mitra, Vijayamitra, Devamitra, Ajavarman and Kumudasena. Of 
these Kumudasena alone is called a Raja. It is probably from a 
successor of this king that the Guptas conquered the Oudh region 
and annexed it to their empire. 

4. Kausambi 

The ancient city of Kausambi, which has been identified with 
the village of Kosam about thirty-five miles to the south-west of 
Allahabad, appears to have been the headquarters of a provincial 
ruler in the age of the Maurya emperors; but, about the end of the 
second century B.C., it probably became the capital of a local 
family of rulers. 

The earliest of the inscribed coins of Kausambi appear to be 
those with the legend Kosambi in Brahmi characters of the begin¬ 
ning of the first century B.C. Next in point of date are probably 
the cast coins of Sudeva and Brihatsvatlmitra (probably not Brihas- 
patimitra as is usually held) which are closely connected with the 
early uninscribed cast coins of the locality in style and types and 
may be assigned to the middle of the first century B.C. Brihatsvati- 
mitra also issued die-struck coins. The struck coins reveal the 
names of Asvaghosha, Parvata, Agnimitra, Jyeshtamitra and Deva¬ 
mitra. Some coins recently discovered at Kausambi have been 
attributed to Varunamitra, Suramitra, Radhamitra, Prajapatimitra, 
Rajamitra and Vijayamitra. Coins of a king named Praushthasri 
have been found at Bhita, while those of the kings Bhadramagha, 


174 


NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHAhlAS 


Sivamagha, Vaisravana and Bhlmavarman have come from the 
Fatehpur District. Some unclassified KausambI coins in the British 
Museum reveal the names not only of Vaisravana and Vijayamagha, 
but also of some rulers whose names may probably have been 
Mulahasta, Vishnusri and Sankumagha. A few KausambI coins 
have been attributed to a Raja named Dhanadeva. 1 All these coins 
may be referred roughly to the period between the first century 
B.C. and the fourth century A.D. 

A number of the KausambI kings who issued coins are also 
known from epigraphic sources. The earliest of the inscriptions, 
which may be assigned to about the end of the first century B.C., is 
the Pabhcsa (near Kosam) record of Ashadhasena, prince of Ahich- 
chhatra, dated in the tenth regnal year of Udaka. The epigraph 
represents king Gopallputra Brihatsvatlmitra, 2 a contemporary or a 
predecessor of Udaka, as the daughter’s son of king Traivarnl- 
putra Bhagavata, son of king Saunakayanlputra Vangapala of 
Ahichchhatra. King Brihatsvatlmitra is known from his coins; but 
no coins of Udaka have as yet been discovered. Varunamitra 
of the coins is apparently the same as Rdjd Gauptlputra Varunamitra 
of a fragmentary Kosam inscription of the first century A.D. 
Varunamitra’s son was also a king who had the metronymic Kohatji- 
putra. The dynasty of these rulers of KausambI appears to have 
been overthrown by Kanishka I. An inscription of the Kushana 
monarch has been found at Kosam itself. 

The records of the later kings of KausambI are characterised by 
the use of an era which seems to be no other than Kanishka’s reckon¬ 
ing, i.e. the Saka era of A.D. 78, 3 introduced in the locality during 
the rule of Kanishka I. This dynasty of rulers must have originally 
been subordinate to the Kushanas. As some of the kings of this 
house had names ending with the word Magha, it is probably that 
they are the Meghas (sic. Maghas) mentioned in the Puranas. The 

1. For the new coins see ASR, 1911-12, pp. 50 ff; JNSI, II, pp. 95 ff; IV, pp. 4 ff; 
133 ff. For a silver coin of Asvaghcsha, see JBORS, XX, p. 8. Some Kau¬ 
sambI coins have also been attributed to Rajanlmitra, Praushthamitra, 6ata- 
mitra, S-arpamitra, Navika, Pushvasrl and Agaraja (cf. JNSI, IV, 133 ff). But 
the reading of some of the names appears to be doubtful. Pushvasriyah seems 
to be a wrong reading for prashthasriyah (i.e. praushtha 0 ). Agaraja has been 
identified with Gauptlputra Agaraju (Afigaradyut), son of Garglputra Visva- 
deva who was a feudatory of the Sungas and is mentioned in a Bharhut 
inscription (Sel. Ins. I, p. 89), while Praushthamitra has been supposed to be 

N the person of that name known from a KausambI inscription (JNSI, IV, p. 134). 
Praushthamitra of the inscription, however, was not a king. 

2. See below 214. 

3. Some scholars, however, take it to be the Traikutaka or the Gupta era, or a 
local era. For full discussion on the subject cf. NHIP, VI, p. 41, fn. 2. 

175 







THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


wide extent of the Magha dominions is indicated by the find of their 
epigraphic and numismatic records not only in the Allahabad Dis¬ 
trict, but also in the Fatehpur District as well as in the Rewah State 
of Baghelkhand in Central India. 

Although the new dynasty may have been founded by a lieute¬ 
nant of the Kushanas named Magha, the earliest ruler known from 
epigraphic sources seems to be Raja Vasishthiputra Bhlmasena of a 
Bhita seal. In the Bandhogarh (Rewah State) inscription of the 
year 51 (A.D. 129) and the Ginja (40 miles to the south of Allahabad 
inscription of the year 52 (A.D. 130) Bhlmasena is credited with 
the more dignified title of Maharaja. Maharaja Kautsiputra Prau 
shthasrl, son of Bhlmasena, is known from six records found at 
Bandhogarh with dates in the years 86, 87 and 88 corresponding to 
A.D. 164, 165 and 166. PraushthasrI is no doubt the king of that 
name who is known from his coins. His successor appears to have 
been Bhadradeva of a Bandhogarh inscription of the year 90 (A.D. 
168) who is probably identical with Bhadadeva of another record of 
the same place. 

Maharaja Kausiklputra Bhadramagha is not only known from 
his coins but also from several Kosam inscriptions dated in the years 
81, 86 and 87 corresponding to A.D. 159, 164 and 165. It seems that 
Bhadramagha, who may have been a younger step-brother of Bhlma¬ 
sena or an elder step-brother of PraushthasrI; was the immediate 
successor of Maharaja Bhlmasena. But PraushthasrI appears to have 
rebelled against Bhadramagha’s authority and declared himself king 
in the southern part of the kingdom about the closing years of the 
latter’s reign. Later he extended his power also over the KausambI 
region. Some scholars are inclined to identify Bhadramagha with 
Bhadradeva or Bhadadeva of the Bandhogarh inscription of the 
year 90; but the suggestion is unconvincing. 

Two records from Bandhogarh belong to Raja Vaisravana who 
is known from his coins. This ruler, probably belonging to the same 
house, is represented in the inscriptions as the son of the Maha- 
senapati Bhadrabala whose identification with Bhadramagha, sug¬ 
gested by some writers, is, however, unwarranted. Vaisravana may 
have at first been the viceroy of the KausambI kings in tfie southern 
part of their kingdom; but he later established himself on the throne 
of his masters. A Kosam inscription of the year 107 (A.D. 185) 
mentions him as Maharaja. A later king of KausambI was Maha¬ 
raja Bhimavarman who is not only known from his coins but also 


170 


NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 

from two inscriptions found at Kosam dated respectively in the 
years 130 and 139 corresponding to A.D. 208 and 217. 1 <JGng 
Sivamagha of the coins is no doubt the same as Maharaja Gautami- 
putra Sivamagha mentioned in a Bhita seal and in several inscriptions 
from Kosam. But his exact date as well as his relations with the 
other kings such as Bhadramagha cannot be determined in the pre¬ 
sent stage of our knowledge. Nothing definite is known about the 
genealogical and chronological position of the other kings of the 
Magha dynasty whose names, known from their coins, are referred 
to above. 

A Bhita seal of about the third century A. D. speaks of Maharaja 
Gautamlputra Vindhyavedhana who is as yet unknown from any 
other sources. He is said to have received his kingdom through 
Mahesvara and Mahasena and had the bull as his banner. 2 Whether 
Vindhyavedhana was the founder of a new dynasty cannot be 
ascertained. One of his successors appears to have been Maharaja 
Samkarasimha who is known from a Bhita seal of about the fourth 
century A.D. The Bhita seals also reveal the names of Mqhddev 7 
Rudramati and Mahasvapati-Mahddandanayaka Vishnurakshita who 
were undoubtedly associated with the kings of Kausambl. 3 


1. For the inscriptions and seals, see Sel. Ins., p. 365; El, XVIII, pp. 159 ff; XXIII, 
pp. 245 ff; XXIV, pp. 146-48; 253 ff; Jha Comm. Vol., pp. 100-14; IC, I, p. 692; 
III, pp. 179, 183; ASR, 1911-12, pp. 50-53. For notes on the Bandhogarh records, 
see NHIP , VI. pp. 41 ff. 

2. One is reminded of the Nala king J3havadattavarman who makes a similar 
claim as regards the two gods; but his banner was different. 

3. Coins reveal the names of many other rulers who flourished in different parts 
of northern India in the first century B.C. and the early centuries of the 
Christian era. The coins of three kings named Suryamitra, Brahmamitra and 
Vishnudeva have been doubtfully assigned to Kanauj. Other important names 
known from numismatic source include those of Ajadatta and Yugasena. None 
of these rulers is mentioned in the Puranas by name. The only king of this 
period, mentioned in the Puranas by name is the mighty VisvasphanI 
of Magadha, who was very probably of foreign origin. 

177 


A.J.U.—12 





CHAPTER XII 


THE SAKA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 

We have seen how the Indo-Greeks conquered Sind, Saurashtra 
and parts of Rajasthan in the second century B.C. The Scythians 
of East Iran established themselves in the valley of the lower Sindhu 
in the following century, when they probably also penetrated as 
far east as Saurashtra and the adjoining regions. Scythian princes 
continued to dominate over considerable parts of Western India as 
late as the time of the early emperors of the Gupta family, till 
Chandra-gupta II finally annexed their dominions to the Gupta 
empire. 

I. THE SCYTHIANS IN WESTERN INDIA 

The earliest reference to Scythian rule in Western India can be 
traced in the Periplus (c. A.D. 70-80) The lower Sindhu valley is 
mentioned in this work as Scythia (i.e., the land of the Scythians), 
although Parthian princes are represented as occupying its capital 
Min-nagara, the name usually applied by the early Scythians to 
their chief cities. The Periplus also refers to a powerful king 
named Mambarus who had his headquarters at another Min-nagara 
and was probably a Scythian. The family of Mambarus seems to 
have been originally subordinate to the Scythian emperors, but 
appears to have become practically independent after the Parthian 
occupation of the western part of the dominions of Azes II includ 
ing the lower valley of the Sindhu. The Periplus says: ‘‘Beyond the 
gulf of Baraca (Dvaraka) is that of Barygaza (Broach) and the coast 
of the country of Ariaca (Ptolemy’s Larike, i.e. Lata) which is the 
beginning of the kingdom of Mambarus and of all India. That 
part of it. lying inland and adjoining Scythia is called Abiria 
(Abhira) and the coast is called Syrastrene (Surashtra).” The 
kingdom of Mambarus thus seems to have comprised Saurashtra, 
Gujarat and parts of Rajasthan. But the reference in the Periplus 
to the city of Calliena (Kalyan in the Thana District) being at first 
in the possession of the elder Saraganus (Satakami), and later in 
that of Sandares, when the port was much obstructed and Greek 
ships were taken to Barygaza under guard, may point to the 


178 


THE SAKA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 


Scythian occupation of the northern Konkan about the middle of 
the first century A.D. It is not improbable that Sandares was the 
viceroy of Mambarus 1 in Aparanta, which was conquered from the 
Satavahanas about that time. Some scholars suggest that the name 
Mambarus is a mistake for Nambanus, which again is supposed to 
be a Greek corruption of the name Nahapana. As the satrap Naha- 
pana is known to have ruled in the period c. A.D. 119-25, the sugges¬ 
tion appears to be unwarranted. 

II. THE KSHAHARATA SATRAPS 

About the end of the first century A.D., the Kushana emperor 
Kanishka I seems to have extended his power over Central and Wes¬ 
tern India. The ruling house represented by Mambarus was either 
subdued or supplanted. It is as yet unknown whether the Kshaha- 
ratas, who probably ruled Western India as Kshatrapas of 
Kanishka I and his successors, belonged to the same family as 
Mambarus. This satrapal house seems also to have been Scythian 
in origin. 

1. Bhilmaka 

Kshaharata Bhumaka is the earliest known Kshatrapa in charge 
of the south-western part of the empire of the Kushanas of Kanish- 
ka’s house. His coins have been found in the coastal regions x>f 
Gujarat and Saurashtra and sometimes also Malwa and the Ajmer 
region of Rajasthan. The use of both the Kharoshthi and Brahmi 
scripts in Bhumaka’s coin-legends probably points to the fact that 
the Kshatrapa territories not only comprised such districts as Malwa, 
Gujarat, and Saurashtra where Brahmi was prevalent, but also some 
regions about western Rajasthan and Sind where Kharoshthi appears 
to have been in use. Traces of Greek legend on the coins of the 
early Kshatrapas of Western India point to the influence and popu¬ 
larity in Indo-Scythia of the Indo-Greek coinage to which the 
Periplus bears witness. Some writers' are inclined to associate the 
use of Kharoshthi on the earlier satrapal issues with the northern 
origin of the Kshatrapas. No details of Bhumaka’s rule are known. 
Whether he issued coins during the lifetime of Kanishka I or after 
the latter’s death, when the hold of the Kushanas on the outlying 
provinces of the empire was growing feeble, cannot be ascertained. 

1. For different views cf. next Chapter. 


179 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


2. Nahapana 


Kshatrapa Bhumaka seems to have been succeeded by Naha¬ 
pana who belonged to the same Kshaharata family. The exact 
relation between the two satraps, however, is as yet unknown. Naha¬ 
pana is known not only from his coins but also from a number of 
inscriptions bearing dates ranging between the years 41 and 46 of an 
era. As the era seems to be no other than Kanishka’s reckoning, i.e., 
the 6aka era of A.D. 78, Nahapana very probably flourished about 
the period A.D. 119-25. 1 In the earlier records Nahapana is called 
a Kshatrapa, while in the inscription of the year 46 he is credited 
with the title Mahakshatrapa. But in all these epigraphs Nahapana 
has the additional title Rdjan, which probably indicates a political 
position superior to that enjoyed by his predecessor, Kshatrapa 
Bhumaka. On the coins Nahapana is invariably called Rdjan, and 
on none of them occurs the title Kshatrapa or Mahakshatrapa. It 
should also be pointed out that no record of Nahapana refers to his 
overlord. He therefore seems to have been ruling practically as 
an independent king without openly disavowing his allegiance to 
the Kushanas. The Kardamakas who succeeded the Kshaharatas 
also enjoyed the title Rajan (sometimes referred to also as Maharaja) 
together with a satrapal designation. 

Nahapana issued both silver and copper coins. The silver 
issues were imitated as regards size, weight and fabric from the 
hemi-drachms of the Yavana kings, and in these respects they set 
a standard which was followed by the Western satraps for about 
three centuries, and afterwards by their successors the Guptas and 
the Traikutakas. Probably from the same source, as well as from 
the Homan coins imported into Indian ports like Broach (where, 
according to the Periplus, they yielded a profit when exchanged for 
native money), they derived their obverse type ‘Head of King’. 
This type, together with a legend in Graeco-Roman characters which 
later degenerated into a sort of ornament, became a feature of these 
coins. 

Nahapana’s coins have been discovered in the Ajmer region of 
Rajasthan in the north and in the Nasik District in the south. The 

1. The Jogalthembi hoard shows that Gautamlputra Sa taka mi restruck the coins 
of Nahapana and of no other later ruler of the Kshaharata dynasty which he 
claims to have uprooted. Nahapana and Gautamlputra were therefore contem¬ 
poraries. According to the evidence of Ptolemy’s Geography, Gautamlputra’s 
son Pulumavi was on the throne of Pratishthana (the Satavahana capital) about 
A.D. 140. Gautamlputra and his contemporary Nahapana therefore ruled about 
the first quarter of the second century. See the section on the Satavahanas. 

180 





THE 6AKA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 

his dominions actually comprised the wide area from Ajmer to 
northern Maratha country is indicated by epigraphic evidence. 
An inscription of Aryaman, who was an amatya of Nahapana, has 
been found at Junnar in the Poona District. A number of inscrip¬ 
tions recording the pious gifts of the Hinduised Saka chief Itisha- 
bhadatta (Ushavadata), son of Dinika, have been discovered in the 
rock-cut caves at Nasik and at Karle in the Poona District. Risha- 
bhadatta was the husband of Dakshamitra, daughter of N&hapana, 
and was the viceroy in the southern province of his father-in-law’s 
dominions. There is no doubt that the dharas (districts) of Govar- 
dhana (Nasik) and Mamala (Poona) were in charge of Rishabhadatta; 
but he may have also ruled over southern Gujarat and the northern 
Konkan from Broach to Sopara. In connection with Rishabhadatta’s 
benefactions, inscriptions refer to such localities as Kapur -ahara 
(Kapura in the old Baroda State), Prabhasa (in southern Saurashtra), 
Bhrigukachchha (Broach), Dasapura (Mandasor in western Malwa), 
Surparaka (Sopara in Thana District) and Pushkara (near Ajmer) as 
well as to the rivers Tapi, Barnasa (Banas, a tributary of the Cham- 
bal), Parada (Par in the Surat District), Damana (Damanganga near 
Daman) and Dahanuka (near Dahanu in the Thana District). It is, 
however, likely that Bashabhadatta visited some of the holy places 
outside his viceregal state as a pious pilgrim; but it seems very 
probable that Malwa, Saurashtra, Gujarat, the northern part of the 
Konkan and the Maratha. country, and large parts of Rajasthan 
probably including a portion of the lower Sindhu valley, lay within 
the dominions of his father-in-law. 

In one of the Nasik cave inscriptions, Rishabhadatta is said to 
have gone, at the command of the Bhattaraka, to relieve the chief 
of the Uttamabhadra tribe, who was besieged by the Malay as (Mala- 
vas, settled in the Jaipur region of Rajasthan). After inflicting a 
crushing defeat on the Malayas, the &aka chief is said to have gone 
to the Pushkara lake for ceremonial consecration. It is not known 
whether the word bhattaraka (lord) indicates the Satrap Nahapana 
or his Kushana overlord. But whichever interpretation is accepted, 
it cannot be denied that the Ajmer region in Rajasthan lay within 
the sphere of Nahapana’s influence. The Nasik and Poona Districts 
had been conquered from the Satavahanas of Pratishthana either by 
Nahapana himself or by one of the earlier Scythian rulers of Western 
India who appear to have extended their power over the northern 
Konkan. 


181 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

In the latter part of, or shortly after, the Saka year 46 (A.D. 124- 
25), which is the latest known date of Nahapana, the satrap seems 
to have been defeated and killed by the Satavahana king Gautaml- 
putra Satakarni, who annexed the southern provinces of the 
Kshaharata dominions. Gautamiputra is not only said to have 
totally uprooted the Kshaharata dynasty arid to have extirpated 
the Sakas together with the Yavanas and the Pahlavas, but is 
also described as the lord of many countries including Surashtra 
(Saurashtra), Kukura (in the Gujarat-Saurashtra region), Anupa the 
Mandhata or Mahesvar region on the Narmada), Aparanta (northern 
Konkan), Akara (east Malwa) and Avanti (west Malwa). Gautaml- 
putra’s inscriptions in the Nasik and Poona Districts show how Naha¬ 
pana’s viceroy Hishabhadatta was ousted by him from those regions. 
The large hoard of Nahapana’s coins, discovered at Jogalthembi in 
the Nasik District, shows how the Satavahana king captured the 
satrap’s treasury and restruck the latter’s coins for re-circulation. 
But even after the loss of the southern provinces to the Satavahanas, 
the Sakas appear to have held the northern provinces of the 
Kshaharata dominions. The Kshaharata family, however, seems to 
have become extinct with Nahapana’s death. In the south-western 
satrapy of the Kushana empire the Kshaharatas were succeeded by 
the Scythian family of the Kardamakas. 

III. THE KARDAMAKAS 


1. Chashtana 

The authority of the new family was established in Western 
India by Chashtana, son of Ysamotika 1 of the Kardamaka 2 family. 
On the earlier coins of Chashtana he is called a Kshatrapa, and in 
later issues a Mahakshatrapa; but in all cases he has the additional 
title Rdjan. His father Ysamotika, however, has no royal title. The 
early home of the Kardamakas is unknown; but Chashtana may have 
been ruling in the Sind region as a feudatory of the Kushanas. After 
Nahapana’s death Chashtana seems to have been appointed by the 
Kushanas viceroy of the south-western province of their empire in 
place of the Kshaharata ruler with instructions to recover the lost 
districts of the satrapy from the Satavahanas. 

1. The name is sometimes read Ghasamotika; the Andhau inscription, however, 
appear to Support Ysamotika. The value of the first conjunct of the name 
seems to be that of z. 

2. The name Kardamaka has been derived by some from the Kardama river in 
Bactria (PHAI, 363, fn. 3). 


182 







THE SAKA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 

In some provinces of the Scythian and Kushana dominions the 
viceroy with the title Mahakshatrapa was associated in the adminis¬ 
tration with a subordinate ruler called Kshatrapa. When Chashtana, 
probably in his old age, became a Mahakshatrapa, he seems to have 
selected his son Jayadaman as Kshatrapa who, however, died early 
and was succeeded by his son Rudradaman I. Inscriptions discover¬ 
ed at Andhau in Kachchha show that in the &aka year 52 (A.D. 
130-31) Raja Chashtana was ruling jointly with his grandson Rdjd 
Rudradaman. It seems that at that date Chashtana was the Maha¬ 
kshatrapa, and Rudradaman, the Kshatrapa. Thus the Kardamakas 
were at least on the borders of the expanded empire of Gautamlputra 
Satakarni within a few years after Nahapana’s death. 

But there is evidence to show that the Sakas under Chashtana 
and Rudradaman defeated the Satavahana king and recovered most of 
the northern districts of the latter’s dominions originally conquered 
from Nahapana. In the Geography of Ptolemy, written about A.D. 
140 with materials gathered a few years earlier, Ozene, i.e. UjjayinI, 
capital of Avanti (west Malwa), is mentioned as the headquarters of 
Tiastenes, undoubtedly a Greek corruption of the name Chashtana . 
In the Junagarh inscription of Rudradaman, that ruler is represented 
as the lord of many countries including Akara, Avanti, Anupa, 
Aparanta, Saurashtra and Anarta (Dvaraka region in Saurashtra), 
which had all been conquered from Gautamlputra (c. A.D. 106-30), 
probably when Rudradaman was a Kshatrapa under his grandfather. 
Rudradaman further claims to have twice defeated Satakarni, lord 
of Dakshinapatha, whom he did not destroy as he was a near relative. 
This Satakarni seems to be no other than Gautamlputra. The close¬ 
ness of relation between the two rulers is explained by the Kanheri 
inscription which refers to a Kardamaka princess as the daughter of 
Mahakshatrapa Ru(dra) who is generally identified with Rudra¬ 
daman, and as the wife of Vasisthiputra Satakarni, apparently a 
co-uterine brother of Vasisthiputra Pulumavi and a son of Gautaml¬ 
putra. Rudradaman’s claim to have reinstated deposed kings may 
have reference to the reinstatement of certain feudatories of Naha¬ 
pana, ousted by Gautamlputra Satakarni. 

The early coins of Chashtana bear the type ‘crescent and star’ to 
which a hill (chaitya of some writers) symbol was added later. As 
the hill is intimately associated with the northern issues of Gautaml¬ 
putra Satakarni and Yajna Satakarni, it has been suggested that it 
signifies some extension of Chashtana’s power at the expense of the 
Satavahanas, “some reconquest of territories previously taken by 


183 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


them from his predecessor Nahapana.” After Chashtana’s rule the 
use of the KharoshthI was discontinued, although the Graeco-Roman 
legend continued to appear as a sort of ornamental fringe around the 
obverse of the coins. The omission of KharoshthI may be a result 
of the transference of the Kardamaka headquarters from the 
KharoshthI area to Ujjain. On the coins of Jayadaman, who was a 
Kshatrapa for some time during his father’s rule as Mahakshatrapa 
before A.D. 130-31, the satrap is called Rdjan and Kshatrapa. 

2. Rudradaman 

Some time after A.D. 130-31, Chashtana was succeeded as 
Mahakshatrapa by his grandson Rudradaman I. All his known coins 
belong to the period when Rudradaman was a Mahakshatrapa. For 
the history of Rudradaman’s reign we possess one exceptionally im¬ 
portant document in the Junagarh inscription dated in the &aka year 
72 (A.D. 150-51). The subject for the prasasti is the reconstruction 
of the dam of the Sudarsana lake, created by storing the waters of 
streams like the Suvarnasikata and Palasinl running from the 
Ur jay at (modern Girnar) hill. The lake was situated far from 
the city of Giri-nagara (modern Junagarh), the old capital of 
Surashtra. A large dam for the storage of water was constructed by 
Pushyagupta, who was Chandragupta Maurya’s viceroy in Surashtra, 
while irrigation canals from the lake were excavated by Yavana- 
raja Tushaspha on behalf of his master, the Maurya emperor Asoka. 
The lake remained a boon to the cultivators of Surashtra for several 
centuries.. Shortly before A.D. 150-51, a terrible cyclone caused a 
serious breach, as a result of which the Sudarsana lake ceased to 
exist. When the peasants were fearing failure of the annual crops, 
Rudradaman sent his councillors and executive officers for the re¬ 
pair of the dam and the reconstruction of the lake. All the officials 
having been unsuccessful in the task, Pahlava Suvisakha, son of 
Kulaipa, was appointed governor of Anarta and Surashtra. The 
efforts of this Parthian official in the employment of Rudradaman 
were crowned with success, and the reservoir was again brought 
into being. 

We have seen how Rudradaman defeated Satakarni, lord of 
Dakshinapatha, and conquered Malwa, Saurashtra, Gujarat, the nor¬ 
thern Konkan and the Mahishmatl (modern Mandhata or Mahesvar) 
region on the Narmada. The Mahakshatrapa’s territories also com¬ 
prised other districts such as Kachchha (Cutch), Svabhra (the Sabar- 
mati valley), Maru (the Marwar region), Sindhu (western part of the 


184 


THE 6AKA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 

lower Sindhu valley), Sauvira (eastern part of the lower Sindhu 
valley) and Nishada (about the western Vindhyas and the Aravalli 
range). Thus Rudradaman appears to have ruled over the whole of 
the Kshaharata dominions with the only exception of the Nasik and 
Poona Districts. He claims to have conquered all these territories 
by his own valour. 

Rudradaman is said to have inflicted a crushing defeat on the 
republican tribe of the Yaudheyas who inhabited southern Punjab 
and the adjoining regions. It is probable that he tried to subdue the 
insubordinate Yaudheyas on behalf of his Kushana overlords. But 
that he ruled almost as an independent king is indicated by the 
absence of any reference to the Kushanas in the records of his time 
as well as by his claim that he himself assumed the title of Maha- 
kshatrapa. Rudradaman is said to have enjoyed royal fortune even 
when he was in his mother’s womb. The exact significance of the 
claim, however, cannot be determined in the present state of our 
knowledge. His good rule, we are told, rid his dominions of disease, 
robbers, wild beasts and other pests. 

Rudradaman was not only a great conqueror and administrator, 
but a patron of classical Sanskrit. He was himself a pastmaster of 
grammar, polity, music and logic, and was reputed for the excellence 
of his compositions in Sanskrit, both in prose and verse. Under the 
Kardamakas, the city of UjjayinI became one of the most important 
seats of learning in all India. According to the Junagarh inscription, 
Rudradaman attended several Svayamvaras and won the hands of 
a number of princesses. These matrimonial alliances of the Karda¬ 
makas point to the gradual absorption of the Scythians into Indian 
society. There is evidence for the marriages of Kardamaka girls 
to the families of the Satavahanas of Dakshinapatha, the Ikshvakus 
of Andhrapatha and probably also the Lichchhavis of Vaisali. 

3. Successors of Rudradaman 

Damaysada (Damaghsada according to some writers) or Dama- 
jadasri I, son of Rudradaman I, issued coins as Kshatrapa during his 
father’s lifetime. This sort of joint administration by the king as 
Mahakshatrapa, with his son or brother in the junior capacity of 
Kshatrapa, seems to have been a fairly regular practice in the family. 
Some time after A.D. 150-51 he succeeded his father as Mahaksha¬ 
trapa. The latter part of his name represents the Persian word Zada . 


185 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The name of Damaysada does not occur in the official genealogy of 
the time of his brother and nephew. Although there is nothing un¬ 
natural in the omission of a collateral branch in epigraphs which 
often record only the direct descent from father to son, Rapson 
suggests that this omission is the result of a struggle for the throne, 
after the death of Damaysada, between his brother Rudrasimha I and 
son Jlvadaman. 

No coin of Jlvadaman as Kshatrapa is known and it is therefore 
probable that he did not exercise any administrative function dur¬ 
ing his father’s reign. Jlvadaman succeeded his father as Maha- 
kshatrapa, but was soon ousted by his uncle Rudrasimha I. From 
the time of Jlvadaman and Rudrasimha I onwards the Kardamaka 
coins, especially their silver issues, have the year of their issue 
recorded in Brahml numerals on the obverse behind the king’s head. 
Jlvadaman seems to have issued coins as Mahakshatrapa in 100 
(A.D. 178-79). 

Rudrasimha I issued coins as Kshatrapa in the Saka year 102 
(A.D. 180-81) and, according to the Gunda inscription, he was still 
a Kshatrapa at the beginning of the next year, evidently under his 
nephew Jlvadaman. During the latter part of the year 103 (A.D. 
181-82), however, Rudrasimha I assumed the title of Mahakshatrapa 
and issued coins in that capacity in the periods 103-10 (A.D. 181-89) 
and 113-18 (A.D. 191-97). It is strange that in the intervening 
years 110-112 (A.D. 188-91) between the two periods of his rule as 
Mahakshatrapa, Rudrasimha I issued coins as Kshatrapa. 

Rapson is inclined to ascribe his temporary degradation to the 
success of Jlvadaman, who is supposed to have again attained to the 
status of Mahakshatrapa during the period in question. Altekar 
rightly points out that the king’s bust on the coin dated the year 100 
represents a youthful figure, while the other issues of Jlvadaman 
dated 119 and 120 portray him as an old man. Jlvadaman should 
therefore be regarded as having ruled as Mahakshatrapa for the first 
time in his youth, and for a second time in his old age. But we have 
no coins of Jlvadaman in the period A.D. 188-91. Bhandarkar may 
therefore be right in associating Rudrasimha’s degradation in A.D. 
188-91 with the rise of Isvaradatta, whose coins issued as Mahaksha¬ 
trapa during the regnal years 1 and 2 are said to have been 
discovered in Saurashtra. Nothing definite is known about Isvaradatta 
whom some writers call an Abhlra. 


186 


THE SAKA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 

About the end of the second century A.D. the Satavahana king 
Yajna Satakarni is known to have deprived the Kardamakas of some 
of the southern provinces of their dominions. It is probable that 
the success of Isvaradatta was mainly due to the help he received 
from the Satavahana ruler. But both of them appear to have ex¬ 
ploited the situation resulting from the struggle between Jivadaman 
and Rudrasimha I. 

Epigraphic and numismatic records of the time of Rudrasimha I 
have been discovered in Saurashtra, Malwa and Rajasthan. The 
inscription from Gunda (north Saurashtra) records the pious work 
of the Abhira general Rudrabhuti, son of the general Bapaka. 

Rudrasimha I was succeeded by Jivadaman, who again ruled as 
Mahakshatrapa in the period A.D. 197-99. His brother Satyadaman 
(another son of Damajadasri I) issued coins as Kshatrapa. But the 
dates of these issues are uncertain, and we do not know whether this 
Kshatrapa ruled under his uncle Mahakshatrapa Rudrasimha I or 
brother Jivadaman who ascended the throne in his youth, but lost 
it and again became Mahakshatrapa in his old age. 

The next ruler was Rudrasena I, son of Rudrasimha I. Rudra- 
sena issued coins as Kshatrapa in the year 121 (A.D. 199-200), but 
according to the Mulwasar (near Dwarka) inscription, dated in the 
month of Vaisakha of the year 122 (A.D. 200-201), he had assumed 
the dignity of Mahakshatrapa by the beginning of this yeai\ Clay 
seals belonging to Mahddevi Prabhudama, described as a daughter 
of Mahakshatrapa Rudrasimha I and a sister of Mahakshatrapa 
Rudrasena I, have been discovered at Basarh (ancient Vaisall) in 
the Muzaffarpur District of Bihar. It is not improbable that she 
was married to a chief of the Lichchhavis who appear to have 
flourished in that region before the rise of the Guptas. 

The Garha (near Jasdan, Saurashtra) inscription of Mahaksha¬ 
trapa Rudrasena I is probably dated in the year 127 (A.D. 205-206). 
He ended his rule in the year 144 (A.D. 222-223), when he was suc¬ 
ceeded by his brother Sanghadaman, another son of Rudrasimha I, 
as Mahakshatrapa. Coins of the Kshatrapas of this period are rare. 
In the year 144 (A.D. 222-23), however, Prithivlsena, son of Rudra¬ 
sena I, is known to have been ruling as Kshatrapa, under his father 
or his uncle Sanghadaman. Mahakshatrapa Sanghadaman had a 
short rule of two years (Saka 144-45) and was succeeded by his 
brother Mahakshatrapa Damasena, third son of Rudrasimha I. 


187 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Damasena’s coins have dates ranging between the years 145 and 
158 (A.D. 223-237); but it is probable that he died not long before 
the year 160 (A.D. 238-39), 1 the earliest known date of the coins of 
Yasodaman issued as Mahakshatrapa. During the rule of Maha- 
kshatrapa Damasena, his nephew, DamajadasrI II, son of Rudrasena I, 
ruled as Kshatrapa and issued coins in the years 154 and 155 
(A.D. 232-34). The successor of DamajadasrI II in the office of 
Kshatrapa was VIradaman (Saka 156-60 or A.D. 234-39), son of 
Damasena. . After the reign of Mahakshatrapa Damasena, the potin 
coinage of the Kardamakas, which is usually attributed to Malwa 
or some district of that country, seems to have discontinued. This 
currency is associated with the Mahakshatrapas; the Kshatrapas, 
who probably held sway in Saurashtra and Gujarat, and not in any 
part of Malwa, did not issue coins in potin. The discontinuance of 
this coinage is suggested to have denoted that about this time a part 
of Malwa was lost to the Kardamaka Mahakshatrapas, or that the 
potin currency previously circulating in that district was superseded 
by the more widely used silver coinage. 

Rapson is inclined to favour the latter suggestion, as the esta¬ 
blishment in Malwa of the silver coinage of the Kardamakas is 
probably presupposed by similar coinages subsequently introduced in 
this region by the Guptas and the Hunas. It may, however, be 
pointed out in this connection that about the middle of the third 
century there were not only internal dissensions amongst the Sakas 
of Western India, but they were also threatened by the Malavas from 
the north and the Abhiras from the south. According to the Nandsa 
(old Udaipur State) inscriptions dated in A.D. 226, freedom and pros¬ 
perity had returned by that date to the country of the Malavas as a 
result of the brilliant achievements of a Malava chief. This pro¬ 
bably indicates the loss of the northern part of the Kardamaka 
dominions. 

In the south, the Abhiras appear to have established a powerful 
kingdom in northern Maharashtra and the adjoining regions and 
started an era of their own in the year A.D. 248-49. Somewhat 
later we find a Saka Mahadandanayaka named Srldharavarman, 
originally a governor of the Kardamakas in east Malwa, practically 
ruling as an independent king. The Sanchl inscription of SrTdhara- 
varman, dated in his 13th regnal year, also contains a Saka year, 
which is read by some as 201 corresponding to A.D. 279-80, and by 


1. Rapson places Mahakshatrapa Isvaradatta between the years 159 and 1G1, i.e. 




THE SARA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 

others as 241 or A.D. 319-20. He called himself a dharmavijayin 
and a devotee of the god Mahasena. The Nagas of Vidisa and 
Padmavati must also have become aggressive neighbours of the Saka 
satraps in the second half of the third century A.D. 

Numismatic evidence refers to four sons of Damasena who ruled 
as Kshatrapa or Mahakshatrapa, or both as Kshatrapa and Maha- 
kshatrapa. Kshatrapa Viradaman seems to have died early in the 
Saka year 160 (A.D. 238-39) and was succeeded as Kshatrapa by his 
brother Yasodaman, another son of Damasena. Yasodaman, how¬ 
ever, assumed the position of Mahakshatrapa in the same year, 
leaving the Kshatrapa status for his brother Vijayasena. But 
Yasodaman ruled as Mahakshatrapa only for about one year 
(Saka 160-61 =rA.D. 238-39), since Vijayasena’s coins issued as Maha¬ 
kshatrapa are known to belong to the period Saka 161-72 A.D. 239- 
51). Vijayasena’s coins are found in large numbers in Gujarat, 
Rajasthan and Saurashtra. The next Mahakshatrapa was Dama- 
jadasrl III, a brother of Vijayasena and another son of Damasena. 
Whether Damajadasrl ruled for some time as Kshatrapa is not known. 
The dates on his coins range between the years 173 and 177 (£.D. 
251-56). We have no coins issued by a Kshatrapa in the period 
c. A.D. 240-75; but whether the office of Kshatrapa was in abeyance 
cannot be ascertained. 

Damajadasrl III was succeeded as Mahakshatrapa by his nephew 

Rudrasena II, son of Viradaman. The coins of Mahakshatrapa 

* 

Rudrasena II, which are found in great abundance, bear dates rang¬ 
ing between the years 177 and 198 (A.D. 255-77). It is, however, 
not unlikely that he ended his rule a few years later than the date 
suggested by numismatic evidence. Rudrasena II seems to have 
been matrimonially allied with the Ikshvaku king Virapurushadatta 
of Andhrapatha, who probably married Rudradhara-bhattarika, des¬ 
cribed as a daughter of the Maharaja of Ujjayini. Rudrasena’s son 
Visvasimha issued coins as Kshatrapa in the year 197-200 (A.D. 275- 
79) and later assumed the title of Mahakshatrapa. Visvasimha was 
succeeded as Kshatrapa in the year 200 (A.D. 278-79) by his brother 
Bhartridaman. The earliest definite date on Bhartridaman’s coins 
issued as Mahakshatrapa is the year 204 (A.D. 282-83). He ruled as 
Mahakshatrapa at least up to 217 (A.D. 295-96). Bhartridaman was 
succeeded by his son Visvasena whose date as Kshatrapa ranges from 
215 to 226 (A.D. 293-305). He did not assume the title Maha¬ 
kshatrapa, which office seems to have been in abeyance till 270 
(A.D. 348-49). Visvasena is the last Kshatrapa who is definitely 


189 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

known to have belonged to the family of Chashtana, for in the year 
226 (A.D. 304-05) we find as Kshatrapa Rudrasimha II, son of JIva* 
daman, who bears no royal title and whose relationship with his 
predecessors is not known. The history of this new line of the 
Kshatrapas will be related in the next volume. It is probable that 
Mahakshatrapa Bhartridaman and his son Kshatrapa Visvasena were 
overthrown by the Sassanians whose political influence in Western 
India has been noted above. 1 It must be mentioned, however, that 
the theory of the Sassanian rule in India, explaining the vicissitudes 
in the political fortunes of the Kardamakas or Western Satraps, 
thought not improbable, cannot be regarded as certain, for the inter¬ 
pretation of the Paikuli inscription, among others, on which the 
theory primarily rests, is very uncertain. 

GENERAL REFERENCE 

E. J. Rapson— Catalogue of the Coins of the Andhra Dynasty, the Western 

Kshatrapas, the Traikutaka Dynasty and the Bodhi Dynasty. 

D- R. Bhandarkar—Sarvsnia hoard ( ASI . 1913-14, pp. 227-45). His reading 
of the dates 149 and 206 respectively on the coins of Sarighadaman (p. 187) and 
Visvasena (p. 189) is, however, very doubtful, and has not been referred to in the 
text. 


1. Sec p. 152. 


190 





CHAPTER XIII 


THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDJS 

The major part of Southern India, with the exception of a few 
minor states to the south of Mysore, formed part of the Maurya 
empire during tine reign of Asoka. The relations of Asoka’s succes¬ 
sors with the subject peoples of the Deccan cannot be ascertained. 
There is some reason to believe that the outlying districts of the 
southern part of the empire soon assumed independence under 
local chiefs. Inscription, discovered at Bhattiprolu in the Krishna 
District and assignable to about 200 B.C., refer to a Rajan named 
Kuberaka 1 who appears to have ruled independently of the Mauryas. 
But the later Mauryas probably continued to exercise sway over 
certain districts of the Upper Deccan for, as noted above, 2 Vidarbha 
(i.e., the Berar region) was not only governed by a viceroy of the 
last Maurya king Brihadratha but also acknowledge the sovereign- 
ty of the Sungas during the rule of Pushyamitra (c. 187-151 B.C.). 
In the first century B.C. two southern powers became predominant 
in trans-Vindhyan India. These were the Satavahanas of the Upper 
Deccan and the Chedis of Kalihga. The power of the Chedis was 
shortlived, but the Satavahana power endured for nearly three 
centuries. 

I. THE SATAVAHANAS 

1. Territories of the Early Satavahanas 

Kings of the Satavahana family were styled “lord of Dakshina- 
patha.” The name Dakshinapatha, however, was not always used 
in the same geographical sense. Sometimes it indicated the whole 
of trans-Vindhyan India, but often only the present Maratha country 
with the adjoining eastern and western regions. Although a later 
Satavahana king is known to have claimed a sort of vague suzerainty 
over the whole of South India, the aforesaid title, at least in regard 
to the early Satavahanas, appears to point to their hold on parts of 
Dakshipapatha in the narrow sense. According to Indian literary 


1. Liiders List No. 1338; Sel. Ins. I, pp. 215 ff. 

2. See p. 96. 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


tradition, which is supported by the evidence of Ptolemy’s Geogra¬ 
phy, tne capital of the Satavahana kings was at the city of Pratis- 
thana, identified with modern Paithan on the Godavari in the 
Aurangabad District of Mahrashtra State. Records of the early 
members of the family have been discovered at Nasik and Nanaghat 
(a pass leading from the Konkan to Junnar in the Poona District, 
in northern Maharashtra, one of the rulers being also known from 
an epigraph found in the vicinity of Vidisa, the ancient capital 
of East Malwa. It should be noted in this connection that the 
territories under the direct sway of even the powerful later Sata¬ 
vahana king Gautamlputra Satakarni (c. A.D. 106-30), who claimed 
suzerainty over trans-Vindhyan India, did not extend beyond the 
Krishna in the south and Malwa and Saurashtra in the north. 

Especially significant seems to be the fact that the districts, 
afterwards known as ‘the Satavahanlya province’ (the modern 
Bellary region) and Andhrapatha (about the mouths of the Krishna), 
which have been taken by different scholars to have been the 
original home of the Satavahana family, did not form any part of 
Gautamiputra’s empire. That these countries were not the heart 
of the dominions of the early Satavahanas is also suggested by the 
Hathigumpha inscription, which places the kingdom of the Sata¬ 
vahana contemporary of Kharavela (second half of the first century 
B.C.), to the west and not to the south, of Kalinga (the coast country 
comprising the Puri and Gan jam Districts and the adjoining area). 
There is reason to believe that the southern districts were annexed 
to the Satavahana empire about the middle of the second century 
A.D. The theory that Vidarbha (Berar) was the original home of 
the Satavahanas is highly improbable as there is not the slightest 
evidence to connect the founder of the family and his immediate 
successors with that country. Equally untenable is the suggestion 
associating the Satavahanas with the Satiya (probably, Satya) 
country mentioned in the inscriptions of Asoka. 

2. The Name of the Family 

The kings, represented in epigraphic records as belonging to the 
Satavahana-kula (Satavahana family), are mentioned in the Puranas 
as Andhra or Andhra-bhritya. The expression andhra-bhritya is 
sometimes interpreted as “the Andhras who were originally servants 
of some other power such as the Maurya or the Sunga.” Some 
writers, on the other hand, take the expression to indicate ‘the ser¬ 
vants of the Andhras’, and suggest that the Satavahanas were of 


192 


THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 


Kannada origin and that they at first owed allegiance to some 
Andhra rulers. Neither of the interpretations appears to be satis¬ 
factory, although it is probable that the predecessors of the Sata¬ 
vahana emperors were feudatories of the Kanvas. By the expres¬ 
sion andhra-bhritya, the Puranas appear to have actually indicated 
not the Satavahanas who, according to most of them, were Andhras, 
but the dynasties (e.g., the Abhiras) that were subservient to the Sata¬ 
vahanas but assumed independence after the latter’s downfall. Some 
scholars believe that the Satavahanas are wrongly called Andhras 
in the Puranas and that “the name Andhra probably came to be 
applied to the kings in later times when they lost their northern and 
western possessions and became a purely Andhra power governing 
the territory at the mouth of the river Krishna.” It may, however, 
be pointed out that Satavahana was the name of a kula or family, 
apparently so called after a prince of that name, 1 while Andhra was 
the name of a jati or tribe. The first king of the Satavahana family 
is actually described in most of the Puranas as andhra-jatlya, ‘belong¬ 
ing to the Andhra race.’ The Puranic testimony may be reconciled 
with epigraphic evidence, if it is believed that the members of the 
Satavahana family i.e., the descendants of a prince named Sata¬ 
vahana, were Andhras by nationality. It is interesting in this 
connection to note that the author of the Suttaniptita commentary 
(fifth century A.D.) refers to a tradition mentioning the Asmaka and 
Mulaka countries (which lay in the heart of the Satavahana kingdom) 
as Andhaka (from Sanskrit Andhraka, i.e ., Andhra) rdjyas. 2 

3. The Andhras before the Rise of the Satavahanas 

The Telugu-speaking inhabitants of the northern part of the 
Madras State and the adjoining area now call themselves Andhras 
or Andhras. The heart of this country round the mouths of the 
river Krishna is called Andhrapatha in an inscription of about the 
end of the third century A.D. There is, however, reason to believe 

1. Both the personal names Satavahana and Satakarni may be of Dravidian 
origin. But their meaning is not known. Przyluski connects them with some 
Austric words signifying ‘son of horse.’ But the interpretations of the words, 
so far offered, are all unsatisfactory. For Satavahana as a personal name, cf. 
Sel. Ins., I, p. 185. Satavahana-kula was also the name of the Lohara dynasty 
of Kashmir, cf. Raj. VI. 367, VII. 1283, 1732. The Loharas were either des¬ 
cendants of a prince named Satavahana or claimed connection with the Sata¬ 
vahanas of the Deccan. Ibid, Tr. by Stein, II. pp. 79, 258n. It seems that the 
Satavahana family of the Deccan was named after Simuka-Satavahana or one 
of his ancestors. The second alternative is supported by the fact that Krishna, 
brother of Simuka-Satavahana, claims to have belonged to Satavahana’s kula. 

2. Cf. Paramatthajotika, II, p. 581. 

193 

A»T,U«—18 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


that the Andhra tribe, which had great numerical strength, originally 
lived in the Vindhyan region and in the northern part of the Deccan, 
but that it pushed gradually to the south in later times. In the 
Aitareya Brdhmana (VII, 92, 18) which is usually assigned to a date 
not later than 500 B.C., the Andhras are mentioned together with 
the Pun^ras, Sabaras, Pulindas and Mutibas as Dasyu or non-Aryan 
tribes living on the borders of the land occupied by the Aryans in 
India. As the later authorities are unanimous in locating the Andhra 
people in South India, the Aitareya Brdhmana apparently points to 
their home about the southern fringe of Aryavarta, the land of the 
Aryans, the southern boundary of which was the Pariyatra (the 
western Vindhyas and the Aravalli range), according to the 
Baudhdyana-Dharmasutra, the Vindhya according to the Manu- 
samhitd, and the Narmada according to later authorities. The sug¬ 
gestion that the Andhras originally inhabited the Vindhyan region 
and the adjoining part of the Deccan is probably supported by their 
association with the Pulindas who were another Vindhyan tribe 
living, as late as the sixth century A.D., in a territory to the south¬ 
east of Dasarna (East Malwa) and in the south of the kingdom of 
Dabhala (Jubbulpore region). 1 

The thirteenth rock-edict of Asoka seems to place the land of 
the Andhras 2 not very far from the country of the Bhojas who in¬ 
habited some districts of the northern Deccan including Vidarbha 
or Berar. Pliny (first century A.D.), who is usually supposed to 
have utilised the information supplied by Megasthenes (c. 300 B.C.), 
speaks of a powerful king of the Andhra country possessing 30 forti 
fied towns as well as an army of 100,000 infantry, 2,000 cavalry and 
1,000 elephants. 

This no doubt points to the large extent of the land occupied by 
the Andhra people, and it is not improbable that Pliny actually 
received the information from a later source referring to the Sata- 
vahana kingdom. The Vinaya Texts locate a city called Setakannika, 
often believed to be associated with an early Satavahana king named 
Satakarni, on the southern frontier of the Majjhima-desa (Madhya- 
de£a), i.e., in the Vindhya region or the Upper Deccan. 

The Serivanija Jdtaka places a city called Andhapura (Andhra- 
pura), which may have been the capital of an Andhra principality, 

1. PHAI, pp. 79, 258n. 

2. The land of the Andhras and of the other peoples mentioned in the record 
formed parts of the raja-vishaya, i.e., dominions, of the Maurya emperor, 
although the peoples may have enjoyed some sort of autonomy (above, pp. 78-9). 

194 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 


on the river Televaha, identified with the modern Tel (a tributary of 
the Mahanadi) in the eastern Deccan. The valley of the Tel as well 
as the Telugu-speaking Vizagapatam area does not appear to have 
ever come under the rule of the Satavahanas of Pratishthana. We 
know little about the settlement of the Andhras in the southernmost 
districts of the present Telugu-speaking area; but the Satavahana 
power probably extended over the territory round the mouths of the 
Krishna and also over the Bellary District during the reign of 
Vasishthlputra Pulumavi (c. A.D. 130-59), when the newly conquered 
provinces appear to have come to be known respectively as Andhra- 
patha and ‘the Satavahanlya district’. 

4. Chronology of the Satavahanas 

There is difference of opinion amongst scholars as regards the 
problem of Satavahana chronology, although the Puranas appear to 
supply us a definite clue. According to the Puranic lists of the 
‘future’ kings, the ten rulers of the Sunga dynasty, that came to 
power 137 years after Chandragupta Maurya’s accession about 324 
B.C., reigned for a period of 112 years, and the last Sunga king Ddva- 
bhuti was overthrown by his amdtya, Vasudeva, the founder of the 
Kanva or Kanvayana dynasty; the four Kanva kings in all ruled for 
45 years and the last of them, Susarman, was ousted by the founder 
of the Andhra (Satavahana) dynasty whose name is given as Simuka 
in inscriptions, but variously as Sisuka, Sipraka, Sindhuka, etc. in 
the Puranic texts. If these traditions are to be accepted, the over¬ 
throw of the Kanva king Susarman by the Andhra (Satavahana) 
Simuka may be assigned to a date 137 + 112 + 45 = 294 years after 
c. 324 B.C., i.e., about 30 B.C. Simuka, "Who reigned for twenty- 
three years according to the Puranas, may be supposed to have 
ruled about the third quarter of the first century B.C. and to have 
extirpated the Kanvas about the close of his career. This date is 
supported by the palaeography of the Nanaghat, Nasik, Sanchl and 
Hathigumpha inscriptions referring to Simuka and his immediate 
successors Krishna and Satakarni. The characters of all these records 
are more developed and therefore later than those of the Besnagar 
epigraph of Heliodorus which cannot be much earlier than the end 
of the second century B.C. 1 As regards the chronology of the later 

1. It should, however, be remembered that earlier epigraphists had no knowledge 
of the Besnagar inscription. They usually compared the script of records like the 
Nanaghat and Hathigumph^ inscriptions with that of the Asokan epigraphs and 
assigned them to the beginning of the second century B.C. They also relied 
on the Puranic statement giving about four centuries and a half as the dura- 


195 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Satavahanas, it has been fairly satisfactorily established on the basis 
of their relations with the early Saka satraps of Western India. 

5. Rise of the Satavahanas under Simuka 

According to the Puranic passage referred to above, Simuka “of 
the Andhra race will obtain this earth after having violently extir¬ 
pated the Kanvayana Susarman and having also destroyed the rem¬ 
nants of the power of the Sungas.” 1 The region which Simuka 
conquered from the Sungas and Kanvas may have included the 
district round Vidisa, which was probably the capital of the late* 
Sungas. There is no reason to connect the Satavahanas, whose 
dominions lay principally in Dakshinapatha, with Magadha or any 
other part of Northern India excepting probably parts of Central 
and Western India. If any district of Western India really belong¬ 
ed to Simuka’s empire, it may have been conquered either from the 
Indo-Greeks or from the Sungas or Kanvas. 

In some Puranic passages Simuka seems to be called the Bhritya 
or servant of the Kanvas, and it is not improbable that he himself, 
in the earlier part of his life, as well as his immediate ancestors 
were feudatories of the Kanva kings. Of the ancestry of Simuka 
nothing definite is known. He is called Raja Simuka-Satavahana in a 
Nanaghat inscription. This suggests that Satavahana was his second 
name, although the expression may perhaps also mean ‘Simuka the 
descendant (son or grandson?) of Satavahana/ Like Chandragupta, 
the founder of the Maurya dynasty, the first king of the Satavahana 
family is represented in Indian tradition as a Vrishala, which is 


tion of the reign of the Andhra kings and, as the Satavahanas are known 
to have ended their rule in Andhrapatha about A.D- 225, placed Simuka’s 
accession 450 years before that date, i.e., about 225 B.C. These scholars 
therefore ignored the unanimous Puranic tradition regarding the contempora¬ 
neity of Simuka with the latest ruler of the Kanvayana family, who flourished 
about two centuries after 225 B.C., when the immediate successors of Asoka 
Maurya were ruling. It may also be pointed out that the Puranic statements 
regarding the duration of Andhra rule and the number of the Andhra kings 
are not unanimous. The number of kings is given in some versions as 19 
and in others as 30, while the duration of rule is variously given as 300, 411, 
412, 456 and 460 years. It is interesting to note that in some cases, e.g. in 
most MSS of the Vdyu Purdrui, the duration of Andhra rule is given both 
as 411 and 300 years. Some writers therefore suggest that about nineteen 
kings belonging to the main branch of the Andhra or Satavahana family ruled 
for about three centuries (c. 75 B.C.—A.D. 225), but about thirty rulers of 
several collateral lines of the dynasty reigned collectively for more than four 
centuries.—R. G. Bhandarkar, EHD, Section VI; D. R. Bhandarkar, I A, 1918 
pp. 69 ff. ’ 

1. See p. 99 above. As noted there, there is nothing to support the view of 
those who favour an early date for Simuka, that the 45 years of Kanva rule 
should be included in the period of 112 years allotted to the ten gungas. 

196 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 


unfortunately an ambiguous term. It is not only used in the sense 
of a Sudra, but also of a Hinduised or Aryanised foreigner or non- 
Aryan, characterised as a member of the higher order degraded to 
a lower social rank owing to the non-observance of specified duties 
and to want of regard for the priestly class. The epithets eka- 
bamhana, i.e., eka-bmhmana (the unique Brahmana) and Kshatriya- 
darpa-mdna-mardana (distroyer of the pride and conceit of the 
Kshatriyas) applied to the later Satavahana king Gautamiputra 
Satakarni in a Nasik inscription, probably suggest that the Sata¬ 
vahanas claimed the social status of the Brahmanas. 1 But as stated 
above, the Andhras are called Dasyus in the Aitareya Brahmana. A 
tradition recorded in the Dvdtrimsat-puttalika represents Salivahana 
(< Salavahana < Satavahana) as of mixed Brahmana and Naga 
origin. The association of the Satavahana kings with the Nagas and 
also with foreigners like the Sakas is proved by epigraphic evidence. 
It seems, therefore, that the Satavahanas, who Were non-Aryans, 
claimed Brahmanahood as a result of an admixture of Brahmana 
blood in the family, but that they were regarded by the orthodox 
Brahmanas, owing partly to their non-Brahmanioal ways and asso¬ 
ciations, as Vrishalas, i e., degraded Brahmanas or outcastes. 2 

6. Krishna and Satakarni 1 

According to the Puranas, Simuka was succeeded by his brother 
Krishna who ruled for eighteen years. The next king of the Puranic 
lists is Krishna’s son Satakarni, who also appears to be given a 
reign-period of eighteen years. Both these rulers are known from 
inscriptions. An epigraph in a cave in the Nasik hills says that it 
was excavated during the sovereignty of king Krishna of the Sata- 
vahana-kula, ‘the family of Satavahana’. In the Nanaghat pass there 
were some relievo figures, now destroyed, with label inscriptions 
above their heads. The second of the eight labels gives the names 
of queen Nayanika (Nag-annika) 3 and king Satakarni in the genitive 

1. According to some scholars, however, Prakrit eka-bramhana stands for 
Sanskrit eka-brahmanya which, like the well-known expression parama - 
brahmanya merely shows that Gautamiputra Satakarni claimed to be a Brah- 
manical Hindu. 

2. It is interesting to note in this connection that, in the arbitrary scheme of the 
Indian society found in the Manu-smriti and other works on law, the Andhras 
are assigned to an exceptionally low rank, while their neighbours the Dravi<jlas 
(Tamil people) are regarded as degraded Kshatriyas. This may have been due 
to the fact that the heart of the Andhra country was an important centre of 
Buddhism during the early centuries of the Christian era. Cf. 7HQ, XVI, 560-66. 

3. The actual name seems to have been Naga. For the Dravidian name-suffix 
annaka and its faminine form annikd, see Sel. Ins., I, p. 185n. The queen was 
evidently born in a Naga family. 


197 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


case-ending, while the other labels contain the names of persons, 
related to the royal pair, in the nominative. The label above the 
head of the first figure shows that it represented the illustrious king 
Simuka-Satavahana. The absence of any representation of king 
Krishna between the figures of Simuka and Satakarni has led some 
scholars to suggest that the latter was probably a son of Simuka, 
and not of Krishna, as indicated in the Puranas. It may, however, be 
pointed out that two out of the eight label inscriptions are totally 
lost and that Krishna might have been actually mentioned in one 
of them. 1 

A votive inscription found on the southern gateway of the Great 
Stupa at Sanchl in the Bhopal State, Central India, records a gift 
of VasishthTputra Ananda, the foreman of the artisans of king 
Satakarni. This king, whose name points to his descent from the 
Satavahana lineage, is usually identified with the Satakarni of the 
Nanaghat inscriptions, but may actually be the second king of that 
name. 2 The San chi record can hardly be regarded as proof of the 
Satavahana occupation of Malwa, as the chief artisan of Satakarni 
may have visited the monastery on pilgrimage. 3 

But the Puranic account of Simuka’s success against the Suhgas 
and Kanvas, probably in Central India, as well as the discovery of cer¬ 
tain coins of the so-called ‘Malwa fabric’ with the legend indicating 
“of the illustrious king Sata”, 4 may suggest that the Malwa region 
was within the sphere of early Satavahana influence. The Hathi- 
gumpha inscription shows that the eastern boundaries of the domi¬ 
nions of Satakarni I abutted on the western frontier of the kingdom 
of Kalihga under Kharavela. The epigraphic passage in question may 
be differently interpreted, and may suggest either that the relations 
between the two kings were friendly or that Kharavela’s army 
attacked a city on the Krishna in the southern part of Satakarni’s 
kingdom. Satakarni I thus seems to have exercised sway over wide 

1. The lost figure at the side of that of Maharathi Tranakayira, supposed to be 
the father of the queen, may have represented Krishna, the father of the king. 

2. In the Puranic lists Satakarni II is sometimes placed immediately after Sata¬ 

karni I, but sometimes one or two kings are represented as having intervened 
between the two. „ * « 

3. Cf. Thomas Commn. Vol., pp. 291 ff. 

4. The form Sata is known to have been a contraction of both the names Sata¬ 
vahana and Satakarni. The coins of Sata are usually attributed to Satakarni I, 
although Sata’s identification with Simuka-Satavahana, cannot be regarded as 
impossible. Certain coins of the ‘West India fabric’ bear the legend indicating 
‘of king Satakarni’. This king may be identified with Satakarni I or any of 
his successors bearing the same name. The name Satavahana has been re¬ 
cently read on certain coins which were probably issued by Simuka Sata¬ 
vahana. 


198 




THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 

regions of the Upper Deccan including probably a portion of Central 
and Western India. The northern Konkan and also Saurashtra may 
have been within the sphere of Satavahana influence during the rule 
of Satakarni I and probably also his immediate predecessors. 

A long Nanaghat inscription, much of which is damaged, speaks 
of the Kumar as VedisrI and Saktisrl and of their mother who claims 
to have celebrated numerous Vedic sacrifices apparently as the 
saha-dharmini (lawful partner in religious performances) of her 
royal husband. Kumar a Saktisri has been identified with the prince 
6akti-Kumara, son of king Salivahana of Pratishthana, mentioned in 
literature. He is also believed to be the same as Kumdra Hakusiri 
(probably a Dravidian corruption of Sanskrit £aktisri) of the Nana- 
gh'at label inscription, who is supposed to have been a son of Sata¬ 
karni I and Nayanika. The actual performer of the sacrifices, which 
included one Rajasuya and two Asvamedhas, thus appears to have 
been the powerful monarch Satakarni I, husband of Nayanika. One 
of the horse-sacrifices may have been performed about the beginning 
of Satakarni’s reign to commemorate the recently acquired sove¬ 
reignty of the Satavahana family and the other to celebrate his own 
exploits about the end of his career. 

7. Temporary Eclipse of Satavahana Power 

The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea , which was written between 
A.D. 70 and 80, 1 while referring to the different market-towns of the 
country called Dachinavades (Dakshinapatha), mentions Suppara 
(modern Sopara in the Thana District, the same as ancient Surparaka, 
capital of the Aparanta country) and Calliena (Kalyana near Thana) 
“which in the time of the elder Saraganus became a lawful market- 
town; but since it came into the possession of Sandares the port is 
much obstructed, and Greek ships landing there may chance to be 
taken to Barygaza (modern Broach near the mouth of the Narmada) 
under guard”. Saraganus may be regarded as a Greek corruption 
of Satakarni , and the elder Saraganus of the Periplus, who appears 
to be the earlier of the two rulers of that name, may be no other 
than Satakarni I of the Satavahana dynasty; but the language of the 
passage seems to suggest that the northern Konkan passed from the 
elder Saraganus (or his successor, a younger Saraganus) to Sandares 
shortly before the time of the author, i.e. some time about the 
middle of the first century A.D. This Satakarni, therefore, may 

l” Cf. EHI, 1924, p. 245n! \ ' 

199 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


have been a descendant of Satakarni I who ruled about the end of 
the first century B.C. The troubled condition referred to in the 
Periplus may have been caused by the conquest of Aparanta by the 
gakas. 1 

In the lists of Andhra kings found in the Puranas, many rulers 
are placed between Satakarni I and Gautamlputra Satakarni, the 
number of them being variously given in the different lists as 10, 12, 
13, 14 and 19. It has been suggested that some of these kings may 
have belonged to collateral lines and ruled at the same time in diffe¬ 
rent parts of the Deccan. Only a few of these rulers, such as Apu- 
laka, Kuntala-Satakarni and Hala, are known from other sources; 
but they do not appear to have belonged to the main line of the 
Satavahana family. Apllaka seems to have belonged to a branch of 
the family holding sway in Madhya Pradesh, while Kuntala-Satakarni 
and Hala probably belonged to another branch ruling in the Kuntala 
country comprising the North Kanara District of the Bombay State 
and parts of Mysore, Belgaum and Dharwar. The period of about 
a century that seems to have intervened between the reign of Sata¬ 
karni I (end of the first century B.C.) and that of Gautamlputra 
Satakarni (beginning of the second century AD.) witnessed the 
temporary eclipse of the Satavahana power, owing to the encroach¬ 
ment of the £akas who came from east Iran and settled in the lower 
Sindhu valley before the end of the first century B.C. 2 The Scythian 
ruler Nahapana, whose ascertained dates range between A.D. 119 
and 125, 3 is actually known to have been in possession of the nor¬ 
thern parts of Maharashtra and the Konkan as well as of Malwa, 
Saurashtra and southern Rajputana. It seems quite probable that 
the immediate predecessors of Gautamlputra Satakarni, who re¬ 
established the fallen fortunes of the family, continued their pre¬ 
carious existence merely as subordinate allies of the foreigners. 

8. Gautamlputra Satakarni 

Gautamlputra Satakarni is said to have been the destroyer of 
the Scythians, Indo-Greeks and Parthians (saka-yavana-pahlava- 
nisudana) and the establisher of the fame of the family of Satavahana 
(satavdhana-kula-yasah-pratishthdpana-kara ). His outstanding 

1. See above, p. 179, where it has been suggested that Sandares was a Saka 
Viceroy. Some scholars, however, prefer the identification of Sandares with 
the Andhra king Sundara Satakarni, who is placed in the Puranic lists a few 
generations earlier than Gautamlputra Satakarni (c. A.D. 106-30). 

2. See above, pp. 178-9. 

3. See above, pp. 180 if. 


200 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 


achievement, as noted above, 1 was the ‘extirpation of the Kshaharata 
dynasty’ to which the &aka chief Nahapana belonged. Nahapana’s 
overthrow must have taken place in or shortly after the eighteenth 
regnal year of the Satavahana king and in or soon after A.D. 124-125 
which is the last known date of Nahapana. A Nasik inscription of 
the eighteenth year of Gautamiputra’s reign records the grant of 
some land that is stated to have been in possession of Rishabhadatta, 
who is undoubtedly the Saka chief of that name who was Nahapana’s 
son-in-law and governor of the southern provinces including the 
Nasik and Poona Districts. It is interesting that the order regarding 
the grant was issued from a “victorious camp of the army that was 
gaining success”, 2 and that the Satavahana king is represented as 
stationed at the time at a place called Benakataka (probably situated 
on a river called Bena) in the Govardhana (Nasik) district. Appa¬ 
rently Gautamiputra’s presence in that region at the head of an 
army was connected with his campaign against the Kshaharatas, 
which led to the liberation not only of the Upper Deccan but also of 
considerable parts of Western and Central India. The grant of a 
village called Karajika in the Mamala Ahcira (modern Poona 
District), originally made by Rishabhadatta and afterwards' by 
Gautamlputra, further points to the transference of authority in 
northern Maharashtra. Of the territories which were under Gau- 
tamlputra’s rule according to the Nasik prascisti, Aparanta, Anupa, 
Surashtra, Kukura, Akara and Avanti must have been conquered 
from Nahapana. 3 


In the list of countries over which Gautamlputra held sway 
mention is made not only of the above countries but also of Rishika 
(district round Rishika-nagara on the Krishna), Asmaka (territory 
about Bodhan, ancient Paudanya, in the Hyderabad State), Mulaka 
(with Pratishthana, modern Paithan on the Godavari, as its capital) 
and Vidarbha (Berar). The direct rule of this king therefore seems 
to have extended over the whole land from the Krishna in the south 
to Malwa and Saurashtra in the north and from Berar in the east 
to the Konkan in the west. But Gautamlputra apparently claimed 
a sort of suzerainty over the whole of trans-Vindhyan India, as he is 
described as the lord of the Vindhya (the central and eastern 
Vindhyas as well as the Satpura), Rikshavat (portion of the Vindhyan 

1. See p. 182. 

2. For the interpretation of the relevant passage see Sel. Ins. I, p. 191n; JNSL 
IH, pp. 79-81. There is here no reference to the city of VaijayantI as Senart 
suggests (El, VIII, 72). 

3. See above, p. 182. 


201 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


range to the south of Malwa), Pariyatra (western Vindhyas and 
the Aravalli), Sahya (Western Ghats to the north of the Ndgiri 
hills), Malaya (Travancore hills), Mahendra (eastern Ghats) and 
other mountain ranges encircling the peninsula of South India. The 
idea may have originated from a conventional claim of dig -vi jay a 
indicated by Gautamlputra’s epithet tri-samudra-toya-pita-viihana, 
i.e., one whose charges drank the waters of the three seas in the 
east, west and south, viz. the Bay of Bengal, the Arabian Sea and 
the Indian Ocean. 1 

We have seen that the eighteenth year of GautamJputra Sata- 
karjni’s reign roughly coincided with A.D. 124-25. The latest 
epigraphic record of Gautarmputra, which is dated in his twenty- 
fourth regnal year, was issued jointly by the king with his mother 
GautamI BalasrI, who is significantly styled “one whose son is living.” 
It is probable that the charter was issued when the king was an in¬ 
valid. He seems to have died soon after and was succeeded by his 
son Vasishthlputra Pulumavi. 2 His reign, therefore, may be assigned 
roughly to the period c. A.D. 106-30. 

Before his death Gautarmputra Satakarni appears to have lost 
most of the districts he had conquered from the Kshaharatas to 
another dynasty of Scythian rulers known as the Kardamakas. 3 
The Geography of Ptolemy speaks of Baithana (Pratishthana) as 
the capital of Siriptolemaios (sri-Pulumavi, son of Gautarmputra 
Satakarni) and Ozene (Ujjayini in West Malwa) as that of Tiastenes 
(Chashtana). This no doubt points to the Kardamaka occupation of 
Malwa during Chashtana’s rule and proves that Pulumavi was not 
in possession of the northern provinces of his father’s empire. That 
Gautarmputra himself lost parts of his dominions to the Kardamakas 
is suggested by the Junagarh inscription of Rudradaman dated 
A.D. 150. 4 This record shows that the whole of the land conquered 
from Nahapana, with the exception of the Govardhana and Mamala 
ahdras, probably forming parts of Mulaka, was conquered by Rudra¬ 
daman, apparently as a colleague of his aged grandfather, from 
Satakarni who is no other than Gautamiputra. The closeness of 

1. We know that the spheres of influence of a Chakravartin both of the dicjvijayin 
and disampati types was supposed to comprise the whole of India according lo 
one view, but only Aryavarta for the North Indian monarchs and the' Deccan 
for South Indian kings according to other conceptions. Southern powers like 
the Chalukyas of Badami claimed to be lords of the whole land bounded by 
the three seas. For the conception of the Chakravarti-kshetra, see JRASBL, 
V, 1939, pp. 407-15. 

2. The name is also written as Pulumayi. 

3. See above, p. 183. 

4. See above, p. 184. 


202 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 


relation that is said to have existed between Satakarni and Rudra¬ 
daman is indicated by a Kanheri inscription representing a certain 
Vasishthlputra Satakarni, very probably a co-uterine brother of 
Vasishthlputra Pulumavi and a son of Gautamlputra Satakarni, as 
the husband of a daughter of a Mahakshatrapa whose name appears 
to have been Rudradaman. 1 Thus Gautamlputra seems to have made 
an attempt to save a few of the conquered territories by contracting 
a matrimonial alliance with the Kardamaka Sakas. 

We have already discussed the achievements of Gautamlputra 
as a conqueror. He is described as a handsome person with a 
charming and radiant face, with beautiful gait and with muscular 
and long arms. As regards his temperament, Gautamlputra is cre¬ 
dited with readiness to impart fearlessness to all, obedience towards 
his mother and reluctance to hurt even an offending enemy. He was 
the refuge of the virtuous, the asylum of fortune and the fountain 
of good manners. As a king he was not only a unique controller 
obeyed by the circle of all kings, but he evinced interest in the weal 
of his subjects and sympathised with their woes, always levied 
taxes in conformity with justice, helped the higher as well as the 
lower castes and stopped the social evil called varna-samkara (inter¬ 
mingling of the four social orders). 

It is sometimes suggested that Gautamlputra Satakarni is iden¬ 
tical with the celebrated Vikramaditya of Indian tradition and 
folklore. The theory is untenable in view of the facts that Vikra¬ 
maditya of Ujjayini and Salivahana of Pratishthana are always 
distinguished in the legends and that Gautamlputra, whose successors 
are known to have used not any era but their own regnal reckoning, 
cannot be regarded as the founder of the Vikrama-Sarhvat or any 
other era. Gautamlputra is never known to have assumed the title 
Vikramaditya. 2 The suggestion that he was the Satavahana con- 

1. See above, p. 183. Some writers are inclined to identify the Satavahana con¬ 
temporary of Rudradaman with Pulumavi, while others prefer his identifica¬ 
tion with the 6aka king’s son-in-law Vasisthlputra Satakarni of the Kanheri 
inscription, who is supposed to have succeeded his elder brother Pulumavi. 
The first suggestion is untenable as the two names, Satakarni and Pulumavi, 
are never known to have been borne by a single individual. The second identi¬ 
fication is aiso improbable as Vasisthlputra Satakarni, if he ruled at all as a 
lord of Dakshinapatha, appears to have reigned after Pulumavi (c. A.D. 130-59) 
and therefore after the date of the Junagarh inscription of Rudradaman (A.D. 
150-51). 

2. Gautamiputra’s epithet vara-varana-vikrama-charu-vikrama, ‘one whose gait 
is as beautiful as that of the choice elephant,’ has nothing to do with the title 
Vikramaditya, ‘equal to the sun in valour.’ The title was assumed by 
Samudra-gupta about the middle of the fourth century. Titles ending with the 
word aditya as in Vikramaditya seem to have become popular only after that 
date. 


203 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


temporary of Nagarjuna seems also to be improbable. According 
to the tradition recorded by Hiuen Tsang, this king held sway over 
South Kosala which is, however, conspicuous by its absence in the 
list of countries forming parts of Gautamiputra’s empire. Equally 
unwarranted is the suggestion that Gautamlputra Satakarni ruled 
conjointly with his son Vasishthiputra Pulumavi. The absence of 
any charter and coin issued conjointly by Gautamlputra Satakarni 
and Pulumavi as well as the mention of Pratishthana as the capital 
only of Pulumavi in Ptolemy’s Geography renders the theory of 
conjoint rule highly improbable. 1 

9. Successors of Gautamlputra 

According to the Puranas, Puloma, i-e. Vasishthiputra Pulumavi, 
ruled for twenty-eight or twenty-nine years. His reign may there¬ 
fore be tentatively assigned to c. A.D. 130-59. Pulumavi’s inscrip¬ 
tions have been discovered at Nasik (years 2, 6, 19 and 22), Karle 
in the Poona District (years 7 and 24) and Amaravati in the Krishna 
District. Although Pulumavi was not in possession of the northern 
provinces of his father’s empire, he was probably responsible for 
the extension of Satavahana power in the land about the mouths of 
the Krishna. This is suggested by the discovery not only of his ins¬ 
cription at Amaravati but also of a large number of his coins in the 

1. Sir R. G. and D. R. Bhandarkar (op. cit.), who are the principal advocates 
of this theory, believe that the inscription of Gautamiputra’s twenty-fourth 
regnal year, which is engraved on the east wall of the verandah of the Nasik 
Cave No. 3 and which records a grant made by the king and his mother in 
favour of certain monks dwelling in the cave that was a pious gift of theirs, 
presupposes the gift of cave No. 3 made by Gautamiputra’s mother and record¬ 
ed in the inscription of Pulumavi’s nineteenth regnal year, incised on the back 
wall of the verandah above the entrance. It is suggested therefore that the 
twenty-fourth year of Gautamiputra’s reign was later than the nineteenth 
regnal year of his son. It is further pointed out that in the Nasik inscription 
of Pulumavi (year 19), GautamI BalasrI is described as the mother of a Maha¬ 
raja and the grandmother of a Maharaja, both of which she probably was at 
the same time, and also that the above record, which deals chiefly with the 
exploits of Gautamlputra and speaks of none of his son’s renders it inexpli¬ 
cable why a king dead for nineteen years is extolled and the reigning monarch 
passed over in silence. None of the arguments, however, appears to be quite 
convincing. The inscription of Gautamiputra’s twenty-fourth year apparently 
refers to the grant of the verandah only, while the record of the nineteenth year 
of Pulumavi speaks of the gift of the cave with or without the verandah. As 
regards BalasrI’s representation as the mother of a king and the grandmother 
of a king, it is to be noted that in the same context she is also called a Maha- 
devt, ‘wife of a king’. This shows that the lady claims to be one of the few 
that see not only their husband and son but also their grandchild on the 
throne. As to the prasasti of Gautamlputra in an inscription of his son re¬ 
cording a gift of his mother, it is not unnatural for a mother in her old age to 
recount the glories of her dead son who was associated with her in a previous 
gift, not unconnected with the new gift, especially at a time when most of 
that son’s conquests were lost again to the foreigners. 

204 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 


same area as well as in the adjoining regions. The Bellary District 
seems also to have been annexed to the Satavahana empire during 
Pulumavi’s reign. As has already been suggested, probably the two 
newly annexed provinces came to be styled Andhrapatha and ‘Sata- 
vahanlya district’ from this time after the tribal and dynastic 
designations of the conqueror. 


According to the Puranic lists, Pulumavi’s immediate successor 
was Sivasri Satakarni (c. A.D. 159—66), who is no doubt the same as 
Vasishthlputra £ivasrl Satakarni of coins discovered in the Krishna 
and Godavari! Districts. The king is usually identified with Vasish¬ 
thlputra Satakarni, son-in-law of Rudradaman, who is known from 
the Kanheri inscription. According to the Junagarh record, however, 
Aparanta, in which Kanheri is situated, formed a part of the domi¬ 
nions of Rudradaman and not of his Satavahana contemporaries. It 
is therefore not improbable that Vasishthlputra Satakarni was his 
father-in-law’s viceroy in Aparanta or conquered that region from 
the Scythians after Rudradaman’s death. His identification with 
&ivasri, however, cannot be regarded as certain. 1 


The next rulers according to the Puranas were Sivaskanda 
Satakarni (c. A.D. 167-74) and Yajnasri Satakarni (c. A.D. 174-203). 
Sivaskanda is unknown from any other sources, although his name 
reminds one of Sivamaka Sata (Satakarni) of an AmaravatS inscrip¬ 
tion and Skanda Satakarni of the Tarhala coins. It may be suggested 
that Sivaskanda is the Sanskritized form of Sivamaka. 2 The real 
name of the Puranic Yajnasri was Yajna 'Satakarni who is known 
from inscriptions at Nasik (year 7), Kanheri (year 16), and Chinna- 
Ganjam in the Krishna District (year 27), and from coins from the 
Krishna and Godavari Districts of the Madras State, the Chanda 
District of Madhya Pradesh, Berar, Northern Konkan, Baroda and 
Saurashtra. Silver coins of Yajna found at Sopara (ancient Surpa- 
raka, capital of Aparanta) are closely imitated as regards types, size, 
and weight from the ordinary silver coinage of Rudradaman. Of all 
Satavahana coins, only this series has the head of the king on the 
obverse, while the reverse type is a combination of the Ujjain and 

1. It may be suggested that SivasrI was the coronation name of Vasishthlputra 
Satakarni. Gopalachari speaks of a silver coin, modelled on the Kshatrapa 
coinage, on the obverse of which he finds the word vdsithiputasa and the king’s 
head and the word hdtakanisa probably on the reverse. The coin has been 
ascribed to Vasishthlputra Satakarni of the Kanheri inscription (EHAC, 
p. 67); but the case is doubtful. 

Sivamaka may be a variation of Simuka. 

205 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


hill symbols with the rayed sun. It is well known that the king’s 
head and the rayed sun associated with a hill are constant features 
of the coins of the Sakas of Western India. Yajha was therefore a 
great king who ousted Scythian rule not only from Aparanta,. but 
probably also from parts of Western India and the Narmada valley. 
Iiis success against the Sakas may have been partially due to the 
struggle between Jlvadaman and Rudrasiihha I and the rise of 
Mahakshatrapa Isvaradatta. 1 If Yajha may be identified with the 
Satavahana contemporary of Nagarjuna, he probably further extend¬ 
ed his power in the eastern part of Madhya Pradesh, But Yajha was 
the last great king of the family, and soon after his death the empire 
seems to have been split up into a number of separate principalities 
under different princes of the royal blood. 

10. Decline of the Satavahanas 

The successors of Yajha Satakarni, according to some of the 
Puranas, were Vijaya (c. A.D. 203-09), ChandrasrI or Chandairl 
(c. A.D. 209-19) and Puloma (c. A.D. 219-27). Vijaya is probably 
the king whose name is doubtfully read on a few coins of the Tarhala 
(Berar) hoard as Vijaya Satakarni, but whether he ruled over the 
whole empire is unknown, ChandrasrI or ChandasrI has been iden¬ 
tified with king Chada Sata (i.e., Chandra or Chanda Satakarni) of 
an inscription discovered at Kodavali in the Godavari District. 
Some of the coins discovered in the same region were issued by king 
Vasishthlputra Chada Sati (Chandra Satakarni), while others give 
the name of the king as Cha^a Sati (Chandra or Chanda Satakarni). 

Chada and Chada are usually believed'to be different forms of 
the name of Chandra Satakarni, who is identified with the king 
known from the Kodavali inscription. But the coins may have been 
actually issued by two different kings named Chandra and Chanda. 
According to some writers, the second year of Chada Sata, when the 
Kodavali inscription was incised, corresponds to A.D. 210. The 
Puranic Puloma seems to be no other than king Pulumavi who is 
known from an inscription of his eighth regnal year found at 
Myakadoni in the Bellary District. We do not know if these kings 
held sway over territories outside the southern provinces of Yajna’s 
empire. Another Satavahana king known from coins, found in the 
heart of the Andhra country, was Rudra Satakarni who is not men¬ 
tioned in the Puranic lists. Andhrapatha passed to the Ikshvakus 


1. See above, p. 187. 


206 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 


before the middle of the third century and the Pallavas of Kahchi 
conquered both Andhrapatha and the Satavaharfiya district before 
the end of that century. 

A king named Majhariputra Sakasena is known from an inscrip¬ 
tion of his eighth regnal year found at Kanheri in the Aparanta 
country. He is sometimes identified with the issuer of certain coins 
discovered in the Krishna and Godavari Districts, whose name has 
been doubtfully read as Sakasena or Sata. The coins, however, 
may actually belong to king Saka Satakarni known from some 
specimens of the Tarhala (Berar) hoard. If Sakasena may be identi¬ 
fied with Saka Satakarni, this king must have ruled over wide 
dominions. What relation Sakasena of the Kanheri inscription 
might have had with Vasishthiputra Chatarapana Satakarni of a 
Nanaghat record of the thirteenth year of his reign cannot be deter¬ 
mined. The names of these rulers, who are not mentioned in the 
Puranas, have traces of their Scythian affinity . 1 

11. Branches of the Sdtavdhana Dynasty and the Viceregal Families 

Indian literary traditions speak of a branch of the Satavahana 
family ruling in Kuntala, comprising the North Kanara District and 
parts of Mysore, Belgaum and Dharwar. Rajasekhara’s Kdvyami- 
mamsd refers to a king of Kuntala named Satavahana. The Puranas 
as well as Vatsyayana’s Kdmasutra mention a king named Kuntala- 
Satakarni. The Puranic lists make him a predecessor of Gautaml- 
putra Satakarni, and a commentator of the Kdmasutra explains the 
name as being due to the king’s birth in the Kuntala country. 
Another king called Hala (Sata), whose name is known to be a con¬ 
traction of Sdtavdhana > Sdldhana, is called ‘Kuntala’ or ‘lord of 
Kuntala’ in traditions. His name is associated with the celebrated 
Prakrit anthology called Gdthdsaptasati. Hala may have been 
identical with Kuntala-Satakarni, although they are separately men¬ 
tioned in the Puranas. 

When precisely Kuntala came under Satavahana influence can¬ 
not be ascertained; but probably it was in the wake of the southern 
expeditions of Pulumavi that his lieutenants established themselves 
in the Kannada country. Inscriptions testify to the existence of 
kings belonging to the Chutu-kula who were in possession of the 
south-western Deccan before the rise of the Kadambas. The Chutus 

1. As Gopalachari suggests, Chatarapana may have been the Dravidian corruption 
of a name like Kshatrapannaka. 


\ 


207 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


were intimately related to the Maharathis (Maharashtrins, probably 
the Rashtrikas of the earlier period) and Mahabhojas (probably the 
Bhojakas of the earlier epoch) who were feudatories of the Satava- 
hanas. They may have claimed Satavahana blood. 

Coins of a king named Mutfananda and of another named 
Chutukadananda have been discovered at Karwar and are connected 
by type with those of Sadakana (Satakarni) Kalalaya Maharathi, the 
semi-independent governor of the Satavahanas in the Mysore region. 
Chutukadananda, whose name possibly refers to a place called 
Chutukata (cf. Bhojakata), seems to have been associated with the 
Chutukulanandas of inscriptions. It is not improbable that the 
semi-independent Satavahana governors of Kuntala were ousted by 
Mudananda when the Satavahana power declined after Yajha Sata¬ 
karni and that Mudananda’s family was overthrown by Chutukada¬ 
nanda. The Banavasi inscription of Haritiputra Vishnukada 
Chutukulananda Satakarni has been assigned, on palaeographic 
grounds, to the age of Yajiia, i.e. to the end of the second century 
A.D., but may actually be a little later . 1 The record refers to a 
lady styled MahabhojI (wife of a Mahabhoja), who was a daughter 
of the Maharaja i.e., the king, and to her son named Sivaskanda- 
nagairl. Rapson is inclined to identify Sivaskandanagasri and his 
mother of this epigraph with Skandanaga Sataka (Satakarni) and his 
mother Nagamulanika (Nagamulannika) of a Kanheri record in 
which the lady is described as the wife of a Maharathi and as a 
daughter of a MahabhojI and the Maharaja. 

It is further conjectured that the name of king Vishnukada 
Chutukulananda Satakarni must have occupied the damaged initial 
part of the Kanheri record just as in the Banavasi epigraph, and 
that he was the father'of the lady mentioned in the above records. 
But the identification of SivaskandanagasrI and Skandanaga Sataka 
is extremely doubtful. Even if it be suggested that they were two 
sons of the daughter of Vishnukada Chutukulananda Satakarni, the 
Chutu occupation of Aparanta cannot be regarded as an established 
fact in the present state of our knowledge. The identification of any 
of the two princes with the king Sivaskandavarman of VaijayantI 
(modern Banavasi), capital of Kuntala, as suggested by Rapson, is 

1. A comparison of the letters of the Banavasi record with those of the Ikshvaku 
inscriptions would suggest the first half of the third century A.D. to be the 
date of the former. Vishnukada or -ka^a may have been a place like Chutu¬ 
kata and Bhojakata. The Malavalli inscription reads -ka^a which probably 
stands for -kotfa. 


208 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND TIIE CIIEDIS 

also improbable. Sivaskandavarman and his predecessor (probably 
father) Vishnukada Chutukulananda Satakarni of the Malavalli 
inscription flourished shortly before Kadamba May urasar man’s 
occupation of the Kuntala capital about the middle of the fourth 
century A.D. 

The Chutu king who issued the Malavalli charter in his first 
regnal year seems to have ruled at least about half a century after 
his namesake of the Banavasi inscription. It is probable that 
Vishnukada Chutukulananda Satakarni II was a feudatory of the 
Pallava king Sivaskandavarman and named his son after his over- 
lord. The suggestion is supported not only by the Pallava occupa¬ 
tion of Andhrapatha and the Satavahanlya district about the end of 
the third century, but also by the fact that the founder of the 
Kadamba dynasty of Kuntala is said to have received the feudatory 
state bounded by the Arabian Sea and the Prehara or Prahara 
(either the Malaprahara, i.e., Malaprabha, or the Ghataprahara, i.e., 
Ghafaprabha) from the Pallava king of Kanchl. 

Coins issued by the kings Satakarni, Pulumavi, Yajna Satakarni 
and Krishna Satakarni, have been discovered in the Chanda District, 
Madhya Pradesh. In the absence of metronymics, it is with some 
diffidence that we propose to identify Satakarni and Pulumavi of 
these coins with Gautamiputra Satakarni and Vasishthiputra 
Pulumavi. 1 The palaeography of the Chanda coins of Pulumavi 
seems to be earlier than that of the ordinary issues of Vasishthiputra 
Pulumavi; but, as Rapson has rightly noticed, the palaeographical 
test is not quite reliable in these cases. Krishna Satakarni was pro¬ 
bably a successor of Yajna Satakarni in the eastern part of the empire. 

In the year 1939 a hoard of 1,525 coins of some of the later 
members of the Satavahana family was discovered at Tarhala 2 near 
Mangrul in the Akola District of Berar. They bear the names of Sata¬ 
karni, Pulumavi, Sivasrl Pulumavi, Skanda Satakarni, Yajna Sata¬ 
karni, Vijaya (?) Satakarni, Kumbha Satakarni, Krishna 3 Satakarni, 
Saka Satakarni and Pulahamavi. Apparently the kings Satakarni, 
Pulumavi, Yajna Satakarni and Krishna Satakarni of the Chanda coins 
are identical with their namesakes of the Tarhala hoard. Some of the 
other rulers known from this hoard have already been referred to 

1. Rapson is inclined to identify Satakarni of the Chanda coins with Yajna 
S^tdkdmi 

2. 1HQ, XVI. 503; JNS1, II. 83; P1HC , VII. 104. 

3. Mirashi suggests Karna instead of Krishna. 

209 

A.i.r 


14 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


above. Sivasri Pulumavi and Pulahamavi (a variant form of the* 
name Pulumavi) appear to be two different rulers, none of them 
probably identical with Vasishthiputra Pulumavi and his namesake 
of the Myakadoni inscription. Kumbha is unknown from any other 
sources. It seems that some of the successors of Yajna Satakarni, 
who may have extended Satavahana power in eastern Madhya 
Pradesh, ruled primarily in Berar and Madhya Pradesh. This 
branch of the Satavahana family appears to have continued to rule 
up to the second half of the third century A.D. when its authority 
was supplanted by the Vakatakas. 

The existence of a line of Satavahana kings holding sway over 
South Kosala (modern Chhattisgarh and the adjoining region) is sug- 
gested by a tradition recorded, among others, by the Chinese pilgrim 
Hiuen Tsang. According to this tradition, when Nagarjuna (c. second 
century A.D.) lived in a monastery built by Asoka to the south of 
the capital city of Dakshina. Kosala, the king of the land was So-to 
p’o-ho, i.e. Satavahana. 1 It seems that Madhya Pradesh was con¬ 
quered by the Satavahanas during the rule of one of the immediate 
successors of Gautamlputra Satakarni, probably Yajna Satakarni 
himself. That Dakshina Kosala in eastern Madhya Pradesh was once 
under the Satavahana kings is possibly supported by the discovery 
of a copper coin of king Sivasri Apilaka in Chhattisgarh. Although 
the Puranas place king Apilaka long before Gautamlputra Satakarni, 
he may have actually been a successor of Yajna Satakarni, in the 
eastern part of the empire. On numismatic grounds some writers 
ascribe Apilaka’s coin to a date earlier than Gautamlputra, while 
others prefer to connect it with the later Satavahanas. 

An interesting group of kings holding sway over the Kolhapur 
region of the South Maratha country is known from coins. The 
group is represented by three rulers, viz. Vasishthiputra Vilivaya 
kura, Mathariputra Sivalakura who restruck the coins of the previ 
ous king, and Gautamiputra Vilivayakura who restruck the coins of 
both the other rulers. Rapson is inclined to take kura as a Prakrit 
form of Sanskrit kula; but in it we have probably a dynastic name. 
If this suggestion be accepted we may speak of these rulers as be 

1. According to I-tsing, the personal name of the king was Shi-yen-te-ka (Shan- 
fe-ka of a previous translator) and his style was Sha-to-p’o-han-na (Sata¬ 
vahana). Shi-yen-te-ka and Shan-t’e-ka appear to suggest an original like 
Santikarna or Santakarna, the Puranic corruptions of the name Satakamii. 
Some traditions speak of Vidarbha instead of South Kosala in connection with 
Nagarjuna. But the tradition recorded by Hiuen Tsang, who visited the 
monastery in question, appears to be more rediable. 


210 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 


longing to the Kura (or Ankura) dynasty of Kolhapur. Some scholars 
believe that the kings of the Kolhapur coins represented a branch of 
the Satavahana family, while others attempt to identify them with 
some of the known members of that family. The identification 
of Majharlputra Sivalakura with Mathariputra Sakasena and of 
Gautamlputra Vilivayakura with Gautamlputra Satakarni is, how¬ 
ever, entirely conjectural. There is no evidence to connect these 
kings, who appear to have been local rulers of the Kolhapur region, 
with the Satavahanas. 

II. THE CHEDI (MAHA-MEGHAVAHANA) DYNASTY 

OF KALINGA 

1. Kalinga and the Chedis 

The ancient Kalinga country roughly comprised the present Puri 
and Gan jam Districts and parts of the Cuttack District of Orissa 
with the adjoining region in the north and the north-west; but 
sometimes it also included certain portions of the presenl-day 
Telugu-speaking area of the south. Reference has been made above 
to the conquest of this country by the Nandas and the Maurya 
emperor Asoka. The Mauryas probably divided the country into 
two halves, both for political and administrative purposes, one with 
its headquarters at Tosall (modern Dhauli near Bhuvaneswar) and 
the other with Samapa (near modern Jaugada) as its chief city: 
Pliny (first century A.D.) says: “The tribes called Calingae are 
nearest the sea; the royal city of the Calingae is called Parthalis 
(probably a corruption of the name Tosall). Over their king 60,000 
foot soldiers, 1,000 horsemen and 700 elephants keep watch and 
ward in precinct of war.” 1 

Whether Pliny derived his information from the accounts of 
Megasthenes (end of the fourth century B.C.), as is usually supposed, 
or from a later source referring to the time of the Chedi kings, 
cannot be determined in the present state of our knowledge. But 
we know that, in the first century B.C., Kalinga became one of the 
strongest powers in India under the vigorous rule of kings belonging 
to the Maha-Meghavahana family of the Chedi clan. The early 

1. Plinv probably refers to the Kalinga people as a widely diffused race, for he 
speaks of the Macco-Calingae (a branch of the Brachmanae), Calingae (sup¬ 
posed to include the Gangaridae in one passage) and Modogalingae. 

211 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


history of the Chedis has been discussed above, 1 and it is not im¬ 
probable that some Chedi princes migrated from Madhyadesa or 
Magadha to Kalihga where they carved out a principality, which 
ultimately became a mighty empire. 2 

The history of Kalihga after the.Maurya conquest is obscure in 
the extreme. We do not know when it threw off the yoke of 
Magadha or came into the power of the Chedis. But, from a 
damaged inscription on the overhanging brow of the Hathigumpha 
cave in the Udayagiri hill near Bhuvaneswar (Orissa), we know 
some details of the achievements of a mighty Chedi ruler named 
Kharavela 3 who represented the third generation of the rdja-vamsa 
of Kalihga. The king is not only described as an offshoot of the 
Chedi -rdja-vamsa, but is actually said to have been a descendant of 
the ancient Chedi monarch Vasu (i.e., Vasu-Uparichara). 4 Mem¬ 
bers of this family, called both Kalinga-rajavamsa and Chedi- 
rajavamsa, styled themselves Arya and also Maha-Meghavahana, 
which apparently indicates ‘descendant of Maha-Meghavahana.’ 5 
Maha-Meghavahana, therefore, seems to have been the founder of 
the Chedi royal house of Kalihga. Whether he represented the first 
of the three generations of Kalihga kings referred to in the Hathi¬ 
gumpha inscription, and was therefore the grandfather of Kharavela, 
cannot be determined. The epithet arya possibly points to the Aryan 
origin of the family established in the land of the non-Aryans. 

The lower story of the Manchapuri cave in the Udayagiri hill 
was excavated by a Maharaja , probably named Vakradeva, who was 
a lord of Kalihga and belonged to the Arya Maha-Meghavahana line¬ 
age. 6 The upper story of the cave was excavated by the chief queen 
of Kharavela who seems to have been the third king of the family. 
If the excavation of the upper story of the cave may be attributed 
to the reign of Kharavela and to a date later than that of the 
construction of the lower story, it is not improbably that Vakradeva 

2’. PH All pp. 75, 96-97, 250-51. 

3. The name is sometimes believed to represent Sanskrit Kala-vela. For the 
Hathigumpha Inscription, cf. JBORS, III, IV, XIII, XIV, El, XX; 72 ff.; Sel. 
Ins., p. 206. 

4. See Vol. I, p. 296. 

5. Cf. the personal and dynastic name Satavahana. Meghavahana as a personal 
name occurs in the Rdjatararigini. 

6. The name of the king has been doubtfully read as Vakadepa, Kudepa or 
Kadampa in his Prakrit inscription. For the inscriptions cf. IHQ. XIV, 159 ff. 

212 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 

represented the second generation of the royal family and was the 
father of Kharavela. 

2. Kharavela 

Maharaja Kharavela is one of the most remarkable figures Of 
ancient Indian history. The events of his life are recorded in con¬ 
siderable detail in the Hathigumpha prasasti. The first fifteen years 
of Kharavela’s life were spent in games befitting a young prince, and 
in the study of matters relating to writing, coinage, accounting, 
administration and legal procedure. In his sixteenth year, the prince 
was installed as Yuvardja. When he completed his twenty-fourth 
year, he was anointed Maharaja of Kalinga. Kharavela assumed the 
title of Kalingadhipathi or Kalihga-chakravartin and no doubt claim¬ 
ed the status of a chakravartin or universal ruler. He was possibly 
also styled Mahdvijaya. He married a daughter of the gr6at- 
grandson of king Hastisimha, probably of the Lalaka lineage. Khfira- 
vela was a devout Jain and was even called Bhikshu-r&ja, i.e. the 
monk-king. But he was not a bigot, as he said to have honoured, 
like Maury a Asoka, all religious sects (pdsamda from Sanskrit 
pdrshada) dwelling in his realm. 

Immediately after his accession to the throne, Kharavela 
launched on a career of a dig-vijayin (conqueror). In the second year 
of his reign, he is said to have sent a large army to the western 
countries without even thinking of Satakarni, who apparently ruled 
the country to the west of Kalinga. In the course of this expedition, 
the Kalinga army is further said to have reached the banks of the 
Krishnabena (i.e. Krishna) where the city called IJishika-nagara 1 
was threatened. As there is no indication that Kharavela’s army 
came into conflict With Satakarni or that Rishika-nagara formed a 
part of the latter's dominions, the Kalinga king’s claim seems to 
suggest that friendly relations existed between the two kings and 
that the Kalinga army passed to the Rishika country on the Krishna 
through Satakarni’s territories without difficulty. But a sug¬ 
gestion that Kharavela’s army attacked a city on the Krishna in 
the southern part of Satakarni’s kingdom cannot also be regarded 
as altogether impossible. King Satakarni seems to be no other than 
an early Satavahana ruler of that name, very probably Satakarni I. 
In the fourth year of his reign, Kharavela seems to have occupied the 

1. The Prakrit original has Asika-nagara which has sometimes been read as 
Musika-nagara. 


21 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


capital of a prince named Vidyadhara; in the same year he also 
subdued the Rashtrikas and Bhojakas, probably of the Berar region. 
In the eighth year Kharavela destroyed Gorathagiri, a hill fortress 
in the Barabar hills, and attacked the city of Raj agriha (modern 
Rajgir in the Gaya District, Bihar) 1 . The news of. these exploits of 
Kharavela caused so much terror in the heart of a Yavana king that 
he fled away to Mathura. The Yavana ruler, whose name is some¬ 
times doubtfully read as Dimita or Dimata (?Demetrius), was pro¬ 
bably a later Indo-Greek ruler of the eastern Punjab. 

In his eleventh year Kharavela destroyed the city of Pithu^a 
(probably from Sanskrit Prithuda; cf. Ptolemy’s Pitundra, metropolis 
in the land of the Maisoli), the capital of a king of the Masuli- 
patam region in the Madras State. He threatened the rulers of 
Uttarapatha (probably north-western India) in the next year, and 
also defeated the king of the Magadha people, probably on the banks 
of the Ganga. The name of the Magadha king is given in Prakrit 
as Bahasatimita which seems to stand for Sanskrit Brihatsvatimitra 
rather than for Brihaspatimitra as is usually supposed. Brihatsvati¬ 
mitra, a contemporary of Kharavela, seems to be the king of that 
name mentioned as the sister’s son of Ashadhasena of the Pabhosa 
inscriptions 2 3 and as the father of the queen of a Mathura king 
referred to in the Mora inscription. He seems to have been related to 
the Mitra kings of Magadha whose records and coins have been found 
in the Gaya District. To avenge the humiliation of Kalinga dur¬ 
ing the time of the Nandas and the Mauryas, Kharavela carried 
away much booty from Anga and Magadha together with certain 
Jain images originally taken away by a Nanda king from Kalinga. 
In the same year Kharavela also defeated the Pandya king of the 
Far South. 

As a ruler, Kharavela always thought of the welfare of his 
subjects and spent large sums of money on their account. Himself 
a great master of music, the king often entertained the people by 
arranging dancing and musical performances as well as festivities 
and merry gatherings. He enlarged an irrigation canal originally 
excavated by a Nanda king three centuries ago. Kharavela was 
also a great builder. On one occasion the capital city of Kalinga^ 

1. The passage of the Hathigumpha inscription may also suggest that Kharavela 
killed a king named Gorathagiri and plundered his capital Rajagriha. 

2. See above, p. 98. 

3. It is called Kalinga-nagarl. According to some epigraphists the actual nam'.' 
of the city was Khibira; but this is uncertain. 


211 



THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 

was devastated by a terrible cyclone, and the king had to rebuild 
numerous gates, walls and houses that had been damaged, and to 
restore all the gardens. He built a magnificent palace called the 
Mahavijaya-prasada. As a devout Jain, he excavated a number of 
caves in the Kumari-parvata (Khandagiri hill). Kharavela probably 
also built a monastery at a place called Pabhara not far from these 
caves. 

There is a controversy as regards the date of Kharavela. Some 
scholars are inclined to assign him to the first half of the second 
century B.C.; 1 but there is no reason to believe that he flourished at a 
later date. His title Maharaja, which like Maharajadhiraja seems to 
have been inspired and popularised by the foreign rulers of India 
and was first used by the Indo-Greeks in the first half of the second 
century B.C.^suggests a later date. A king of Kalinga, far away 
from the sphere of influence of the foreign rulers, could have assum¬ 
ed it only at a later period. Kharavela’s Magadhan contemporary 
Brihatsvatimitra, who cannot be identified with any of the 6unga 
and Kanva kings mentioned in the Puranas, must have flourished 
long after Pushyamitra Sunga (c. 187-151 B.C.) The script,of 
the Hathigumpha inscription is later than that of the Besnagar 
inscription fend of the second century B.C.) and points to a date in 
the first century B.C. This late date is probably supported by the 
developed Kavya style exhibited by the prasasti. It should also be 

1. The theory is based partly on Kharavela’s contemporaneity with the early 
Satavahana king Satakami I, who is sometimes given an early date (cf. above, 
p. 195, f.n. 1). The advocates of this theory are inclined to identify Kharavela’s 
Magadhan contemporary, whose name is taken to be Brihaspatimitra, with. 
Pushyamitra Sunga (c. 187-151 B.C.) on the ground that Brihaspati or Jupiter 
is regarded as the guardian of the Pushya or Tishya constellation of stars. 
But the identification, to say the least of it, is hopelessly unconvincing. These 
scholars also identify the Yavana-raja, who was another contemporary of 
Kharavela, with the Indo-Greek king Demetrius (c. 190-165 B.C.), son of Euthy- 
demus. But the reading of the Yavana king’s name as Dimita or Dimata is 
extremely doubtful. The interpretation of the expression tri-varsha-sata. in 
the passage nanda-rdja-tri-varsha-satodghatita as “one hundred and three 
years” goes not only against the traditional Indian way of reckoning by hundreds, 
but also against known facts of history. Even if the aqueduct in question had 
been excavated about 324 B.C. when the Nandas were overthrown by the 
Mauryas. the year 103 after the excavation, corresponding to the year 5 of 
Khara vela’s reign, would fall in c. 221 B.C. Kharavela’s installation as Yuva- 
raja would then fall in c. 234 B.C. and the dynasty would appear to have been 
founded by Kharavela’s predecessor’s predecessor about the middle of the third 
century B.C. But we know that Kalinga was an integral part of the Maga¬ 
dhan empire in the days of Asoka. It is sometimes believed that the Hathi¬ 
gumpha prasasti refers to “year 165 of the Maurya era (supposed to be counted 
from Chandragupta’s accession about 324 B.C.)” and points to a date about 
the middle of the second century B.C. But what is, in this case, read as 
muriya-kala (maurya-kala , ‘Maurya era’) is really mukhiya-kald (mukhya * 
kald , ‘the principal art’). For the different views see references under f.n. 3 
on p. 212. and PHAI , 310 ff). 


215 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

noted that, according to students of Indian art, the sculptures of the 
Manchapuri cave excavated during the Maha-Meghavahana rule 
“are considerably posterior to the sculptures at Bharhut (belonging 
to the Sunga age).” 1 The most important evidence as to Kharavela’s 
date is supplied by the passage referring to the enlargement of a 
canal, that was excavated by a Nanda king three centuries earlier 
iiuinriaraja-tri-varsha-sat-odghatita), in the fifth regnal year of the 
Kalihga king. 

There is no doubt that the same Nanda king is also mentioned 
a s an earlier ruler in connection with the Magadhan campaign of 
Kharavela. He has therefore to be identified with a ruler of the 
Nanda dynasty of Pataliputra. There is, again, no doubt that “three 
hundred years” has been used in the well-known Indian way of 
reckoning by hundreds, illustrated so often in early Buddhist lite¬ 
rature, to signify “the fourth century”. As the Nandas held sway 
over the Magadhan empire in the fourth century B.C., Kharavela, 
who flourished more than three hundred years after a Nandaraja, 
should be assigned to the first century B.C., most probably to its 
latter half. It may be pointed out that we have placed the early 
Satavahana king Satakarni I, who seems to have been a contempo¬ 
rary of Kharavela, at about the end of the first century B.C. That 
was apparently also the epoch of Kharavela. 

The end of the Maha-Meghavahanas of Kalihga is obscure. A 
prince called Vadukha is known to have excavated one or two caves 
in the Udayagiri hill. But we do not know if he was the son and 
successor of Kharavela. Not long after, the country seems to have 
been split up into a number of smaller principalities. But whatever 
be the political condition of Kalihga after the passing away of 
Kharavela, the people of this country are known to have played a 
brilliant role in the diffusion of Indian culture in the lands beyond 
the sea. It is interesting to note that the Kalihga kingdom is not 
mentioned in the Periplus (c. A.D. 70-80) or Ptolemy’s Geography 
(c. A.D. 140), although the latter authority refers to the apheterion 
near a city in Kalihga where vessels bound for the Golden Land 
ceased to follow the littoral and sailed for the open sea. 2 


1. CHI, I, pp. 639 ff. 

2. The city is called Paloura (near modern Chicacole), which is often identified 
with Dantapura ( JA, 1925, pp. 46-57); but the identification is doubtful. The 
Golden Land is the Suvarnabhumi or Suvamadvlpa of the Indian Literature 
and signified the lands to the east of the Bay of Bengal. Cf. Ch. XXV. 


216 




CHAPTER XIV 


THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 

1. THE EARLY VAKATAKAS 

• 

The death of Yajria Satakarni about the beginning of the third 
century A.D. led to the decline and dismemberment of the Sata¬ 
vahana empire. Several branches of the imperial family appear to 
have been ruling in different parts of the Deccan in the early part 
of that century; 1 but they were gradually ousted by powers many 
of which had originally been subordinate to the Satavahana emperors. 
Large parts of Madhya Pradesh and Berar, which appear to have 
been under a branch of the Satavahana family in the first half 
of the third century, are later found to be in the occupation of kings 
belonging to the Vakataka dynasty. The Vakatakas were the most 
important power that held sway over parts of the Deccan (sopie- 
times with portions of Central India) after the fall of the Satava- 
hanas and before the rise of the Chalukyas about the middle of the 
sixth century. 

Nothing definite is known about the ancestry and original 
home of Vindhyasakti, founder of the Vakataka dynasty. His name 
no doubt associates him with a territory about the Vindhyan region, 
and the name of the family may possibly be derived from that of a 
person or, more probably, a locality called Vaka^a. 2 The Vayu 
Purina refers to Vindhyasakti with a reign of 96 (sic.) years, his son 
Pravlra (doubtless Pravarasena I of inscriptions) with a reign of 60 
years, and the latter’s four sons who are said to have become kings. 
Vindhyasakti is mentioned in association with a people called the 
Kilakilas, who are styled Yavanas or Vrishas in the Puranas and 
may have been foreigners related to the Sakas of Western India, and 
also with the Naga kings of Vidisa in East Malwa. Pravlra is said to 
have ruled at a city called Kahchanka (or at Purika and Chanaka) 
and performed a number of Vajimedha or Vajapeya sacrifices. 
Curiously, however, while Vindhyasakti is mentioned after the 

. . . ... -- .. - . . ■ ■ ■ ■ , . . - . ■■ . A ■ 

$ 

1. See above, p. 206. 

2. There is as yet no definite evidence to support the suggestion that the 
Vakatakas hailed from the village of Bijnaur-Bagat in Bundelkhand. and that 
the Puranic Kilakilas had something to do with the modern Kilakila river in 
the Panna State. 


‘217 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Kilakilas, the Nagas of Vidisa and other rulers are mentioned be¬ 
tween Vindhyasakti and his son, and the relation between Pravira 
and the king of Purika called Sisuka, mentioned immediately before 
him, is not specified. Reference is further made to the end of the 
Vindhyaka family, possibly indicating the dynasty represented by 
Vindhyasakti and his descendants. 


It is difficult to determine the precise meaning or authenticity 
of most of these Puranic details about the Vakatakas. But the des¬ 
cription seems to indicate that Vindhyasakti flourished near about 
East Malwa when, in the third century, the authority of the Saka 
Maliakshatrapas was being gradually weakened in that region by 
the rise of semi-independent Saka chiefs like £rldharavarman and 
by indigenous princes such as the Nagas of Vidisa. It may be sug¬ 
gested that Vindhyasakti strengthened his position and extended his 
power across the Vindhyas at the expense of the later Satavahanas. 
But most of the records of Vindhyasakti *s descendants have been 
found in Madhya Pradesh and Berar and the adjoining regions 
of the Deccan, and only a few epigraphs of one of their feudatories 
have been discovered in Bundelkhand in Central India. 

It should also be remembered that, so far as epigraphic evidence 
goes, the Vakataka kings had their headquarters in the Nagpur Dis¬ 
trict of Madhya Pradesh and the Akola District of Berar, and Bundel¬ 
khand was ruled through a viceroy or a feudatory. Inscriptions thus 
appear to indicate that the founder of the Vakatka dynasty was a 
feudatory of the later Satavahanas of Vidarbha and he became power¬ 
ful with the decline of his masters. One may suggest, if such was the 
case, that Vindhyasakti and his son extended Vakataka power over 
parts of Central India. It is, however, difficult to be definite on this 
point, as the possibility of the transference of the Vakataka head¬ 
quarters to the Deccan, when the Guptas advanced in Central India 
in the fourth century, is not entirely precluded. Some scholars be¬ 
lieve that the origin of the Vakatakas should be traced to the Deccan, 
because the word Vakataka occurs in an early inscription at Amara- 
vatl. But Vakataka is in this case the name of a person who visited 
the Buddhist establishment at Amaravati on pilgrimage. There is no 
evidence to show that the personal name of the pilgrim had .any¬ 
thing to do with the dynastic appellation of the Vakatakas or that 
the home of the pilgrim was in the Deccan. 


218 


THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 


The records of the Vakafaka kings are dated in their regnal 
year and not in any era. 1 There are, however, several clues to 
determine the age of the rulers of this dynasty. The compilation of 
the historical sections of the Puranas, which do not mention any 
Gupta king by name but speak of the Gupta kingdom comprising 
only the Prayaga-on-Ganga, Saketa and Magadha areas, is usually 
assigned to the second quarter of the fourth century before the sub¬ 
jugation of wide regions of Northern India by Samudra-gupta about 
the next quarter of the century. It is interesting to note that the 
same Puranic account not only refers to Vindhyasakti, his son and 
grandsons, but probably also to the end of Vakataka domination 
over parts of Central India. This suggests that at least Vindhyasakti 
and his son ended their rule before the second quarter of the fourth 
century, and that the former probably flourished in the second half 
of the third century. Again we know that Vindhyasakti’s great- 
great-grandson Prithivlshena I was more or less contemporary of 
Samudra-gupta, for his son married a daughter of Chandra-gupta II 
(A.D. 376-414), son of Samudra-gupta. Prithvishena’s rule may 
therefore be assigned roughly to the third quarter of the fourth 
century, and if we count, as is usual, 25 years to a generation, 
Vindhyasakti, the great-great-grandfather of this king, may be 
placed in the corresponding quarter of the previous century. The 
latest reference to the Vakatakas is traced in the records of the 
Vishnukundins according to which Madhavavarman I (c. A.D. 535- 
85) of the Andhra country married a princess of the Vakataka family. 
The Vakataka kings therefore, ruled from about the middle of the 
third to about the middle of the sixth century. 

Vindhyasakti, the founder of the Vakataka dynasty was a 
Brahmana belonging to the Vishnu vyiddha gotra. The Puranic state¬ 
ment that he ruled for 96 years seems to be a mistake, or probably 
refers not to his reign-period but to the period covered by his long 
life. No inscription of his reign has been so far discovered; but he 
is mentioned in the Ajanta inscription of the time of Harishe^a. 
Vindhyasakti is described as a dvija (Brahmana) and a banner of the 
Vakataka family and is credited with the conquest of countries, with 
victory in many battles, and with great liberality. He is given no 
royal epithet in the Ajanta inscription; but the record being frag¬ 
mentary and in verse, it is uncertain whether the founder of the 
Vakataka dynasty ruled without royal titles like Senapati Pushya- 

1 . The theory that the Vakatakas founded the era of A.D. 248-49 is not supported 
by any evidence. No coins can be attributed to the Vakataka kings. 

219 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


mitra Vindhya^sakti appears to have been a powerful ruler who 
extended his sway at the expense of his neighbours. Little, how¬ 
ever, is known about the actual extent of his dominions. 

Vindhyasakti was succeeded by his son Maharaja Haritlputra 
Pravarasena I, called PraVira in the Puranic account. Although 
no inscription of his reign has as yet been discovered, his achieve¬ 
ments find a place in most of the records of his family. He is the 
only Vakataka ruler who has been described as a samrat (a universal 
monarch) in some records. In many epigraphs, the Vakatakas are 
styled samrdd-Vaka taka (no doubt pointing to the imperial position 
of the family), with special reference to the age of Pravarasena I. 
The Puranic account assigns him a reign of 60 years and credits him 
with the performance of a number of Vajapeya (or Asvamedha) sacri¬ 
fices. That he was a great champion of the Brahmanical religion is 
also evidenced by the inscriptions of his family. He is said to have 
celebrated, besides the Vajapeya, not only such Vedic sacrifices as 
Agnishtoma, Aptoryama, Jyotishtoma, Brihaspatisava, Sadyaskra, 
Ukthya, Shodasin and Atiratra, but also no less than four Asva- 
medhas. The horse-sacrifices were performed probably to com¬ 
memorate the recent foundation of the Vakataka empire on the ruins 
of the earlier empire of the Satavahanas. The Brahmana king 
Pravarasena I secured his position in the north by giving his son 
Gautamlputra 1 in marriage to a daughter of the powerful Naga king 
Bhavanaga of the Bharasiva family that held sway over consider¬ 
able parts of Central India. It is not improbable that Pravarasena 
received great help from his Bharasiva relatives in extending his 
dominions in Central India as well as in the Deccan, and that he 
performed the Asvamedhas in imitation of the ten horse-sacrifices 
celebrated by the Bharasivas. It was he who seems to have been 
the real founder of the Vakataka empire extending from Bundel- 
khand in the north to the Hyderabad State in the south. It should, 
however, be pointed out that there is absolutely nothing to justify 
the theory of Jayaswal and his followers attributing to the early 
Vakatakas a pan-Indian empire and representing them as the suc¬ 
cessors of the Kushanas. Most of Jayaswal’s suggestions about 


1. As the epigraphic passage pravarasenasya sunoh sunoh . bhavantiga- 

dauhitrasya gautamiputrasyn putrasya . rudrasenasya 


may be differently interpreted, it is sometimes suggested that Gautamlputra 
was the son’s son of Pravarasena and daughter’s son of Bhavanaga. This 
interpretation is untenable in view of the facts that it leaves unexplained the 
non-mention of the name of Gautamlputra’s father, and that in the Pattan grant 
(El. XXIII, p. 85) we have gautamxpuira-putrasya (instead of gautamiputrasya 
putrasya ), which cannot be doubly interpreted. 


‘220 





THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 

Vakataka history do not deserve serious consideration. PraVarasena 
I probably died about the end of the first quarter of the fourth 
century. The history of his successors will be dealt with in the 
next volume. 


2. THE ABHIRAS 

The Abhlras appear to have been a foreign people who entered 
India shortly before or along with the &akas from some part of east¬ 
ern Iran. It is tempting to connect their name with the locality 
called Abiravan between Herat and Kandahar. The Puranas speak 
of the Abhlras amongst the successors of the Satavahanas. Although 
we have an Abhira settlement as far east as Ahirwar between Bhilsa 
and Jhansi in central India, the Abhira people is usually associated 
with Aparanta, which indicated in a wider sense the western division 
of India and in a narrow sense only the northern part of the Konkan. 
In one context the Mahdbharata places the Abhlras in Aparanta; but 
in another it associates the people with the Sudras, and assigns both 
the tribes to the land near Vinasana where the Sarasvati lost itself 
in the sands of the Rajputana desert. 1 The Abhlras are also found 
in association with the Sudras in Patahjali’s Mahdbhdshya. The 
Periplus of the Erythraean Sea and the Geography of Ptolemy locate 
Aberia of Abiria, i.e., the Abhira country, between the lower Sindhu 
valley and Saurashtra, apparently in south-western Rajputana and 
the adjoining regions. The dominions of the Abhira kings referred 
to in the Puranas, however, lay in the north-west region of the 
Deccan and may have sometimes included the northern Konkan 
as far as the Broach area in the north. 

In early epigraphic records the Abhlras figure as generals of 
the £aka Mahakshatrapas of Western India. The Gunda (North 
Saurashtra) inscription of A.D. 181 belonging to the time of Rudra- 
simha I records the digging of a tank by the Abhira general Rudra- 
bhuti, son of the general Bapaka. An adventurer named Isvaradatta 
issued silver coins of the satrapal style actually with the title 
Mahdkshatrapa , and must have been in possession of the major part 
of the &aka territories for about two years. The coins of this ruler, 
dated in the first and second years of his reign, have been assigned 
by Rapson to A.D. 237-40, but by Bhandarkar to A.D. 188-90. The 

1. In, the second half of the fourth century B.C. when Alexander invaded north¬ 
western India, the Sudras, called Sodroi by the Greeks, lived in northern Sind 
to the south of the Punjab rivers. The mediaeval lexicographer Purushottama 
identifies Vinasana with Kurukshetra in his Trikdndasesha. 


221 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

latter view seems more reasonable. That Makakshatrapa Isvara- 
datta was not a Saka is evident from his name, which does not re¬ 
semble that of any of the satrapal rulers, as well as from the inde¬ 
pendent way of the dating of his coins. He is usually regarded as 
an Abhlra; but this conjecture is not supported by any positive 
evidence. 1 

We know only of one Abhira king who may be regarded as a 
successor of the Satavahanas and the Sakas in the north-western 
Deccan. He is Raja Mathariputra Isvarasena, son of Abhlra 6iva- 
datta, mentioned in the Nasik inscription of his ninth regnal year. 
The inscription records two investments, one of 1,000 Kdrshapanas , 
and another of 500 Kdrshapanas, in trade-guilds at Govardhana (old 
Nasik) for the purpose of providing medicines for the sick among the 
monks dwelling in the monastery on the Nasik hills. The benefac¬ 
tress was the lay devotee Vishnudatta, who was a Sakanl, mother of 
Ganapaka Visvavarman and daughter of Saka Agnivarman. As the 
king’s father Sivadatta is credited with no royal title in the inscrip¬ 
tions, king Isvarasena may be regarded as the founder of the Abhira 
dynasty of kings. There is no doubt that this king flourished some 
time after the death of Yajna Satakarni, which took place about the 
beginning of the third century. It is therefore not improbable that 
the so-called Kalachuri or Chedi era starting from A.D. 248-49 was 
counted from the accession of Isvarasena 2 . Although the Puranas 
refer to ten Abhlra kings ruling for 67 years, nothing is known 
about isvarasena’s successors. 

The inscription of Isvarasena proves that his dominions com¬ 
prised the Nasik region in northern Maharashtra; but the actual 
extent of his kingdom is uncertain. If he was really the founder of 
the era of A.D. 248, it may be suggested that the Abhlras extended 
their political influence over Aparanta and Lata where the era is 
found to be in use in later days. The Kalachuris, originally of the 
Anupa region on the Narmada, probably used the era after their 
conquest of territories belonging formerly to the kingdom of the 
Abhlras. 3 

1. There is no reason to believe that Isvaradatta and the Abhlra king Mathariputra 
Isvarasena ruled over the same territories. The absence of the tribal name and 
of any patronymic and metronymic in Isvaradatta’s coin-legend appears to be 
significant. The identification of the two rulers is improbable in view of the 
difference in their names. 

2. Cf. ABORI , XXVII, 1 ff. 

3. Prof. Mirashi has recently suggested that Khandesh was ruled by the Mahd- 
rdjas Svamidasa, Bhulun^a, and Rudradasa respectively in the years 67, 107 and 
117 of the era of A.D. 248-49 as feudatories of the Abhlras (ABORI, XXVI, 159, 


222 



THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 


The Abhiras continued to rule as late as the middle of the fourth 
century when, according to the Chandravalli inscription, 1 they came 
into conflict with the Kadamba king Mayurasarman. Although the 
Traikutakas, who flourished in the northern Konkan in the fifth 
century, may have been a branch of the Abhlra tribe, Mayurasar¬ 
man’s inscription points to the separate existence of the Abhlra and 
Traikutaka kingdoms in the fourth century. The Allahabad pillar 
inscription of Samudra-gupta mentions the Abhiras in the list of 
tribes subdued by the Gupta emperor; but it is uncertain whether 
the reference here is to the Abhlra kingdom in the north-western 
Deccan. 2 The Abhlra territories in this region appear to have later 
passed to the Traikutakas. 

3. THE BODHIS 

The Bodhi dynasty seems to have held sway over some parts 
of north-western Deccan probably in the third century. As the lead 
coins of the Bodhis bear the hill symbol on the reverse in common 
with the issues of the Western Satraps, it seems that they flourished 
in a territory that was once within the sphere of Saka influence 

There are some coins which belong to Bodhi or Sribodhi who 
may have been the founder of the family. It is not improbable that 
the word indicates the Bodhi tree and that the Bodhis were Buddhists 
in faith. This is probably suggested by the tree within railing found 

1HQ, XXI, 79). It should, however, be pointed out that these kings, whose 
territories have not yet been satisfactorily located, are styled Maharaja and are 
described as meditating on the feet of the Paramabhattaraka. As the Parama- 
bhattdraka overlords of feudatory Maharajas are unknown before the age of 
the imperial Guptas, the three Maharajas in question appear to have acknow¬ 
ledged the supremacy of the Gupta emperors Chandra-gupta II and Kumara- 
gupta I, rather than of the unknown successors of an Abhlra Raja named 
Isvarasena. 

The dates of their charters should better be referred to the Gupta era and 
not to the era of A.D. 248-49. The use of the Gupta era pointing to the expan¬ 
sion of Gupta power to the south of the Vindhyas (cf. reference to the 
Narmada as the southern boundary of a province of Budha-gupta's empire, 
Sel. Ins., p. 327) is probably also indicated by the Barwani grant of Maha¬ 
raja Subandhu issued from Mahishmatl-nagara (modem Mandhata or Mahes- 
war) in the year 167 (A.D. 486). 

The fact that no Paramabhattaraka is referred to in this record indicates 
the decline of Gupta power in this region about the end of the fifth century. 
It is not improbable that the Maharajas Svamidasa (A.D. 386), Bhulunda 
(A.D. 426), Rudradasa (A.D. 436) and Subandhu (A.D. 486) belonged to the 
same royal family flourishing in the Anupa region under the nominal supre¬ 
macy of the Gupta emperors. Some scholars believe that the so-called Kala- 
churi or Chedi era was in use in different parts of India even in the early 
period. There is, however, no evidence to show that the era was used in early 
times anywhere outside the territories originally under Abhiras and Traikutakas. 

1 . Some scholars regard this inscription as a modem fake (NHIP. VI. 238), but 
it is difficult to accept this view. 

2. See above, p. 160. 


223 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


cn some of these coins. Other coins, possibly of a slightly later date, 
disclose the names of three kings of this family, viz., Sivabodhi, 
Chandrabhodhi or Srichandrabodhi, and Vlrabodhi or Virabodhidatta. 
Nothing, however, is known of the relations that any one of these 
rulers might have borne to the others. The end of the dynasty is 
also wrapped in obscurity. 

4. THE IKSHVAKUS 

The heart of the Andhra country in the districts about the 
mouths of the Krishna and the Godavarf was in the possession of 
the main branch of the Satavahana family, which seems to have been 
Overthrown by the Ikshvakus about the end of the first quarter of 
the third century. It is uncertain whether these Ikshvakus of the 
Andhra country represented a branch of the ancient Ikshvaku family 
of Ayodhya that might have migrated to the Deccan and settled on 
the lower Krishna. 

The founder of the Ikshvaku dynasty of the Andhra country 
seems to have been Santamula (Chamtamula) I, who may be assigned 
to the second quarter of the third century. He is known to have per¬ 
formed an Asvamedha sacrifice, probably to celebrate the overthrow 
of the Satavahanas whose suzerainty the Ikshvakus and other ruling 
families of the Andhra country must-have acknowledged in the ear¬ 
lier epoch. 

The Ikshvakus, who are probably referred to in the Pura^as as 
the Srlparvatlya Andhras, appear to have ruled from the city of 
Vijayapuri situated in the Nagarjunikonda valley in the Nallamalur 
range, the ancient name of which was $rlparvata. As no records 
of the time of Santamula I have so far been discovered, little is 
known about the events of his reign and the extent of his dominions. 
He was a staunch follower of the Brahmanical faith and is described 
as “favoured by Mahasena (i.e., the god Skanda-Karttikeya).” 
SSntamula I is known to have celebrated not only the Asvamedha, 
but also the Vajapeya and some other Vedic sacrifices. This revival 
of Brahmanism after the fall of the later Satavahanas, who probably 
had Buddhistic leanings, was, however, short-lived, as Santamula’s 
immediate successors leaned again towards Buddhism. 

Two of Santamula’s sisters are referred to in inscriptions, the 
first of them being married to a Mahasenapati-Mahatalavara of the 
Pukiya family. The Pukiyas have been located by some writers 
in the Pungi District comprising parts of Nellore and the adjacent 


224 


THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 

area. The king’s daughter Atavi-Santisri was married to a Maha- 
senapati-Mahadan^anayaka belonging to the Dhanaka family. 
Another family related to the Ikshvaku kings was that of the Hiran- 
yakas, who probably dwelt in the Hiranyarash^ra covering parts of 
Nellore and Cuddapah and the adjoining regions. 

King 6antamula I was succeeded by his son Mathailputra Vira- 
purushadatta, whose rule of about twenty years may be roughly 
assigned to the third quarter of the third century. Cross-cousin 
marriage, which is prevalent in South India even today and which 
is sanctioned for the southerners by such an early work on law as 
the Baudhdyana Dharmasutra (c. fifth century B.C.), was favoured by 
the Ikshvakus. Three of VTrapurushadatta’s queens are known to 
have been the daughters of his father’s sisters. Mahadevi Rudra- 
dhara-bhattarika, very probably a queen of the same king, is des¬ 
cribed as a daughter of the Mahdrtija of Uj jay ini. This queen seems 
to have been related to Rudrasena II (c. A.D. 255-77), the contem¬ 
porary §aka Mahakshatrapa of Western India. Virapurushadatta 
gave his daughter in marriage to a Mahdrdja of Vanavasa, who was 
probably no other than one of the Chutu-Satakarni rulers of Kuntala. 
The position of the Ikshvakus must have been strengthened by 
these matrimonial alliances with the powerful rulers of Ujjain and 
Banavasi; but whether both of them were contracted during the 
reign of Virapurushadatta is uncertain. 

Records of Virapurushadatta’s reign have been found at the 
Buddhist sites of Amaravati, Jaggayyapeta and Nagarjunikon^a, the 
latest recorded date being the king’s twentieth regnal year. The 
inscriptions record private donations to some Buddhist establish¬ 
ments and are not official documents of the Ikshvaku king. The 
Nagarjunikon^a inscriptions are mostly records of the benefactions 
of some female members of Virapurushadatta’s family in favour of the 
Mahachaitya or Great Monastery lying in the vicinity of Vijayapuri 
which, as already suggested, was probably the Ikshvaku capital. 
These ladies, whose anxiety to attain to the bliss of Nirvana is exhi¬ 
bited by the epigraphs, were no doubt Buddhists by faith; but 
whether Virapurushadatta himself and his son were Buddhists is 
not quite certain. It, however, seems to be significant that unlike 
Santamula I, these kings are described neither as performers of 
Brahmanical sacrifices nor as favoured by the god Mahasena. 

The son of Virapurushadatta was Ehuvula Santamula II, who 
succeeded his father and ruled at least for about eleven years. An 


225 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


inscription at Gurzala in the Guntur District reveals the name of 
Maharaja Rulupurushadatta. The name of this king embodying the 
expression purushadatta, as well as the palaeography of his record, 
seems to connect him with the Ikshvaku king Vlrapurushadatta. It 
is not improbable that Rulupurushadatta was the successor of &anta- 
mula II. The independent rule of the Ikshvakus in the lower valley 
of the Krishna, however, seems to have terminated by the end of the 
third century. This is evident from the Mayidavolu copper-plate 
inscription which records an order of the Pallava crown-prince 
Sivaskandavarman, stationed at Kanch'i, to the vydprita or provin¬ 
cial governor of Andhrapatha residing at Dhanyakataka in the pre¬ 
sent Amaravati-Dharanikota area of the Krishna District. There is 
difference of opinion as to the date of Pallava Sivaskandavarman 
and his father, whose name is unknown but in whose tenth year of 
reign the Mayidavolu grant must have been issued. There are, how¬ 
ever, reasons to believe that Sivaskandavarman flourished about the 
first quarter of the fourth century and that the Pallava occupation 
of the heart of the Andhra country was not much later than the end 
of the third century. 

The Ikshvakus of the Andhra country lingered as a local power 
for many years after the Pallava conquest of Andhrapatha. The 
Anaji inscription of about the fifth century A.D. speaks of a matri¬ 
monial alliance between the Kekaya kings of Mysore and the saintly 
rulers of the Ikshvaku family. There is little doubt that the 
reference is to the dynasty of the Ikshvakus of the lower Krishna 
valley. Vague references to these Ikshvakus have been traced in 
the Dharmdmrita , a late Kannada poem by Nayasena. 

5. THE BRIHATPH ALA YANAS 

According to the Geography of Ptolemy (c. A.D. 140), the 
country of the people called Maisoloi had its metropolis at the city 
of Pitundra (probably from Sanskrit Prithuda ), which seems to be 
the same as Pithuda of Hathigumpha inscription, 1 and Pithunda of 
the Uttarddhyayana. The Maisoloi lived about the present Masuli- 
patam or Bandar taluk of the Krishna District, and their chief city 
may not have been situated very far from Masulipatam. In the 
second half of the first century B.C., Kharavela, king of Kalihga, 
claims to have devastated this royal city. About the end of the third 
century A.D., the Masulipatam area was in the possession of kings 


1. See above, p. 214. 


226 




THE DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 


of the Brihatphalayana dynasty who very probably had their head¬ 
quarters at the same place. 

Only one king of the Brihatphalayana dynasty is known to us, 
viz. Jayavarman, who is called a Rdjan in his Kondamudi grant but 
a Maharaja on the seal attached to the charter. The charter was 
issued in the tenth regnal year of Jayavarman, who is described as 
a devout worshipper of Mahesvara and as belonging to the Brihat¬ 
phalayana gotra. It records an order of the king from his camp of 
victory at Kudura to the governor of the Kudur -ahara in regard to 
a grant of land in favour of some Brahmanas. Kudura, headquarters 
of the dhdra or district of that name, is often identified with modern 
Guduru near Masulipatam, but sometimes also with Koduru near 
Gantasala, the same as ancient Kantakasaila or Kantkasaula and 
Greek Kantakassulos. Some scholars believe that Kudura was the 
capital of Jayavarman. 

Nothing is known about the predecessors and successors of the 
Brihatphalayana king Jayavarman and about his relations with the 
Satavahanas, Ikshvakus and the Pallavas. It is probable that the 
earlier kings of the Brihatphalayana dynasty acknowledged the 
supremacy of the later Satavahanas and of their successors, the 
Ikshvakus. Towards the close of the third century, Jayavarman 
seems to have thrown off the yoke of the Ikshvakus and ruled for 
some time as an independent ruler. Very soon, however, both the 
Ikshvakus and the Brihatphalayanas appear to have been subdued 
by the Pallavas of Kanchi whose empire, about that time, is known 
to have extended over Andhrapatha, the ‘Satavahanlya province’ 
(Bellary District) and Kuntala in the north and the north-west. 


227 


CHAPTER XV 


SOUTHERN INDIA AND CEYLON 

1. SOUTHERN INDIA 


1. The Tamil Land 

Southern India, i.e., India south of the Krishna, was known 
from the earliest times to have been divided into three major king¬ 
doms and a number of smaller states subordinate to them. These 
three important kingdoms were: Chola, occupying the Kaverl delta 
and the adjoining region; the Pandya to the south of it, extending 
from coast to coast, the northern boundary being marked by what 
was the old Pudukkottai State, or rather the river Vallaru which runs 
across the middle of the State; and the Chera, extending along the 
west coast right up to the Konkan in the north. The region above 
the Ghats and in the plateau, constituting the present State of 
Mysore, together with some of the adjoining districts, contained 
many subordinate states, whose number varied at different periods 
from seven to fourteen and which often attempted to throw off the 
yoke of the three kingdoms. The boundry line on the north was 
definitely fixed at Vengadam. the hill of Tirupati. Crossing the 
Tirupati boundry, according to the Tamils, was symbolical of leav¬ 
ing the Tamil land for regions where the spoken language changed. 

In historical times, however, we are able to distinguish a central 
core where pure Tamil was spoken, and a number of outlying dis¬ 
tricts in which mixed dialects were employed. The whole of the 
northern borderland of this region was occupied by a tribe of people 
whom the southern Tamils called Vadavar or Vadukar, speaking a 
dialect differing from Tamil. At a somewhat later period, Tamil 
literature locates the Telugu and Kannada-speaking peoples further 
to the north of the Vadavar or the Vadukar, occupying a block of 
territory on the northern border of the peninsula. 

2. Contact with the Outside World 

\ 

The division indicated above became a normal feature during 
historical times. Contact between the north and south seems to 
have been fairly frequent. Not only do we hear of people migrating 


228 


SOUTHERN INDIA AND CEYLON 


from one portion to the other; but we have also evidence that there 
was regular communication between the Deccan and Southern India 
as well as between these two and Northern India. The earliest 
instance of contact between the northern Aryans and the southern 
Tamils goes back to the tradition of the mission of the Rishi Agastya. 
He is stated to have made his headquarters on a hillock in the 
Western Ghats known as the Podiyil Hill on the Madura-Tinnevelly 
border. He brought his wife and disciples and a band of peasants to 
form the nucleus of an Aryan colony. 

Whatever value there may be in this tradition, the earliest 
achievements of Dravidian culture are credited to Agastya. There is 
also a persistent legend, which still continues to hold the field, that 
during the great war of the MakdbMrata , the armies on both sides 
were fed, maintained and conditioned by the Pandyan king. There 
are, again, stories of settlements of Dravidian tribes coming from 
the north-west, chiefly Gujarat and Saurashtra. There is even today 
a living tradition that at one time our people did actually come from 
these regions with the permission of no less a person than Krishna. 
In fact Agastya is said to have brought his agricultural population 
from the homeland of Krishna. Not only that, but we hear of com¬ 
mercial intercourse between southern and northern India, and we 
can trace references in the Arthasastra and kindred works to the ex¬ 
change of commodities such as cotton fabrics between Kalinga and 
the Pandya country. 

Similarly we find reference to the pearls obtained from the 
southern corner of the Pandya country. We also find allusions to 
pilgrimages from the Deccan to the sacred bathing place at Cape 
Comorin. Apart from these general references, we have an explicit 
statement by Magasthenes that the country in the extreme south 
was ruled by a Pandya queen who maintained an orderly govern¬ 
ment and an organised administration. He further remarks that the 
queen’s territory consisted of 365 villages, each one of which brought 
its revenue to the State Treasury on an appointed day. Whatever 
truth there may be in this, there is no doubt that Megasthenes had 
heard of the Pandya country. The three kingdoms of the South 
v/ere certainly known to Asoka as mentioned above. 1 Asoka does 
not claim authority over them but regards them as neighbouring 
kingdoms. He had to maintain the same relationship with them as 
with distant western allies like the Greeks. 


1. See p. 78- 


229 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


During the centuries immediately preceding and following the 
Christian era, the commercial activity of South India was very great, 
with a creditable volume of foreign trade. A lively commerce in 
agricultural and industrial commodities, including spices, was car¬ 
ried on with the Roman Empire, and there was a correspondingly 
brisk trade with the East, going as far as Kattigara (or Canton), the 
most important port of South China. The voyages were long and 
even dangerous. Regular and brisk communications with these 
foreign lands as well as the different parts of India seem to have 
been generally maintained. We can gather continuous evidence of 
this both from Tamil literature and from the writings of foreign 
travellers. 

3. The Three Kingdoms 

Generally speaking, the history of South India consists of the 
ascendancy of one or other of the three powers of the South, viz. 
Chola, Parujya or Chera. The chronology is very uncertain, but it 
would appear from the literary evidence that the Chola ascendancy 
began in the first century B.C. and continued to the end of the first 
century A.D., perhaps a little later. Then it passed to the Pantfya 
and Chera dynasties. 

It is impossible, at the present state of our knowledge, to deal 
with the history of any of these states in the form of a connected 
narrative. We can only glean a few facts concerning some great 
rulers of each of them, mostly from Tamil poems of a later date. 

The most distinguished of the early rulers of South India was 
the Chola king Karikala, round whom has gathered a host of 
romantic legends. Having been put into prison by his enemies, he 
not only managed to escape but made himself ruler and defeated the 
joint forces of the Pan<Jya and Chera kings, with the help of eleven 
minor chieftains, in the famous battle of Venni, 15 miles to the east 
of Tanj ore. This great victory gave him undisputed supremacy over 
the Tamil states. He also fought with many predatory tribes and 
forced them into submission. 

An important incident in the career of Karikala, which deserves 
to be treated in some detail, is the invasion of Ceylon. Although 
not mentioned in the Mahdvamsa, later chronicles of Ceylon refer 
to it. Hie great Chola Karikala who exerted himself to establish the 
dominance of the Chola kingdom in Tamil India, had apparently good 


230 


SOUTHERN INDIA AND CEYLON 

reasons to carry on war against Ceylon. On one of these occasions, 
he seems to have defeated the Ceylonese so thoroughly as to have 
carried away 12,000 of the Ceylonese inhabitants and put them to 
work in his fortification of the sea-port town of the Chola country, 
Puhar, at the mouth of the Kaveri, set over against the island of 
Lanka (Ceylon). 

One great achievement of Karikala must be noted here. It is a 
work of beneficent enterprise which resulted in immense permanent 
benefit to the inhabitants of the land. He conceived the idea of con¬ 
trolling the waters of the Kaveri at the head of the delta and redis¬ 
tributing them so as to fertilise regions not reached by the natural 
flow of the channels. The great Chola Karikala is universally re¬ 
garded as the author of the Grand Anicut Srirangam and drawing 
the waters off through a new channel, now called Vennar, into the 
arid regions of South Tanjore. The idea seems to have caught on 
after the great success he achieved. A study of the irrigation canals 
of the Tanjore District shows that most, if not all, of these were the 
work of the Chola period, and carried the overflow to irrigate other 
parts of the district, and then out into the sea. 

The Tamil poems naturally magnify the achievements of Kari¬ 
kala and credit him with the conquest of the whole of India. He is 
said to have promoted art, industry and trade and is praised for his 
impartiality as a judge and for his patronage of the Brahmanical 
religion and Tamil literature. At the same time, we get a vivid 
picture of the king as enjoying the joys of life to the full. On the 
whole, Karikala stands out among the early Tamil rulers as a strik 
ing personality, great alike in the pursuits of war and peace. 

Reference may here be made to Tontfaiman Ilandiraiyan who 
ruled at Kahchl and was a younger contemporary of Karikala. 
According to some scholars, he was a grandson of Karikala or a 
viceroy appointed by the latter to rule over Kahchl. Others, how¬ 
ever, regard him as an independent ruler of Tondai which, like 
Chera, Chola and Paxujya, designated both the country (round 
Kanchi) and its ruling dynasty. It has been suggested that Tondai 
was “the name of a creeper, and to this fact must be traced the 
name Pallava (sprout) of the rulers of Ton<Jaiman<Jalam in later 
times.” 1 

But the relation between the Ton^aiyar kings and the later 
Pallavas is uncertain. Of the ruler Ilandiraiyan we know nothing 

1. NH1P , VI. 222. 


231 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


except vague references to his righteous conduct and poetic abilities. 
About his power and status we get contradictory views. He is said 
to “have commanded the respect of the three crowned kings of the 
Tamil land;” but some writer ‘counts him as a princeling not of full 
regal rank.* 1 Nothing is known about his predecessors or successors. 

Among the Pandya rulers, Mudukudumi Peruvaludi is referred 
to in a later inscription of the eighth century A.D., as renewing his 
original grant of a village. He is called Paramesvara and is said to 
have fought many battles and performed a number of sacrifices. 
More distinguished, however, was a later king of his line Neduh- 
jeliyan. Having ascended the throne at an early age, he had to 
face the invasion of a powerful hostile confederacy consisting of the 
Chola and Chera rulers and five minor chieftains. 

The enemy advanced almost up to the gates of Madura. But 
Nedunjelyan rose equal to the occasion, and not only drove them 
out of his kingdom but even pursued them beyond its frontier. The 
decisive encounter took place at Talaiyalanganam (about 8 miles to 
the north-west of Tiruvalur) and the Pandya king obtained a com¬ 
plete victory. This victory marked a turning point in the career of 
Neduhjelyan who was henceforth distinguished by the proud epithet 
“victorious in the battle of Talaiyalanganam.” Its memory was long 
cherished and even a Pandyan charter of the tenth century A.D. 
alludes to it. Nedunjeliyan also defeated the chieftains of Kongu 
and Nidur and annexed some territories of the latter. Himself a 
poet, he was a patron of a large number of poets who have immorta¬ 
lised him in their songs. He was a follower of the Brahmanical 
religion and performed many Vedic sacrifices. 

None of the Chera kings achieved the celebrity either of Kari- 
kala or of NedunjeUyan. The Chera ruler joined Pandya against 
the Chola and the Chola against the Pandya ruler as suited him, but 
he often fared worst. The Chera king Perum Serai Adan, who 
joined the Pandya ruler against Karikala, was wounded, and starved 
himself to death in the battlefield by way of expiation. Nedun¬ 
jeliyan captured the Chera king Chey, who invaded his dominions 
along with the Chola ruler. A later Chera ruler Kanaikkal Irum- 
porai was defeated by the Chola king Seiiganan and taken prisoner. 
Against these successive humiliations the victories of the Chera 
ruler Imaiyavaramban Nedunjeral Adan stand out in high relief. He 


1. NHIP, VI. 222. 


232 





SOUTHERN INDIA AND CEYLON 


defeated the Yavanas and brought them home as captives, “their 
hands tied behind and oil poured on their heads.” These were pro¬ 
bably Greek or Arab merchants, as we are told that the king obtain¬ 
ed from them a large quantity of diamonds and many costly vessels. 
The king also conquered Kadambu near the sea, perhaps the region 
near Vanavasi which later formed the Kadamba: kingdom. 

The location of the Chera capital Vanji has been a subject of 
keen controversy among scholars. Some place it at Karur near 
Trichinopoly, while others identify it with Tiruvanjikulam on the 
west coast of Cochin. The latter view seems more probable. 

The Panqlyas and two or three successive Chera rulers arc said 
to have led expeditions to the north as far as the Himalayas. They 
even claim to have planted emblems on the Himalayas. Whatever 
we may think of these claims, we have at any rate definite evidence 
of inter-communication between some of the northern countries and 
the South in the centuries immediately preceding and following the 
Christian era. 

4. Pallava Ascendancy 

During this period the cultural contact between the North and 
the South had been frequent, and for some time even continuous, so 
that northern Aryan culture penetrated fully into South and in¬ 
fluenced the local Dravidian culture and languages. As a result of 
this contact we also find the establishment of the dynasty of the 
Pallavas, which transformed their capital Kanchl into a centre of 
Sanskrit culture as well as the Brahmanical, Buddhist and Jain reli¬ 
gions. This seems also to be the age of active contact with the 
outside world through commerce with the countries of the West, 
and by means of establishment of colonies throughout the East. 

In the general movement from the north to the south, a people 
called Kalvar or Kalavar by the Tamils seems to have played a pro¬ 
minent part. They seem to have been the people occupying all the 
country along the northern border of the Tamil land, from Vehgadam 
in the east to the north-west frontier of the Mysore State in the 
west, making its frontier outposts against the north. The southward 
advance of the Andhras brought about the movement among these 
people in the south. The movement of this people subverted the 
dynasties ruling the country round Kanchl called Tondaimandalam. 
While we are not in full possession of details, it is clear that it 


THE 6AKAS AND THE PAHLAVAS 


was these Kajvars again that upset the political order even further 
south. They established themselves in the Chola kingdom, and 
perhaps in the Pai^dya as well, and brought about a complete change 
in the ancient political conditions of the south at the commencement 
of the fourth century A.D., which we can trace from the Sangam 
literature of the Tamils. The Tamils took time to recover from this 
movement and we find the whole of the territory round Kanchi, 
Tondaimandalam, occupied by the Pallavas. The southern outposts 
of Chola and Pan<Jya were also overrun, but they regained their 
freedom after a generation of struggle. The Pallavas ruled in Kanchi 
for several centuries more and stood as a bulwark against further 
invasion from the north. Their origin and history will be dealt with 
in the next volume. 


II. CEYLON 

1. Colonisation by the Aryans 

The island of Ceylon is traditionally identified with the island 
of Lanka, the kingdom of the Rakshasas according to the Rdmdyana 
and other accounts. But according to the detailed statements in the 
Rdmdyana, the island, which contained the capital of Havana, has to 
be located far away from Ceylon, and on the basis of astronomical 
statements it ought to be situated on the equator immediately to 
the south of Cape Comorin. It has sometimes been asserted that 
Lanka was a large island, a considerable part of which has now 
sunk under the sea, leaving only the remnant which constitutes 
modern Ceylon. 

Unlike India, Ceylon possesses chronicles which narrate its his¬ 
tory from the earliest times. Events from the death of the Buddha 
were recorded by the Buddhist Church after its introduction in 246 
B.C., and later incorporated into the Dipavarhsa and the Mahdvamsa , 
composed respectively in the fourth and sixth century A.D. Both 
these works are written in Pali and based on a common source now 
lost, viz. the Atthdkathd-Mahavamsa of the Mahavihara monastery, 
composed in old Sinhalese prose mingled with verse in the Pali 
language. “Of this work the Dipavamsa presents the first clumsy 
redaction in Pali verses. The Mahdvamsa is then a new treatment 

of the same thing distinguished from the Dipavamsa .by more 

artistic composition and by a more liberal use of the material 


234 



SOUTHERN INDIA AND CEYLON 


contained in the original work.” 1 The Mahavamsa was composed by 
Mahanama, but the author of the Dlpavamsa is not known. 

The aboriginal inhabitants of Ceylon, described in the Chroni¬ 
cles as Nagas and Yakshas, were probably the ancestors of the 
modern Veddahs, a primitive people of pre-Dravidian origin still 
found in the Eastern Province. 

The earliest historical tradition that we have is of the colonisa¬ 
tion of Ceylon by people from Bengal under the lead of Vijaya, as 
narrated in the Mahavamsa. This colony is said to have started from 
the well-known port of Tamralipti, the Tamluk of modern times. 
The occasion for this emigration from Bengal was the banishment 
of prince Vijaya, for his evil conduct, by his father. Vijaya sailed 
with seven hundred companions and, after a long voyage, landed in 
the north coast of the island. They settled there, founding nume¬ 
rous towns such as Tambapanni, Anuradhagama, Ujjeni, Uruvela, 
etc. 

Since these adventurers were all of the male sex, they felt the 
need for women folk. As the story goes, they applied to the nearest 
kingdom across the sea, and had 1,000 families along with a number 
of maidens sent across. They entered into marital relations with 
them, and thus both north and south Indian elements constitute, 
according to tradition, the more civilized elements in the population 
of Ceylon. From Simhavahu or Simhala, the father of Vijaya, the 
island received the name Simhala-dvlpa, the Arabic Serendib, the 
Portuguese Ceilao, and the modern Ceylon. 

Apart from the story of Vijaya in the Mahavamsa, there are 
indications in Indian literature of a close relation between India and 
Ceylon. Indian literature gives the name Nagadvlpa—the island of 
the Nagas—to Ceylon, and relates incidents in which the Nagas play¬ 
ed a part. There is the story of a jewel throne, for which an uncle 
and a nephew fought, and, at the end of it, made a present of it to 
the Buddha. That throne remained in the island with miraculous 
power and people went to it on pilgrimage. Another connection with 
South India, which is often referred to, is the presence of the foot¬ 
prints of the Buddha on the hill Samantakutam. 

The story runs that, having accepted the invitation of Mani 
Yakshaka, the ruler of KalyanI, Chelani in South Ceylon, the Buddha 
left his footprints on the top of the hill. That had remained ever 

1. Geiger, Mahdvaihsa (Eng. Tr.) po. x-xi. cf. G. C. Mendis—The Pali Chro¬ 
nicles of Ceylon (University of Ceylon Review, October, 1946, pp. 1 fT). 

235 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


since a place of pilgrimage to which Indians often went. One thou¬ 
sand families of the 18 guilds from the Pantjya country are said to 
have arrived at a place called Mhatitta (Mahatirtha), now Mantotta, 
opposite the Isle of Mannar. Public squares in Ceylon bear the 
name Naga-Chatukkam, which seems really to be on the analogy of 
the Indian nomenclature for public squares, such as the well-known 
Bhuta-Chatukkan in Puhar. 

By way of connection between India and Ceylon, we might 
mention the alms-bowls of miraculous power, one of which is con¬ 
nected directly with the name of the Buddha, and another is referred 
to in the Manimekhalai as having come from the Panqlya country. 
Apart from these legends and traditions, the migration of the Aryans 
from India into the island of Ceylon as well as their settlement there 
is proved by inscriptions in the Aryan dialect (Elu or Helu) from 
which modern Sinhalese developed. As the scripts of these inscrip¬ 
tions resemble those used in India in the second or third century 
before Christ, the Aryan settlements must have commenced at a 
much earlier period. According to the Mahdvamsa , prince Vijaya 
landed in Ceylon on the very day that the Buddha died. Whatever 
we may think of this, there is no inherent improbability in the 
assumption that the Aryan settlements date back to the fourth or 
even fifth century B.C. It would appear from the find-spots of the 
inscriptions that the Aryans had settled in the northern, south¬ 
eastern and the eastern parts of the island before the beginning 
of the Christian era. 

2. H istory 

The Mahdvaiiisa and the Dlpavamsa give a connected historical 
account of Ceylon from the time that “the ministers in full assembly 
consecrated Vijaya king of the island.” As Vijaya had no son, he 
wrote to his brother in Bengal to come to Ceylon. The latter’s son 
Pandu-Vasudeva came to Ceylon about a year after the death of 
Vijaya and succeeded him. After three more kings had ruled, there 
came to the throne of Ceylon the famous king Devanampiyatissa. 
He was a contemporary of Asoka and sent an embassy with rich 
presents to the Maury an emperor. Asoka welcomed the envoys and 
sent the various essentials for the formal consecration of the king 
of Ceylon, which was celebrated amid scenes of great splendour. 1 

1. It looks as if the Ceylonese king sought for investiture at the hands of Asoka, 
though the reason is not apparent (cf. Codrington, 12). 

‘236 




SOUTHERN INDIA AND CEYLON 


Shortly alter, Asoka's son (or brother) Mahendra, who had become a 
monk, was sent to Ceylon as a Buddhist missionary. The king and 
the people accepted the new religion and the Mahavamsa gives a list 
ot the sanctuaries built by him, including the famous Mahavihara. 
A branch ol' the original Bodhi Tree was brought from Bodh Gaya 
and planted at the capital, Anuradhapura, in the eighteenth year 
ot Asoka’s reign. 

The contemporaneity of Devanariipiyatissa and Asoka gives us a 
fixed point in Ceylonese chronology. The Mahavamsa places Vijaya’s 
accession in year 1 of Buddha's Nirvana and gives the length of each 
succeeding reign. There is no doubt that at a later time Buddha’s 
Nirvana was regarded in Ceylon as having taken place in 544-43 
B.C.. but with this starting point the reign of Devanariipiyatissa falls 
during the period 808-7 B.C. to 268-7 B.C. and the accession of Asoka 
(according to Mahavamsa which places it in 218 A.B.) in 326-5 B.C. 

As this is not generally accepted, the date of Buddha’s Nirvana 
has been computed from 483 B.C. 1 According to Geiger, this date 
for the Nirvana era was current in Ceylon up to the close of the fourth 
century A.D., after which the new reckoning with 544-43 B.C. as the 
epoch of A.B. was adopted. According to this view, which has been 
adopted hei‘e, Devanariipiyatissa ruled from 247 to 207 B.C. 

He was succeeded by his three brothers, the last of whom 
Suratissa) ruled from 187 to 177 B.C. In the course of the reign of 
this prince, two Tamil usurpers, sons of a horse dealer, conquered the 
land and ruled in succession. Some time after the restoration of the 
old ruling dynasty, there entered an enterprising person from the 
Tamil land by name E]ara, of noble descent, who overcame the ruler 
Asela and reigned over the island for 44 years (145-101 B.C.) “with 
even justice to friend and foe.” Indian tradition has reference to a 
person somewhat similar, b>' the popular name Elela Singan. This 
ruler is said to have carried out the execution of his son for having 
killed a calf by accidentally running over it. This incident is allud¬ 
ed to in the Silappaclikaram and other pieces of Tamil literature. 
Another story relating to him is somewhat similar to the Jataka 
story of Sibi, who gave his own flesh to save the life of a dove. 
There are other similar legends. In response to the complaint of 
an old woman about the unseasonable rain damaging her paddy, he 

1. For further discussion cf. pp. 36-7 above, where 486 B.C. has been regarded 
as the probable date of the Nirvana. On account of this difference in views 
about the date of the Nirvana, the dates of the Ceylonese kings are differently 
t-iven by modern scholars (cf. c.(/. NHIP, VI. Ch. XIII, Sp. Appendix on p. 262). 

237 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


is said to have brought Indra himself to a sense of his duty to his 
people. This ruler is said to have introduced the bell of justice, a 
familiar story in the Chola country as well as the Pandya. The fact, 
however, in respect of Elara to be noted was that he was a Tamil of 
noble descent from the Chola country. Whether he was an ancestor 
of the great Chola Karikala is not known for certain. 

This Tamil usurper was, however, defeated and killed by king 
Dutthagamani (101-77 B.C.) who once more established a free and 
united kingdom in Ceylon. He constructed the Great Stupa and 
there was a large assembly of priests for its consecration. The 
Mahdvamsa gives a long list of the countries in India from which 
monks came to attend this ceremony. Dutthagamani was succeed¬ 
ed by his brother Saddhatissa (77-59 B. C.). On his death, his younger 
son Thulathana was selected king by the counsellors and Buddhist 
monks. But Lahjatissa, the elder son, defeated his younger brother 
and ascended the throne. He was succeeded by his younger brother, 
who was killed by the commander of troops after a rule of six years. 
The rebel was killed in 43 B. C. by the king’s younger brother named 
Vattagamani, who married the widowed queen and adopted her 
young son. 

Soon after his accession to the throne, this ruler had to face 
simultaneously a Tamil invasion and a rebellion by one of his gov¬ 
ernors in Ceylon. He put down the rebellion by setting the invaders 
against the rebel, but then found the former too strong for him, and 
had to flee the country, leaving them in possession of the kingdom. 
He had to abandon his second queen SomadevI, as well as the royal 
crown and the alms-bowl of the Buddha, which was maintained as a 
royal treasure. The queen and the alms-bowl were carried away 
by two of the seven invaders, who returned to India, and the re¬ 
maining five ruled in the country (43-29 B.C.). The first of them 
is given the name Pulahatta (Brihasta). It is doubtful if he is 
the person addressed by Kapilar in the Tamil poem Kurunjipdttu. 
Then followed in quick succession four kings each of whom forcib¬ 
ly occupied the throne after overthrowing his predecessor. The last 
of them was killed by Vattagamani. Some of these names sound 
like those of well-known Tamil chieftains, but no definite identifi¬ 
cation is possible. 

When Vattagamani recovered his kingdom, he destroyed the 
Jain and built a Buddhist vihara in the name of the queen Soma¬ 
devI. The one remarkable feature of his reign (29-17 B.C.) was the 


238 


SOUTHERN INDIA AND CEYLON 


writing down of the Tripitakas of the Buddhists and the Atfhakatha. 
Two of the sons of this VattagamanI succeeded one after the other. 
Mahachuli Tissa, the eldest, reigned for 14 years (17-3 B.C.). The 
second, named Choranaga (3 B.C.-A.D. 9), was one of the few 
kings of Ceylon who were hostile to Buddhism and destroyed 
Buddhist sanctuaries. He was poisoned by his wife Anula, who also 
killed by the same means the next king Tissa, son of Mahachuli. 
According to the Mahdvamsa this wicked queen next raised four of 
her favourites to the throne, in quick succession, removing each by 
poison to make room for the next. She then ascended the throne 
herself but was slain by Kutkannatissa (A.D. 16-38), the second 
son of Mahachuli. 

After five kings had ruled in succession the throne was occupied 
by Sivali, the sister of the last king ( A‘.D. 93). Sivali was, however, 
dethroned by her cousin Ilanaga. Lambakanna clan rebelled early 
in his reign and he had to be an exile in India for three years. 
He returned at the head of an army from India, regained his throne, 
and ruled for six years (A.D. 96-102). Ilanaga was succeeded by 
his son Chandamukha Siva (A.D. 103-112), who was killed by his 
younger brother Yasalalakatissa. He ruled for about eight years 
(A.D. 112-120) and with him ended the royal dynasty founded by 
Vijaya. 

Subha, the gatekeeper of king Yasalalakatissa. slew his master 
and ascended the throne in A.D. 120. But he was overthrown after 
six years by Vasabha of the Lambakanna sect, who founded in A.D. 
127 a new dynasty which ruled for more than three hundred years. 

The Lambakannas, who had already made a bid for the throne 
during the reign of Ilanaga, were an ancient and powerful clan. 
Later writers assert that they descended from the Mauryans who 
accompanied the Bodhi Tree to Ceylon, but no such statement occurs 
in the early works including the Mahdvamsa . Vasabha, who estab¬ 
lished the supremacy of the clan, has left numerous inscriptions all 
over the island. He ruled prosperously for 44 years (A.D. 127-171) 
and was succeeded by his son Vankanasikatissa. While this king 
was ruling at Anuradhapura, the capital city of the north, his two 
brothers set up independent kingdoms in the rest of the island. 

It was probably during this period of divided rule that the Chola 
king Karikala invaded the island, as mentioned above. Vahkanasi- 
katissa’s son Gajabahu or Gajabahukagamanl (A.D. 174-196), how- 


239 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

ever, not only united the whole country under his rule, but even 
invaded the Chola country. This fact is not mentioned in the 
Mahdvamsa or other early sources, but is found embellished with 
marvellous legends in later literature. As the story has it, an old 
woman was so distressed by the abduction of her son that she be¬ 
wailed the calamity every night. The sovereign took notice of it 
and found on enquiry that Ceylon had suffered great ravages during 
the Chola invasion. He in turn undertook a counter-invasion in 
great force, and is said to have so far succeeded that he was in occu¬ 
pation of the Chola capital of Uraiyur near Trichinopoly for a time. 
The story is embellished by details of his having taken with him 
a giant attendant who caused great havoc among the Chola warriors, 
and did great damage to their reputation. The two parties seem at 
last to have come to an understanding. A treaty was concluded, 
which made arrangements for the restoration of the Ceylonese 
prisoners of war to their native land. 

In connection with this story it is also stated that friendly rela¬ 
tions were established between the two countries which led to the 
building of Hindu temples in Ceylon including those for PattinidevI, 
the virgin martyr of the Silappadikaram . This in a way confirms 
the statement made in the Silappadikdram that among the foreign 
princes who attended the consecration ceremony on the completion 
of the temple of PattinidevI in the Chera capital, a number obtained 
permission to install the image of the “chaste lady” in shrines built 
in their own capitals and constructed temples to her. Many Indian 
rulers are mentioned in this connection and, along with them, Gaja- 
bahu, the king of Ceylon. This visit of Gajabahu constitutes a 
specific datum, which establishes the chronology of Tamil literature. 
In fact, a temple of PattinidevI still exists in Ceylon, and it would 
be carrying scepticism too far to deny that it had been brought into 
existence as detailed above. 

For seventy-two years after the death of Gajabahu, Ceylon had 
on the whole a peaceful and prosperous time under six rulers. King 
Tissa, who reigned from A.D. 269 to 291, was an enlightened ruler 
who abolished mutilation as a penalty and consequently received the 
name Voharika tissa. His reign witnessed a great religious schism in 
Ceylon. The Mahayana doctrine, called Vetulya in the Mahtivcuhsa 
and Vitan^a-vada in the Dipavamsa, found favour with the Abhaya- 
giri-vihSra but was opposed by the Mahavihara. The king, persuaded 
by the latter to hold an inquisition, suppressed the new doctrine and 


‘240 


SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 

banished Its followers. But this merely sowed the seeds of future 
dissension. 


Vohiirikatissa had a tragic end. His brother Abhayanaga car¬ 
ried on an intrigue with the queen and, being discovered in hiq 
guilt, fled to South India. The assistance of the Tamils and the 
treachery of an uncle enabled him to invade Ceylon and defeat and 
kill his brother. He married the widowed queen, ascended the 
thione (A.D. 291) and ruled for eight years. He was, however, suc¬ 
ceeded by Sirinaga II and Vijaya, the son and grandson respectively 
of Voharikatissa, who ruled for a total period of three years. The 
death of Vijaya was followed by a troublesome period in course of 
which the kingdom was seized by two rebels. Though they belong¬ 
ed to the Lambakanna sect, their relationship, if any, with the pre¬ 
ceding kings is not known. Then the throne was occupied by 
Gothabhaya (A.D. 309-322). He is also represented as a rebel and 
adventurer in the Mahavamsa, but it appears from more reliable 
epigraphic records that he was a son of Sirinaga II. 


The heterodox Vetulya doctrine again came into prominence 
during this reign, and was supported by the monks of Abhayagiri- 
vihara. Gothabhaya not only proscribed the sect, but branded sixty 
of its leading followers and banished them. They fled to South 
India and the story of the barbarous cruelty inflicted on them moved 
Sahghamitta, a pupil of one of these, to take vengeance. He came 
to Ceylon, won royal favour, and was appointed tutor to the two 
princes. Jetthatissa I, the elder of the two, ruled for ten years 
(A.D. 323-33) after his father’s death, and was succeeded by his 
younger brother Mahasena. He was greatly ‘attached to Sahgha¬ 
mitta and, on his advice, persecuted the monks of Mahavihara for 
refusing to accept the Vetulya doctrine. He confiscated the property 
of the Mahavihara and destroyed many of its establishments, and 
the plundered wealth was bestowed on Abhyagiri-vihara. The king 
also set up the Jetavana-vihara and built a magnificent stupa in it, 
which was the largest in Ceylon. 


The reign of Mahasena falls within the period A.D. 334 to 362 
according to the system of chronology followed above, and A.D. 277- 
304 according to the other. 1 The Mahavamsa and the Dipavamsa, 


Cf the preceding footnote. The chronology of the Ceylonese kings given above 
is based 1 on the revised chronology of Geiger ( Chulavamsa , Eng. Transl. Part II, 

p. IX). 


241 


A.I.U.—ltt 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the two great Chronicles of Ceylon which are the principal sources 
of the early history of the island, end with his reign, though a sup¬ 
plement was added to Mahdvamsa at a later period. These chroni¬ 
cles refer in great detail to the building of various Buddhist sanctua¬ 
ries by the kings mentioned above as well as their works of public 
utility such as roads, tanks and irrigation canals. It is not possible 
to refer to them in detail, but enough has been said above to indi¬ 
cate the great and far-reaching influence of Buddhism in Ceylon and 
the high state of culture and civilization in the island mainly brought 
about by its close and intimate association with India. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 


Original Sources 

1 Mahdvamsa and Chulavamsa (1) Edited and translated by W. Geiger and 
Mrs. C. M. Rickmers; (2) Tr. by G. Tumour (Chs. 1-36) and L. C. Wijesinha 
(Chs. 37-100). 

2. Dipavamsa —Edited and translated by Oldenberg. 

Secondary Texts 

1 A New History of the Indian People, Vol. VI (Edited by R. C. Majumdar and 
A. S. Altekar), Ch. XIII. 

2. H. W. Codrington —A Short History of Ceylon. 

3 Camb. Hist. India, Vol. I, Chap. XXV. 

For chronological discussion cf. Geiger’s Introduction to ChvXav&msa, VoL II, 
Wijesinha’s Tr. of Mahdvamsa, and Wickremasinghe’s article in Epigraphia 
Zeylanica, III, 1-47. 


242 


CHAPTER XVI 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

The period succeeding that of the Upanishads and Sutras was 
characterised by a many-sided outburst of literary activity in both 
northern and southern India. In the first place it saw the rise of 
Dravidian literature in the south. Secondly, the process of evolu¬ 
tion in the Sanskrit language gave rise to various forms of Prakrit 
which had a distinctive literature of its own. Apart from this 
classification according to language, the literature of the period may 
be broadly divided into three classes—religious, philosophical and 
secular. The rise of different religious sects, each with a rich lite¬ 
rature, was a characteristic feature of the time. Two of these, the 
Buddhist and Jain, will be dealt with in Chapter XIX. As regards 
the Brahmanical religion, the most important literary works were 
the two great epics and the Dharma-sastras or Smritis. Both of these, 
however, may be said to be on the borderline between religious and 
secular literature. Then there were the Puranas and the Tantras, 
Although the beginnings of these two types of composition may be 
traced to an early age, the extant texts, as we have them now, do 
not belong to this period and will be dealt with in the succeeding 
volume. The rich philosophical literature will be dealt with along 
with religion in Chapter XIX. As regards secular literature, the 
most important are the dramas and poems. Next in importance are 
works on Grammar, Law, Polity, Medicine and sundry other sub¬ 
jects. We shall first deal with Sanskrit literature under the different 
classes enumerated above and then briefly review the development 
of the language culminating in the evolution of the various forms 
of Prakrit. Finally we shall deal with the Dravidian language and 
literature.* 

A. SANSKRIT LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

PART I. LITERATURE 
I. THE EPICS 

1. Origin 

It has been customary with scholars to trace the origin of all 
forms of Indian literature to the Vedas. The epic has been no 

• See Preface. 

243 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


exception, and many scholars have tried to show that the germs of 
the epic can be found in the Sanhvdda hymns, such as the one con¬ 
taining the dialogue between Pururavas and Urvasi. 1 Others, again, 
have discovered the germs of dramatic literature in the same hymns. 
Whatever may be the truth in these theories, the fact remains that 
the Vedic poets, while writing hymns in praise of deities of nature, 
also took delight in the versification of old popular legends. Though 
the Samvdda hymns and the epics can be brought into connection, 
for both of them have a narrative to tell, they have essential differ¬ 
ences from the point of view of their form and purpose. 

i 

To the Brahmanas, however, we may fruitfully turn to find some 
form of literature which offers a parallel to epic poetry. We have 
particularly in view the legends of Sunahsepa in which “the gathfis 
or verses scattered among the prose approach the epic in language as 
well as in metre.” 2 We may also turn our attention to the gdthti- 
ndrdsamsis , 3 glorifying in flowery language the deeds of warriors and 
princes, which may have added not an insignificant quota to the deve¬ 
lopment of epic literature. We have, moreover, evidence in the 
Brahmanas and the Grihya-sutras that the recitation of such lauda¬ 
tory verses formed part of certain ceremonies. These gdthd-ndrd- 
iamsds, perhaps small in extent and simple in subject-matter, must 
have soon developed into lengthy ballads and eyen song cycles in¬ 
volving more or less intricate plots. As has been the case with the 
other forms of literature, so even here, we have, in the Rdmayana 
and the MahdbMrata, only the finished products of an activity which 
had a long previous history. Some other epics, like that of N'ala, 
originally independent works, are incorporated in the Mahabkdrata. 

The essential difference of the epic from the earlier literature 
lies in its origin. It arose not among the priestly classes but among 
traditional bards called Sutas. These Sutas also served as chariot¬ 
eers who witnessed the actual battle-scenes and described them at 
first-hand in their ballads. In character again, as has been already 
noted, it is martial poetry, concerned not with the praise of deities 
but of kings and nobles, not connected with the details of sacrifices, 
but with events like wars, and imbued not with higher philosophi¬ 
cal motives, but with the practical purpose of gaining some reward 
from the audiences before whom they were recited. In this latter 

1. Rigveda, X. 95. 

2. Wintemitz, HIL, I, p. 211. 

3. Cf. jSatapatha Brahmarm, XI. 5, 6, 8. These gathas are connected with the 
D&nastutis of the Rigveda and the Kuntapa hymns of the Atharvaveda. 

244 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


process of carrying the epics from the courts to the people, and thus 
popularising them, the Sutas must have been helped by the Kusilavas, 
the travelling singers. From these two points of view it is worth 
while to remember that it is Saiijaya, the Suta, who describes the 
bafttle-scenes to Dhritarashtra in the Mahabharata , and in the Ramd- 
yancL, Kusa and Lava, the two sons of Rama, are said in a later 
interpolation, to have wandered from place to place singing in as¬ 
semblies the Rama-song which they had learned from Valmiki. 

But these two great epics have unfortunately not come down to 
us in their original form. They are not even compilations of original 
songs such as we have in the Samhitds of Veda, untampered with 
by the hands of later redactors. They have now become, and espe¬ 
cially so the Mahabharata, great repositories of knowledge contain¬ 
ing diverse matters such as religion, philosophy and morals, added 
to by different hands at different periods, so that in certain places 
the thread of the original nucleus seems to be altogether lost. 

2. The Mahabharata 

The word Bharata signifies “battle of the Bharatas” 1 and thus 
the word Mahabharata means “the great narrative of the battle of 
the Bharatas’’. We hear of the tribe of the Bharatas already in the 
Rigveda, and its home was between the Upper Ganga and the 
Yamuna. The Kauravas, so called after king Kuru, a descendant 
of the Bharatas, ruled over the territory for a long time, and made 
the land of their habitation famous under the title Kurukshetra. 
The germs of the Mahabharata lie in the family-feud which resulted 
in the overthrow of the Kauravas at the hands of the Pandavas, 
who are represented in the epic as their cousins. 2 Such a great event 
must have given rise to many detached heroic lays which were later 
on strung together by some unknown poet. 

To this nucleus were added, at a still later period, many pieces 
of the ancient bardic poetry containing legends connected or un¬ 
connected with the life of the epic heroes, of sacred poetry deal¬ 
ing with numerous myths and legends of Brahmanical origin, and 
large sections devoted to philosophy and ethics, cosmologies and 
genealogies in the fashion of the Puranas, legends of the Siva and 
Vishnu cult, and also fables and parables. These additions indicate 
on the one hand the great popularity which this epic has enjoyed 
at all times and, on the other, the zealous spirit of the compilers to 

1 Panini, IV 2, 56. 

2. Cf.'Vol. I, p. 296. 

245 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


bring together all that could be collected in an encyclopaedic form, 
and declare “yad ihasti tad anyatra yan nehdsti na tat kvachit” 
[whatever is (included) here may be found elsewhere; (but) what 
is not to be found here cannot be got anywhere else]. But though 
the great epic is a compilation extending over centuries, it is ascribed 
to the venerable sage Vyasa, who is also credited with the authorship 
of the Puranas and the compilation of the Vedas. 

The introduction of the great epic informs us that Vyasa im¬ 
parted his poem first to his pupil Vaisampayana, who in his turn 
recited the whole of it at the time of the great snake-sacrifice of 
king Janamejaya. It was then heard by the Suta Ugrasravas who, 
being entreated by the Rishis assembled at the sacrifice of Saunaka 
in the Nimisha forest, narrated to them the whole poem as he learnt 
it on that occasion. Even according to this tradition, recorded in 
the epic itself, before it reached its present dimensions, it had 
passed through three recitations. 

Thus the Mahdbhdrata , as we have it today, was never the 
work of any one author nor was it written down at one time. In 
point of form it is not a single book but a whole literature, and in 
point of time it stretches along a vast period. It is only in a very 
restricted sense that we may speak of the Mahdbhdrata as an ‘‘epic” 
or a ‘‘poem”. Indeed, in a certain sense, the Mahdbhdrata is not 
one poetic production at all, but rather a whole literature. 1 

It is hardly necessary to recount here the main narrative which 
formed the kernel of the original epic, for it is well known and has 
been related above. 2 Among the additional matter may be men¬ 
tioned first of all, heroic legends of ancient kings which had some 
distant connection with the subject-matter of the epic. As an exam¬ 
ple may be cited the story of Bharata in the unartistic and rather 
mutilated Sakuntala episode. 3 What strikes the reader here is that 
§akuntala lays stress not so much on her own rejection as on that 
of her son. She tries to impress on the mind of the king the impor¬ 
tance of a son and warns him to guard himself against the grave 
error of abandoning a male offspring. The legend of king Yayati 4 
in its present form appears more like a moral narrative than a heroic 
one. 

1. Wintemitz, HIL, I. p. 316. 

2. Vol. I, pp. 300 ff. 

3. Mhh, I. 62-69. 

4. Mhh, I. 70-88. 


246 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


The famous episode of Nala and DamayantI contained in the 
Nalopakhyana 1 may rightly be styled as an independent poem. 
Its inclusion in the epic is due to the love of ancient story-tellers of 
embedding one narrative within the framework of another. The 
reason given in the epic itself is the similarity in the fate of 
Yudhishthira and Nala, who had both lost all their possessions by 
gambling. The hero of the poem is known to the Satapatha 
Brdhmana as Nada Naishadha, and hence the story glorifying his 
deeds must have been very old. The Rama episode 2 is an unartistic 
abridged version of the ancient Rama epic. Its inclusion has been 
occasioned by the similarity in fate of the two heroines, both of 
whom were abducted. 

But, of them all, the story of Vidula 3 is most truly reminiscent 
of the warrior-spirit which must have animated the heroic poetry. 
The hero-mother Vidula chastises her cowardly son Sahjaya and 
exhorts him in forceful language to take up arms and fulfil his duties 
as a warrior. 

Of the Brahmanical myths and legends, which betray the hand 
of the priests rather than of the bards, in the Mahabhhrata, mention 
may be made of legends connected with the great snake-sacrifice of 
Janamejaya. Interesting is the story of the sage Chyavana whom 
Asvins restored to youth. The same story is told in detail in the 
Satapatha and the Jaimintya Brdhmana. The Mahdbhdrata version 
is told with such deviations from the earlier versions as are calcu¬ 
lated to show the ascendancy of the Brahmanas. This characteristic 
of the Brahmanical poems is apparent in many other legends where, 
for instance, it is pointed out. that even Indra-is afraid of losing his 
throne, owing to the austerities of the Brahmanas. Very old also 
are the narratives of Manu, the Flood, and the Goddess of Death. 
The last propounds that originally human beings were immortal, 
but later on became subject to death, due to disease and sins such 
as greed, anger, jealousy, hatred and infatuation. 

The beautiful story of the devoted wife Savitri told in the 
Sdvitryupakhydna 4 is of a very high order. On account of the 
boldness and independence which Savitri shows in her actions, 
Dr. Wintemitz suspects that this poem may have formed part of the 
ancient bardic poetry. As regards the high merits of the poet, he 

1. Mbh, HI, 50-78. 

2. Mbh, IH, 257-276. 

3. Mbh, V, 131-136. 

4. Mbh, HI, 277-283. 


247 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


remarks: “Only a true poet could have described in such a touching 
and elevating manner the victory of love and constancy, of virtue 
and wisdom, over destiny and death, without even for an instant 
falling into the tone of the dry preacher of mortality.” 1 The extent 
of the deep impression this legend has made on Hindu life can be 
seen from the fact that even to the present day devout Hindu women 
celebrate annually a festival in honour of Savitri in order to secure 
a long and happy married life. 

The Tirthayatra section 2 contains numerous Brahmanical myths 
which are put in the mouth of the Eishi Lomasa. These include, 
among others, the legends of the sage Agastya who is said to have 
drunk up the ocean at the request of the gods, and of the sages 
Vasishtha and Visvamitra who, as the representatives of the Brah- 
mana and the Kshatriya order, reveal the struggle for supremacy 
that went on between them. Besides these, there are numerous 
stories in the Mahtibhtirata which are more or less invented by the 
Brahmans to further their own ends. 

Many fables and parables have also found their way in this 
gigantic work as they illustrate the rules of worldly wisdom and 
morality. Thus a minister advises Dhpitarashtra to follow the 
cunning of the jackal who, having secured the help of the other 
animals in seizing his prey, schemes to keep it for himself. On the 
other hand Vidura warns him not to follow the example of the king 
who, having killed the birds that brought him gold, lost both. It 
is Vidura again who narrates to Dhptarashtra the almost univer¬ 
sally known parable of the “Man in the well”. It is calculated to 
exaggerate the dangers with which human existence is beset in this 
world and thus promote the ascetic ideal. Ernst Kuhn has traced 
throughout world literature the “circulation of this truly non- 
sectarian parable which has served equally for the edification of 
Brahmanas, Jainas, Buddhists, Muslims, Christians and Jews.” 3 

The story of Mudgala 4 illustrates the doctrine of karman, and 
also the higher ideal of the ascetic, who not only renounces the 
pleasures of this world but also those of heaven, and has only the 
one ideal of attaining the highest and eternal bliss. This doctrine 
of karman , again, which traces a man’s happy or woeful condition to 

1. Winternitz, H/L, I. p. 398. 

2. Mbh, III. 80-153. 

3. Quoted by Winternitz, HI L, I. p. 409. 

4. Mbh, III. 24G ff. 


248 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


his past actions is at the bottom of many narratives. In the story 
of the Brahmana woman Gautaml 1 the God of Death himself de¬ 
clares that everything good or bad happens through the agency of 
Fate (here identified with Kola or ‘time’). 

Most of these narratives, found in Books XII and XIII which 
have little connection with the main plot, are very important for 
the history of Indian asceticism, its ideal and ethics, and Brahmani- 
cal morality. They are even sometimes contrasted to show the 
superiority of the former over the latter. 2 Though in some respects 
the thoughts contained in these narratives bear resemblance to the 
Buddhist or Jain way of life, they need not necessarily be derived 
from them. These two Books (XII and XIII) are primarily intended 
to include the didactic teachings put in the mouth of Bhlshma, deal¬ 
ing with such subjects as the duties of a king, of the four castes and 
the four stages in life, politics, and the doctrine of liberation. 

Of all the philosophical tracts in the Mahdbhdrata the Bhagavad- 
gitd (‘Song of the Lord’) is indubitably of the highest merit. It has 
become during the past century and a half the subject of numerous 
editions, translations and discussions, not only in this country but 
outside it. It contains the earliest exposition of the philosophy of 
the Bhagavata cult, which later developed into Vaishnavism, and 
will be discussed in detail in Chapter XIX. There are differences of 
opinion about the Gita being a genuine part of the original Maha- 
bhdrata. The adherents of the view that it is a later addition to the 
epic hold that the original Gita must have been composed as early 
as the second century B. C. and assumed the form in which it appears 
in the Mahdbhdrata today, in the early centuries A.D. 

The Harivamsa, which forms an appendix ( khila ) to the Mahd¬ 
bhdrata, has more or less gone through the same vicissitudes as the 
great epic iself. It is by no means the work of a single poet, nor 
even of one compiler, the text being a mass of legends and myths 
collected together for the glorification of Vishnu. The title of the 
work means ‘the genealogy of Hari’. The first part is entitled Hari- 
vamsaparvan and begins in the Puraiia style with an account of 
creation. Besides the genealogy of the Yadavas it also contains 
mythological narratives. The second section, styled Vishnuparvan, 
deals with the feats and love-affairs of the cowherd god Krishna, 


1. Mhh, XIII. 1. 

2. Cf. Mhh, xn. 175. 


249 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the incarnation of Vishnu. The third part is the Bhavishyaparvan 
containing, like the Puranas, certain prophecies regarding the Kali 
age and also much other matter which goes ill with the title. 

The Mahdbhdrata that we have today has come down to us in 
two recensions, the Northern and Southern. These two recensions 
can again be further subdivided into versions according to the scripts 
in which the text is written. The Northern recension is thus made 
up of the &arada or Rasmiri, the Nepali, the Maithili, the Bengali and 
the Devanagari versions. The Southern recension comprises the 
Telugu, the Grantha and the Malayalam versions. There are many 
differences and discrepancies in these two recensions, and on the 
whole the Southern recension is longer than the Northern. This is 
not only due to the fact that there are numerous additions in that 
recension, but also because it contains numerous detailed episodes. 
“The Southern recension thus impresses us by its precision, schemati- 
zation, and thoroughly practical outlook. Compared with it the 
Northern recension is distinctly vague, unsystematic, sometimes even 
inconsequent, more like a story rather naively narrated, as we find 
in actual experience. ,,1 

Among the complete printed editions of the Mahdbhdrata three 
alone are important, viz. the Calcutta, the Bombay and the Kum- 
bhakonam editions. But none of these can be taken to represent 
any of the two recensions referred to above. The difficult work of 
bringing out a critical edition of the Mahdbhdrata , based on all the 
available manuscripts, is being most systematically done at the 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona. The ideal of this 
critical edition is given by the late General Editor, Dr. V. S. Suk- 
thankar, in the following words: “What the promoters of this scheme 
desire to produce and supply is briefly this: a critical edition of the 
Mahdbhdrata in the preparation of which all important versions of 

vn __ 

the Great Epic shall have been taken into consideration, and all im¬ 
portant manuscripts collated, estimated, and turned to account. Since 
all divergent readings of any importance will be given in the critical 
notes, printed at the foot of the page, this edition will, for the first 
time, render it possible for the reader to have before him the entire 

significant evidence for each individual passage.Another 

feature of the new edition will be this. Since not even the seemingly 
most irrelevant line or stanza, actually found in a Mahdbhdrata 
manuscript collated for the edition, is on any account omitted, this 

1. V. S. Sukthankar, Sukthankar Memorial Edition , Vol. I, p. 48. The remark, 
though made with reference to the Adiparvan, applies to file whole recension. 

250 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


edition of the Mahdbharata will be, in a sense, more complete than 
any previous edition. It will be a veritable thesaurus of the Afahd- 
bhdrata tradition”. 1 

The conclusion drawn from the huge conglomeration of matter 
of the most diverse type, viz. that the text of the present epic has 
no unity of authorship or of time, is further, strengthened by consi¬ 
derations of style, language and metre. All these show a curious 
mixture of earlier and later characteristics. It is therefore extremely 
difficult to speak of the age of the epic except in a general way. 
Scholars hold widely divergent views on the subject, but we may 
accept for all practical purposes the one expressed by Dr. Wintemit2 
in the following words: “The Mahdbharata cannot have received 
its present form earlier than the 4th century B.C. and later than the 
4th century A.D.” 2 

This conclusion is based on the facts that on the one hand we 
have numerous references to Buddhism and to the Yavanas in the 
present form of the epic and, on the other, the works of such classical 
authors as Bana and Kumarila and the epigraphic records of the 
fifth century A.D. onwards testify to the epic having at that time 
assumed a form of a Smriti, or religious text-book. These inscrip¬ 
tions further refer to it as containing one hundred thousand verses, 
with which the present text closely agrees. 

It is now generally accepted that the great battle between the 
Kauravas and Pandavas was a historical event which occurred some 
time between 1400 and 1000 B.C. It is equally true that the Suta 
tradition and the narrative literature are of a very early date. It 
is, therefore, not unreasonable to assume that the great battle and 
at least some of the ballads of the kings who took part in the fight 
were nearly contemporary. It is, however, extremely difficult to 
fix the date when these floating ballads were first unified in an epic 
poem called the Mahdbharata. Among the Sutra works, the &an- 
khdyana Srauta-sutra is the first to refer to the Kurukshetra battle, 
and the Advalayana Grihya-sutra knows *both Bharata and Mahd¬ 
bharata as sacred books. Coming to the early grammatical works 
we find that Patafijali definitely knew a Pan^u epic, and that Panini 
explains the formation of the names of the epic personages and the 
word ‘Mahabharata’. 3 Moreover, the acquaintance, though partial 

1. Sukthankar Memorial Edition, Vol. I, p. 13. 

2. Wintemitz, HIL, I. p. 465. Cf. Pargiter, AIHT, p. 77. For the trustworthiness 
of the Puranic account cf. AIHT * pp. 119 ff. 

3. For the dates of Panini and Patanjali see section VI. 1 of this chapter. 

251 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


of the Mahdbhdrata , betrayed by the Pali canon, suggests that as 
early as the fourth century B.C. the knowledge of the epic which ori¬ 
ginated in the west had begun to spread to the east. All these facts 
seem to indicate lhat the original epic poem, around which grew the 
enormous mass contained in the present Mahdbhdrata, probably goes 
hack to the Brdhmana period. At the same time it must be admitted 
that the silence of the Vedas about the Mahabhdrata is incompatible 
with this view of its early date, 

3. The Rdmdyana 

The Rdmdyana, which is the adikavya or ‘the first ornate poem’ 
according to indigenous estimation, is ascribed by tradition to Valmiki, 
the adikavi or ‘the first author of ornate poetry’. That the Rama- 
yaya deserves to be styled as the adikavya will hardly be questioned, 
for herein we do find the characteristics of the later Sanskrit 
ornate poetry such as the descriptions of nature and the presence 
of the figures of speech, both of word and sense. It differs, even 
in its present form, from the Mahabhdrata, not only in its external 
appearance but even in spirit. Whereas the Mahabhdrata has al¬ 
most lost its epic form, the Rdmdyana still retains its original 
character. Though the metres are almost alike, in the Rdmdyana they 
appear more polished. In spirit, on the other hand, the Mahd- 
bhdrata reflects the genuine feelings of its characters without any 
artistic embellishment, whereas in the Rdmdyana they seem to bend 
under the pen of the poet and therefore appear less natural and 
more self-conscious. The sacred character of the Mahabhdrata is 
not so much due to its heroes as to the didactic sections added to it 
at a later stage; but in the case of the Rdmdyana the sanctity attach¬ 
ed to it is due to the inherent purity of its hero and heroine, who 
in their deified character have ever represented the ideals of Indian 
conjugal love and faithfulness. Both the epics have undoubtedly 
influenced the thoughts and actions of the Indian people for two 
thousand years or more. Their universal popularity is evinced by 
the fact that not only the dramatists of the classical period, but also 
writers in the medieval Indian languages right from the beginning to 
the present day, in all parts of the country, borrow their plots from 
them. Even the cinema borrows freely from this source, and various 
popular festivals celebrate the victories of Rama over the demon 
Ravana, with the aid of his ally Hanuman, the monkey-king. 

The Rdmdyana, in its present form, is made up of seven books, 
and some 24,000 Zlokas. The principal contents of this epic, too. 


252 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


are too well known to need any treatment here. Book I, the Bala 
kdnda, deals with the early history of Rama, but it is complicated by 
the insertion of numerous Brahmanical legends and myths, some 
of which appear in the other epic also. Here, for instance, wc come 
across the Rishyasringa legend, the stories woven around the sages 
Vasishtha and Visvamitra, and also the myth of the descent of the 
Ganga from heaven. The real story of the Rama epic begins with 
Book II and ends with Book VI. The one difference between the 
two epics that strikes the reader, as he follows the main narrative, 
is that in the Mahdbhdrata, as far as the nucleus is concerned, the 
characters are all human beings and we live in the world of reality, 
but in the Rdmdyana, from the third book onwards we meet with 
demons and monkeys, and have to stretch our imagination to feel 
secure in the world of make-believes. Book VII again contains 
numerous myths and legends dealing with the origin of the Raksha- 
sas and the fights of their leader Ravana with Indra, the early life 
of Hanuman, the legends of Yayati and Nahusha, and the Sudra 
ascetic Sambuka. As regards the Rama story, this book narrates 
that part which relates to Rama deserting Slta in the forest, her 
giving birth to the twins Kusa and Lava, and their singing the RSma 
epic in the court of Rama. 

As in the case of the Mahdbhdrata, the Rdmdyana has not come 
down to us in its original form. The whole of Book VII and most 
of Book I are undoubtedly later additions to the main Rama epic, 
for these two books contain a number of topics which have no, or 
very slight, connection with the main story. It is, again, only here, 
with a few interpolated exceptions in Books II-VI, that Rama 
appears as an incarnation of Vishnu, whereas elsewhere he is only 
a mortal hero, and in the genuine sections the Vedic god Indra, 
and not Vishnu, is given the highest place in mythology. The 
language and style of the two later books also betray the hand of a 
different author. 

The text of this epic has come down to us in three different 
recensions, one current in northern and southern India, the other 
in eastern India, and the third in north-western India. These 
three recensions vary amongst themselves very widely and hence 
it is difficult to speak definitely of the original form of the Ramu- 
yana . Obviously these differences must have been mainly due to 
the oral transmission of the text for many centuries, during which 
the rhapsodists must have taken some liberty in adding or deleting 


253 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


certain passages to cater to the taste of their audiences. It was 
only when the epic was written down that it must have assumed 
a definite form to which there were no substantial additions or 
changes. 

From the numerous references to the Rdmdyaiia and its author 
Valmlki in the Mahdbhdrata, from the abridged version in the same 
epic of the Rama story as we find it in the present Rdmdyana, 1 and 
also from a mention in the Harivamsa of a dramatic representation 
of the Rdmdyana, it may be concluded that the Rdmdyana in its 
present form must have existed at least two hundred years before 
the fourth century A.D., the latest date by which the Mahdbhdrata 
must have attained its final form. But the nucleus of the 
Mahdbhdrata may have existed prior to the nucleus of the 
Rdmdyana. The celebrated grammarian Panini makes allusions to 
Vasudeva, Arjuna and Yudhishthira; but he is silent about Rama, 

. and so is his successor Patanjali, as well as the inscriptions prior to 
the beginning of the Christian era. Moreover, the Mahdbhdrata 
has preserved some archaic features in the prose formulae of the 
ancient ballad form, but the Rdmdyana shows the characteristics of 
the later ornate poetry. The Brihaddevatd and Rigvidhdna (fourth 
century B.C.) show a form of metre similar to the one found in the 
Rdmdyaria. Then again the custom of sati, which flourished in 
Magadha in the days of Megasthenes, is not referred to in the genuine 
part of the epic. As regards its relation to Buddhist literature, 
it may be observed from the references to Rama story in the Jdtakas 
and their silence about Havana, that at a time when the Buddhist 
Tripipika was being formulated there were in existence some ballads 
about Rama but not the Rama epic as such. It is therefore permis¬ 
sible to conclude that the original Rdmdyana, in which Rama was 
a human being, was composed by Valmlki in the third or more 
probably in the fourth century B.C., and that, with the addition of 
Books I and VII and some passages in the other books, it assumed 
its present form at the end of the second century A.D. when Rama 
was already deified as an incarnation of Vishnu. 2 

II. THE DHARMA-SASTRAS OR SMRITIS 

The Dharma-£astras, also called Smritis, have played a very 
important part in Hindu life during the last two thousand years. 

1. For Ramopakhyana as an epitome of our R'amayana, see V. S. Sukthankar, 
*‘Epic Studies VIII,” Kane Comm. Vol. pp. 472-87. 

2. For a detailed discussion see Winternitz, HIL, I, pp. 500-517. 

254 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Although the Vedas are regarded as the ultimate sources of dharma, 
in practice it is the Smriti works to which the Hindus all over India 
turn lor the real exposition of religious duties and usages. They 
are also regarded as the only authentic sources of Hindu law and 
social customs. 

In general the Smritis may be regarded as the expanded and 
metrical versions of the Dharma-sutras, to which reference has 
been made above. 1 Some scholars believe that each Smriti was 
really based upon a Dharma-sutra, though it may not be always 
possible to trace this original source. 2 The Smritis have, however, 
incorporated the contemporary local customs and usages of the 
Sishtas (learned and cultured). In this way they have tried to keep 
abreast of changing times and reflect their spirit. The Smritis also 
owe much to the Matiabhdrata which has particularly influenced the 
form of this literature, for, unlike the prose form of the Sutras, it is 
written in poetry. 

As noted above, the Dharma-sutras cover the period from, about 
the sixth to third century B.C. The Smriti works follow almost 
immediately afterwards, and extend over a period of eight hundred 
years or even more. As in the case of Dharma-sutras, we have a 
large number of works of this class which are ascribed to old rishis 
but are of comparatively late origin. 

The Mdnava Dharma-s&stra or Manu-smriti is not only the oldest 
work of this class, but is also the most well-known, and held in the 
greatest respect even today all over India. Such wide popularity 
is, no doubt, due mainly to the comprehensive character of the work, 
and is also perhaps partly to be explained by the new theory of the 
origin of this class of work. The Dharma-sutras were manuals 
written by the teachers of the Vedic schools for the guidance of their 
pupils. Their use was, therefore, at first restricted to these schools 
alone, and it was not till a later period that they were acknowledged 
as authority all over India. The Smritis, on the other hand, were 
declared to be of divine origin, and hence claimed from the very 
beginning to be authentic sources of law for all Aryans. This is 
best illustrated by the case of Manu-smriti. As already noted, this 

1 Vol. I, p. 475* 

2. Introduction to Buhlcr’s English translation of Majiu-smriti (SBE , XXV). Kane, 
however. Isolds a different view ( KHDS , I. 79). The most elaborate account 
of the Dharma-sutras or Smritis is given by Kane (KHDS, Vol. I), whose 
chronology of the texts is adopted in this chapter. 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


metrical Smriti was probably based upon a Mdnava Dharma-sutra, 
which is now lost, but quotations from which have been traced 
in Vasishtka Dharma-sutra. The Smriti, however, contains a mytho¬ 
logical legend to the effect that ‘these Institutes of the Sacred 
Law’ were originally composed by the Divine Creater who taught 
them to Bhrigu and other sages. It is Bhrigu (or his pupil, accord¬ 
ing to some versions) who ultimately expounds them. This theory 
of divine origin undoubtedly gave a sacrosanct character to Manu- 
smriti and at least partially explains (or is explained by?) its im¬ 
portance and popularity. 

Though nothing definite can be said about its date, it is now 
generally agreed that the text was formulated some time between 
200 B. C. and A. D. 200. It was possibly revised several times. As we 
have seen above, the Smriti itself admits more than one redaction of 
the text, and the Ndrada-smriti says that the original text by Manu 
was successively condensed by Narada, Markandeya and Sumati. 
The Smriti deals with the duties of persons in the four stages of 
life, those of the king and his officials and husband and wife, civil 
and criminal law, the origin of the various castes, various forms 
of penances and some philosophical doctrines. The commentary of 
Medhatithi on the Manu-smriti belongs to the ninth century, of 
Govindaraja to the eleventh, and of Kulluka, probably to the 
thirteenth century. 1 There are many other Smriti works of a more 
or less similar nature of which those of Vishnu, Yajnavalkya, Narada, 
Brihaspati and Katyayana are more important than others. They 
are all very important sources of law and social customs and will be 
more fully dealt with in Chs. XVIII and XXI. 

The V&ishnava Dharma-sdstra or Vishnu-smriti is said to have 
been revealed by Vishnu. It appears to be an old Dharma-sutra 
of the Kathaka school which was subsequently remodelled into a 
Smriti, written partly in prose and partly in verse, by a member of 
the Bhagavata sect of the Vaishnavas. The present text, however, 
probably priginated not earlier than the third century A.D., though 
some would place it between A.D. 100 and 300. 

There is considerable difference of opinion among scholars re¬ 
garding the date of the other Smriti works mentioned above. We 
place below, side by side, the views of Jolly, 2 who represents the 

1. According Biihler and others Kulluka flourished in the fifteenth century AD 

2. Hindu Law and Custom by J. Jolly. Tr. by Dr. B. K. Ghosh. 


256 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


older school of scholars, and Kane, 1 the latest writer on the subject 


Name of the Smriti. 

Yajnavalkya 

Narada 

Brihaspati 

Katyayana 


Jolly's view. Kane's view. 

4th century A.D. A.D. 100-300. 

A.D. 500. A.D. 100-400. 

6th or 7th century A.D. A.D. 300-500. 
(Later than Brihaspati) A.D. 400-600. 


The dates given by Kane have been adopted in this work, and 
all the above Smritis, except that of Katyayana, have been treated 
as authorities for the period dealt with in this volume mainly in 
respect of law and social customs. In general the Dharma-sutras 
and Dharma-sastras have been regarded as sources of information 
about these topics, respectively in the two successive ages dealt with 
in Vol. I and II of this series, though probably most of the extant 
texts of the Dharma-sutras were put in their present form in the 
earlier part of the period dealt with in this volume, and some of the 
Dharma-sastras were not compiled until after that period. It is also 
important to note that though the term Dharma-sastra generally 
designates the metrical Smriti work of the later period, it is also hot 
unoften applied to the Dharma-sutra work of the previous period. 
The Dharma-sutra of Vasishtha, for example, is actually named 
Vasishtha Dharma-sastra. 


Ill. DRAMA 

1. Origin 

In spite of all efforts to discover the origin of the Sanskrit drama, 
no solution has yet been found which commands general acceptance. 
Different theories have been put forward by scholars like Hille- 
brandt, Konow, Oldenberg and A. B. Keith. Bharata’s Ndtyasdstra , 
the earliest extant work on Sanskrit dramaturgy, ascribes the drama 
to divine origin, assigns to it a high place by recognising it as the 
fifth Veda, and at the same time throws it open to all, even the 
Sudras. The earliest elements of the Sanskrit drama, however, may 
be discerned in the dialogue hymns of the Rigveda. Some of the 
Vedie rituals also, like the Mahavrata ceremony which involved 
dancing and dialogue, may have directly contributed to the develop¬ 
ment of the drama. 

Still the drama, in the full sense of the word, cannot be thought 
of till we come to the period when epic compositions were largely 

1. Kane’s views are summarised in KHDS, Vol. II, Part I, p. xi. 

257 

A.I.U.—17 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

sung by rhapsodists in popular gatherings. Prof. Keith observes; 
“One very important point in this regard has certainly often been 

neglected. The Sanskrit drama does not consist.of song and 

prose as its vital elements; the vast majority of the stanzas which 
are one of its chief features, were recited, not sung, and it was doubt¬ 
less from the epic that the practice of recitation was in the main 
derived .” 1 Though it is difficult to assert that Panini knew of the 
drama on the basis of his having used the word ‘Natasutra , Patanjali 
(c. second century B.C.) can certainly be credited with the know¬ 
ledge of dramatic representations of past events. “The balance oi 
probability, therefore, is that the Sanskrit drama came into being 
shortly after, if not before, the middle of the second century B.C., 
and that it was evoked by the combinations of epic recitations with 
the dramatic moment of the Krishna legend .” 2 

The treatises dealing with the theory of the Sanskrit drama un¬ 
fortunately date from a late period. The most ancient and, at the 
same time, the most important of these is the NatyaSastra of Bharatn 
which will be discussed later in this Chapter. The next work of 
importance is the Dasarupa of Dhananjaya who flourished in the 
tenth century A.D. The other works are of a still much later date. 

The Sanskrit dramas were certainly meant to be enacted on the 
stage, and not merely read privately. The occasion for the perfor¬ 
mance of the drama was usually some festival in honour of a deity 
or a royal marriage or victory celebrations. For purposes of the 
theatre, generally, the quadrangle of a temple, the hall or courtyard 
of a king’s palace, or sometimes even a cave of the type found in the 
Ramgarh hill 3 was used. 

2 . Asvaghosha 

Asvaghosha, the famous Buddhist poet and a contemporary of 
Kanishka , 4 is credited with the authorship of the three Buddhist 
dramas discovered at Turfan in Central Asia . 5 Asvaghosha’s 
authorship of one of them, the Sdriputra-prakarana, a Prakarana 
in nine acts; is proved beyond doubt by the mention of his name in 
the colophon of the last act. Apart from being the oldest extant 

1. Keith, SD, p. 27. 

2. Keith, SD, p. 45; also cf. R. G. Bhandarkar, *’ Allusions to Krishna in Palan- 
j all’s Mahabhashya,” LA, III, pp. 14 ff. 

3. ASI, 1903-4, p. 130. 

4. See p. 147 above. 

5. See Ch. XXV. 


258 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Sanskrit drama, the S' Civipuira-pTUkarcLna has an importance of its 
own, since in its formal aspect Asvaghosha mostly follows the rules 
laid down in the Natyasiislra for the composition of a Prakarana. 
The benediction at the close of the drama, however, is uttered by 
Buddha himsell, and it is not preceded by the usual phrase ‘atah 
paramapipriyam asti’ (Is there anything more pleasing ihan this?). 
The subject-matter of the drama refers to the conversion of Maud- 
galyayana and Sariputra, the hero, by Buddha, which involves some 
philosophic discussion. 

The ascription of the fragments of two other dramas to Asva¬ 
ghosha rests on the rather slender ground that all three of them are 
contained in the same manuscript and that in a general way they 
have the appearance of Asvaghosha’s works. One of them seems to 
be an allegory, for it introduces such figures as Buddhi (wisdom), 
Khii (fame), and Dhriti (firmness), all of them speaking in Sanskrit. 
The other drama is perhaps more interesting and humorous. The 
characters found in the fragments are a hero, he t a era, a Vidushaka 
whose gluttonous nature is already in evidence, a rogue ( dushta ), a 
prince, Sariputra, and Maudgalyavana. The very scanty material 
offered by these two dramas does not permit any conclusions about 
them. 

On the whole the Sanskrit of those fragments contains very few 
errors, some of which like Somadattassa can be easily attributed to 
the ignorance of the scribes. Among the genuine errors may be 
mentioned the use of krimi, pratlgrihlta and tirttha. Among the 
Prakrits used in these fragments three different varieties can be 
traced. These Prakrits seem to have been th£ forerunners of the 
grammarians, Magadhi, Ardha-Magadhi and ^auraseni. 1 The speech 
of Dushla has all the three salient features of later Magadhi; it 
changes r to l, reduces all three sibilants to s, and the nominative 
singular of masculine nouns in -a ends in -e. But so far as the other 
features of phenology are concerned, like the sonantisation of hard 
consonants, elision of intervocals, cerebralisation of n, it differs from 
Magadhi. Even in the treatment of clusters like rj > jj and not yy , 
ksh > kkh and not sk, sht and shth > tth and not st, it has nothing- 
in common with the standard Magadhi. 

The Prakrit of one character, whose name is not clear beyond 
the letters Gobam, shows the features of old Ardha-Magadhi. It 
has l for r and -e for nominative singular quite regularly and reduces 

). For details see Liiders, Bruchstilckc buddhistichcr Dramen, Berlin, 1911. 

259 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


all sibilants to s. The Ardha-Magadhi of the grammarians, however, 
has both r and l and -e and -o. 

The third variety of the Prakrit is instanced in the language 
of the Vidushaka and the hetaera. It preserves r and has the only 
dental sibilant s; the nominative singular ends in - o; ksh > kkh, and 
not chchh. Thus far the dialect admirably agrees with the later 
Sauraseni, but its reluctance to soften or drop the intervocals and 
its preservation of n give it an appearance of old Sauraseni. Among 
other deviations may be noted the change of the clusters yrx and ny 
to nii and not nn, and of dy to yy and not jj. 

3. Bhdsa 

Until the year 1912 when the epoch-making discovery of the 
thirteen Trivandrum plays was announced, the dramatist Bhasa was 
to Sanskrit scholars a mere name, celebrated by later writers like 
Kalidasa, Baiia, Vakpati and Rajasekhara. Rut since the publication 
of these plays by the late T. Ganapati Sasttfl, Bhasa seems to have 
left the ranks of his former colleagues like Saumilla 1 and Kaviputras 
and joined those of the better known masters of Sanskrit belles- 
lettres. The text of these plays offers no direct evidence to settle 
the problem of their authorship. By ascribing them to Bhasa the 
learned Sastrl gave rise to an animated controversy which does not 
seem to have ended even now. 2 

The whole Bhasa controversy really hinges upon two issues: 
(1) Are these dramas the works of one or more authors? and (2) Who 
is the author (or authors) of these plays? As regards the first of these 
two questions, scholars are now agreed that all the plays were writ¬ 
ten by one and the same author. The conclusion is based on strong 
internal evidence clearly pointing to the oneness of authorship: there 
are structural similarities, like beginning the play with the words 
ndndyante tatah pravisati Sutradharah , or the use of the word 
sthapana for the more common prastavand, running through all the 
dramas or a l^rge majority of them; several of these plays disregard 
the rules of the Natyasastra, e.g. representing deaths, battles, sport, 
or sleep on the stage; there are similarities in single words and whole 
phrases as well as in ideas; even some of the stanzas are sometimes 
repeated in full; there are also similar grammatical irregularities and 

1. To Ramila and Saumilla, Rajasekhara ascribes the Sudrakakatha. Certain 

verses are ascribed to them and to Kaviputras in anthologies; cf. S&rngadhara - 

paddhati, 133, 40; Subhashitavali, 1698 and 2227. 

2. For a recent and learned discussion see Pusalker, Bhasa— A Study, Lahore, 1940 

260 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Prakrit archaisms. All these considerations point unmistakably to 
a single author, whoever he may have been. 

If, therefore, we can ascribe any one of these dramas to Bhasa, 
his claim for the authorship of the rest of them may reasonably be 
conceded. To achieve this end the references to the Svapnavdsava- 
datta by later waiters offer great help. Thus those scholars who 
favour the ascription of the plays to Bhasa argue somewhat as fol¬ 
lows; the famous stanza 

Bhdsandtakachakre'pi chhekaih kshipte parlkshitum 
Svapnavasavadattasya ddhako’ bhun na pdvakah 

clearly shows that Bhasa wrote not only the SvapnavdsavcidaUa but 
a whole group of dramas; Bana, in the introduction to his Harsha- 
charita, mentions the following as the characteristics of the Bhasa- 
plays: they are begun by the Sutradhara, they contain numerous 
characters and are marked by the patakas. Now the Trivandrum 
plays more than bear out all these features. 1 Then again the inci¬ 
dents in these dramas fully justify Vakpati’s description of Bhasa as 
jdlanamitta , the friend of fire. Ramachandra and Gunachandra in 
their Natyadarpodya ascribe the Svapnavdsavadatta to Bhasa 'and 
quote a stanza from that drama. Though this stanza does not occur 
in the printed text of the said drama, the fourth act in it contains 
a situation which easily envisages the possibility of such a stanza 
being once present in the text. 

The whole argument seems to be well constructed, and for all 
practical purposes Bhasa may be taken to be the author of the Trivan¬ 
drum plays. Again the question of the date of Bhasa has also been 
a matter of prolonged controversy. Kalidasa’s reverential reference 
to him as a poet of established repute makes Bhasa’s date hinge 
upon that of Kalidasa. Of the two theories referring Kalidasa to 
the first century B.C. and the fourth century A.D., the latter seems 
to be more plausible, and in that case Bhasa’s date may be placed in 
the second or third century A.D. 2 3 This also agrees well with the 
fact that Bhasa’s Prakrit is later than that of Asvaghosha who 
flourished in the first century A.D. 

The plays ascribed to Bhasa number thirteen 1 and, except Chd- 
rudatta , all of them are preserved intact. They can be convemently 

1. In the AvaV'tisundarikcitha also appears a stanza giving a few of Bhasa’a 
characteristics which are borne out by the present plays. 

2. For an attempt to place Bhasa in the 5th or 4th century B.C. see Pusalker, 
Bhasa—A Study. For making Bhasa a predecessor of Kautilya on linguistic 
and historical grounds see V. R. R. Dikshitar, Kane Comm. Vol., pp. 165-67. 

3. Ddmaka and Traivikrama are two more dramas ascribed to Bhasa. 


201 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


divided according to their sources. The Madhyama-vydyoga, Duta - 
ghafotkacha, Karnabhdra, Dutavakya, Urubhanga and Panchardtra 
are all based on the Mahdbharata , and most of them are one-act 
plays. The Bdlacharita, is based upon Krishna legend. From the 
Ramdyana are derived the plots of the Pratima-nd^aka and the 
Abhishekanafaka. Lastly the Avimdraka, Chdrudatta , Pratijno- 
yaugandhardyana and Svapnavdsavadatta indicate the current story 
literature as their probable source. 

The dramas based on the Ramdyana show little ingenuity on the 
part of the author. They vary from the original only in unimportant 
details and no effort at characterisation is in evidence. The Pratimd- 
ndtaka derives its name from the statue (pratimd) of Dasaratha 
that was placed in the statue-hall after his death. It describes 
Rama’s exile and his return to Ayodhya after Ravana’s destruction. 
The incidents in the Abhisheka-ndtaka begin with the death of Valin 
and end in Rama’s coronation ( abhisheka ). 

The Mahdbharata plays show the dramatist in better relief. 
The departures from the original show skill and intelligence and the 
characters are more lively and vivid. The Madhyama-vydyoga deals 
with the trick played upon Bhima by Hi<Jiniba in order to compel 
the former to pay a visit to her. The self-sacrifice of the middle 
(madhyama ) son is somewhat reminiscent of the Sunahsepa legend 
recorded in the Axtareya Brdhmana. In the Dutaghafotkacha , Ghsi- 
totkacha is seen as a messenger (duta) warning the Kauravas 
who are delighted at the death of Abhimanyu. In the Kariia- 
bhdra the hero is deprived of his armour by Indra in the form of a 
Brahmana. The Dutavakya is woven round the unsuccessful mission 
which Krishna, as an ambassador (duta) of the Pan<Javas, undertook 
to avoid the great battle. In the Urubhanga, Duryodhana is depicted 
as a true hero, though in the end his thigh is broken by his adversary. 
The Panchardtra relates the incidents that occurred when the Kau¬ 
ravas tried to steal the cows of Virata. Its title is derived from the 
promise given by Duryodhana to Drona to hand over half the realm 
to the Paiftlavas if they were heard of within five days (or nights). 

The Bdlacharita depicts the exploits of the youthful Krishna. It 
shows many departures from the Krishna legend known from other 
sources, and has peculiarities of technique also. It commences with 
the birth of Krishna, narrates some of his exploits, and ends with the 
re-establishment of Ugrasena at Mathura. 


262 


!,ANV.UAGE AND LITERATURE 


Tlie Avimaraka derives its name from that of the hero, and 
depicts in a rather unpolished style the love story of the hero and 
Ihe princess Kurahgl. The starting point of the romance is the 
daring rescue of the princess from the clutches of an elephant by the 
hero. The stumbling block in their marriage is the low social status 
of Avimaraka which is temporarily thrust upon him due to some 
curse. The drama ends in happiness when the true identity of 
Avimaraka is revealed by Narada. 


Of the Chuvudaito we have only a fragment in four acts. It seems 
to have been based on the story which also forms the plot of the 
later Mrichchhakatika. It revolves round the love a'Tair between the 
hetaera Vasantasena and the impoverished merchant Charudatta. 


The Pratijndyauqandhar(iyana and the Svapnavascivadatta are 
based on the Udayana legend. These two dramas are complement 
tary, the latter picking up the thread of the narrative where it was 
left in the former. King Udayana was taken captive to Ujjayini 
by the clever use of a stratagem . 1 His minister Yaugandharayana 
then took a vow {pratijnd) to release his master and succeeded in 
doing so. He also took away from Ujjayini princess Vasavadatta 
who had fallen in love with Udayana during the period of his capti¬ 
vity. The SvapnovdsaradattCL , which by the way is the best of the 
Bhasa-plays. shows king Udayana deprived of his kingdom by a 
certain rebel Aruni. Vasavadatta and the minister are then re¬ 
ported to have died in a forest fire. This paves the way for the 
marriage between Udayana and Padmavati, the princess of Magadha. 
With the help of his new relatives, Udayana wins back his lost king¬ 
dom and then meets his queen and the minister. The play derives 
its name from an incident in the fifth act where the king obtains a 
glimpse of the lost queen and thinks it to be a dream ( svapna ). 


The credit for having written the largest number of extant 
Sanskrit dramas easily goes to Bhasa. In technique he sometimes 
flagrantly violates the rules of the Ndtyasdstra. His plot-construc¬ 
tion is quite crude, and certain incidents are simply repeated. The 
magic rand the divine, which give the plays an air of unreality, are 
introduced quite freely. Bhasa’s style, however, is simple and direct. 
It does not involve the use of long compounds and too frequent 
embellishments. 


Bhasa’s Sanskrit usually agrees with the norm fixed by Panini 
and his followers, yet it sometimes shows epic influence. Some of 

1 Sec pp. 9-10 above. 


2(13 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the irregularities, and especially those of sandhi and vowel-quan¬ 
tities, are due to metrical requirements. Confusion in the active 
and middle exists (e g. garjase, slishyate, aprichchhami, parishvaja ); 
absolutives of the type of grihya are found; the particle md is used 
with gerundive (md ... chintayitva ); vdchd, a form sanctioned by 
Bhaguri in nom. sg., is Used; the form avachaya, used by Kalidasa 
also, appears for avachaya. 

Bhasa's Prakrits 1 are later than those of Asvaghosha and earlier 
than those of Kalidasa. The Prakrit normally used by Bhasa is Saura- 
senl. In it -t- > -d- and -t- > -d; intervocalic consonants are occa¬ 
sionally dropped; n > n both initially and medially; aspirates like kh, 
gh , etc. often lose their occlusion; the cluster jn shows either nn or 
nn but ny and ny > nn in all cases: the nom. acc. pi. term, of neut. is 
sometimes used for acc. pi. of mas. nouns; the Pratijndyaugandha - 
ray an a and the Charudatta on the one hand and the Balacharita and 
the Padchardtra on the other also show two varieties of MagadhI, 
the sh and -o of the latter alternating for the s and -e of the former. 

4. Sudraka 

King Sudraka, whom tradition credits with the authorship of 
the famous play, the Mrichchhakatika > has remained so far, like king 
Vikramaditya, a mere legendary figure. The drama itself speaks of 
him as a person versed in many sciences and as one who died by 
consigning himself to fire at the age of a hundred years and ten days. 
He was known to the authors of at least half a dozen Sanskrit works 
like the Skanda Purdna, Kddambari, Harshacharita, Dasakumdra- 
charita, Kathasaritsdgara and Rdjatarangini. But nothing definite 
can be said either about the aqthor or the date of the play. It is even 
difficult to say whether the play was written before or after Kalidasa; 
but the former view is more generally accepted. 

The dramatist is indebted to the Charudatta of Bhasa for the plot 
of his play. But in the Mrichchhakatika the love story of Vasanta- 
sena and Charudatta is combined with a political event in which 
Aryaka, the friend of the hero, overthrows the ruling prince Palaka. 
The play is full of incidents of varied interest, which show the nobi¬ 
lity of Charudatta’s mind and the selfless love of Vasantasena. The 
play derives its name from a scene in the sixth act where the young 
son of poor Charudatta complains of having to play with a toy-cart 

( snkata ) made of clay ( mrit ). All difficulties are overcome, and the 

_ / _ _ _ ' __ 

1. For details see W. Printz, Bhasa's Prakrit, Frankfort, 1921. 

‘2f>4 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


drama ends in happiness, for Vasantasena was freed from her low 
position and enabled to become the lawful wife of Charudatta. 

The drama is technically a Prakarana in ten acts. It bears 
ample evidence to the author’s capacity to invent incidents and depict 
varied characters. The Vidushaka, for instance, takes keen interest 
in delicious food; but his steadfastness to his friend in times of adver¬ 
sity and the warmth of his heart distinguish him from his felloto- 
characters in the Sanskrit drama. The drama also offers a trust¬ 
worthy picture of the everyday life of the people in those days. The 
author’s style is simple and effective; he gives us many utterances 
full of wisdom. 

The Prakrits of the play are more important than the Sanskrit, 
which in general agrees with the norm. These Prakrits evince a 
large number of variety not to be witnessed in any other extant 
drama, viz. £aurasenl Avantika, Prachya, MagadhI, Sakarl, Chandall, 
and Dhakki or TakkI. This distinction in the use of the Prakrits 
mostly agrees with the rules laid down in the Ndtydsastra. The 
dialectal differences among them are quite minor, so that they are 
mere variants of either §auraseni or MagadhI. Only the TakkI seems 
to have enjoyed some individual existence. It preserves the palatal 
and the dental sibilants and changes sh > s and in this respect it may 
be compared with the European and Syrian dialects of Romani. 1 

IV. SANSKRIT SECULAR POETRY 
1. Origin of the Sanskrit Kavya 

Of Sanskrit secular poetry we have unfortunately no exact 
work dating back to the days preceding the Christian era, 2 a period 
marked by fervent activity in Prakrit literature. This once gave 
rise to a theory that the Sanskrit Kavya originated in Prakrit— 
a view now definitely rejected on good grounds. That the seeds for 
the growth of Kavya were already sown in the Rigvedic period be¬ 
comes clear from the use of apt similes in the earliest hymns. The 
ddna-stutis composed in praise of patrons evince that exaggeration 
which contributes so much to the elaboration of later epics. Coming 
to the epic period we find in the Rdmayana the earliest specimen of a 
court-epic. In the Rdmayana is also to be found some indulgence in 

1. For details see Mehendale, “TakkI or Dhakki,” BDCRI, I. pp. 190 ff. 

2. To Panini, however, tradition ascribes the Jambavatlvijayam or Paidlavijayam. 
There are aho some verses ascribed to Panini in the anthologies, but the iden¬ 
tity of the poet and the grammarian Panini is by no means proved, cf- 
Krishnamachariar. HCSL, pp. 84-85. 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the formal aspect of the poem to the detriment of the matter—a cha¬ 
racteristic which became so salient after the period of Kalidasa. 
A Vdrarucha kavya is mentioned by Patanjali who also offers unmis¬ 
takable evidence for the cultivation of lyric and gnomic verses. 
Lastly, the early Sanskrit inscriptions show the transitional stage 
between the simple and flowing Kavya on the one hand and the orna¬ 
mental and slowly-moving Kavya on the other. They testify also 
to a tendency towards using long compounds and efforts at achieving 
the sound effects. 

2. Asvaghosha 

Asvaghosha, whose dramas have been discussed above, is the 
author of several political works. Of these the Saundarananda and 
the Buddhacharita , written in the later epic style, are easily the best. 
The former describes in eighteen ca; tos the conversion of Buddha’s 

V- > 

half-brother Nanda by Buddha himself. Nanda was too much attract¬ 
ed by the beauty of his wife and the pleasures of worldly life to be¬ 
come a convert. But he was persuaded to lay aside the thoughts of 
his wife by his attention being drawn to mpre beautiful heavenly 
nymphs, and he was further told not to value the heavenly life too 
high, for even that was transitory in character. 

As regards the original length of the Buddhacharita, we are 
informed by I-tsing that it ran into twenty-eight cantos, and this is 
independently proved by its Chinese version prepared in the fifth 
century A.D. But the text that is available today shows only 
seventeen cantos of which, again, only the first thirteen are genuine, 
the rest being added in recent times by Amritananda. The text 
narrates, in accordance with the traditional account, the life of 
Buddha. The poet’s originality is, however, seen in his selection 
of incidents and depicting them in a touching manner. The influ¬ 
ence of the Ramayana on this work is unmistakable. Suddhodana 
easily reminds us of Dasaratha, and Sundarl of Slta. Even a few in¬ 
cidents like the lamentations of the people at the sight of the chariot 
without Rama in the Rdmdyana and without Siddhartha in the Bud¬ 
dhacharita show a close resemblance that cannot be overlooked. 

To the same poet and philosopher are ascribed the Mahaydna- 
sraddhotpd,da which discusses the early Mahayana views, the Vajra- 
siichi, forming a vehement attack on the caste system, and the 
Gandistotragdtha which bears ample witness to the author’s skill in 
metre and his sense of sound values. Reference may be made in 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


this connection to the Sutrdlankara or Kalpandmanditikd which was 
once ascribed to Asvaghosha. The discovery of the fragments of 
this work in Central Asia is important on more than one account. 
In the first place, it clearly shows that the title Sutrdlafih'irn given 
to this work by a Chinese version was a misnomer; and, secondly, it 
lays at rest the problem of the authorship of the work by ascribing it 
to Kumaralata (and not to Asvaghosha) who may have flourished 
a little later Asvaghosha.- The fragments bring to light some 
eighty narratives and ten parables. The form of the work is prose 
mixed with verses, a style which was given a sort of fixity by Ary a 
Sura in his Jatakamalq,. 


Asvaghosha’s style belongs to that variety which later on came 
to be styled as VaidarbhI. It is simple in diction and clear in mean ¬ 
ing, in spite of the author using certain words which later became 
obsolete in their peculiar nuances. The language of Asvaghosha 
fairly agrees with standard Sanskrit though a lev/ irregularities 
like the epic gerund grihya are found. 


3. Arya Sura andl other Minor Poets 

We owe to Arya Sura the Sanskrit version of the Jataka tales 
in the form of the Jdtakamdla, written in prose intermingled with 
verses. Most of the stories in this work are those included in the 
Pali Jataka book or in the Chariydpito.ka. They narrate the life of 
Buddha in his former births and also illustrate the pdramitds. the 
various perfections, ascribed to the Buddha to be. The style of 
Arya Sura, like that of his predecessors, is simple and clear. His 
language in general is free from blemishes. The Jdtakam-dld was 
translated into Chinese in A.D. 434, and Arya Sura therefore pro¬ 
bably lived in the third or fourth century A.D. 1 

To the philosopher Nagarjuna (c. second century A.D.) we owe 
two philosophical works, the Madhyamakakdrikd and the Suhyii - 
lekha, the latter summarising the Buddhist doctrine in the form of 
a letter. The Chatuhsatikd of Arya Deva, perhaps of the third 
century A.D., criticizes the Brahmanical practices. The Mahdydna- 
svtralankdra of Asanga, showing the mastery of Buddhist writers 
over Sanskrit, perhaps belongs to the fourth century A.D. 

V. THE AVADANA LITERATURE 

The nature of the Avadana (Pali Apadana) literature will be 
discussed later in connection with the Pali canon. 2 Of the Sanskrit 


1. Winiernilz, HI L. II, p. 276. 

2. See Ch. XIX. B. VI. 


'207 



nil*; A(;e of imperial unity 

Avadanas, the Avaddnaxataka seems to be the oldest. It may be 
placer! in the second century A.D. as it is reported to have been 
translated into Chinese in the third century A.D. There is nothing 
artistic in the arrangement of the tales, their principal purpose 
being edification and not mere amusement. The Divyavaddna , 
too, may have belonged-to the same period as that of the Avadd- 
v a sat aka. The origin of the'work seems to be complex as its style 
also suggests; simple prose with equally simple gdthds is found along¬ 
side prose with long compounds and verses in elaborate metre. In 
certain sections Prakritisms like the loss of the final consonants are 
to be met with: there are also to be found a few rare words and 
words with rare meanings. 

VI. SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 

1 Grammar 

Though the beginnings of grammatical studies in India can be 
traced back to the period of the Brahmanas, the first important 
treatise on the subject is Yaska’s Nirukta. The work deals with 
etymology, a subject included in the six Vedangas, taking into 
account only the Vedic words. The earliest work, therefore, deal¬ 
ing with the grammar of the contemporary spoken language is 
Pitnini’s Ashtddkydyh The author refers to his predecessors like 
Sakatayana and Saunaka, which indicates the existence of a long 
tradition of grammatical studies before the days of Panini. The 
great grammarian was the native of a village called Salatura in the 
N.-W.F. Province. His work, the Ashtddhydyi, consists of some 
4.000 Sutras divided, as the title suggests, into eight chapters. The 
principal aim of the work is to describe the bJidshd , or the current 
medium of expression. The Vedic usages are marked out by such 
terms as chhandasi , nigame or mantre. The date of Panini is not 
definitely known and has been variously estimated between the 
seventh and fourth centuries B.C. On the one hand he was later 
than Yaska, and on the other earlier than Patanjali and Katyayana. 
The language, of which he taught the grammar, was more akin to 
the prose of the Brahmanas than to the Classical Sanskrit literature, 
and this explains the absence in later literature of many forms and 
expressions explained by the great grammarian. Moreover, Panini 
does not indicate any knowledge of Southern India which the Aryans 
certainly knew from the days of Asoka. And if the city of Sahkala 
mentioned by Panini 1 can be identified with Sangala, a city said 


1. IV. 2.75. 


208 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

to have been destroyed by Alexander, Panini must have certainly 
lived before this event. On the whole, we may place the great 
grammarian about the fifth century B.C. 1 

The next important figure to follow Panini was Katyayana, who 
flourished about the third century B.C. During the period that elapsed 
between these two grammarians some forms recorded by Panini 
had become obsolete and some other new forms had come into vague. 
Katyayana notes all these changes in the spoken language in the 
forms of his Varttikas. The object of his work was to explain and 
support the Sutras of Panini and also to amend and supplement them 
wherever necessary. 

Katyayana was followed by Patanjali in the second century B.C. 
His Mahnbhashya is a more extensive work explaining, and some¬ 
times correcting, Panini’s Sutras. Sometimes he agrees with Panini 
where Katyayana finds fault with him; and on other occasions he 
upholds the view of Katyayana as against Panini. In accordance 
with the changes introduced in the language by the lapse of time. 
Patanjali also gives certain supplementary rules ( ishtis ). ^ The 
Maluibhdshya is perhaps the earliest specimen of a commentary, a 
mode of writing which came to be extensively employed in later 
days. The presence of proverbial expressions and references to every¬ 
day life make the work interesting reading. Kaiyata’s commentary 
on the Mahdbhdshya belongs to the twelfth century A.D. 

2. Dramaturgy 

The NCityasdstra ascribed to Bharata is not only the earliest 
extant work on dramaturgy but, incidentally, it is also the earliest 
work dealing with the topics of poetics. The work, though mostly 
composed in Slokas, partakes of some of the features of the sutra 
style. It has come down to us in a rather badly preserved form of 
which two main recensions may be noticed. The Northern or the 
later recension consists of 37 chapters, while the Southern or the 
earlier recension, 30 chapters. Nothing definite can be said about 
the date of the Natyasdstra. It has been assigned by different scholars 
to various dates between the second century B.C. and third century 
A.D. Matrigupta, whom tradition makes contemporary or identical 
with Kalidasa (fourth century A.D.), seems to have written a com¬ 
mentary on it. The Prakrits recognised by the Ndtyasdstra are later 

1. R. G. Bhandarkar, JBBRAS, 16, p. 340; Keith, HSL, p. 425. For still earlier 
date (700-600 B.C.) ascribed to Panini cf. Belvalkar, Systems of Sanskrit 
Grammar, p. 15. 


269 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Ilian those of Asvaghosha. It recognises the use of the Ardha-MagadhI 
which is not found in the dramas other than those of Asvaghosha 
and Bhfisa. On the other hand, it ignores the Mabarashtrl which 
is freely used in the later classical dramas. The fact that Bhasa 
violates some of the rules of Bharata suggests that in his days the 
Ndtyasdstra had not obtained sufficient sanctity. All this evidence 
goes to suggest the third century A.D. as a probable date of this 
work. 1 

The Ndiyasdstra is the most important and authoritative treatise 
on Sanskrit dramaturgy. Not very long after its composition it 
seems to have been held in high veneration so that later writers 
Iiave merely followed this old work. Speaking of the drama, it says 
that the Natyaveda was the creation of Brahma himself. It further 
assigns to drama a very high status by ranking it as the fifth Veda. 
It then goes on to discuss in quite an elaborate manner the plot, the 
characters, and the sentiments which constitute the essentials of a 
drama. In this connection it mentions the different divisions of the 
drama and gives their distinguishing characteristics and construc¬ 
tion. The Ndiyasdstra also deals with such other relevant topics as 
the gestures of the actors, the mode of delivery, and the dress and 
other equipment. It says that the dress and the make-up should 
always be appropriate to the rasa or bhava, and also suggest the 
correct way of speaking in the drama, which should be appropriate 
to the different emotions intended to be conveyed. It may be noted 
here that the Ndiyasdstra gives a detailed account of the use of the 
languages, especially about the assignment of the various forms of 
Prakrit to different characters. The religious ceremony, called the 
Purvaranga, which is to precede the drama, is described in detail 
by Bharata, but it has practically gone out of vogue in the classical 
drama. 

The theatre and the scenery are also given proper attention by 
the author. He mentions three kinds of theatres, one for the gods 
and the other two, the rectangular and the triangular, evidently 
meant for human beings. The author has not forgotten the role 
which the audience plays in the successful representation of a drama, 
and says that the audience should be clever and capable of appre¬ 
ciating the feelings and emotions expressed by the actors. 

The Ndiyasdstra deals with poetics, metre, music and dance as 
they affect the composition and representation of the drama. It is 


1. Keith, SD, p. 292. 




LANGUAGF' AND LITERATURE 


responsible for the development of an important doctrine of rasa or 
sentiment. It accepts rasa as the essence of Kavya and relegates 
guy a and alankdra to a subordinate position. It recognises eight sub 
divisions of the sentiment, which is just a condition produced in the 
mind of the audience as a result of the emotions of the characters. 
It enumerates 3G lakshanas or embellishments of poetry (Kdvyani- 
bhiishanani ), four poetic types, and ten poetic merits and faults. It 
does not distinguish between the alanlcdras of sabda and artha bid 
mentions the JJpamd (with five sub-divisions), the Rupcika , the 
Dipaka and the Yamctka as the four Ndtakdlankdras . 

The author, hov/ever, recognises that the theorist can give only 
a few suggestions, the people themselves being the final authority 
over the drama; and as human nature affords immense variety, no 
hard and fast rules can be insisted upon by theorists. 

3. Metrics 

The science of Metrics is supposed to have originated with 
Pingala, and his Chhand.as Sutra is even believed to be a Vedanga. 1 
It is generally agreed, however, that it was probably Pingala who 
gave a sure foundation to this. science. He started the practice 
of measuring a metrical line with the help of the Trikas or the 
eight groups of three letters each. From very old times the 
Sanskrit metres in the Vedas were distinguished from each other by 
the number of letters contained in each line of a stanza. In the days 
of the Pratisdkhyas, 26 varieties of this type were already noted; but- 
as the science progressed and metres came to be harnessed to a new 
kind of music,* each one of these 26 varieties yielded many a iff e rent 
metres, according as the order of short and long letters in their line 
changed. This new kind of music is the Varna Sangita as distin¬ 
guished from the Svara Sangita of the Vedic and the Taia Sangita 
of the purely Apabhrariisa metres. This Varna Sangita is based upon 
a sound-variation, unlike the Svara Sangita which is based upon 
a pure modulation of the voice unconnected with the variation of 
short and long sounds. 2 

All the Classical Sanskrit metres, beginning with the Anushiubh, 
are based upon this Varna Sangita. The earliest and most success¬ 
ful attempt to define a few among these many sub-varieties of the 
main 26 kinds is found in Pingala’s Chhandas Sutra , and this is 
very likely the reason why Pingala is supposed to be the father of 


1. Vol. I, p. 478. 

2. PO, VIII, p. 202. 


*271 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Sanskrit metrics. Along with these Varna Vrittas, which arc based 
upon a positive form of the Varna Sahgita, Piiigala mentions three 
other main varieties of metres which are based upon a negative 
form of that Sanglta. These are the Arya, the Vaitallya and the 
Matrasamaka. In later metrical works they are all counted as the 
Matra Vrittas; but Pingala does not call them by this name. Even 
the enumeration of the five Matra Canas of four Matras each, whieh 
are necessary for these metres, is peculiar in the case of Piiigala. He 
describes them as though they were only another group of the 
Akshara Ganas, where the usual ta, na, ma and ya are dropped and a 
group of two long letters and another of four short letters are added. 
Among the Varna Vrittas, Pingala does not define metres whose lines 
contain less than six letters. Jayadeva and Bharata also do the 
same so far as the Sanskrit metres are concerned; but the latter 
defines and illustrates the shorter metres from Prakrit poetry. This 
is really noteworthy. 

It should also be noticed that Pingala mentions only four of th^ 
six Pratyayas; he completely drops the adhvan and does not at all 
refer to the graphical representations of long and short letters as is 
done by writers who came after him. This would perhaps indicate 
that at his time the writing down of metres was not much in vogue. 
Pingala’s date is uncertain; yet it is clear that he belongs to a period 
which is posterior to the full development of the epic Anushtubh and 
Trishtubh or the Upajati. He is nevertheless an ancient writer and is 
mentioned by §abarasvamin in his Bhashya on the Mimdmsd Sutras. 
He may thus be assigned to the first or second century before Christ. 
Pingala himself mentions earlier authorities like Rata, Mandavya, 
Kasyapa and others while defining the classical metres, which shows 
that the development of the classical metres had begun long before 
Pingala. 

Bharata’s Ndtyasdstra also contains two chapters on metres, 
namely Chs. 16 and 32. 1 In the former, the names of the metres are 
introduced by Mudra, while this is not done in the latter, where the 
illustrations are mostly in Prakrit and seem to have been composed 
by Bharata himself. At least, the Prakrit illustrations do not appear 
to have been extracted from any sustained poetical composition. 
Bharata makes a distinction between the metres described in Chs. lb 
and 32; the former are to be used for the general type of poetry to 
be employed in dramas, etc., while the latter are exclusively to be 
employed for purposes of singing and for the Dhruvas. A Vritta is 

1. Edited in Kashi Sanskrit Series. 


27‘2 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


pdthya (to be recited), while the Gitas in Ch. 32 are geya (to be sung), 
according to Bharata. Usually the metrical definitions are given 
in a whole stanza in the metre which is being defined; but some¬ 
times they are given even in an Anushtubh stanza. As noted above, 
metres containing less than six letters in a line are defined and 
illustrated by Bharata under the Gitas in Ch. 32. Bharata’s notable 
deviation from Pingala is that, whereas the latter uses merely a 
Sutra for the definition, he defines the metres in a full stanza, com¬ 
posed in the same metre which is being defined. When this was 
done, there really was no need for an additional illustration; but 
Bharata invariably quotes a stanza in illustration after defining a 
metre. Pingala gives no illustration at all. 

Jayadeva is the next known writer on Sanskrit metres. He 
closely follows the plan of Pingala, giving the Vedic metres in the 
first three chapters, and then the Matra Vrittas (Ch. 4), Vishama 
and Ardhasama Varna Vrittas (Ch. 5), the Sama Varna Vyittas 
(Chs. 6 and 7) and lastly the six Pratyayas (Ch. 8). He, however, 
differs from Pingla in two important respects. He mentions 
adhvan among the six Pratyayas, which was not even hinted at by 
Pingala. Adhvan is the space occupied by a given metrical line 
when written down, the rule being that each letter, whether short 
or long, shall occupy the space of an Angula, and that so much space 
shall also be left between any two letters. This indicates that by 
Jayadeva’s time writing had come to be employed, though it was in 
its early stages when the letters were required to be rather big in 
view of the writing material, which could not have been either birch 
bark or palm leaves, but merely big wooden, stone, or metal boards. 
The second point in which Jayadeva differs from Pingala is that the 
former employs in his metrical definitions single lines of the very 
metre which is being defined, whereas Pingala used only the Sutras. 
As contrasted with Bharata, Jayadeva has introduced economy by 
making the definition itself serve the purpose of illustration. Jaya¬ 
deva is quoted by Abhinavagupta and Svayambhu (himself quoted 
by Hemachandra), and very likely was known even to Varahamihira. 
He may roughly be assigned to a period which immediately follows 
Bharata and, therefore, to the second or third century A.D. Jaya¬ 
deva’s work, called Jayadevachhandas , is so far known to exist in a 
single manuscript at Jaisalmer, which also contains a commentary 
by one Harshata, son of Mukula. Jayadevachhandas has recently 
been published with Harshata’s commentary. 1 

1. See pp. 1-40 of Jayadaman, edited by H. D. Velankar, Bombay, 1949. 

278 

18 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


4. Science of Polity 

The science of polity was known by various names, Arthasastra, 
Dan^anlti, Nltisastra, Rajanlti, etc. and dealt not only with the poli¬ 
tical theories and the actual organisation of administrative machi¬ 
nery, but also various matters connected with State and society which 
would now form the subject-matter of law, sociology, and economics. 
At first these subjects were treated in a section in the Dharma-sutras 
and later in the Dharma-sastras. But independent treatises were 
also written at an early date. The Arthasastra ascribed to Kautilya 
(also called Vishnugupta) is the earliest extant work of this class, 
but it contains references to a large number of treatises which were 
regarded as authoritative in his days. These were the products of 
no less than five schools and thirteen individual writers on the 
science of polity. Many of these are also mentioned in the Maha- 
bhdrata which deals with the subject under the name Rajadharma. 
Kautilya’s Arthasastra, however, gradually came to be regarded as 
the standard work on the subject and, as often happens, the previous 
works were cast into shade and completely lost by the pre-eminence 
and the well-deserved reputation of this masterly and comprehensive 
treatise. Ever since its publication in the year 1909 this work has 
provoked a prolonged controversy as regards its authenticity and 
date, which does not seem to have been finally settled even now. 

Indian tradition is unanimous in holding the Arthasastra as the 
work of Kautilya, and the work repeatedly ascribes itself to Kautilya 
(or Vishnugupta), also styled Chanakya, who is reported to have 
been the minister of Chandragupta Maurya. The work would thus 
belong to the fourth century B.C. Those scholars who favour this 
traditional theory point out that Dandin and the author of the 
Panchatantra ascribe the Arthasastra to Vishnugupta or Chanakya, 
and that Bana is certainly aware of a treatise on political science 
by Kautilya; that the Nitisdra of Kamandaka is based on Vishiiu- 
gupta’s work on polity and Vatsyayana seems to have modelled his 
work on the Arthasastra; that both Kalidasa and Yajnavalkya seem 
to be indebted to Kauplya’s work; that the picture of the society 
portrayed by Manu and Yajnavalkya is in many respects later than 
the one depicted by Kautilya; that the divergences between the 
Kaufiliya and the Manu-smriti show the antiquity of the former; 
and that the civil and constitutional laws explained by Kautilya are 
similar to those recorded by Megasthenes. 


274 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


The opponents of the traditional view, however, maintain that 
the Arthasastra is a later work, which may have been based on the 
teachings of Kautilya, but cannot have been a work by his own hand. 
In support of this theory they point out that the mode of citation 
‘iti Kautilyah' or ‘neti Kautilyah n in the text speaks against the 
authorship of Kautilya; that the very name Kautilya, which means 
‘falsehood’, is nothing to be proud of and hence is highly suspicious; 
that the close agreement between the Arthasastra and the K&masutra 
and the fact that they both quote the same rare authorities suggest 
closeness of their dates; that the reference to China in the Arthasastra 
points to a later date for the work; that the Puranas and later works 
are silent about Chanakya’s literary activity; that even in the latest 
parts of the Mahabhdrata Kautilya is not referred to, only Brihaspati 
and Sukra being mentioned as the teachers of Niti; that though 
Patanjali refers to the Mauryas and the sabhd of Chandragupta, he 
is silent about Kautilya; that not only does Megasthenes not refer 
to him but also that in matters of essential details the two authors 
entirely differ; that in the Arthasastra there is no reference either 
to Chandragupta or to his capital Pataliputra; that the rules of 
government laid down by the Arthasastra pertain to a small state 
and not a vast empire as that of Chandragupta; that the knowledge 
of alchemy and the use of the word surunga (Greek syrinx) suggest 
contact with Greeks over a long time; that the metre and the language 
are regular and have no special archaic features; and that, on the 
whole, the work seems to have been written by a Pandit and not 
by a statesman. According to this view, therefore, the Arthasastra 
was composed much later than the time of Chandragupta Maurya 
and may even be as late as A.D. 300. The question has been further 
discussed in the Appendix. 

The work is divided into 15 adhikaranas with 180 prakaranas. 
It is also divided by another device, perhaps a later one, into 
adhyayas , separated from one another by the insertion of verses 
summarising the subject of each adhyaya . The form of the work is 
said to be a combination of Sutra and Bhdshya (commentary). The 
term sutra probably applies to the headings of the prakaranas , and 
the rest is a commentary on it with a certain mixture of verses. The 
purpose of the work is stated to be that of laying down means for 
the acquisition and maintenance of dominion over the earth. The 
various topics that are dealt with in the different adhikaranas are 

1. “This is (or is not) the view of Kautilya.” 


275 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


briefly as follows: (1) the education and discipline of princes; the 
qualification of ministers; the different kinds of spies; the daily 
duties of a king; (2) the superintendents of different departments and 
the departments themselves; the administration and fortification of 
towns, industrial establishments, regulation of prostitution, etc.; (3) 
civil law; (4) removal of dangerous elements and criminal law; (5) 
methods to remove state-enemies and fill the treasury of the king; 
salaries of government servants; (6 and 7) seven elements of king- 
ship and the six lines of policy; (8) vices of the king and calamities, 
such as floods, fire, etc., to the State; (9 and 10) military campaigns; 
(11) corporations and guilds; (12 and 13) methods to win wars and 
become popular in a conquered country; (14) recipes for preparing 
powders and mixtures to produce illusive appearances, spread 
diseases, etc.; (15) description of the plan of the work. 

The style of the Arthasastra, though generally simple, is enig¬ 
matic in places. The presence of many obscure and technical terms 
renders the work at time difficult to understand. Its language is 
correct Sanskrit, though a few un-Paninian forms like rochayante 
and ptipishthatama occur. 

5. Medicine 

The crudity of early Indian medicine can be judged from the 
Atharvaveda , which betrays belief in the demons of disease and 
prescribes spells as cures. The detailed references in Buddhist 
canonical literature to topics concerned with medicine 1 and Patah- 
jali’s reference to Yaidyaka speak for the development of this science 
in the early centuries preceding the Christian era. But only a few 
works on medicine have come down to us in the form of Saihhitas 
dealing with various topics. The oldest among them is the Samhita 
ascribed to Charaka. His date is uncertain, though tradition makes 
him the physician of the great king Kanishka. The available text 
of this Samhita is not the original one but that which was revised by 
Dj-idhabala, a Kashmirian of the ninth century. Dri^habala himself 
admits of having added certain chapters to Charaka’s work. It deals 
with such topics as the eight principal diseases, diet and remedies, 
pathology, anatomy, embryology, etc. Its popularity can be gauged 
from its early translations into Persian and Arabic. 

The Samhita ascribed to Susruta is equally famous. From the 
Mahabharata we learn that Susruta was the son of Visvamitra. This 

1. Cf. particularly the story of Jlvaka in the Vinaya Texts of the Mulasarvasti- 
vMms (Gilgit Manuscripts, Vol. Ill, part 2, pp. 1-52). 

276 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Samhita also has not come down to us in its original form. We are 
told that Nagarjuna worked over Susruta’s treatise, and we have also 
a text in a revised form by Chandrata. The treatise deals with such 
topics as pathology, anatomy, embryology, therapeutics, and toxi¬ 
cology. It also contains two chapters on surgical instruments and 
the mode of operation. 

The Bhela Samhita is preserved in a defective manuscript. It is 
mostly in metrical form with some mixture of prose. It shows 
acquaintance with Susruta and has the same divisions as in the 
Charaka Samhita. 

The so-called Bower manuscript 1 discovered at Kashgar in 
1890 contains certain tracts on medicine. Palaeographically it has 
been assigned to the fourth century A.D. and special importance 
therefore attaches to a number of previous authors cited, viz. Atreya, 
Ksharapani, Jatukarna, Parasara, Bheda, Harita and Susruta. It 
deals with the qualities of garlic, elixirs for prolonging life, recipes 
for external and internal application, and many other topics. The 
tract called the Navanltaka forms the cream of ealier works and 
discusses powders, decoctions, elixirs, etc. Another manuscript in 
fragment and written on leather was discovered in East Turkestan. 
It dates from c. A.D. 200 and expounds the doctrine of eight of ten 
rasas as opposed to the six found in the works of Charaka and 
Susruta. The language of these treatises is Sanskrit, but it shows 
a marked influence of the current Prakrit tendencies. 

VII. GENERAL REVIEW 

The literary activity of the period shows'a great advance over 
that of the preceding one. The religious literature has grown in 
content and diversity, and the vast canonical literature of the 
Buddhists throws into shade anything attempted before or since in 
this line. Philosophical literature has also been systematised and 
developed. The Dharma-sutras and Dharma-£astras contain the last 
echo of the Vedic civilisation which was rapidly passing away. They 
also form the foundation of modern Hindu law and customs, the later 
works on the subject being mere imitations or digests. The epics 
represent the monumental literary effort of the age which was des¬ 
tined to exercise a unique influence upon the whole Indian nation 
for untold centuries. The dramas of Asvaghosha are only fragmen¬ 
tary, and those of Bhasa are no doubt thrown into the background 

1. So called after its discoverer. Edited by Hoemle in 1914. 

N 

277 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


by the later masterpieces of Kalidasa and Bhavabhuti, but the 
Mrchchhakatika of §udraka has ever remained popular on account 
of its variety of incidents and quick dramatic appeal. The poems of 
Asvaghosha, though not widely read these days, had strength enough 
to influence the diction and incidents in the works of Kalidasa. 
These works are happily free from the elaborate styles adopted by 
later Sanskrit writers. The authors of this period do not show the 
same fondness for sound-plays and double meaning as, for instance, 
evinced by Bana and Subandhu, or Bharavi and Magha. They all, 
whether they are Brahmanical or Buddhist, show unmistakable in¬ 
fluence of the epics on their style and language. It may be men¬ 
tioned with regret that in this period we very much miss lyrical 
works for which Sanskrit poetry is so famous. The achievements of 
this period in many departments of technical or scientific literature 
have remained supreme throughout the history of Sanskrit literature, 
^here d : 1 not appear at a later stage any grammarian who had the 
critical acumen of Panini or the remarkable observation of Patanjali; 
and whatever the merits or demerits of the Arthasastra, no work of a 
later period has been able to oust it from the high position adorned 
by it in the branch of polity. Similarly in medicine most of the im¬ 
portant works were written in this period. Important works were 
written on astronomy, the knowledge of which was considerably 
advanced by contact with the western world. But they are all lost 
and their names alone survive in later texts as will be noted in the 
next volume. On the whole there was a general efflorescence of 
literary activity, which reached its climax in some branches during 
the period under review. 

PART II. LANGUAGE 
I. SANSKRIT 

In the continuous development of the Sanskrit language the 
period that came after the Brahmanas and the early Upanishads is 
marked by the formulation of the Classical Sanskrit. The Brahma- 
i>as have no doubt done away with some of the Vedic terminations, 
the variety of the infinitives, and the subjunctive mood, yet their 
richness in the use of the different verbal forms taught by Panini 
gives them a pre-classical character. 

The language of the epics shows a popular tinge in it, for it 
contains more solecisms than are to be met with in any other form 
of literature. And this is just as it should be, for the original corn- 


278 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


posers of the epic ballads were in Sutas who were outside the 
priestly circle. The language of the epics, and especially of the 
Mahabharata, does not show a clear uniformity, and we cannot speak 
of the ‘epic dialect’ except in a general way. The language, no doubt, 
conforms generally to the standard Sanskrit norm of the period, but 
it also betrays many archaisms of the Vedic period, Prakritisms of 
the Middle Indo-Aryan period, and also ungrammatical forms show¬ 
ing the hand of uneducated authors. It is true that some of these 
irregularities and especially the unwarranted shortening or lengthen¬ 
ing of the vowel quantities are metri causa, and they are so regarded 
( chhandovat ) by Patahjali; but it is also true that most of the irre¬ 
gularities giving analogical forms show the influence of the popular 
dialects. 

But the language which Panini aims to describe was strictly the 
spo 1 x language, at any rate very much akin to it, among the hiera¬ 
tic classes. No one now doubts that the bhasha of Panini was the 
spoken language of his days. The colloquialisms like khada khadeti 
khadati, atra khadatamodata variate, expressions with namul forms 
like hastagraham grihndti jwandsam nasyati , precise instructions 
as to the intonations of questions and commands, of forms used when 
addressing people at some distance, etc.,—all point to a spoken 
language and not to a mere literary medium. The differences that 
are noticed in the language of the Vedas and the bhdshd of Panini 
are clearly due to the process which normally govern the deve¬ 
lopment of any language. The contact with the aboriginal tribes 
may have accentuated to a certain extent the process of simplifica-' 
tion of the older language. After the period of Panini and his fol¬ 
lowers, Katyayana and Patahjali, Sanskrit became more and more 
a literary language and its sphere as a spoken language gradually 
decreased, with the result that after the beginning of the Christian 
era, Classical Sanskrit ceased to develop as a language and assumed 
a stylized form. This was also due, to a certain extent, to the cele¬ 
brity, almost religious, accorded to the three great grammarians. A 
few un-Paninian forms are, no doubt, found in the works of early 
classical writers like Asvaghosha and Bhasa. But the number of 
such forms is so small that it merely shows the last phases of the 
influence exerted by the popular speeches on the sacred Sanskrit 
language. The archaisms and irregularities that are met with in the 
Puranas are only due to the influence of the epics and the lack of 
learning on the part of their authors. Partial acquaintance with 
grammar is also responsible for the confusion and errors, sometimes 


279 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


bewildering, found in the works of Buddhist and other non-Brahma* 
nical origin (cf. for instance, the language of the works like the 
Lalitavistara and the tracts in the Bower Manuscript). 

The bhasha of Panini has the following features:—In phonology 
there is evolved a strict system of euphonic combinations, sandhi, 
which, when carried to extremes, lends an artificial character to the 
language; the sound l, in place of the older r, is recognised, and this 
is probably due to the eastern influence; the IJigvedic changes of 
d > l and dh > lh are completely set aside; and there is a marked 
tendency towards cerebralisation, in all probability a further deve¬ 
lopment of an inherent tendency accentuated by the contact with 
the aboriginals. 

In declension we find more simplificaion; in the singular of -a 
stems - ena has removed the older variant -a and in plural -<ls, ani, 
-ais and -anam have wiped out - asas, a, -ebhis and -dm respectively; 
in pronouns the nom. yuvam and abl. yuvat are eliminated; in con¬ 
jugation - masi of the first pi. active, - e of the third sg. middle, - dhva 
of the second pi. are all lost; the whole subjunctive goes out of use, 
and in optative and infinitive the rich variety is seriously lost; of 
the Vedic gerunds in -tw, tvi and tvaya only the first prevails; on 
the other hand, only a few new forms like the two periphrases and 
the formation of perfect with auxiliaries are developed. 

As we come to the period of Katyayana we find that the differ¬ 
ent verbal forms, though taught in the grammar, were not actually 
used. His Varttikas asti aprayuktah, etc. show that in his time some 
verbal forms, for instance, the perfect usha. tera, chakra, etc., had 
become obsolete and their place was taken by participial expressions 
Thus the way was gradually being prepared for the later nominal 
or attributive style in place of the earlier verbal style. Katyayana 
also notes certain innovations in the language after the days of 
Panini: thus he gives brahma and ndma also as voc. sg. forms be¬ 
sides brahman and ndman; by the extension of optional forms to 
masculine in words like dvitiya we have both dvitiydya or dviti- 
yasmai, dvitiyat or dvitiyasmdt, etc., in feminine forms, additions 
like mdtuld , upadhydydnt, arydni and kshatriyani are noted. 

The Mahabhasya of Patanjali gives us the earliest extant spe¬ 
cimen of a somewhat developed nominal style. So far as the deve¬ 
lopment in the language itself is concerned Patanjali does not show 
any great advance over the stage arrived at in the days of Katyayana. 
He notices the loss of certain idioms like nivachane-kri (to be silent). 


280 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


anvaje- or upaje-lcri (to strengthen); similarly the pronominal base 
tya, infinitive in - tavai, and perfect participle middle in-ina are dis¬ 
used; there have also occurred a few changes in syntactical peculia¬ 
rities. It is significant to note that Patahjali ascribes the correct 
usage, of Sanskrit to the Sishtas of his times, who are described as 
Brahmanas inhabiting the Aryavarta. They could speak correct 
Sanskrit, even without studying Panini’s grammar; in fact it was 
the use of these Sishtas that decided the correctness or otherwise of 
a particular form. Other persons, though they spoke Sanskrit, made 
certain mistakes which are clearly attributable to the influence of 
Prakrits. Thus in their speech kasi appeared for krishi , disi for 
drisi, gdvi, gonl, etc. for gaus, and, among the verbs, dnapayati for 
ajndpavattati for vart-, and vaddhati for vardh-. 

Later classical writers strictly conformed to the norm set up by 
Panini and as revised by Katyayana and Patanjali. Here and there 
they commit such errors as the confusion of -tva and •• ya in gerunds, 
of active and middle, and the loose use of the past tenses. But the 
real change that affected the later writers was not in language but 
in style. They developed a .fondness for the use of participles in 
lieu of inflected forms, of gerunds for subordinate clauses, and of 
compounds to give the style an element of brevity. In vocabulary 
Classical Sanskrit has lost many of the Vedic words and roots, and 
this loss has hardly been compensated for by a few borrowings from 
the indigenous Prakrits and the language of the later invaders. 

II. PRAKRIT 

The grammarians leave no doubt in our mind as regards the use 
of Sanskrit as a spoken language in their days. But at the same 
time they afford evidence that gradually there had appeared in the 
spoken medium many corrupt forms and usages, and hence it had 
become essential to turn to the Sishtas, the cultured and the educated 
persons in society, for a knowledge of correct Sanskrit. When we 
consider this state of affairs and add to it the fact that the founders 
of Buddhism and Jainism propagated their faiths among the masses 
with the help of the Prakrits and not Sanskrit, it clearly follows 
that, as time went on and as the Aryans spread in different parts of 
India, Sanskrit lost its position as the medium of expression among 
all classes of society and was restricted to only the highly educated. 
That even in this period and for many years to follow Sanskrit had 
not become unintelligible to the lower strata in society is amply 
shown by the Classical Sanskrit dramas, the earliest of which belong 


281 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


to the first or second century A.D. In these dramas, men of the 
upper classes speak in Sanskrit, but women and men of the lower 
classes speak various forms of Prakrit, proving thereby that the 
distinctions which arose in the forms of speech of the people were 
due to their social status, sex and locality. 

Philologists have traced in detail the successive stages of this 
linguistic evolution, but we can only briefly refer to them. The old 
Indo-Aryan stage of the Aryan speech, as typified by Vedic and early 
Sanskrit, altered imperceptibly and became transformed into Middle 
Indo-Aryan and Prakrit. The rate of change of this progress—or 
degeneration—was not the same in every part of India. The lan¬ 
guage was more conservative in the north-west, the original nidus 
of the Aryans in India, and more advanced or modified in the cast. 
Already in the period of the Brahmanas, long before Buddha, we 
find indications of at least three distinct dialectical types in North 
India just when Middle Indo-Aryan took its rise —Udichya (north¬ 
western), Madhyadesiya (middle) and Prdchya (eastern). The Classi¬ 
cal Sanskrit, which came to be established as a literary language 
after Panini, was based primarily on Udichya (Panini’s own dia¬ 
lect) and Madhyadesiya dialects. But although the Brahmanas used 
the Classical Sanskrit, the dialects continued their development un¬ 
checked and gradually the gulf between the two became wider and 
wider. This was more prominently marked in the east where arose 
the anti-Vedic and anti-Brahmana socio-religious and philosophical 
movements like Buddhism and Jainism. It was symptomatic of the 
attitude of the followers of Mahavira and Gautama that they should 
address the masses in their own dialect and not hieratic Sanskrit 
Thanks to the exertions of the heterodox sects, the Prakrits (verna¬ 
culars) grew as literary languages and became powerful rivals to 
Sanskrit. The earliest literary products of these Prakrits were the 
canonical texts of the Buddhists and the Jains, to which detailed 
references will be made later. Apart from these, the inscriptions 
of Asoka give us the first definite knowledge about them. They prove 
the existence of at least three different dialects, viz. those of the 
east, west and north-west. The eastern dialect, as the language of 
the imperial city of Pataliputra, was undoubtedly the most popular, 
and widely prevalent all over the Maurya Empire. 

The dramas of Asvaghosha (c. A.D. 100) show the next import¬ 
ant stage of development when we can distinguish the older forms 
of the first three of the four well-known Prakrit dialects of later 


282 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


date, viz. Ardha-Magadhi, Magadhi, Sauraseni and Maharashtri. 1 It 
is probable, though not definitely proved, that both Gautama Buddha 
and Mahavira preached their doctrines in Old Ardha-Magadhi 
dialect, but the extant canonical texts of their sects are written 
in a language which shows great divergencies from it. The early 
Jain scriptures are lost, but even the earliest preserved texts, viz. 
those of the Svetambara canons, which go back to the middle of 
the fifth century, show a strong influence of the Maharashtri Prakrit. 
As regards Buddhist canon, the best preserved is that of the 
Ilinayana school (Theravada) in Pali, and now used in Ceylon, 
Burma and Siam. But the origin of Pall, or in other words the 
particular Prakrit dialect from which it was derived, is a matter of 
dispute among scholars, and no unanimous conclusion has yet been 
arrived at. While some derive it from the Prakrit dialect current in 
Magadha, others find a closer association between it and the dialects 
of Kausambi or Avanti, i.e. the Midland or Madhyadesa. 

The theory that Pali was originally a dialect of Avanti has much 
to commend itself. When Asoka quotes from Buddhist scriptures 
in his Bhabra Edict, he quotes from a version in the eastern dialect 
which was evidently current in his day. Literary Pali was evidently 
unknown to him. The Buddha as an easterner can only be expected 
to have used the eastern Prakrits and these, as we find from the 
eastern inscriptions of Asoka, agree in some vital matters with the 
Magadhan Prakrit. Pali, however, does not at all agree with the 
Magadhan Prakrit. It rather agrees with the Sauraseni or mid¬ 
land dialect, particularly with the old Saurasenl which we find in 
Asvaghosha’s works. The Buddha enjoined upon his disciples that 
his teachings should be studied by the people in their own dialects 
(saka nirutti) and we have definite evidence that the Buddhist canon 
was redacted, if not wholly, at least in part, in no less than four 
different forms of speech, viz. Eastern Prakrit (Asoka’s inscription), 
N.-W. Prakrit (Central Asia), Buddhist Sanskrit (Gilgit and Nepal) 
and Pali. It seems that almost immediately after the death of 
Buddha, bis sayings were rendered into the midland speech from 
the original one by persons who were connected with Ujjain and 
Mathura. A parallel case happened nearly two thousand years later 
when the discourses of Kabir, who belonged to Banaras and spoke 
Bhojpuri, appear to have been rendered into a midland literary 
speech consisting of Brajbhakha of Mathura and the incipient 
Hindustani of Delhi. It should be remembered that the Pali canon 

1. See above, p. 259. 


283 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


mainly survived in Ceylon where it was presumably taken by 
Mahendra, who was born in Ujjain and had his training there before 
he took Orders and came to his father’s court at Pataliputra. 

But whatever may be the origin of Pali, there is no doubt that 
the growing popularity of the Prakrits, due mainly to the patro¬ 
nage of the Buddhists and Jains, gave a temporary set-back to Sans¬ 
krit. This is clearly evidenced by the epigraphic records of the 
period. It is significant that all the inscriptions of Asoka through 
which the great Maurya Emperor addresses his subjects or officers 
arc written in Prakrit dialects. This inscriptional activity started 
by Asoka was picked up later on by many others, whether kings or 
donors, and we get a large number of Prakrit inscriptions—about 
1,500 in number—throughout the length and breadth of India and 
covering a period of no less than seven centuries. The fact that not 
more than a dozen inscriptions were written in Sanskrit during the 
same period proves incontestably that Prakrit continued to be the 
dominant language in popular usuage up to the beginning of the 
fourth century A.D., after which, however, not many Prakrit in¬ 
scriptions are to be met with. In the literary field, on the other hand, 
the Prakrits did not long continue to enjoy the same status, and 
even Buddhist and Jain writers from the second century A.D. on¬ 
wards showed their preference for Sanskrit to the neglect of Prakrits. 
It must, however, be admitted that the non-canonical literature of 
the Buddhists and Jains continued to be written in Pali and Jaina- 
Maharashtrl till a very late date. Similarly, the Prakrit Dhamma- 
pada acquired from Khotan in 1892 and the use of a variety of 
Indian Prakrits in the Kharoshthl documents discovered in Chinese 
Turkestan speak for the popularity attained by these languages 
outside India in the early centuries of the Christian era. 

The Prakrit languages were, besides, employed by the Sanskrit 
dramatists for their female and secondary characters. Thus the 
dramas of Asvaghosha, Bhasa and Sudraka are replete with speeches 
composed in Maharashtrl, Saurasenl, Magadhi and the secondary 
dialects derived from these. Generally Maharashtrl is employed for 
verses, SaurasenI for prose, and Magadhi for the speeches of menials. 
Maharashtrl is indeed regarded by grammarians as the model Prakrit 
and it is quite evident that this particular Prakrit was a great favou¬ 
rite of poets and authors. 

A very large amount of stray lyric poetry was undoubtedly 
composed by poets and even poetesses during this period. Hala’s 


284 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURF 


Gathdsaptasati is a collection of such stanzas, properly arranged, 
edited, and often supplemented by Hala himself. All these verses 
are composed in the Arya metre; but surely there existed even others 
that were composed in the Classical Varna Vrittas as is evident from 
Svayambhu’s quotation from Hala in the Sardulavikrhjita metre. 1 2 
The most important Prakrit work of this period, however, is 
Gunarihya's Brihatkathd which was composed in the Paisachl lan¬ 
guage and which contained an inexhaustible treasure of romantic 
tales as can be judged from its Sanskrit versions of Kshemendra and 
Somadeva in later days. The work itself is irretrievably lost, but 
has supplied themes to many a work of later times. 


APPENDIX 

NOTE ON TI1E DATE OF ARTHASASTRA 

^ As noted on p. 274 above, there are widely divergent views on the date of 
Kautilya’s Arthai-dstra and a considerable literature has grown up on the subject. 
It is not possible to traverse the whole ground and discuss the different views in 
detail," but a lew salient points bearing on the subject may be noted here. 

1. JBBIiAS, 1935, p. 26. 

2. In support of the fourth century B.C. as the date of the Arthasastra, see Shama- 
sastry’s Preface to his edition of the Arthasastra; Fleet’s Introductory Note; T. 
Ganapati Sastri’s Introduction to his edition of the Arthasastra; Jacobi, IA, 
XLV1I, p. 187; K. P. Jayaswal, Hindu Polity, I. Appendix C. pp. 203-215; N. N. 
Law, CR, Sept., Dec. 1931; D. R. Bhandarkar, ABORI, VII pp. 65 ff. Radha Kumud 
Mookcrji's Introductory Essay on the “Age and Authenticity of the Arthasastra 
of Kautilya” in N. N. Law’s Studies in Ancient Hindu Polity. See also H. C. 
Ray, 1A, LIV, pp. 170, 201; Kane, ABORI, VII, pp. 85 ff, KHDS, I, p. 85. L. D. 
Barnet in his “Indian Antiquities” does not commit himself but works on the 
basis of the same hypothesis. V. A. Smith (Early History of India, 3rd and 4th 
editions) and F. W. Thomas (Cambridge History of India, I) use the Arthasastra 
in connection with the Mauryas. 

For a date about the beginning of the Christian §ra cf. R. G. Bhandarkar, 
POC. I, Vol. I, pp. 24-5. 

For the third century A..D. as the most probable date of the Arthasastra, 
see Introduction to Jolly and Schmidt’s edition of the Arthasastra, pp. 1-47; 
Jolly’s paper “Kautalya and Chanakya” submitted to the Fourth Oriental Con¬ 
ference, Allahabad, 1926; Winternitz, CR, April, 1924; A. B. Keith, JRAS, 1916, 
pp. 130-38; HSL, pp. 458 ff. 

Hillebrandt ascribes the composition of the Arthasastra to a school of 
Kautilya’s disciples, and Keith ascribes it to some follower of Kautilya. But 
Kautilya is really in line with Hindu tradition in introducing his name in his own 
work. It may be stated, in reply to Keith, that Achdrydh is only the customary 
honorific plural; that on p. 263 (Shamasasiry’s edition) Kautilya distinguishes 
the view of Achdrydh from those of Kautilya and Vatavyadhi, and that on page 
322 the views of Achdrydh are distinguished from those of Bharadvaja. On 
p. 255, the criticism of Kautilya by Bharadvaja and that of the latter again by 
Kautilya only bring together the opinion of two schools of thought. The fact 
seems to be that the Arthasastra, like the Dharma-sastra, had several traditions 
and that Kautilya represented one, perhaps the most powerful, of them. 

For references to Kautilya in Hindu literature, cf. Kamandaka, II, 4-7, 
Dandin, Dasakumaraeharita, II, 8 and other works cited by Shamashastry, Gana¬ 
pati Sastri and Jolly in their introductions to the editions of the Arthasastra. 
The Jain Nandisutra placed the Kautiliya among the false sciences; though 


285 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


\ 


The Arthasdstra certainly existed before Bana (seventh century A.D.), the 
Nandisutra of the Jains (not later than the fifth century A.D.) and possibly the 
Jatakamala of Arya 6ura (third or fourth century A.D., see p. 267 above). In the 
Junagarh rock inscription of Skanda-gupta reference is made to the testing of 
officials by upadhas, as we find in the Arthasdstra. Again verse 10 of the same 
record reminds us of Arthasdstra I. 1. 

The prevalence of the study of Arthavidyd in still earlier days is proved by 
the Junagarh rock inscription of Rudradaman I (second century A.D.), which 
mentions such technical terms as pranaya, vishp, , etc. Attention may be drawn in 
this connection to the fact that the Kautiliya Arthasdstra, which purports to be a 
compendium of pre-existing Arihasdstras, does not quote the views of previous writ¬ 
ers in the chapter on Kosabhisamharanam which deals with pranaya (Book V. 
Chap. II). It is, therefore, not unlikely 'that the knowledge of the term in the days 
of Rudradaman I was derived from the Kautiliya itself and not from anv pre¬ 
existing treatises. An early date is also suggested by the absence of any reference 
to the Denarius (Bk. II. Chaps. 12 and 19) in the sections dealing with coins 
and weights. 

Regarding the terminus a quo there are grave doubts as to whether, in its 
present shape, the famous book is as old as the time of the first Maurya (c. 300 B.C). 
It is, for example, not clear why in the matter of dating Asoka should ignore the 
system of Kautiliya Arthasdstra (II. 6; 20; IX. 1), if the work really proceeded from 
the pen of his grandfather’s chancellor, and prefer the Persian model as urged by 
some writers. Asoka’s dating, it may be remembered, not only pertains to the 
issue of proclamation of edicts (as in the case of the Achaemenids), but also to 
military campaigns (R.E. XIII), tours (R.E. VIII), appointment of officers (R.E.V.), 
and gifts (Barabar hill cave inscr.). Some of the dated orders relate to the Yuktas 
(R. E. Ill) who had duties in connection with state-funds and accounts. 

The following points, too, deserve attention:— 

1. None of the writers, whose evidence is usually cited in favour of a date for 
Kautiliya in the fourth century B.C., can with certainty be definitely placed before 
c. A. D. 300. The interval of six centuries is wide enough for the growth of legends. 

2. The official language contemplated in the Sasanadhikdra (II. 10) is Sanskrit 
and not Prakrit used by the Mauryas, the Satavahanas and the earliest Pallavas. 
Cf. use of prefixes like Pra and passages like agramyasabdabhidhanam-auddryam 
“the use of words other than colloquial ( gramya Prakrit according to Monier 
Williams’ Dictionary) is dignity.” The number of varnas (letters of the alphabet) 
according to Kautiliya is 63 (akdradayo varndh trishashtih) . It would be interesting 
to know if all these sixty-three letters were known to the scribes of the Maurya age. 
Asokan scribes seem to have been acquainted with about 41 letters. 

3. The prdkara of Kautilya’s durga is to be made of brick. He had a horror 
for wooden structure “as fire finds a happy abode in it” (II. 3). Arian, apparently 
on the authority of Megasthenes, the Greek diplomat in the court of Chandragupta, 
informs us that “such cities as are situated on the banks of rivers or on the sea- 
coast are built of wood instead of brick”, and Strabo definitely states that the city 


about thp tenth century A.D. the Jain author Somadeva Suri borrowed the 
material of his Nitivakydmrita from Kautilya. For reference in the Jain 
Pampas cf„ B. C. Law Volume, I, p. 609. 

The author of Arthasdstra, is also called Chanakya and Dramila by 
Hemachandra in his Abhidhanachintamani (Bombay edition, p. 34) and Yadava- 
prakasa (Vaijayanti, ed. Oppert. p. 96). Hemachandra identifies him with 
Vatsyayana, the author of the Kdmasutra (Shamasastry, QJMS, IV, pp. 210-16). 
The identification is not corroborated by any other work in Sanskrit literature, 
but the resemblance in the style of the two works is striking. 

In manuscripts of the Arthasdstra, both Kautalya and Kautilya occur as 
spellings of the author’s name. Both may, therefore, be held to be correct. 
Kautalya occurs in the Alur inscription of Vikramaditya V of the tenth century 
A.D. (El. XVI, No. 7) and also in another inscription of the thirteenth century 
A.D. ( IHQ, 1925, pp. 569, 786). The name is not, as some scholars have suppos¬ 
ed, a nickname signifying ‘false’ or ‘fraudulent’. For the matter of that, as has 
been pointed out, Sunahsepa means ‘dog’s tail’ and Divodasa, ‘time-server’. 

286 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


of Pataliputra was ‘ girded with wooden walls” (McCrindle, Megasthenes and Arrian, 
revised edition, pp. €5, 67). 

4. There is no reference in Kautiliya Arthasdstra to royal titles characteristic 
of the Maurya age. On the contrary, Indra-Yama-sthanametat (I. 13) cannot fail 
to recall Dhanada-varun-endrdntaka-sama of the Allahabad prasasti. 

5. While some of the official designations in the Kautiliya Arthasdstra are met 
with in Maurya inscriptions, epigraphic references to the samdhartri and sannidhatri 
are definitely late. 

6. The geographical horizon of the Kautiliya Arthasdstra embraces Parasamudra, 
Chlnabhumi (the land of Chlnapatta) and Kambu (II. 11, 13). If Parasamudra stands 
for Palaesimundu of the classical writers, the name cannot claim as high an anti¬ 
quity as Taprobane i.e. TamraparnI which is the designation of the place in question 
known to Maurya epigraphs. The Periplus in the first century A.D. mentions 
Palaesimundu as the name, current in his days, of the island which “the ancients 
called Taprobane”. China silk, as is well known, occurs frequently in Classical 
Sanskrit literature, and finds prominent mention in the work of Kosmas Indi- 
kopleustes (Bom. Gaz., I. I. 547; McCrindle, Ancient India, p. 162). China and 
Cambodia were clearly outside the horizon of the earliest Mauryas. There is no 
indisputable evidence of any contact between India and China before the Han 
period (206 B.C.—A.D. 220). Among other geographical or ethnic designations 
which possibly point to a comparatively late date are Nepala (II. 11) and Harahu- 
raka (II. 25). 

The points mentioned above show that the problem of the true date of the 
Kautiliya Arthasdstra still awaits solution. Taking all relevant facts into considera¬ 
tion, the theory of interpolation or identification of well-known places like China, 
“the land of Silk,” with obscure localities on the borders of India, as is done by 
certain writers on the subject, does not carry conviction. 

B. DR A VIDIAN LANGUAGES AND LITERATURE 

I. General Review 

The Dravidian group of languages comprises Tamil, Kannada, 
Telugu and Malayalam. To this group also belong dialects like Tulu, 
Kodagu, Gondi and some others including Brahui in Baluchistan. 
The Dra vidian languages are today spoken by about 75 millions in 
India, roughly 20% of the population of the country. As Mr. E. P. 
Rice remarks, “a line drawn from Goa, on the West Coast, to Raj- 
mahal, on the Ganges, will approximately divide the Dravidian lan¬ 
guages on the south from the Aryan languages on the north.” 1 2 

While the filiations between the Dravidian and the Sanskritic 
(or Aryan) groups of languages are obvious enough, it would not 
be correct to assume that the Dravidian languages are but vikritis, 
i.e. languages derived from Sanskrit or Prakrit. These two groups 
of languages have existed side by side for several centuries. It is 
not surprising, therefore, that a large number of Sanskrit words 
are now found in the Dravidian tongues. But Sanskrit, too, has 
borrowed many words of Dravidian origin and incorporated them 

1. For the origin of the Dravidian language, its relation to other speech families 
and its early history cf. Vol. I, Ch. VIII. 

2. Kanarese Literature (1921), p. 11. 


287 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


into its own texture. There is also a further category of words like 
mina (fish) and mulzh.il (cloud) which, from the beginning, belonged 
to both. It should be remembered that it is the root that fixes the 
common stock, and not the words borrowed or annexed from one 
language to another. A language can borrow freely from other lan¬ 
guages, it can coin new words to express new concepts, but it can¬ 
not fundamentally change the character of its grammar and its syn¬ 
tax. If we take into account the striking grammatical peculiarities 
of Sanskrit vis-a-vis the Dravidian languages, we mark the following 
important points of difference:— 

(a) In the Dravidian languages, all inanimate things and non¬ 
human creatures are classified under the neuter gender. 
In Sanskrit, this is not necessarily so. 

(b) The Dravidian languages use post-positions, unlike the 
languages of the Indo-European group, which use pre¬ 
positions. 

(c) In Sanskrit the adjectives are declined: but they are not 
declined in the Dravidian languages. 

(d) The existence of two pronouns of the first person plural, 
like the Tamil, nam, ndngal, is a peculiar feature of the 
Dravidian family of languages, and is absent from Sanskrit. 

(e) The governing word in Sanskrit precedes the word govern¬ 
ed, while in the Dravidian languages it follows, and the 
result is that the principal verb comes last. 

We may therefore conclude that the Dravidian languages are 
not just by-products of Sanskrit, although they have doubtless been 
considerably influenced by it. 

(a) Soon after the early Aryans penetrated into the South, 
many Sanskrit or Prakrit words gained general currency. 
This was before the Christian era, and may have extended 
over a period of some centuries. 

(b) In the second period, the period of Buddhist and Jain influ¬ 
ence, many more Sanskrit words were freely used by 
Tamil, Kannada and Telugu writers. 

(c) In the third period, the period of the Alvars, Nayanmars 
and other religious reformers, Sanskrit influence was a 
palpable fact, and in the latter half of the period, roughly 
between the eleventh and fifteenth centuries, a large num- 


238 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

ber of Sanskrit works were translated or adapted into the 
various Dravidian languages. 

Tamil, Kannada, Telugu (Andhra) and Malayalam are the pre¬ 
sent active members of the Dravidian group. Tamil leads the rest 
chronologically no less than in respect of its recorded achievement, 
being in Dr. F. W Thomas’s words “the greatest Indian literature” 
next to Sanskrit. 1 Besides, Tamil is the representative language 
of the family, as it reached maturity earlier than the others, and 
was able, with its vocobulary, systematized grammar, and spirit of 
independence, to inspire its junior sisters in the Dravidian family. 
The earliest extant work in Kannada is Nripatunga’s Kavir&ja- 
m&rga , a treatise on poetics, written in the ninth century, though 
Vodda-tir&dhana, a recently discovered prose work attributed to the 
Jain author Sivakotyacharya, is presumably of an earlier date still. 
Likewise, the ealiest extant works in Telugu and Malayalam are 
respectively Nannayya-Bhatta’s Bharata (eleventh century) and 
SrT Rama’s Ramacharitarh (fourteenth century). But from inscrip¬ 
tions we can conclude that both Kannada and Telugu flourished as 
full-fledged literatures even before the time of Nripatunga and 
Nannayya-Bhatta. As for Malayalam, prior to the tenth century 
it was Sentamil or pure Tamil. 

II. ‘Tamil’ and ‘ Tamilakam’ 

The word Tamil’ is often used as a synonym for !Dravitfa\ 
It is said that the Sanskrit word ‘Dravida’ was corrupted into 
‘Drami^a’ and ‘Damila’ and ultimately became ‘TamiT. But Pandit 
R. Raghava Iyengar thinks that ‘Tamil’ was in all likelihood origi¬ 
nally a Tamil word, accreting to itself an ‘r’ and becoming ‘DramiF 
and ‘Dramida’, and ending up as ‘Dravi<Ja\ From the root ‘dhru’ 
(to drive out), we may derive the meaning of ‘Dravida’ as that 
which is driven out, the implication being that ‘Tamil’ was driven 
cut by the northern Sanskrit. Even the expression ‘Tenmoli* 
(southern tongue), which came into currency in opposition to 
‘Vadamoli’ (northern tongue or Sanskrit), is said to have been 
applied to Tamil with a mischievous intention, for the southern 
direction is synonymous with the abode of Yama, the ruler of our 
Hell! To dispel this insinuation, some Tamil writers have taken 
pains to show that even the word ‘ten’ (in ‘tenmoli’) is used in many 
places to signify sweetness. The word ‘Tamil’ too has been made to 
yield the meaning of sweetness or hoariness. Also, from ‘tami' the 

1. The Legacy of India (ed. by Garratt) (1037) p. 214. 

289 


A.I.U_19 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


meaning of ‘alone’ has been derived, and ‘Tamil’ is therefore said 
to suggest isolated grandeur. These views are, however, hardly 
reasonable and the more probable origin of the name Tamil has 
been discussed above. 1 

Tamilakam 2 is the land of the Tamils—the land where Tamil 
is the current language of the classes as well as the masses. The 
geographical limits of Tamilakam have been thus defined in an old 
work. Venkatam (i.e. the Tirupati Hills) in the north, Kurnail in 
the south, and the sea on the east and west. ‘Kumari’ is said to 
refer, not to Cape Comorin, but to a river of that name, now lost in 
the Indian Ocean. 

The beginnings of every language and literature must neces¬ 
sarily be wrapped in obscurity, and Tamil is certainly no exception 
to the rule; but the Tamils have been busy with myth-making, and 
all sorts of stories are told in connection with Agastya, the supposed 
father of the language and its first grammarian. We summarise 
below the most important of these traditional accounts. 

In bygone times, when God Siva celebrated on Mount Kailasa 
his marriage with Uma, people migrated from the south to witness 
the celebrations. This circumstance threatened to tilt the earth’s 
balance. The assembled elders therefore prayed to the divine bride¬ 
groom to send to the southern comer of India a saintly personality 
who could attract men and thereby restore normal conditions. Siva 
chose Agastya for this task; for Agastya, though a pigmy in stature, 
was a great sage. In a fit of temper he had once drunk up the oceans 
—so great were his powers! Agastya’s wife was the renowned 
Lopamudra, the beacon light of chastity. Certainly, Agastya and 
Lopamudra were almost, if not altogether, on a par with Siva and 
Uma. 

Learning of his new mission, Agastya begged Siva to guide 
him into the mysteries of the Tamil language and literature, as he 
felt that a knowledge of the country in which he was going to reside 
was an essential condition for the. success in his mission. Siva 
thereupon summoned the two rishis, Agastya and Panini, and 
started beating a drum with his two hands. The sounds that came 
from the left were the basis for the Tamil language and the sounds 
that came from the right were likewise the basis of the Sanskrit 
language. The rishis took the cue, and Agastya in due course reached 

1. Vol. I, Ch. VIII. 

2. The word is usually pronounced Tamilakam. 


290 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

tlie Podhikai Hills from which flows the river Tambravarni (in the 
Tinneveliey District). There, in the cool mountain fastness, Agastya 
produced a giant Tamil grammar called Agastyam, the supposed 
fountain-head of Tamil language and literature. 

It is difficult to say whether or not this mythical tale had any 
kind of historical basis. It may, however, explain—or is perhaps 
the result of—the Agastya cult which is wide-spread and popular 
in the south. 

Agastyam (or Akattiyam as it is commonly called) is supposed 
to have consisted of 12,000 sutras or aphorisms. Excepting for a 
few incorporated in later works, Agastya’s aphorisms are all lost. 
One of the extant aphorisms enunciates the close tie that should 
exist between language and literature, or rather between form and 
substance: 

There is no language without literature, 

Even as there can be no oil without seed; 

But as oil is extracted from seed, 

So is language (grammar) evolved out of literature. 

III. The Sarigams 

Putting aside this mythical work, the history of Tamil litera¬ 
ture has necessarily to begin with an account of the so-called 
‘Sarigams.’ Tradition tells us that there were three of these San- 
gams in antiquity. Saiigams were societies of learned men and 
functioned presumably in the manner in which the great French 
Academy has been functioning in recent times. It appears that the 
word ‘sangam’ was used by the Buddhists -and the Jains as a 
euphonious substitute for the earlier Tamil word ‘kudal\ All three 
Sangams are said to have flourished in the Pandyan kingdom, and 
to have been patronized by its kings. 

The ‘Sangam Age’ in Tamil literature was, according to the 
popular view, a period of great literary glory, never to be surpassed 
in the history of any literature whatsoever. It saw the production 
of a colossal volume of Tamil poetry in its pristine purity. Works 
were produced in every department of knowledge,—though, alas, 
most of them are now lost to the world. The age was, besides, a 
period of national awakening, when the arts and the sciences 
flourished alike, when the people obtained all social amenities, and 
when far-flung trade and commerce secured to the Tamils prosperity 
and power. 


291 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The traditional story is thus succinctly set forth in NakkTrar’s 
commentary on Iraiyanar’s Ahapporul :— 

The first Sangam had its seat in old Madura—the Madura that 
is now submerged in the Indian Ocean. It included celebrities like 
Agastya (its President), Tiripuramerittha Virisadaikkadavul (Siva), 
Kunramerinda Murugavel (Muruga or Subramania), and Muran- 
jiyur Mudinagarayar (Adisesha). The membership of the academy 
or college totalled 549. No less than 4,499 authors submitted their 
wrintings to the Sangam and obtained its approval for them. Eighty- 
nine Pandyan kings, seven of them poets, patronized the first 
Sangam, which lasted 4,400 years. The standard works of the first 
Sangam Were Akattiyam (Agastyam), Paripaddl, Mudunarai, Mudu- 
kuruku and Kalariavirai. 

The second Sangam had its seat in another submerged town 
called Kapatapuram (or Alaivai) and included Agastya, Irundayur 
Kurungolimosi, Vellurkappiyan and others, forty-nine members in 
all. This Sangam set its imprimatur on the works of 3,700 poets, 
received the support of fifty-nine Pandyan kings, and flourished in 
unbroken continuity for 3,700 years. The classics of this period 
were Akattiyam, Tolkdppiyam, Mdpurdnam, Isai-Nunukkam, 
Bhuta-purfinam, Kali, Kuruku , Vendali and Vydlamalai. This 
Sangam housed in its library 8,149 works, but all were swept away 
by the sea. Since Agastya (Akattiyar) is common to both the 
Sangams, it is obvious that the second was but a continuation of 
the first, though held in a different place owing to the loss of old 
Madura. The works of the second Sangam are also now lost, except 
Tolkdppiyam, 1 the great Tamil grammar attributed to Tolkappiyar, 
one of Agastya’s twelve direct disciples. 

The third Sangam had its seat in Northern Madura or the 
Madura known to us. Its membership totalled forty-nine, but 449 
poets submitted their works to it for approval. Forty-nine Pandyan 
kings patronized it, and it continued for 1,850 years. The major 
lights of this Sangam were Nakklrar, its President, Iraiyanar, 
Kapilar, Paranar, SIttalai Sattanar and the Pandyan king Ugra 
The classics of this period were Nedunthokai , Kurunthokai, Natri- 
nai, Ainkurunnuru, Paditrupattu, Nutrairhbathu, Pari-Padal( 70 ) 
Koothu, Vari, Perisai and Sitrisai. While many of these are now 
totally lost, some have fortunately survived to give modern readers 
an idea of the richness and variety of Sangam literature. A com- 

1. Most of the extant works of the third 6ahgam, as also Tolkdppiyam, have been 
published by the South India Saiva Siddhanta Publishing Society, Tinnevelly. 

292 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


plete list of the forty-nine members of the third Sangam is given 
in the “Garland of Tiruvalluvar,” included at the end of his im¬ 
mortal work, Kural. 

On the face of it, the traditional account of the first two 6an- 
gams seems to have little historical value. The promiscuous men¬ 
tion of gods and human beings as members of the first Sangam, the 
inclusion of Agastya in both of them, the inordinate stretches of 
time involved, and the loss of almost everything produced,—all 
these point to the conclusion that the story of the first two &angams 
at any rate is a pure fabrication. On the other hand, it could be 
argued that there might be some truth after all behind this mytho¬ 
logical scaffolding. The names of gods were perhaps meant to refer 
to certain deified celebrities of the time or were mere interpola¬ 
tions. It is highly probable that the Sangams were more or less 
continuous, although they are now described as three, because of 
the changes in the capital from Old Madura to Kapatapuram and 
again from the latter to Northern Madura. 

Since the traditional dates are of no use to us, scholars have 
tried to determine the actual period of the three Sangams, though 
there is hardly any unanimity among them. From the available 
evidence, however, it seems to be reasonable to assume that the three 
Academies—the Sangam epoch, in short—comprised a period of 
about one thousand years, instead of the traditional ten thousand; 
and we shall not be far wrong if we fix 500 B.C. and A.D.,500 as 
the extreme limits of the Sangam Age. 1 

We saw that none of the works of the first Sangam has come 
down to us. From the second, apart from stray verses cited by 
later writers, only, one work, viz . Tolkdppiyam, has survived. As 
Tolkdppiyam is a grammatical treatise, it must obviously have been 
preceded by centuries of literary activity. It may be supposed that 
Tolkappiyar, being a close disciple of Agastya, was faithful to his 
master in the grammatical work he has bequeathed to posterity. 
This great work, Tolkdppiyam, is in the form of sutras, and is divided 
into three parts of nine sections each. These three parts deal res¬ 
pectively with Elutliu (orthography), Sal (etymology), and Porul 
(matter). The book is truly encyclopaedic in range and masterly 
in treatment. Rhetoric and prosody, the expression of subjective 
experiences like love and objective experiences like war, the lan- 

1. The question is discussed in detail by V. R. R. Dikshitar ( Studies in Tamil 
Literature and History) and S. K. Aiyangar ( Ancient India and South Indian 
History and Culture, Vol. II, Part II). 


293 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


guage of flowers, contemporary manners and customs,—all these 
are discussed in detail in the book. It is thus as much a treatise 
on language as a manual on dharmdrthakdmamoksha or aram-porul - 
inbam-vidu. This masterly work has been annotated by many 
writers, the most famous of them being Nacchinarkiniyar. Some 
of the other disciples of Agastya also wrote treatises of their own, 
of which references to Avinciyctm, N dththatham and Kdkkaipddi- 
nayam (bearing the names of the respective authors) are found in 
the works of later writers. 

IV. The Third Sahgam 

Some of the principal works of the third Sahgam have come 
down to us in the shape of anthologies. Of these three are especially 
known to fame: Patthuppdttu (The Ten Idylls), Ettuthokai (The 
Eight Collections), and Padinenldlkanakku (The Eighteen Minor 
Didactic Poems). We shall briefly refer to them. 

1. The Ten Idylls 

Two of these are by Nakklrar, two by Rudran Kannanar, and 
the remaining six are by Maruthanar, Kanniar, Naththathanai, 
Napputhanar, Kapilar and Kousikanar respectively. The idylls, 
excepting the fifth, are dedicated to various kings like Karikala- 
Chola, Nedun-Jeliyan the Pandyan, and Ilandiraiyan. The idylls 
are all meritorious descriptive poems, snapping nature in her most 
characteristic moods. 

Of the two idylls by Nakklrar, Tirumurukattruppadai is in praise 
of the god Muruga and of the various shrines in which he is wor¬ 
shipped, while Nedunalvudai is a singular study in contrast, des¬ 
cribing side by side—in the modern Hollywood “look-upon-this 
picture-and-on-that” fashion—king Nedun-Jeliyan in his camp on 
the battle-field and his lonely queen pining in her bed chamber. 
The latter poem is the more consistently beautiful of the two idylls; 
as Mr. Purnalingam Pillai remarks, ‘‘the taste and tact with which 
every line is made to subserve to the one single artistic effect of 
presenting the king and his queen spending the dreary winter night 
alone and apart and away from each other, cannot but arrest the 
reader’s attention.” 1 In addition to these two poems, Nakklrar 
wrote many other minor works as well. The influence his per¬ 
sonality exerted on his contemporaries and successors was greater 

1. Tamil Literature (1929) p. 40. 

294 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


than his actual literary achievement; and he thus holds a position 
analogous to that held by Dr. Johnson in English literature. 

Rudran Kannanar’s Perumpdndttrupadai is a poem of five hun¬ 
dred verses and contains, among other interesting descriptions, a 
memorable account of Kanchipuram. His Pattinappdlai is a moving 
song of love, and it is said to have obtained for its author a reward 
of a large sum of money from Karikala. Torn between love and 
the call of battle-drums, the hero at last succumbs to the former and 
decides to remain with his beloved. Incidentally, we have in this 
poem a graphic and rather detailed description of Puhar, once the 
great capital of the Chola kingdom. 

Of the remaining six poems, Maruthanar’s Maduraikkdnchi 
glorifies the Pandyan kingdom at the time of Nedun-Jeliyan and 
mirrors the civilization of the ancient Tamils; Kanniar’s Poruna- 
rdtruppadai gives a convincing picture of the average impoverished 
man of letters moving about in tattered rags; and Naththathanar’s 
Sirupdnatruppadai is full of references to contemporary social cus¬ 
toms. In the last poem, under the guise of describing the virtues 
of Nallia-Kodan, Naththathanar pictures in fact his vision of the 
ideal king. 

Napputhanar’s Mullaippdttu describes in the course of its one 
hundred felicitous verses the ardent longing of the queen for her 
absent husband. She is anxious, she is impatient, she consults the 
omens, she is a prey to gloomy forebodings, but the long night of 
separation comes to an end at last, she hears the lusty sound of the 
trumpets—her lord will soon be with her! Kapilar’s Kurinchipp&ttu 
is the story of a mountain-chief and a charming girl falling in love at 
first sight, triumphing over all obstacles and being united in happy 
wedlock. The last of the ten idylls, Kousikanar’s Malaipadukadam, 
is a long poem of nearly six hundred verses. Amidst much admir¬ 
able description of nature the poem also gives a critical account of 
the art of dancing. 

These ten idylls constitute a literary heritage of no mean order. 
The poets have an eye for nature’s shifting movements, they are 
attracted by its opulence of colour and sound, and they read the 
human heart like an open book. Two of the poems are dedicated 
to Karikala-Chola and two to Nedun-Jeliyan. We can therefore 
conclude with reason that these poems were composed in the second 
century of the Christian era. 


295 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 
2. The Eight Collections 

The first of the Eight Collections ( Ettuthokai) is called Natrinai 
and brings together 400 short lyrics in the ahaval metre. The 
second, Kurunthokai, likewise consists of about 400 stanzas on love, 
written by about two hundred different poets. The thiid, Ainkuru - 
nwru, is a collection of 500 love poems composed by five different 
poets. Tolkappiyar has discussed in the third part of his grammar 
the five-fold aspects of love, viz., union, separation, waiting, lament¬ 
ing and sulking; he has paired them off with the corresponding 
facets of nature, viz. mountain ( kurinchi ), desert ( pdlai ), jungle 
(mullai) f beach (neithal) and fields (marutham) . The 500 verses of 
Ainkurunuru are similarly divided into five centuries of verses, 
each by a different poet, and each devoted to one of the five aspects 
of love enumerated above. 

The fourth collection in the Ettuthokai is called Paditruppattu 
or the ‘Ten Tens’. 1 It originally consisted of ten poems containing 
ten stanzas each, but the first and the last are not now available. 
The remaining eight poems commemorate the military prowess or 
other virtues of various Chera kings. The kings referred to seem 
to have lived during the second and third centuries of the Christian 
era. We can therefore assign these poems—and their authors, 
Paranar, Kapilar, Palai Kauthamnar, Kakkai Padiniar, and the rest 
—to the same period. These poems are of considerable historical 
value, and they are also of great interest to the social historian, 
who will find references in them to many curious customs such as 
women braiding their hair into five parts, soldiers wearing garlands 
of ginger and flowers, the burial of the dead in urns at the foot of 
tress, etc. As Mr. M. Srinivasa Aiyangar'points out, Paditruppattu 
is “a museum of obsolete words and expressions, archaic gramma¬ 
tical forms and terminations, and obscure customs and manners of 
the early western Tamil people who were the ancestors of the 
Malayalis.” 2 The fifth of the group is a song in praise of Cheran 
Senguttuvan, the greatest of the Chera kings. The sixth of the 
group was written by the woman poetess Kakkai Padiniar. It is 
worthy of note that Paditruppattu has few Sanskrit words—hardly 
a dozen words of Sanskrit origin in about 1.800 lines. 3 

The fifth collection, Paripadal , seems to have originally consis¬ 
ted of 70 poems, but only twenty-four have survived the ravages of 

1. 'Hie standard edition is that of Dr. V. Swaminatha Aiyar. 

2. Tamil Studies (First Series), p. 264. 

3. Ibid., p. 280. 


296 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

time. Some of the pieces are hymns in praise of some deity or 
other, but the descriptive ones are no less striking. Here, for 
instance, is a description of the peacock’s dance: 

“On either side 

Raising up his wings 

Which seem like uplifted fans 

Which people wave 

To dry the painted sandal, 

With the spotted tail . 

Dances on the slope 
To the rhythmic rumble 
Of the rolling clouds.'* 1 

The sixth collection, Kalithokai , comprises 150 love songs in 
kali metre, the songs, as in Axnkurunuru, being grouped under the 
classical Tolkappiyam categories of kurinchi, pdlai , mullai , neithal 
and marutham. This collection is supposed to be the work of Kapi- 
lar and four other poets. 

The seventh collection, Ahandnvru, also known as Nedunthokai, 
is a choice anthology of four hundred love lyrics, the work mainly 
of Paranar and Mamulanar. These lyrics also are divisible under 
the classical categories, though the number dealing with pdlai or 
separation are far more numerous than those dealing with the other 
four. 

The last collection, Purananuru, brings together 400 * pieces 
gleaned from many sources spread over a considerable period. No 
wonder some of the poems are attributed to the poets of the first 
Sahgam! Of the one hundred and fifty poets who are represented 
in this collection, the most important are Kapilar, Avvai, Kovur- 
Kilar, Perunthalai Sattanar, Perum-Sittiranar and Uraiyur Enicheri 
Mudamosiyar. This collection is a mine of useful information re¬ 
garding the life of the Tamils of about two thousand years ago. 
Apart from the intrinsic merits of the pieces as poetry, they also 
constitute an inexhaustible source-book of early Tamil social history. 

3. The Eighteen Minor Didactic Poems 

One of these ‘minor’ didactic poems is the world-famous classic, 
Tiruvalluvar’s Kural , 2 which is indeed one of the cornerstones of 

1. Translation by P. N. Appuswami Aiyar (Free India, Dec. 1941). 

2. Various English renderings of the Kural are available, of which the most im¬ 
portant are those by G. U. Pope, V. V. S. Iyer, H P. Popley & K. T. Paul, 
and C. R'ajagopalachari. 


•JP7 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

Tamil literature. It is, besides, a touchstone of taste and an invalu¬ 
able guide to the art of good living. Tradition tells us that Tiruval- 
luvar was an avatdra of God Brahma. Very many interesting stories 
are told about Tiruvalluvar and his poetic sister, Avvai. It appears 
he had much difficulty in getting his Rural approved by the third 
Sangam, but in the end it was acclaimed as a masterpiece and 
posterity has more than reaffirmed that verdict. The poem is made 
up of 113 sections of ten couplets each, and the whole territory of 
knowledge is amazingly comprehended by these poetic aphorisms. 
Virtue, wealth, love, morals, prosperity, happiness,—these are Tiru- 
valluvar’s themes, sung in verses that have the beauty, brevity and 
finality of a Japanese haikku in which whole worlds of significant 
suggestion or pointed advice find their glittering place. Ethics, 
statecraft, kingcraft, citizenship, married love, the art of life in all 
its ramifications,—all these problems yield their secrets to Tiruval 
luvar. His work is not therefore inaptly called ‘Veda in miniature’, 
“a mustard seed into which is comprehended the riches of the seven 
seas.” It is impossible to bring out in translation the brevity, bril¬ 
liance and beauty of the original verses, but some of the ideas may 
be rendered as follows:— 

“When a man is blessed with a good wife, he wants nothing in 
this world; when he is not so blessed, he lacks everything.” 

“Wounds inflicted by fire may be cured; those caused by a biting 
tongue can never be cured.” 

“To forgive trespasses is good, to forget is even better.” 

“Only those who haven’t heard the prattle of their children 
find music in the vind and the flute.” ! 

The Rural is one of the few Tamil works that form a constituent 
of the popular culture of the Tamils. It is also the only Tamil 
classic that has been translated into many modern Indian and Euro¬ 
pean languages. 

While the Rural is the eleventh of the Eighteen Minor Poems, 
Naladiydr is the first, being an anthology of 400 venbds or quatrains 
composed by various Jain writers. Unlike the Rural , the Naladiydr 
is an unequal work. But it includes a good deal that is first-rate, 
justifying the common saying in the Tamil country: “Just as the 
banyan and the neem tree are good for one’s teeth, Naladiydr and 
Rural are good for one’s speech.” 


298 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


The second item in the collection, Niaganar’s Nanmanikkadaikai , 
contains a century of quatrains full of felicitous parallelisms like the 
following:— 

The diamond comes out of the quarry; 

Happiness comes out of the beloved’s speech; 

Virtuous action comes out of a generous heart; 

And all come out of wealth. 

The next four items are called jointly Nd-ntirpathu or the “Four 
Forties.'’ Of these, Kar-narpathu deals with mullai and depicts the 
feelings of a lady who is separated from her beloved. It is inset with 
striking descriptions, and is a moving love poem. Kalavali-ndrpathu 
is a vivid description of a battle between a Chera king and a Chola 
king. The author of this war hymn is identified by, some with 
Poikai-Alvar, one of the great Vaishnava singers. The remaining 
two “forties,” Iniavai-ndrpathu , and Inna-ndrpathu, are comple¬ 
mentary, and consist of positive and negative exhortations res¬ 
pectively. One of the latter may be rendered thus: 

The desire of the destitute to act generously is vain; 

For the poor, to dwell in a city of palaces is vain. 

To feast upon the sight of a kitchen is vain; 

To hug the friends who desert you in need is vain. 

The next group of four anthologies is called Ainthinai. They 
are all love poems based on the Tolkdppiyam parallelism between 
love’s vicissitudes and nature’s changing facets. The poems contain 
between fifty and one hundred and fifty stanzas. 

Tirikadukam and Sirupanchamulam, 1 the twelfth and the 
fifteenth in the series, are similar in conception, and each consists 
of a century of pointed verses. Tirikadukam is a sequence of verses, 
each of which is built upon three correlated thoughts, as for example: 

The three sure ways of impoverishment are— 

Arrogant exhibition of your riches, 

Excitement for no purpose, 

And an inordinate need to possess the whole world. 

Likewise, each verse of Sirupanchamulam is built upon five 
corrected thoughts: 

A chaste wife is ambrosia to her husband; 

A genius to his people; 

1. Rao Saheb Vaiyapuri Pillai has recently published an authoritative edition of 
these two poems (Madras University, 1945). 

290 







T1IE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


An industrious subject to his king; 

A pillar of strength to his country; 

And a loyal servant to his master. 

The remaining items of the Eighteen Minor Didactic Poems are 
Acharakdvai , Palamoli , Mudvmolik-kdnchi , lnnilai and Elddi. All 
these arc bunches of exhortations on problems of conduct, and thus 
supply choice quotations for every occasion. A specimen from 
Acharakdvai is: “These four—one’s body, wife, trust money, and 
means of maintenance—must be treasured like gold, lest irreme¬ 
diable evil should follow.” 

V. THE EPICS 

The three collections of the third Sangam are not the sole sur¬ 
viving monuments of the literary activities of the Tamils of that 
bygone age. Indeed, the second century of the Christian era seems 
to have been a Golden Age (or ‘Augustan’ Age) in-Tamil letters. 
The poets of the time were drawn from different parts of the Tamil 
country and belonged to diverse faiths and castes; they represented, 
besides, the various professions. Thus, in the Tamilakam of seven¬ 
teen hundred years ago. men and women of different faiths—Jains, 
Buddhists, Saivites, Vaishnavites—seem to have lived together in 
understanding and harmony. One of the greatest writers of the 
third Sangam, Slttalai Sattanar, was a corn merchant and a Bud¬ 
dhist; many of the minor didactic poems already described were 
composed by Jains; and the Hindu poets praised Siva or Vishnu 
without flying at each other’s throats. Two at least of the “Five 
Major Epics” were composed during the Golden Age, and the others, 
and perhaps the Five Minor Epics as well, were composed not much 
later; and most of these epics were the work of Buddhists or Jains. 
Some of these epics cannot now be traced and are perhaps lost for 
ever; but even the extant works give us a fair idea of the glory 
of that great age in Tamil literature. 

The five major epics are Silappadikaravi, Manimekhalai , Jivaka- 
chintdmani , Vaiayapati and Kundalakesi. Of these, only the first 
three are now available. 1 The five minor epics are Yctsddhara 
Kavyam , Chulamani , Udayana Kavyam , Ndgakumdra Kdvyam and 
Nilakesi.. Of these, again, the fourth is lost, but the others have 

1. The standard editions of Silappadikaravi, Maniviekhalai and Jivaka-Chintct- 
viani are the fruits ol the late Mahamahopadhyaya Swaminatha Aiyar’s monu¬ 
mental industry and scholarship. More recently, V. R. R Dikshitar has 
published an English translation of Silappadikaravi (Oxford University Press 








LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


been either published or something at least is known about them. 
Yasddhara Kdvyam , based on a Sanskrit work, consists of 320 stanzas; 
Ch.ulama.ni by Tholamolithevar is a longer and a better poem; Nila - 
kesi is a philosophical poem, written perhaps as a reply to Kundala - 
kesi, a Buddhist work. 


1. Silappadikdram 

Ilango-Adigai, the younger brother of the celebrated Chcran 
Senguttuvan, became a monk in order to allay the fears of Senguttu- 
van, the reigning king. Kanakasabhai and Purnalingam Pillai think 
that Ilango became a Jain monk, Swaminatha Aiyar thinks he re¬ 
mained a Saiva, while Ramachandra Dikshitar describes Ilango as a 
follower of Hinduism “in its broader sense.” 1 In the course of his 
wanderings, Ilango met the Buddhist poet, Slttalai Sattanar, who 
read out to him his poem Manimekhalai. Thereupon, Ilango wrote 
Silappadikdram , taking Sattanar’s story a generation backwards. 
Whether there is any truth in this tradition or not, it is evident that 
Ilango and Sattanar were contemporaries. A princely ascetic and a 
merchant-humanist—a Hindu monk and a Buddhist householder— 
but poets both, poets who bore the burden of poesy with ease, tole¬ 
rance, broad humanity and with mellowed wisdom! Silappadikdram 
and Manimekhalai are the Iliad and the Odyssey of Tamil poetry 
and it is impossible to exaggerate their importance. 

Silappadikdram tells movingly the star-crossed story of Kovalan 
and Kannaki. The story is highly dramatic and moves human hearts 
profoundly even to this day. Kovalan forgets his sweet and chaste 
wife, Kannaki, being infatuated by the courtezan, Madhavi; after 
exhausting his fortune and that of his wife, the penitent husband 
and the forgiving wife leave Puhar for Madura. A tragic error 
leads to Kovalan’s execution on the orders of the Pandyan king. 
Under the stress of this final overwhelming sorrow, Kannaki the 
angelic and uncomplaining wife excels herself and towers above 
king and queen and petty humanity. The sight of Kovalan’s dead 
body makes her cry out in her anguish; 

“Are there women here, are there women? Are there women 
who can endure such injustice done to their wedded husbands? Are 
there such women? 

“Are there good people? Are there good people here? Are 
there good people who nurture and fend for children born of them? 
Are there good people here? 

1. Introduction to the Silappadikdram, p. 69. 


301 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


“Is there a god? Is there a god? Is there a god in this Kudal, 
whose king’s sharp sword killed an innocent man? Is there a god?” 1 

In Medusa-like splendour, Kannaki freezes the royal couple to 
death and pronounces the doom of Madura. In a deathless scene 
in this immortal story, she twists and plucks out her left breast 
with her hand, and in her extremity of pain hurls it across the street 
The city of Madura is accurst, and is soon a heap of charred remains. 
The lovers, however, are at last reunited in heaven, and Kannaki is 
henceforth worshipped as the goddess of chastity in the land of the 
Tamils. Silappadikdram, besides telling us a moving and poignant 
story, amazes us by its perfect sense of form, its harmonized blend¬ 
ing of iyal (poetry), isai (music), and ndtakam (drama), its gorgeous 
and picturesque descriptions, epic dignity and sublimity. 

2. The Other Epics 

Manimekhalai , although chronologically considered to be the 
earlier work, is in effect a sequel to Silappadikdram , Its heroine 
Manimekhalai is K5valan’s daughter by Madhavi, but spiritually she 
is rather Kannaki’s daughter! She sees through the limitations of 
human love and consecrates herself to the service of Buddha, Dharma 
and Sangha. The poem no doubt lacks the intensity and tumult of 
Silappadikdram, but it is not lacking in incident or humanity. The 
vicissitudes of Manimekhalai’s terrestrial fortunes signify rather the 
evolution of the human soul into a state of perfection. It is true 
Silappadikdram and Manimekhalai read here and there like sec¬ 
tarian special pleadings; but we are never made to forget that 
humanity is the main thing, and that poetry is one with humanity. 

Tiruthakkathevar’s Jivaka-chintdmani is the work of a Jain 
author, perhaps a young Chola convert to the Jain faith, a poet who 
was young as well as wisely austere. A minister usurps his master’s 
throne; the king dies; his child Jivaka, undergoes many tribulations, 
but at last regains his father’s throne after killing the usurper. In 
his forty-fifth year, king Jivaka renounces the world, lives the life of 
a Jain ascetic, and gains bliss at last. The story of a soul’s pilgri¬ 
mage from birth to liberation is told in over three thousand stanzas 
of chaste and flowing verse. It is rightly considered one of the 
major Tamil epics. Another Jain work, Konguvelir’s Perunkathai , 
detailing the story of Udayanan, bears marked resemblances to 
Jivaka-chintdmani. 


1. The Silappadikdram, pp. 244-5. 


302 



CHAPTER XVII 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE 

SYSTEM 

I. STUDY OF POLITICAL SCIENCE 

The period under review is very rich in data concerning the 
political theory, administrative organisation, law and legal institu¬ 
tions. For political theory we have the Rajadharma section of Santi- 
parva in the Mafidbhdrata , Kautilya’s Arthasastra, and the Smritis, 
such as those of Manu, YajnaValkya, Narada and Brihaspati. For the 
administrative organisation our chief sources are the Greek accounts, 
Kautilya’s Arthasastra and the Smritis. The Smritis also deal in 
detail with law and legal institutions. Some light is thrown on all 
these topics by the inscriptions and literature of the period includ¬ 
ing Buddhist and Jain canonical literature. 

A number of treatises dealing with the science of polity were 
written during this period. The most important of them is Kautilya’s 
Arthasdstra. This was long regarded as the standard text on the 
subject and we have many references to, and quotations from, it in 
works of ancient authors. But the text of this important work was 
discovered only at the beginning of the present century. It ascribes 
itself to the famous Brahmana Kautilya, also named Vishnugupta 
and Chanakya, who, according to tradition, overthrew the last Nanda 
king and placed Maurya Chandragupta on the throne. At the end 
of each of the 150 chapters of the work the author subscribes himself 
as Kautilya and refers, in a concluding verse, to the overthrow of 
the Nanda dynasty as one of his exploits. 

R. Shamasastry, who published the text (and also an English 
translation), regarded it as the genuine long-lost work on polity 
composed by Chanakya, the prime minister of Chandragupta Maurya. 
This view was at first endorsed by many scholars who held that 
“though the existing text is perhaps not absolutely word for word 
that which was written by Kautilya, still we have essentially a work 
that he did compose.” 1 But, gradually, doubts arose about both its 
authorship and date of composition. Many scholars now refuse to 
accept the view that the work was really composed by Kautilya or 
any statesman of the type, and they regard it as of a much later date. 

1. Fleet in KAT . p. ii. 

303 




THE AGE OF' IMPERIAL UNITY 


Some bring it down to the third century A.D., though others would 
prefer a date three or four centuries earlier. The whole question 
has been discussed in detail in Chapter XVI. 1 

But, whatever be the date, it would be convenient to designate 
the work as Kautiliya Arthasastra or Arthasastra composed by 
Kautilya, without implying in any way his identity with the prime 
minister of Chandragupta Maurya. References in this work prove 
beyond doubt that there were many works on the science of polity 
at the time Kautilya w T rote and these were fully utilised by him. 
The very opening sentence of the book states that “this Arthasastra 
is made as a compendium of almost all the Arthasastras which, in 
view of acquisition and maintenance of the earth, have been com¬ 
posed by ancient teachers.” The book itself contains quotations from 
works of five different schools and no less than thirteen individual 
authors. The existence of many treatises on the subject is also con¬ 
firmed by the story, contained in the Mahabharata, of the origin of 
the science of policy—how it was originally written by Brahma in 
one hundred thousand chapters and underwent successive abridg¬ 
ments by different authors. The importance of political science is 
also indicated by Kautilya in his enumeration of the different 
sciences. Different schools of thought quoted by him regarded the 
number of sciences as four, three, two or one, but each included 
Dandanlti or the Science of Government in his list. The school of 
Usanas declared that Dandanlti was the only science, for “it is in that 
science that all other sciences have their origin and end.” 2 

Everything thus indicates that political science was assi¬ 
duously studied during this period and it had attained a high rank 
among the subjects of study. No wonder, then, that the political 
thought of the period is rich in content, richer probably than that of 
any other period of Indian history. It centres round various topics 
such as the spiritual and mundane objectives of society, social strati¬ 
fication, political purposes, inter-state, federal and feudal relation¬ 
ships, organisation of the legislative, judicial and executive autho¬ 
rities, the kingship, ministers, administrative hierarchy, local and 
functional institutions, law and military science. 

II. POLITICAL THEORY 
1. The King and State—their Origin and Nature 

The origin of State or kingship forms the subject of an important 
inquiry by the writers of this age. 3 In the Mahabharata , Yudhish- 

f See pp. 274-76, 285-87. 

2 fCAT 6 

3. Cf. Bhandarkar, CL, I, 119 ff. 

304 



POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 

lima asks iihishma: ‘Whence arose the powers of a king? Possessed 
oi physical and mental qualities similar in every respect to the other 
men, how does he govern the rest of the world?’ The two replies, 
put m the mouth oi Bhishma in two chapters, really elaborate the 
theory oi the divine origin of kingship and the theory of social con¬ 
tract with which we are familiar. As already noted, 1 2 the theory 
of divine origin can be traced in the Brahmana period. It is stated 
in its most developed form in the following verses in Manu- 
Sa inhitu , 1 :— 

“The Lord created a king for the protection of this whole 
creation, taking (for that purpose) eternal particles of Indra, of the 
Wind, of Yama, of the Sun, of Fire, of Varuna, of the Moon, and of 
the Lord of Wealth (Kubera). 

“Even an infant king must not be despised, (from an idea) that 
he is a (mere) mortal; for he is a great deity in human form.” 

But although this extreme theory of divine origin was destined 
to prevail in the long run, the theory of social contract also exercised 
great influence during this period. Its genesis may be traced to the 
Sutra period for, according to Baudhayana, 3 ‘the king was to protect 
his subjects, receiving as his pay a sixth part (of their grains).’ It 
is stated more fully in the Makabhdrata , and was also known to 
Kautilya. He briefly expresses it as follows: “People suffering from 
anarchy first elected Manu to be their king and allotted one-sixth 
of the grains grown and one-tenth of merchandise as sovereign dues. 
Fed by his payment, kings took upon themselves the responsibility 
of maintaining the safety and security of their subjects.” 4 The 
theory is also repeated in the Buddhist canonical texts, according to 
which the people elected, not Manu, but ‘the. most handsome, gra¬ 
cious and powerful individual from among them on condition of 
giving him a portion of their rice 5 . The general rule, found in the 
Sutras, Smritis and Arthasastra , that if the king cannot recover 
stolen property, he must compensate the owner, may be regarded as 
a logical corollary to this theory. Its influence may also be seen in 
the exclamation of the Buddhist monk Aryadeva towards a haughty 
king: “What is thy pride worth, O King, who art a (mere) servant 
of the gana (multitude, i.e. body politic) and receiveth the sixth part 
as wages?” 

1. Vol. I, p. 430. 

2. VII. 3, 4, 8. 

3. I. 18. 1. 

4. KAT. 26. 

5. Bhandarkar, CL, I, 121. 

305 

A.I.U.—-'0 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


According to both the theories, State and kingship evolved out 
of necessity caused by the evils of anarchy and of wickedness in¬ 
herent in human character. Hence special stress is laid on the 
importance of dan da, a term which is difficult to translate, but more 
or less refers to the power of punishment or chastisement vested in 
the ruler. The danda, according to Manu, 1 ‘alone governs all created 
beings, protects them, watches over them while they sleep, and the 
wise declare it (to be identical with) the law.’ According to Kautilya, 
‘on daiida depends the progress of the arts and sciences and the 
well-being of mankind’. Hence the science of government is called 
by him danda-nlti ~ All political writers agree that the king must 
exercise this danda judiciously. “If the king,” says Manu, 3 “did 
not, without tiring, inflict punishment (danda) on those worthy to 
be punished, the stronger would roast the weaker, like fish on a spit.” 
Kautilya also echoes this sentiment. 

But while the necessity of a strong king is stressed by all, none 
is prepared to vest in him the absolute authority of doing whatever 
he jikes. The theory of divine origin did not carry with it the divine 
right which the Stuart kings, for example, claimed to exercise over 
their subjects at their pleasure, being accountable to none but God. 
Thus Manu 4 declares that while a just king prospers, one who is 
voluptuous, partial and deceitful will be destroyed. The very danda , 
which is the symbol of royal authority, “strikes down the king who 
swerves from his duty, together with his relatives.” It is fully 
recognised that daiida is hard to be administered by men with un¬ 
improved minds and both Manu and Kautilya, as well as other poli¬ 
tical writers, give elaborate directions for the proper education and 
training of the king. Kautilya even goes so far as to say that if the 
only son of a king proves to be of perverted mind and devoid of intel¬ 
ligence, he would even “try to beget a son on his wife by the system 
of levirate, but never shall a wicked and only son be installed on the 
royal throne,” 3 This has been a cherished theory of political writers 
and has been summed up by Kamandaka when he says: “The king, 
who is virtuous, is a part of the gods. He who is otherwise is a part 
of the demons.” Consequently the right of the people to rebel against 
a wicked or tyrannical king is not only recognised but held up as a 
dire consequence to a vicious king. Though we do not hear so much 

1. vn. 18. 

2. KAT. 9. 

3. VII. 20. 

4. VII. 26-28. 

5. KAT. 39-40. 


806 





POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 

of direct constitutional checks against the arbitrary exercise of power 
by the king, the political writers repeatedly enjoin upon the king 
the duty of following the Dharma or eternal principles of law laid 
down by the sages, and warn him against doing things which are 
likely to incur the wrath or displeasure of his subjects. They also 
quote with approval many instances of kings falling a victim to pub¬ 
lic uprising on account of their tyranny and unjust rule. 

The king was not the State but merely a part of it. The State 
was conceived as an organic whole, its different constituent parts 
being called anga or limbs, evidently on the analogy of a human 
body. These are generally described as ‘the king, the minister, the 
country, the fort, the treasury, the army, and the friend’. In other 
words a fixed territory, organised administration, economic self- 
sufficiency, adequate means of defence, and recognition by other 
states were regarded as essential requisites of a state. The desirable 
qualities of each of the elements are also described in detail. Manu 1 
felt that injury to any of the preceding elements was to be regarded 
as more serious than to the following one. But in the next two 
verses he recognises that none of the organs is really superior to the 
others. “Each limb is particularly qualified for the fulfilment of a 
distinct purpose and hence each is declared to be the most important 
in reference to that purpose which is fulfilled by its means.’ , 

2. Scope of State Activity 

But although the conception of a State is surprisingly modern, 
the scope of the State’s activity is widely different. In order to 
understand this we must have some idea of the Hindu view of life. 

As is well known, the Hindus had a profoundly spiritual out¬ 
look on life. Their civilisation is distinguished from that of Greece, 
Rome and modern Europe, pre-eminently by its inwardness, its 
constant stress on the inner consciousness, the imperative need of 
integrating it with the totality of the universe and with the spiri¬ 
tual principle embodied in it. Dharma is the principle that sustains 
all existence, embodies the whole truth, and covers all the forms, 
institutions and practices of social life. It upheld an ideal that ele¬ 
vated the soul to the loftiest heights. Dharma in the practical sense 
stands for belief, ritual and conduct. It was felt that Dharma stood 
above all the rulers of the world and was binding upon them. 
Dharma was conducive to the highest good. Dharma is easily equated 


1. IX. 295. 


307 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


with the totality of social relationships. At the same time, it was 
perceived that identification with society was an aspect of, or a 
step in, the identification with the universe. Society was not only 
inevitable, but also desirable; for it assisted the development of 
the psyche and ought to be an instrument of elevating the human 
soul. Accordingly, the social aspect is comprehended in the spiri¬ 
tual, and Hindu social theory approaches all problems from a pro¬ 
foundly spiritual standpoint. 

Inter alia , the spiritual approach served to impart breadth and 
integration to all social speculation. It furnished a criterion for the 
tenor of individual life and social institutions as well as the political 
apparatus. It implied that every detail might be subjected to one 
supreme test was it or was it not conducive to the lasting welfare 
of the soul? All Hindu thought assumed that man must try to 
achieve salvation or heavenly bliss and that social institutions exist¬ 
ed to further the end. Political institutions existed to sustain the 
social order and hence to subserve the spiritual aim. 

It is clear from the foregoing propositions that there was never 
an a priori limit set to the activity of the State. The State was 
integrated into the vast institutional apparatus for the realisation 
of the spiritual life, and could not, therefore, be restricted to merely 
police functions, or the administration of justice. Hindu govern¬ 
ment could not be merely negative. It had to adopt a positive attitude 
towards all the main concerns of life—religion, ethics, family, eco¬ 
nomics, culture, etc. We find accordingly that the Hindu State 
touched the whole of life. 

This is the reason why the duty of the State is frequently 
summed up as protection. The State protects the religion, the 
morality, the customs and the tradition which have been derived 
from the gods or evolved by society. It is totalitarian in the sense 
that it embraces the whole of life. But it is not totalitarian in the 
sense of dominating all other associations and enacting statutes for 
wholesale regimentation. The State holds the ring for the inter¬ 
play of social forces, intellectual influences, economic enterprise and, 
above all, the spiritual tradition. Protection also means that it is 
one of the prime functions of the State to defend its territory against 
all possible enemies and to protect the people against internal dis¬ 
order or injustice. It undertakes accordingly to maintain law and 
order and to administer justice. Thirdly, it must protect the people 
from the effects of natural calamities like floods, earthquakes and 


308 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


locusts. It must protect them against famine, disease, fire, etc. It 
must protect people against their own folly and ignorance. In short, 
protection covers not merely hindrance or hindrances to good life, 
which the German and British idealists have defined as the proper 
sphere of the State, but it is also stretched to comprise the whole 
programme of spiritual, cultural and economic welfare. 

The best practical illustration of this view is the picture of the 
State activity in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra which includes practically 
everything. The State should promote true religion, but Kautilya 
wants it also to regulate the age and conditions under which one 
might renounce the world. The State should see that husband and 
wife, father and son, brother and sister, uncle and nephew, teacher 
and pupil, are faithful to one another and do not play each other false. 
The State itself should provide support to the poor, the pregnant 
women, their new-born offspring, orphans, the aged, the infirm, the 
afflicted and the helpless. Kautilya tells us when it was legitimate 
to use witchcraft to gain the affections of wives or sweethearts and 
when, for instance, in case of perversion, it was to be punished with 
mutilation or death. He prescribes conditions of divorce, separa¬ 
tion, second or subsequent marriages and ways of teaching manners 
to refractory women. Detailed and minute are his provisions for 
safeguarding the honour of women, the safety of immature girls, 
relations of lovers, as well as the profession of prostitutes. The State 
should facilitate, regulate and control public amusements and enter¬ 
tainments, including gambling. 

The three-fold motive of regulating life, detecting thieves and 
spies, and securing some revenue for the State underlies Kautilya’s 
excise policy. In town and country, camp and fort, the State should 
itself establish liquor shops at suitable distance from one another 
or license private individuals to do so according to the laws of 
supply and demand. Kautilya would furnish public houses with beds 
and seats and enhance their attractions with scents, garlands of 
flowers, water and other comforts. Stringent regulations on the sale 
and use of liquor and other fermentations are given, but the code 
of temperance was to be relaxed for four days on occasions of festi¬ 
vity, fairs and pilgrimages. On the slaughter of animals and the 
sale of meat, Kautilya is equally minute. 

According to the Arthasdstra, all professions and occupations 
are to be controlled by the State. For instance, physicians should 
report all cases of grave illness to the government. If death 

309 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


occurred in an unreported case, the physician should be punished 
with the first amercement. If in any case death was due to his care¬ 
lessness, he should receive the middlemost amercement, while posi¬ 
tive neglect or indifference was to be treated as assault or violence. 
Similarly rules with an amazing fullness of detail are given for the 
conduct of goldsmiths, weavers of various descriptions, washermen 
and others, while a series of veritable draft statutes of labourers 
prescribe, inter alia, that artisans must fulfil their engagements as 
to time, place and form of work, and obey the instructions duly 
given, on pain of forfeiting their wages or paying damages or both. 
The State itself appears as the biggest of all business concerns 1 
.and was entitled to regulate the whole of the economic life 
in order to promote prosperity. Kautilya would license wholesale 
business, fix the prices and allow a profit of 5% on home commo 
dities and 10% on foreign ones. He would fix rates of interest on 
loans and mortgages at 15% and 12J%. All imports and exports 
are to be taxed. 

For relief of famine, the State granaries should open their 
doors, the rich should be compelled to yield up their hoards of 
grain, heavy taxes should be levied on wealthy people, hunting and 
fishing should be resorted to on a grand scale; emigration to the 
seashore, and to the banks of lakes, rivers, etc. should be encourag¬ 
ed; wherever possible, grains, vegetables, roots and fruits should 
be intensively cultivated. Relief should be sought from friendly 
States in the neighbourhood; prayers should go forth to the higher 
powers; the gods Mahakachchha and Indra as well as the gods of 
the mountains and the holy Ganga should be worshipped during 
drought. 

According to Kautilya the State is to provide, manage and regu% 
late the Rdjamdrga or the king’s highway, Rdshtra-patha or the State 
road, and paths for animals, paths for asses and camels, cart-tracks, 
foot-paths, pasture-paths, shop-paths, defile-paths, cremation-paths, 
etc. On the main thoroughfares, pillars at intervals of half a kos 
should be set up to serve as signposts. 

3. Forms of Government 

It is impossible to describe Hindu government in Greek terms 
which have been taken over by modern political science from Plato 
and Aristotle. Ancient India knew of republics, but they differed 

~T. For details see Ch. XXIII. 


310 




POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 

in texture and form from the city-states of the Greeks and the 
Romans. The Hindu State, for the most part, was a country State. 
It could not be democracy because direct democracy implies a 
primary assembly of all citizens and was a physical impossibility 
in an extensive State. Here the democratic element is to be found 
at the bottom, in village communities and in group organizations on 
the basis of kinship 6r function, all over the country. But demo¬ 
cracy at the centre, either in the Greek or in the modern European 
sense, was, except for^small tribal republics, ruled out by the facts 
of geography and the difficulties of transport. 

Nor could Hindu governments be aristocratic in the sense in 
which a number of Greek cities in antiquity, Venice during the 
Middle Ages, and Britain, Prussia and Hungary in the seventeenth 
and the eighteenth centuries, were aristocratic. Here in India caste 
forbade a combination of the power of wealth with that of office. 
There never was an organized church in India comparable to the 
Roman Catholic or Protestant churches, but there was a sacerdotal 
caste, some of whose members, though not all, functioned as priests, 
preceptors, writers and political advisers. They enjoyed high pres¬ 
tige of birth but were mostly poor. They were expected to lead 
austere lives and depended on gifts of offerings from prince and 
peasant alike. True, there was supposed to be a ruling and military 
caste in India known as the Kshatriyas, but it had had to share social 
control with the Brahmanas, who represented the brain power, and 
the Vaisyas who represented the economic strength of the commu¬ 
nity. Secondly, many Kshatriyas had nothing to do with functions 
of government. Thirdly, many non-Kshatriyas, including Sudras, 
occupied important positions including the throne in some regions 
and ages. Accordingly, there was no concentration of the prestige 
of birth, influence of wealth, and political office which imparts an 
aristocratic tinge to social organisation and sustains aristocratic 
government. There was no aristocracy in India in the Greek or 
European sense of the term. 

The normal form of government in India was monarchical, but 
it was different from that which flourished in Europe during the 
Roman Empire, for the most part during the Middle Ages, and in 
the modern period up to the outbreak of the French Revolution. 
The Hindu State rarely presented that high degree of centralisation 
which is associated with the Roman Empire and the modern 
nation-State. 

•.» 


811 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


But it had a centre whose main features demand attention. 
This was the king, usually hereditary in accordance with the rule 
of primogeniture, living in high style and a blaze of glory, in enjoy¬ 
ment of an immense revenue from private and public property. 
Political theory which usually, though not uniformly, approached 
political questions from the ethical standpoint, expected the king 
to lead a blameless life, disciplined to ceaseless administrative labour 
and consecrated to the public good. It laid heavy responsibilities, 
temporal and spiritual, on him, promised him lasting bliss in 
heaven or threatened him with all the tortures of hell in accord¬ 
ance with his success or failure in the great moral and political 
venture. In practice, doubtless, the absence of constitutional, as 
distinct from conventional, checks left many a crowned head com¬ 
paratively free to indulge in luxury and vice, caprice and injustice. 
But it is only fair to remember that all despotic authority was 
tempered by rebellion or assassinations. So long as he was on the 
throne, the king presided over the executive and judicial depart¬ 
ments of government and was expected to take the lead on the 
field of battle. The part he played in the promulgation of law will 
be described later. 1 

The machinery for executive administration was well orga¬ 
nized. It was the special care of the king, assisted by ministers and 
a number of high officials. Below the great functionaries stood a 
host of minor officials, military officers, diplomats and spies, secre¬ 
taries, clerks, technical employees and so forth. 

There was no separation of the executive and judicial functions. 
But in practice there were a number of men whose primary function 
was adjudication and who were assisted by a set of minor func¬ 
tionaries. 2 Hindu theory laid the highest emphasis on justice. In 
theory and practice alike judicature was one of the most important 
aspects of governance. 

Such was the machinery in outline that normally worked at 
the centre. But it was difficult to ensure its extension to the pro¬ 
vinces, districts and towns or villages. It was necessary to devise 
means for reconciling central with local government and adminis¬ 
tration. Three lines were struck by political theory. In the first 
place, a great deal of autonomy was left to feudatories and sub¬ 
feudatories. In the second place, the king or feudatory organized 


1. For details see next Chapter. 

2. See next Chapter. 


312 



POLITICAL, THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


a rogular system of provincial and district administration. In the 
third place, a great deal of autonomy was left to villages, more in 
the Deecan than in the North, and most of all in the South. 

This territorial organization contained elements of federalism, 
feudalism and local autonomy. But it did not exhaust the whole 
subject of social regulation. There existed parallel organizations, 
on the basis of function, in the form of village communities, kinship 
associations, and guilds of manufacturers, merchants, bankers or 
others. They enjoyed considerable autonomy in the management 
of their affairs. Their customs or rules were recognized by the state 
and upheld by the law-givers. It will be observed that in India the 
principle of function dovetailed into that of kinship and habitancy 
and was, therefore, often vested with greater significance than in 
medieval Europe. In any case, it was the basis of an important part 
of the machinery of social control. 

Thus, organization was both horizontal and vertical, and^com- 
prised a number of local and functional jurisdictions and inter¬ 
mediate associations standing in various, more or less ill-defined, 
relations with the State. Incidentally, the vocational association 
often cut across lines of caste and locality. For instance, Sreni or 
a guild consisted of persons following the same craft though be¬ 
longing to different castes, while the Naigama formed a guild of 
traders belonging to various towns. 

4. Inter-State Relations 1 

The organization of the Hindu State was determined by its 
geographic and economic environment. The extensive plains 
favoured the growth of large States, but the difficulties of transport 
and communication were so formidable that the Central Govern¬ 
ment could not usually make its power felt at the circumference. 
So began that interplay of centripetal and centrifugal forces around 
which a good deal of the history of India, as of every other country, 
seems to revolve. Every State tended to encroach upon its neigh¬ 
bours. It was not long before opinion and philosophy held up to 
admiration the ideal of the “big kingdom”, “the kingdom extending 
up to the sea”, “the universal dominion”. On the other hand, such 
an empire could not last long. The outlying regions were constantly 
tempted to cut adrift from the main body, to start on an abso¬ 
lutely independent career and, in their turn, to make a bid for 
supremacy. 

1. On this topic cf. N. N. Law, Inter-State Relations in Ancient India. 

313 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Normally, a compromise was struck in the interests of peace 
and harmony. A kingdom or empire came to mean a fusion of two 
features which, for want of perfectly suitable terms, may be designat¬ 
ed federalism and feudalism. There was a king or emperor at the 
centre claiming suzerainty over a number of princes who offered 
allegiance to him, subordinated their foreign policies to his diplo¬ 
matic moves, usually served him in war and offered him tribute, 
but who retained their autonomy in internal administration. These 
Princes in their turn might have feudatories who stood towards 
them more or less in the same relation in which they stood towards 
their suzerain. So there might be a third, a fourth, and even 
further layers in the political hierarchy. 

All these tendencies are reflected or exaggerated, systematised 
or unduly simplified, analysed or synthesised in a very logical and 
abstract manner by the doctrine of Mandala which imparted a very 
symmetrical form to the relationships resulting from the quest 
for suzerainty and the consequent need of astute diplomacy and 
alliances. The Mandala is supposed to consist usually of twelve 
kings:— 

(1) The Vijigishu or the would-be conqueror, i.e. the sovereign 
in the centre. 

Then, next in geographical order, were five kings in front 
of him, viz. 

(2) Ari, the enemy. 

(3) Mitra , the friend of the Vijigishu. 

(4) Ari-mitra , the friend of the enemy. 

(5) Mitra-mitra, the friend’s friend of the Vijigishu. 

(6) Ari-mitra-mitra, the friend’s friend of the enemy. 

In his rearward stood in geographical order: 

(7) Parshnigraha or a rearward enemy. 

(8) Akranda, rearward friend. 

(9) Pdrshmgrdhdsara , friend of the enemy in the rearward. 

(10) Akrcmdasdra, friend of the friend in the rearward. 

The circle was completed by: 

(11) Madhyama or the intermediary. 

(12) Uddsina or the neutral. 

Within this circle the Vijigishu was to maintain a sort of 
balance of power or to assert his own supremacy. It is assumed in 
the above enumeration that two adjacent states are normally hos¬ 
tile, and consequently two states with another intervening between 


314 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


them would be friendly, being common enemies of the latter. The 
Uddsina is the strongest power in the neighbourhood, which nor¬ 
mally can rely on its own strength and need not enter into any 
diplomatic relationship with the neighbouring powers for pro¬ 
tection. The Madhyama is intermediate in strength between the 
Uddsina and the other powers. 

The game of power-politics naturally lowered the tone of state¬ 
craft and imparted to it a Machiavellian tinge. For instance, all 
the writers enumerate the four instruments of policy, viz. Soma 
or conciliation, Dana or gift, Danda or chastisement, and Bheda or 
sowing dissensions. Kautilya recognises deceitfulness and secret 
punishment among the legitimate means of statecraft. There were, 
however, a few writers who repudiated the whole doctrine of reason 
of State. Thus Arya Deva 1 declared that morality, i.e. righteous¬ 
ness, must everywhere be supreme, in public as in private life. 

It was a natural consequence of this state of things that there 
should grow up conventions and rules on relations between suze¬ 
rains and vassals as well as on those between independent sove¬ 
reigns. There is accordingly a regular network of doctrines and 
maxims on what may be called foreign affairs or inter-state rela¬ 
tions and client states. 

The most comprehensive account of this is given in Kautilya’s 
Arthasdst.ra. It enumerates the fallowing six-fold policy deter¬ 
mining the relations of States with one another:— 

1. Sandhi (Treaty of peace or alliance); 

2. Vigraha (War); 

3. Asana (Neutrality); 

4. Yana (Making preparation for attack without actually 
declaring war); 

5. Samsraya (Seeking the protection of another); 

6. Dvaidhibhdva (Making peace with one and waging war 
with another). 

Kautilya points out in detail the most important conditions 
that should influence the decision of a ruler in the matter of adopt¬ 
ing one or other of the above policies. This discussion shows a 
penetrating insight into affairs of State. The sole guiding principle 
in making the choice is the material welfare of the State; “A wise 
king,” says Kautilya, “shall observe that form of policy which, in 

1. Chatuhsatikfi. ;>p. 4G2-G4. 


315 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

his opinion, enables him to build forts, to construct buildings arrl 
commercial roads, to open new plantations and villages, to exploit 
mines and timber and elephant forests, and at the same time to 
harass similar works of his enemy.” 

Kautilya is not guided by any spirit of chivalry when it is not 
conducive to the material interest of a State. Thus when a weak 
king is attacked by a powerful king, he should seek the protection 
of a powerful king, combine with a number of his equals or even 
inferior kings, or shut himself up in an impregnable fort. Failing 
all these means he should, according to one school of writers, rush 
against the enemy like a moth against a flame, with a view to secure 
death or victory. But Kautilya is definitely against this. Accord¬ 
ing to him, the weak king should rather accept the most humiliat¬ 
ing terms, biding his opportunity to free himself from this servi¬ 
tude. The details given by Kautilya about these terms indicate 
the extent of a suzerain king’s authority over his vassal. Without 
the permission of the former the latter could not undertake, among 
other things, to construct forts, celebrate marriages of sons or 
daughters, hold the installation ceremony of his heir-apparent, 
purchase horses, capture elephants, perform sacrifices, march against 
foes or even go out on excursions for amusements. 1 He was not 
free even in his dealings with his officers and subjects. Even on 
occasions of worshipping the gods and making prayers he should 
invoke the blessings of God on the suzerain king. He should help 
the protector as much as he can, and always proclaim his readiness 
to place himself at the disposal of his suzerain. 

Various kinds of treaties between independent kings are dis¬ 
cussed by Kautilya. One of them was an alliance with another State 
with the ultimate object of forming a coalition against an enemy. 
The others have for their objects acquisition of land or gold, colo¬ 
nization of wasteland, and construction of forts. 

Kautilya also enumerates various types of treaties concluded 
between a powerful and a weaker state when the latter is threatened 
by the formet*. These are divided into three broad classes according 
as the essential conditions are the cession of territory, payment of 
money, or promise of military help by the inferior State. There 
are various sub-divisions in each class. In the first, for example, 
there may be (1-2) cession of only a part of the kingdom or the 

1. This is the interpretation of Ganapati Sastri (II. 341) which is somewhat 
different from that of Shamasastry ( KAT, 377; KA. 310). 


316 



POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


whole of it without the capital, or (3-4) the payment of the product 
of his lands, or of more than his lands produce. In the second class 
the amount of indemnity may be large or small and paid in one or 
more instalments. In the third class, it might be stipulated that 
the troops to be sent for the assistance of the superior king were to 
be led in person by the king of the inferior State, his son and com¬ 
mander-in-chief, or by some other person. In the first two cases a 
person of high rank or a woman was to be given as hostage, evi¬ 
dently to ensure the presence of the king or the prince with his 
troops, which was naturally regarded by them as the most humiliat¬ 
ing. These various kinds of treaties indicate in a general way the 
relation between States of unequal power. 

The enforcement of a treaty proved a difficult problem. In 
addition to the promises of the two parties, sometimes an oath was 
taken for the due fulfilment of the terms of the treaty. “Honest 
kings of old”, we are told, “made their agreement of peace with this 
declaration: ‘We have joined in peace.’ In case of any apprehension 
of breach of promise, they made their agreement by swearing by 
fire, water, plough, a fort-wall, clod of earth, shoulder of an elephant, 
horse-back, seat of a chariot, weapon, precious stone, seed of plant, 
fragrant substance, rasa (mercury, poison, or milk) and gold, and 
declaring that these (i.e. the thing or things by which the oath is 
administered) will desert and kill him who violates the oath.” 1 

One school of political writers thought that mere hones.ty and 
oath were not sufficient, but hostages were necessary for the due 
fulfilment of the treaty. Kautilya differs from this, though he enun¬ 
ciates the principle that “whoever is rising in power may break the 
agreement of peace.” In general, moral considerations have no 
place in Kautilya’s statecraft, its sole guiding principle being the 
welfare of the State. 

It is difficult to say whether there was any definite body of 
rules regulating the relation between different States, such as we 
have, for example, in the international law of the present day. 
Some such usage as the inviolability of ambassadors, or the personal 
safety guaranteed to cultivators even in times of war, may be re¬ 
garded as coming under this category. The humane rules of war¬ 
fare laid down by Manu 2 might also be regarded as generally recog- 

1. N. Law, Op. Cit. 50-51; cf. KAT. 381; KA. 314. 

2. VII. 90-93. 


817 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


nised by States. These forbid the use of weapons, which are con¬ 
cealed, poisoned or barbed, or the points of which are blazed with 
fire, and also striking down an enemy who is wounded, engaged in 
fighting with another, has offered submission, turned to flight, broken 
his weapon or lost his coat of mail. But the elaborate directions of 
military campaigns laid down in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra 1 do not take 
into account these humanitarian rules of warfare. He recommends, 
without scruple, any means, fair or foul, that may bring success 
against the enemy. 

Kautilya however, agrees generally with Manu in recommend¬ 
ing mild and beneficent measures to be adopted towards a conquered 

country. The conqueror should “follow the friends and leaders of 
% 

the people”, and “adopt the same mode of life, the same dress, 
language and customs as those of the people. He should follow the 
people in their faith with which they celebrate their national, reli¬ 
gious and congregational festivals or amusements.” 2 Manu, how¬ 
ever, further recommends that relative of the vanquished ruler, 
approved by the people, should be put on the throne on stipulated 
conditions. 

That there was a more or less regular diplomatic intercourse 
between different States is proved by Kautilya’s long dissertation 
on the ‘mission of envoys.’ 3 The envoys are divided into three 
grades, according to status, and probably also, as their names imply, 
with reference to the powers vested in them. To the highest cate¬ 
gory belongs an ambassador vested with full discretionary powers. 
The second class had limited powers and was probably despatched 
with a particular object in view. The envoys of the third class 
merely carried a definite message. 

The envoys sent to a foreign State were expected to secure in¬ 
formation about its internal condition including its military strength, 
the state of parties and public opinion. For this he should employ 
spies and use cypher-writings. The duties of an envoy, enumerated 
by Kautilya include the transmission of messages, observance of the 
due fulfilment of treaties, contracting alliance, intrigue and sowing 
dissension among allied powers, gathering information about the 
movements of spies, securing release of hostages, etc. 

1. Book X. 

2. KAT. 491-92. 

3. KAT. 34-7. 


318 



POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 
III. SYSTEM OF ADMINISTRATION 

1. Monarchy 


(i) The king 

Strictly speaking, Hindu political theory vests sovereignty in 
the Dharma or law in the widest sense of the term. 1 But adminis¬ 
tration was entrusted to the king. Accordingly the kingly ollice is 
extolled to the skies. The theory of his divine origin and absolute 
power has been referred to above. Priestly functions pertained to 
the Brahmanas, not to the king, but all were integrated into a single 
stream of social and spiritual life. It is often stated that protection 
of the people on the part of the king was equal to the performance 
of the greatest sacrifice ( Yajha) and was conducive to bliss and 
prosperity. 2 Similarly, Narada observes that the king attains to 
his position through austerities. By way of prescribing a high 
standard of conduct to the king, Manu 3 observes that “where another 
common man would be fined one Karshapana, the king shall be fined 
one thousand, that is the settled rule.” One of the most valuable 
ideas that run through Sanskrit literature is that power or the kingly 
office is a trust. 

The king, on his part, must be humble and modest, versed in 
sacred and secular lore. The absence of constitutional checks on 
the kingship was an additional reason for moral exhortation and for 
stress on duty with a supernatural sanction behind it. All the 
writers hold that the conquest of internal enemies by the king, i.e 
the attainment of perfect self-control and equilibrium, was a condi¬ 
tion precedent to his successful government at home and conquest 
abroad. As already observed, some of them go so far as to observe 
that rulers who lacked culture and were victims to folly, greed and 
sensuality were incapable of wielding the rod of punishment. Manu 4 
and Yajnavalkya 5 insist that the king must be versed in Vdrta or the 
science of economics and should develop the resources of the State. 

His duties are described by Manu and Kautilya in wide terms. 
He must have a good education 6 and undergo rigorous training in 
discipline. “Day and night he must strenuously exert himself to 

1. See Vol. I, pp. 430 f, 482 f. 

2. Cf. Manu, VII. 84. 

3. VHI. 336. 

4. VII. 43. 

5. III. 111. 

6. See Ch. XXII. 


319 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


conquer his senses; for he (alone), who has conquered his own senses, 
can keep his subjects in obedience.” He must shun all the vices 
which spring from sensuality, greed and wrath. He must actively 
encourage agriculture, improve the highways, exploit the mines, 
clear the forests, colonise barren lands, tame elephants, build forts 
and bridges. 1 He must be unremitting in the performance of his 
duty. He must rise in the last watch of the night, perform religious 
ceremonies, worship the Brahmanas, and then commence the busi¬ 
ness of government by entering the hall of audience and gratifying 
all who have come to see him. Then he must proceed to consult 
his ministers. 

The daily programme which Manu and Kautilya prescribe for 
the king follows the line of the Mahdbhdratu. Narada 2 observes 
that “it is not permitted to advise or rebuke a king or a Brahmana 
on account of their sanctity and dignity, unless they should swerve 
from the path of duty.” This evidently implies that rebuke was 
permissible for dereliction of duty. The king is to follow a rigid 
time-table, in order to be able to discharge all his duties, including 
deliberation on state affairs, administrative planning, review of 
finance and revenue, inspection of the cavalry, the elephant force, 
the armoury, etc., supervision of spies, receptions, etc., in addition 
to ordinary administrative and judicial business. 

(ii) The Ministers 

All the writers on polity agree that in order to carry on suc¬ 
cessfully the heavy work of administration, the king must have 
assistance. As Kautilya so characteristically puts it, “sovereignty 
is possible only with assistance,” for “a single wheel can never 
move.” 3 According to Kautilya, therefore, the king shall employ 
ministers ( mantri ) and also have a council (mantriparishad) . 4 

Kautilya starts with the general proposition that “all kinds of 
administrative measures are preceded by deliberations in a well- 
formed council.” It would be of interest to know something definite 
about the constitution and powers of the council, but Kautilya’s 
account is somewhat vague. He quotes the opinions of preceding 
writers who suggest the number of members as 12, 16, or 20, but 
himself recommends that it ‘shall consist of as many members as the 
needs of his dominion require.’ That it consisted of members not 

1. Manu, vn. 154. 

2. XVIII. 122. 

3. KAT. 14. 

4 . For these two topics cf. KAT. 14-20, 30-32. 


m o 




POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 

usually resident in the capital city appears from the direction that 
the king shall consult those that are not near by sending writs. The 
powers of the council are described in very general terms. There 
is, however, one important point that requires careful consideration. 
“In works of emergency”, says Kautilya, “the king shall call both 
the ministers and the council,” and after discussion, “shall do what¬ 
ever the majority of the members suggest or whatever course of 
action leading to success they point out.” If we accept this inter¬ 
pretation, we must hold that the king’s power was effectively check¬ 
ed by the joint body of ministers and councillors. Some, however, 
interpret the passage differently and take it to mean that the king 
should either accept the view of the majority or follow that course 
of action which (in his opinion) leads to success. 

The council or mantriparishad was probably an important 
feature of the Maurya constitution, for we hear of a parishad in 
Asoka’s inscription, and the emperor attached a great deal of im¬ 
portance to its deliberations. 

As compared with the vagueness of his account about the'coun¬ 
cil, Kautilya gives a comprehensive account of the ministers. The 
first point discussed is the method of selection. A discussion re¬ 
corded by Kautilya, though avowedly theoretical, throws interest¬ 
ing light on this point. He dwells at length on the opinions of pre¬ 
ceding writers and the criticism urged against them. Thus we are 
told that Bharadvaja advised the king to select ministers from among 
his old fellow-students, but Visalaksha demurred to it as ultimately 
destructive of royal prestige. Parasara emphasised loyalty as the 
foremost qualification, but Pisuna pointed out that capacity, intellec¬ 
tual and administrative, was the essential desideratum. Kaunapa- 
danta laid stress on family traditions and recommended the appoint¬ 
ment of those whose fathers and grandfathers had been ministers 
before, but Vatavyadhi explained that new men versed in the science 
of politics were safer. Bahudantiputra, however, decried mere theo¬ 
retical knowledge and laid emphasis on high birth and capacity. 
Kautilya generally agreed with the last view. He holds that ‘the 
ministerial appointment shall wholly depend on qualifications* and 
describes in detail what these qualifications are and how to ascertain 
them. One possessed of the necessary qualifications should be sub¬ 
jected to various tests—the four allurements of religion, money, love 
and fear, as Kautilya calls them. Those who successfully pass all 
the tests should be selected as ministers, while those who pass one 

321 

A.I.U.— 21 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

or more of them will be appointed to high offices according to the 
test to which they were put. 

Manu on the whole holds the same view, though expressed more 
briefly. Thus he lays down that the king should “appoint seven or 
eight ministers whose ancestors have been royal servants, who are 
versed in the sciences, heroes skilled in the use of weapons, and des¬ 
cended from (noble) families and who have been tried/’ 1 Kautilya, 
afte^ a long discussion, concludes that the king should discuss matters 
of Sfiate not with one or two, but with three or four ministers. For 
‘a single minister proceeds wilfully and without restraint, and in 
deliberating with two ministers the king may be overpowered by 
their combined action.’ According to Manu, however, the king 
‘shall first ascertain the opinion of each minister separately, and 
then the views of all together’. 2 

Among the ministers, one should be selected as the chief. But 
though Manu directs that he should be a Brahmana, 3 Kautilya does 
not lay down any such restriction. 

(iii) Other Officers 

Every minister seems to have controlled one or more depart¬ 
ments. The precise number of the departments is not stated by 
Kautilya, but his work, as a whole, gives an idea of the working of 
the departments of Audit and Accounts, Records, Stores, Treasury, 
Forest Produce, Weaving, Agriculture, Pasture Lands, Cows, Slaugh¬ 
ter-houses, Weights and Measures, Gold-smithy, Mines, Ocean-mines, 
Metals, Mint, Salt, Wastelands, Commerce, Tolls, Excise, Passports, 
Ships, etc. On the military side the chief departments are those of 
Armoury, Elephants, Horses, Chariots and Infantry. 

Each of these departments was under a Superintendent who was 
assisted by ‘accountants, scribes, coin-examiners, stock-takers and 
additional secret overseers (i.e. spies).’ Kautilya, however, observes 
that ‘each department shall be officered by several temporary heads’ 
and also that ‘elephants, cavalry, chariots and infantry shall each be 
placed under many chiefs.’ It has been very plausibly suggested 4 
that these passages refer to a system of administration by the Board 
described by Megasthenes in connection with the municipal and mili¬ 
tary organization in the time of Chandragupta Maurya. 5 

1. vn. 54. 

2. vn. 57. 

3. vn. 58. 

4. PHAI. 233. 

5. See above, pp. 63-65. 


822 



POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


In addition to the heads of various departments mentioned 
above, Kautilya mentions two very high officials, viz. the Sannidhdtd 
and the Samdhartd. The former, whose designation literally means 
that he ever attends upon the king, seems to have been in charge of 
the Treasury, including stores of all kinds. The latter was the 
Collector-General of Revenue. In describing their duties Kautilya 
gives a comprehensive account of the manifold sources of revenue 
and also the various kinds of stores collected by the State. Among 
other important officials may be mentioned the Purohita , Senapati, 
Dauvdrika (gate-keeper), the Antarvamsika (leader of the harem 
guards), Durgapdla (Governor of forts) and Antapala (Governor of 
the frontier). The Superintendent of the City was also another 
important officer whose duty and method of administration are 
described in detail, throwing much light on the sense of civic duty 
and responsibility in those days. Another class of officers, who 
formed an indispensable part of the administration, were the spies. 
The method of recruiting them and the nature of their training 
and work constitute an important chapter 1 in Kautilya’s work and 
strongly support the vr>ws of those who hold that there was a 
complete divorce between morality and statecraft in those days. 
Many other views, situations and their remedies, described in the 
Arthasastra, would lead to the same conclusion. 

It must be remembered, however, that like Machiavelli of later 
days, Kautilya took a detached scientific view of the State, and 
judged of policy solely by its conduciveness to the welfare of the 
State. He prescribed what he believed would lead to the growth 
of material prosperity of the State and the power and well-being 
of the ruler. He expressed his views frankly, without any mental 
reserve; and uninfluenced by any considerations of morality. Al¬ 
though, prima facie, some of his theories might appear to be quite 
different from those held in modern times, in practice the difference 
is not really so great. He professed what most modern states con¬ 
demn in theory but actually put into practice. But we do not know 
how far ancient rulers followed in actual life the dictates of Kautilya 
as laid down in his Arthasastra. 

The village was the administrative unit and was under a 
gramika , who was appointed by the king, according to Manu. 2 The 
fact that gramika is not included in the list of salaried officials given 


1. KA, Book I, Chs. XI-XH. 

2. VII. 115 ff. 


828 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


by Kautilya has led some scholars to hold that he was ‘not a paid 
servant of the crown but an elected official of the villagers.’ 1 Ac¬ 
cording to Manu, the king appointed lords of ten, twenty, hundred 
and thousand villages. Similar divisions are also hinted at by 
Kautilya, who mentions a royal official called Gopa who looked after 
5 or 10 villages, and another called Sthdnika who supervised one- 
quarter of a Janapada or district. Such a regular gradation of 
officers, under the central State authority, must be regarded as an 
essential feature of administration of a large kingdom, though the 
names of officials and other details varied. Kautilya refers to Samd- 
hartd (Collector-General) assisted by Pradeshtds (Commissioners) 
as in supreme charge, and we find the later mentioned in Asoka’s 
inscriptions along with Rajukas and other officers. According to 
Kautilya the Commissioners appointed by the Collector-General 
shall check the proceedings of Superintendents and their subordi¬ 
nates and inflict punishment on them. Kautilya also recommends 
that a commission of three Pradeshtds or three Amdtyas shall deal 
with measures to suppress disturbance to peace (lit. removal of 
thorns). 2 Some regard these bodies as so many tribunals appointed, 
in addition to ordinary law-courts, to deal in a summary manner 
with various abuses and malpractices of administration. They 
were also authorised to take cognisance of various high crimes and 
also offences of a miscellaneous character. 

On the whole, Kautilya gives us a picture of a highly organized 
system of administration under a powerful bureaucracy at the centre, 
though much scope was left for local self-government. How far it 
was a theoretical scheme, and the extent to which it reflects the 
actual system of administration in any particular age or locality, it 
is difficult to say. It is, however, reasonable to hold that the system 
laid down by Kautilya was followed, at least in general principles* 
during the period under review and perhaps also in subsequent 
times. 

(iv) Sources other than Arthasdstra 

The political data supplied by presumably contemporary Tamil 
literature tally with the Arthasdstra. The relevant passages in V. 
Kanakasabhai’s Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago f based on lite¬ 
rature, often remind one of Kautilya. The same remark holds true 
of the Muppdl or the Rural composed by Tiruvalluvar. He insists 
on the same qualities in the King as Kautilya—fearlessness, liberality, 

1. PHAI, 240. 

2. KAT, 253. 


324 


POLITICAL Til KOPY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


wisdom, energy, vigilance, learning, bravery, virtue in general, free¬ 
dom from pride, anger, lust, avarice and low pleasures, and capacity 
and readiness to hear unpalatable words. 1 The king must be acces¬ 
sible to the people, must personally conduct the administration, 
examine cases and give decisions. 2 3 4 The need for consultation is em¬ 
phasised and the qualifications and duties of the chief officers of State 
are dwelt upon in the manner of the Arthasastra? On ambassadors 
the Kural 4 reads like an echo of the Arthasastra. On forts 5 and on 
the army 6 the Kural is feeble, but in line with the Arthasdtra. Tiru- 
valluvar’s sayings on espionage might, with slight alterations, pass 
for those of Kautilya: ‘A spy and a book of laws are the eyes of a 
king.” 7 8 9 Though avowedly an ethical treatise, the Kural, when deal* 
ing with diplomatic or foreign affairs, betrays the same lack of moral 
considerations as Kautilya. Its opportunism and Machiavellian pre¬ 
cepts are exactly parallel to the maxims of the Arthasastra* 

The political theory of the Arthasastras, the Dharma-sastras and 
the epics, as well as the administrative structure referred to in the 
inscriptions, foreign accounts and other data are reflected in the Clas¬ 
sical Sanskrit literature. Thus Aivaghosha q in his Saundarananda- 
Kdvya testifies to the supreme need and indispensability of kingship, 
and wants it to function as the guide and teacher. In the Sutralan - 
kdra , Asvaghosha prescribes a very elaborate curriculum for the 
prince, comprising grammar, writing, rhetoric, eloquence, the Vedas, 
literature, astronomy, medicine, sacrifices; music and song, playing 
on the tambourine, playing on the conch, dancing and laughter, 
computation, chess, dice, the science of precious stones and valuable 
materials for clothing, silk, sealing, weaving, wax work, strategy, 
sewing, sculpture, painting, arrangement of garlands, interpretation 
of dreams, interpretation of the flight of birds, reading horoscopes; 
the training of elephants, domestication of horses, wielding the 
lance, jumping, running and fording a river, archery, rules of battle 
array, strategy, etc. 


1. Kural, Ed. Lazarus, 382-84, 387-89, 390, 431-432, 436. 

2. Ibid, 520, 547-50, 561, 568. See also 551-55, 563-67 cn righteous rule. 

3. Ibid, 631-35, 638-40, 643, 646, 655, 660, 675. 

4. Ibid , 681-82, 685-86. 

5. Ibid, 742-50. 

6. /bid, 761-62, 764, 766-80. 

7. Ibid. 581. 

8. Ibid, 471-74, 488-90. 

9. See pp. 258, 266. 


325 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Unfortunately, we have very little knowledge of any actual 
system of administration, save that of the Maurya’s which has been 
described above. Of the States that flourished before them we have 
scattered references to administrative organization in literature, but 
it is not possible to draw up any definite outline of it. Thus Pali 
Mahaimgga refers to 80,000 townships of king Bimbisara and an 
assembly attended by their overseers ( grdmikas ). Whatever we 
might think of the number,.it testifies to the importance of the village 
as an administrative unit, and an administrative organization based 
on democratic principles. The Buddhist Pali texts also refer to some 
high officials like Mantris , but do not say anything about their power 
and function. The system sketched in the Dharma-sutras and al¬ 
ready described above 1 must have formed the basis of administration 
at the beginning of this period, and gradually developed into the 
highly elaborate structure of the Maurya period which has been al¬ 
ready described. 2 This development is largely reflected in the 
Dharma-sastras and specially in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra , though the 
latter may not form its very basis. 

Of the administrative system of the many States that flourished 
after the Maury as, our information is very meagre, and we get only 
a few isolated references in epigraphic records. 

The kingdom of the Andhras comprised many feudatories, some 
of whom at least enjoyed, inter alia, the right to stamp their own 
coin. An inscription of Pulumavi of the second century A.D. shows 
military officers holding large areas of land. Coins and inscriptions 
reveal a number of high officers styled Mahardthis, Mahabhojas , 
Mahdsenapatis, Amatyas, Mahdmdtras and Bh&ndjigrikas. They 
acted as ministers, treasurers and heads of departments at the cen¬ 
tral, provincial or feudal capitals. There was a regular secretarial 
staff, comprising Lekhakas or clerks. 

The Kshatrapas and Maha-Kshatrapas, who ruled over South 
Rajputana, Saurashtra and contiguous districts, had numerous feuda¬ 
tories under them. Epigraphic evidence shows that they attended 
i:o irrigation, observed religious toleration, built rest-houses, con¬ 
structed wells, tanks and gardens, etablished free ferries at many 
places and founded jala-satras , 3 halls for meetings, etc. On the 
other hand, forced labour was sometimes exacted for public works 
and new taxes were often imposed. The digging of salt, unless 

1. Vol. I, pp. 486-88. 

2. See pp. 62 ff. 

3. Road-side sheds for free supply of drinking water. 


826 






POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 

alienated, seems to have been a royal monopoly. The higher officials 
seem to have been divided into two grades, Mati-sachivas , i.e., coun¬ 
cillors or ministers, and Karma-sachivas or executive officers. 

The Kushana empire was founded like its predecessors and suc¬ 
cessors on the bases of autonomy and feudalism. The Manikiala 
inscription 1 refers to Dandanayago (=Dan<Janayaka), perhaps a gene¬ 
ral or probably a judicial official, Navakarmiga, superintendent of 
buildings, and Vihdra-(karavhaena) , the architect of Viharas. 

The Junagarh inscription of Rudradaman shows that the foreign 
rulers were well-versed in the Indian science of polity and adopted 
the general administrative machinery described in it. But side by 
side with many familiar official names we also meet with foreign 
ones such as Satrap (provincial governor), Meridarch (probably dis¬ 
trict officer) and Strategos (military governors). 

In general, the foreign rulers used high-sounding royal epithets 
like King of Kings (in Greek) and the corresponding Indian titles 
Chakravartin, Adhirdja or Rajatirtija. The last, along with Deva- 
putra , assumed by the Kushana kings, was probably due to the theory 
of the divire origin of kings discussed above. To the same idea we 
may attribute the apotheosis of deceased rulers of which we get 
clear evidence in this period. Special reference may be made in this 
connection to the practice of erecting Devakulas or temples contain¬ 
ing representations of dead kings. Apart from general references, 
a Devakula of the grandfather of the Kushana king Huvishka is ac¬ 
tually mentioned in an inscription at Mathura. Some scholars have 
found in it an imitation of the practice of dedication of temples'in 
honour of the Roman emperors. The same influence may also be 
traced in the assumption of the title of Kaisara (Caesar) by a 
Kushana king, according to the generally accepted reading of the 
Ara inscription . 2 Some idea of the administrative organization of 
the post-Mauryan period may be formed from the names of officials 
mentioned in epigraphic records, some of which have been mention¬ 
ed above. 

An important feature of the administration of the period is the 
association of near and dear relations of the king, like son, grandson, 
brother, or nephew, with the government. Sometimes, these had 
equal powers and status with the king, as we find, among others, in 
the cases of Lysias and Antialcidas, Agathocleia and Strato I, Strato I 


1. JR AS, 1909, p. 645. 

2. See above, p. 151. 


827 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


and Strato II, Spalirises and Azes, and Chash^ana and Rudradaman. 
Sometimes the relations probably held the position of subordinate 
colleagues. The best examples of this are furnished by the coins of 
Vonones . 1 It may be noted that this practice also prevailed among 
the Pallavas and, later, also among the Cholas in South India. 

(v) Taxation 

To defray the expenses of administration an elaborate system of 
taxation is prescribed by the writers on polity. Incidentally, Manu 
has a remarkable idea on the origin and validity of property. “Land 
belongs to him who clears off the timber, and a forest animal to him 
who owns the arrow.” It reminds one of Locke who sees the be¬ 
ginning of property in the mixing of human labour with natural 
substance. But in Manu 2 the idea is not followed up to establish 
taxation on consent. The maxim is: “No taxation without protec¬ 
tion.” A king who levies taxes but does not afford protection takes 
upon himself “all the foulness of his people” and sinks into hell. 
Duties and taxes must be fixed after full deliberation so as to pro¬ 
vide an adequate revenue to the State and an adequate return to the 
workers. “As the leech, the calf and the bee take their food little 
by little, even so must the king draw from his realm moderate annual 
taxes.” The land tax should be one-sixth, one-eighth, or one-fourth 
of the crops, i.e. of the gross produce. “A fiftieth of cattle and gold 
may be taken by the king,” says Manu. There was hardly anything 
which the State did not tap to increase its resources. Manu awards 
the king a sixth part of “trees, meat, honey, clarified butter, per¬ 
fumes, (medical) herbs; substances used for flavouring food, flowers, 
roots and fruit; of leaves, pot-herbs, grass, (objects) made of cane, 
skins, of earthen vessels, and all (articles) made of stone.” 

The duties on traders should be fixed on a consideration of the 
rates of sale and purchase, the means of communication, the charges 
of securing goods and the necessary expenses of the dealers. Else¬ 
where Manu prescribes one-twentieth of the value of each saleable 
commodity as calculated by experts. All who live by traffic must 
annually pay something, be it a trifle. Those who violated these 
rules were to suffer the confiscation of their whole property. An 
attempt to defraud the customs-house was to be punished with a fine 
of eight times the amount due. There was another species of con¬ 
tribution to which the State was entitled from those who had 

1. See above, pp. 123 f. 

2. For taxation cf. Mann, VII. 127-139. 


828 




POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


nothing to give in cash or kind. Mechanics, artisans and Sudras 
who lived by manual labour should work for the king for a day in 
each month. 


Treasure-trove is pointed out as another source of income. The 
king was entitled to one-sixth, one-tenth, or at least, one-twelfth of 
the property lost and afterwards found. Such property was to be 
deposited temporarily with special officers. If any one of them tam¬ 
pered with it, he was to be trampled under the feet of an elephant. 
If the king, i.e. the State, discovered any old treasure hidden under¬ 
ground, one-half of it must go to the royal exchequer and the other 
half be distributed among Brahmanas. Not only of ancient hoards 
but also of the metals underground, the king was entitled to one- 
half, on the ground that he was the lord of the soil. Here Manu 
seems to suggest that, in the ultimate analysis, the State was the 
owner of the land. Numerous petty dues were levied at ferries. 
Their classification is curious. At a ferry, an (empty) cart shall be 
made to pay one pana, a man’s (load) half a patia, an unloaded man 
one-half of a quarter. Carts laden with merchandise paid according 
to the value of the goods. 

Manu 1 exhorts the king to appoint experts to look after the 
mines and inspectors to attend to concerns which yielded revenue 
to the State. A later work, Brihat-Parasara Smriti (X) admits the 
right of a king to appropriate the wealth of heretics, usurers and 
public women. Vishnu exempts Brahmanas from taxation on the 
ground that their actions are an adequate contribution. He assigned 
to the State a sixth of the gross produce of the land, ten per cent on 
sales within the country, and five per cent on that of commodities 
sold by his subjects in foreign countries, two per cent on cattle, gold 
and clothes; 16 2/3 per cent on roots, fruits, liquids and condiments, 
wood, leaves, skins, earthen pots, stone, vessels and anything made 
of split bamboo; two days’ labour in a month from artisans, manual 
labourers and Sudras, and the whole produce of the mines. Trea¬ 
sure-trove, if discovered by the Brahmanas, belonged entirely to them; 
otherwise, it was to be divided in varying proportions between the 
discoverers, the State and Brahmanas. Besides numerous fines the 
State was entitled to ten per cent of the debt which might form the 
subject of law-suit. 2 


1. VII. 62, 81. 

2. Vishnu, III, 23-32, 55-64; VI. 20. 


829 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


For every suzerain ruler tributes and presents formed a regular 
source of income. It may be observed that fines imposed by courts 
of law formed one of the principal sources of revenue. 

Kautilya also elaborately deals with taxation. While he taps 
all possible sources for ensuring an ample revenue, he warns the 
king against fiscal tyranny which leads to popular discontent and 
outbreak of rebellion. Kautilya enumerates various sources of reve¬ 
nue, the more important of which may be noted below. 

1. Land-tax of various forms. There were crown-lands which 
were either worked by hired labourers or let out to tenants who got 
a share (normally one-half) of the produce. As regards other lands, 
the king received a tax for protection though in some cases they were 
given to officials free of rent in lieu of service. The rate or tax was 
normally one-sixth of the produce. There were also taxes on houses 
in cities, contributions levied for the maintenance of troops (pro¬ 
bably at the time of an actual campaign), and also special and occa¬ 
sional taxes such as those paid on the birth of a prince. 

2. Duties on sales of goods in market and taxes on imports 
and exports. 

3. Road-cess, canal-dues, ferry-dues, tax on loads, various 
taxes levied by toll-houses, fee from passports. 

4. Taxes levied on artisans, fishermen, prostitutes, gambling 
houses, wine houses, slaughter houses, etc. 

5. Income derived from royal properties such as forests, mines 
and manufactories attached thereto, and the monopoly of salt and 
other commodities. 

6. Forced labour. 

7. Fines from law-courts. 

8. Incomes from escheats, lost articles, treasure-trove. 

IV. NON-MONARCHICAL CONSTITUTION 1 

One of the most important characteristics of the period is the 
existence of oligarchic and republican State side by side with the 
kingdoms. 2 Some scholars are of opinion that this was true also of 
the Vedic period. But although some passages in Vedic literature 

1. There is a vast literature on the subject. Cf. Bhandarkar, CL, I, pp. 140 ff; 

CLAI, Ch. HI; Jayaswal, Hindu Polity. 

X See above, pp. 2-3. 


380 



POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 


seem to imply the existence of oligarchic or republican clans, we 
cannot come to any definite conclusion on the point. 

So far as the period under review is concerned, there is abund¬ 
ant evidence that monarchy was not the sole form of government. 
The classical writers refer to many republican clans who fought with 
Alexander, and some of these, as noted already, 1 are referred to in 
Panini’s grammar. According to them Nysa was an oligarchic State 
ruled by a president and a governing body of 300 members. Pata- 
lene had a political constitution resembling that of Sparta. It had 
two hereditary kings of different houses, who led the army, and a 
council of elders with paramount authority. According to Mega- 
sthenes democratic constitution replaced monarchy in most of the 
cities. Strabo refers to an ‘aristocratic form of government consist¬ 
ing of five thousand councillors.’ According to Arrian there were a 
large number of oligarchic states to the east of Hyphasis. Quintus 
Curtius refers to the big republican State of the Sabarcae which had 
extensive territory and an army consisting of 60,000 foot, 6000 
cavalry and 500 chariots. It is to be noted that the majority of 
Indian States with which Alexander came into contact were non- 
monarchical. 

The non-monarchical states are also referred to in Indian litera¬ 
ture such as the Mahabharata and Kautilya’s Arthasastra. But by 
far the most interesting account of them is preserved in the Buddhist 
literature. According to Avadanasataka a few merchants from the 
central part of North India (Madhyadesa), who visited the Deccan, 
replied, being asked about the form of government in their country r 
that ‘some States are under kings while others are ruled by ganas / 
This indicates that the non-monarchical constitution, referred to as 
gcna, was a general feature of the political system of the country. 
This is fully borne out by the political condition of North India at 
the beginning of the sixth century B.C. described above. 2 

The Buddhist literature mentions a large number of republican 
clans, but does not give any details regarding their constitution save 
in the case of the Sakyas of Kapilavastu and the Vajjian Confedera¬ 
tion, of which the Lichchhavis of Vaisall were the most prominent. 
These were ruled by a supreme assembly, consisting of both old 
and young members, which frequently met and fully discussed 
all important questions concerning the State. There was a head 
of the State, probably elected for a term of years, who functioned 


1. See pp. 2-3. 

2. See pp. 1-3, 17. 


331 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

as the chief executive officer. There are good grounds to believe 
that the Mallas and Lichchhavis, and probably also others, had an 
executive council of nine members. The head of the State and the 
members of the assembly were called Raja, which bore here the 
same sense as Consul and Archon. The house where the Assembly 
met was called Santhagara. 

A few details of the Supreme Assembly are preserved in Jataka 
stories which are of a later date than the canonical texts. According 
to them the Lichchhavi assembly consisted of 7,707 rajas or mem¬ 
bers who had a ceremonial consecration, like the king in a kingdom, 
and an important feature of the ceremony was a bath in a tank 
reserved for the purpose. We are further told that each of them 
had a viceroy ( upardja ), a general and a treasurer. In other words, 
the Lichchhavi State was divided into a number of small adminis¬ 
trative units, the heads of which composed the supreme assembly 
at the centre. This has a strong resemblance to the Cleisthenian 
constitution of Athens, and perhaps in both cases the locality was 
substituted for the clan as the administrative unit, which meant 
in effect the transition from the principle of kinship to that of loca¬ 
lity or residence. 

Whatever we might think of the number 7,707, there is no 
doubt that the supreme assembly of the Lichchhavis consisted of 
a large number, and as such may be regarded as a popular body. 
Some scholars are, however, of opinion that these numbers were 
recruited from the nobility. 1 In any case the assembly fully dis¬ 
cussed all important questions, and its conduct of proceedings and 
the management of affairs of State drew the highest encomium from 
Gautama Buddha. Indeed he was so deeply impressed by the 
Lichchhavi and other republican states that he adopted a democra¬ 
tic constitution for his own church ( Sangha ). 

The Buddhist texts give us a detailed account of the rules and 
regulations of the democratic government of the Sangha (Buddhist 
Church), and many scholars hold that these are identical with, and 
probably based upon, the democratic constitution of the republican 
States. This is very plausible, though not an established fact. If 
we assume this, we can formulate the following general principles 
in regard to the republican constitution. 2 

1. For different views on the constitution of the Sakyas and the Lichchhavis cf. 

IHQ. XX (334), XXI (1) and the references contained therein. 

2. Bhandarkar, CL. I. 179 ff. 


882 




POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 

1. Definite rules were laid down regarding the method of 
moving resolutions in the Assembly. Generally the proposal was 
repeated thrice, and if no objections were raised it was taken as 
passed. In case of objection, the sense of the assembly was deter¬ 
mined by the votes of the majority. Definite rules were laid down 
for the counting of votes and there was a special officer for the 
purpose. Voting by ballot was in use. 

2. Complicated questions were referred to committees. 

3. Definite rules were laid down about quorum, votes of ab¬ 
sentees, subsequent legalisation of acts done by an illegally consti¬ 
tuted assembly, etc. 

Buddhaghosha’s commentary has preserved a unique account 
of the administration of justice among the Lichchhavis and other 
clans forming the confederacy of the Vajjis. According to it there 
was a regular chain of eight courts presided over by eight officers 
from Vinichchayamahamatta at the bottom to the Raja at the top. 
An accused person could be discharged by any one of them, if found 
not guilty, but otherwise he had to be brought before the next 
tribunal; he could thus be punished only if he was found guilty by 
all the successive eight tribunals. The truth of this account has 
been doubted on the ground of the late date of Buddhaghosha, but 
it is not unlikely that he relied upon old tradition. In any case, it 
upholds a democratic view of the liberty of a citizen which has 
probably no parallel in the history of the world. Whether literally 
true or not, it reflects a general belief in the ultra-democratic 
character of the Lichchhavi constitution. 

There is a remarkable passage in the old Buddhist canonical 
text Mahdparinibbana Sutta 1 in which Buddha gives eloquent ex¬ 
pression to his views about the constitution of the Vajjis. “So long, 
Ananda,” said he, “as the Vajjians hold these full and frequent 
public assemblies, meet together in concord and carry out their 
undertakings in concord. and act in accordance with the 


ancient institutions of the Vajjians . so long as they 

honour and esteem and revere and support the Vajjian elders and 
hold it a point of duty to hearken to their words.. so long 


may the Vajjians be expected not to decline but to prosper.** Thus, 
while convinced of the inherent strength of a democratic constitu¬ 
tion, Buddha was not oblivious of its two chief dangers, viz. dis¬ 
union, and the tendency of the younger section to disregard the 


l. SBE, XI, 3-4. 


833 







THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


elders and established usages, and favour sweeping changes of a 
radical character. These dangers of the republican States are more 
fully described in the Mahdbhdrata 1 which offers suggestions for 
remedying them. But Kautilya urges upon the kings to destroy 
these States by exploiting their weakness, chiefly by sowing dis¬ 
sensions among the members of the assembly—a policy anticipated 
by Ajatasatru in dealing, with the Lichchhavis. 

Kautilya and the author of Ch. 107 of Santi Par van in the Mahd¬ 
bhdrata represent two distinct schools of political thought. The 
former was in favour of a strong monarchy and regarded the repub¬ 
lican States as the chief centres of opposition to his policy. Hence 
he recommended their destruction by all means, fair or foul, of which 
a lurid account is given in the Arthasdstra. The other school was 
in favour of the democratic forms of government, and was anxious 
to preserve them from the dangers to which they were naturally 
exposed. The chief of these were disunion and dissension and lack 
of secrecy. Hence they recommend forbearance and toleration as 
the guiding principles of members, and the formation of a small 
cabinet of select leaders. “The gana leaders,” we are told, “should 
be respected, as the worldly affairs depend to a great extent upon 
them. The spy and the secrecy of counsel should be left to the 
chiefs, for it is not fit that the entire body of the gana should hear 
those secret matters”. In conclusion it is said that “it is the inter¬ 
nal danger that is chiefly to be guarded against; the external danger 
is not of much importance. The ganas are torn asunder by the 

enemies.by creating dissensions and offering bribes; so it is 

said that unity is the chief refuge of the ganas.” 

The long passage in the Sdnti Parvan from which the above 
extracts are quoted shows a thorough comprehension of the essen¬ 
tial features of a democratic constitution. The existence of the 
democratic States in India for more than a thousand years (600 B.C. 
to A.D. 400) gave rise to a political philosophy of which only a faint 
echo has been preserved in this remarkable passage in the Great 
Epic. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

1. Kaupiliyam Arthasdstram, Edited by R. Shamasastry, Mysore (1919). 

2. English Translation of 1. by Shamasastry, Bangalore 1915. The statements 
about Kautilya in the text are, unless otherwise stated, based on this work. 
References to this book are mostly omitted as the relevant passage can be 
easily found from the Table of Contents and Index of this work. 

3. N. C. Bandyopadhyaya. Kautilya. 

4. K. P. Jayaswal, Hindu Polity. 


1. Santi Parvan, Ch. 107. 


384 




CHAPTER XVlll 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

The period with which this volume deals saw the beginning of 
the systematic treatment of Hindu law, as well as its full develop¬ 
ment. It is in Manu-smriti that we first come across a regular ex¬ 
position of the legal system, which was further followed in the 
later Dharma-sdstras, especially in those of Yajnavalkya, Narada 
and Brihaspati. Although the dates of these works are not definite¬ 
ly known, there are good grounds to believe that they were all 
compiled during the period under review or within a century after 
that. 1 In order to understand the historical development of the 
legal system of the Hindus, it is necessary to treat separately the 
four Dharma-sdstras mentioned above. 

The Arthasastra of Kautilya also deals with legal topics, and 
adds considerably to our knowledge of the subject. But it 'vyas not 
regarded as an authentic source of law, and has not exercised much 
influence upon later writers. It has not, therefore, been thought 
necessary to refer to the details given by Kautilya, which are fairly 
comprehensive and deal with both judicial procedure and exposi¬ 
tion of law. But some general principles of a distinctive character 
have been referred to by way of comparison. Kautilya was pro¬ 
bably not far removed from the time when Manu-smriti was put 
in its present form, but the differences between the outlook of the 
two are both interesting and instructive. This is, however, beyond 
the scope of the present work. 

I. MANU-SMRITI AND ARTHASASTRA 
1. Sources and Topics of Law 

Manu enumerates four sources of law, viz. Sruti or the Vedas, 
Smriti, customs of holy men, and one’s own inclination. 2 He 
makes it clear that in case of conflict the Sruti prevails over Smriti 
and that these have precedence over the last two. 3 But Kautilya 
lays down that “Pharma (sacred law), Vyavahdra (contract), 
Charitra (custom) and Rdjasdsana (royal decree) are the four legs 

1. For the dates of the Smritis, see above, p. 257. 

2. II. 6. 10. 12. 

3. II. 13. 


335 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

of law, each of which is of superior validity to the one previously 
named/’ This is an important innovation by which the king be¬ 
comes the highest authority for promulgating law. Still more 
revolutionary is Kautilya’s dictum that ‘whenever sacred law 
(£dstra) is in conflict with rational law (Dharmanydya) , then reason 
shall be held authoritative.’ This is denied by most of the Dharma - 
sastras which place the sacred law above all, even above the royal 
decree. 1 

The custom or law which bound the king and all other organs 
of government thus represented the will of the gods as well as the 
wisdom of ancestors. It was both written and unwritten, to be 
gathered from the scriptures and the codes as well as from oral 
tradition, transmitted from generation to generation in various loca¬ 
lities, and among various groups. But it was necessary to bring 
it abreast of the times and resolve doubts through fresh enactments 
or interpretations. This imperative necessity was fulfilled by two 
means. The first was the composition of new texts on customary 
law, or the interpolation of new passages into old texts, or the com¬ 
position of commentaries which elucidated the text in the light of 
contemporary conditions, stated and resolved doubts, and offered 
fresh interpretations. That is the purpose underlying a good many 
Dharma-stistras and Arthasdstras, their editing and re-editing, as 
well as (in later times) a plentiful crop of bhashyas, tikds or com¬ 
mentaries. This stream of literature can be traced to the fifth or 
sixth century B.C. and has not yet ceased to flow. It constitutes a 
feature of the first importance in Hindu thought and life in the long- 
range perspective of history. But the process was slow and had to 
be supplemented by another means to cope with immediate neces¬ 
sities of legislation and interpretation. A parishad or assembly for 
law-making was accordingly prescribed by the Dharma-sdstras. The 
parishad would also serve to forestall monarchic despotism and 
surround the legislative process with investigation, discussion and 
promulgation in appropriate form. Thus Manu prescribes a pari¬ 
shad of either ten or three persons. The latter was composed of 
persons who each knew one of the three Vedas—Rig, Yajus and 
Sama. The former included, in addition, three persons conversant 
respectively with logic, Mimdmsd and Nirukia, one who recites (the 
Institutes of) the sacred law, and three men belonging to the first 
three Orders. 2 

1. Cf. PIHC. VII. 43. The four terms denoting four legs of law are differently 
interpreted by Narada and Brihaspati. Cf. below, pp. 349, 354. 

2. xn. 110-112. 


336 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


Manu, for the first time, gives a regular classification of the law 
under eighteen heads or titles. These are (1) non-payment of debts, 
(2) deposit and pledge, (3) sale without ownership, (4) concerns 
among partners, (5) resumption of gifts, (6) non-payment of wages, 
(7) non-performance of agreements, (8) rescission of sale and pur¬ 
chase, (9) disputes between the owner (of cattle) and his servants, 
(10) disputes regarding boundaries, (11) assault, (12) defamation, 
(13) theft, (14) robbery and violence, (15) adultery, (16) duties of 
man and wife, (17) partition (of inheritance), and (18) gambling 
and betting. 1 Almost all these items occur in Kaujilya’s Artha- 
sastra, but are not specified in a systematic manner, though some 
scholars have also divided them into eighteen titles of law. 2 

2. Criminal Law and Punishment 

As regards punishment, Manu recommends, in order of seve¬ 
rity, (gentle) admonition, (harsh) reproof, a fine, and lastly corporal 
punishment. 3 To this may be added banishment, actually prescrib¬ 
ed in many cases. “The king having fully ascertained the motive, 
the time and place (of the offence), and having considered the,abi¬ 
lity (of the criminal to suffer) and the (nature of the) crime shall 
cause punishment to fall on those who deserve it.” 4 “Unjust 
punishment destroys reputation among men, and fame (after death), 
and causes even in the next world the loss of heaven; let him, 
therefore, beware of inflicting it.” The same consequences ensue 
to “a king who punishes those who do not deserve it and punishes 
not those who deserve it.” 5 

Caste privileges and disabilities are reflected in criminal law, 
especially on matters of morality and social hygiene. Different 
punishments are laid down for identical offences in accordance with 
the caste of the criminal and the victim. As a general rule, Brah- 
manas were to be exempted from capital punishment. “No greater 
crime is known on earth than slaying a Brahmana; a king, there¬ 
fore, must not even conceive in his mind the thought of killing a 
Brahmana.” At the worst a Brahmana was only to be banished, 
and even then he must be allowed to take away all his property with 
him. Kautilya also makes similar distinctions, though in general 
his punishments to the lower castes are less severe. But he pro- 

1. VIII. 3-7. 

2. N. C. Bandyopadhyaya, Kautilya, p. 219. 

3. vm. 129. 

4. Vin. 126 . 

5. Vm. 127-8. 


A.I.U.—22 


887 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


vides the death penalty (by drowning) for a Brahmana guilty of 
high treason. 

Caste enters in a conspicuous manner into Manu’s law on 
defamation. For defaming a Brahmana, a Kshatriya was to be fined 
a hundred panas, a Vaisya from one hundred and fifty to two hun¬ 
dred, while a Sudra was to suffer corporal punishment. On the 
other hand, a Brahmana should be fined fifty, twenty-five and twelve 
panas for defaming a Kshatriya, a Vaisya and a Sudra respectively. 
There was a uniform penalty of twelve payias for a twice-born man 
for defaming a caste-fellow. If a Sudra even mentions the names 
and castes of the twice-born with contumely, “an iron rail ten 
fingers long, shall be thrust red-hot into his mouth.” If he insults 
a twice-born man with gross invective, his tongue shall be cut off 
“for he is of low origin”. If he is arrogant enough to teach Brah- 
manas their duties, “the king shall cause hot oil to be poured into 
his mouth and into his ears.” Even harsher and sometimes un¬ 
speakable are the punishments prescribed for insults which a Sudra 
may chance to offer to men of superior castes. It is more than 
doubtful if these brutal punishments were ever actually awarded. 
Perhaps they only embody the ultra-orthodox theory of the supe¬ 
riority of the twice-born and the supremacy of the Brahmana. 
Vishnu lays down practically the same penalties and procedure of 
justice as Manu, but his treatment of insults and offences is extra¬ 
ordinarily minute. For example, a fine is prescribed for omitting 
to invite a Brahmana neighbour to a feast or for offering him no 
food when he has been invited. On the other hand, if the guest, 
having duly accepted the invitation, refused to eat, he should pay 
a gold Mashaka as fine and double the amount of food to the host. 

Similar distinctions are also made by Manu in the case of 
assaults. “With whatever limb a man of a lower caste injures a 
man of the three higher castes, even that limb shall be cut off.” 1 
Among other punishments for less serious offences under this head 
are prescribed branding on the hip, banishment and fine. For 
adultery .various penalties are imposed according to the caste of the 
accused and the ravished woman, and the circumstances under 
which the crime was committed. These include fine, forfeiture of 
property, imprisonment, and even death (except for a Brahmana). 
Corporal punishment was prescribed for those “who either gamble 
and bet or afford an opportunity for it.” Kautilya, however, recog- 

1 VIII. 279. 


838 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


nises gambling as lawful, and penalises gamblers only if they play 
elsewhere than in central places fixed for the purpose under regu¬ 
lations laid down by the superintendent of gambling. 

Manu prescribes capital punishment for the murder of Brah- 
majjas, women and children, tampering with the loyalty of minis¬ 
ters, treason and false proclamations. Mutilations are prescribed 
for robbers, cut-purses and for those who obstruct popular well¬ 
being or steal cows belonging to Brahmanas. Banishment is pres¬ 
cribed for destroying the wall or gate of a town or filling up the 
ditch, or acts which were calculated to endanger public safety. The 
same penalty was also prescribed for gamblers, dancers and singers, 
cruel men, men belonging to a heretical sect, those following for¬ 
bidden occupations, and sellers of spirituous liquor. Damages and 
fines are recommended for destroying a bridge, the flag of a temple 
or royal palace, a pole or image, stealing rope or water-pot from a 
well, or damaging a hut erected for the distribution of water. 1 Manu 
allows that the law may be taken into one’s own hand on certain 
occasions, as in self-defence, and permits recovery of debt by artful 
management or even by force. 2 

Kautilya also refers to capital punishment being awarded for 
various offences. 3 For murdering another man in a quarrel the 
offender was to be tortured to death. Hanging is the penalty for 
various crimes, ranging from murder to such trivial offences as 
spreading false rumour, committing house-breaking, theft, and caus¬ 
ing hurt to royal elephants, horses or carriages. “Any person who 
aims at overthrowing the kingdom, who fbrces an entrance into the 
king’s harem, who instigates wild tribes or enemies against the 
king, or who creates disaffection in forts, oorders, or the army, shall 
be burnt alive.” “When a person breaks the dam of a tank full of 
water, he shall be drowned in that very tank.” “Any woman 
who murders her husband, preceptor, or offspring, or sets fire to 
another’s property, shall be torn asunder by bulls, no matter whether 
or not she is big with child.” After mentioning these and other 
barbarous forms of capital punishments and mutilation Kautilya 
observes: “Such painful punishments as the above have been laid 
down in the Sastras of great sages; but it has been declared as just 
simply to put to death those offenders who have not been guilty of 
cruelty”. This is an important statement, inasmuch as it shows a 

1. Manu , vn. 319; IX. 225, 232-242, 270-293. 

2. Vm. 48-50. 

3. KAT. 286-88. 


830 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


general repulsion against the sayage punishments laid down in 
theory, and an attempt to modify them in practice. Perhaps some 
of the penalties provided in Manu-smriti and other law-books belong 
to the same category. 


3. Civil Law 

As regards civil law, which is also dealt with in an elaborate 
manner, reference may be made to certain interesting points only. 
The monthly interest on debt is allowed at the rate of 2, 3, 4 or 5 
per cent according to the order of the castes. The enjoyment of 
property for ten years gives a prescriptive right to it, but ‘a pledge, 
a boundary, the property of infants, an (open) deposit, a sealed 
deposit, women, the property of the king and the wealth of a 
Srotriya’ are exempted from the operation of this rule. 1 “A con¬ 
tract made by a person intoxicated or insane, or grievously disorder¬ 
ed (by disease and so forth), or wholly dependent, by an infant or 
very aged man, or by an unauthorised (party) is invalid”; and so 
also is the agreement which is “contrary to law or to the settled 
usage of the virtuous.” 2 As regards inheritance, minute rules are 
prescribed to meet various contingencies and different usages. In 
general the division of property took place only after the death 
of the father, and the eldest brother got, as his share, either the 
whole property or a larger share than the other brothers. Maiden 
sisters also got a share, which was normally one-fourth of the 
brother’s. 

4. Administration of Justice 

All Hindu theory lays the greatest stress on the administration 
of justice as an essential part of the protection to which the people 
are entitled from the government. Manu 3 personifies Dan<Ja or 
punishment as a being of dark complexion, with red eyes, inspiring 
terror and threatening penalties. He thinks that Danda is born out 
of the glory of Brahma and is the real ruler. 4 It is implied here 
that punishment was both retributive and deterrent. Manu 5 ex¬ 
pressly lays down that “the king shall establish prisons all along the 
public road where the suffering and disfigured offenders might be 
seen.” In actual practice, punishment does not always seem to have 

1. Vm. 145-149. 

2. vm. 163-164. 

3. vn. 25. 

4. vn. 14 ff. 

5. X. 288. 


840 




LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


been harsh. As noted above, there was great insistence on justice 
and equity. Manu 1 observes: “Where justice, wounded by injustice, 
approaches and the judges do not extract the dart, there (they also) 
are wounded (by that dart of injustice). Where justice is destroyed 
by injustice, or truth by falsehood, while the judges look on, there 
they shall also be destroyed. Justice, being violated, destroys; 
justice, being preserved, preserves; therefore justice must not be 
violated, lest violated justice should destroy us.” 

According to Manu, the king should normally preside over the 
law-courts, and be assisted by Brahmanas and experienced coun¬ 
cillors. 2 In the king’s absence the court should consist of a learned 
Brahmana appointed by the king, assisted by three councillors who 
were normally Brahmanas versed in the Vedas. A popular element 
is introduced into the trial of disputes on boundaries between fields 
or villages. If the inspection of various marks such as tanks, wells, 
cisterns, fountains and temples failed to furnish decisive evidence, 
the case had to depend on the testimony of witnesses. These must 
be examined “in the presence of the crowd of the villagers and 
also of the two litigants. As they, being questioned, unaniihously 
decide, even so he (the king) shall, record the boundary.” If no 
witnesses were available, the case should be left to the decision of 
people from four neighbouring villages. 3 

According to Kautilya, each important city and locality shall 
have a court of justice, consisting of three members acquainted with 
sacred law ( dharmastha ) and three ministers of the king. 4 

5. Evidence 

According to Manu, if the defendant denies the charge, the 
complainant must call witnesses or adduce other evidence. Trust¬ 
worthy men, who know their whole duty and are free from 
covetousness, are admissible as witnesses irrespective of caste. 
Interested persons, friends, companions, enemies, those convicted of 
perjury, and persons of several other categories were not admissible 
as witnesses. 

As a rule, women, twice-born men, Sudras, and men of the lower 
castes should give evidence only on behalf of people of the same 
class. But any person who has personal knowledge of a murder 

1. VIII. 12, 14-15. 

2. VIII. 1. 

3. VIII. 253-258. 

4. KAT, 187. 


841 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


case, or of acts done in the interior of a house or in a forest, 
could be called as a witness. Indeed, on failure of regular wit¬ 
nesses, anyone could be summoned to bear evidence—women, infants, 
pupils, relations, slaves or hired servants, for example. Particularly 
in cases of violence, adultery, defamation and assault, the compet¬ 
ence of a witness should not be examined too closely. The witnesses 
were strongly exhorted to speak the truth and severe penalties 
were laid down for giving false evidence. 1 It appears that witnesses 
did not merely report facts; they also shared a little of the character 
of assessors. This is the hypothesis which best explains the follow¬ 
ing verse in Manu:—- 

“On a conflict of the witnesses the king shall accept (as true) 
the (evidence of) the majority; if (the conflicting parties are) equal 
in number, (that of) those distinguished by good qualities; on a 
difference between (equally) distinguished (witnesses, that of) the 
best among the twice-born.” 2 

In case there were no witnesses the judge could ascertain the 
truth by means of oath or ordeal. A religious sanctity was attach¬ 
ed to oath, for he who swears an oath falsely is lost in this (world) 
and after death. 3 4 “Let the (judge) cause a Brahmana to swear by 
his veracity, a Kshatriya by his chariot or the animal he rides on 
and by his weapons, a Vaisya by his kine, grain and gold, and a 
S§udra by (imprecating on his own head the guilt of) all grievous 
offences.” “Or the (judge) may cause the (party) to carry fire or 
to dive under water or severally to touch the heads of his wives 
and children. He whom the blazing fire burns not, whom the water 
forces not to come (quickly) up, who meets with no speedy mis¬ 
fortune, must be held innocent on (the strength of) his oath. ,,4 
This method of taking oath really amounts to ordeals. 

Kautilya mainly follows Manu, but has some new suggestions 
to offer. “If witnesses differ”, says he, “judgment may be given in 
accordance with the statements of a majority of pure and respect¬ 
able witnesses; or the mean of their statements may be followed, 
or the amount under dispute may be taken by the king.” 5 He also 
lays down, somewhat differently, the words of oath or admonition 
to be administered to witnesses of different castes. Kautilya does 

1. Manu, VIU. 60-100. 

2. VIII. 73. 

3. VIII. 109-111. 

4. VIII. 113-15. 

5. KAT, 225. 


842 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


not refer to ordeals but gives gruesome details of eighteen kinds of 
torture to elicit confession of guilt. 1 

Mention may be made of one remarkable suggestion of Manu 2 
for finding truth about deposits in the absence of witnesses. The 
judge should, through a spy, make a deposit of gold with the accus¬ 
ed. If after some time, when the deposit is demanded back, the 
accused refuses to return it,- he shall be held guilty of the first 
charge also and compelled to return that deposit. 

Reference has been made above to the solicitude expressed by 
Manu for the impartial administration of justice. It is interesting to 
note that Kautilya prescribes punishment to judges for dereliction 
of duty, which includes, among other things, unjust punishment, 
improper treatment of the disputants, failure to do everything pos¬ 
sible to ascertain the truth, interfering with witness, delay in the 
disposal of cases, undue help given to one party, etc. Even the clerk 
of the court is liable to punishment if he does not correctly record 
statements in taking down what has been deposed by both parties, 
enters what has not been deposed, and similar acts. 3 

Punishment is also provided for the superintendent of jails ‘when 
he puts any person in the lock-up without declaring the grounds of 
conviction, maltreats a prisoner by torture, beating or depriving 
him of food and water, or receives bribes from him.’ Severe 
punishments extending to death are prescribed for violating the 
chastity of women prisoners under his charge. 4 

II. Y A JR A V ALKY A-SMRITI 
1. Judicial Procedure 

More important than the Manu-smriti are our other authorities 
on law belonging to this period, namely Yajnavalkya and Brihaspati 
Smritis (in their section on Vyavahara) and the Ndrada-smriti 
(which is completely a ]egal work). We begin with Yajnavalkya, 
one of whose chief merits lies in arranging the materials of the 
Manu-smriti in a more systematic and concise fashion, Yajnaval- 

kya’s description of the royal court of justice 5 agrees with that of 

_ 

2 . VIII. 182-184. 

3. KAT, 281-82. 

4. Ibid, 282-83. 

5. II. 1 f. 


343 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Manu. Yajnavalkya, however, strikes a new note when he arranges 1 
the other courts of justice in an order of descending importance 
as follows: (a) officers appointed by the king, (b) pugas (assemblies 
of inhabitants of the same village or town), (c) srerfis (associations 
of merchants and craftsmen) and (d) kuXas (families). 2 With the 
three last-named courts we may well compare the village, castes 
and family panchdyats of modern times. 

Unlike Manu who only hints incidentally at the processes of 
judicial procedure, 3 Yajnavalkya describes them systematically, as 
we find also in Arthasdstra 4 He refers 5 to four ‘feet’ ( i.e . stages) of 
vyavahara without mentioning them by name. The plaint, he says, 
along with particulars relating to the year, the month and the 
day, as well as the name and the caste etc. of the parties, is to 
be put down in writing in the presence of the defendant. 6 The 
answer is to be written down in the plaintiff’s presence after the 
defendant has heard the plaint. 7 The evidence offered by the plain¬ 
tiff is to be written down immediately afterwards. 8 In regard to 
the plaint and the answer, there are some wise provisions. Until 
the plaint is disposed of, a counter-claim (or counter-charge) is not 
allowed except in cases of delicts ( kalaha) and crimes of violence 
(sahasa). Similarly no one is allowed to file a complaint against 
one who is already under a charge. 9 

In certain types of serious offences including sahasa, theft and 
assault, as well as those in which women are concerned, the parties 
must plead immediately. In other cases they may be allowed time 
at the discretion of the court. 10 Sureties for satisfaction of judg¬ 
ment have to be taken from both parties at the beginning of the 
suit. 11 

After the parties have submitted their plaint and answer, evi¬ 
dence has to be presented before the court. Systematising Manu’s 

1 . n. 30. 

2. The terms kula, sreni, puga (or gaiia) in the Smritis are differently inter¬ 
preted by different commentators and authors of Digests, evidently because of 
lack of continuity of their genuine interpretation. In the present section the 
terms have been translated as above for the sake of uniformity. 

3. VIH. 53-57. 

4. Book III. 

5. II. 8. 

6. II. 6. 

7. II. 7. 

8. II. 7. 

9. n. 9. 

10 . n. 12 . 

11. II. 10. 


844 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


rule on the subject, 1 Yajnavalkya first mentions 2 three kinds of 
proof, namely, documents, witnesses and possession, and he adds 
that ordeal is another kind of evidence in the absence of any of 
these. In the context of the law of debt Yajnavalkya explains the 
law relating to documents and witnesses. The latter closely resem¬ 
bles that of Manu. The elaborate requirements of written docu¬ 
ments are illustrated by Yajnavalkya’s description of the contents 
of a written contract between the debtor and the creditor. Such a 
contract, says he, 3 if written by another hand, must state the names 
of the parties (along with their caste and gotra -names and the 
names of their fathers), and it must also mention the witnesses as 
well as details about the year, the month, the day, etc. Afterwards 
it is to be signed successively by the debtor, the witnesses, and the 
writer in a specified form. A writing in one’s own hand, though 
unattested by witnesses, is still valid, except when it was caused by 
force or fraud. Should the genuineness of the document be in 
question, it is to be established by comparison with other documents 
written in the party’s own hand, as also by presumption, by direct 
proof, by marks, by previous connection, by probability of tijle, 
and by inference. 4 Coming to the last point, Yajnavalkya 5 mentions 
no less than nine kinds of ordeals in place of the three referred 
to by Manu. 6 These include ordeals by balance, by fire, by water, 
by poison, and by sacred libation. Ordeals are to be used in cases 
of serious charges where the plaintiff has undertaken to pay a fine 
or suffer corporal punishment if defeated, or else by mutual consent 
of the parties. In cases of high treason and sins of aggravated type, 
however, ordeals may be resorted to even if the other party refuses 
to abide by the result. 


In Yajnavalkya, as in the other Smritis, the law enforced by the 
courts of justice is, first and foremost, that of the Smritis. But this 
is supplemented by equity and custom. As the author says, 7 in 
case of conflict between Smritis, the principles of equity as deter¬ 
mined by popular usage are to prevail, but where Dharma-Sdstra 
and Arthasfistra are in conflict, the former is to be followed. 


1. VIII. 73f. 145f, 168, 255, etc. 

2. II. 22. 

3. II. 84f. 

4. II. 92. 

5. II. 95f. 

6. VIII. 114-115. 

7. II. 21. 


345 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 
2. Civil Law 

Yajnavalkya 1 amplifies the law of prescription and ownership 
as laid down by Manu 2 and observes 3 that title is superior to 
possession in all cases except where possession has descended from 
a line of ancestors. Again he says that title would have no force 
if there had not been possession even for a short time. In other 
words, while possession without title creates no claim except in 
cases of long continuity, title without possession has no force. We 
shall see in a later volume how the two texts of Yajnavalkya quoted 
above formed the basis of important discussion by Vijnanesvara 
and other jurists. 

Dealing with the law of debt, Yajnavalkya says, 4 after Manu, 5 
that, in case of debt secured by a pledge, the legal interest is l/80th 
of 100 (i.e. 1J%) per month, while in other cases the interest is 
2, 3, 4 and 5% according to the descending order of castes. Specially 
high rates of interest (namely, 10% and 20% respectively) are 
charged upon persons who travel through forests and those who 
travel by sea. In the same context Yajnavalkya, like Manu, 6 lays 
down the law against usury. The maximum interest allowable for 
different kinds of articles is declared by him to be eight, four, three 
or two times the principal. In case of disputes between debtor and 
creditor, Yajnavalkya follows the authority of Manu. 7 

We may best approach Yajnavalkya’s laws of partition and in¬ 
heritance 8 by considering his view of the son’s share in the ancestral 
property. The father and the son, he says, have equal ownership 
in the land acquired by the grandfather as well as corody and 
chattels—a doctrine which was afterwards to be the cornerstone of 
the view of the Mitakshard school on this point. Proceeding with 
the subject, Yajnavalkya systematises Manu’s rules 9 relating to 
partition. The partition, he says, may take place either during the 
lifetime of the father, or else after his death. If the father divides 
the property, he shall give the best share to the eldest son, or else 
equal shares to all sons. In the event of partition after the father’s 

death, the sons shall divide equally both his assets and debts, the 

- . . ....—— — - 

1. n. 24. 

2 . vm. 147-48. 

3. II. 27. 

4. H. 37. 

5. Vin. 140-142. 

6. vm. 151-152. 

7. VIII. 48f. 

8. II. 114f. 

9. IX. 104, 215. 


340 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


mother taking an equal share and the sisters a fourth part of the 
son's share. In the absence of sons the order of succession is to be 
as follows:—the wife, the daughters, both parents, brothers and 
their sons, the gentiles ( gotrajas ), the agnates ( bandhus ), the pupil 
and the fellow-student. Comparison of the above with the parallel 
text of Manu reveals important differences between the two autho¬ 
rities; for Manu is completely silent about the rights of the widow, 
while he gives 1 the order of heirs after the sons as ‘appointed 
daughter.’ her son, her husband, the father, the brothers, the mother 
and so forth. In giving the widow the full right to succeed after 
her sons, Yajnavalkya brings himself into line with the advanced 
ideas of Brihaspati and Katyayana, unlike the narrow and orthodox 
views of Manu and Narada on the subject. 

Amplifying Manu 2 Yajnavalkya 3 describes six kinds of stri* 
dhana (‘woman’s property’). These are (1) what was given to a 
woman by her father, mother, husband or brother; (2) what was 
received by a woman at the nuptial fire; (3) what was presented to 
a woman on her husband’s marriage with another wife; (4) what was 
given to a woman by her kindred; (5) a woman’s bridal price; and 
(6) what was bestowed upon a woman after her marriage. The 
woman's complete right to her stridhana is implied in the negative 
clause 4 that the husband is not liable to make it good when it was 
taken by him during a famine, or for performance of religious duty, 
or during illness, or while under restraint. In Yajnavalkya. as in 
Manu, stridhana is subject to its distinctive law of succession. If' 
the woman dies childless, says Yajnavalkya 5 agreeing with Manu, 6 
her property is to be inherited by her husband or her parents, 
according as she was married after the four approved, or the four 
disapproved, forms. 


3. Criminal Laic 

Coming to the law of crimes we find that Yajnavalkya is mostly 
in agreement with Manu. 7 A branch of Yajnavalkya’s law of crimes 
is concerned with what may be called offences against public justice. 
A complainant trying to establish his claim by non-judicial means 


1. IX. 127, 130-35. 185, 217 

2. IX. 101. 

3. II. 113-14. 

•1. TI. 147. 

5. II. 145. 

0 IX. IOC- 107. 

7. VIII. 271. 

;M7 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

as well as a defendant who absconds when a claim is established 
against him or fails to say anything when summoned to court, is 
declared to be a false litigant and punishable as such . 1 The suborner 
as well as the false witness is to be punished with a double fine, 
while one who, having sworn to give evidence, conceals it under the 
influence of passion is to pay an eight-fold fine . 2 A person not 
giving evidence is liable to pay the entire debt together with an 
additional one-tenth, while, he who knows the facts of the case but 
refuses to give evidence is liable to the same punishment as a false 
witness . 3 

III. NARADA-SMFtlTI 

The Narada-smriti is admittedly based upon the extant Manu - 
smriti, but it has a number of original features . 4 The description 
of the courts of justice in Narada is more elaborate than in Manu 
and Yajnavalkya. According to Narada 5 the eight ‘members* of a 
court of justice are the king, his righteous officer (satpurusha) , the 
assessors ( sabhyas ), the law (sastra), the accountant and the scribe 
(counted as one), gold, fire, and water. The full import of this some¬ 
what enigmatical statement will be explained when we come to 
deal with the fuller description in Brihaspati. Narada, moreover, 
systematises Yajnavalkya’s list of courts of justice by arranging them 
in the following ascending order 6 :— kulas (families), srenis (asso¬ 
ciations of merchants), ganas (assemblies, in place of Yajnavalkya’s 
pugas) , ‘the authorised person,* and the king. In the above, it will 
be noticed, the king’s representative has become a permanent judi¬ 
cial functionary instead, of being a mere temporary substitute. 

1. Judicial Procedure 

As in Kautilya’s Arthasastra, Narada describes 7 vyavahara 
(judicial proceeding) as having four ‘feet’ (i.e. modes of decision), 

1. n. 16 . 

2. H. 81-82. 

3. n. 76-77. 

4. For Narada’s relation to Manu,* see Jolly, SBE, XXXIII, Introd., pp. xii-xv. 
Hie Narada-smriti exists in two versions, viz. the shorter version translated 
by Jolly ( Institutes of Narada, London, 1876) and the longer and authentic 
version edited by the same author ( The Institutes of Narada together with 
Copious Extracts from the Naradabhashya of Asahaya and Other Standard 
Commentaries, Bib. Ind. Series, Calcutta, 1885) and translated by him ( The 
Minor Law-Books x Part I, SBE, XXXIII, Oxford, 1889). In the present section, 
reference is made throughout to Jolly’s edition of the longer version, while 
his translation of the same work has generally been followed. 

5. Introd. I. 15. 

6. Introd. I. 7. 

7. Introd. I. 10-11. 


348 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

viz. dharma (moral law), vyavakara (judicial process), charitra 
(written document), and rajasdsana (royal edict), each being supe¬ 
rior to the one previously named. 1 Here, for the first time according 
to a Dharma-sastra, we find the king’s voice regarded as the final 
authority in judicial trials. 2 3 

As compared with Manu and Yajnavalkya, Narada introduces 
us to a highly complex judicial procedure. Narada’s list of the suc¬ 
cessive stages of a judicial triaP helps us to understand Yajiia- 
valkya’s cryptic reference to the four ‘feet* of vyavahara quoted 
above. Narada declares the stages to be connection ( scil . of the 
case in hand with the whole system of law), the title of law, the 
cure (scil. by means of the four parts of a trial) and the decision. 
The plaint, according to Narada, is the essence of judicial proceed¬ 
ings. The plaintiff is defined by Narada 4 as one who first presents 
his claim before the king in respect of various specified subjects of 
dispute. 5 This is in accordance with the general Smriti rule that 
he who first approaches the court with his plaint is the plaintiff. 
A plaint may be amended at any time before the answer of the 
defendant has been filed. Narada gives the plaintiff the right of 
keeping the defendant under legal restraint ( asedha ) of four kifids 6 
till the arrival of the king’s summons lest the defendant should 
abscond when the case is about to be tried, or does not heed what 
the plaintiff says. 

After the plaintiff has submitted his claim (or charge) the 
defendant has to put in his answer. According to Narada 7 the 
answer may be of four kinds, namely, denial, confession, a special 
plea and a plea of previous judgment. 8 In suits relating to debt 
and the like, says Narada after Yajnavalkya, 9 the answer may be 
delayed “owing to the recondite nature of law-suits and weak¬ 
ness of human memory.’’ But the answer must be given at once 

1. Above, p. 335. 

2. Asahaya, commenting on the text of Narada quoted above, cites a remarkable 
dictum, viz. “What has been decided in a village goes into the town. What 
has been decided in the town goes before the king. What has been decided by 
the king, though wrongly decided, cannot be tried anew*’. 

3. Introd. I. 36. 

4. Introd. II. 38. 

5. For emendation of Jolly’s translation as ‘defendant* in the above into ‘plaintiff’, 
see Kane, Kdtydyana-smriti-sdroddhdra, 139, n. 122. 

6. As Kane observes ( Kdtyayana-smriti-saroddhara, 136, n. 104) these four kinds 
include such modem processes as attachment or arrest before judgment, and 
temporary injunction. 

7. Introd. II. 4. 

8. The last corresponds to the plea of res judicata in modem jurisprudence. 

9. n. 12. 


849 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

in cases of theft, crimes of violence and so forth. 1 The plaintiff 
as well as the defendant may appear by agent, but one who appears 
at a trial without being a relative or an appointed agent is liable to 
punishment. 2 

After the statements of the plaintiff and the defendant have 
been recorded, the evidence has to be placed before the court. 
Narada repeats the three kinds of proof specified by Yajnavalkya, 
namely, documents, witnesses and possession. As regards witnesses, 
Narada 3 amplifies and explains the view of Manu 4 and divides them 
into eleven classes, as will be noted later. 

Where both witnesses and documents are wanting, Narada 
would allow as a last alternative recourse to the ordeal. 5 Narada 
indeed classifies proof under two broad headings, namely, human and 
divine, the former comprising documentary and oral evidence, and 
the latter, ordeal by balance and the rest. Narada increases Yajna- 
valkya’s five classes of ordeals to seven by adding the rice-ordeal 
and the ordeal of a hot piece of gold. Narada’s long and detailed 
account of the different classes of ordeals 6 is matched only by 
Brihaspati, but it is unnecessary to quote it here. 

The last stage of a judicial proceeding is concerned with the 
judgment pronounced by the sabhyas. The victorious party, says 
Narada, 7 is to receive a ‘document of victory’ ( jayapatra ), while 
the defeated party is to be punished by the king according to the 
sastra. When a man loses his case through dishonesty of witnesses 
or of sabhyas, the cause may be tried afresh, but not when he has 
been cast out through his own fault. 8 

In regard to the law applicable to vyavahara, Narada’s rules 
recall those of Yajnavalkya above mentioned. In general, the cases 
are to be decided according to Dharma-sastra. But there remains 

1. Introd. I. 44 f. 

2. Introd. II. 23. In the former clause is contained the germ of the modern in¬ 
stitution of appearance by pleaders. Indeed, according to Asahaya, it applies 
when a party is prevented from personally attending Court through illness, or 
not being a good speaker, appoints an agent. The second clause resembles the 
rule of English Law against champerty and maintenance. 

3. I. 149 f. 

4. Vffl. 62 f. 

5. I. 239. 

6. I. 260 f. 

7. Introd. II. 43. 

8. Introd. II. 40. 


850 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


in the background the view that reasoning is to be observed, “for 
vyavahara is all-powerful and overrides the sacred law”. 1 

2. Civil Law 

The law of debt in Narada amplifies the rules of Manu on the 
subject. 2 Narada mentions 1 without disapproval four kinds of 
interest, namely, periodical ( kalika ), stipulated ( karita ), corporal 
(kayika ), and compound (chakravriddhi) , of which the last three 
are condemned by Manu. 4 On the important topic of liability of 
heirs for debts of their ancestors, Narada lays down important rules. 
The sons, grandsons and great-grandsons, he says, are liable to pay 
the debts of their ancestor (apparently if they have inherited the 
ancestral property), while the sons and grandsons have to pay the 
debt (the latter without interest) even if no ancestral assets have 
been taken. 5 

Under the head partition and inheritance 6 Narada likewise 
makes some important contributions to the law on the subject. If 
the father divides the property, he shall take two shares for himself 
and distribute the rest among his sons either in equal or unequal 
shares according to his inclination. After the father’s death, says 
Narada, the sons shall divide his property equally after payment of 
his debts. But even the legitimate son who was hostile to his father, 
or is expelled from caste, or is guilty of a minor offence, is not entitled 
to inheritance. In the absence of sons the daughters are to inherit, 
the chaste widow being ^granted only the right of maintenance till 
her death. A remarkable rule which cuts at the root of the strict 
law of primogeniture allows even the youngest brother, when 
capable, to take charge of the family management. 

3. Criminal Law 

The penal law in Narada partakes of the complex character 
associated with it in many of the Smrtis. While recognising crimes 

1. Introd. I. 39-40. Commenting on the last passage, Asahaya quotes a text to 
the effect that the usages of different countries which have been handed down 
from generation to generation cannot be overruled by the sacred law. Ifiis 
illustrates the tendency to identify equity with custom, to which Yajnavalkya’s 
text bears witness. 

2. VII. 47 f. 139 f. 

3. I. 102 f. 

4. Vm. 153. But they are approved in Gautama Dh. S. (XII. 34-35). 

5. For this interpretation, reconciling the apparent contradiction between Narada 
i. 4 and i. 6, see the long discussion in Kane ( Kdtydyana-smritt-Baroddh&ra , 
229-32 n) rejecting the view of Jolly ( SBE, XXXIII, 43-44 n). 

6. xm. 1 f. 


851 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


mainly as offences against the State punishable with fines and 
the like, Narada holds in some cases that they are likewise sins 
expiable with penances, as well as private wrongs requiring pay¬ 
ment of compensation to the party injured. His rules relating to 
various crimes systematise and amplify the previous law on the 
point. Treating theft as a separate offence from sdhasa (violence) 
Narada divides it 1 into three grades according to the value of the 
property stolen. Not only those who give food or shelter to thieves, 
but also those who do not offer assistance when asked for help or 
when property is being carried away, are accomplices in the crime. 
Local responsibility for maintenance of the King’s peace is enforced 
by the clause that the inhabitants of the village, pasture-ground 
or deserted spot, to which the foot-marks of a thief can be traced, 
shall make good the loss caused by the theft. Finally, the king’s 
responsibility is enforced by the clause known to other Smritis as 
well, namely, that he must make good the loss from his own treasury 
in case the thieves are not caught. Persons who give food and 
shelter to thieves or buy or receive their property are to be equally 
punishable with them. The punishment for theft varies from 
fine to corporal punishment, mutilation and death, according to 
the amount (or value) of the object stolen, and is explicitly said to 
be the same as that ordained for sdhasa. The idea of theft being a 
private wrong is reflected in the clause that a man receiving stolen 
property must restore it to the owner, or make good its value besides 
paying a fine. The view of theft as a sin is illustrated by the clause 
that a thief approaching the king and confessing his guilt is freed 
from sin. 


IV. BpiHASPATI-SMRITI 

Close as is the connection of Narada with Manu, Brihaspati’s 
connection is still nearer. In fact Bphaspati’s work has been prov¬ 
ed to be a Vdrttika on the Manu-smriti, as he not only gives the 
M&riM~8Qmihitd the first place among all the Smritis, but explains, 
amplifies, and occasionally modifies its rules on various topics of 
law . 2 


1. XIV. 12 f. 

2. For the relation of Bjrihaspati to Manu, see Jolly (Tagore Law Lectures 60-62), 
followed by Biihler (SBE, XXV, Introd. cviii), and Kane KHDS, I, 207). A 
small collection of the fragments of Brihaspati’s work on Vyavandra was 
translated by Jolly in SBE , XXXIIL A very much enlarged edition (Brikos- 
pati-smriti Reconstructed) has recently been published ( GOS . No. LXXXV. 
Baroda, 1941) by K. V. Kangaswami Aiyangar, who arranges the work under 
five heads, viz. Yyavahdra~k&n$a t Samskdra-kdnda, AchqTdkdnda, SrQddha- 

852 





LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


1. Courts of Justice 

The courts of justice in Brihaspati have the same complex con¬ 
stitution as in Narada. Brihaspati * 1 expands Narada’s list of eight 
(really nine) ‘members’ of a court of justice into ten by including 
the king’s own officer in the category, while he substitutes the autho¬ 
rised person ( adhikrita) or the chief judge ( adhyaksha ) for Narada’s 
‘righteous officer’ (satpurusha). Explaining the functions of these 
members for the first time, Brihaspati observes 2 that the king in¬ 
flicts punishment, the adhyaksha pronounces the sentence, the 
sahhyas investigate the case, the accountant computes the sum in 
dispute, the scribe records the proceedings, the king’s officer com¬ 
pels the attendance of the plaintiff, witnesses and sahhyas , the 
Smriti decides the judgment, gold and fire are required for adminis¬ 
tering oaths and (quaintly enough) water is required for quenching 
thirst. Whatever we may think of the above list, it undoubtedly 
shows that the decision of cases rested with the judge and the 
assessors, while the king carried out the sentence. The number of 
sahhyas ; according to Brihaspati, 3 should be seven, five or three. 
Elsewhere 4 Brihaspati mentions the ministers ( amdtyas ) and the 
Purohita as members of the court, but he gives no indication of 
their functions. 

Like Narada, Brihaspati contemplates a chain of courts as 
spreading throughout the kingdom. Courts, says Brihaspati, 5 are 
of four kinds, namely, fixed, moving, meeting under the king’s seal, 
and directed by the king himself. The first of these courts meets 
in town or village, the second is itinerant, the third is presided over 
by the adhyaksha , and the fourth is attended by the king. The last 
two classes of courts have their counterparts in the other Smritis, 
but the first two have no precise parallel elsewhere. Besides the 
above, Brihaspati contemplates 6 courts for foresters to be held in 
the forest, those for soldiers to be held in the camp, and those for 
merchants in the caravan. Again, courts consisting of learned 
Brahmanas alone are to decide the disputes among ascetics as well 
as those versed in sorcery and witchcraft, for otherwise the king 

kanijUi and Asaucha-kdiida. In the present section the references throughout 
are to Aiyangar’s edition, while Jolly’s translation in SBE, XXXIII, has been 
generally followed. 

1. I. 1. 87. 

2. I. 1. 88-90. 

3. I. 1. 63. 

4. I. 1. 22 and Ibid 70. 

5. I. 1. 57-58. 

6. I. 1. 73. 


858 




THE AGE> OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

would rouse the resentment of the parties. 1 Finally, we are intro¬ 
duced to the five grades of courts known to Yajnavalkya and Narada, 
namely kulas, §renls , ganas (in place of Yajnavalkya’s pug as), the 
authorised person and the king, each succeeding court being com¬ 
petent to hear appeals from the one immediately preceding. 2 The 
ample jurisdiction of these courts is illustrated by the rules that 
kulas, srenis, ganas and so forth, which are duly authorised by the 
king, shall decide all cases other than those relating to sdhasa . 3 

2. Judicial Procedure 

In the richness and complexity of his rules of judicial proce¬ 
dure, B|ihaspati surpasses Manu and Yajnavalkya, and approaches 
the level of Narada and Katyayana. Brihaspati, to begin with, dis¬ 
cusses in two contexts 4 Narada’s list of the four modes of decision, 
namely those according to dharma, vyavahara , charitra, and rajdjn a 
(for Narada’s rajasdsana). But his twofold exposition of this dictum, 
given in two different quotations, differs not only from the explana¬ 
tion of Narada, but from each other. According to the quotation in 
the Smjntichandrikd, vyavahara means a decision based on the sdstra 
alone, charitra means a decision given in accordance with local usage, 
with inference and with the opinions of merchants, while rdjdjnd 
refers to the king’s decision in disregard of usage. It will be ob¬ 
served that while Narada takes vyavahara and charitra to refer to 
judicial processes based on two distinct kinds of evidence, Brihaspati 
understands them in the sense of processes of law founded on two 
distinct classes of authorities. Both Narada and Brihaspati, how¬ 
ever, agree in declaring the king’s voice (rajasdsana or rajdjrva) to be 
the final authority in legal decisions. 

Completely different from the above is Brihaspati’s explanation 
of the dictum according to the quotation in the Viramitrodaya. Here 
Brihaspati divides each of the four modes into two kinds. Decision 
by dharma, according to him, takes place when the matter in dispute 
has been decided after due deliberation, according to equity and after 
tendering oaths. Again, it arises when the defendant admits the 
claim (or charge), or else his innocence is proved by means of ordeals. 
When the judgment was passed after examination of the evidence 
and, again, when the defendant told a lie or made no answer, it is 

1. I. l. 76. — 

2. I. 1. 75, Ibid 93-94. 

3. I. 1. 92. 

4. I. 1. 18 f and I. 9. 1 f. 


854 






LAW AND LEGAL INSTmJTIONS 


known as decision by vyavahara. When the judgment was based 
upon inference and, again, when it was passed according to usage, it 
is known as judgment by charitra . Finally, judgment by the king’s 
edict takes place when the evidence is equally balanced and, again, 
when the law-books and the sabhyas are at variance. The above 
classification, it will be observed, simply refers to different methods 
of deciding a suit—by equity, by oaths, by confession of the accused, 
by proof, by inference, and finally (in case of conflict of evidence or 
of authorities) by the king’s order. 

In so far as the decision by vyavahdra is concerned, Brihaspati 
enumerates a category of its four ‘feet’ (i.e. stages), which may be 
compared with a similar list in Narada. According to Brihaspati 1 
vyavahdra comprises four parts, namely, purvapaksha (plaint) uttara 
(answer), kriyd (adducing of proof), and nirnaya (judgment). A 
variant of this list is found in 1. 2. 1, where the four ‘feet’ of 
vyavahdra are said to consist of bhdshd (declaration), uttara (answer), 
kriyd (adducing of proof) and pratydkalita (deliberation as to 
burden of proof). 


3. Evidence 

Brihaspati’s rules relating to various kinds of evidence’ are 
ampler than those of Narada. Brihaspati expands Narada’s eleven 
kinds of witnesses into twelve by adding lekhita (one caused to be 
written) to his list. What is more, Brihaspati describes, for the 
first time, the characteristics of these classes. ‘A subscribing wit¬ 
ness’, according to him, is one who enters in a deed his own as well 
as his father’s caste, name, etc. and his place of residence. ‘A witness 
caused to be written’ is one whose name has been entered in the 
deed together with the details of the agreement by the plaintiff when 
writing the contract. ‘A secret witness’ is one who, having listened 
to the speeches of the debtor from concealment, relates them just as 
they were spoken. ‘A family witness’ is one who is appointed by 
both parties as being connected with them to witness a deed of parti¬ 
tion, gift or sale. ‘A messenger’ is a respectable man appointed by 
both parties who has come near to listen to their speeches. ‘A sponta¬ 
neous witness’ is one who declares of his own accord what he has 
winessed in a transaction under trial. ‘An indirect witness’ is one 
who repeats from hearsay previous statements of actual on-lookers. 
The king, having heard the speeches of both parties, may act as a 

1. I. 1. 17. 


855 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


witness if they contradict each other. The chief judge and the asses¬ 
sors may act as witnesses only when a fresh trial takes place after 
decision of a suit. The villagers may give evidence on what has 
been spoiled or damaged on their boundaries. 1 


However pedantic the above classification may seem, it at any 
rate shows the variety of ways in which witnesses could be employ¬ 
ed in judicial trials. Their importance is also illustrated by the list 
of ‘incompetent witnesses’ (including relatives of various degrees, 
persons morally wrecked and so forth), which Brihaspati gives 2 
after Narada. Unlike Narada who is content with a minimum 
number of 3 witnesses, Brihaspati 3 gives their number as 7, 5, 3 and 
(in case of Srotriyas) 2. That his rule was not meant to be rigidly 
followed is proved by Brihaspati’s declaration that the number in 
case of ‘subscribing’ and ‘secret’ witnesses shall be 2 of each sort 
and in case of ‘spontaneous’, ‘family’ and ‘indirect’ witnesses it shall 
be 3, 4 or 5 of each class. 4 Again, a single witness is permissible if 
he is a king or a chief judge ( adhyaksha ) and so forth. 5 Brihaspati 
agrees with Yajnavalkya in imposing a drastic penalty upon recal¬ 
citrant witnesses. A witness not attending court without the excuse 
of illness, he says, is to repay the debt and pay a fine after the lapse 
of a fortnight. 6 Brihaspati, moreover, seems to provide for the first 
time for the examination, cross-examination and re-examination of 
witnesses. It is valid testimony, he observes, 7 when the contents of 
a plaint have been fully corroborated by witnesses. Again, he says, 8 
the faults in a witness as in a document must be exposed at the time 
of the trial but not afterwards. Finally, he declares 9 that he whose 
documents or witnesses are objected to in a suit cannot gain his 
cause till he has removed those objections. 

Brihaspati gives 10 a systematic account of documents such as 
is unknown even to Narada. Amplifying Narada’s classification 
quoted above, he observes 11 that documents are of three kinds, 

1. I. 5. 4 f. 

2. I. 5. 39 f. 

3. I. 5. 1. 

4. I. 5. 19. 

5. I. 5. 20. 

6. I. 5. 45. 

7. I. 5. 44. 

8. I. 5. 22. 

9. I. 5. 29. 

10. I. 6. 1 f. 

11. I. 6. 4. 


856 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


namely, those written by the king, those written in a particular 
place (soil, by professional scribes), and those written by a man 
with his own hand. Brihaspati describes 1 three classes of king’s 
writings, namely, ‘royal edict’ which records in sufficiently complete 
form the king’s grants of land and the like, ‘writing embodying the 
king’s favour* which records grant of provinces etc. by the king to 
a favourite, and ‘document of victory’- ( jayapatra ) which contains 
the record of the whole proceedings of a trial and is sealed with the 
royal seal. Brihaspati also describes 2 seven classes of private 
documents, namely, deeds of partition, gift, purchase, mortgage, 
agreement, bondage and debt. This list is sufficient to illustrate the 
preponderance of written documents in the legal system of Brihas¬ 
pati. As a logical corollary of the above, we find Brihaspati con¬ 
veying a warning against forged documents as well as defining the 
characteristics of valid and invalid documents. 3 Brihaspati takes 
great pains in emphasising the need of giving publicity to docu¬ 
ments. A document, he says, 4 should be shown, read out and retold 
to kulas, srernis, ganas , etc., in order that its validity might be esta¬ 
blished. A document, which has neither been seen nor read out 
for thirty years, loses its validity although the subscribing witnesses 
be still alive. 5 Other passages point to the supreme importance 
of presenting documents in court. He who has acquired property 
shall establish his written title, although his son need establish the 
fact of possession alone. 6 When a creditor does not produce the 
bond and asks his debtor to repay the loan after cessation of in¬ 
terest, the bond itself becomes suspect. 7 

In the spirit of Yajnavalkya and Narada, Brihaspati 8 recom¬ 
mends recourse to ordeal when a doubt arises with regard to a 
document or statement of witnesses and when inference fails. 
Brihaspati 9 expands Narada’s list of seven ordeals into nine by 
adding the ordeals by the plough-share and by dharma. 

4. Civil and Criminal Law 

While referring to the eighteen titles of law made classical by 
Manu, Brihaspati classifies them for the first time under two broad 


1 . 

I. 6. 20 f. 

2. 

I. 6. 5 f. 

3. 

I. 6. 31 f. 

4. 

I. 6. 49. 

5. 

I. 6. 47. 

6. 

I. 6. 39. 

7. 

I. 6. 48. 

8 . 

I. 4. 17. 

9. 

I. 8. 3-1 


357 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


heads. The fourteen titles of law, he explains, 1 comprising money- 
lending, deposits, invalid gifts, concerns of partnership, non-pay¬ 
ment of wages, non-performance of service, disputes about land, sale 
without ownership, rescission of sale and purchase, breach of con¬ 
tract, relations between husband and wife, theft and inheritance, as 
well as gambling, spring out of wealth. On the other hand, the 
four titles of law comprising the two kinds of insult (parushya), 
violence (sahasa) and criminal connection with another’s wife spring 
out of injury to others. This classification is an important land¬ 
mark in the history of Hindu Law, for it implies the first clear re¬ 
cognition of the division between civil and criminal law. 


Dealing with the head ‘recovery of debts’, Brihaspati declares 2 
that the creditor shall lend money after securing a pledge ( ddhi ) of 
adequate value, or a deposit ( bandha ), or a trustworthy security, or 
a bond written by the debtor himself, or else attested by subscribing 
witnesses. To Narada’s four kinds of interest ( kalika, kdrita, kdyika 
and chakravriddhi) , Brihaspati adds 3 two others, namely, sikhd- 
vriddhi (‘hair-interest’) and bhogaldbha. (‘interest by enjoyment’). 
The former is so called because it grows constantly like hair and does 
not cease till the cutting-off of the head (i.e. payment of the prin¬ 
cipal), while the latter is based upon the use of a mortgaged house 
or the produce of a field. ‘Hair-interest’, ‘corporal interest’ and 
‘interest by enjoyment’ are to be taken so long as the principal 
remains unpaid, but the use of pledge after twice the amount of the 
principal has been realised from it, as well as compound interest 
and the exaction of principal and interest (together as principal) 
is reprehensible. 4 

Dealing with the law of partition and inheritance, Brihaspati 
says 5 that the father and the sons have equal shares in the pro¬ 
perty acquired by the grandfather, but the sons cannot claim a 
share of the father’s own property without his consent. This dictum, 
like that of Yajhavalkya quoted above, became in later times the 
corner-stone of the view of the Mitakshard school on the subject. 


Passing to the penal law in Brihaspati, the plea of first provo¬ 
cation is forcibly illustrated in the striking rule 6 that a man who 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 




I. 1. 11 f. 

I. 10. 5. 

I. 10. 9 f. 

no, 16, 21. 

I. 26, 10. 

I. 21, 19. 


358 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


having been abused returns the abuse, or having been struck returns 
the blow, or having been attacked kills his assailant, commits no 
offence. Compensation to the aggrieved party is provided by the 
clause 1 that he who injures a limb or divides or cuts it off must 
pay the expense of curing the wound, and that he who forcibly 
carries away property in a quarrel must restore it to the owner. 
An interesting clause 2 provides that in case a number of persons 
joined in beating a man to death, he who struck the fatal blow shall 
receive the prescribed punishment, while the first aggressor and his 
associates shall receive half the punishment. In Brihaspati, even 
more than in Narada, punishment for theft or violence is propor¬ 
tioned to the gravity of the offence without reference to the caste 
of the offender. 


1. 1. 21. 15. 

2. I. 23. 14-15. 


859 




CHAPTER XIX 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

A. GENERAL INTRODUCTION 

Freedom of religious speculation, of which we get the first fruits 
in the earlier Upanishads, was the special characteristic of the period 
under review. It was the main pre-occupation of men who belonged 
to the last two nsramas or stages of life formulated in the Brahmanical 
scriptures. 1 This class of wandering ascetics, freed from the obliga¬ 
tions of prevailing religious ideas and practices, thought out anew 
the fundamental problems of life. Their number increased in this 
period, and their constant movements brought them into frequent 
associations with one another. The result was a vigorous reorienta¬ 
tion of religious life. The Vedic religion lost credit and a twofold 
reaction ensued,—an atheistic movement which frankly denied the 
necessity, if not also the reality, of the Vedic gods together with the 
pre-eminence of the Brahmanas in spiritual matters, and a mono¬ 
theistic movement which accepted devotion (bhakti) as the only way 
of pleasing a personal God. 

We thus find in the sixth century B. C. an upheaval of new ideas 
leading to the rise of new philosophical tenets and religious sects, 2 
often of a revolutionary' character, such as India has never seen be¬ 
fore or since. Many of these philosophical dogmas or religious sects 
had a merely temporary vogue, and gradually faded away. A few, 
however, came to stay, and left a permanent impress. A review of 
the religious condition of the period must, therefore, first take note 
of the new religious sects and philosophical doctrines which pro¬ 
foundly modified the outlook of the future, before considering the 
further progress of: the Vedic religion, or the multiplicity of other 
religious beliefs and practices which had little in common with 
Vedic rituals. 

Of the new religious sects four alone played an important part 
in subsequent history. These are Jainism, Buddhism, Vaishnavism 
and Saivism. The* first three were founded by the Kshatriyas, and 
had their origin in the eastern and western parts of India which were 
outside the pale of Madhyade&a, the homeland of orthodox Vedic 

1. See above, Vol. I, pp. 493-94. 

2. A long list of these, given in Anguttara Nikaya and other Buddhist texts, is 
given on p. 462. 


860 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


culture. Saivism had also a non-Vedic, probably a pre-Vedic, origin 
and developed as a sectarian religion in Western India. All of them 
had as their common ground the repudiation, explicit or implied, of 
the Brahmanical claim that the Vedas were the infallible source of 
spiritual truth, and the rituals prescribed therein the sole means of 
salvation or emancipation. 

But there was a fundamental difference between them. While 
the last two were theistic and centred round two Vedic deities— 
Vishnu and Siva—the first two had no veneration for Vedic gods, or 
for the matter of that, any god at all. They laid emphasis on a rigo¬ 
rous system of discipline based on a code of moral and spiritual be¬ 
haviour, and a loving faith in the founders of the religion took the 
place of devotion to particular gods like Vishnu or Siva. They were 
also averse to the iniquities of the caste system, especially to the 
high pretensions of the Brahmanas. 

Although, therefore, all the four religious sects mark consider¬ 
able departure from the Vedic cult, Buddhism and Jainism alone are 
looked upon as heterodox, while Vaishnavism and Saivism are, by 
contrast, regarded merely as reforms of the orthodox religion. 
Hence the religious doctrines of these two sects form the subject- 
matter of Brahmanical works such as the Epics, the later Upanishads 
and the Puranas, while the Buddhists and Jains have altogether 
separate canons of their own. 

The common essential elements in the two theistic religions, 
Vaishnavism and Saivism, are bhakti and prasada. The former 
means intense love and devotion of the worshipper to his beloved 
god, even to the extent of complete self-surrender. The latter 
means the grace of God which brings salvation to the devotee. The 
followers of Siva and Vishnu formed two rival sects with many 
points of contact between them. We hear of claims and counter¬ 
claims on behalf of the one or the other god, and of combats and other 
tests to prove their relative strength. Legends grew round the gods, 
and they became incorporated in the great Epic poems. The fol¬ 
lowers of one god would naturally shower the highest praise on 
their deity; and this, as a matter of course, would be called to 
question by their rivals. But it must be said at the same time that 
there were also, even in Vedic times, some thinkers who realized that 
though God was called by different names, Siva and Vishnu were 
only aspects of the one. 1 

1. See the Creation Hymn, Rigveda X. 129: “God is One, though men speak of 
Him by many names.” 


361 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Buddhism and Jainism had also many elements in common. 
Philosophically they both started from the same fundamental prin¬ 
ciple that the world is full of misery, and the object of religion is to 
find means of deliverance from the endless cycle of births and deaths 
which bring men again and again into this world. As Karma, or the 
individual's actions, is the root-cause of rebirth, emphasis is laid 
upon conduct and the practice of austerities in varying degrees of 
severity as the chief means of salvation, rather than sacrifices or 
prayers to a personal god. Both believe that complete emancipation 
from rebirth is only attainable by the homeless ascetic, but both 
regard the life of the layman as an initial and preparatory stage in 
the process. The community of monks ( Sangha) and of laymen 
form in both the chief objects of disciplinary regulations, but 
different moral and spiritual codes are prescribed for each. 

These resemblances are so close that it was held at one time 
that Jainism was a branch of Buddhism. But this is certainly erro¬ 
neous, as we can now trace the different historic origins of the two, 
and detect fundamental differences in their philosophic conceptions 
and essential practices. Their ideas on the subject of the soul, for 
example, differ considerably. Besides, Buddhists did not favour the 
extreme fo r ms of asceticism and abstention from taking life advo¬ 
cated by tne Jains, or some of their practices like going naked. 
Buddhism advocates the golden mean in all these matters. The 
common elements are easily explained by the fact that both arose 
in the same region and at about the same time, and drew upon many 
of the views, ideas and practices which were more or less common 
property. 

Jainism and Buddhism both imply a ‘system of philosophy and 
a social organization, with a code of morality and cult of their own, 
which together gave to their followers a sense of religious solidarity. 
They both possess a common background of Aryan culture, and are 
inspired by the ascetic ideals and the philosophy of the Upanishads, 
though in varying degrees. Both of them owed their origin to 
kindred forces,, whether intellectual, spiritual or social, and may be 
viewed either as a revolt against the Brahmanical religion, or as an 
outcome and modification of it by overstressing the ascetic side, such 
as renunciation of the world, self-denial and alnimsd. In both we 
may also detect the influence of a pre-Aryan culture in eastern India 
which, though gradually submerged, probably preserved some latent 
traces which germinated at a later date. It has been noted above, 1 


1. See Vol. I, Ch. VIII. 


362 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


how the eastern part of India, even when Aryanised, preserved con¬ 
siderable differences from the midlands in point of language, ethnic 
elements and culture, and this undoubtedly explains the origin of 
the two heterodox sects in this very region. The 6akya clan had 
probably a Mongolian strain in their blood. 

In the field of philosophical ideas the heterodox religions show 
a number of points suggestive of either a borrowing from, or a sur¬ 
vival of, the thought-currents of primitive peoples. Jacobi has 
shown how, in spite of divergent growths in later days, there are 
some essential features common to Jainism, Buddhism and the 
Sankhya-Yoga philosophy, which go back to the ‘primitive currents 
of religious and philosophical speculation’. 1 All three share a kind 
of pessimism, a conviction that human life is full of misery, no trace 
of which is to be found in the optimistic attitude of the Vedic Aryans. 
The doctrine of transmigration, unknown to the early Brahmanas, 
suddenly emerges in the Upanishads and forms an essential element 
in these three systems. What is more important is the fact that thi9 
doctrine assumes its peculiarly Indian form by its association with 
the doctrine of Karman, and we know that the most primitive'ideas 
of Karman are found in Jain metaphysics. An atheistic attitude 
and a kind of dualism between spirit and matter characterise all the 
three systems of thought. 

To the same primitive influence must also be attributed another 
important feature in the development of religions during this period, 
viz . the introduction of the practice of image-worship. The glyptic 
and other antiquarian remains of the pre-historic sites of the Sindhu 
valley seem to suggest that it was in vogue among the earliest inha¬ 
bitants of this region. 2 As noted above, 3 the Sindhu valley folk have 
been regarded by most scholars as pre-Vedic and quite distinct from 
the Aryan immigrants. The question whether this form of religious 
worship was known to the latter has long been debated, and diffe¬ 
rent scholars have held quite contrary views on it. Som sOTgest 
that the Vedic Aryans did not make visible repx t their 

gods and goddesses as, in the particular form of sacrifietEi religion 
which was practised by them, divine images had no part to play. 
Others, however, hold that these people made icons of various divi¬ 
nities such as Indra, Rudra, Vayu, Varuna and others, and these, if 
not actually worshipped, were u sed for ritualistic purposes. They 

1. ERE, VH, 465. 

2. See Vol. I, p. 187. 

3. See Vol. I, pp. 158, 194, 203. 

863 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


principally rely on the anthropomorphic descriptions of these deities 
in the Vedic hymns. In assessing the truth of these views, it should 
be borne in mind that Vedic literature is almost exclusively con¬ 
cerned with the beliefs and practices of the Aryan invaders. The 
Dasyus or aboriginal inhabitants are scornfully referred to as wor¬ 
shippers of the phallic emblem later associated with Siva. There is 
therefore very little justification for the supposition that the higher 
classes were iconic; the anthropomorphism of the Vedic gods and 
goddesses was vague and variable and does not seem to rest on any 
concrete basis. 

One unanswerable argument in support of this view is the fact 
that in most of the earlier and more authoritative Brahmanas, which 
lay down in meticulous detail the rituals of the various sacrifices, 
there is no reference to images, which would certainly have been 
explicitly mentioned had they been regarded as necessary. In the 
subsequent period, when image-worship had come to play a definite 
part in Indian religion, detailed descriptions of these are never lack¬ 
ing. But the cult of symbols and images seems to have been current 
among a large section of the population, who continued the tradi¬ 
tional religious practices of the pre-Aryan settlers of India, some of 
whose cultural remains were unearthed in the Sindhu valley region. 
Reference may be made in this connection to the images of Yakshas 
and Nagas, one of whom, the Manibhadra Yaksha from Pawaya, is 
actually called Bhagavan. 

The early Buddhist convention of representing the Buddha by 
means of various symbols such as foot-prints, the Bodhi-tree with 
Vajrasana beneath it, a parasol, a stupa, etc. and the subsequent in¬ 
troduction of his figure in the Hellenistic art of Gandhara led many 
European scholars to suggest that the Indians learnt the art of making 
images from the idolatrous Greeks. But this theory no longer holds 
the field. It is now generally held that the practice of making images 
of the Buddha grew up independently at Mathura at the time when, 
with the development of the Mahayana doctrine under the Kusha- 
nas, Gautama was no longer regarded as a dead teacher but a Saviour 
God. Contact with the West might have given an impetus to the 
development of monographic art in India, but it was certainly not 
its origin. It was already there as a social undercurrent dating 
from pre-Vedic times, and it became an almost general practice when 
different sectarian religions such as Vaishnavism (Bhagavatism), 
Saivism, Mahayana Buddhism, Jainism, etc, were formulated. It 


364 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


was developed principally owing to the spiritual needs of the various 
sectaries, who wanted images of their respective gods and goddesses 
to whom they could offer single-minded devotion (ekdtmikd bhalcti ) 
through the medium of these concrete symbols, as will be noted 
later. 


B. BUDDHISM 

Since very ancient times every convert to Buddhism has been 
solemnly invoked to take refuge in the Triratna (the three jewels), 
viz. the Buddha, Dhamma, and Sahgha. This emphasis on the three 
aspects of the religion, viz. the Founder, his principles, and the 
monastic order, forms an essential characteristic of the sect. We 
may also adopt this broad classification in the delineation of 
Buddhism. 


I. THE BUDDHA 

We possess no authentic accounts of the life of Gautama, the 
founder of Buddhism. Two poems in the Sutta Nipata and a few 
early Suttas supply us with some data, but we have to rely for de¬ 
tails mainly upon comparatively later works, which appear to have 
preserved older traditions handed down in some form of ballad 
poetry. The following short sketch of the life of the Master is re¬ 
constructed on the basis of these different sources. 

1. Early Life 

Gautama, alias Siddhartha, was born at Lumbinivana 1 in c. 563 
B.C. 2 in a lonely corner of India on the border of Nepal. His father 
Suddhodana was the chief of the Sakya clan, which had its capital 
at Kapilavastu. 3 His mother Maya died seven days after his birth, 
and he was brought up by his mother’s sister Mahaprajapati Gotamff. 
Many miraculous events are said to have heralded his advent. An 
ascetic called Asita, who lived in the Himalayas, came to the royal 
palace to pay his respects to the new-born babe. He lamented the 
fact that he would not live to listen to his teachings, and so he 
enjoined his disciple Nalaka (later known as Mahakachchayana) to 
become a follower of the new Teacher. 4 

1. This site is marked by the Rummindei Pillar inscription of Asoka. The ruins 
of Rummindei (Lumbini) lie 4 miles inside the Nepalese border (85° IP N. Lat. 
25° 58' E. Long.) near Padara. 

2. For this date cf. p. 36. 

3. For the $akyas, see p. 16 above. According to tradition, the forefathers of the 
gakyas hailed from Saketa and settled in a forest near the hermitage of 
Rishi Kapila (Mah&vastu, I. pp. 351-2). 

4. tiutta-Nipata, Nalakasutta. 


865 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

In the earlier sources there is no mention of his early education 
or training. The Lalitavistara gives a legendary account of his 
schooling and of his extraordinary proficiency in archery and other 
princely attainments. As was the wont with the sons of the nobility, 
Gautama lived a life of ease and luxury, and ultimately settled down 
as a householder after marrying Bhaddakachchana (=rYasodhara), 1 
daughter of the Sakyan Suppabuddha and sister of Devadatta. A 
son was born of the marriage and he was called Rahula. 

The idea of renunciation, according to the later texts, came into 
his mind from seeing four persons in four different stages,—an old 
man, a cripple, an ascetic and a corpse. His disgust for worldly plea¬ 
sures was aroused by the sight of dancing girls sleeping in ugly 
postures. In the early texts like the Sutta Nipata or the Ariyapari- 
yesana-sutta there is no reference to the above-mentioned causes for 
retirement. It is simply stated that Siddhartha realised that home 
life was full of hindrances and impurities and that the life of a 
recluse was free and open, and so he decided to retire from the 
world and refrain from committing wrong in thought, word or deed. 
At the age of twenty-nine he left the palace secretly at night on his 
horse Kanthaka, doffed his princely robes, and embraced the life of 
a wandering hermit. 

He traversed a number of villages, till at last he reached the city 
of Vaisall, on the outskirts of which lived the teacher Arada Kalama. 
He stayed at his hermitage for some time and realised the seventh 
stage of meditation (akinchanydyatana=zsphere of desirelessness or 
nothingness). It is only from the Buddhacharita that we learn that 
Arabia Kalama espoused the Sankhya school of philosophy. 2 It is 
very likely that Siddhartha, hailing as he did from Kapilavastu, had 
some knowledge of the Sankhya doctrine, and that he became a dis¬ 
ciple of Arada Kalama to improve his knowledge of it. Evidently 
he was not satisfied with the teachings of the Sankhya school and 
left the hermitage of Arada to become a disciple of another teacher, 
Rudraka Ramaputra, who was then living in the outskirts of 
Raj agriha. 

It was on his way to this teacher that he met, at the Pandava 
hill, king Bimbisara who tried to dissuade him from giving up his 
princely life. Politely declining king Bimbisara’s request, he pro¬ 
ceeded to the hermitage of Rudraka and became his disciple. He 

1. In the Lalitavistara, the name given is Gopa, daughter of the Sakyan 
Dandapani. 

2. Buddhacharita, XII, 17-65. 


866 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


found that the stage reached by this teacher was that of the highest 
meditation but did not lead to final liberation. He accordingly left 
him, and had recourse to rigorous practices along with five other 
Brahmana ascetics. One day he was almost on the point of death, 
when he decided to take food just sufficient to sustain his body for 
the strain of extreme mental exertion. On account of this he was 
deserted by his five Brahmana companions. 

He then took his seat under a pipal tree at Uruvela, when he 
was offered milk by a milkmaid named Sujata, who took him to be 
the tree spirit (vrikshaka). After accepting this nourishment, he sat 
cross-legged in meditation, with the resolve not to rise from his seat 
until he had attained Enlightenment ( Bodhi ). With full confidence 
in his powers of resistance, he remained unmoved by fear of tempta¬ 
tion (personified as Mara). In the autobiographical Ariyapariye- 
sana-sutta , 1 there is no reference to Sujata’s offering or his experi¬ 
ments in asceticism, though the latter is mentioned in other suttas 
of the Majjhima Nikaya. In the Ariyapariyesana-sutta, it is stated 
that Gautama, after leaving Rudraka’s hermitage, went to Univilva 
where he found a charming spot with river water almost overflow¬ 
ing the banks and within easy reach of villages. Seated at this 
spot, after intense exertion, he finally realised the Truth. He thus 
became the Buddha (the Enlightened One). He attained both in¬ 
sight and knowledge, and knew for certain that he had achieved full 
emancipation and would not be reborn. For seven weeks, it is said, 
he remained in blissful contemplation of his newly-acquired know¬ 
ledge. 

The Truth realised by him was so deep and subtle that at first 
he thought that it would not be worth his while to try to expound 
it to the world at large. Then, we are told, at the intervention of the 
god Brahma himself, he agreed to preach at least for the benefit of 
those who were spiritually advanced. At first he thought of his 
two teachers, Arada Kalama and Rudraka Ramaputra, but found 
that they were no more. He then turned his attention to his five 
Brahmana comrades who were then residing at Rishipattana (Sar- 
nath) near Banaras and maue up his mind to enlighten them. He 
proceeded there and delivered before them his first sermon, which 
is metaphorically represented in Buddhist literature as “turning the 
Wheel of the Law”. 2 

1. Majjhima Nikaya, I, p. 164 f. 

2. Most of the biographies end their account with the discourses delivered to the 
five Brahmanas. There is no connected account of Buddha’s career after the 

867 _ 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


2. Missionary life 

Buddha thus began his career as teacher at Itishipattana, where 
he converted the five Brahmana ascetics. With them he went to 
Banaras and converted Yasa, a rich setthi’s son, and a number of 
his friends, among whom were the distinguished monks Punnaji 
and Gavampati. 

From Banaras, Buddha went to Raj agriha where he passed the 
second, third and fourth vassds (retreats). At that time there were 
in Magadha many Brahmanical and non-Brahmanical teachers 
( titthiyas ) and wandering monks (parivrajakas ), and much of 
Buddha’s time and energy was spent in refuting their doctrines and 
convincing them of the excellence of his teaching. He succeeded in 
making a large number of converts, including a few distinguished 
householders as lay-devotees (upasakas). The notable among the 
converts were Sariputra and Maudgalyayana, who were formerly 
disciples of Sanjaya Belatthiputta; the Brahmanical ascetics, the 
Jatilas; Upali gahapati and Abhayarajakumara, staunch followers of 

c 

Nigantha Nataputta; the rich merchant Anathapindika of fabulous 
wealth; kings Bimbisara and Ajatasatru, and later, king Muntfa. 
Besides Rajagriha, Buddha visited Gaya, Uruvilva, Nalanda, and 
Pataliputra. 

Though the foundation of the religion was laid in Magadha, its 
full development took place in Kosala (Savatthi) where Buddha 
spent the last twenty-one vassds, delivered the largest number of 
discourses, and framed the greater part of the disciplinary code. 
Brahmanism was strong in Kosala, and it was with the help and 
munificence of Anathapindika that Buddha was enabled to gain a 
footing there. His favourite resort was the famous Jetavana monas¬ 
tery, which was purchased for him by Anathapindika at a fabulous 
price. King Prasenajit (Pasenadi) became a devout listener of 
Buddha’s discourses, while his queen Mallika and his two sisters 
Soma and Sakula became lay-devotees. Another influential sup¬ 
porter was Visakha, who built the Pubbarama monastery for him 
and who was particularly interested in the welfare of the nuns. 

Buddha once visited Kapilavastu while he was staying at 
Rajagriha and converted the members of his family, including his 
son Rahula and foster-mother Mahaprajapati Gotaml. The Sakyas, 

attainment of Bodhi. There is, however, ample material in the Nikayas, the 
Vinaya and the introductory portions of the Jatakas for compiling an authen¬ 
tic account of Buddha’s peregrinations. The commentaries furnish us with a 
list of the places where Buddha spent his vassds or rainy season retreats. 


868 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


it is said, were not at first very well disposed towards Buddha, but 
after an exhibition of his miraculous power they showed him due 
respect and invited him to consecrate their newly built assembly 
hall (santhagdra ). 

Buddha spent the fifth vassd at Vaisall. Ambapali, the famous 
courtezan of Vaisall, became a convert, and offered her mango grove 
to the Sangha. While staying at Vaisall Buddha gave his consent to 
the formation of an order of nuns at the importunities of Ananda 
and Mahaprajapati Gotami. The latter came there all the way on 
foot from Kapilavastu in the fullness of her grief at the demise of 
king guddhodana. 

The Mallas were not in favour of the new Teacher. Once they 
issued a mandate that any person welcoming him would be fined 
500 kahdpanas. In spite of this order a few Mallas became converts. 

Buddha spent the ninth vassd at Kausambi. King Udayana did 
not look upon the new Teacher with favour but queen Samavati 
became a devotee of Buddha. His other queen Magandiya took 
advantage of the king’s antipathy towards Buddha to bring about 
the ruin of Samavati. Her machinations were, however, discovered; 
the king became repentant and ultimately appreciated the teachings 
of Pii?<Jola Bharadvaja, a noted disciple. 

The westernmost country visited by Buddha was Veraiija (near 
Mathura) where he spent the twelfth vassd. Once he was invited 
by king Pradyota of Avanti, but he declined to go to his city and 
deputed Mahakachchayana, a native of the place, to impart his 
teachings. Mahakachchayana made only a few converts in Avanti. 
Buddha did not pass any vassd in Anga though he dwelt at times at 
Champa, Apana, Assapura and Kajangala. 

In the Mahdparinibbana-sutta we have not only a graphic ac¬ 
count of Buddha’s last journey to Kusinara, the capital of Mallas, 
and his fatal illness, but also a detailed description of his cremation 
and the divison of his relics. This sutta is particularly important 
for a summary of his teaching, as also for the list of countries where 
the largest number of devotees existed, 1 and the names of claimants 
to the relics. 2 From the account of Buddha’s peregrinations given 
above, the names of places mentioned in the Mahdparinibbana-sutta , 

1. The list is as follows:—Champa, Rajagaha, Savatthi, Saketa, Kosambi and 

Varanasi. 

2 The claimants were Lichchhavis of Vesali, 6akyas of Kapilavatthu, Bulis of 

Allakappa, Koliyas of Ramagama, Brahmanas of Vethadipa, Mallas of Kusi¬ 
nara, Dona Brahmana, and Moriyas of Pipphalivana (See Ch. I). 

369 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


and the local habitations of the claimants of the relics, we may con¬ 
clude that during the lifetime of the Master, the religion spread all 
over the central belt of India from Kajangala and Champa on the 
east to Yerahja and Avanti on the west, and from Rajagyiha and 
Varanasi to KausambI, SravastI and Saketa on the north, as also to 
the various tribes inhabiting the Himalayan foothills. 

II. DHAMMA 

The earliest available source for our knowledge of Buddha’s 
teaching is the Pali Sutta Pipaka consisting of the five Niktiyas, viz. 
Digha, Majjhima, Samyutta , Anguttara and Khuddaka , as also the 
few fragments of their Sanskrit versions discovered in Central Asia 
and Eastern Turkestan. The Sutta Pipaka which has come down to 
us contains many additions and alterations made by succeeding 
generations of disciples, for which Mrs. Rhys Davids states that the 
teachings embodied in the Sutta Pipaka should be attributed not only 
to Gautama but also to his immediate disciples whom she would 
designate as the *‘co-Founders” of Buddhism. It is not a homogeneous 
work containing, as it does, statements which are not always con¬ 
sistent and are capable of being differently interpreted. In view of 
this lack of homogeneity it is not possible to state definitely what 
were actually the original teachings of Buddha, and so we shall have 
to satisfy ourselves with what can be elicited from the Pali Pipaka 
as it now stands. 

Buddha’s repeated instruction to his followers was to pursue 
practical methods in order to arrive at the Truth, and not to distract 
themselves with academic speculations about the Beyond, the 
Ultimate. What is most needed is the removal of ignorance, thirst, 
attachment, etc. by the comprehensions of the four Aryasatyas (Noble 
Truths), viz. (1) that worldly existence is full of misery ( duhkha ), 
(2) that thirst, attachment, etc. are the causes of worldly existence 
(samudaya), (3) that worldly existence can be ended ( nirodha ) by 
the destruction of thirst, etc. and (4) that there is a Path ( vndrga) 
for the destruction of thirst, etc. The Path is the well-known Eight¬ 
fold Way, viz . right speech, right action, and right means of liveli¬ 
hood, then right exertion, right-mindedness, right meditation, and 
lastly right resolution and right point of view. The first three prac¬ 
tices lead to physical control ( sila ), the second three to mental con¬ 
trol (chitta), and the last two to intellectual development (prajnd). 1 

1. Cf. Digha Nikaya, II. p. 123:— 

Silarn samadhi pahnd cha vimutti c ha anuttarc, 

Anubuddhd ime dhamma Gotamena yasassind. 

870 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

There is nothing particularly Buddhistic in seven of the eight prac¬ 
tices. It is the eighth practice which contains the Buddhist dogma, 
for all views about the ultimate except those of the Buddhists are 
wrong ( mithyd ). By observance of slid (moral rules codified in the 
Vinaya) the adept becomes a perfect brahmachari, by that of chitta 
(meditational practices detailed in the Sutta and Abhidhamma 
Pifakas) the adept attains full mental concentration, and by that 
of prajnti (intellectual culture provided in Suttu Pitaka ) the adept 
realises Truth or Reality, which may be summed up as follows: 

The phenomenal world has no real existence; to the unenlight¬ 
ened certain causes and conditions ( hetu-praiyaya ) make a thing 
appear to exist, like waves on the sea. As waves are not different 
from the sea, yet the common man differentiates them, so there are 
no individuals though, to the unenlightened, different individuals 
appear to exist on account of certain causes and conditions ( pratittya - 
samutpada). It is only the spiritually advanced who can compre¬ 
hend this truth. 

Still more difficult and subtle is the conception of NiW&$a. 
This is incommunicable,, for the Infinite cannot be described by finite 
words. The utmost that we can do is to throw some light on it by 
recourse to negative terms. Nirvana (Nibbana) is the final result 
of the extinction of the desire or thirst for rebirth. In the Ariyapari - 
yesana-sutta, it is described as not subject to decay (ajam), disease 
(avyddhi) or death ( amrita ); it is free from grief (asoka)\ and im¬ 
purity (asamklishfa) ; it is the incomparable ( anuttara ) and highest 
goal (yogakshema) . It is the relinquishment of all worldly ties, 
cessation of the effects of past actions, end of all things, removal of 
desire, severance of attachment, quietude. In the Nikayas generally 
any definition of Nirvana has been avoided as far as possible with 
the remark that it is indeterminate (avyoJcnta), but here and there 
are stray passages which describe it as the blissful reward of a long 
course of exertion—a haven of peace and rest. Buddha purposely 
discouraged questions about the reabsorption of the individual soul, 
as being of no practical value in the quest for salvation. 

The exposition of the Eightfold Path forms the theme of the 
Dharm a-chakra-pravartana Sutra , which is said to be the Buddha’s 
first discourse. It is also widely known as the Middle Path 
(madhyama pratipat ) as it keeps clear of the two extreme ways of 
life, one being that of ease and luxury and the other of rigorous 
ascerticism. This path allowed a monk to live a life of moderate 


371 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


comfort, with the bare requirements of food, clothing and residence, 
but with the mind intent on achieving the goal. 

The second discourse said to have been delivered by Buddha 
strikes the keynote of his teachings, viz., that the five constituents 
which make a being are without a self ( andtma ), impermanent 
( anitya) and are not desirable (duhkha). He who realizes the 
absence of soul or substance in the constituents knows that he does 
not exist as an individual, and as such there can be no relationship 
between himself and the objects around him. There is nothing in 
this world to make him happy or sad and so he is free ( vimukta ), he 
is an arhat—perfect. 1 

Such, in brief, is the doctrine of Buddhism as finally developed 
in the Tripitaka. There are, however, good grounds to believe that 
Buddhism, like Jainism, was originally a moral code, rather than a 
metaphysical or religious system in the western sense of the term. 
In its earlier phase this moral code was marked by an underlying 
note of pessimism. There is so much evil and suffering in the world 
that life cannot be considered a blessing. It has been said that if 
the tears shed in sorrow since the beginning of the world could be 
collected together, their volume would far exceed the waters of 
all the seaS put together. 

This suffering, however, can be escaped by a correct life and 
correct thinking. But when you talk of thinking, you must also say 
what it is that one should think of. To Buddha, it was, in brief, the 
contemplation of the impermanence of the world we live in. Igno¬ 
rance of this produces desire: desire leads to action (karma): action 
(karma) to the impulse to be born again and again in order to satisfy 
desire. This chain of transmigration leads to further actions, which 
in their turn lengthen the chain of rebirth. But this chain can be 
snapped once the seeker realizes the truth that the world of things 
is impermanent, that there is not even a permanent soul. The uni¬ 
verse is a ceaseless flow of events and the soul is not identical with 
itself and is not a unity. It is merely a flux of experiences and de¬ 
sires. This perpetual flux is caused by action (karma ) and ended by 
knowledge (jndna). There is no personal deity (Atman), hence the 


1. There are four stages of sanctification in the Buddhist code. The first is 
Srotapanna, i.e. one who is in the stream leading to Nirvana. The second is 
Sakridagami, i.e. one who will be reborn once more in this mortal world to 
reach the goal. The third is Anagami, i.e. one who will not come to the world 
of men but will be reborn among the gods to attain Nirvana. The fourth is 
Arhat , i.e. one who has destroyed all impurities and attained Nirvana and will 
have no more rebirth. 


872 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

attainment of Nirvana does not depend upon prayers or sacrifices. In 
his dying words Buddha exhorted his disciples to be “lamps unto 
themselves”, as there is no other light. Salvation can only be won 
by the extinction of karma by right living and thinking. 1 

It will appear from the above account that the metaphysical 
element, properly so called, did not play a prominent part in the 
earlier phases of Buddhism. . But a philosophical background gra¬ 
dually became necessary not only for its propagation but for its 
very existence. There is a parallel to this phenomenon in the history 
of Christianity. In the beginning, Christianity like Buddhism was a 
creed intended to bring to mankind a message of hope and solace in 
its sufferings. But when the simple faith of Jesus planted itself in 
Hellenic soil, it could not take root until an alliance had been effect¬ 
ed with the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. Similarly Buddhism 
also had to adopt a policy of give and take with the acute Brahmani- 
cal thinkers of the day in order to save itself from their assaults and 
to compete with them. 

The first sign of this development and adaptation appears in 
the schism between what has been called Hlnaydna and Mahayaha 
(or the small vehicle and the large vehicle). The first school look¬ 
ed upon the salvation of the individual as the goal, whereas the 
other school took the salvation of all beings as its aim. The first 
was thus a lower ( hina ) aim than the second. The first kept to Pra¬ 
krit as the language of its exposition, while the second soon betook 
itself to Sanskrit, the language of learning. This development will 
be treated in a later section. 

In conclusion it must be pointed out that, while the fundamental 
teachings of the main Upanishads were tacitly accepted by the 
early Buddhists, their attitude towards Brahmanism was one of un¬ 
disguised hostility. The Vedas have been repeatedly referred to 
in the Nikayas as compositions of certain rishis (sages), but the Vedic 
belief of union with Brahma by means of good works or performance 
of sacrifices was rejected as misleading and baseless. On the other 
hand some Buddhist suttas preached that one can attain rebirth in 
Brahmaloka by practising the four excellent practices ( brahma - 
viharas ), viz. maitfi (love), karuna (compassion), mudita (elation 
at others' success), and upekshd (equanimity) towards all beings of 
the four corners of the world. There are also bitter criticisms of 

1. This view is strongly contested by Mrs. Rhys Davids. See What is the original 
Doctrine of Buddhism? (1938). 


873 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the belief that merit or happiness can be obtained by means of ani¬ 
mal sacrifices such as the Asvamedha, Purushamedha or Vajapeya. 
The Brahmanic claim of superiority in caste was challenged, but the 
caste system was tacitly admitted with the proviso that Kshatriyas 
were a superior caste to Brahamnas. 

Without admitting the existence of the soul, the early Buddhists 
accepted the Upanishadic theory of karma; in other words, the in¬ 
evitability of the effects of deeds in regulating future births, and 
that of the existence of heavens and hells. The theories that the 
worldly existence is full of misery, and that the cessation of worldly 
existences must be sought for, were also inherited by the Buddhists 
from the previous thinkers. 

III. SANGHA 

In the earlier stages, Buddha’s disciples led a wandering life, 
residing in caves and forests, living on alms, and dressing themselves 
in rags collected from dust-heaps. They assumed the title of bhikkhu 
or beggar. Buddha, as already stated, was not in favour of extreme 
austerity; he permitted his disciples to live in monasteries specially 
built for them, accept food and robes offered by the faithful, and 
take medicines prescribed by the physicians. To prevent novices 
from abusing their privileges, he framed a number of rules for their 
guidance. These were codified in the Patimokkha. In course of 
time there were many additions to the rules made by the Teacher 
himself and his disciples. These supplementary rules have been 
incorporated in the other parts of the Vinaya Pitaka. The rules 
may be classified under seven heads, viz. ordination; monastery; 
dress; food and medicine; the fortnightly assembly; the rainy season 
retreat and its closing ceremonies; special rules for nuns; the eccle¬ 
siastical constitution. 

1 . Ordination 

Buddha at the beginning personally ordained his disciples by 
uttering the words: “Ehi bhikkhu” (Come;, O monk). He then dele¬ 
gated his power of ordination to his disciples, after laying down 
certain rules for their guidance. A person seeking first or lower 
ordination must obtain the consent of his parents, attain the age of at 
least 15, and must be free from certain disabilities. He is then to 
shave his hair and moustache, put on yellow robes and choose a 
teacher who will present him before a panel of at least ten monks. 
If none of the monks dissent, he is given the lower ordination 


874 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


( pravrajyd ). He becomes a Sramana (novice) and is asked to ob¬ 
serve the ten precepts. 1 On his attaining the age of 20, if he is 
found fit, he is given the higher ordination ( upasampadd ) and is 
enjoined to abide by the rules of the Patimokkha. 

2. The Monastery 

There are detailed rules for the selection of the site of a monas¬ 
tery and also about the size of the rooms. Large monasteries w«re 
usually provided with dwelling rooms, a service-hall, storehouse, 
cloister, well, bath-room, and rooms for walking exercises. The 
ownership of the monastery vested in the Sahgha of the Four Quar¬ 
ters. The monasteries were allowed to be furnished with certain 
articles of furniture. 

3. Dress , Food and Medicine 

Three garments ( chivara ) viz. an upper robe, a lower one, and 
a sort of cloak worn over these two were allowed to the monks. 
These garments had to be made out of pieces of cloth cut and dyed 
yellow. For food and alms, begging was the usual rule, but 'the 
monks were allowed to accept invitations to meals or offerings sent 
to the monastery by the faithful; they were prohibited from express¬ 
ing their wish for any particular kind of food. Regarding medicine, 
there was practically no restriction and the monks were allowed to 
benefit fully by medical science. They were, however, repeatedly 
warned that in the name of medicine or under the plea of illness 
they must not drift to excess. 

4. The Uposatha or Fortnightly Assembly 

Every fortnight all the monks living within a parish, which had 
a defined boundary, had to attend the assembly, the sick attend¬ 
ing by proxy. After the election of the president (Sanghatthera or 
Sanghaparindyaka ), two speakers, one on Dhamma and the other on 
Vinaya, were selected. Then the rules of the Patimokkha were 
recited, and every monk was asked whether he had committed any 
breach of the rules in the preceding fortnight. If the offence was 
of a light nature, absolution was given on his confessing it in public; 
if it was serious, the offender was ordered to leave the assembly 
hall and appear before a panel of monks on a subsequent day for 

1. The ten precepts are: Abstention from (i) killing, (ii) stealing, (iii) adultery, 
(iv) speaking falsehoods, (v) drinking intoxicating liquor, (vi) afternoon meals, 
(vii) witnessing dances, music, etc., (viii) the use of garlands, unguents, etc., 
(ix) the use of high beds, and (x) the acceptance of gold and silver. 

875 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

reprimand. After finishing the business of the assembly, religious 
discourses were delivered for the benefit of the monks and the 
laity, if any, present. 

5. The Vassavasa or Rainy Season Retreat 

During the three months of the rains, commencing from the day 
next to the full moon of Ashadha (June-July) or Sravana (July- 
August), the monks were required to take up a fixed abode and 
depend for their subsistence on the neighbouring householders. At 
the close of the Retreatment, the monks met together to confess their 
offences, if any, committed during the three months. This ceremony 
is called Pavarana. At the end of the ceremony they accepted gifts 
from the laity. 

6. Special Rules for Nuns 

There is a special code of rules for the nuns entitled Bhikkhuni- 
Patimokkha. It contains certain extra restrictions, which generally 
relate to movements and residence, and a general supervision of the 
nuns by the monks. 

7. Constitution 

Buddhism is the only Indian religion to have departed from the 
ancient practice of the Teacher nominating a disciple to take his 
place after his death. Buddha did not nominate a successor, and 
enjoined that the monks living within a defined boundary (simd) 
were to elect their chief who would be the Sanghatthera or Sahgha - 
parindyaka. Besides the election of the Sanghatthera, there were 
also the systems of formal moving of resolutions (jnapti), ballot 
voting by means of wooden sticks (salakd), formation of sub-com¬ 
mittees, and sp forth. 1 For the different kinds of ecclesiastical acts 
like inflicting of punishment for an offence, restoration of the pri¬ 
vileges of a monk, admission or readmission of a monk into the 
Sangha, the minimum number of members required to form the panels 
was fixed, and any reduction in the number made the ecclesiastical 
act invalid. In certain cases even the absence of a single member 
made an act invalid, and the resolution had to be passed unanimously. 
In every Sangha , office-bearers were elected, and that by unanimous 
consent, for carrying on its various functions, e.g. distribution of 
food and dress, provision of beds, erection of monasteries, etc. 

1. See above, pp. 332 ff. 

376 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Monastic institutions were the most remarkable contribution of 
Buddhism to Indian culture. Their original object was to give suit¬ 
able accommodation to the monks for carrying on their studies and 
meditation. These gradually developed into academic centres for 
producing the right type of men, well grounded in religion and phi¬ 
losophy, to propagate the teachings of Buddhism. The ruins of the 
monasteries so far unearthed in the various parts of India give us 
some idea of the magnificence of these educational institutions and 
of the liberal gifts of the lay-devotees to further the cause of reli¬ 
gion. These institutions grew up not merely as organisations for 
training missionaries, but also as great centres of culture, to which 
teachers and students flocked from far and near. 

IV. HISTORY OF BUDDHISM 

Having described the essential features of Buddhism we may 
now briefly trace its growth and development as a powerful factor 
in the culture not only of India but also of a large part of Asia. 
Broadly speaking, it may be said that the four General Councils 
mark the first four stages in the history of the Buddhist religion'and 
literature, and it will therefore be convenient to begin with them. 

1. First Council—Close of the First Stage 

The first Buddhist Council, which closes the first stage of the 
history of Buddhism, was held soon after Buddha’s death under the 
auspices of king Ajatasatru. 1 An account of this Council appears 
in all the Vinaya texts of different sects and runs as follows:—Maha- 
kassapa, a distinguished disciple of Buddha, convened a Council of 
Elders, who were all arhats , to put together the scattered sayings of 
the Teacher relating to Dhamma and Vinaya. While Mahakassapa 
took the chair, Ananda recited the discourses delivered by the 
Teacher on Dhamma, and Upali recited those on disciplinary matters. 
The monks present committed them to memory, and thus a begin¬ 
ning was made of the two Pitakas, Sutta and Vinaya. It is not 
possible to determine which portions of the two Pitakas were com¬ 
piled in the Council, but in view of the close agreement that exists 
in certain texts and passages between the Pali and Sanskrit versions, 
it may be assumed that the texts and passages common to the two 
versions, as also the passages which are repeated in the Suttas, form¬ 
ed the nucleus of the Pitakas as rehearsed in the Council. 


1. See above, p. 28. 


377 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Many scholars have expressed their doubts about the authenti¬ 
city of the account of the Council, but the latest opinion is in favour 
of the view that the Council was an enlarged Patimokkha assembly. 
This view is supported by the story that Ananda was made to confess 
before the assembly certain minor offences committed by him while 
acting as the servitor of Buddha. In the fortnightly assemblies, as 
already stated, a president is elected as also two expositors, one of 
Dhamma and the other of Yinaya. Hence, this Council complies 
with all the conditions of a Patimokkha assembly, and we can there¬ 
fore take the account of the Council as fairly authentic, except that 
portion which deals with the recitation of the complete Pitakas. 

It is not possible to determine how much of the Buddhist religion 
and philosophy and monastic organisation developed during Buddha’s 
lifetime i.e., before the First Council. The details given in the 
preceding pages have been collected from the Pali Pitakas, a 
large portion of which must have been composed after the First 
Council. It will not be wide of the mark if we attribute all the 
developments detailed above to the century that elapsed after 
Buddha’s death. During this period the Sangha remained intact, 
and whatever differences occurred among the monks were either 
settled by persuasion or by application of the rules laid down in the 
Patimokkha. There are statements in the Nikayas and Vinaya 
hinting at the possibility of dissensions in the Sangha, and Devadatta 
actually made an attempt to create a dissension, but probably without 
much success. 

2. Second Stage 

It is in the account of the Second Council, held about a century 
after Buddha’s death under the auspices of king Kalasoka or Kaka- 
var$in at Vaisali, that we come to know for the first time that a 
sharp division took place between the two groups of monks described 
as easterners and westerners. The former lived mostly at Vaisali 
and Pataliputra, and the latter at Kausambi, Patheyya and Avanti. 
According to the tradition recorded in the Vinaya Pitaka, the diffe¬ 
rence arose in connection with the ten rules of discipline which the 
easterners adopted against the protest of the westerners. The ten 
rules are as follows:—(i) storing of salt for use when needed, (ii) 
taking food after mid-day, (iii) over-eating by taking a second fore¬ 
noon meal in a neighbouring village, (iv) observance of uposatha in 
different places within the same parish (sima), (v) taking sanction 
for an act from the Sangha after it has been done, (vi) use of prece- 


378 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


dents as autftority for an act, (vii) drinking whey after meals, (viii) 
the use of a seat without a border, (ix) drinking of unfermented palm 
juice, and (x) the acceptance of gold and silver. The westerners 
came in a body to dissuade the easterners from adopting these rules, 
but failed to do so. A sub-committee was then formed with four 
members from each of the two groups. This sub-committee of eight, 
composed mostly of senior and learned monks, discussed the rules 
and declared them unorthodox in open assembly. The easterners, 
who were known as the Vajjiputtakas, did not abide by the decision, 
convened another Council which they called Mahasangtti, and adopt¬ 
ed all the rules as valid. 

In a few late texts on the history of Buddhist sects, the diffe¬ 
rence between the two groups is attributed to the five doctrines of 
Mahadeva, four of which assign certain imperfections to an arhat, 
who is regarded by the westerners as perfect and fully emancipated. 
It is very likely that there were differences between the two groups 
both in doctrines and disciplinary rules, and the former is not men¬ 
tioned in the Vinaya Pitaka as these were outside its scope. 

The LHpavamsa adds that the seceding monks made certain 
changes in the texts of the Tripitaka and excluded the Abhidhamma 
Pitaka from the sayings of Buddha. The easterners came to be 
known as the Mahasanghikas and, in contrast to the designation of 
the westerners as Theravada, they were known as Achariyavada. 

Once the dissension in the Sangha started, it began to multiply. 
The Theravada became gradually divided into eleven sects, and the 
Achariyavada into seven. All the eighteen sects were fundamental¬ 
ly HInayanists; a few sub-sects of the Achariyavada group later on 
introduced new doctrines which paved the way for Mahayanism. 
Besides the eighteen there came into being a few more sects at a 
later period. As it is not possible to speak here of the doctrines of 
all the sub-sects, we shall touch only the principal doctrines of some 
of the major sects. 

The oldest and the most orthodox sect was the Theravada 
(=Sans. Sthaviravada) which, according to the Tibetan tradition, 
claimed Mahakachchayana, a native of UjjayinI (Avanti), as its 
founder. This sect had its centre at Kausambi and UjjayinI and 
adopted Pali as the language of its Pitaka. It was propagated in 
Ceylon by Aioka’s son Mahendra or Mahinda, who carried with him 
the Pali Pitaka to Ceylon. There were two very large monasteries 
in Ceylon, known as Mahavihara and Abhayagiri. The former 


879 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


became the repository of the Pali Pi^aka and a favourite rendezvous 
of the Theravadins, while the latter (Abhayagiri) became the seat of 
the less orthodox sects, 1 The doctrines found in the Pali Pitaka and 
dealt with above are really those of the Theravada sect and need 
not therefore be reiterated here. 

The most important branch of the Theravada was the Sarvasti- 
vada. According to the Tibetan tradition, the founder of this sect 
was Rahulabhadra, and the language of its Pitaka was Sanskrit. Its 
early centre was at Mathura; later it moved to Gandhara and then 
to Kashmir. It became very popular all over northern India, and 
weilded great influence from the time of A£oka to that of Kanishka, 
who was its staunch supporter. During the Kushana period it made 
its way to Central Asia and thence to China. Hiuen Tsang and 
I-tsing carried to their country the Pitakas of this sect, and the Hina- 
yana texts at present existing in China are mainly translations of 
the Sarvastivada Pitaka. Of the manuscripts and their fragments 
discovered in Central Asia and Eastern Turkestan, several belong to 
it. In doctrine and disciplinary rules there is a general agreement 
between this sect and the Theravada. The vital difference between 
the two is that the Sarvastivadins held that a being is composed 
of five dharmas , sub-divided into seventy-five elements. These 
elements persist in an individual through all his existences, the 
present complex being the result of the past, and potential of 
the future. This sect contended that when Buddha spoke of imper¬ 
manence ( anitya ), he meant the composite of the elements and not 
the elements themselves. In short, it maintained the permanence 
of the elements like the atoms of the Nyaya-Vaiseshikas. This sect 
became later known as the Vaibhashikas on account of the fact that 
It attached more importance to the Vibhdshds (commentaries) than 
to the Sutras (original sayings); it is referred to in the Brahmanical 
philosophical literature by this alternative name. 

Several other sects, such as the Mahisasaka, Saihmitiya or 
VasIputrTya and Sautrantika differed from the Theravada only in 
minor points. 

The Mahasanghika sect, as already stated, originated at the time 
of the Second Council. It claimed Mahakassapa as its founder. At 
its early stage it had its centre at Vai^all and was scattered all over 
northern India. Later, it became located in the Andhra country, 
having its principal centre at Amaravatl and Nagarjunikomjla. The 


1. See above, p. 240 f. 


380 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


alternative name of this sect and its sub-sects was the Andhaka, evi¬ 
dently on account of its popularity in the Andhra country. From 
the Nagarjunikontfa inscriptions it is apparent that this sect had a 
complete Sutta Pifaka , divided into five Nikdyas , and a Vinaya 
Ptfcika, which is now available in Chinese translation. It adopted 
Prakrit as the language of its Tripitaka. Philosophically there was 
not much difference between this sect and the Theravada. The main 
deviation made by this sect was to deify the Buddha, and to assert 
that he was supramundane ( lokottara ), so that what passed as 
Buddha in this world was an apparition. Along with this deviation, 
it maintained that the arhathood was not the highest or the fully 
emancipated state, and that every individual should aspire for Bud- 
dhahood, and not arhathood, as had so long been preached by the 
Theravadins. 

Among the sects that branched off from the Mahasanghikas, the 
most popular and influential were the Purvasailas, Aparasailas, 
Uttarasailas and Chaityakas. These are mentioned in the Nagarjuni- 
kon$a and Amaravati inscriptions. Their Pi^aka was the same as 
that of the Mahasanghikas, and their views about Buddha 'and 
arhathood were identical with those of the Mahasanghikas. They 
add that even the Bodhisattvas are not average beings, as they also 
are possessed of supramundane qualities. The mind, they state, is 
pure in its origin and becomes impure only by contact with impu¬ 
rities. 

The deification of the Buddha, the introduction ot the Bodhi- 
sattva conception, the change of the ideal from arhathood to Buddha- 
hood and, lastly, the conception of mind (vifnana) as pure in its 
origin prove distinctly that they were the precursors of Mahayanism, 
particularly Vijnanavada or Yogachara. 

There were a few other sub-sects of this group. They did not 
attain much prominence except the Vaitulyakas (=Pali Vetulla- 
vada) who had stronger pro-Mahayanic views and probably made 
their centre in Ceylon at the Abhayagiri monastery. 1 

3. Third Stage 

From the above survey of the Buddhist sects, it is apparent 
that the history of Buddhism of the second century after Gautama’s 
death was no longer the history of a single monastic organisation, 
but of quite a larger number growing independently of one another 
in different parts of India. The more influential of them compiled 

1. See above, p. 241. 


881 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


their own sets of Pitakas and claimed these to be the original sayings 
of the Teacher. There was no supreme head of the Buddhist 
Church either to co-ordinate the divergent views or to settle the 
rival claims about the authenticity of the Buddha’s sayings. 

A Buddhist monk could reside in any monastery irrespective 
of his adherence to a particular sect. This is also implied in the 
direction that a monastery belonged to the Ckatuddisasaiigha (monks 
of the four quarters). In some inscriptions, however, the donor has 
particularly named a sect to which he dedicated his monastery, 
though this was against the general monastic rule. When members 
of different sects resided in one monastery, difficulties arose in the 
observance of the fortnightly Uposatha ceremony, for one of the 
preliminary conditions of such a ceremony was that all the resident 
monks taking part in the ceremony must declare at the outset that 
they had not committed any breach of the disciplinary rules during 
the preceding fortnight. As the disciplinary rules and regulations 
of the sects differed from one another, a member of a sect complying 
with the rules of his own sect might not be accepted as guiltless by 
another sect. A member, e.g. of the Mahasanghika sect, would be 
regarded as pure by the Mahasahghikas even though he took a meal 
after midday, but he would be regarded as impure by the Theravada 
sect, and the latter would not allow him to take part in ceremonies 
unless he confessed his offence. 

It was very likely due to differences of this nature that the 
fortnightly assemblies could not be held in the Aiokarama at Patali- 
putra for seven years. The tradition goes that Asoka wished that 
the assembly for Uposatha ceremony should be held at his monas¬ 
tery, and deputed a minister to see that his wishes were carried 
out. The minister, it is said, went too far in enforcing the king’s 
command, and actually beheaded those monks who refused to com¬ 
ply with the king’s wishes. A£oka was stricken with deep remorse 
for the brutal measures taken by his subordinate and sought the 
advice of the most learned monk of the time, Moggaliputta Tissa, 
who was then residing in a neighbouring forest. On his advice, the 
story goes, Aioka dismissed from the Sangha all those monks who 
did not avow themselves as Vibhajjavadins (=Theravadins). A 
Council was then held by the Vibhajjavadins under the chairman¬ 
ship of Moggaliputta Tissa. who made an attempt to refute the views 
of some of the non-Theravadins in order to establish his own as the 
original teaching of Buddha. The refutations were compiled under 


882 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


the title of Kathdvatthu , which was made the fifth book of the Abhi- 
dhamma Pitaka of the Theravadins. It is doubtful if the efforts of 
Moggaliputta had the desired effect, but history shows that some of 
the minor sects ceased to exist or coalesced with other sects. 1 

The authenticity of the account of the Third Council has been 
questioned by many scholars On the following grounds: (i) that it 
is not to be found in the Sanskrit traditions nor in records of the 
Chinese travellers, (ii) that the edicts issued by A£oka towards the 
end of his reign do not mention it, and (iii) that Asoka could not 
have lent his support to any particular Buddhist sects to the exclu¬ 
sion of others. The grounds are plausible, though they are only of 
a negative character. Regarding the authenticity of the account, 
it may be conceded that the Council was a sectarian one meant for 
the Theravadins, and that Asoka or his minister had nothing to do 
with it. After the conclusion of this Council, it is said, missionaries 
were despatched to various countries, evidently for the propagation 
of the Theravada doctrines. 

It would appear from the list of sucn countries 2 that Buddhism 
spread over the major part of India and, if Suvannabhumi denotes 
Burma, even beyond its frontier. This is not at all unlikely, for 
we know from Asoka’s inscriptions that he sent Buddhist missions 
to the Greek kingdoms in western Asia, North Africa and eastern 
Europe 3 . The amount of success achieved by these missions can¬ 
not be determined, but it seems possible that Buddhism ultimately 
gained a footing in some of these regions, as will be related in 
Chapter XXIV 

4. Fourth Stage 

Perhaps as a reaction to the zeal of Asoka for the Buddhist 
faith, his successors were not very favourably disposed towards 
Buddhism. With the exception of Mahinda, the apostle of Ceylon, 
none of the sons or grandsons ol Aioka is known to have embraced 
Buddhism. In Pushyamitra, who overthrew the Mauryas, the re¬ 
action against Buddhism reached its climax. The immediate effect 

1. The doctrines of the following sects are discussed in the Kath&vatthu:-- 

Sarvastivadins, Saihmitiyas (Vatsi’putriyas), Mah^sahghikas, Sailas 
(—Andhakas), Mahis&saka, Uttarapathaka, Hetuvada, and Vetulyaka; also 
Bhadrayanika and Gokulika. In the inscriptions of the post--Christian eras 
appear the names of the following sects: Sarvastivadins, Mahisahghikaa, 
Saihmitiyas, Chaityakas, the 6ailas (— Andhakas), Bahusrutlyas and Mahi- 
sasakas. (See JRAS, 1892, p. 597). 

2. See above, p. 84. 

3. See above, p. 84. 


888 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


of this antipathy upon the spread of Buddhism cannot be precisely 
determined, but there is no doubt that for a time it enjoyed wide 
popularity. The architectural remains especially of stupas and 
monasteries, and the large number of inscriptions in Mathura, Sanchl, 
Bharhut, Bodh-Gaya and other important centres, to which 
reference will be made later, leave no doubt about its phenomenal 
development by the beginning of the Christian era. 

Another important factor was its patronage by foreign rulers. 
The famous treatise Milinda-panha or Questions of King Milinda 
(or Menander) and the Shinkot (Bajaur) inscription of his reign 
prove that he espoused the Buddhist creed and helped its propaga¬ 
tion even in the hilly region between the Hindu Kush and the 
Sindhu. There are evidences that other Greek rulers followed his 
example. The Kushana rulers, particularly Kanishka, were also great 
patrons of Buddhism. 

Hiuen Tsang records that Kanishka was at first unsympathetic 
towards Buddhism but later embraced it. 1 Being perplexed by the 
variant interpretations, given by the different teachers, of the sayings 
of Buddha, he decided to convene a Council in Kashmir 2 with the 
help of Parsva and invited the monks of all countries to take part 
in the deliberations of the Council. 3 Vasumitra was elected its 
chairman. A thorough discussion took place about the sense of the 
difficult passages of the scriptures and these discussions were com¬ 
piled in the form of commentaries known as the Vibhasha-sastras. 

Paramartha 4 gives a slightly different account of the Council. 
He also locates the session of the Council in Kashmir, but gives the 
credit of convening it to Katyayanlputra, author of the Jnanapras- 
th&na-sutra, , the principal treatise of the Abhidharma Pitaka of the 
Sarvastivadins. It contains eight sections and was put into literary 
form by Aivaghosha. Then the commentaries ( Vibhasha-sastras) 
were compiled and it took twelve years to complete them. 

The Tibetan historian Taranatha also gives an account of the 
Council. He writes that the Council admitted the claims of the 
eighteen sects as giving a correct interpretation of Buddha’s say¬ 
ings, evidently from a sectarian point of view. 

1. HTW , I, p. 203. 

2. /bid., pp. 270-1. 

3. See above, p. 147. 

4. Paramartha’s Life of Vasubandhu, translated by Takakusu in Touna Pao. 

1904, p. 269 f. 


884 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


From all these accounts it is apparent that the Council was 
held in the stronghold of the Sarvastivadins, and that the leading 
monks of the Council belonged to this sect. Hence the Council 
might have listened to the different interpretations of the teachers 
of the different sects, but ultimately gave preference to the exposi¬ 
tion of the Sarvastivadins. It is doubtful if Kanishka had any hand 
in the Council, though it might have been held under his auspices. 
The session of this Council is ignored in the Pali traditions. Ap¬ 
parently it was also a sectarian affair of the Sarvastivadins, as the 
Third Council was of the Theravadins. 

5. The Rise of Mahdydnism 

The session of the Fourth Council synchronises with the emer¬ 
gence of Mahayanism, which marks the first great split in the Bud¬ 
dhist church and its fundamental doctrines. As is usual with all 
such movements, its beginnings may be traced to a much earlier, 
period, although it did not assume any definite shape until about 
the beginning of the Christian era 

Buddhism retained its pristine originality during the first'cen¬ 
tury of its existence, but in the second century we notice a change 
in the outlook and the inauguration of a new movement towards a 
more liberal interpretation of the disciplinary rules. The emphasis 
was still on the monastic life, though in the doctrines of the Saila 
schools was incorporated the new Bodhisattva ideal, which implied 
that anyone, be he a householder or recluse, was entitled to perform 
certain meritorious acts ( pdramitas ) in order ultimately to attain 
Buddhahood. Anoka’s edicts reveal that he wanted good citizens 
and not recluses. He laid emphasis on a heavenly life hereafter, 
and not on Nirvana; in other words, he gave preference to the ideal 
which the early Buddhists held out to their lay-devotees (updsdkas 
and updsikds). It is therefore not improbable that, under the aegis 
of A£oka, the Buddhist monks changed their angle of vision and de¬ 
vised ways and means for providing a place in the religion for the 
laity. 

The laity was allowed to take the Trisarana, observe tempo¬ 
rarily eight of the ten moral precepts, and offer gifts to the Sahgha, 
but there was no provision for organized worship or ritual. For the 
first time we find in the Mahdparinibbana-sutta directions for erect 
ing stupas and chatty as (burial mounds and shrines), and an account 
of the contest for relics to deposit in them. The same sutta further 
enjoins the laity not only to worship at the stupas with garlands and 

885 

A.I.U.—*5 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


unguents, but to make pilgrimages to the four places sanctified by 
the Buddha’s birth, his attainment of Bodhi , his first promulgation 
of the Dhamma, and his entry into Nirvana {mah&parinirvana) . The 
merits accruing were believed to be immense, and assured the re¬ 
birth of the performer in heaven. These directions given to the laity 
were undoubtedly interpolations of a later date, which may be 
assigned to the Asokan period. 

In the Nikayas there is neither reference to the Bodhisattva 
ideal nor to meritorious acts—the six pdramitds —of the Saila schools. 
In the post-Asokan period, however, the Bharhut and Sanchi sculp¬ 
tures testify to the popularity of the Jafakas and Avaddnas, the 
main theme of which is the fulfilment of paramitd. It must there¬ 
fore be some time in the third or second century B.C. that the 
doctrine of paramitd was evolved and, by way of illustration, story 
after story was composed, resulting in the accumulation of the huge 
Jataka and Avadana literature. 

By Paramitd is meant the highest acquisition of a particular 
virtue. There were at first six of them, and then the number was in¬ 
creased to ten. These are as follows:—liberality ( ddna) ; righteous¬ 
ness ( sila ); forbearance or endurance ( kshdnti ); mental strength 
(virya) ; mental concentration ( dhydna ); realisation of the truth 
iprajnd); skilfulness in expedients ( updyakausalya ); vow or resolution 
(pranidhdna) ; attainment of certain powers ( bala ); and knowledge 
(jndna). 

A Bodhisattva, whether as a householder or a recluse, or even 
as a non-human being, is required to acquire all the six or ten vir¬ 
tues in order to qualify himself for the attainment of Buddhahood. 
Gautama and all other Buddhas had to do the same in their several 
existences. The early (Pali) Buddhists included the Jdtakas in 
their Khuddaka Nikdya, indicating their tacit approval of the new 
cult. The Sarvastivadins laid special stress on this literature and 
extolled the cult in the Lalita Vistara. These sects, however, still 
adhered to their old belief that this cult was meant for exceedingly 
rare beings, perhaps one in a kalpa, who, like Sakya Gautama or 
Dipankara, would ultimately become a Buddha. Hence the credit 
for first popularising it among the masses goes to the Mahasanghikas 
and their offshoots, who preached that every being should aspire 
to Buddhahood and therefore aim at becoming a Bodhisattva by 
acquiring the appropriate virtues. 

Along with this doctrine, the Mahasanghikas deified the Buddha, 
and so gave an opportunity to the masses to satisfy their religious 


886 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


emotions. During the centuries preceding the Christian era de¬ 
votees had to content themselves with making and worshipping 
symbols. In the centuries after the Christian era the erection and 
worship of Buddha-images came into vogue, and devotees at last 
found a means for expressing their devotion. They covered India 
with temples and monasteries filled with such images in the belief 
that merit accrued both to the donors and to the artists. Pristine 
Buddhism could no longer withstand the surge of religious enthu¬ 
siasm and had to yield to popular feeling. This paved the way for 
the advent of Mahayanism. 

It is difficult to assign any particular date to the rise of the 
Mahayana sect. Even in the Pali Nikayas there are passages which 
inculcate Mahayana doctrines. The crucial test for designating a 
particular form of Buddhism or a particular text as Mahayana is to 
ascertain whether it (i) teaches dharmaMnyatd (non-reality of 
phenomenal objects) besides pudgalasunyatd (absence of any sub¬ 
stance such as soul); (ii) incorporates the conception of countless 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas; (iii) advocates the worship of gods' and 
goddesses; and (iv) recommends the use of mantras for attaining 
emancipation. The earliest text to contain the above-mentioned 
doctrines is the Prajnfiparamitd. The first Chinese translation of 
the text was made in A.D. 148 by Lokaraksha, and so we can assume 
that the original was in existence by the first century A.D. 1 There 
are several Prajnaparamita texts of different dates; of these the 
oldest is Ashtasahasrika. 

Now let us examine the traditional evidence regarding the time 
of the emergence of Mahayana. It would appear from the account 
of Kanishka’s Council, as given by Paramartha and Taranatha, that 
Mahayanism was already a living force. Taranatha also tells us 
that, during the reign of Kanishka’s son, the teaching of Mahayana 
had greatly advanced and that various Mahayana texts were com¬ 
posed by the younger monks without any dispute with the older 
brethren. 2 In the Ashtasdhasrikd-Prajndpdramitd we come across 
an interesting statement to the effect that the Mahayana teaching 
will originate in Dakshinapatha (southern India), pass to eastern 
countries ( vavtanyam ), and prosper in the north. There is also the 
Tibetan tradition that the Saila schools (Mahasanghika group) had 

1. According to the Sautrantikas, Taranatha states, the Ashfasahasrikd 
Prajnapdramitd was composed after the time of Mahapadma Nanda. 

2. Schiefner, Taranatha’s Geschichte des Buddhismus, p. 63. 

387 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

a PrajnapcLramitd in Prakrit. Taranatha describes Arhat Nanda, a 
native of Anga, as a great expounder of Mahayana doctrines. 

Putting all these pieces of evidence together, we may conclude 
that Mahayana Buddhism originated about the first century B.C. in 
the Andhra country where the Mahasanghikas had their centre; it 
became a recognised form of Buddhism at the time of Kanishka; and 
then it spread all over northern India in the first or second century 
A.D. to blossom into its full glory under the care of Nagarjuna, Arya- 
deva, Asanga and Vasubandhu. 

Though Mahayanism had its beginning in the pre-Christian era 
when the first Prajndpdramita was composed, it took time to attain 
popularity against the opposition of the well-established Hlnayan- 
ism, the name applied, by way of contrast, to the primitive religion. 
The main argument put forward by the Hinayanists against Maha¬ 
yanism was that it was not expounded by Buddha, and that its ideal 
of Buddhahood as attainable by every being was not practical. In 
most of the Mahayana texts attempts have been made to refute 
these charges. 

Mahayanism, it seems, could not make much Headway till the 
advent of the two savants Nagarjuna and Asanga, whose masterly 
expositions put into shade the HInayana teachings and made a 
strong appeal to the intelligentsia. The common belief that 
Asvaghosha, the contemporary of Kanishka, was the earliest expo¬ 
nent of Mahayana philosophy is based on the confusion made be¬ 
tween the author of the Buddhacharita and other Kavyas and dramas 1 
and that of the Sraddhotpada-sutra containing a brief exposition of 
the Yogachara views. There can, however, be hardly any doubt 
that the two were different persons and the latter flourished much 
later than the poet Asvaghosha. 2 

The earliest writer, therefore, on Mahayana philosophy was 
Nagarjuna, about whom the traditions are still more confusing than 
those about Asvaghosha. The accounts furnished by the Chi¬ 
nese and Tibetan writers were all derived from an Indian source, 
which had mixed up the famous alchemist and the Tantric teacher 
Nagarjuna, the contemporary of a Satavahana king, 3 with the phi¬ 
losopher Nagarjuna, the propounder of the Madhyamika philosophy. 
The information given in Taranatha’s and Buston’s history appears 

1. See above, pp. 258 f, 266 f. 

2. B. C. Law, Asvaghosha, in RASB Monograph Series, No. 1. 

3. See Suhrillekha in JPTS. 1886. For details about the alchemist Nagarjuna see 
Sylvain L4vi in BSOS, VI pp. 417-29. 


888 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


mostly to relate to the Tan trie teacher and not to the philosopher 
Nagarjuna. Kumarajiva’s biography (in Chinese, A.D. 405) does 
not furnish us with any detailed reliable information. All the tradi¬ 
tions state that Nagarjuna wrote the commentary on the Pancha- 
viThsatisdhasrikd-Prajndpdrirnitd , 1 which is still available in Chi¬ 
nese 2 and reveals the master mind of Nagarjuna. It is the gist of 
this sastra that we find in his Madhyamaka-kdrika , in which he 
clearly establishes his doctrine of ‘Sunyata or Tathata (j=the ab¬ 
solute). Several Buddhist texts 3 contain the prophecy of Buddha 
that Nagarjuna would be born 400 years after his demise. If Bud¬ 
dha’s death took place in 483 B.C., the period of activities of the 
philosopher Nagarjuna should be placed about the first century A.D. 
Out of the confusing traditions we may elicit the following informa¬ 
tion about the philosopher’s life: 

Nagarjuna was born at Vidarbha (Berar) in a Brahmana fami¬ 
ly and was well versed in the Brahmanic sastras. He became an 
authoritative exponent of the doctrine of existence and non-exist¬ 
ence, i.e. Sunyatd or Tathatd. Although a Mahayanist, he was 
solicitous of the welfare of the Hlnayanists. He was a statmeh 
disciplinarian, and it is said that he expelled from the Sahgha a 
large number of monks who showed laxity in the observance of the 
Vinaya rules. He became the head of the Sangha at Nalanda, the 
fame of which put into shade the glories of Vajrasana (Bodh-Gaya), 
hitherto one of the principal centres of Hlnayanists. 

While he was the chief abbot of Nalanda, 4 it is said, there was a 
division among his followers, leading to the origin of the Yogachara 
school of philosophy. The earliest and greatest exponent of this 
school was Asanga. He also came of a Brahmana family of Pesha¬ 
war. He was at first a Sarvastivadin, and later in his life became 
a Mahayanist (Yogachara). His brother was Vasubandhu, 5 the 
famous exponent of Sarvdstivdda-dbhidharma as also the Yoga¬ 
chara philosophy. 

The growth of Mahayana contributed to the further develop¬ 
ment of Buddhism as a popular cult all over India and even far 

1. Edited by the present writer in the Calcutta Oriental Series. 

2. There is a French Tr. by Lamotte, Le traite de la grande vertu de sagesse de 
Nagarjuna (Mahdprajndparamitg, Sastra) Louvain, 1940. 

3. Lankdvatara (p. 286), Mahameghasutra (Le Museon, 1910, p. 274), Manjusri- 
mulakalpa (p. 616), Mahamayasutra (Przyluski, Legende de Vempereur Asoka, 
p. 183). 

4. He was succeeded by his disciple Aryadeva. 

5. He is said to have been a contemporary of Chandra-gupta I, but opinions differ 
widely on this point; cf. NHIP, VI, 155 fn. 2. 

389 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


beyond his frontiers. The epigraphic evidence furnishes the most 
eloquent testimony to its prevalence in different parts of India from 
the remote N.-W. Frontier Province to the extreme south. Of more 
than a thousand epigraphic records belonging to the first three cen¬ 
turies of the Christian era that have so far come to light, by far the 
great majority belongs to Buddhism. 

The monumental remains tell the same tale. Apart from the 
important centres mentioned above, we have many others located 
in south-east India, notably at Amaravatl and Nagarjunikonda. The 
famous relic-tower at Peshawar, built by Kanishka, was a veritable 
wonder for centuries. Even the inaccessible hilly regions beyond 
the Sindhu have preserved numerous relics of a flourishing state 
of Buddhism. In addition to the Kushanas, other ruling dynasties, 
such as the Western Satraps, Satavahanas and Ikshvakus, were great 
patrons of Buddhism. 

It should not be supposed, however, that all this wide popu¬ 
larity was monopolised by Mahay an ism. The large number of 
inscriptions at Amaravatl and Nagar j unikonda reveal that a few 
Hlnayana sects, mostly of the Mahasanghika group, were popular 
in this region in the early centuries of the Christian era. Of parti¬ 
cular importance for the history of Buddhism is the inscription 
recording the dedication of a monastery to the Theriyas (i.e Thera- 
vada monks of Ceylon) to whom credit has been given for the intro¬ 
duction of Buddhism into Kashmir-Gandhara, China, Chilata, Tosali, 
Aparanta, Vanga, Vanavas!, the Yona countries, Damila, Polura 
and Tambapanni. The inscriptions seem to prove that Buddhism 
(Mahasanghika) flourished in this area in the early centuries of the 
Christian era, and the Mahachaitya erected at Nagar j unikonda be¬ 
came a place of pilgrimage for Buddhists all over India 

The first three centuries of the Christian era also witnessed a 
wide spread of Buddhism in a large part of Asia as far as China. 
The first impetus to it was given by the missionary activity of 
Asoka, 1 but its further progress was accelerated by the patronage 
of foreign rulers like the Greeks, Parthians, Sakas and the Kushanas 
who had intimate association with western and central Asia. 
Through these regions Buddhism gradually penetrated into China, 
Burma and other parts of eastern and south-eastern Asia. This 
phenomenon is of particular importance inasmuch as Buddhism still 


1. See above, p. 84. 


890 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


prevails in many of these countries, though it has practically lost 
hold over the land of its origin. The history of this outward move¬ 
ment of Buddhism will be related in a subsequent chapter. 

V. BUDDHA IMAGES AND BUDDHIST SCULPTURE 

The early Buddhist monuments of Sanchl, Bharhut, Bodh-Gaya, 
Amaravati and other places of the Sunga and post-Sunga periods 
will be described in detail in Chapter XX. These were mostly 
stupas or funerary structures which were encircled by railings 
( vediha. ) with gateways ( tor anas ) attached to them. Different sec¬ 
tions of these railings and gateways were covered with carvings, 
some of which are intimately associated with episodes in the various 
lives lived by the Buddha, which have been described as Jatakas. 
The word Jataka meant ‘birth-stories’ or stories having a bearing on 
the jati (birth) of the Buddha. The jdti again not only meant his 
present or last birth, but also the countless previous ones as bird, 
beast and man, in which he was continually qualifying himself for 
the attainment of the final goal (Nirvana). In the early Buddhist 
texts, Nidanakathd, or a collection of tales connected with this chain 
of divine births, has been orincipally divided into two sections, viz . 
dure nidana (remote section) and avidure nidana (not-far-remote 
section), the former dealing with his previous existence and the 
latter with the last one. Of the latter, again, those incidents that 
occurred after his victory over the arch-tempter Mara come under 
the santike nidana (near-at-hand section). Other stories narrated 
in early Buddhist literature dealt with the lives of the former 
Buddhas, a belief in whom was already well current in Maurya times, 
and with the history of the order after the Mahdparinirvdna of 
Buddha. All these were illustrated in the carvings of the monu¬ 
ments mentioned above. 

One very interesting peculiarity of these early bas-reliefs is thai 
neither the present Buddha &akya-muni nor his predecessors are re¬ 
presented in iconic form. The extant Amaravati reliefs, which mostly 
belong to the second century A.D. and later periods, combine the 
earlier aniconic tradition along with the later iconic one, for some 
of them show Buddha anthropomorphically represented. Buddha’s 
presence in most of the early sculptures is invariably indicated 
by means of various symbols, such as the Bodhi tree with the 
Vajrasana beneath it, the garlanded wheel (Dharmachakra) , the 
concrete representation of the Buddha’s walk ( Chafikrama ) and the 
stupa of the present or past Buddhas. From the strict uniformity 


891 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


with which this practice is followed it appears that there was 
puritanical convention against the anthropomorphic representation 
of the Master, observed by the artists of central India. This was pro¬ 
bably due to the fact that, to the earlier Buddhists, the Master was a 
Teacher, not a Saviour God, and they were anxious to avoid any form 
of worship except reverence to his relics. This convention, however, 
was shortly to disappear and iconographic types of the Buddha 
made their appearance apparently simultaneously in the Hellenistic 
school of Gandhara and in the Indian school of Mathura. 1 Both the 
Gandhara and Mathura Buddha types, however, were basically de¬ 
rived from the Indian conception of a great man (Mahapurusha) who 
had some destinctive marks on his body (MaMpurvxhalakshxiiuis ). 
Early Indian literature, belonging to different Indian creeds, is full 
of references to these characteristic signs of great men, and some 
Buddhist texts of the pre-Christian period ( Mah&padana- and Lak- 
khana-suttantas of the Dtgha Nikaya ) went so far as to enumerate 
them as thirty-two major ones to which eighty minor ones 
were subsequently added (dvdtrimsanmahdpuriishalakshandni and 
aJntyanuvyanjantini). The texts glibly inform us that the person 
who bears these marks on his body will be a sovereign king 
(rajachakravarfi ) if he remains at home (agdri, really living a 
worldly life), but if he renounces the worldly life (or becomes 
andgdri) he will be a Buddha. Now, the Hellenistic artists of Gan¬ 
dhara as well as the indigenous artists of Mathura utilised in their 
respective manner whichever of these canonical signs could be re¬ 
presented in art. Iconographic and iconometric texts of a much 
later date, such as the Sambuddhabhdshita-Pratimalakshaya, deli¬ 
neating the various signs and bodily measurements of the ideal 
figure of Buddha, contained relevant references to them. 

The Buddha figures in general can be classified under three 
main types, viz. sth&naka (standing), asana (seated), and say ana 
(recumbent). Each of these, when it was a part of a composite re¬ 
lief, especially the first two, with the hands shown in particular 
poses (rrmdra), was intended to illustrate different incidents in the 
life-history of the Master; a number of accessory figures clustering 
round the central one were sometimes used as aids in this respect. 
The recumbent form was only utilised to represent the scene of the 
great decease ( mnMparinirmna) at Kusinagara. In this scene 
Buddha is shown lying sideways on a couch, his head resting on one 

1. The relation of these two schools, specially in respect of the Byddha image, 
has been discussed in Ch. XX. 


892 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

of his hands, the chief accessory objects, almost invariably present 
in the composition, being the two Sala trees indicating the Sola grove 
of Kusinagara in which he breathed his last, the sorrowing Vajra- 
pai?i and Ananda, the monk Subhadra seated in dhydna pose who is 
said to have been converted by Buddha in his death-bed, and 
Ka^yapa with his monk’s garb and staff standing near the feet of the 
dying Buddha. This composition, which we frequently find among 
the extant Gandhara sculptures, came to be the recognised mode of 
representing the Mahaparinirvana scene though, in later sculptures, 
the number of accessories was much curtailed. 

In the Gandhara standing types, Buddha is usually shown with 
his right hand raised in the abhaya mudrd 1 and the left hanging down 
by his side slightly projecting out of the garment. This is the nor¬ 
mal mode, its variants being rarely found. A favourite theme of 
the Gandhara sculptors is to show eight figures standing side by side 
with halos behind their heads, the first seven clad in monk’s gar¬ 
ments, the eighth wearing secular dress and holding a nectar flask 
in its hand. The former are the seven past Buddhas including 
Sakyamuni, whose symbolical representation in central Indian Bud¬ 
dhist art has already been alluded to. It should be noted that the 
arrangement of the monk’s dress in the several figures is almost 
invariably the same, though the position of the hands slightly differs 
in individual specimens. But what is of particular importance here 
is the presence of Maitreya, the future Buddha, with a nectar flask 
as his special cognisance, which is undoubtedly a new feature. The 
treatment of drapery of these Buddhas of the extreme north-west 
of India is almost entirely Hellenistic. 2 

The earlier Gandhara Buddhas again show heads covered with 
waving tresses, but the locks are certainly not intended to conceal 
‘the disfigurement caused by the ushnisha (a bump on the top of 
the head regarded as a bump of intelligence)’ as was supposed by 
Griinwedel and other scholars. The plastic treatment of hair gather¬ 
ed in a top-knot created what came to be mistaken later as a bump, 
and this motif must have been at the root of the later illusion that 
the ushnisha was a sign of greatness. The peculiar device adopted 
by the early artists of Gandhara, Mathura and S&rnath for protect¬ 
ing the fingers was similarly responsible for the rise of the concept 
of another sign of greatness ( mahapurusha-lakshana ), viz. the 
webbed fingers ( jalangulihastCLpadatalata ). 

1. Attitude of Protection. 

2. Cf. Ch. XX. 

398 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


In some sculptures from Gandhara, Mathura and Sarnath, the 
hair on Buddha’s head is shown well-arranged in curls turning from 
left to right, which meant to represent another auspicious sign, the 
dakshinavartamurdhaja (curls turning from left to right). But the 
treatment of hair in the early Buddha images of Mathura widely 
differed from the usual Gandhara convention; it is indicated by a 
raised plane above the forehead and a thick single spiral coil on 
the top centre turned from left to right. This fashion was misunder¬ 
stood by scholars, some of whom maintained that the head of this 
type of Mathura Buddha was partially shaven with the ushnisha 
shown spirally on the top. 

The mudras or the hand-poses of the seated Buddhas of Gandhara 
are usually very few in number, the commonest among them being 
the abhaya (protection), the dhydna (meditation) and, comparative¬ 
ly rarely, the bhusparsa (touching the earth) and the Dharmachakra- 
mudrti (turning the wheel of law). 

In addition to Buddha images we get also those of Bodhisattva, 
t.e. ‘a being who is in process of obtaining but has not yet obtained 
Buddhahood’, such as Gautama or Siddhartha before his attainment 
of nirvana. He was not represented in early relief-sculptures in 
human form, his presence being indicated by means of symbols like 
a caparisoned horse without a rider, with a parasol held above, and 
the Bodhi tree with the vajrasana beneath it. 

The indigenous artists of Mathura and the Hellenistic sculptors 
of Gandhara between them introduced the figure of the Bodhisattva 
Gautama in art. The inscribed standing and seated images of 
Mathura, representing Gautama dressed as a monk, are sometimes 
described in their pedestal inscriptions either as Bodhisattva or as 
Buddha, and it seems that the local artists did not attach any great 
significance to the difference in meaning between the two terms. 
But the Gandhara artists, who illustrated in detail the various inci¬ 
dents in the present life of the Master, depicted him in several ways 
as the particular occasions in the narratives demanded. The grown¬ 
up Gautama was usually shown as a prince dressed in secular 
garments. But many of the royal figures, adorned with jewelled 
head-dresses and other elaborate ornaments, and holding either a 
lotus flower or a nectar flask in their hands, undoubtedly stands for 
Bodhisattvas other than Siddhartha. The future Buddha Maitreya, 
characterised by a peculiar mode of arranging the hair in a double 
loop on the head, as noted above, is not only shown in the company 

394 


t 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of the sever) past Buddhas but is also very often depicted as one of 
the two principal acolytes by the side of Gautama. The latter com¬ 
position usually shows Buddha seated in the middle, with Maitreya 
to his left, and another well-dressed figure to his right who either 
holds a lotus flower in his right hand or bears a lotus mark on it. 
The latter undoubtedly stands for Padmapani or Avalokitesvara, 
one of the most important Bodhisattvas of the developed Maha- 
yana pantheon. It should be noted that Maitreya and Avalokites¬ 
vara belonged to different categories. The former like Siddhartha 
was to become a Buddha in future, while the latter would always 
remain in the Bodhisattva stage. 

The most important characteristic of these divine beings is 
compassionateness, which is strikingly illustrated by a remarkable 
Hellenistic composition recovered from Loriyan Tangai and now in 
the collection of the Indian Museum, Calcutta. The relief shows 
Buddha sitting in Padmdsana on a lotus having two seated Bodhi¬ 
sattva figures, one on either side; both are depicted in a sorrowful 
pose, indicated by the heads resting aslant on one of their hands,'the 
right hand of the figure on the proper right holding a manuscript, 
and the left hand of the one on the other side a bunch of lotus 
flowers. The attendant on the left is Padmapani-Avalokitesvara, 
“the all-pitying one”, while the one on the proper right can be 
identified, on the basis of the manuscript in his hand, as Manjusri, 
personifying knowledge and wisdom. Thus, it is possible for us 
to recognise three different Bodhisattvas in Gandharan art from 
their individual iconographic features, the first of them, Maitreya, 
belonging to one category, and the next two, Avalokitesvara and 
Manjusri, to another. Such Bodhisattva figures are, however, ex¬ 
tremely rare among the ruins at Mathura of the 6aka-Kusha$a 
period, only a few figures of Maitreya and Vajrapani being recognis¬ 
able from their respective cognisances such as an amriiaghata or a 
vcjra in their hands. 

Another distinct iconographic type in Gandhara, a thunderbolt¬ 
bearing figure almost invariably accompanying Buddha in the nume¬ 
rous genre representations of the life-story of the Master, from 
the time of the Great Renunciation to that of the Great Decease, 
was variously identified by scholars as Devadatta, Mara, &akra, and 
Dharma; but it was correctly identified by Foucher as Yaksha Vajra¬ 
pani, who is described in many authoritative Buddhist texts as one 
of the principal ministerial angels of the Buddha from the time of 


395 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


his Mahabhinishkrainana to his Mahaparinirvdna . This Yaksha 
Vajrapani was the prototype of Bodhisattva Vajrapani, one of the 
important Dhyani-Boddhisattvas of the developed Mahayana, about 
whom more will be said later on. 

VI. THE PALI CANON 

It has been stated above that the canon of the sacred literature 
of the Buddhists was composed in Pali, Magadhi, and other dialects. 
Of these the Pali version alone has survived in its entirety. Of the 
rest, only very small fragments have so far come to light and these 
need not be surveyed in detail. 

The Pali canon consists of three pi^akas (baskets) and is there¬ 
fore known as the Tipitaka (Tripitaka in Sanskrit). These are 
Vinaya, Sutta and Abhidhamma Pitakas. The first deals with the 
rules of the monastic order. The second, as noted above, deals with 
the ethical principles of Buddha’s teaching. The third or Abhi¬ 
dhamma Pitaka expounds the metaphysical principles underlying 
the doctrine. 

There is yet another division of the canon into nine ahgas 
(limbs) mentioned in several places in the Tipitaka. They are: 
sermons in prose only (sutta), sermons in prose and verse ( geyya ), 
explanations (veyyakarana) , stanzas (gdvha), epigrams (udana), short 
saying beginning with “Thus spoke the Buddha” (itivuttaka) , stories 
of previous incarnations (jataka), miracles (abbhutadhamma) , and 
teachings in the form of question and answer ( vedalla ). This list 
of the angas is a classification of the various texts comprising the 
canon according to their form and contents. It clearly shows that 
all these diverse types of Buddhist literature were already in exist¬ 
ence when the canon was compiled in its present form. 

1. Vinaya Pitaka 

The Vinaya Pitaka, which has been placed at the head of the 
canon by the Buddhists themselves, comprises the following texts: 
Patimokkha, Sutta Vibhanga, Khandhakas, and Parivara. 

(i) Patimokkha . The nucleus of the Vinaya is the Patimokkha , 
which, as noted above, 1 gives a list of rules of discipline together 
with atonements for transgressing them. An oft-repeated phrase 
says that the life of a good monk is checked by the restraints of 
the Patimokkha. It originally contained only 152 rules, which were 

1. See p. 374 ff. 


896 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


later extended to 227, divided into ten sections, as we now find in 
the Vinaya Pitaka . 

(ii) Sutta Vibhanga, i.e. explanations of Suttas (of the Pati- 
mokkha ), tells in a sort of historical introduction how, when, and 
why the particular rule in question came to be laid down. The 
words of the rule are given in full, followed by a very ancient word- 
for-word commentary, which in its turn is succeeded by further ex¬ 
planations and discussions of doubtful points. The Sutta Vibhanga 
comprises (1) Maha-vibhanga which has eight chapters dealing with 
eight classes of transgressions against discipline, and (2) Bhik- 
khuni-vibhanga, a much shorter work, being a commentary on the 
code for the nuns compiled on the lines of Patimokkha for the monks. 
The offences have been divided into those which were punishable 
with expulsion from the Order ( parajik&s) and those punishable with 
expiation (pachittiyas). 

(iii) The Khandhakas (sections) comprise two divisions, Mahd- 
vagga and Chullavagga , and form a sort of continuation and sup¬ 
plement to the Sutta Vibhanga . 

The Mahdvagga (great section) in its ten sections furnishes us 
with the story of the formation of the Sangha, and lays down rules 
for admission to the Order, observance of the Uposatha ceremony, and 
the mode of life during the monsoon. There are also rules for the 
wearing of shoes, and for seats, conveyances, dress and medicine of 
the monks, and for the regulation of legal proceedings and restoration 
of order in the Sangha. There are some serious narratives which 
embody the purest Buddhist morals in their simplest form. The inci¬ 
dental notices in the Mahdvagga are valuable as they throw consi¬ 
derable light on the everyday life of ancient India. The sections 
dealing with thefts, sexual offences, crimes, etc. have a special in¬ 
terest as they present a cross-section of the society of those days. 

The Chullavagga (smaller section) in its twelve sections contains 
a number of edifying anecdotes connected with the life of Buddha 
and the history of the Order. The first nine sections contain rules 
for the Bhikkhus while the tenth section describes the duties of 
nuns. The former deal with disciplinary proceedings and methods 
of settling disputes among monks; various offences, expiations and 
penances; the daily life of the Bhikkhus; their residence, furniture, 
etc. The tenth section prescribes the eight conditions precedent to 
the entry of a woman into the Order, and rules for the guidance of 
the Bhikkhuni sangha (the order of nuns). The last two sections. 


897 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

containing an account of the first two councils at Raj agriha and 
Vaisali, are regarded as later additions, and form rather an appendix 
of the Chullavagga. 

(iv) Parivdra, the last book of the Vinaya Pitaka, gives in the 
form of questions and answers an abstract of the other parts, and 
appears to be a later production, being probably the work of a 
Ceylonese monk. It consists of nineteen sections, catechisms, 
indices, appendices, lists, etc., reminiscent of the anukramanis and 
parisishtas of the Vedic texts. 

2. Sutta Pitaka 

The Sutta Pitaka incorporates the greatest literary works of 
Buddhism in prose and verse. It comprises the following five col¬ 
lections called Nikayas: (1) Digha, (2) Majjhima, (3) Samyutta, 
(4) Anguttara and (5) Khuddaka. The first four consists of suttas 
or discourses which are either sermons of the Buddha (occasionally 
by a disciple), preceded by a short introduction relating the place 
and occasion of the discourse; or dialogues in prose, occasionally 
mixed with verse. These four are cognate and homogeneous in 
character with a number of suttas recurring in two or more collec¬ 
tions. 

(1) The Digha Nikaya (or DIghagama or DIghasahgha) is a col¬ 
lection of long sermons containing 34 suttas, each dealing fully with 
one or several points of the doctrine. There is no connection bet¬ 
ween the suttas. Each is complete in itself and capable of being 
regarded as an independent work. The Digha is divided into three 
books, diverse in contents and character, and containing earlier and 
later strata: Silakkhandha, Mahavagga and Pdtikavagga. The 
earliest stratum is found in the first book, which mostly deals with 
ethical questions, while the third book constitutes the later stratum, 
the second comprising the longest suttas, grown in bulk owing to 
interpolations. The origin of the universe, rebirth, self-control, 
asceticism, way to union with God, miracles, nirvana , heretical doc¬ 
trines, artificiality of the caste system, etc., are some of the topics 
dealt with in these books. 

Each sutta has a short preface explaining the occasion when 
Buddha delivered it. Some suttas are dialogues between Gautama 
and an unbeliever. The initial sutta of the Digha, Brahmajalasutta 
(the discourse on the Brahmana net), is important for the history, 
not only of Buddhism but of the entire religious life and thought of 


898 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


ancient India. This is followed by Samahhaphala-sutta (discourse 
on the reward of asceticism), which is a valuable piece of evidence 
for the life and thought at the time of Buddha, as it speaks of the 
views of prominent non-Buddhist teachers and founders of sects. 
Essentially different in form and contents from the other suttas, the 
Mahaparinibbana-sutta (No. 16) is neither a dialogue nor a discourse 
on one or more chief points of the doctrine. It is a detailed and 
interesting account of the later part of Buddha’s life, his last 
speeches and sayings, and his death and funeral ceremonies. 

(2) The Majjhima Nikaya (collection of medium suttas), with 
its three books of 50 suttas ( panndsas ) each, deals with practically 
all points of the Buddhist religion, and throws considerable light on 
the life of Buddhist monks, as also on Brahmanical sacrifices, various 
forms of asceticism, the relation of Buddha to the Jains and other 
systems of the day, the superstitions and the socio-political conditions 
of the time. There is a long enumeration of offences—burglary, 
robbery, adultery, etc—and the consequent punishments, which in¬ 
cidentally reveal the penal laws of the day. Besides dialogues and 
sermons, some suttas are pure narratives like the Angulimala. In 
one of the dialogues Buddha characteristically tells an enquirer, 
seeking information concerning subtle metaphysical problems, that 
answering these questions would leave no time for finding the way 
to salvation (sutta 63). 

With regard to the dialogues in the Digha and Majjhima , Rhys 
Davids rightly observes: “In depth of philosophic insight, in the 
method of Socratic questioning often adopted, in the earnest and 
elevated tone of the whole, in the evidence they afford of the most 
cultured thought of the day, these dialogues constantly remind the 
reader of the dialogues of Plato. But not in style. They have in¬ 
deed a style of their own; always dignified and occasionally rising 
into eloquence.” 1 

(3) The Samyutta Nikdya (book of kindred sayings) has 56 
groups (samyuttas) each dealing with vairious points of the doctrine 
in connection with a certain name or object. The suttas have been 
grouped on at least three principles: (1) those that deal with one 
of the chief points or principal branches of the Buddhist doctrine; 
(2) those that refer to classes of gods, men or demons; and (3) those 
that have some prominent personality as hero or speaker. The 

1. EB, llth Ed., IV, p. 746a. 


899 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Samyutta is a compilation of suttas mainly bearing on psycho-ethical 
and philosophical problems. 

Yet another division of the Samyutta is into the following five 
vaggas (divisions): Sagatha, Nidana, Khandha, Salayatana and 
Maha. Ethics and the Buddhist ideal of life dominate the first vagga 
and epistemology and metaphysics the other vaggas. There are 
suttas in this collection in which the Buddha and Dhamma are already 
objects of veneration, while some deal with the life of the Master and 
a few with the discipline of the Order ( vinaya ). Though there is 
monotonous repetition and tedious multiplication of suttas, which 
was due probably to sound practical reasons in their use for religious 
exercises, there are many things that are noteworthy from a purely 
literary point of view. The first vagga especially abounds in real 
poetry. Many riddles and aphorisms in the form of questions and 
answers are found in the Devata Samyutta and, like Yudhishthira 
who correctly answers the puzzles of a Yaksha, Buddha satisfies a 
Yaksha by wisely answering his questions. 1 The Mara Samyutta 
and the BhikkhunI Samyutta, which are ballads in mixed prose and 
verse, are of great poetical merit. Winternitz considers such poems 
as “sacred ballads, counterparts of those akhydnas with which the 
epic poetry of the Indians originated.” 2 The sayings and episodes in 
this Nikaya impress one successively with Buddha’s great good sense, 
readiness to adapt his teaching to the individual enquirer, keen 
intuition, ready humour and smiling irony, courage and dignity, and 
catholic and tender compassion for all creatures. 

(4) Ahguttara (or Ekuttara) Nikaya is a numerical grouping of 
sermons arranged serially in an ascending order. It consists of ele¬ 
ven sections ( nip&tas ), each of which is further split into several divi¬ 
sions (vaggas). Though similar in many cases to the grouping or 
enumerations of doctrines or principles in the Samyutta, the bearing 
of the Anguttara is on the whole practical. Its purpose is sufficiently 
to emphasise certain doctrinal points by repeatedly dinning them into 
the ears of the audience. 

The style of the Anguttara is characterised by sobriety and 
perspicuity. Though following a purely prosaic and mechanical 
scheme, the Anguttara presents certain matters which are full of 
interest. Variety of contents may be said to be its special feature. 

1. Samyutta, X. 12. 

2. HIL, H, p. 59. 

400 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


A large number of suttas deal with women, mostly in an uncompli¬ 
mentary way. The Anguttara also throws a flood of light on brutal 
methods of punishment and on the criminal law of the day. 

(5) The Khuddaka Nikaya (collection of smaller pieces), though 
usually taken as the fifth Nikaya of the Sutta Pi\aka, is sometimes 
classed with the Abhidhamma Pitaka. It may better be called “a 
collection of miscellanea” as, besides several short works, it includes 
also a few of the most extensive of the Pali canonical books. It was 
added as a supplementary Nikaya after the Nikayas had been closed. 
The Khuddaka is composed for the most part in verse and contains 
the most important Buddhist works in poetry. In contents and 
character the various texts comprising this collection differ very 
widely. It would appear from a very remarkable sutta , recurring 
several times, that the claim of poetical pieces to be regarded as 
sacred texts was recognised only at a later time. 1 The works in¬ 
cluded in the Khuddaka originated at different periods and were 
not intended to be incorporated in one collection. 

The Khuddaka comprises the following texts: Khuddakapatha, 
Dhammapada, Udana, Itivuttaka, Sutta Nipata, Vimanavatthu, 
Petavatthu, Theragatha, Therigatha, Jatakas, Niddesa, Patisambhi- 
damagga, Apadana, Buddhavamsa and Chariyapitaka. 

The Khuddakapatha (lesser readings) with its nine short texts 
is a little tract, a first lesson book for the young neophytes when they 
joined the Order. The texts were used as a kind of mantra or prayer 
in the Buddhist cult. It is interesting to note that seven of these 
texts are still used at the Buddhist “Paritta” ceremony (exorcism 
spells). 

The Dhammapada , the best known of the Buddhist canonical 
texts, is an anthology of 423 sayings of Buddha in verse divided into 
26 vaggas or chapters, the stanzas being arranged by subjects. These 
stanzas are mostly taken from the other books of the Pali canon, 
and embody the spirit of Buddha’s teaching, if not the very words of 
the Master. The Dhammapada is a fine exposition of the sublime 
ethical teachings of the Buddha and was a very popular text all over 
the Buddhist world. 

The Uddna (ecstatic utterances of the Buddha), containing stan¬ 
zas and narratives, is divided into eight vaggcLs or sections of ten 
suttas each. Each sutta contains the utterances and the narratives, 

1. Samyutta, XX. 7; Ahguttara, TV. 160; Wintemitz, HIL, II. p. 77. 


A.I.U.—96 


401 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the former being older than the latter into which they were inserted. 
The style is simple. The outbursts of the Buddha are very terse and 
enigmatic. Each sutta is concluded by an Udana (ecstatic utterance) 
of the Buddha. 

The Itivuttaka (“Thus spake the Buddha”) is a book of quota¬ 
tions in prose and verse of the authoritative sayings of Buddha. It 
is divided into five vaggas comprising 120 short pieces beginning 
with “Vuttam hetam Bhagavata vuttam-arahata ti me sutam” (Thus 
was it said by the Blessed One, the Exalted One—Thus have I heard), 
and ending with “Ayam-pi attho vutto Bhagavatd iti me sutan-ti” 
(This meaning was told by the Blessed One—Thus have I heard). 
It expounds the ethical teachings of the Buddha on a variety of sub¬ 
jects. There is no excessive verbosity, and occasional similes and 
beautiful metaphors give a pleasing touch to the style. The language 
is simple and natural. At times we come across figures of speech 
drawn from nature, animals, etc. 

The Sutta Nipdta (the section of discourses) is a collection of 
poetic suttas in five vaggas (chapters): Uraga, Chula, Maha, Atthaka, 
and Parayana. It is the most frequently quoted text in the works of 
Buddhism next to the Dhammapada. There are many references, 
or allusions to Brahmanical ideas. The Sela-sutta (III. 7) relating 
to the conversion of the Brahmana Sela contains passages remini¬ 
scent of the verses of the Bhagavadgita and Anugitd. On the whole 
the Buddhist ideal is contrasted with the Brahmanical and shown 
as the higher one. The Vasettha-sutta (III. 9) beautifully elaborates 
the idea found in old portions of the Mahdbharata that true Brah- 
mai?ahood consists not in birth but in good conduct. 

The old dialogue form is occasionally combined with the old 
riddle poetry already found in the Veda and the Epic. The Yaksha 
appears as a questioner as in the Mahdbharata , and a sage answers 
the queries by presenting the ethical doctrines of Buddhism. The 
Nalaka-sutta, the Pabbajja-sutta and the Padhana-sutta are of special 
importance, being the precious remnants of the sacred ballad poetry 
which gave rise to the later epic version of the life of Buddha in the 
same way as the akhydnas later grew into heroic poetry. The Sutta 
Nipdta preserves many fragments of the oldest Buddhist poetry. 
Some of the prose narratives forming the framework for the poems 
are, however, later additions, though Fausboll’s view that all prose 
passages were written later cannot be accepted. 1 The Sutta Nipdta 

1. Preface, p. vii, Editio Princeps of the text; cf. Wintemitz, H1L, II. p. 98. 

402 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


is a valuable aid for studying Buddhism as an ethical religion and 
contains information about the social, economic, and religious con¬ 
ditions of India in the Buddhist age. It refers to the six heretical 
teachers and the Samanas and Brahmanas. 

The Vimdnavatthu (stories of divine palaces) and Petavatthu 
(ghost stories) are short treatises, probably belonging to the latest 
stratum of literature collected in the Pali canon. The Vimdnavatthu 
describes certain celestial abodes enjoyed by gods as the result of 
their meritorious deeds while on earth, whereas the Petavatthu 
refers to sufferings after death as the result of evil deeds on earth. 
The Vimdnavatthu and Petavatthu are among the dullest productions 
of monkish poetry, metrical form being their only claim for being 
ranked among poetical works. The profound doctrine of Karman, 
so beautifully expressed in Brahmanical and Buddhist texts, is ex¬ 
plained most clumsily in these stories. 

The Theragathd and Thengatha are collections of poems, being 
respectively the work of monks and nuns. There are differences in 
idiom, tone and sentiments in these two works. The Theragathd 
concerns itself more with inner experience, while the Thengatha 
deals more with external experiences. With regard to their poeti¬ 
cal excellence, Dr. Winternitz is justified in ranking these collec¬ 
tions, in point of force and beauty, with the best productions of 
Indian lyric poetry from the Bigvedic hymns to the lyrics of Kali¬ 
dasa and Amaru. 1 

The refrain and the repetition of typical phrases are the dis¬ 
tinguishing features of these collections. The semi-dramatic dialogue 
appears to be very popular. 

Beautiful descriptions of nature in the Theragathd are largely 
responsible in transforming many of these religious poems into real 
gems of Indian lyric poetry. The love of nature finds expression 
also in many charming similes. Despite his supposed indifference 
to pleasure the saint does not refrain from describing the spring in 
glowing terms. 

The Therigdtha more frequently Strikes a personal note which 
is not found in the Theragathd. Descriptions of nature predominate 
in the Theragathd, whereas pictures of life preponderate in the other 
collection. From the Thengatha we know that women were attracted 
to the Order owing to the loss of their children. There are also 
stories of former courtesans becoming nuns which artistically portray 


l. hil, n, p. 100 . 


408 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

the contrast between the life and conduct of the two. The contrast 
between extravagant festive joy and the peace of Nirvana is also 
effectively brought out. There is an elaborate collection of similes 
in the Therigdthd, reminiscent of the embellishments of ornate poetry. 
Occasionally we come across very artificial word-plays. 

These collections are very important on account of the pictures 
of life they portray, which give us a valuable insight into the social 
conditions, especially the position of women, of those days. Like 
the other collections in the Pali canon, there is a combination of old 
and new material in these gdthds, so that each portion is to be dated 
separately on its own merits. 

The Jdtakas (stories of the former lives of the Buddha), which 
were the chief vehicle of Buddhist propaganda, afford an insight 
into popular Buddhism. As we possess merely a commentary and 
not the original canonical Jataka, it is difficult to say how much of 
the present Jataka book belongs to the canon. Each story (or 
Jataka) in this commentary consists of the following parts: (1) 
pachchuppannavatthu (the story of the present), relating the occa¬ 
sion of Buddha’s telling the story; (2) atitavatthu (story of the past), 
a prose narrative, telling of one of the former births of Buddha; 
(3) gdthds (stanzas) which generally belong to the “story of the 
past” but very often also to the “story of the present”; (4) veyya- 
karana (short commentary) which explains the gdthds word for word; 
and (5) samodhdna (connection) in which the Buddha generally 
identifies the personages of the story of the present with those of 
the past. The gdthds appear generally to have belonged to the 
canon and the prose portions appear to have been added later. 

The Jdtakas, more than 500 in number, are very varied in their 
character. Some are fables aiming at teaching ruti (worldly wis¬ 
dom). Only a few have a directly moral aim and not many can be 
classed as definitely Buddhistic. Others are fairy stories, pure and 
simple. Most of the moral narratives, sayings and pious legends 
are the common property of Indian didactic poetry, and are only 
partly of Buddhist origin. About the short anecdotes, humorous 
tales, and jokes in the Jatakas, there is nothing specifically Buddhist. 
The Jdtakas also include romances, adventures and narratives. The 
only touch of Buddhism in these is the hero, who is always the 
Bodhisattva. On the whole, more than a half of Jdtakas are of 
non-Buddhistic origin. 


404 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


The Jdtakas present practically all forms and types of compo¬ 
sition. Prose narratives are interspersed with poetry. The prose 
and verse are artistically joined and together present a finished 
whole. There are also collections of sayings on different subjects 
and epic fragments. As in the case of the ballads, the prose in these 
is redundant, late and insipid. 

There are stories bringing out the contrast between grateful 
animals and ungrateful men. The story of the jackal “All-tooth’' 
(Sabbadatha) in Jataka 241 has a touch of delightful humour. Many 
deal with the perpetual and inexhaustible subject of the wickedness 
of woman. A whole collection of stories and sayings on the same 
subject is grouped in Jataka 536 (Kunala Jataka), and Nos. 61-66 
are such a cycle. A long moral in the form of a ballad is pre¬ 
sented in Jataka 527, which is so extremely dramatic as to appear 
like a short drama. To the Western reader, the stories of female 
demons (Yakshinis) who lure the shipwrecked mariners in order 
to kill and devour them call to mind the sirens and other beings 
like Circe and Calypso in the Odyssey of Homer. 1 There are also 
consolatory stories, a kind of moral narrative whose purpose is to 
comfort those grieving for the departed. The picaresque and other 
narratives in which robbers, vagabonds, dice-players and courtesans 
figure as the chief characters, though historically interesting, have 
not much that is characteristically Buddhist in them. It is interest¬ 
ing to note that the Bodhisattva actually figures twice as a highway¬ 
man. The anecdote of the woman who decides in iavour of her 
brother in perference to her son or husband (Jataka 67) is particu¬ 
larly interesting on account of its relation to a similar story in 
Herodotus. Scholars hold divergent views as regards the origin of 
the motif and Winternitz strikes the correct note in stating that it 
is difficult to determine its actual home. 2 

The view that the Jdtakas furnish valuable material not only 
for literature and art, but for the study of economic conditions and 
social manners and customs of Buddha’s time, is true in the case 
of only some poems and a few prose narratives which go back to 
his time. The major part of the verses is not perhaps earlier than 
the third century B.C., whereas much of the prose is later than the 
Christian era. In point of age the Jdtakas bear a close resemblance 
to the Mahabharata in that every single gatha requires to be tested 
independently with regard to its chronology. The Jdtakas give 


1. Cf. Winternitz, HIL, II, p. 131. 

2. HIL, H, p. 135. 


405 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


particulars about the life of people of all classes, about some of 
whom there is scarcely any other information in Indian literature. 

The Niddesa (exposition) contains detailed explanations by 
Sariputta of 33 Suttas from the last two vaggas of the Sutta Nipdta, 
and is divided into two sections; Maha-niddesa, and Chulla-niddesa. 
From its inclusion in the canon, it is-evident that the Niddesa was 
the oldest of the Pali commentaries. This commentary explains im¬ 
portant technical expressions, frequently quoting from canonical 
texts. It gives a long list of synonyms to explain a word, the list 
being repeated every time the same word occurs. 

The Patisambhidamagga (Path to analysis); Each of its three 
large sections (Maha-vagga, Yuganandha-vagga, Panna-vagga) con¬ 
tains ten chapters on some important topics of the Buddhist doctrine. 
It treats all subjects in the form of questions and answers in the 
manner of the Abhidhamma texts, and is among the latest of the 
canonical books. It was included in the Sutta Pitaka because its 
form is that of the Suttas, and the traditional opening “evam me 
sutam ,f of the Sutta Pitaka is found fairly frequently. 

The Apaddna (Sanskrit Avadana, heroic or glorious deeds, and 
then, glorious deeds of self-sacrifice and piety) is an anthology of 
legends describing the heroic and pious works of the Buddhist 
saints. It is entirely in verse and contains biographies of 550 male 
and 40 female members of the Buddhist Order. The Apadanas, 
like the Jatakas, have a story of the present and a story of the past, 
but the stories in the Apadanas relate to the previous existence of 
a saint, an arhat, not of the Buddha as the Jdtaka. Apaddna is 
more closely allied to the Sanskrit Avadanas than to the remaining 
works of the Pali canon, and is one of the latest works of the 
Khuddaka. 

The Buddhavamsa contains poetical legends of 24 Buddhas 
supposed to have been the predecessors of Gautama in the last 
twelve kalpas. Gautama is the narrator. In the case of each in¬ 
dividual Buddha, it is related somewhat dryly how he set the wheel 
of religion in motion and the principal events in Gautama’s life find 
their counterparts in the life of one of his predecessors (former 
Buddhas). 

The Chariydpitaka, a collection of Jatakas in verse, is a post- 
Aiokan work. It illustrates the modes in which Bodhisattva prac¬ 
tised the conduct ( chariyd ) and shows how he had attained the 
ten perfections (paramitds) in his previous existence. 


406 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


3. Abhidhamma Pitaka 

Contrary to the indications given by its name ( Abhidhamma, 
higher religion or metaphysics), there is very little of metaphysics 
in the Abhidhamma Pitaka (basket of transcendental doctrine). It 
deals with the same subjects as the Sutta Pitaka, but in a more 
scholastic way. It is written mostly in the form of questions and 
answers like a catechism. The subject-matter of the Abhidhamma 
is chiefly derived from the Sutta Pitaka in which are found the 
beginnings of the Abhidhamma and the Vinaya Pitaka. The Abhi¬ 
dhamma may be said to be merely the extension of the matikas or 
lists mentioned in the Vinaya. The Abhidhamma comprises seven 
books commonly known as Sattapakarana, viz. Dhammasangani, 
Vihhanga, Dhatukatha, Puggalapahnatti, Kathavatthu, Yamaka and 
Patthana. All these books are later in date containing a more ela¬ 
borate and classified exposition of the Dhamma than given in the 
Nikayas. There is hardly any originality or profundity in the 
Abhidhamma books. There is no trace of any scientific reasoning 
or research in the definitions and classifications; mere dogmatism 
appears to have formed their basis. 

The Kathavatthu (points of controversy) or the Vijnanapada, 
ascribed to Moggaliputta Tissa, President of the Third Council, is 
the only canonical work claiming definite authorship. Oldenberg, 
Rhys Davids, Geiger and others accept the historicity of the tradi¬ 
tion, but Barth, Keith, Minayeff and Walleser reject it. According 
to Winternitz the Kathavatthu in its present form cannot be re¬ 
garded as a work of the third century B.C. 1 It is later than the 
Vinaya and the Sutta and the first two books of the Abhidhamma 
to which it refers. It is valuable for the light it throws on the 
development of Buddhist dogmatics during the later centuries. 


4. Chronology of Canonical Pali Literature 

Canonical Pali literature can be roughly placed between two 
well-defined chronological limits. The death of Buddha, after which 
the formal collection of his teachings was made according to unani¬ 
mous Buddhist traditions, affords the upper limit, while the lower 
limit is supplied by the reign of king Vattagamani of Ceylon during 
whose reign the canon is said to have finally closed. Thus the Pali 
canonical literature was produced some time between the fifth cen- 


1. HIL, II, p. 170. 


407 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


tury B.C. and the last quarter of the first century B.C., but the date 
of some of the canonical texts may be fixed within narrower limits. 

It is now generally agreed that the canon is not as old as the 
First or even the Second Council; but quotations from scriptures in 
Asokan edicts, references to persons well versed in sacred texts in 
inscriptions of the second century B.C. and scriptures, reliefs and 
inscriptions on the railings and gateways at Bharhut and Sanchl 
suggest that the works on Dharma and Vinaya were current before 
the rise of the Maurya and Sunga dynasties. The Milinda-panha is 
the earliest evidence of the existence of the three Pitakas and five 
Nikayas. 

As regards the chronology of the different texts constituting 
the canon, the Mahavagga and Chullavagga are evidently anterior 
to the period of Asoka, as they are silent about the Third Council. 
The Sutta Vibhanga and the five Nikayas which are referred to in 
the Chullavagga are certainly much older. There is no reference 
to the Abhidhamma, which is the latest of the Pitakas. The 
Kathdvatthu, ascribed to Tissa, presupposes the Vinaya, Sutta and 
the other books of the Abhidhamma. This work was probably not 
written till the compilation of the canon by Tissa, and was append¬ 
ed to the canon by the Council. The Parivdrapdtha , the last treatise 
in the Vinaya, which is said to have been written by DIpa in Ceylon, 
is assigned to the reign of Vattagamani, and it refers to the five 
Nikayas, the seven treatises of the Abhidhamma and all older texts 
of the Vinaya as made known to Ceylon by Mahinda after the Third 
Council. As the Nikayas know no place in the east, south of 
Kalinga, and no place in the west, south of the Godavari, the geo¬ 
graphy of the Nikayas points to their age being much earlier than 
A£oka. Roughly, therefore, we may say that the bulk of the Vinaya 
Pitaka and the first four Nikayas of the Sutta Pitaka were compiled 
before 350 B.C. 

After discussing the chronology of the Pali canonical texts from 
different points, Dr. Law places them in the following groups in their 
chronological order: 1 

“1. The simple statements of Buddhist doctrine now found in 
identical words in paragraphs or verses recurring in all the 
books; 

2. Episodes found in identical words in two or more of the 
existing books; 

1. History of Pali Literature I, 42. 


408 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


3. The Silas, the Parayana group of sixteen poems without 
the prologue, the Atthaka group of four or sixteen poems, 
the Sikkhapadas; 

4. Digha Vol. I, Majjhima, Samyutta, Ahguttara and earlier 
Patimokkha with 152 rules; 

5. Digha Vols. II, III, Thera-Theri-gatha, 500 Jatakas, Suttavi- 
bhahga, Patisambhidamagga, Puggalapannatti and Vi- 
bhanga; 

6. Mahavagga, Chullavagga, Patimokkha with 227 rules. 
Vimanavatthu, Petavatthu, Dhammapada, Kathavatthu; 

7. Chulla- and Maha-niddesa, Udana, Itivuttaka, Sutta Nipata, 
Dhatukathii, Yamaka, Patthana; 

8. Buddhavamsa, Chariyapitaka, Apadana; 

9. Parivarapatha; 

10. Khuddakapatha. ” 

5. Non-canonical Pali Literature 

A vast exegetical literature arose out of the necessity of ex¬ 
plaining canonical texts, especially as these travelled to distant 
lands. The major part of the non-canonical Pali literature com¬ 
prises these commentaries. This commentarial literature not only 
explained the texts by adding critical notes, but classified the sub¬ 
ject-matter and added legends. The activity of the commentators 
began in India after the compilation of the texts, and already during 
Asoka’s time, his son Mahendra had taken to Ceylon an Atthakatha 
along with the canon. The great bulk of non-canonical Pali litera¬ 
ture, however, is the product of the Ceylonese monks. The period 
of the great commentators of the Pali canon comes after the fourth 
century and properly belongs to the next volume. The only Indian 
non-canonical works that pertain to our period are the Milinda-panha , 
Nettipakarana and Petakopadesa. 

The Milinda-panha originated in north-west India about the 
beginning of the Christian era and was written probably in Sanskrit 
or some north-Indian Prakrit. The original text is lost, and the pre¬ 
sent work is merely a Pali translation of the original made at a very 
early date in Ceylon. The work is a conversation between the 
Greek king Milinda of Sagala and Thera Nagasena on a number of 
problems and disputed points of Buddhism. In the arguments, the 
Buddhist doctrine of the impermanence of the Ego is expounded and 
Milinda is converted. King Milinda is certainly the Greek ruler 


409 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Menander, 1 who was a scholar as well as a soldier. Nagasena cannot 
be identified with certainty. 

The problems discussed in the Milinda-pahha find their counter¬ 
part in those that play a prominent part in the Kathdvatthu. The 
style of the Milinda-panha shows an advance over the speeches of 
the Sutta Pitaka, while some of the dialogues of the Milinda-pahha 
stand comparison with the dialogues of Plato. The language is ele¬ 
gant, and there are various eloquent passages. 

The Milinda-pahha at present comprises seven books; but it 
originally consisted of only a small portion of the first, and the 
whole of the second and third books. The v/ork is complete with 
Book III, which forms a fitting conclusion to it, and there is a fresh 
introduction to Book IV. That Books IV-VII have been interpolated 
would be evident from their absence from the Chinese translation 
which may be dated between A.D. 317-420. They differ, again, from 
Book I in character. Mrs. Davids, however, thinks the book is the 
work of a single author, who first edited the conversations (which 
actually took place according to her), then wrote dialogues on the 
dilemmas after about ten years, and, still later, composed the book 
of the similes. 2 

In the first book there is a whole series of parables which seeks 
to explain why man is responsible for his actions, though according 
to the Buddhist doctrines there is no permanent ego. In contrast 
to the next two books which deal with the most important topics of 
Buddhist ethics and psychology, of interest even to laymen, there 
is a system of apologetics in Book IV which would interest only the 
well-read students of canonical texts. There are a number of quota¬ 
tions from the canon in Books IV-VII, which also contain frequent 
allusions to traditions divergent from the canonical texts and pertain¬ 
ing to a later period. 

Contemporaneous with the Milinda-pahha are the Nettipakarana 
and Petakopadesa, ascribed to Mahakachchana, a disciple of Buddha, 
proclaimed as the best expounder of the word of the Master even in 
the Majjhima Nikaya. The Nettipakarana (book of guidance) is a 
treatise on textual and exegetical methodology. It is to the Pali 
canon what Yaska's Nirukta is to the Vedas. It is the earliest work 
giving a systematic treatment of all the teachings of Buddha. Accord¬ 
ing to Mrs. Rhys Davids the Netti is earlier than the last two books 

1. See above, p. 112 fl. 

2 The M Hind a Questions (London, 1930), pp. 6 ff. 23, 105 ff, 149 ff etc. 


410 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of the Abhidhamma. 1 A commentary on the Netti was written by 
Dhammapala in c. fifth century A.D. 

Mahakachchana is said to have composed also the Petakopadesa 
(Instructions to students of Pitakas), which is a continuation of the 
Netti and is but a different manipulation of the same subject. It 
throws some new light on the points left obscure in the Netti. It 
speaks of the four Ariya truths to be the central theme or essence 
of Buddhism—a point which was emphasised in the literature of 
the Sarvastivadins. 


C. JAINISM 


1. Parsva and Mahavira 

Jain tradition speaks of twenty-four Tirthakaras or “ford-makers 
across the stream of existence”, each of whom preached the doctrine 
to his own age. Of these, however, the first twenty-two seem to be 
completely mythical and have no historical foundation. 

The case, however, is different with the last two prophets, Parsva 
and Mahavira. All that Jain tradition reports of them is quite pro¬ 
bable. The contemporaries of Mahavira were well-known and the 
Buddhist canon supplies us with incontrovertible proof of their 
historicity. 

We know very few facts of Parsva’s life. He is said to have 
been a son of Asvasena, king of Banaras, and his wife Vama. He 
lived for 30 years as a householder, then became an ascetic and, after 
performing penance for 84 days, received enlightenment. He lived 
for a full hundred years and died on Mount Sammeta in Bengal, some 
250 years before Mahavira. He must have been of a genial nature 
as he is always given the epithet purisaddniya ‘beloved of men.* 

We know, however, something of his teachings. We are told that 
he believed in the eternity of matter as did Mahavira after him. 
The followers of Parsva preached that self-control ( samyama ) results 
in the cessation of Karma (anhaga ), and penance leads to its anni¬ 
hilation. With this Mahavira agreed as well as with the four vows 
enunciated by Parsva, viz. that life should not be taken, no falsehood 
spoken, nothing should be received which is not freely given, and 
non-attachment should be practised (bahiddMdando veramanam). 
This last may have reference to celibacy and not to the vow of non- 


1. JRAS, 1925, p. Ill ff. 


411 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

possession as made out by later tradition. 1 Finally there was this 
outward difference between the two sects, that Parsva allowed the 
use of a white garment by the monks, while Mahavira forbade even 
this. Hence the two Jain sects are entitled Svetambara (white-clad) 
and Digambara (sky-clad or naked). 

The belief in the historicity of Parsva is confirmed by the canon, 
which not only gives us some idea of his doctrines but preserves 
anecdotes about his followers. The account of Kesi, one of his dis¬ 
ciples, in the canonical books is quite realistic. Another of his disci¬ 
ples holds a disputation with Goyama, the chief disciple of Mahavira, 
while a third follower of Parsva expresses his desire to exchange the 
religion of the four vows for the one with five vows of Mahavira. 
Even the parents of Mahavira belonged to the lay following of Parsva. 
Moreover, Jacobi has put forward a strong argument to prove his 
historical existence. 2 3 A Buddhist Sutra mistakenly attributes to 
Mahavira the religion of the four vows, which really belonged to 
Parsva, and such a mistake could only have occurred if Parsva 
actually had followers existing at the time. 

It is thus highly probable that some kind of Jain faith existed 
before Mahavira, and his teachings were based on it. The conver¬ 
sation between Kesi and Goyama in the Uttarddhyayana? testifies 
to their friendly relations and points out that, in spite of some minor 
differences, the two were essentially the same. By the very nature 
of the case, tradition has preserved only those points of Parsva’s 
teachings which differed from the religion of Mahavira, while all 
other common points are ignored. The few differences that are 
known make Mahavira definitely a reformer of an existing faith, and 
the addition of a vow, the importance of nudity and a more syste¬ 
matic arrangement of its philosophical tenets may be credited to his 
reforming zeal. 

Thus, unlike Buddha, Mahavira was more a reformer of an exist¬ 
ing religion and possibly of a church, than the founder of a new faith. 
This fact is well brought out by the differences in their traditional 
lives. We are told that Buddha, at the beginning of his spiritual 
career, lived with some teachers, with whose teachings he became 
dissatisfied and finally found out the truth for himself. The Jain 
tradition makes no such claim for Mahavira. He is represented as 
following a well-established creed, most probably that of Parsva. 

1. Schubring, Die Lehre der Jainas, p. 25. 

2. SBE, Jaina Sutras. II. XLV. xx-xxii. 

3. Chapter xxiii. 


412 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Equally significant is Buddha’s insistence that his followers should 
remember well his first sermon, suggestive of its novelty. Above 
all, the Pali canon shows that it regarded Mahavira not as a founder 
of a new sect, but merely as a leader of a religious community 
already in existence. 

Some authentic facts of Mahavlra’s life can be collected from 
the Ardha-Magadhl canon. 1 He was born in a suburb of Vaisall, 
called Kundagrama,, now known as Basukuiwja. He belonged to the 
Nay a clan known as Ndta (or Nata) in Pali and Jndtri in Sanskrit. 
His parents were Siddhartha, a wealthy nobleman, and Trisala, sister 
of Chetaka, an eminent Lichchhavi prince of Vaisall. Tradition em¬ 
phasises the importance of Mahavlra’s noble birth and tells of the 
transference of his embryo from the womb of the Brahmana lady 
Devananda, wife of Hishabha, to that of Trisala. It is difficult to 
ascertain how old this belief is, but the canon makes Mahavira speak 
of Devananda as his mother and the role of Harinegamesi in the 
transference of the embryo. A sculpture from Mathura also re¬ 
presents this scene. The original name of the prophet was Vardha- 
mana, while his more popular name Mahavira is said to have been 
bestowed on him by the gods. The canon also gives him a number 
of suggestive epithets like Ndyaputta ‘a scion of the Naya clan’, 
Kasava on account of his gotra, Vesdliya after his place of birth, and 
Vedehadinna after his native country. He is most frequently re¬ 
ferred to as “the venerable ascetic Mahavira”. 

At the normal age Mahavira married Yasoda and had a daughter 
called Anojja or Priyadarsana. She was married to a son of his 
sister, Jamali, whose name is not found in older sources but only in 
the Avasyaka tradition. The suppression of his name in early books 
of the canon may be due to the ignominious role he plays in church- 
history as the originator of the first schism. 

Not to grieve his parents, Mahavira became a monk only after 
their death and with the permission of his elder brother Nandivar- 
dhana. He was at that time 30 years old. He left his home at the 
beginning of winter, which shows his inclination towards severe 
asceticism. Thirteen months after, also in winter, he abandoned his 
clothing and began to wander abroad as a naked monk. This was 
probably the first important step in the reformation of the church of 
ParSva, which allowed clothing. The fine ballad in the Achardnga 
gives us a beautiful picture of the way in which he performed his 

I. Acharanga (Uvahanasuya, Bhavanao). Kalpasutra, BhagavaU. 


418 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


meditation and spent his days in austerities, and also of the treatment 
he received from the unfriendly people of the neighbouring countries. 
In this period his thought matured. He attributed life ( jiva ) not 
only to animals and plants, but to material objects like earth and 
water, assumed the real cause of worldly misery to be Karma, engen¬ 
dered by indulgence in sensual pleasure, and the essential misery 
of life to be due to the endless cycle of birth and death. His own 
behaviour furnished an example to be followed by the monks in their 
religious life. The ballad also suggests that, after a period of two 
years and two months, he decided on a wandering mode of existence, 
which lasted for 12 years. Jain tradition tells us that Mahavlra was 
born with the three types of knowledge, acquired the fourth at the 
beginning of his monkhood, and achieved omniscience under a &ala 
tree at the end of 12 years of austerity, on the bank of the river Riju- 
palika not far from the village Jrimbhikagrama. Henceforth he 
entered on his career as a religious teacher. 

One important event in this period of Mahavlra’s life was his 
meeting with Gosala Mankhaliputta, the head of the Ajivika sect. 
From the one-sided account of Bhagavati 1 we know that Gosala be¬ 
came a pupil of Mahavlra in the second year of his monkhood and 
remained with him for six years. Then came a breach between the 
two on the point of rejuvenation and, maybe, also on other points, 
and Gosala went his own way. He soon proclaimed himself a jina 
and lived in Sravastl. The two met again sixteen years later and 
again quarrelled. Gosala died soon after, some 16 years before 
Mahavlra. 

We have some information about the doctrines of Gosala, from 
the Buddhist writings, independent of the Jain sources, and there 
are some parallelisms between them and the Jain doctrines. Though 
it will be going too far to regard Mahavlra as a pupil of Gosala, and 
assume many points in the Jain creed as borrowed from the Ajivika 
sect, it is quite probable that the rules about diet current among 
the Jain monks may have come from the code of the Ajivikas, and 
some significance must be attached to the coincidence of Mahkvlra 
giving up his garment in the year of his meeting with Gosala. 

The acquisition of perfect knowledge entailed the continuation 
of a wandering mode of life and constant preaching of his doctrines 
to all kinds of men. He wandered for eight months of the year and 

1. Say a, xv. Cf. Hoemle, ERE. I. 259. 


414 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

spent the four months of the rainy season in some famous towns of 
eastern India. The Jain tradition gives the names of such places 
as Champa, Vaisali, Raj agriha, Mithila and Sravasti, where he spent 
one or more seasons. They give us a fair idea of the country over 
which he wandered propagating his faith, but we must bear in mind 
that the list is neither exhaustive nor chronological, though cover¬ 
ing broadly the 42 years of his itineracy. With the spread of his 
fame, he was now better received by the people, and famous kings 
came to hear him preach. At the age of 72 Mahavlra died in a place 
called Majjhima Pava (which may mean that, contrary to his usual 
practice, he resided inside the town on account of his illness) in the 
house of a ruler of the name of Hastipala (Hatthivala). This place 
is said to be the modern Pavapuri in the Patna District. We are told 
that on the night of his death the kings of the two clans, the Mallas 
and the Lichchhavis, celebrated the lamp festival in his honour. 

As noted above, Gosala, the head of the Ajivika sect, appears 
to have had very close ties with Jainism. This would explain to 
some extent why the Jain canon makes frequent attempts at refut¬ 
ing his doctrines in strong terms, while it takes practically no nqtice 
of Gautama Buddha, the famous contemporary of Mahavlra. On 
the other hand, the Pali canon often attempts to refute the teachings 
of Mahavlra, whom it knows by the name of Nigantha Nataputta, 
along with Gosala and other Titthiyas, all of whom were elder con¬ 
temporaries of the Buddha. Neither of the sources mentions any 
meeting between Mahavlra and the Buddha, but the Pali Suttas 
suggest that Mahavlra died some time before him, if we are correct 
in accepting that Pava, where Mahavlra died, is the very place 
later visited by Buddha. 

Like Buddhism, Jainism also received royal patronage from 
the very beginning. Srenika, the king of Magadha, was devoted to 
Mahavlra, and was related to the prophet on his mother’s side. The 
Jain attempt to explain away the parricidal act of his son Ajatasatru 
or Kunika would indicate that he was more inclined to Jainism than 
to other religions. Later Jain tradition, without much historical 
support, however, brings nearly all the kings of north India in those 
days in relation to Mahavlra by describing their queens as daughters 
of Chetaka, the maternal uncle of Mahavlra. 

2. Jainism after Mahavlra 

For a few centuries after the death of Mahavlra, the history of 
Jainism means little more than the history of the Jain church. We 


415 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


have a regular account, mostly a farrago of myth and historical re¬ 
miniscence, of the Jain patriarchs, with a reference, now and then, 
to some ruling king favourably disposed towards the faith. This 
history, as recorded in the Avasyaka SHtra, reaches up to Vajra and 
Aryarakshita, while agreement between the two major sects covers 
only a few immediate successors of Mahavlra and comes hardly up 
to Bhadrabahu, some 170 years after his death. This period is 
characterised by a constant tendency towards the rise of dissension. 
The church organisation grows more complex. There is also a gra¬ 
dual shift of the centre of gravity of the community, which slowly 
spreads to the west and south of its original home. The religious 
dogmas show a development, however slight, and a vigorous literary 
activity results in the formation of the present-day canon of the 
Svetambaras and the pro-canonical books of the Digambaras. 

Even in the lifetime of Mahavlra, the tendency to form a dis¬ 
senting opinion was prevalent, and we know of Gosala’s doctrine of 
fatalism, formulated before the omniscience of Mahavlra, and that 
of Jamali after it, which is regarded as the first schism in a list of 
seven. 1 Most of them pertain to minor points in the doctrine and 
have left no permanent mark on the Jain community. 

In contrast with these earlier attempts at breaking the unity of 
the Jain community, the last schism 2 in the two sects of the Svetam- 
baras and Digambaras was more successful and resulted in a sharp 
division of the church, each section claiming greater authenticity 
than the other. At present, after the division has become well 
established, the points of difference between the two pertain to 
matters of dogma like the number of movable and immovable 
beings, the possibility of women attaining liberation, and the food 
partaken by the omniscient teachers; to mythological events like 
the transference of Mahavlra’s embryo, his marriage, the sex of 
Mali!, one of the prophets, and to practices like the wearing of 
clothes and going naked. The traditional accounts of the origin of 
this split are puerile and the outcome of sectarian hatred. They, 
however, agree in assigning it to the end of the first century A.D., 
which is quite likely. The evidence of the literary writings of the 
Svetambaras and early sculptures goes to show that most of the 
differences between the two sects were of slow growth and did not 
arise all at one time. 

1. Glasenapp, Der Jainismus, 346-349. 

2. Gu&rinot, La Religion Djaina . 48-62; Schubring, op. cit., 38-39. 


416 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Attempts to explain the origin of this split are mainly based 
upon only one divergent practice, that of wearing a white robe or 
going naked, which has given the two sects their names. The split 
is sometimes traced to differences between the practices of Mahavira 
and his predecessor Parsva, or the more austere life of his pupil 
Gos&la, or to the events caused by the great famine in Magadb* 
which occurred at the time of Bhadrabahu and Chandragupta, causing 
the migration of a section of the community to the south. In all 
probability, Gosala’s teaching has nothing to do with this later 
division and is firmly repudiated by both sects. The teachings of 
Mah&vira and Parsva on the use of clothes and the practice of nudity 
were somehow reconciled in the lifetime of Mahavira. Orthodox 
teaching allowed option, producing two modes of behaviour known 
as Jinakalpa and Sthavirakalpa, but some sections of the community 
may have preferred the one to the other, and isolated groups insist¬ 
ing on the harder course of life may have well existed from the 
very beginning. 

When the first council was held at Pajaliputra to compile the 
canon, a group, given to a more severe mode of life, appears to have 
repudiated it, perhaps due to the migration ‘to the coast’ caused by 
the famine. Along with such a group there must have also existed 
others holding views which combined the opinions of both the sects 
in various ways. With their disappearance, in course of time, the 
two sects found themselves in sharp contrast and finally fell apart. 
By the very nature of the case, no precise date can be assigned to 
this process. 

The spread of Jainism was more a case of successive migrations 
than of continuous expansion. In spite of the mechanical scheme 
Visible in the traditional account of the different migrations, said to 
be caused by a famine of 12 years’ duration, we find them confirmed 
by other evidence, and the tradition agrees with all the historical 
facts of the spread of this religion. The wanderings of Mah&vlra 
give us a fair idea of the original extent of Jainism. This included 
the kingdoms of Kosala, Videha, Magadha and Anga. One of the 
ChhedaHUras 1 preserves the memory of the earlier extent of the 
faith in the rule which allows Jain monks to wander as far as Anga- 
Magadha to the east... KauiambI to the south, Sthuga to the west 
and KuuAla to the north. The additional remark that a monk may 

1. Kappaautta, I. 51-52. 


a? 


417 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

also go to a country where the faith has taken roots shows that the 
new faith was already spreading in the adjoining countries. 

One early migration led the community to the south-east, the 
country of Kalinga, as can be seen from the famous inscription of 
Kharavela. 1 Evidence of it may be found in the Svetambara tradi¬ 
tion, according to which a dreadful famine in Magadha drove the 
monks as far as ‘the sea-coast’. Here the faith took firm root and 
flourished for a long period. Kharavela, the Chedi king of Orissa, 
though adopting the usual eclectic attitude assumed by Indian 
monarchs, did show a decided inclination towards Jainism, as can 
easily be seen from his own record and the inscription of his chief 
queen dedicating a cave for the use of Jain monks. The numerous 
caves on the Udayagiri and Khandagiri hills testify to the continued 
existence of the Jain faith in this part of the country. 

A similar extension or migration of the Jain community to the 
west must have early brought it to Mathura. 2 We have here the 
ruins of a Jain shrine dating back to the pre-Christian period and 
a large number of small dedicatory inscriptions, engraved on the 
images of the Jinas, votive tablets, and arches, dating from the first 
two centuries of the Christian era. Their references to the teachers 
of the donors, their gotra, kula, sdkha, etc. offer welcome confir¬ 
mation of similar information found in the Sthavimvall and suggest 
a flourishing condition of the religion in that region. 

Further south, the country round Ujjayini was also a stronghold 
of Jainism. The evidence for this centre of Jain culture is mostly 
found in later traditions. If we believe in the story of Asoka’s grand¬ 
son king Samprati 3 and his conversion tg Jainism by Suhastin, this 
spread to Malwa must be placed as early as the second century B.C. 
We are further told that Samprati imitated his grandfather in send¬ 
ing religious missionaries to the countries of Andhras and Dramilas 
to propagate the religion. The famous story of Kalakacharya, 4 the 
Jain sage, implies the spread of Jainism in Malwa in the first century 
B.C. 

The Junagarh inscription of the grandson of Jayadaman (either 
Damaysada or Rudrasimha I), belonging to the second century A.D., 
makes mention of men who had attained perfect knowledge ( kevali- 

1. See above, pp. 213 ff. 

2. Btihler, The Indian Sect of the JaincLS, Appendix A; V. A. Smith, Jaina Stupa 
and other Antiquities of Mathura: J. Ph. Vogel. Mathura Museum Catalogue. 
41-3, 66-82. 

3. See above, pp. 89 f. 

4. Brown, The Story of K&laka. See above, p. 155. 


418 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


jndna) and were free from old age and death (jGramarana), words 
distinctly suggestive of Jain dogma. The inscription is found in 
a cave, one of a group near the town, which appears to have been 
used by Jain monks, as is indicated by the peculiar Jain symbols 
like the Svastika Bhadrasana, Minayugala and others. Of nearly 
the same date may be the caves found at Dhank, in which the sculp¬ 
tures of the Jain prophets like ftishabha, Parsva, Mahavira and others 
have been definitely identified. It may incidentally be mentioned 
that the Junagarh inscription, referred to above, contains the earliest 
reference to Jain monks claiming the attainment of perfect know¬ 
ledge. 

The extension of Jainism to South India is associated with the 
migration of the Digambaras to this locality. The problem is com¬ 
plicated by the nature of the evidence, which is insufficient to lead 
to any definite conclusion. Scholars 1 of South Indian history have 
mostly accepted the late Digambara tradition and have reconstruct¬ 
ed the history to the effect that the great famine of Magadha caused 
Bhadrabahu to seek shelter in the south, along with his royal 
disciple Maury a Chandragupta and a large following, resulting in the 
establishment of the Digambara community in the Mysore territory, 
with Sravana Belagola as its centre. The Svetambara tradition, 
however, makes the migration proceed from Ujjayini in Malwa, 
which is also corroborated by the early Digambara tradition. A 
close scrutiny of the evidence, however, raises grave doubts whether 
the migration to the south had anything to do with the famous pat¬ 
riarch Bhadrabahu or the Mauryan king Chandragupta. The view 
that a second Bhadrabahu forecast the famine and, though he re¬ 
mained behind, sent his followers to the south under the guidance of 
one Visakhacharya or even Prabhachandra, remains a mere possibi¬ 
lity. Among the different sects of the south, the Senagana of the 
Mulasahgha appears to show some intimate connection with the story 
of migration and may have formed the first migrating group. The 
route of this migration is suggested to be along the western coast, 
from Gujarat, through Maharashtra, to Karnatak, and thence to the 
countries of the extreme south, which is quite probable. 

3. Jain Doctrines 

The growth of Jain doctrines was not very rapid, and not easy 
to follow. For one thing, the writings in which these dogmas and 
teachings are preserved have suffered many vicissitudes, and it is 

1. Rice, Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions; Narasimhacharya, EC, II. 

419 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


often difficult to separate the old from the new in the Jain canon. 
Secondly, the starting point of the dogmatic system remains vague. 
We do not know exactly what the preaching of Mahavira was, to 
which additions were made in later days. Lastly, as compared to 
the growth of Buddhist and Brahmanic philosophy, Jain thought has 
remained remarkably conservative and has not developed into new 
and fundamentally divergent streams. Jacobi 1 has convincingly 
demonstrated how all the references to both Jain philosophical tenets 
and religious practices in the Pali texts fully agree with the teach¬ 
ing of the Jain canon and present-day practices of the community, 
which means that little change has taken place in the Jain religion 
in the course of centuries. 

As a reformer of an existing religion, Mahavira added a few 
doctrines to those of his predecessor. While Parsva taught only 
four vows, Mahavira taught five, in all probability making chastity 
a separate vow. The constant use of the phrase ‘sapachchakk&Qa’ 
in describing his religion of the five vows makes it highly probable 
that confession of sin was an innovation of his. Apart from these 
reforms in ethical teaching, it is difficult to ascertain what additions 
Mahavira made to the ontological and psychological system of his 
predecessor. Most of the features of Jainism suggestive of its primi¬ 
tiveness may be regarded as received by Mahavira as they already 
existed. What he did was, in all likelihood, the codification of an 
unsystematic mass of beliefs into a set of rigid rules of conduct for 
monks and laymen. A decided inclination towards enumeration and 
classification may be attributed to him. 

No fundamental change in the Jain system is visible in later 
days. The different schisms pertain to minor details, and even the 
dogmatic differences causing the last schism, which broke the com¬ 
munity into two, are equally insignificant. The full implication of 
this remarkably conservative spirit can be best appreciated by re¬ 
calling to mind the ramifications in the history of Buddhist thought 
and the rise of various philosophical systems in the Brahmanic reli¬ 
gion of the corresponding period. In spite of it, some minor changes 
did occur in Jainism. The drawing up of the list of sub-divisions of 
Karma, the systematic arrangement of the teaching in the rubric of 
the seven principles of soul, non-soul, influx, bondage, cessation, ex¬ 
purgation, and liberation; the elaboration of the doctrine of the five 
or seven Nayas and Saptabhangl and the formulation of the rules 

1. SBE, XLV. xv 


420 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of church-discipline and similar matters must have been evolved 
between Mahavira and Umasvati who wrote his compendium of 
Jainism in the first or second century A.D. 

4. The Jain Canon 

If the teachings of Mahavira have remained substantially un- 
changed, their literary expression in the form of the sacred writings 
called the Agama has suffered many violent alterations. The canon 
of the undivided community is not available, and the one preserved 
and claimed by the Svetambaras was finally settled in its present 
form a thousand years after the death of Mahavira 1 in a Council 
held at Valabhl in the fifth century A.D. But indications are not al¬ 
together lacking that even in this canon we possess something of the 
ancient books, though necessarily in a modified form, under a differ¬ 
ent arrangement and modernised language. From the fact that 
both the Svetambaras and Digambaras postulate the original canon 
to consist of the 12 Angas, including the 14 Purvas as a part of the 
last Anga, we may naturally be inclined to accept that to be its 
original extent. But a constantly recurring phrase in the 6vetam- 
bara canon itself makes the Samayika the beginning and the Bindu - 
Sara the end of the canonical writings. This means that the earliest 
canonical writings contained something less than the 12 Angas and 
included at least some works which did not strictly belong to the 
Anga type. 

We are ignorant of the contents of these works. Particularly 
in case of the Angas, we do not know to what extent the present-day 
works of the same name retain their original contents. The older 
parts of the Achardnga and Sutrakritanga may well claim to pre¬ 
serve much original matter, and the same may be true to some 
extent of the Bhagavati-sutra. The Samayika prayers, like the 
Buddhist formulae of confession, obviously formed the very be¬ 
ginning of the sacred writings, but unfortunately we do not have 
them in their authentic form. We know even less of the Purva works. 
The name is often misunderstood to mean the ‘earlier books’, and 
it is supposed that they formed the oldest canon. This is, however, 
not correct. The traditional scheme places all the Purvas in the 
12th Anga, and another old tradition tells us that the immediate 
disciples of Mahavira composed the Angas after receiving the ideas 
from the prophet himself. Moreover, all the later works, which 

1. Schubring, Wrote Mahaviras; Winternitz, HIL, II. pp. 294 ff. 


421 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

are said to be derived from the Purvas, form part of the Angabahira 
group. From the name ‘pavdya’ applied to most of them, we may 
conclude that they contained matter of a controversial nature, pro¬ 
bably stating the views of the opponents and their refutations. 
Some of the schismatic views are said to be drawn from them. 
Their place in the Drishfivada suggests similar contents. 

The further growth of the Jain canon is intimately connected 
with the work of the First Council of Elders at Pataliputra. It 
marked the second stage. According to tradition, a famine of 12 
years* duration, at the time of the patriarch Sthulabhadra, rendered 
the existence of the canon precarious. At the end of the period, the 
Sariigha found it necessary to come together to rescue the sacred 
writings as much as possible. Sthulabhadra learnt from Bhadra- 
bahu all the fourteen Purvas , but was not allowed to teach the last 
four to his successors. These were consequently lost to posterity. 
Thus it is not possible to know the exact nature of the canon, as 
settled by this Council. 

Fortunately, however, some later books like Nandi supply us 
with a classification and list of canonical books which must be due 
to the First Council, as it is at variance with the present-day plan 
of the canon. The canon, at that time, consisted of the 12 Angas 
giving the chief doctrines of Jainism, and standing in opposition to 
the remaining works, collectively called Angabahira. Though not 
so old as the Angas, works dealing with the discipline of the monks 
in their corporate life must have come into existence early. The 
basis of such works was the Avassayas, and the name points to their 
importance. All other works were put under the category of 
Avassayavairitta. They, in turn, comprised works called Kdlika, 
to be learned at a fixed period of study, and Utkalika which carried 
no such restriction. 

Many books of this canon are now lost and the names of others 
remain obscure to us. That later additions were made to the canon 
formulated in the First Council is obvious from the fact that a few 
books are attributed to later writers like Samarya, Aryarakshita, 
Virabhadra and others. As some of them w , ere lost and additions 
were made to others, the older classification could not be maintained 
for long, but it may be admitted that a substantial part of the canon 
goes back to those days. The philosophical outlook of the canon, 
which makes little mention of the Buddhist schools like Sunyavada 
and VijnanavSda, is suggestive of a period earlier than the third 


422 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


century A.D. Even the latest parts of the canon make mention of 
only such works as are earlier than the Gupta era. Further, the 
canon shows the stronghold of the religion to be yet in the couiitry of 
its origin, Magadha. 

According to statements of the canonical books themselves and 
later tradition, Mahavira preached his religion in Ardha-Magadhi, 
which is said to be the language of the canon. The language of 
the available canon, however, shows a close approximation to the 
standard Prakrits called Maharashtrl and Jain Maharashtri, with 
only two features (like the Nom. sg. in e and the change of r to l 
in a few words) in common with the MagadhI of the Prakrit 
grammarians. 

According to the Digambara tradition, not only the Drishtivada 
but also the eleven Angas were lost by degrees in course of time, and 
thus no part of the canon is now available to them. They do not 
know of other works grouped as Upangas, Chhedasutras, etc., which 
are found in the present canon of the Svetambaras. We must, how¬ 
ever, bear in mind that the basic works like the Shatkhayddgama y 
incorporated in the huge commentaries called Dhavala and Jayadha - 
raid, are said to be based on the Drishtivada. 1 A few citations 
from the Anga works are also given by them. Systematic treatises 
by later famous scholars like Umasvati, Kundakunda, Vattakera, 
Yativfishabha and others now serve the community as authorities 
in place of the canon. 

The need of explaining parts of the canon must have been felt 
by the Jain community. In the early stages the explanations were 
mostly oral, and mnemonic verses summarised some discussions as a 
help to the teacher’s memory. A collection of such metrical com¬ 
ments gave rise to the Niryuktis, ten of which are often enumerated 
and traditionally attributed to Bhadrabahu. Leumann has, however, 
shown that internal indications from the texts make it most probable 
that they were composed in the first or second century A.D. In 
addition, only the Tattvarthddhigama Sutra of Umasvati can be 
confidently assigned to the pre-Gupta age. 

5. Jain Philosophy 

As noted above, Jainism shows a close affinity with Samkhya 
system. 2 It also developed a kind of logic which cut at the root 
of all stable knowledge. It was technically called Syadvada. 

1. Hiralal, Introduction to Sha^khandfiigama, I. II. 

2. Schubring, op. cit. 10-12. 


428 







THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


According to this logic ( Sytidvada, or the theory of ‘May be*), as 
many as seven modes of predication are possible in any given case. 
No definite or absolute statement, therefore, can be made about 
any question. If the question is: ‘Is there a soul?*, this logic of the 
Jains would admit of seven answers, to it, viz: (i) is, (ii) is not, (iii) 
is and is not, (iv) is unpredicable, (v) is and is unpredicable, (vi) 
Isr not and is unpredicable and (vii) is, is not and is unpredicable. 
There is a sense in which there is a soul and there is also a sense in 
which no soul exists; and a third sense is not inconceivable in which 
we must admit that we cannot describe it; and so on. This is 
equivalent to saying that knowledge is only probable. 

It would, however, be wrong to assume that it only implies 
agnosticism or metaphysical nihilism. The negative result of such 
a theory of knowledge is apparently agnosticism, but even out of this 
the Jains constructed a philosophy. They had a theory of reality 
also. Their logic was a subtle and disguised protest against the 
dogmatism of the Vedas, and not intended to deny all reality. The 
world according to them was not altogether unknowable; only, one 
must not be cocksure about one’s assertions. The world consisted of 
two eternal, uncreated, co-existing but independent categories, viz. 
the conscious (jiva) and the unconscious (a jiva ). 

The conscious being or jiva corresponds to what we call the 
soul. It knows and feels. It acts and is acted upon. It suffers by 
its contact with matter and is born again and again, only to suffer; 
and its highest endeavour is to free itself from this bondage. And 
this salvation could be attained by higher knowledge and meditation 
upon the great truth. 

According to some, the term ‘jina* should be taken to mean ‘life’. 
We know that modern thought draws a distinction between life and 
consciousness. In Jainism, and for thp matter of that in ancient 
Indian thought, this distinction is not always present and is never 
emphasised. The ‘ jiva 9 could inhabit a plant, an animal or a human 
body. That makes it equivalent to life. And the ‘jiva’ is supposed 
to vary in size and shape according to the body it lives in. That also 
makes it equivalent to life. But when we talk of the salvation of 
the jiva, we definitely imply a soul. Life or soul, there was a 
plurality of jivas in the universe, and each one of them was subject 
to the law of karma and rebirth, and could be saved by knowledge 
and meditation. 


424 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


The *ajiva ’ or the unconscious was not exactly what we call 
‘matter’, for it was equivalent to the universe minus the jivas. It 
included matter, which was given the name ‘pudgala’, but it also 
included such things as space and time, virtue and vice, etc. 

There is no God or Creator, and man’s emancipation from suffer¬ 
ing does not depend upon the mercy of any such being. Man is the 
architect of his own destiny. By living an austere life of purity and 
virtue, he can escape the ills of life. The best life was the life of 
renunciation. It was thus the shortest way to salvation. 

Jainism is thus a moral code rather than a religion in the 
modern western sense of the term. It recognized no Supreme Being, 
but there was a whole galaxy of deified men who had been spiritual¬ 
ly great. Every soul possessed the potentiality of becoming as great 
as they. And, if the necessity arose, Jainism was not unwilling to 
admit a god of popular Hinduism to this galaxy. Besides, it was 
also not opposed to the theory of caste. It was thus very much less 
hostile and more accommodating to Hinduism than the other hetero¬ 
dox systems. It must also be remembered that Jainism did not 
dogmatise. According to its fundamental logic, no absolute affirma¬ 
tion or denial was possible. When all knowledge is only probable 
and relative, your opponent’s view is as likely to be true as yours. 
The result of this spirit of accommodation was that Jainism has 
survived in India till today, whereas Buddhism, its twin sister, had 
to look for habitation elsewhere. 

6. Jain Icons 

Although tney denied the existence of a Supreme Being the 
Jains regard the practice of worshipping images of their Tirtha- 
karas as co-eval with the foundation of their creed. The authenticity 
of this tradition may be doubted, but the custom of icon-worship 
among the Jains certainly may be traced back to the Maury a- 
Suhga period. One of the earliest stone images in the round dis¬ 
covered in India is associated with Jainism. It is the torso of a nude 
figure unearthed from Lohanipur in Patna whose high polish enables 
us to date it in the Maury a or early Sunga period. 1 Its nudity, the 
stiff straight pose of its arms hanging down by its sides indicative 
of the Kayotsarga attitude characteristic of the Jinas, and its general 
outlook unmistakably prove that it was originally the image of one 


1. JBORS, XXIII, 130-32 and plates. 


425 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


of the Tirthakaras. Its upper and lower portions being unfortu¬ 
nately lost, there is no means to ascertain which of the 24 Jinas 

it represented. 


Epigraphic evidence also seems to prove that the practice of 
image-worship was current among the Jains in eastern India even 
in the pre-Maurya times. There is a possible reference in the 
Hathigumpha inscription to the removal of a Jina image from 
Kalinga to Pataliputra by the Magadhan king Nanda at the time of 
his invasion of Kalinga, and its subsequent recovery by the Chedi 
king Kharavela who invaded Magadha in the first century B.C. 1 
That the practice was well-established in parts of northern India in 
the centuries immediately preceding and following the Christian 
era is fully proved by a number of well-carved Jain images and 
several Aydgapatas (Jain votive tablets), with Jina figures in their 
centre and ashtanwhgalas (eight auspicious marks) on their borders, 
which have been discovered in Mathura. 2 


In order to understand correctly the meaning of the ancient and 
mediaeval Jain sculptures, one must obtain a clear idea about the 
hierarchy of the Jain pantheon in its broad outline. Jain texts like 
Achara Dinakara, Uttaradhyayana Sutra and Abhidhana-chintamani 
show in their classification of the Jain gods and goddesses that many 
of the subsidiary divinities were mere adaptations from the Brah- 
manic pantheon. 3 The principal class of Jain divinities are, how¬ 
ever, the 24 Tirthakaras or Jinas. beginning with Adinatha or 
Rishabhanatha and ending with the last of the Order, the historical 
Mahavira. Each of these Jinas is characterised by his respective 
cognisance, which is usually carved in the centre of the pedestal. 
They have also their individual Upasakas and Sasanadevatas, who 
are sometimes described in the texts as the attendant Yakshas and 
Yakshinis. The main order of the Jain hierarchy can be shown thus 

1. See above, pp. 212, 214. The Khanjagiri and Udayagiri caves of Orissa, in one 
of which the inscription is engraved, contain some early Jain reliefs. A con¬ 
tinuous frieze of relief carvings on the fagade of the Rani Nur Cave at Udaya¬ 
giri is supposed by some scholars to illustrate incidents in the life-history of 
the 23rd Jina Parsvanatha (see also Ch. XX). 

2 . See References under footnote 2 on p. 418. 

3. B. C. Bhattacharya, Jaina Iconography, 22-6. These deities are regarded by 
the Jains ‘as devoted adherents of the Tirthakaras, and thus they consider 
them to be deities of their system, and accordingly perform certain pujas in 
honour of them profusely referred to in their ritualistic literature'. This was 
also the case with many of the subsidiary divinities which figured in early 
Buddhist art. 


426 



RELIGION 'AND PHILOSOPHY 


in tabular form:— 


Name of the Jina 

Cognisance 

Upasaka 

£dsanadevat& 

1. Adinatha 

Bull 

Gomukha 

Chakresvari 

2. Adinatha 

Elephant 

Mahayaksha 

Ajitabala 

3. Sambhavanatha 

Horse 

Trimukha 

Duritari 

4. Abhinandanatha 

Monkey 

Yakshanayaka 

Kalika 

5. Sumatinatha 

Krauncha 
(a type of bird) 

Tumburu 

Mahakall 

6. Padmaprabha 

Lotus 

Kusuma 

6yama 

7. Suparsvanatha 

Svastika 

(symbol) 

Matahga 

Santa 

8. Chandraprabha 

Moon 

Vijaya 

Bhikuti 

9. Suvidhinatha 

Makara 

Ajita 

Sutaraka 

10. Sltalanatha 

Srivatsa 

(symbol) 

Brahma 

Asoka 

11. 6reyamsanatha 

Rhinoceros 

Yakshet 

Manavi 

12. Vasupujya 

Buffalo 

Kumara 

Chanda 

13. Vimalanatha 

Boar 

Shanmukha 

Vidita 

14. Anantanatha 

Falcon 

Pa tala 

Ankusa 

15. Dharmanatha 

Thunderbolt 

Kinnara 

Kandarpa 

16. &antinatha 

Deer 

Garuda 

Nirvanl 

17. Kunthunatha 

Goat 

Gandharva 

Bala 

18. Aranatha 

Nandyavarta 

(symbol) 

Yakshet 

Dharin! 

19. Mallinatha 

Pitcher 

Kubera 

Dharanapriya 

20. Munisuvrata 

Tortoise 

Varuna 

Naradatta 

21. Neminatha 

Blue lotus 

Bhrikuti 

Gandharl 

22. Neminatha 

Conchshell 

Gomedha 

Ambika 

23. Parsvanatha 

Snake 

Parsva 

Padmavati 

24. Mahavlra 

Lion 

Matahga 

Siddhayika 


The above table, which is based on such late texts as Abhi- 
dhdna-chintamani, shows that there are some overlappings and 
repetitions in the nomenclature of the individual Yakshas or 
Upasakas, 1 and in one instance the name of a &asanadevi occurs 
also as that of an Upasaka. 2 Some members of the two subsidiary 
orders are sometimes differently named by the followers of the 
two principal Jain sects—the Digambara and the Svetambara. 
There is no doubt that this elaborate grouping was of gradual 
growth and, like the DhyanI Buddhas and the DhyanI Bodhisattvas 
of the Mahay ana Buddhist pantheon, came to be stereotyped at a 
later period. 

1. Cf. Nos. 7 and 24, 11 and 18 in the above list. 

2. Cf. Nos. 8 and 21 above. 


427 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The subsidiary divinities in the Jain pantheon have been 
classified differently in different texts, one of the earlier modes 
being to group them under four classes, such as Jyotishi, Vimana- 
vasl, Bhavanapati and Vyantara, based on their natural and indivi¬ 
dual affiliations. A long list of these is given in Jain literature, 
in which the names of many Hindu divinities can be recognised. 
Besides, Sri-Lakshml, Ganesa, Kubera, etc. were as much used in 
the Jain and Buddhist shrines as in the Brahmanical Hindu temples. 
In studying the early Jain iconography in its broader outline, 
however, we are principally concerned with the images of the 
Jinas and the companions, and several other groups of divinities 
such as the Navagrahas, the Dikpalas, the Sruta or Vidyadevls, the 
Matrikas, etc. 

The images of the Jinas are characterised by their long hang¬ 
ing arms (in the case of standing figures, this pose is known as the 
Kdyotsarga) , the Srivatsa symbol, the suavity of form, the youth¬ 
ful body and nudity; according to the Svetambara canons, the Jina 
images are partially clad. The Yakshas and the Yakshinis are shown 
in developed composition in the right and left of their respective 
Tirthakaras, sometimes depicted beneath their particular Bodhi- 
trees; several of the other pratihdryas (marks) are occasionally 
carved on the prabhdvali. 1 


The Yakshas and Yakshinis, when they are separately repre¬ 
sented, can be distinguished not only by their individual attributes 
and emblems, but also by the miniature figures of their respective 
Jinas either on their crown or on the topmost part of the stele. The 
iconography of many of these subsidiary divinities also differs 
according to their affiliation to one or other of the major Jain 
sects. The Jain ashtamangalas (eight auspicious signs), such as 
(1) a Svastika, (2) a mirror, (3)' an urn, (4) a cane seat shaped like 
an hour-glass, (5-6) two fish (yugma-mina) , (7) a flower garland 
and (8) a manuscript, are sometimes carved on the pedestal or 
other parts of the back slab. 2 It should be noted, however, that 
many of these iconographic features came to be developed gradually, 


£wu ight P ratih “ryas are (1) celestial tree, (2) celestial flowers, (3^ drum, 

(4) throne-seat (5) heavenly music, (6) Yak-tail choxvries, (7) trilinear um¬ 
brella, (8) dazzling aura. 

The signs do not seem to have been stereotyped in earlier reliefs The 
Ayagapata of Siha-nadika shows the eight symbols in the following order from 
™ P i ef - (1) two fish (2) cane-seat, (3) grlvatsa, (4) Offering ( naivedya) 
lyavarta, <(G ) garland in a leaf cup, (7) manuscript on ornate stand, 
(8) pitcher (bhadraghata) . In other Ayagapatas, the number, variety and 
arrangement seem to differ; V. A. Smith, op. cit., pis. VII and IX. 


428 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


and some of the principal distinctive traits are often absent in the 
earliest extant Jina images of India. Almost all the seated Tlrtha- 
kara figures in the Mathura Museum, which can be dated on the 
basis of their pedestal inscriptions in the Kushana period, show 
below their seat a wheel of law ( dharma-chakra ) placed on a 
pillar in the centre, flanked on either side by numbers of devotees, 
male and female, with a lion at each end. They remind us of 
Buddha’s Dharmachakra-pravarttana scene at Sarnath in early 
Buddhist art, but none of them appears to bear on their plthika 
their individual cognisances, which are invariably present in later 
Jain reliefs. 

An image, entitled Adi or Rishabhanatha in its pedestal inscrip¬ 
tion dated in the year 84 of the era of Kanishka, has the wheel on 
a pillar, attended by devotees, on its pedestal, but the miniature 
figure of a bull, the special lanchchhana of the first Jina, is conspi¬ 
cuous by its absence. The sculptured panel representing the Jain 
ascetic Kanha, dated in the year 95, contains on its top section four 
Jinas, two on each side of a stupa, seated in Samddhimudrd { who 
can reasonably be identified as the last four Tlrthakaras—Nami, 
Nemi, Parsva and Mahavlra. The first two and the last are almost 
similar to one another in every respect, the third, Parsvanatha, alone 
differing from the others on account of the snake hood over his 
head; but none of them has its respective cognisance carved below 
its seat as we find almost invariably in the medieval images. 

The partly broken inscribed pedestal in the Lucknow Museum, 
the Jina image over which was not recovered, shows, however, that 
distinctions on the basis of nomenclature and cognisance were 
occasionally adhered to even in the Kushana period. The sacred 
symbol in the centre of the pedestal composition is a wheel resting 
on a nandipada placed on a lotus flower flanked by two fish; the 
inscription above it, dated in the year 79 (of the Kanishka era), 
records the setting up of the image of the Arhat Nandyavarta. 
Nandyavarta is the special cognisance of the 18th Jina Aranatha, and 
it is interesting to note that the name of the distinctive symbol is 
used to denote the Jina himself, though the mark itself does not stand 
for a typical nandyavarta. 1 Another composite relief in the same 
museum, probably to be dated in the early Gupta period on the basis 

1. Smith, op. cit., 12-13, pi. VI. Smith’s remarks about the great antiquity of the 
stupa in which the image was set up are not entirely convincing. The symbol 
in the centre of the pedestal rather resembles a variety of nandipdda (foot-mark 
of Siva's bull Nandin), than a typical nandyavarta which is defined in some Jain 
texts as ‘a svastika with nine comers’, a sort of a geometrical pattern. 


429 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

of its extremely fragmentary pedestal inscription, shows Mahavlra 
stated in the dhydna pose on his lion throne underneath a tree, 
surrounded by the miniature figures of the 23 other Tirthakaras; but 
it is noteworthy that none of these miniatures, arranged eight on 
either side of the main figure with seven on its top, bears on its 
seat its special mark. 1 

That the Jains set a very high value on learning is proved by 
the importance they ascribed to one class of divinities described by 
them as Vidyadevls. They are, according to the Jain tradition, 
sixteen in number, at whose head is Sarasvati, the one Sruta-dev'T, 
the goddess of learning par excellence. They are known by such 
names as Rohim, Prajnapti, Vajrasrimkhaia, Kali, Mahakall, Gaurl, 
Manavl and others among which we find the names of many Yak- 
shims, but the iconography of these two orders is different. As 
Srutadevata, Sarasvati also presides over the Sruta or the preaching 
of the Tirthakaras and Kevalins, and is one of the most important 
objects of worship among the Jains from a very early period. 

One of the earliest representations of this goddess, who had also 
many votaries among the Buddhists and followers of Brahmanical 
religion, is associated with Jainism. It is a headless image in the 
collection of the Lucknow Museum. The left hand of the goddess 
holds a manuscript and the pedestal inscription informs us that 
Sarasvati was set up in the year 54 (? or 44, evidently of the 
Kanishka era). 2 Large numbers of various types of Sarasvati images 
are found in many Jain temples of India of different dates, and 
the Svetambaras and the Digambaras celebrate a special festival 
in her Honour known as the Jnana-panchami or Sruta-panchami. 
Two, four, six, eight and sixteen-armed varieties of the goddess are 
known, and her mount is almost invariably a swan, and very rarely 
a peacock; of these the four-armed images are quite common. 3 The 
images of the Vidyadevls can be recognised among the numerous 
carvings of such medieval temples as the Dilwara group, the 
Khajuraho Jain temples and others. 

Most of the other groups of Jain images such as those of the 
Dikpalas, the Navagrahas, the sixty-four Yoginis and such divinities 
as Ganesa, Kshetrapala, Lakshml and others have usually the same 
iconography as in their Brahmanic setting, though occasional re- 

1. V. A. Smith, op. cit., 52, pi. XCIV. 

2. V. A. Smith, op. cit., 56-7, pi. XCIX. 

3. U.P. Shah, ‘Iconography of uie Jain Goddess Sarasvati. Journal of the Univer¬ 
sity of Bombay , X, 195-218 and plates. 


430 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


orientation in their delineation is not absent. A very interesting 
image-type is that of Harinegamesi or Naigamesha, one of the gene¬ 
rals of Devaraja Indra, who transferred the embryo of Mahavira 
from the womb of the Brahman! Devananda to that of Trisaia, a 
Kshatriya lady, under the orders of his master. He is depicted 
with a head of an antelope or a goat and reminds us of the goat¬ 
headed Daksha-Prajapati of the Brahmanic pantheon; his character 
as the general of the gods is also reminiscent of Karttikeya, one of 
whose names were Naigameya. 

One of the earliest sculptural representations of this god is to 
be found in a broken frieze in the collection of the Lucknow 
Museum, which shows on its obverse the animal-headed deity 
‘seated in an easy attitude on a low seat, turning his head to the 
proper right as if addressing another personage whose image has 
been lost'. He is described Bhagava Nemeso in bold characters 
of the first century A.D., and is accompanied by one child and three 
female figures on his left, his companions on the right being bro¬ 
ken; traces of letters below the attendants seem to show that the 
obliterated inscription might have contained their names. Th'e re¬ 
verse of the ornamental slab represents female dancers and musi¬ 
cians probably rejoicing at Nemesa’s successful transference of the 
foetus. 1 


D. VAISHNAVISM 

1. The Origin 

Vaishnavism, as the name implies, means the particular theistic 
religion of which Vishnu is the object of worship and devotion as 
the Supreme God. The germ of Vishnu’s later greatness and of 
sectarian Vaishnavism is traceable even in the Rigveda, 2 and in later 
Vedic period he is regarded as the greatest god by at least one sec¬ 
tion of the people. 3 But Vishnu was usually recognised as an aspect 
of the Sun in the Rigveda and associated in the later Vedic texts 

1. V. A. Smith, op. cit., 25-6, pi. XVIII. Smith suggests that the scene of the 
composition is Indra’s heaven where Naigamesha had gone after succeeding in 
his mission. 

2. Of the three padas of Vishnu, whereby the god maintained the dharmas or 
fixed ordinances, the highest is described as known to himself and visible only 
to the Suris, apparently indicating persons or spirits favoured by Vishnu. The 
highest station of Vishnu is said to be a land beyond ordinary mortal ken in 
which “god-seeking men delight”. The Rigvedic poets pray that people may 
go to this blessed abode of Vishnu, which is supposed to have been the home 
of departed spirits, to enjoy felicity. In later times the abode of Vishnu be¬ 
came the goal of the spiritual aspiration of the devotees of that god and nume¬ 
rous places came to be styled Vishnu-pada (usually at the top of hills). 

3. Cf. Ait. Br., S.P.Br. and other texts, and legends referred to in VS. p. 34. 

431 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

more with sacrifice than with devotion and grace. We cannot there¬ 
fore assert, in the present state of our knowledge, that Vaishnavism 
as a theistic sectarian religion flourished in the Vedic age. 

It is a moot point whether Bhakti, as a religious doctrine, can be 
traced in the early Vedic texts, but it certainly played no dominant 
role. Bhandarkar thinks that the germ of the Bhakti doctrine is to 
be found in the Upanishadic idea of Upasand or fervent meditation , 1 
which cannot but magnify the thing meditated upon and give it a 
glorious form so as to excite love and admiration. He also points 
out to the Brihaddranyaka Upanishad in which the dtman (soul) is 
regarded as dearer than a son, wealth and everything else. This 
makes the nearest approach to Bhakti, with the substitution of the 
impersonal dtman for a personal god. 

The earliest reference to devotion to, and worship of, a person¬ 
al god, out of which Vaishnavism arose, may be traced to the 
Ashtddhydyi of Panini (fifth century B.C.) which offers the rule for 
the formation of the word ‘Vasudevaka’ in the sense of “a person 
whose object of Bhakti is Vasudeva.” It is generally agreed that 
Bhakti here probably, though not certainly, is to be taken in the 
sense of religious adoration . 2 But that Vasudeva was the object 
of such devotion, at least as early as the fourth century B.C., is 
proved by the statement of Megasthenes that the Sourasenoi, i.c. 
the people of the Mathura region, held Herakles in special honour; 
for there is no doubt that Herakles was the Greek analogue of 
Vasudeva-Krishna. 

The historical character of Vasudeva, as the son of Vasudeva of 
the Vrishni (known also as Satvata) sect of the famous Yadu or 
Yadava clan, need not be doubted. The important role played by 
this clan and the great achievements of Vasudeva-Krishna, as 
narrated in the epics and Puranas, have been noted above . 3 This 
hero of the Yadava clan, who became the leader of a religious move¬ 
ment, was deified and styled Bhagavat. This process was completed 
by the second century B.C. at the latest, for an inscription on a 
pillar at Besnagar refers to Heliodorus, the Greek ambassador of 
the Indo-Greek king Antialcidas, as a devotee of Vasudeva, the ‘God 
of gods.* In the light of Megasthenes’s statement referred to above, 

1. Probably borrowed along with other ideas from pre-Aryan religious beliefs. 

2. EHVS 23-4. It is to be noted, however, that the word is also used in the 
Ashtddhydyi in connection with cakes, and the possibility of the meaning 
‘fondness’ is not altogether precluded. 

3. Vol. I. p. 297 ff. 


482 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


we may place the foundation of the Vasudeva cult in the fourth cen¬ 
tury B.C., if not much earlier still. A reference to the founder of 
this sect has been traced in the Chhdndogya Upanishad which refers 
to sage Krishna, son of Devaki, as a disciple of the rishi Ghora of the 
Angirasa family, and some have even found the influence of the 
latter’s teaching upon the Bhakti religion founded by the former. 

In any case it is interesting to note that while the above pass¬ 
age of the Chhdndogya Upanishad inculcates tapas (asceticism), 
ddna (charity), dr java (simplicity or piety), ahimsd (non-injury), 
and satyavachana (truthfulness), the same virtues are extolled by 
Krishna in the Gita . 1 Further, Ghora deprecates vidhi-yajna while 
the Gita makes little of dravyamaya-yajna or material sacrifice. 
Ghora’s doctrine that all the acts of the life of a pious man consti¬ 
tute a sort of sacrifice to the deities and enable him to attain to the 
God of the gods seems to be essentially the same as the theory of 
absolute resignation to the Lord, inculcated in the Gntd. Krishna 
and his teacher were worshippers of the Sun. It has been pointed 
out that, like Ghora, the Gita , attributed to Krishna, emphasises the 
need of meditation “at the last hour” on the “word which knowers 
of the Veda call Imperishable,” and “the Sun-coloured Being be¬ 
yond the darkness” as the best means of attaining to the Supreme 
Celestial Being. As both in the Chhdndogya Upanishad and the 
Gita essentially the same doctrines are associated with one and the 
same person called Krishna-Achyuta, son of Devaki, it is very pro¬ 
bable that they were originally learnt by Krishna from Ghora and 
were later taught by him to his own disciples. Although the 
teachings of Ghora Angirasa to Krishna thus appear to have formed 
the kernal of the Gita, that work must be regarded as a later product 
of the followers of Vasudevism, exhibiting considerable development 
of the original doctrine. 

Thus the Bhagavata religion, which was propounded by Vasu¬ 
deva and was the parent of later Vaishnavism, was probably the 
development of Sun-worship. According to the Santiparvan, the 
Satvata vidhi, another name for the Bhagavata doctrine after the 
tribe responsible for its introduction, was laid down in old times 
by the Sun. The Gltd also says that the Bhagavata doctrine was 
taught by the Lord to the Sun, by the Sun to Manu, and by Manu to 
Ikshvaku. The doctrine is sometimes referred to as Yoga of the 
Satvata style . 2 

1. XVI. 3. 

2. The Tusham inscription of the fourth century speaks of a Bhagavad-bhakta 

483 


A.I.IJ.—28 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

A pastoral character was later attributed to Krishna, and there 
are stories in the Harivamsa (a supplement to the Mahdbharata) and 
the Puranas (e.g. Vdyu, Bhdgavata f etc.) about his tender babyhood 
and wanton childhood, and also in some later works, about his youth 
full of amorous ecstasies. The popularity of the cowherd god is 
indicated by the name of the Pallava king Vishnugopa (fourth cen¬ 
tury). The stories about the early life of the pastoral Krishna may 
have partly developed out of the Vedic legends about Vishnu, called 
Gopa (protector of cows) in the Rigveda * 1 and Govinda and Damo- 
dara 2 in the Baudhayana Dharma-sutra 

There was possibly another contributory factor to the develop¬ 
ment of the mythology of the cowherd Krishna. The Yamuna 
region seems to have been famous for its cows as early as the time 
of the fligveda, and a Varshna (i.e. one belonging to the Vrishni 
family) named Gobala (literally “one strong in the wealth of cows”) 
is mentioned as a teacher in the Taittiriya Samhita and Jaiminiya 
Upanishad Brdhmana. It is therefore not improbable that the 
Yadava-Satvata-Vrishnis of the Mathura region were as famous for 
their cows as the Matsyas , 3 their western neighbours, were in epic 
times. But most of the legends about Krishna’s early life, espe¬ 
cially the charming stories about his amours with Radha and the 
Gopls, appear to have been mainly due to his identification with the 
local deities of the Abhlras and other allied tribes. 

The age when Vasudeva-Kpishna flourished cannot be deter¬ 
mined with certainty. The reference in the Chhandogya Upanishad 
seems to point to a date in the sixth or seventh century B.C. The 
Jain tradition, making Vasudeva-Krishna a contemporary of Tlrtha- 
kara Arishtanemi, who preceded Parsvanatha , 4 supports the date 
suggested by the Chhandogya Upanishad. His alleged association 
with the Mahabharata War appears to be a less reliable datum for 
fixing his date. 

According to Barth and Hopkins, Krishna was not a human 
being at all, but a popular divinity whose identification with Vishnu 
gave rise to sectarian Vaishnavism. But while the latter considers 
Krishna to be the tribal god of the Pandavas, supposed to be an 

teacher of the noble Satvata-yoga (drya-sdtvata-yogachg,rya ). The names 
Ekantika and Tanmaya applied to the Bhiigavatas were probably due to thi s 
aspect of the doctrine. 

1. Of. also the description of Vishnu’s highest station as the dwelling of many- 
horned swiftly moving cows. 

2. One with cord round one’s belly, i.e. a herdsman. 

3. Cf. the stories about Virata’s Gogrihas. 

4 . See above, p. 411. 


484 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


aboriginal people, the former regards him to be a deity of solar 
origin. As to the theory of Krishna’s solar character, Keith has 
rightly dismissed it with the remark that “the ‘dark sun’ requires 
more explanation than it seems likely to receive.” In the opinion 
of Macnicol and Keith, Krishna, who is believed to appear in the 
Mahabhashya in a ‘vegetation masque’ contending with Kaiiisa for 
the possession of the Sun, was developed out of one of the vegetation 
deities that were widely worshipped in all countries of the world. 
The evidence at our disposal seems to bear testimony to the human 
character of Krishna who was later associated with some popular 
cults and festivals. Krishna, like Radha, was a deified hero or prince. 
The attempts to make him a solar myth are as unconvincing as the 
endeavours to prove that Buddha and Christ are imaginary figures. 

2. The Evolution of Vaishnavism 

The first step in the evolution of Vaishnavism was the identi¬ 
fication of Vasudeva-Krishna 1 with the Vedic deity Vishnu. This 
was accomplished by the time the Bhagavadgitd was composed, and 
henceforth the Vasudeva cult or Bhagavata religion was known also 
as Vaishnava dharma. It has been suggested with great plausibility 
that this identification was prompted by a desire on the part of the 
Brahmanas to bring this new and powerful religious sect 2 within 
the pale of orthodox Vedic faith. But whatever may be the motive, 
the identification undoubtedly served this purpose. 

A further step in the same process was the identification of 
Vasudeva-Krishna-Vishnu with a deified sage (or hero) named 
Narayana. The origin of the conception of Narayajna is differently 
given by different authorities. The Satapatha Brahmana mentions 
a purusha named Narayana who thrice offered sacrifice at the 
instance of Prajapati. But Narayana is not identified with Vishnu 
or any of the adityas. Elsewhere in the same Brahmana, Purusha 
Narayana is said to have performed a pancharatra-satra (sacrifice 
continued for five days) and thereby obtained superiority over all 
beings and “became all beings”. Scholars naturally refer the name 
Pancharutra or Pahcharatrika applied to the Bhagavatas (or to one 
of their important branches) to this five-day satra of Narayana. The 
earliest evidence regarding the identification of Narayana wifh 
Vishnu is probably to be traced in the Baudhayana Dharma-sutra. 
The tenth Prapathaka of the Taittiriya Aranyaka contains the for- 

1. As noted above, he was originally deified by his own people and later regarded 
as the Supreme God by the devotees. 

2. Perhaps it was greatly influenced by pre-Aryan ideas and practices. 

485 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


mula: Ndrdyandya vidmahe Vdsudevaya dhlmahi, tan—no Vishnuh 
prachodayat, which regards Narayana, Vasudeva and Vishnu as one 
and the same deity. Here Narayana appears also as Hari and as 
“the deity eternal, supreme and lord”. But this part of the work 
is admittedly a later addition and may be considerably later than 
the Baudhdyana Dharma-sutra. Several sections of the Mahi- 
bhdrata support the conception of Narayana as found in the 
Taittiriya Ar any aka. 

Some passages of the Mahdbharata call Narayana an ancient 
rishi who was the son of Dharma and was associated with another 
rishi named Nara. They went from the world of men to the world 
of Brahman and, worshipped by the gods and the Gandharvas, they 
existed only for the destruction of the Asuras. Indra received the 
assistance of Nara and Narayana in his struggle against the demons. 
In a passage which apparently exhibits the touch of a Saivite, 
Narayana, son of Dharma, is said to have undergone austerities in 
the Himalayas (the exact place is sometimes specified as Badari) and 
thus became one with Brahman (the All-Soul); he achieved this by 
propitiating Siva. From Narayana’s austerities was born the sage 
Nara, equal to Narayana himself. Nara is identified with Arjuna 
and Narayana with Vasudeva-Krishna. According to the late 
Narayanlya section of the £antiparvan, Narayana, the eternal and 
the universal soul, was born as the son of Dharma in the quadruple 
form of Nara, Narayana, Hari and Krishna. 1 It also refers to the 
white people of the white island ( sveta-dvipa), on the northern 
shores of the Milk Ocean, worshipping Narayana, a thousand-rayed 
deity who could not be seen by persons not devoting themselves 
wholly and solely to him, in consequence of his Sun-like brightness. 

An earlier generation of scholars believed that the Narayanlya 
section of the Mahabhdrata pointed to an actual journey undertaken 
by some Indian Vaishnavas to Christian countries, and to an attempt 
in the Indian eclectic fashion to include Christ among the incarna¬ 
tions of the Supreme Spirit Narayana. 2 Others, however, have, with 
much plausibility, taken the story to be a mere flight of fancy. 
Raychaudhuri points to Narayana’s solar associations and compares 
Narayana in the Sveta-Dvlpa of the White Islanders with the Rig- 
vedic Vishnu, an aspect of the Sun, in his highest station seen only 
by the Suris. R. G. Bhandarkar believes that Narayana has a cosmic 

1. Cf. the Chatur-vyuha of the Pancharatrikas. 

2. There seems to be no reasonable ground for this theory, which was first put 
forward by Weber. 


436 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


character and is not a historical or mythological individual. He 
interprets the word Ndrayana as the resting place or goal of Ndra , 
or a collection of Naras ( i.e . men). It is, however, more reasonable 
to take Narayana to be an ancient leader of thought born in the 
family of another sage named Nara, 1 both of whom were probably 
advocates of solar worship which ultimately led to their identifica¬ 
tion, especially of the former, with the solar deity Vishnu. 
Whether the family of Narayana had anything to do with the Yada- 
vas and whether he had Vasudeva as a second name cannot be 
determined in the present state of our knowledge. It, however, 
seems that the worshippers of the deified sage Narayana were origi¬ 
nally known as Pancharatrikas, who were later mixed up with 
the Bhagavatas worshipping Vasudeva according to the vidhi of the 
Satvata people, and that the Narayana cult originated in some part 
of the Himalayan region or its neighbourhood. 

3. Progress of Vaishnavism 

Having now considered the evolution of Vaishnavism, we may 
attempt to trace its progress as a religious sect. The Buddhist 
canonical work Anguttara Nikdya gives a long list of religious sects, 
but does not mention Vasudevaka or Bhagavata. The inscriptions 
of Asoka, which speak of B rah man a, Sramaija, Ajlvika and Nir- 
grantha, do not refer to the followers of Vasudeva. But a passage 
occurring in the Buddhist canonical commentaries (c. first century 
B.C.), called the Mahdniddesa and the Chullaniddesa, mentions the 
worshippers of Vasudeva and Baladeva (Sankarshana). Although, 
therefore, the Bhagavata sect, worshipping Vasudeva, was known 
probably to the grammarian Panini of Gandhara and certainly to 
Megasthenes, it was apparently not so prominent outside the 
Mathura region and the neighbouring land towards the north-west 
about the third century B.C. 

The Bhagavata religion, which originated with the Yadava- 
Satvata-Vrishni people of the Mathura area, appears to have spread 
to western India and the northern Deccan with the migration of the 
numerous Yadava tribes. As already observed, Vasudeva was pro¬ 
bably deified, at least partially, and worshipped by his own people 
as early as the age of Panini, although he may or may not have been 
regarded as the supreme god. It cannot be ignored that the identi¬ 
fication of Vasudeva with the highest god is not recognised in the 
earlier parts of the Mahabharata. The reviling scene in the Sabha- 

1 . Cf. the words Kanvayana, Kat.yavana, etc. 


437 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


parvan shows that Vasudeva-Krishna’s claim to divine honours was 
sometimes openly challenged. Even in the Gita, Vasudeva-Krishna 
laments that the magnanimous person who says “Vasudeva is All” 
is rare, and that people scorn him. Vasudeva is sometimes described 
as a pious hypocrite, and it is only in late passages that he is repre¬ 
sented as a friend of the Brahmanas, the originator of the Vedas, and 
perfectly identical with Vishnu. The Mahdbhashya refers to the 
Kamsabhaktas who were kalamukha (dark faced), and to Vasudeva- 
bhaktas who were raktcmukha (red faced), although the reference 
is possibly to the masked stage-players of the Kamsa-vadha story. 

A Besnagar (old Gwalior State) inscription of the last quarter 
of the second century B.C. refers to a garuda-dhvaja (column sur¬ 
mounted by the figure of Garu<Ja conceived as the emblem or 
vdhana of Vishnu) raised at Vidisa in honour of Vasudeva, the deva - 
deva (the greatest god), by his Yavana or Greek devotee Heliodorus, 
an inhabitant of Takshasila in Gandhara, who calls himself a Bhaga- 
vata, i.e. a worshipper of Bhagavat (Vasudeva-Vishnu). Another 
inscription from Besnagar speaks of the erection of the Garuda 
column of an excellent temple (prasadottama) of the Bhagavat 
(Vasudeva). 

The Ghosundi (Chitorgarh District, Rajputana) inscription of 
the first century B.C. refers to the construction of a puja-sila-prakara 
(a stone enclosure for the place of worship, of better, an enclosure 
for the sacred stone called Salagrama believed to be typical of Vishnu 
as the Linga is of Siva), probably styled Narayanavataka, by a 
Bhagavata performer of the Asvamedha sacrifice, in honour of Sah- 
karshana and Vasudeva who are called Bhagavat, anihata (uncon¬ 
quered or respected), and sarvesvara (supreme lord). The Nanaghat 
(Bombay State) inscription of the same age belonging to the queen of 
a Satavahana performer of numerous Vedic sacrifices 1 begins with 
an adoration to the gods Dharma, Indra, Sahkarshana and Vasu¬ 
deva, the Moon and the Sun, and the four lokapdlas , viz. Yama 
(differentiated from Dharma), Varuna, Kubera and Vasava (diffe¬ 
rentiated from Indra). 

These epigraphs support what is already known from literary 
evidence as regards Vasudeva’s association with Garuda, 2 and there¬ 
fore with Vishnu, with the Vrishni hero Sahkarshana as well as with 

Narayana, long before the birth of Christ. He is not called Krishna 

• • 

1. See above, p. 199. 

2. Cf. the ^igvedic conception of the Sun as a celestial bird. 

m 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


in the earlier epigraphic literature of India; but the use of Krishna 
as another name of Vasudeva in such works as the MahabhArata 
the Ghata Jdtaka and the Mahdbhashya should probably be ascribed 
to a pre-Christian date. 

The spread of the Bhagavata religion far outside the Mathura 
region and the Yadava-Satvata-Vrishni people, especially amongst 
performers of Vedic sacrifices in western India and the northern 
Deccan, is thus clearly indicated by epigraphic evidence; but the 
Satavahana record at Nanaghat also shows that some people regard¬ 
ed Vasudeva, even in the first century B.C., not as the greatest of 
all gods, but only as an equal of Indra and other gods. That another 
Satavahana king of the second century A.D. claimed to be equal to 
Rama (Baladeva or Sankarshana) and Kesava (Vasudeva-Krishna) 
is also noteworthy. The growing importance of Vasudevism in 
South India is, however, indicated by the Chinna (Krishna District) 
inscription of the second century A.D., which begins with an 
adoration to Vasudeva, and a Prakrit charter of the Pallavas refer¬ 
ring to a devakula of Bhagavat Narayana somewhere in the Guntur 
District. 1 

The introduction of Bhagavatism in the far south at a much 
earlier date is indicated by the relation of the Pajpdyas with the 
Pandavas and §urasenas, alluded to in the confused stories narrated 
by Megasthenes about Herakles and Pandaia and in the grammati¬ 
cal work of Katyayana, and by the name of the Pandya capital 
Madura, adapted from that of Mathura, the original home of the 
Vasudeva cult. 

Iconic representations of the god Vishnu-Vasudeva cannot be 
traced much earlier than the beginning of the Christian era. A 
four-armed figure of the deity, with Chakra in the upper left hand, 
is found on the coins of the Panchala king Vishnumitra in evident 
allusion to the issuer’s name. A similar representation of the four¬ 
armed Vishnu, with gankha, Chakra, Gadd and a ring-like object, 
instead of the lotus, in the hands, appears in a Kushana seal-matrix 
attributed by Cunningham to Huvishka. It is interesting that the 
Kushana king is represented as reverentially looking up at the god 
with his hands in the anjali pose. He may have become for some 
time a worshipper of Vasudeva. Some of Huvishka’s coins bear 
the figure of the four-armed god Ooshna (Vishnu). The adoption 
of the name Vasudeva by Huvishka’s successor also points to the 

1. Cf. also the name Vishnu-gopa among the early Pallava rulers. 


439 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


fact that the later Kushanas, who had an important centre of govern 
ment at Mathura, the original centre of the Vasudeva cult, had 
Bhagavata leanings. 

Under Panini, IV, 3, 98-99, Patanjali seems to make a distinc¬ 
tion between Vasudeva the tatrabhavat, i.e. the specially honoured 
Vasudeva and the Kshatriya Vasudeva. The Padma-tantra, a 
canonical work of the Bhagavatas, also makes a distinction between 
the two Vasudevas. The Mahabharata refers to a story which says 
that there was, besides Krishna of the Yadava-Satvata-Vrishni 
family, another claimant to the status of Vasudeva in Paundraka 
Vasudeva, i.e. Vasudeva, king of the non-Aryan Paundraka people, 
probably of north Bengal. Although Paundraka Vasudeva may 
have actually been the leader of a rival religious sect, these legends 
were perhaps the result of an attempt on the part of a section of 
the Bhagavatas to absolve their hero from the bad deeds (e.g. killing 
his maternal uncle) attributed to him by rival sects, probably in¬ 
cluding the followers of an earlier teacher named Narayana, by sug¬ 
gesting a different entity for the performer of those deeds. The 
name Satvata, applied to the Bhagavata religion, shows that its 
founder was not different from the Kshatriya Vasudeva of the 
Yadava-Satvata-Vrishni family. The legends about Krishna’s 
questionable acts appear to have their origin in the Rigveda, which 
represents Vishnu as a Kuchara (performer of bad deeds) and as 
stealing food and butter. In later Vedic literature also Vishnu is 
often found to resort to cunning devices in order to help Indra and 
other friends to defeat the Asuras. 

4. Bhagavadgiid or Gita 

The earliest and best exposition of the doctrine of the Bhaga¬ 
vata sect founded by Vasudeva-Krishna is to be found in the Bhaga - 
vadgita (also simply called the Gita), which has been incorporated 
in the Mahabharata. Although it cannot be definitely dated, it is 
generally referred to the first or second century before Christ. 

The Bhagavadgita, holds a unique position in Indian literature. 
It is a poem which, by virtue of its dialogue-form, takes on a drama¬ 
tic interest, and imparts lessons in philosophy, religion and ethics 
without seeming to do so, because the occasion or situation which 
gives rise to the dialogue is of the nature of a psychological crisis 
which may occur in the life of any individual. Arjuna, who re 
presents such an individual, comes to the battlefield to fight his 
kinsmen, the Kauravas. At this crucial moment, a curiously pessi- 


440 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


mistic mood suddenly overcomes him. The fratricidal combat in 
which he was about to engage appears to him to be a sinful act and 
he decides to withdraw from the battlefield. Krishna, who serves 
as his charioteer, dissuades him from this cowardly course of action, 
and his teachings to Arjuna in this connection form the subject- 
matter of the Bhagavadgitd . It is this specific situation involving a 
moral dilemma which gives a perennial charm and universal appeal 
to the poem. 

As the Gita thus deals with a specific situation, a particular 
occasion and the course of conduct suited to it, we cannot expect 
it to discuss the whole of normal philosophy or to present a complete 
theory of morals. Nevertheless, as practical teaching is the mot if 
of the work, its teachings are predominantly ethical It also dis 
cusses metaphysical problems, more or less as a background to its 
ethics, and contains an exposition of many other doctrines inter¬ 
spersed here and there along with its main one. We shall, there¬ 
fore, concentrate here on the essential and fundamental part or 
core of its teaching. 

That Karma-yoga or activism should be the focal point of its 
teaching follows naturally from the fact that Arjuna who, in the 
beginning of the poem, is discovered as overwhelmed by a pseudo- 
philosophical mood of inaction, resignation and aversion to duty, 
declares himself at the end ready to fight in that detached frame of 
mind which behoves the philosopher in action. Karma-yoga is ap¬ 
plication or devotion to Karman with that mood of detachment or 
equanimity in which the desire for, or attachment to, the fruit or 
result of the Karman is absent. Karman (or action) should be an 
end in itself, and not the means to achieve the result, which must 
follow the Karman but should never form the inspiration to activity. 
Karman signifies the whole set of duties, i.e. social obligations or 
varna-dharmas w r hich, according to the Gita itself, are incumbent on 
every individual and are laid down by the Sastra for each of the 
four varnas (castes) constituting the Chdturvarnya which, Sri Krishna 
says, was formulated by himself for the organisation of human society, 
by the fourfold classification of men according to their qualities and 
inclinations (not birth). Yoga is that balance of mind ( samatvam ) 
which, by banishing desire or self-interest as a motif in the per¬ 
formance of prescribed duty, ensures not only the choice of the 
right deed or correct action, but also the absence of that over* 
enthusiasm in the pursuit of duty which the prospect of a tempting 


441 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

reward may induce in a man and make him swerve from the path 
of rectitude. 

The Gita thus steers a middle course between the two ideals of 
nivftti and pravritti, which held the field in those days, by choosing 
the golden mean. Nivritti, i.e. withdrawal from all Karman, or 
renunciation, had then become popular among certain types of people, 
because Karman was supposed to involve the doer in the vicious 
circle of birth and death. The Gita points out that Karman by itself 
does not form a bond. After all, not even the most thorough-going 
Sannydsin (ascetic) can eschew all action so long as he lives and 
breathes, because breathing is also a kind of ‘action’. It is the 
attachment to the result or fruit of the action that constitutes the 
bond. It is therefore possible from this point of view to practise 
‘renunciation’ even in the midst of action! On the other hand, the 
path of pravritti, which prescribes the performance of all duties, 
social obligations and ritualistic activities, is attended with the 
danger that, though selfishness is held in check by a sense of duty, it 
may extend its scope to the other world, which is the scene of the 
realisation of rewards accruing from action in general and ritualistic 
action in particular. The Gita points out that the rewards, though 
transferred to the other world, are nevertheless transitory, and con¬ 
stitute a bond all the same, as it involves coming back again to 
the w T orld after the exhaustion of merit! 

The attachment to the fruit of action is, therefore, the root of 
all evil. The snapping of this bond is true ^renunciation’ and not the 
giving up of all action, which in any case is impossible in one’s life¬ 
time as shown above. So Samnyasa or detachment in action is the 
golden mean advocated by the Gntd. The debility, despondency, 
diffidence and doubt which suddenly assail Arjuna on the battlefield 
can qualify a person neither for activism nor for renunciation. 

But motivelessness or detachment may degenerate into indif¬ 
ference or distaste for all activity. Is will without desire possible? 
The Gita sees this danger and places two motives and two correspond¬ 
ing goals before the Karma-yogin, either of which he may follow 
according as he chooses the path of (i) Jnana (knowledge) or (ii) 
Bhakti (devotion): 

(1) The selflessness prescribed for activitism is, in a sense, moti¬ 
vated by self-purification {dtma-suddhi). Karma-yoga in thus not 
disinterested in the sense that it has no goal or motive behind it. The 
difference is that, instead of a separate motive for each separate act, 


442 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


it substitutes one single motive for all acts, viz. the spiritualisa¬ 
tion of all our impulses and not merely the rationalising of them, 
the ennobling of our spiritual nature—in other words, subjective 
purification (dtma-sud.dhi) . The ‘selfless activity’ of the Karina - 
yogin is carried on from the point of view of the outer world, in the 
interests of the society of which he forms part, and from an inward 
individual point of view, for cleansing the heart. The goal is self- 
realisation or becoming Brahman or absprption in the Absolute. 
This is the Absoluteist view. 

(2) The other motive that may legitimately be the inspiration 
of the Karma-yogin is the service of God. Whatever is done is done 
for the sake of God and constitutes in fact service to Him. The fruit 
of all activity is dedicated to God. Duty is divine service. He is in 
contact with the living personality of God which is in touch with 
the world in which he acts. The Karma-yogin, who is at the same 
time a devotee of God, has the reasonable hope that God will not let 
him down. 1 The mind is thus gradually turned away from the 
worldly results of action and worldly desire, even legitimate, is elimi¬ 
nated. The goal here is God-realisation or reaching the presence of 
God, described sometimes as merging in Him. This motive and goal 
represent the Theistic point of view. 

The Karma-yoga of the jnanin is consummated in a perfect state 
of self-realisation, dominated by the attitude of enlightenment which 
sees all beings in one-self and one-self in all beings. The Karma- 
yoga of the Bhakta finds Uts fulfilment in a loving communion with 
God, the attitude being one of Bhakti or passionate devotion to God, 
or love of God expressing itself in the love of His creatures. Inward 
peace is, of course, the sine qua non of the Perfect State. There are 
several beautiful accounts in the Gita of the Perfect State, giving 
slightly discrepant versions. For example, VIII. 5 tells us that the 
final state is attained after death. A more common version 2 is that 
it can be realised even within this life. The eleventh chapter records 
the possibility of an enthralling direct vision of God by the devotee, 
as was vouchsafed to Arjuna. 

We shall now briefly review the metaphysics of the Gita which 
forms the bed-rock of its ethical teaching. It broadly distinguishes 
between the unchanging and the immortal on the one hand, and the 
everchanging and the perishable on the other. The world of ex¬ 
perience is further resolved by the Gita into two elements—the 


1. IX. 31. 

2. V. 19, 26, etc. 


443 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

perishable and the imperishable, not from the ultimate point of 
view, but from a relative one. The prakriti, the relatively per¬ 
manent background of the world, is distinguished from the changes 
of the world, its fleeting manifestations. These two are, therefore, 
relatively speaking, the akshara (indestructible) and the kshara 
(destructible) world-changes ' The ultimate reality is not the ever- 
changing prakriti . It is the infinite Being who pervades and sup¬ 
ports all the worlds and dwells in all beings, and is thus not quali¬ 
tatively distinct from the finite which he underlies and animates. 
The Absolute is the being that never becomes , the eternal bed-rock 
(kutastha) on which is reared the superstructure of the things of 
the world that are always struggling to become something else. An 
analysis of the ‘Objective’ experience gives us these results. 

By an analysis of the ‘Subjective’ experience, we realise that 
deeply rooted in our consciousness is the firm belief that there is 
something within us that must survive the demise of the mortal 
body. The individual self may be analysed into the component 
parti of body, mind and soul. Neither the body, which is like a 
garment, cast off at death, nor the fleeting contacts of the senses with 
sense-objects, nor the empirical mind could be the permanent ele¬ 
ment in the self, which is always the subject and never the object. 
The inner principle, the subject, is thus higher than the senses, the 
mind, and the understanding . 2 3 This undying element is the essen¬ 
tial basis of the objective world which has no existence apart from 
the Subject—the K*hetrajna —the lord of the body (kshetra), des¬ 
cribed in glowing terms 1 as the dtman that neither dies nor is born, 
that is not affected by elemental forces, nor is touched by weapons. 

The intelligence, the mind, and the senses are but developments 
of the unconscious prakriti which enacts the whole drama of evolu¬ 
tion under the auspicies of the purnsha (spirit), the self who is a non- 
doer ( akartri ), a mere passive spectator, and who, though stationed 
in the body, remains uncontaminated. Empirical individuals are 
combinations of subject and object or the divine principle of subject 
circumscribed by the context of objects. Individual souls or Jivas 
are individualised fragments of Purushottama (the Absolute). The 
illusion of individuality is due to the subject confusing itself with 
the object and considering itself the doer of actions which are 

wrought by the qualities of may a or prakriti . According to the Gita , 4 

_ 

Z III. 42. 

3 II 20-25 

4 JX 19. 

4 44 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

tlie personal God ( iwcira ) combines within himself the immutability 
of Brahman and the mutation of becoming (that is) both the sat and 
the asat. Mdyd is the power of self-becoming, the energy which is 
utilised by the Hvara in producing mutable nature, both mdyd and 
Is vara being without beginning and mutually dependent. 

It is in this sense that the word mdyd is used in the Gitd, and not 
in the Vedantic sense of a beginningless and unreal avidyd imaging 
the illusions of the world. The Gitd does not indicate that the 
changes of the world are only apparent and imaginary. There is no 
hint that the world is real only so long as we live in it. It does not 
vanish, but only changes its meaning for one who rises above mdyd 
and enjoys the immortality of timeless self existence, even in the 
very midst of this world of becoming. 

The Gltd , of course, teaches the doctrine of rebirth. The cha¬ 
racter we develop in this life will determine the type of our next 
birth. This doctrine gives a reality to free will in spite of necessity 
or determinism, because the latter operates in a single life only. 
The discipline of rebirth leads to perfection and ultimately, to 
moksha. 

The theory of avatdra or incarnation is mentioned in the Gitd 
which declares Krishna to be the Purushottama or Perfect Man 
“Though unborn and eternal, I take charge of prakriti and am born 
through recourse to mdyd,' > says Krishna, 1 and this happens “when 
piety (clharma) wanes and unrighteousness rears its ugly head. 4 * 
An avatdra is, generally kpeaking, a limited manifestation of the 
Supreme, but the Gita seems to take it as the descent of the whole 
god into man. In a sense every individual human being is an 
avatdra; only it is enveloped in ignorance and is a veiled manifesta¬ 
tion, whereas the divine avatdra with a conscious being is none else 
but God, who limits Himself for a definite purpose and fulfils Him¬ 
self in the world. This possibility of an avatdra at the time of a 
world crisis is indeed a most heartening spiritual message of the 
Gitd. 

To sum up, the catholicity of the Gita is clearly seen when, in a 
spirit of true toleration, it presents the most harmonious blend of 
the apparently conflicting doctrines then prevalent, and declares: 
‘All roads to moksha (salvation) lead but unto Me.’ It lays down, 
three distinct paths or ways (mdrga) of salvation, viz . through 
Jndna (Knowledge), Karma (Action) and Bhakti (Devotion). Very 

l. IV. 6. 


445 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


characteristic is its treatment of the first, viz. Jnana-mdrga or ‘path 
of knowledge*. There are two kinds of knowledge: (1) the under¬ 
standing of the phenomena of existence externally through the 
intellect is called vi jnana; and (2) the integral knowledge, through 
the force of intuition, of the ultimate principle behind the pheno¬ 
mena, the common foundation of all existence, is Jnana. It is this 
Jiidna which the Gita describes as incomparable in its purifying 
power and thus a means to attain final emancipation. It can only 
be attained if vijnana or science is supplemented by pariprasna 
(investigation) and seva (service). As a jnana (ignorance) is more a 
spiritual blindness than an intellectual fog, mental training and a 
cleansing of the soul are necessary to remove it. The Gita says that 
Karma-yoga, supplemented by the Yogic discipline (which was later 
systematised in Patanjali’s Sutras ), provides such a training. 

The second path, the Karma-yoga of the Gita, gives a new 
version of the Vedic theory of sacrifice and harmonises it with true 
spiritual knowledge. Sacrifice is nothing but self-restraint and self¬ 
surrender. The sacrifice of sense-pleasures is the true sacrifice. 
The Karma-yogin surrenders to God whatever work he does. He 
not only lives but acts in God. The third, the Bhakti-yoga, the path 
of love and worship or emotional attachment to God, as distinguished 
from knowledge or action, is, according to the Gita, the royal road 
to moksha (salvation), being the easiest and open to all. Meditation 
on the unmanifested Absolute, i.e. the jnana-mdrga, is a difficult 
process and entails much hardship ( klesa ). The great attraction of 
the Gita for the ordinary man is that it reveals as it were this un¬ 
manifested Absolute as a Personal God—a saviour answering the 
cry of Faith in distress with His grace. This doctrine of Bhakti is at 
the same time reconciled with Karma-yoga. The inexorability of 
the law of Karman is sought to be mitigated by the doctrine that the 
thought of the last moment of a man’s life is far more potent than 
previous thoughts in shaping man’s destiny, and the true Bhakta 
may also be at the same time a true Karma-yogin if, in the midst of 
all his activities, he keeps his mind steadfastly on God so that his 
last thoughts may not stray from his Saviour. 

Thus the paths of knowledge, devotion, ritualism and activism 
are perfectly reconciled. On the philosophical side it may be said 
that diverse currents of philosophic thought, not yet determined and 
labelled as irreconcilable, meet in it. One is not surprised therefore 
to find the following observation made with regard to its teaching: 


446 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


“Whether it is a Vishnuite remodelling of a Pantheistic poem 
(Holtzmann ), or a Krishnite version of an older Vishnuite poem 
which in its turn was a ‘late Upanishad’ (Hopkins), or a text-book 
of the Bhagavatas revised in a Vedantic sense by the Brahmanas 
( Garbe ), or a late product of the degeneration of the monistic thought 
of the Upanishads representing the period of transition from theism 
to realistic atheism ( Deussen ), can hardly, in the presence of such 
a conflict of opinions, be definitely determined.” 1 

5. The doctrine of the four Vyuhas (chatur-vyuha) 

Although ultimately Vasudeva-Krishna alone figures as the 
founder of the new religious movement, there is no doubt that several 
other members of his family originally shared the honours of deifi¬ 
cation with him. The five.Vrishni heroes, referred to in an inscrip¬ 
tion 2 of the first century A. D. at Mora near Mathura, are enumerated 
in the Vayu Purdna as Sankarshana (son of Vasudeva by RohinI), 
Vasudeva (son of Vasudeva by Devaki), Pradyumna (son of Vasu¬ 
deva by Rukmini), Samba (son of Vasudeva by Jambavatl), and 
Aniruddha (son of Pradyumna), all of whom are known to have 
been deified and worshipped. 3 

According to the Vyuha doctrine, which is one of the foremost 
tenets of the earlier Pancharatra or Bhagavata, and the later 6ri- 
Vaishnava religion, Bhagavat Vasudeva, who in his Para aspect is 
the highest object of Bhakti, created from himself the Vyuha (phase 
of conditioned spirit) Sapkarashna and also Prakriti (the indiscreet 
primal matter of the Sankhyas); from the combination of Sankarshana 
and Prakriti sprang the Vyuha Pradyumna and Manas (Buddhi or 
intelligence of the Sankhyas); from the association of Pradyumna 
and Manas arose the Vyuha Aniruddha and Ahamkdra (conscious¬ 
ness); from the combination of Aniruddha and Ahamkdra sprang 
the Mahabhutas (elements with their qualities) and Brahman who 
fashioned the earth and all that it contains, from the elements. 
Vasudeva is the sole possessor of the six ideal gunas, viz. jnana, hala, 
virya, aisvarya, sakti and tejas, while each of his three emanations 
possessed only two of the gunas in turn. It is clear that this philo¬ 
sophical interpretation of the relation of Vasudeva with the other 
deified Vrishni heroes is a later development. There is no reference 
to the Vyuhas in the Gitd, the earliest religious text of the Bhaga¬ 
vatas; they are alluded to in several other sections of the Mahd - 

1. Macnicol, Indian Theism, p. 76. 

2. El, XXIV. 194. 

3. PIHC, VII. 82. 

447 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

bharata (e.g. Bhishmaparvan, the Narayaniya section of the Santi- 
parvan, etc ), although the earlier works do not give a consistent 
account of them. Bhandarkar says that of the five Prakritis of 
Vasudeva, viz. the five elements, mind, Buddhi, egoism, and jivo, 
mentioned in the Gita , jiva, mind and egoism were later on personi¬ 
fied into Sankarsha^a, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. The Vyiiha 
doctrine is probably alluded to in the passage jandrdanas=tv=dtma- 
chnturtha eva, quoted in the Mahabhdsya from an unknown poem 
on the life of Vasudeva-Krishna. 

There is no doubt that the five Vrishjni heroes mentioned in the 
Mora inscription were apotheosised and worshipped, with the title 
Bhagavat, in the Mathura region about the beginning of the Chris¬ 
tian era, apparently by people of the Yadava-Satvata-Vrishni origin. 
The V Uhruidharmottara contains rules for the making of images of 
various divinities associated with the Bhagavata cult, and these in¬ 
clude the five Vrishni heroes mentioned above. The Brihat-samhitd 
also gives details for the construction of the images of Vishnu 
(VAsudeva), Baladeva (Sankarshana), Samba, and Pradyumna, but 
not of Aniruddha. The preference of Samba to Aniruddha may 
point to the fact that the author of the Brihat-samhita belonged to 
the community of the Maga Brahmanas who seem to have held 
S£mba, often associated with their solar cult, in special honour. In 
later times, Samba fell in the estimation of Bhagavatas, probably 
because he was represented as the champion of solar worship in 
India and was very often identified with the Sun-god himself. 

That all the five Vrishifi Viras (i.e. the four Vyuhas together 
With SAmba) were independently worshipped has been suggested 
by Banerjea, Who is inclined to identify Samba with certain sculp¬ 
tured figures hailing from the Mathura region. There was the cus¬ 
tom of electing dhvajas or votive columns in honour of different 
sectarian deities, especially near their temples. Banerjea points out 
that the fragmentary capitals figuring Garu<Ja, Tala (fan-palm), and 
Makara (crocodile), found at Besnagar and Pawaya, point to the 
existence of the dhvaja and shrines respectively of Vasudeva, 
Sahkarshana and Pradyumna. 

Certain early coins, including a few from Taxila, are supposed 
by Banerjea to bear the representation of columns surmounted by 
fan-palm capital. At Tumain in Madhya Bharat has been discovered 
an originally Vaishnava temple (now dedicated to Vindhyavasinl), 
adorned with carvings illustrating the early life of Krishna in which 


448 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


a figure of Baladeva, assignable to the second or third century A.D., 
was recognised. 

There is no doubt that the Chatur-Vyuha doctrine was an out¬ 
come of the apotheosis of several Vrishni vxras besides Vasudeva. 
But the non-mention of Pradyumna and Aniruddha, along with 
Sankasrhana and Vasudeva, in the Ghosundi and Nanaghat inscrip¬ 
tions of the first century B.C., probably shows that the independent 
worship of the- third and fourth Vyuhas, who are not known to hava 
been religious teachers, was not quite popular outside the Vrishid 
circle. Their deification may have been influenced partly by the 
practice in the Mathura region of installing images of deceased an¬ 
cestors in devakulas, as is indicated by an inscription of Huvishka. 1 
But Sankarshana, also called Baladeva, Balarama and Rama, was a 
more important figure, whose independent worship spread over wide 
areas before the birth of Christ. In the Ghosundi inscription, he is 
called Bhagavat and Sarvesvara jointly with Vasudeva. The Mahd- 
bhdrata represents Sankarshana as being held in special honour by 
the Kuru king Duryodhana, while the Kautiliya Arthasdstra speaks 
of a class of ascetics with shaved head or with braided hair'who 
adored him as their devata. The Buddhist Niddesa works also men¬ 
tion the votaries of Baladeva side by side with those of Vasudeva. 

In epic and Puranic traditions, which sometimes represent 
Sankarshana as the form of Anantanaga and point to his identifica¬ 
tion with some tribal god of the Nagas, 2 he figures as a great helper 
of his younger step-brother Krishna in the latter's exploits, especially 
in the struggle with Kamsa. 

The pastoral association of Sankarshana may have been due 
partly to his relations with Krishna and partly to his identification 
with some tribal gods. The Bhishmaparvan and the Ahirbudhnya 
Saihhitci regard him as an exponent of the Satvata or Pancharatra 
system. In the Narayaniya section of the Santiparvan, Vasudeva is 
identified with Paramatman (Supreme Soul) and Sankarshana with 
JIvatman (individual soul). The votaries of Sankarshana ultimately 
merged themselves with those of Vasudeva. In later times the inde¬ 
pendent worship of the Vyuhas Pradyumna and Aniruddha, and even 
of Sankarshana, declined owing to the growing popularity of the 

1. Cf. also Pratimdnataka (Act III) attributed to Bhasa. 

2. ' Cf. the Kaliyanaga episode in the Krishna saga, probably pointing to the 

victory of Bhagavatism over the tribal cult of the Nagas who ruled in the 

Mathura area before the Guptas. 

449 


A.U.I.- 20 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

worship of the avatdras of Vishnu, which became the dominant fea¬ 
ture of Bhagavatism in the Gupta age. 

6. Relation of Bhagavatism with Other Creeds 

The Ajivikas are known to have been followers of a great cham¬ 
pion of fatalism named Gosala, 1 a contemporary of Mahavlra. 
Utpala, commenting on the Brihajjataka, seems to include the 
Ajivikas amongst the Narayanasritas, i.e. devotees of Narayana. It 
is probable that in later day's the Ajivikas merged themselves with 
the followers of Vasudeva. 

It may be observed that the Jain faith, which shares the doc¬ 
trine of Ahimsa with Bhagavatism and Buddhism, is permeated with 
influences of Hinduism, especially of Krishna worship. The Jains 
include Vasudeva and Baladeva among the 63 salakd-purushas who 
have directed or influenced the course of the world. The legend of 
Mahavira’s birth in Jain mythology is again entirely derived from 
that of Krishna’s birth. On the other hand, the later conception of 
the 24 forms of Vishnu was probably derived from that of the 24 
Jain Tirthakaras. The Jain Tirthakara Rishabha w^as regarded as 
an avatar a of Vishnu by some Bhagavatas. 

Senart and Poussin believe that there was an intimate relation 
between the Buddhist way of deliverance and that of the old thiestic 
cults of India, and suggest that devout worshippers of Narayana 
exerted great influence on the making of the Buddhist doctrine even 
from its inception. Although the theory can hardly be accepted, as 
the early spheres of influence of the two creeds were different, we 
know that the importance of Ahimsa: is recognised in both the 
systems. It is possible that the adoration of Buddha’s footprints was 
borrowed from the conception of Vishnu’s pada. 2 The influence of 
the Gita on Buddhist works like the Saddharma-pundarika, Maha- 
ydna-sraddhotpada, etc., is unmistakable. - On the other hand, the 
full development of the avataravdda seem to have been influenced by 
the Buddhist conception of the former Buddhas, some of whom were 
worshipped in their own stupas as early as the third century B.C. 
That a large number of Buddhists were admitted into the fold of the 
Vaishnavas towards the close of the Hindu period is suggested by 
the inclusion of Buddha in the list of Vishnu’s avatdras . 3 

1. See above, p. 414. 

2. It means both ‘station’ and ‘foot’, and often leads to confusion as regards the 
original interpretation of Vishnu-pada. 

3. Cf. JRASBL, XV. 101. 


450 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


It will be seen from the above discussion that the Vaishnava 
sect absorbed a number of different elements, among which promi¬ 
nent mention should be made of the worshippers of such different 
divinities as the Vedic Vishnu, the deified sage Narayana and the 
deified Vrishni heroes Vasudeva and Baladeva. We have to include 
in the list also the followers of Vasudeva’s relatives Pradyumna, 
Aniruddha and Samba, of his friend the Pandava Arjuna, 1 as well 
as of the avatdras before their identification with Vishnu, and of 
such tribal gods as those of the Abhlras. Under the circumstances, 
the existence of sectarian or doctrinal differences was inevitable, 
although its nature can hardly be determined. 


Some writers believe that much of Bhagavatism, including the 
idea of Bhakti, was borrowed from Christianity, while others go so 
far as to suggest that Krishna himself was an adaptation of Christ. 
It should, however, be remembered that the origin of Bhakti in India, 
the apotheosis and worship of Vasudeva, and the identification of 
Vasudeva-Krishna with Vishnu and Narayana are pre-Christian. 
There are, no doubt, resemblances between the story of the .child 
Krishna and that of the child Jesus, just as there are between the 
lives of Gautama and Jesus, and also Rama in Tulsi Das’s work. 
Kopkins attributes it to direct importation from Christian lands into 
India, especially because of the late date of the development of the 
Krishna legend. But the MaMbhdshya, quoting passages from a 
Kavya on the Kamsa-vadha episode, points to the pre : Christian 
origin of the Krishna saga. Indian literature and archaeological 
evidence 2 show that the cowherd association of Krishna was widely 
known about the third and fourth centuries A.D. On the other 
hand, it has been pointed out that the adoration of the Virgin Mary 
is not much earlier than the fifth century. Kennedy rightly says: 
“There is no Christian representation of the suckling mother before 
the twelfth century, but there is a much earlier Hindu one.” The 
Christian influence cannot be satisfactorily proved with the evidence 
at our disposal. Bhandarkar’s theory that the Abhiras were respon¬ 
sible for bringing the legends of Christ to India and for their intro¬ 
duction into the Krishna saga is hardly supported by evidence. If 
Christian legends found their way to India at all, it was probably 
through the mission of Saint Thomas to the court of the Parthian 

1. Cf. Panini’s rule for the formation of the word Arjunaka in the sense of a 
person whose object of Bhakti was Arjuna. 

2. Cf. the Mathura relief illustrating Krishna’s birth. 


451 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


king Gondophernes 1 or through the Nestorian settlers on the Malabar 
coast. 

7. The Worship of Images 

The Bhagavatas or the Pahcharatrins seem to be mainly respon¬ 
sible for the dissemination of the practice of image-worship among 
the higher section of the orthodox Indian people. To them the 
Archd or &ri-vigraha (auspicious body of the Lord) was the God 
Himself in one of His aspects, and was thus the object of the greatest 
veneration as the ‘God manifest’ (pratyaksha devatd). Epigraphic 
data of the pre-Christian and early post-Christian periods prove that 
there were Bhagavata or Vaishnava shrines in various parts of India, 
such as Besnagar (ancient Vidisa), Mathura, etc. Very early images 
are not, however, extant and this can be explained by referring to 
undoubted evidence that the images were usually made at first of 
perishable materials. One or two stone images of Vaishnavite 
deities are, however, known, which can be dated prqbably in the 
second century before the Christian era, if not earlier. 2 

The present writer has shown that the so-called Yakshini image, 
which was discovered by Cunningham at Besnagar along with the 
Banyan-capital, is really the goddess Sri, who held an important 
place in the Pancharatra cult as the active energic principle, the 
chief consort of the Para-Vasudeva. The other image is that of 
Sankarshana or Balarama in the collection of the Mathura Museum, 
which shows the usual characteristics of the god, viz. the snake 
canopy, the ploughshare in one of the hands and round protruding 
eyes indicative of inebriety {mattavivrittekshana). 

Vaishnava images of the early post-Christian period also are 
not many in number, a few that are extant being mostly attributable 
to the Mathura region. It was traditionally associated with the 
Vasudeva cult, and inscriptions of the first century A.D. and later 
periods refer to the construction of Bhagavata shrines, some by 
foreigners. One such inscription discovered at Mora refers, as noted 
above, to the installation of the images of the holy Panchaviras of 
the Vrishnis in a beautiful stone temple erected under the orders of 
Tosha, evidently a foreign lady. A few fragmentary images in the 
round, obtained from Mora site and now exhibited in the Mathura 
Museum, may be the remains of the figures of the five Vrishni 
vlras; but the multilation is so complete that nothing can be said with 

1. See above, p. 130. 

2 - in ? a ? e of Vish^iu-parivara, now worshipped at Burhikhas in Bilaspur 

District, bears a Brahml Ins. of about the first century B.C. 


452 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


certainty about their iconography. Reference has already been 
made 1 to the images of Vishnu on the coins and seals of the first and 
second centuries A.D. 

A partially preserved architectural relief of the second or third 
century A.D. in the Mathura Museum collection illustrates the scene 
of Krishna-JanmashtamI; it is of unique interest as it is the earliest 
extant sculpture illustrative of the Krishnayana stories, which later 
became the favourite motifs of Indian iconographists. 

E. SAIVISM 


1 . The Pasupatas 

As we have seen above, the cult of Siva goes back to very early 
times, and it is not unlikely that it was current among the non- 
Aryans in pre-Vedic period. His character was formed by the con¬ 
flation of the attributes of many deities, one of the earliest being the 
Vedic Rudra. 2 But, whatever may be his origin, the god gradually 
rose into great importance. In the Svetasvatara Upanishad, Siva 
figures as the Great God (Mahadeva) superior to the Vedic pantheon, 
and a similar position is accorded to his spouse Uma Haimavata 
in the Kena Upanishad. The fact that he is classed among minor 
gods both in Apastamba Grihya Sxitra and Kautilya’s Arthasdstra 
shows, however, that his position of unquestioned supremacy was 
not established at a very early period. The rise of a definite religious 
sect, revering Siva as the Supreme God and with a philosophy and 
organization of its own, cannot be traced back earlier than about 
the beginning of the Christian era. 

So far as present evidence goes, the earliest was the Pasupata 
sect, which itself gave rise to different sub-sects. In the Maha- 
bhdrata mention is made of the Pasupata along with the systems 
of Sankhya, Yoga, Pancharatra and Veda; and it is stated that 
the consort of Uma, namely Pasupati, Srlkantha, or Siva, son of 
Brahma, revealed the jndna known as the Pasupata. 3 It is the belief 
of the Saivas, to whatever school they might belong, that Siva him¬ 
self was the first preceptor of their doctrine. In the Vayu Purdna, 
Mahesvara is represented to have declared to Brahma that in the 
twenty-eighth mahdyuga, when Vishnu would be born as Vasudeva, 
he would incarnate himself as a brahmacharin, by name Nakulin, 

1. Above, pp. 150, 439. 

2. Vol. I. pp. 162, 187, 203. 

o. Mbh.. Southern Recension: cd. by P. P. S. Sastri, Vol. XV, Santi, Pt. Ill, 
Ch. 238. w. 62-65. 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


after entering a dead body in the burial ground of Kayarohana, a 
land of siddhas, and that he would have four pupils—Kusika, 
Gcrgya, Mitraka and Rushta—who, duly initiated into Mahesvara - 
yoga, would reach Rudraloka whence there is no return. 1 The 
same legend is found in the Linga Purana also, with this difference, 
that the name of the incarnation is given there as Lakulin, and 
the pupils are called Kusika, Garga, Mitra, and Kaurushya. 2 There 
seems to be some historical basis for this myth, as a few inscrip¬ 
tions 3 speak of a teacher of Saivism by name Lakulin or Nakulin, 
who was regarded by his followers as an incarnation of Siva. In 
an inscription dated A.D. 971 in the temple of Natha near that of 
Eklinga, a few miles north of Udaipur, it is stated that Siva became 
incarnate as a man bearing a club ( lakula ) in his hand, in the 
country of Bhrigukachchha. There is another inscription of the 
thirteenth century A.D. which records that Siva became incarnate 
in the form of Bhattaraka Sri Lakulisa and dwelt in Karohana in 
the Lata country, and that he had four pupils, Kausika, Gargya. 
Kaurusha and Maitreya, who became the founders of four branches 
of the Pasupata school. Thus it is evident that there was a person 
by name Lakulin who taught a form of Saivism which has come 
to be known by his name. He is even considered to be the author 
of a work, Pahchddhydyi or Pahchdrthavidyd, to which Madhava 
alludes in his account of the Pasupata system in the Sarvadarsana- 
sangraha. Sir R. G. Bhandarkar placed the rise of this school about 
a century after that of the Pancharatra system, i. e. about the second 
century B.C., but the Mathura inscription of the reign of Chandra- 
gupta II proves that Lakulin flourished in the first quarter of the 
second century A.D. 4 

The Pasupatas believe that Mahesvara has taught five cate¬ 
gories for the sake of releasing the jiva from its bonds. The cate¬ 
gories are (1) kdrya or effect, viz . that which is not independent, 
(2) karana or cause, viz. that which is independent, (3) yoga or path, 
(4) vidhi or rule, and (5) duhkhanta or the end of misery. A 
knowledge of these is said to be essential for release. 

The first two categories involve abstruse philosophical con¬ 
cepts. The third, yoga, is that which connects the individual soul 
with God through the channel of the mind ( chitta ). It is of two 

1. Vnyu Purana, ch. 23, vv. 210-213. 

2. Linga Purana, ch. 24, vv. 127-131. 

3. - For these records, cf. VS. 116; JBBRAS, XXII. 151 ft; El, XXI 1 ff 

4. VS. p. 117; El, XXI. 5-7. * ' n * 


454 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


kinds: (1) that which is of the nature of action, and (2) that which is 
of the nature of cessation from action. The first consists in actions 
like chanting of mantras, meditation, etc., and the second ‘consists in 
mere feeling’. The fourth, vidhi or rule, is that which takes the aspi¬ 
rant to the proximity of Dharma, which is the Lord. It is twofold, 
principal and subsidiary. The primary rule is charyd or conduct, 
which is the direct means. It. consists of vows ( vratas) and channels 
(dvdras ). The vows are: besmearing the body with holy ashes, lying 
in ashes, certain practices called upahdra (laughing, singing, dancing, 
etc.), muttering magic formulae, and circumambulation. The chan¬ 
nels are various forms of behaviour such as feigning sleep, etc., 
which do not conform to the normal. The secondary vidhi consists of 
processes which are intended to be helpful to charyd. These com¬ 
prise besmearing the body with ashes after worship, begging and 
eating the remnants of what others have eaten so that the sense of 
indecency attached to such acts may be overcome. 

Duhkhdnta, which is the last category, is the final deliverance 
from sorrow. It is of two kinds: (1) anatmaka, which is of the 
nature of absolute elimination of misery, and (2) satmaka, which 
is of the nature of lordship consisting in the possession of powers 
of seeing and acting. The power of seeing, though one, is said to 
be fivefold on account of distinctions in objects: (a) darsana which 
is knowledge, visual, tactile, etc., of objects that are subtle, con¬ 
cealed or distant; (b) sravarta which is supernormal hearing of all 
sounds; (c) manana which is supernormal knowing of all objects of 
thought; (d) vijhdna which is supernormal knowledge of all sciences 
with their treatises and what are taught in them; and (e) sarvajnatva 
which is supernormal knowledge of the principles of a system, 
whether expressly mentioned or not, succinct and in detail, with 
their divisions and peculiarities. The power of acting, though one, 
is said to be threefold: (a) manojavitva, or the power of doing any¬ 
thing instantly; (b) kamarupitva, or the power of assuming a variety 
of shapes and forms, or bodies and senses, without any effort; and 
(c) vikaranadharmitva, or the possession of supreme power, even 
when the senses have been withdrawn from operation. One acquires 
these supernormal powers of knowledge and action through long 
adherence to the discipline as presented in the Pasupata system. 
It is to be noted that, while in the other systems the destruction of 
misery is regarded as moksha, in the Pasupata this is coupled with 
the attainment of supernormal powers. 


455 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


It would seem that even from very early times certain mystic 
practices were associated with the Pasupata religion. When ineli¬ 
gible persons began to adopt them, considerable deterioration set in 
and the system itself fell into disrepute. But there is nothing 
inherently wrong about the faith. Any mystic cult can be distorted 
and become vitiated by the importation of left-handed practices 
(vdmdchdra). That has happened everywhere and in the case of 
every faith. The essentials of the Pasupata system, however, are 
those of a virile theism leaning on the side of a healthy asceticism. 
The Pasupata as well as the other branches of Saivism have claimed 
the allegiance of some of the finest of spiritual personages who would 
be regarded as the salt of the earth in any age or country. 

2. Saivism as a Popular Cult 

The earliest historical record to mention the worship of Siva is 
that of Megasthenes, the Greek envoy at Pataliputra about 300 B.C. 
He describes two Indian deities under the names of Dionysus and 
Herakles, generally identified with Siva and Krishna respectively. 
Patanjali in the second century B.C. refers in his Mahabhashya to 
the Siva-bhagavatas as also to images of Siva and Skanda, which 
were sold by the Maury as to raise money. This shows the popularity 
of the cult. According to Haribhadra’s Sha^darsanasamuchchaya , 
Gautama and Kanada, founders respectively of the Nyaya and 
Vaiseshika systems, were of Saiva persuasion. Gunaratna, in his 
commentary of Haribhadra’s work, says that the Naiyayikas were 
called Saivas, and the Vaiseshikas, Pasupatas. Among the suc¬ 
cessors of Aioka we come across one Jalauka who was a Saiva. 1 In 
the early centuries of the Christian era some of the Kushana kings 
became ardent Saivas and caused their coins to be minted with 
the images of Siva and of his emblems like the trident and the 
sacred bull on them. The first Ikshvaku king, Santamula, 2 was a 
worshipper of Skanda. 

We obtain a fair idea of the popular cult of Saivism from the 
epics. The Rdmayana refers to Siva by several of his well-known 
names, such as Sitikantha, Mahadeva, Rudra, Tryambaka, Pasupati 
and Sankara. By the time of this ddi-kdvya, Rudra-Siva had gained 
a history and founded a family; and references to many of the 
legends, elaborately described in the later Puranas, are to be met 
with in the poem. 

1. Rajataranginx , I. 108 ff; also above, pp. 89-90. 

2. Above, p. 224 f. 


45G 







RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


In this epic we hear of Himavat giving his daughter Uma in 
marriage to the “unequalled Rudra,’’ 1 of Kandarpa’s attempt to 
enter into Rudra at a time when he was performing austerity, and 
Rudra’s curse in consequence whereof Kandarpa became bodiless 
iandnga ). 2 We hear also of the birth of Karttikeya who was to be 
the generalissimo of the gods. 3 The story of Bhagiratha’s propitia¬ 
tions of Siva and the descent of Ganga is related in the R&mdyana , 
as also the story of Rudra drinking the poison emitted by the serpent 
Vasuki when it was used as the rope in the process of the churn¬ 
ing of the Ocean of Milk. 4 Some of Mahadeva’s achievements are 
alluded to in the course of the epic narrative. The principal among 
them are the destruction of Andhaka (or Ardhaka), and the con¬ 
quest of Tripura. That the overlordship of Mahadeva was not 
recognised by the votaries of other gods could be gathered from the 
episode at Daksha’s sacrifice which is narrated in its simplest form 
in the Ramtiyana. It is to be noted that there is no mention in 
the Ramayana of Rudra commissioning Virabhadra to break up the 
sacrifice or put the gods to flight. The significance of the episode, 
however, is clear, viz. that Daksha refused to recognise Rudra as 
a god worthy of propitiation; and Daksha may be taken as repre¬ 
sentative of those who reviled Rudra. 

In the Mahdbhdrata we notice Saivism and Vaishnavism be¬ 
coming more prominent and widespread than the other cults and 
dividing between them the allegiance of great masses of men. 
Though Siva’s character remains essentially the same as that of the 
Vedic Rudra, his attributes are more clearly defined and he receives 
new features and fame which are illustrated by numerous legends. 

Some of the stories related in the Rdmdyana figure again in 
the Mahdbhdrata with additional details. The myths of Siva’s 
destruction of Tripura and of Daksha’s sacrifice, for instance, are 
narrated at greater length. Besides, Siva’s personality and 
prowess become directly connected with the development of the 
main epic story itself at several places. At the beginning of the 
Bhishma-parvan, Durga, the consort of Siva, is prayed to by Arjuna 
on the advice of Krishna, before the commencement of the battle. 
In the Vana-parvan, Arjuna goes to the Himalayas and obtains the 
Pasupata weapon from Siva, who appears in the form of a hunter 

1. Ravi, I, 35, 20. 

2. Ram, I, 23, 10 fT. 

3. Ram, I, 38. 

4 Ram, I, 45. 


457 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


(kirata) and reveals his identity only after testing the Pandava 
prince's valour. 

It is interesting to note that in one story in the Anusasana- 
parvan, Krishna worships Mahadeva. He had to go through the 
diksha ceremony, which is an essential part of the discipline of 
several Saiva schools as we know them. “Equipped with a staff, 
shaved, clothed with rags, anointed with ghee and provided with a 
girdle, living for one month on fruits, for four more on water, 
standing on one foot, with his arms aloft, he at length obtained a 
glorious vision of Mahadeva and his spouse, whom all the gods were 
worshipping among them Indra, Vishnu (the delight of his mother 
Aditi), and Brahma, all uttering the rathantara sdma ” 1 Krishna 
then proceeds to praise Mahadeva as the Supreme Deity, and 
secures from him eight boons and eight more from Uma. One of 
them, it is worthy of note, is that Krishna would be a Siva -bhakta 
for all time. 

There are sections of the Mahdbharata where the poet, who¬ 
ever he was, surmounts sectarian barriers and sees the divinity 
equally in Vishnu and Mahadeva. In the Santi-parvan, Hari, the 
lord of the world, addresses the god Isana (Mahadeva) thus: “He 
who knows thee knows me; he who loves (lit. favours) thee loves 
me. There is no distinction between us; do not thou entertain any 
other idea. From this day forward let this srivatsa of mine be the 
mark of the trident: and thou shalt be the srikantha marked upon 
my hand .” 2 In the Anusasana-parvan among the one thousand 
names of Vishnu are included the names of Mahadeva, such as 
Sarva, Siva, Sthanu, Isana and Rudra. In one place Siva speaks of 
Vishnu as the greatest god; while in another Krishna praises Maha¬ 
deva as the one to whom there is nothing superior. Thus, side 
by side with sectarianism, there is also in the great epic a sort of 
universalism in faith. 

From the places mentioned in the Mahdbharata as being sacred 
to Siva, it may be gathered that the Saiva sect was to be found all 
over India. There were two classes of Saivas—householder-devotees 
and ascetics ‘whose sign was tonsure and the yellow robe.’ The 
observance of caste was not stressed; the practice of yoga was 
insisted on. 


1. Muir, OST. IV, p. 194. 

2. Muir. OST, IV. p. 241. 

458 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


3. Saivism in South India 

Traces of Saivism are to be found in South India from very 
remote times. The literature of the Sangarn age refers to Siva as 
the greatest god. The Ahananuru describes Siva as the Lord who 
wears konrai flowers, whose three eyes neither close nor wink, whose 
consort is Uma and whose weapon a battle-axe, who wears the cres¬ 
cent moon on his matted locks, who is unknowable even by the 
gods and the sages, who is blue-necked, and whose footstool is the 
universe In Puram 55 there is a reference to the destruction of 
the three cities (Tripura) by Siva. Nakklrar compares 1 his contem¬ 
porary Pan^ya king to Siva, Vishnu, Balarama and Subrahmanya 
for his various excellences. He speaks of Siva as having a long 
braid of hair shining like a flame, a flag with the bull ensign and a 
blue neck. It is significant that Siva is here referred to as Kurram, 
the god of death and destruction. In the Tirumurukattruppadai , 
besides references to the features of Siva already described, the god 
is spoken of as the Lord seated under the banyan tree (Kallal). 
Puram 166 characterises Siva as mudu-mudalvan (the foremost) and 
says that the Veda is ever on his tongue. The twin classics, Silappadi - 
karam and Manimekhalai, generally assigned to the early centuries 
of the Christian era, contain ample references to Siva-worship in 
the Tamil country. In the Silappadikaram , 2 it is stated that the 
Chera king Senguttuvan worshipped both Siva and Vishnu. Among 
the temples of Kaverippumpattinam, the author mentions one dedi¬ 
cated to Siva. 3 In the Manimekhalai there is a statement 4 to the 
effect that temples beginning with that of Siva with an eye in his 
forehead, and ending with that of the guardian-deity of the public 
square “should all be tidied for the coming festival.” 5 In Canto 27 
of the same work there is a reference to the Saivavadin who ex¬ 
pounds to Manimekhalai, daughter of Kannaki, the Saiva doctrine, 
according to which Siva appears in eight forms and is the absolute 
Lord of creation and dissolution. 

4. Saiva Images 

As noted above, 6 prototypes of Siva as Pasupati and his em¬ 
blem par excellence, Siva-lihga (the phallic emblem of Siva), have 

1. Puram 56. 

2. Canto 26. 

3. Canto 12. 

4. Canto 1. 

5. See S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar, Some Contributions of South India to Indian 
Culture, p. 56. 

6. Vol. I, p. 187. 


459 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


been found in the Sindhu valley. Several indigenous coins of differ¬ 
ent varieties, dating back to a few centuries before the Christian 
era, contain anthropomorphic as well as phallic figures of Siva. 
These, supplemented by early literary data, prove that the exclusive 
worshippers of Siva, the Siva-bhagavatas, had long been using such 
icons for religious purposes. It is presumable that human as well 
as phallic forms of the god were at first enshrined in the main 
sanctum of the Saiva temples; but it became the general custom 
afterwards to place Siva-lingas only in it and use them as the princi 
pal object of worship, the human figures of Siva being present a 
accessories in the various parts of the temple. 

References in the Mahdbhdrata seem to prove that an orthodox 
section of the Brahmanas was tardy in giving recognition to the 
worship of Siva-lingas on account, perhaps, of the idea underlying 
sucn icons. The extant early specimens of these cult objects are, 
as will be presently shown, extremely realistic in appearance, and 
that was probably the reason why their use was not at first coun¬ 
tenanced by this section of the people; it was also this aversion 
which was, perhaps, one of the causes for their gradual convention¬ 
alisation. Their general shape became so much modified and altered 
that the Siva-lingas of the mediaeval times hardly bear any traces of 
their original realism—Havell even goes so far as to suggest that 
they were modelled on the votive stupas of the Buddhists. It is in 
the mode of laying the Brahma-sutras on the Rudra or Pujdbhzga of 
the lingas that faint traces of their original character are to be found. 
They were no doubt very much conventionalised in later times, but 
they came to have numerous forms of a varied nature, which were 
elaborately depicted in the mediaeval hieratic art of the Saivas. 

One of the earliest Saiva sculptures of India in the historic- 
period is the very interesting Siva-linga which is still an object of 
worship in the village of Gudimallam near Renigunta, Madras. The 
extremely realistic phallic emblem, five feet high, bears upon it a 
two-armed figure of Siva; the god holds a ram in his right hand and 
a water-vessel and a battle-axe in his left one, and stands on the 
shoulders of a malformed dwarf (Apasmdra-purusha) ; below the 
diaphanous loin-cloth his sex-mark is prominently shown; jatdbhdra 
(matted hair) adorns his head, and his body is sparsely decorated 
with ornaments. Gopinatha Rao dated it in the second century B.C., 
while others like Coomaraswamy would place it a century later. 
This combined mode of depicting Siva both in his human as well 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


as phallic form in a single piece of sculpture was a practice which 
was continued with some modifications in subsequent periods, and 
the Lingodbhavamurti of Siva and the different varieties of Mukha- 
lirigas are really so many adaptations of it. 

Coomaraswamy has drawn our attention to a much later sculp¬ 
ture (second or third century A.D.) showing a four-armed standing 
figure of Siva carved on one side of a less realistic phallus; the 
natural hands of the god are shown in abhaya and katyavalambita 
poses, while the added ones are raised and placed on his j atas. 
Phallic emblems of Siva of a highly suggestive nature, without any 
figure of the god carved on them, have been found mostly in the 
Mathura region, which can be dated in the first few centuries of 
the Christian era. 

Mukhalirigas proper are known from the Gupta period onwards, 
and they are usually of the ekamukha and chaturmukha types, 
according as they bear, on their Rudra or Pujabhdgas, the represen¬ 
tation of one or four faces. The four faces in a chaturmukha liriga 
typify the Sadyojata, Vamadeva, Aghora and Tatpurusha forms 
of Siva, the fifth face on the top, viz. isana, remaining invisible 
(Panchamam cha tathesdnam Yogindmapyagocharam). The faces are 
usually shown carved round a single shaft; so a Mathura sculpture 
of the late Kushana or early Gupta period is interesting inasmuch 
as it show four faces carved on four shafts joined together. 

Early numismatic as well as glyptic data prove that there was 
also not much diversity at first in the human representations of Siva, 
the god being usually depicted with two or four hands with his bull 
mount Nandi (really the god in his theriomorphic form) by his side; 
but a tendency to multiply the varieties was already present, as a 
careful analysis of the figures of Siva on Ujjain coins, coins of the 
lndo-Scythian and Indo-Parthian rulers like Maues ^and Gondo- 
phernes, and those of the Kushana kings likfc Wema Kadphises, 
Kanishka, Huvishka and Vasudeva testify. A very early Saiva 
sculpture is a red sandstone relief in the collection of the Curzon 
Museum of Archaeology, Mathura, carved on both sides and belong¬ 
ing to the late Kushana period; it shows Siva and Parvati standing 
against Nandi. Siva is ithyphallic, and both he and his consort hold 
riilotpala buds in their hands; this is one of the earliest sculptural 
representations of the god in his aspect of Umasahitamurti. The 
magnificent South Indian bronzes of Siva Nataraja, the Lord of the 
Dance, belong to the eleventh century A.D. arid will be noted later. 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


F. MINOR RELIGIOUS SECTS 

Although the four main religious sects, whose history has been 
described above, figured rather prominently in the religious world, 
it would be wrong to assume that the people at large entirely forgot 
the Vedic pantheon and the religious practices associated with it, or 
did not initiate new ones, mainly through the influence of the non- 
Aryans who had been absorbed in Vedic society. As a matter of 
fact, the Vedic rituals were scrupulously performed by a large sec¬ 
tion of the people, and though their number grew smaller and 
smaller, they never died out altogether. On the other hand, we find a 
curious medley of religious beliefs, which defy any systematic classi¬ 
fication or even any satisfactory interpretation. Many of these were 
allied with, or derived from, the major religious conceptions referred 
to above and were ancillary to them. Some were ultimately ab¬ 
sorbed by them. But still a cursory survey of them is necessary for 
an intelligent appreciation of the religious condition of the period. 

A picture of the variety of religious beliefs current during the 
period is obtained from some Buddhist texts. The Buddhist canoni¬ 
cal work Aiiquttara Nikdya (fourth-third centuries B.C.) mentions 
a number of religious sects such as Ajivika, Nirgrantha (Jain), 
Mun$a-Sravaka, Jatiiaka, Parivrajaka, Magandika, Traidandika, 
Aviruddhaka, Gautamaka (Buddhist) and Devadharmika. The 
Mahdniddesa and Chullaniddesa —two Buddhist canonical commen¬ 
taries (second-first centuries B.C.)—mention the Ajivikas, Nirgran¬ 
tha, Jatila, Parivrajaka and Aviruddhaka, along with the wor¬ 
shippers of the elephant, horse, cow r , dog, crow, Vasudeva, Baladeva, 
Purnabhadra, Manibhadra, Agni, the Nagas, the Yakshas, the Asu- 
ras, the Gandharvas, the Maharajas, Chandra, Surya, Indra, 
Brahman, Deva and Dik. 

These two lists, which are by no means exhaustive, are interest¬ 
ing and instructive. They demonstrate the existence, side by side 
with well-known religious sects, of a bewildering variety of primi¬ 
tive faiths and popular cults—a characteristic feature of Indian 
religious life throughout the ages. It is neither possible nor neces¬ 
sary to refer to all of them in detail, but we shall deal with a few of 
these and add to them others known from different sources. We 
shall first deal with the heterodox or heretical Ajivika sect which 
heads both the lists, and then take up some of the Vedic deities, 
those connected with Siva and Vishnu, and finally some of the new 
conceptions of primitive faith. 


4C2 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


1. The Ajivikas 

Of the five prominent heretical sects or schools that arose at 
about the time when Mahavlra and Buddha began to preach their 
messages, one alone—the Ajivikas—had a long history of about two 
thousand years before it became extinct. The Order, established 
possibly by Nanda Vachchha and headed by Kisa Samkichchha after 
him, acquired dynamic energy under the third pontiff Gosala. The 
cult spread at one time from Avanti to Anga, and it is almost certain 
that, though both Jainism and Buddhism denounced Gosala and his 
creed, they quietly absorbed some of the tenets and practices of his 
school, and had to reckon with and combat some others. The 
Ajivikas enjoyed the patronage of Asoka and also of his grandson 
Dasaratha, both of whom dedicated caves to them. The sect is 
referred to by Patahjali (c. 150 B.C.) and in the Milinda-panha 
(c. first century A.D.). Its fatalistic creed that things gain perfec¬ 
tion even through non-performance of actions, and that “there is a 
process of natural and spiritual evolution through ceaseless rounds 
of births and deaths”, was an anathema to the Kriyavadins who be¬ 
lieved that moral action was an indispensable condition of individual 
and social perfection. But the orthodox showed the same disfavour 
towards the Bauddhas as towards the Ajivikas, and neither class was 
entertained at srdddhas and sacrifices in Kautilya’s time. 

No trace of Ajlvika literature has been preserved, but scattered 
quotations from the writings of the school are to be found in* Bauddha 
and Jain literatures. Their extreme asceticism, love of solitude, 
disdain of comfort and even of decencies, and love of austerities of 
all kinds repelled all but an infinitesimal minority, and so, naturally, 
the sect lost popularity in course of time. Yet it lingered on and 
is referred to by Varahamihira (sixth century A.D.) and in the 
Harsha-charita (seventh century A.D.). The followers were known as 
ekadandins from the single staff that they carried, and were latterly 
confused, sometimes with the Bauddhas and sometimes with the 
Jains in South Indian epigraphical records and by Tamil writers. 
The sect became extinct in the fourteenth century A.D. As noted 
above, 1 the sect was probably merged into Vaishnavism. 

In the Jain Bhagavati-sutra reference is made to the fact that 
the Ajivikas had shifted their centre of activities to the Pundra 
country at the foot of the Vindhya mountains, and that in their pan¬ 
theon were included many Vedic and non-Vedic gods. Two of these, 


1 . Se^ p. 450. 


463 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

Punnabhadda (Purnabhadra) and Manibhadda (Manibhadra), are of 
interest as their worshippers are referred to also in the Buddhist 
Niddesa , though as distinct from the Ajivikas. Manibhadda and 
Punnabhadda have been regarded as Yakshas by modern writers, 
but there is no doubt that the Niddesa distinguished them from the 
latter class of supernatural beings, though in other Buddhist and 
Jain texts they are characterised as Yakshas and classed with tute¬ 
lary deities of cities. The Pawaya inscription on the pedestal of a 
statue, of the first century B.C., leaves no doubt that a class of 
Manibhadra-bhaktas existed at one time and that Manibhadra was 
given the usual honorific title of Bhagavat. 

It appears also that the worship of Kubera-Vaisravana was also 
not uncommon, for not only does Kautilya refer to the installation 
of his image in a fort, but there is sculptural evidence to prove that 
Kubera with his two nidhis —the conch-shell and the cornucopia 
exuding coins under a banyan tree ( kalpa-vriksha ) on the top of a 
column—was a favourite cult-object at one time. In fact, in the 
Mahdbharata (and in the Lalitavistara version of the Atandtiya 
Suttanta) Manibhadra (also called Manivara or Manichara) appears 
as the chief attendant of Kubera and, like him, functions as the 
lord of wealth and treasure and the patron of merchants, whence he 
is called Yakshendra, Nidhisa, Dhanapati, etc., and receives equal 
honour with him at the hands of the Gandharvas. 1 

2. Prajapati—Brahma 

During the period of the Brahmanas, Prajapati occupied the 
topmost position and was looked upon as. the creator of gods, men 
and demons. His predominance was assured when he came to be 
identified with Brahman, the impersonal Absolute of the Upanishads 
and the Vedanta. When the post-Brahmanical age of rationalism 
was ushered in and the cult of sacrifice fell into comparative disuse, 
the worship of Prajapati gradually declined. But the theists coin¬ 
ed a new name for him and called him Brahma, first of the 
later Hindu Trinity. In the Buddhistic Nikayas, it is this personal 
Brahma of the popular religion that is pictured, attacked and ridi¬ 
culed. In fact, his unity is not recognised, and many Brahmas with 
different appellations are mentioned, and their inferiority to Buddha 
in wisdom is sedulously preached to lower them in the estimation of 

1. It may be mentioned that the cults of Kubera and Manibhadra definitely de¬ 
clined in the Gupta age. The one becomes a dikpala and the other degenerates 
into a snake in the Bhavishya Purana. Purnabhadra is altogether forgotten. 

464 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


the people. Sakra (Indra) and Brahma are, in fact, represented as 
faithful attendants of Buddha in later Buddhistic sculpture. 

3. Surya 

The one god who neither rose to the supreme position nor ever 
altogether lost his popularity is Surya, and he still claims a sect for 
himself, namely the Sauras. The tradition regarding the divinity 
of the Sun has come down from Vedic times with some modifications 
but with no material variation. Some figures on ancient coins and 
a Bharhut medallion containing a human bust of the Sun, with the 
stamens of a lotus representing his rays, suggest that the Sun was 
a popular deity in the third century B.C. The references by Greek 
writers and the Kushana coins with the name and image of the Sun 
show that the popularity continued in later times. The Sun is a 
popular god in the epics, and his ornaments and adornments are 
vividly described. Legends grew round his family life—his wives 
and children—and his adventures and discomfitures are pictures¬ 
quely described. From the names borne by some of the characters 
of the Mahabharata, it may be inferred that the Sun was a familiar 
cult-object at one time. 

If we believe that the post-Upanishadic religious belief was 
characterised by a return to the concrete and the personal, almost 
by a kind of dialectic movement of the mind, the vivid personifica¬ 
tion of the visible physical object—the Sun-—can be easily under¬ 
stood. The hovering between the physical and the personal has al¬ 
most ended now; tales in Puranic fashion begin to appear and the 
exploits and beneficences of the god are circulated to attract devo¬ 
tees. The popularity of the god receives a sudden accession of 
strength through the infiltration of Persian beliefs and the installa¬ 
tion of images soon after. When and by whom the Persian solar 
cult was introduced into India, and whether Multan (Mulasthana) 
was the ‘original seat’ of the sun-temple, cannot now be satisfactorily 
settled. That Kanishka should have coins struck with the image of 
Mithra, with the name Miiro (Mihira) added, proves that the Persian 
solar cult had infiltrated into Brahmanical belief by the first century 
A.D. The Puranas like Bhavishya, Samba , Varaha and others nar¬ 
rate the story of the introduction of the cult into India from gaka- 
dvlpa (Eastern Iran), and the Brihat-samhitd expressly lays down 
that the images of the god should be duly installed by the Magas, 
who are none other than the Sun and fire-worshipping Magi of 
ancient Iran. The 57th chapter of the Brihat-samhitd and many 

465 

A.I.U—30 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

iconographic texts again emphasise such alien features of the Surya 
figures, as udichyavesa (northern dress), avyanga (the Indian form 
of the Iranian aivydonghen , the sacred woollen waist girdle which 
a Zoroastrian is enjoined to wear), etc., which are almost invariably 
present in the extant North Indian specimens. 

Some pre-Christian Surya figures have been found in different 
parts of India, the one carved on one of the railing pillars at Bodh- 
Gaya being the most interesting. Here the god is shown riding on 
a four-horsed chariot accompanied by the goddesses Usha and 
Pratyusha shooting arrows. The Bhaja relief depicts the god seated 
in a quadriga in company with two female figures (probably Usha 
and Pratyusha), the horses and wheels of which are shown trampling 
upon uncouth figures identified as demons of darkness. An inte¬ 
resting group of sculptures in red sandstone of the second-third cen¬ 
tury A.D. has been found in Mathura and its environs, which have 
been variously identified by scholars; several of them undoubtedly 
represent the Sun-god, while a few may typify Samba, son of 
Krishna, who is traditionally regarded as responsible for introduc¬ 
ing this form of Sun-worship into India. Sculpture No. D. 46 in the 
collection of the Mathura Museum shows a corpulent figure of the 
two-armed Sun-god sitting on his haunches on a chariot drawn by 
four horses; a lotus-bud is placed in each hand, and his shoulders 
are provided with small wings as in the case of the Sun-bird Garu^a; 
the legs are inserted in the chariot, but the body is shown covered 
by garments. 

The North Indian tradition, however, could not penetrate the 
southern regions or even monopolise the field in the north, for the 
Sun-images of South India of later times apparently followed a 
different iconographic tradition, uninfluenced by the Persian inno¬ 
vation, and were imitated in the north also in some selected areas. 

4. Saiva Gods 

Unlike the Vyuha doctrine or later Avatdra-vada of Vaishna- 
vism, Saivism did not develop any elaborate incarnation theory, but 
Siva came to be looked upon as the head of a family of which the 
members were each a cult-object. The effect was a loose federation 
of faiths owing allegiance to this or that member of the Saivite 
household. The first to get affiliated was Rudrani—a name not 
found till the period of the Sutras—who quickly attained an import¬ 
ant position. Ambika, described in the Vdjasaneyi-samhita as the 


466 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


sister of Rudra, came to be regarded in later times as his wife, and 
fully justified her title as the Great Mother with whom were asso* 
ciated the “mothers” ( matrilcds ) in later belief. She became the 
supreme object of adoration in the Sakti cult, and had a number of 
names given to her in subsequent literature. Uma and Parvati 
(more definitely Haimavatl) occur as names in the Taittiriya Aran- 
yaka and the Kena Upanishad. The figure of Uma appears in the 
coins of Huvishka, with or without the figure of Siva, which proves 
that there were votaries of the Uma-cult and that a marital relation 
had already been established between Siva and Uma in popular belief. 
It is not unreasonable to assume that in the Gandhara region the 
cult of Siva and his consort was fairly strong, and probably the 
figure seated on a lion in the coins of Azes I represents Ambika 
or Durga. 

In the Bhlshmaparvan hymn of Arjuna and the Virataparvan 
hymn of Yudhishthira, new names are coined for Uma. She is now 
Durga (regarded as the wife of Narayana in the Virataparvan and of 
Siva in the Bhlshmaparvan) who grants victory, and also Mahisha- 
suranasinl, who killed the Buffalo-demon. In the Harivamsa, she 
is promised a permanent seat in the Vindhyas (whence her later 
title VindhyavasinI). She is also given the later familiar epithets 
of Kumari, Kali, Kapall, Mahakiali, Chandi, KatyayanI, Karala, 
Vijaya, Kausiki and Kantaravasinl. The mountainous associations 
of both Siva and Uma naturally suggested wild associates for both, 
and Kiratcis f Barbaras , Pulindas, etc. were supposed to be their 
devotees (and Siva himself comes as a Kirata to Arjuna). Similarly, 
while Bhutas, Pretas, Rakshas, Pisachas, etc. made up the retinue of 
Siva, Durga had her own fierce female followers in later times, 
both obviously modelled on Vedic ganas, the troop of Maruts re¬ 
garded as the sons of Rudra. As compared with the fortunes of 
Vishnu and Siva, Uma remained a minor deity, though later the 
famous Durgd-saptasati or Devi or Chanfc-mdhatmya of the Mar - 
kandeya Purana extolled her exploits, and her name was glorified 
in other Puranas also. 

But while Vishnu, Siva and Uma increased in importance, 
a few other deities had only fleeting success in winning religious 
allegiance. Judging by literary, numismatic and other evidences, 
the most important of them was Skanda. Unknown to the Vedas, 
he appears in a full-fledged form in the epics, and the Makdbkashya 
of Patanjali bears testimony to his popularity as a god. His father 


407 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


is either Rudra or Agni (the two being identified in earlier litera¬ 
ture), but the privilege of being his mother or nurse is claimed by 
several—Uma, Ganga, the Krittikas and Svaha, who had assumed 
the forms of the wives of the six Rishis (Arundhati, Vasishtha’s wife, 
being inimitable). Suckled by six mothers, he developed one mouth 
for each, whence he is called Shadanana, etc. But while his faces 
remained fixed at six, the arms were sometimes twelve, in keeping 
with the six faces, but at other times he was credited with a lesser 
number of arms. 1 

Certain associates of Skanda serve to help identification. Among 
the gifts to this generalissimo of the gods were included a cock and 
a peacock, and in sculptural and numismatic representations these 
were often inserted. The South Indian popular name Subrahmanya 
does not belong to the epics, and is only an elaboration of the title 
Brahmanya, and this title in its turn probably owes its origin to the 
belief that Skanda is identical with Sanatkumara, son of Pitamaha 
Brahma. His multiple origin was responsible for a variety of other 
names such as Visakha, Karttikeya, Devasenapati, Guha, Kumara, 
etc. 

Some of these names are important inasmuch as they became in¬ 
dependent cult-objects, as is proved by literary and numismatic data 
Thus Patanjali gives the interesting information that the Mauryas, 
in order to replenish their treasury, began to sell images of gods like 
Siva, Skanda and Visakha, the most curious element in this informa¬ 
tion being that none of these, whose images were sold to the public, 
were genuine Vedic gods. It appears also as if Skanda and Visakha 
were treated as different deities unless we are to believe that they 
were two forms of the same god differently named and worshipped 
for different purposes. Accidental confirmation of this dissociation 
of forms comes from the coins of Huvishka, on which the figures of 
Skanda, Mahasena, Kumara and Visakha, with their names in 
Greek letters, are to be found. It appears, therefore, that not only 
Visakha but also Kumara and Mahasena were independently con¬ 
ceived and figured, just as many of the Vedic gods were worshipped 
under different names according to their diverse functions (though 
it has been held by some that the forms were really three and not 
four and that Skanda-Kumara was a single divinity). As the war¬ 
lord, Skanda naturally gained the allegiance of warlike princes and 
tribes, and the functions of his followers being similar to those of 
the Maruts, the followers of Rudra, an easy affiliation to the gaiva 

1. Cf. e.g. the two-armed Karttikeya in some of the Yaudheya coins. 

468 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


cult could be effected, and Guha made into the son of Rudra. But 
as Indra was feared for his warlike exploits but not loved, since he 
lacked graciousness, so also Karttikeya was worshipped for vigour 
but not for bounty. And even though sectarianism made Krishna 
and Hari servants of Skanda, he never gained the position of either; 
nor did he regain his eminence for long in the estimation of men, 
even though his worship did not disappear altogether, as has been 
the case with some other gods of antiquity. 

Ganesa, the brother of Karttikeya in popular belief, has been 
more fortunate in that he is still counted among the five major gods. 
His name is self-explanatory, for he is the leader of the ganas, the 
troublesome followers of a wild god. Rudra is the father of the 
Maruts and is the ganapati par excellence, but the title is used for 
Brihaspati and Indra also in the Rigveda. The later conception of 
Ganesa or Ganapati as the god of wisdom has probably come from 
this association with Brihaspati in the Rigveda. Vinayaka, a syno¬ 
nym of Ganesa, occurs in the Atharvasiras Upanishad where Rudra 
is identified with him. In the MaMbhdrata, the Gagapatis or 
Ganesvaras and the Vinayakas appear as a multitude, but at the 
time of the Grihya-sutras, the tendency to reduce their number had 
already begun. The same process of syncretism, which was res¬ 
ponsible for merging the many Rudras into one, was responsible for 
the evolution of the cult of a single Ganesa (also called Gagegana 
in the Mahabharata ), and the transformation of a terrible god into 
a lovable deity also took place in the cases of Rudra and Ganega. 
The warding off of evil was the indispensable preliminary to all 
good and religious acts, and the leader of the disturbers of the peace 
was placated as a matter of course at the‘beginning with suitable 
offerings lest there should be any interference with the religious 
rites. Ganesa latterly became the giver of siddhi (success), because 
he was supposed to keep back the disturbing factors and thus in¬ 
directly promote success in undertakings. His real popularity came 
slightly later. 

5. Sri or Lakshmi 

It is difficult to trace the connection between elephants and the 
goddess of wealth, and yet in some of the early coins, sculptures 
and relief carvings we have representations of a goddess, either 
seated cross-legged or standing on a full-blown lotus in the midst 
of a lotus shrub, and being anointed with water from jars held over 
her head by two elephants standing on lotuses on her either side. In 


469 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Bharhut there are four representations of this goddess—one seated 
and three standing. She is 6ri (Beauty), regarded, along with 
Asa (Hope), £raddha (Faith) and Hri (Modesty), as the daughter of 
Sakra in Buddhistic literature, but the Satapatha Bmhmana des¬ 
cribes her as issuing out of Prajapati when he was practising austeri¬ 
ties to bring forth the world of living, things. In the Bharhut stupa, 
we have another goddess almost similarly named—Sirima—possibly 
the same as Srlmatl, who with Yasamati, Lakshmlmatl or Yasahprapta 
and Yasodhara belongs to the realm of Virudhaka, the regent of the 
southern quarter. She stands with even feet on a level pedestal, 
holding in her hand a datura flower or a bunch of lotuses. A Siridevi 
or Lakkhi is described in the Siri-Kalakanni-Jataka as the daughter 
of Dhritarashtra the fortunate (sirima), the regent of the eastern 
quarter. Here, the attendant elephants are wanting. 

As other types of figures, viz. the goddess seated or standing on 
a lotus or standing with lotus in hand, in some cases surrounded 
by flowering stems, are also to be found inscribed on coins, it is 
apparent that the cult of these goddesses had become widespread 
round about the beginning of the Christian era—-roughly between 
the third century B.C. and first century A.D. Like Sarasvatl who 
developed into the Goddess of Learning and was credited with 
multiple alliances and worshipped in all principal religions, Sri as 
Lakshml was also credited with multiple origins and relations in 
later times. That was because once she became the Goddess of 
Wealth, she became an object of adoration of all sects and religions. 
It appears that Lakshml, in the sense of plenty (though not yet a 
goddess), occurs in the Rigveda, and that the Atharvaveda dis¬ 
tinguishes the auspicious (siva) and the inauspicious ( papishtha) 
Lakshmls born with a mortal at the time of his birth. The Vaja- 
saneyi-samhitd adds the interesting information that Sri and 
Lakshml are co-wives (of Aditya, according to the commentator), 
and this tradition of their distinction travelled down the ages, for 
even in the MaMbhdrata 1 and the Ramayana 2 &rl and Lakshml are 
invoked together. But in some later traditions §ri’s co-wife is 
Bhudevl or Bhumidevi (Earth Goddess) as in South Indian Vaish- 
navism; and Lakshmrs is Sarasvatl (Goddess of Learning) as in 
Bengal Vaishnava images. That Lakshml was originally not linked 
with Vishnu may be gathered from the fact that she was supposed 
to have been bestowed upon Vishnu after the churning of the ocean 

1. Cr. Ed., Ill, p. 127. 151* after III. 38, 25 (where it is treated as an interpola¬ 

tion). Bombay Edition, III. 37, 33. 

2 . 3 , 46 , 16 . 


470 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


had brought her forth, though a later tradition would have it that 
she came out of the lotus which grew out of Vishnu’s forehead. 

Once Lakshml had come to be looked upon as the Goddess of 
Fortune (the aspect of beauty receding gradually into the back¬ 
ground), she was accorded not only religious worship but also the 
homage of kings. The city goddesses ( nagara-devata ) were probably 
as much protective deities as maintainers of luck and prosperity 
(nagara-lakshrrii ), and popular stories about their departure from a 
city were meant to convey the idea of imminent danger or reversal 
of fortune. As one interested in the continued prosperity of the 
ruling princes, Lakshml came to be looked upon as Rajalakshml, the 
Fortune of the king, and she could be persuaded to stay on so long 
as the king practised virtues and protected his subjects—otherwise 
Lakshml would depart from him, as she had in the past left the 
Asuras because they had turned immoral. In literature and in coins, 
reference is made to city-gods, e.g. those of Rajagriha, Kapisa, 
UjjaiyinI, etc. In this way Pushkalavati was associated with 
Lakshml. 1 

6. Naga or Serpent Worship 

At this distance of time it is difficult to make out what other 
gods were actually objects of sectarian worship during the millen¬ 
nium beginning with 600 B.C. We may presume that the Vedic 
fire-worship continued, though with diminished popularity. While, 
on the one hand, the more reflective section was forming sectarian 
and philosophical groups and groping for a stable monotheism, popu¬ 
lar belief in gods and godlings, demons and spirits of the different 
departments of nature, on the other hand, did not materially decline; 
though the status of these beings came down in accordance with the 
faith accepted. Possibly, in keeping with the changing social con¬ 
dition, not only were new gods created, but the functions of the 
old gods also underwent modification and alteration. Contact with 
indigenous cults was responsible not only for the importation of new 
objects of worship, but also for the incorporation of new mythologies 
in the older cult. 

An illustrative example is furnished by the cult of snakes which 
has penetrated into all the major sects of India. The Vedas not only 
knew of the serpent ( ahi ) but also of its injurious nature (Vritra 
being conceived as such) as well as its beneficent character (Ahir- 


1. See above, p. 116. 


471 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


budhnya being a beneficial agent). This ambivalent attitude to¬ 
wards this creature has persisted all through the centuries in India 
down to the present times. Its emergence as a cult object has been 
traced back to the Mohenjo-daro age in two seals where it appears 
in an attitude of devotion to a figure in yogic posture, possibly a 
god—an early anticipation of the close association of serpents with 
Saiva (and Sakta) cult of later times. That Siva and serpents should 
simultaneously get recognition as important cult objects in the Yajur - 
veda , when both are absent as objects of veneration in the Rigveda, 
may not be a mere accident. The region in which the Yajurveda 
flourished included the land of the Panchalas, whose later capital 
Ahichchhatra (modern Aonla near Bareilly), with Adi Naga as the 
presiding deity, may not unreasonably be associated with the cult 
of serpents—a cult of which vestiges probably remained till the 
reigns of Agnimitra and Bhanumitra, on the reverse sides of whose 
coins images of serpents have been noticed by some numismatists 
(though this has been contested by others). 

In the Atharveveda and the later Samhitas serpents ( sarpdh) 
appear as semi-divine beings, and in the Grihya-sutras, Nagas, called 
for the first time by this name and supposed to belong to earth, sky, 
and heaven, as also to the quarters, receive adoration and worship. 
The Niddesa, too, refers to Naga worshippers, and the Chhargaon 
life-size Naga image is described as “worshipful Naga ( bhagava 
ndgo ).” It was installed in the reign of Huvishka in a tank, possibly 
in accordance with an early tradition that the serpents are the 
dwellers of the deep—a tradition which traveller} down the centuries 
in folklore and literature as attested, for instance, by the Mathura 
Museum image dated the 8th year of the reign of Kanishka. 

That a systematic attempt was made to wean the people from 
the serpent cult may be inferred from the fact that every important 
religion of India had to incorporate snake-worship as an integral 
part of its creed. The Naga was regarded sometimes as the spirit 
of a departed ancestor, and sometimes as a guardian of treasures in 
later times. Thus not only Saivism, but Vaishnavism, Buddhism, 
and even Jainism had to admit the serpent in a subordinate capacity 
in their own religious systems. Buddha receives the homage of 
Muchilinda and Elapattra. Parsvanatha has a serpent as his special 
symbol. Siva and Durga, and even Ganesa and Surya, wear snakes. 
Vaishnavism, too, absorbed the snake-cult in a different fashion. 
The hostile attitude is indicated by Vishnu’s carrier Garu$a, the 

472 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


enemy of serpents, and the subjugation of Naga Kaliya by Krishna 
as narrated in the Hcirivamsa and later literature; but the friendly 
attitude is indicated by the use of Sesha or Ananta as the couch or 
seat of Vishnu. More significant is the belief that Balarama is the 
incarnation of Sesha and, in fact, his death-scene is pictured as the 
departure of a huge white serpent from his mouth towards the sea. 
Still more significant is the story in the Anusasana-parvan that by 
worshipping the serpent Baladeva. one acquires the strength of the 
Varaha (Boar) incarnation of Vishnu (and curiously enough in later 
sculptures of this incarnation Sesha appears as supporting one of the 
feet of the Boar). 

When to this we add the information that the figure of Baladeva, 
often furnished with a cobra’s hood, was probably modelled on that 
of Sesha, as in the Chhargaon statue of the “worshipful snake’*, and 
the region round about Mathura still calls snake statues by the name 
of Baladeva (or simply the Elder Brother, i.e. of Krishna), it may not 
be unjustifiably inferred that at the back of the reverence paid to 
Balarama, there lay veneration for some royal snake. Whatever 
might have been the association of serpents with the Brahmanic 
divinities, there is no doubt that they played a great part in popular 
belief; and snakes, human figures with hoods of an uneven number 
(one, three, five, seven, etc., presumably to produce a symmetrical 
effect with a central hood directly over the head) and mermaid- 
figures, half human and half serpentine, served to represent the- 
Nagas in sculpture and painting. The association with water travel¬ 
led beyond the limits of India, and, in the island of Bali, Basuki or 
Naga-Basaki is regarded as an attendant of the lord of waters 
»Baruna or Varuna). 

7. Miscellaneous Deities 

We may conclude our account of the lesser known cults of the 
period by referring to other types of belief which were less specta 
cular, but perhaps not less popular among the masses. From 
constant reference to sacred trees and tree emblems, it may be fairly 
inferred that the worship of vriksha-chaityas and sthala-vrikshas 
continued with unabated ardour in some form or other from the time 
of the Sindhu valley civilisation onward. Tree spirits were not 
clearly personified, it is true, but like the serpents they were objects 
of popular veneration down the ages. By the side of the tree cult, 
the worship of Siddhas, Sadhyas, Gandharvas and such other minor 


473 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

deities was almost colourless—in fact, the meaning of the first two 
never gained much clarity. 

One notable exception was the Yakshas, who gradually acquired 
prominence in later belief, and many of the earlier statues were of 
Yakshas who were sometimes regarded as the attendants of the 
greater gods and sometimes as objects of reverence themselves. The 
tree cult must have received an accession of strength when the cus¬ 
tom of using trees as symbols of saints and worshipping them as 
such became fashionable, as, for instance, the Bodhi tree among the 
Buddhists. 

We may well believe also that the practice of collecting stones 
and other symbols of divinity is an ancient custom, and that many 
of the village gods and goddesses, as in South India, were placed 
under trees which shared in the worship paid to the godlings under¬ 
neath. Apparently, the Vedic idea that Gandharvas and Apsarases 
live in the trees was not abandoned even in later times, nor also the 
belief that the trees were themselves sentient beings and not merely 
the abodes of other spirits. 

We purposely refrain from discussing the dread of demons and 
the propitiatory cults that must have been practised by the people 
at large to keep them in good humour. Magical formulae and in¬ 
cantations must have been largely used to placate the invisible 
spirits and to control their vagaries. The rivers also began to be 
venerated in larger numbers, and sacred streams, with tirthas or 
sacred spots on their banks, are a distinctive feature of the Mahd- 
bhdrata. Pilgrimage as a religious institution must have been 
strengthened by the peace and facilities fbr travel which resulted 
from settled government. 

From what has been said above it will appear that the most 
remarkable facts in the religious history of the period are the amaz¬ 
ing diversity of beliefs, a proneness to reverence, either towards 
gods or towards men of wisdom and morality, an eager pursuit of 
religious truths, and a tendency to make experiments in religious 
matters. Once the hold of the Vedic cult lost its grip and, later, 
the formalism of the Brahmanas and the abstruse speculations of 
the Upanishads failed to satisfy the common man, the more earnest 
and devout souls sought comfort in bhakti to a personal god, while 
a bolder but not always more intellectual section sought out a saint 
or a religious reformer. But minor divinities continued, as of yore, 
to demand the allegiance of the illiterate and the superstitious. The 


474 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


most significant religious phenomena were, however, the rise into 
prominence of the two major gods, Vishnu and Siva, and the esta¬ 
blishment of the two major dissenting sects, Jainism and Buddhism. 
The minor sects had to make alliance with one or other of these, and 
were gradually absorbed into or transformed by these major cults. 
The period is also characterised by the virtual disappearance, to 
wards its close, of the importance of Indra and Prajapati, the two 
outstanding divine figures of the Vedic and the Brahmanic age 
respectively. 

G. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 

1. Philosophical Sutras 

The earliest philosophical writings in India are the Upanishads. 
But they cannot be regarded as systematised. The rise of what may 
be called regular philosophical system belongs to the period which 
we are considering in this volume. In conformity with the literary 
style then in vogue, this systematic philosophy was composed in the 
form of sutras or aphorisms whose nature has been indicated above. 1 

From the nature of things, the sutras were accompanied and 
followed by long or short commentaries. The more elaborate com¬ 
mentaries were called bhdshyas. These bhdshyas themselves were 
commented upon and these commentaries were given other names. 
Before and after the sutras and bhdshyas, small compendia, in prose 
or verse, were also composed to expound the philosophy of a school. 

One interesting fact about the growth of Indian philosophy is 
that great writers and profound thinkers have appeared often only 
as commentators, without claiming to be original but as expositors 
of the thought of a master-mind who went before. Sankara, Rama¬ 
nuja, Vyasa, Vatsyayana and a host of others were apparently only 
commentators of the sutras of a system. They were no doubt pro¬ 
foundly original, but they never claimed to be so. Later ages 
acclaimed some of them as founders of schools; but they themselves 
never posed as such. They professed only to bring out the true 
meaning of preceding writers, who, they said, had been very much 
misunderstood. 

The process of transition from the Upanishads to the Sutras is 
not difficult to explain. The Upanishads often use cryptic language 
which requires elucidation. For instance, we have the injunction 


1. Vol. I. p. 472. 


475 




H CM CO ^ 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


that Brahman should be worshipped as 4 tadvanam ’ l and as ‘tajja- 
lan’. 2 These are not dictionary words and cannot be understood 
unless explained. Similarly, there are mutually contradictory state 
ments. For example, Taittiriya XJpanishad? says that in the begin- 
ning there was non-Being (< sat) and Being arose from non-Being; 
but Chhandogya 4 categorically asserts that in the beginning there 
was Being (Sat) and it was one and alone; and it goes on to argue 
that when some say that there was non-Being in the beginning and 
all Being came out of it. they assert the impossible. These are 
obviously contradictory statements. But can they really be contra¬ 
dictions? The Upanishads are Sruti or revealed. They are not the 
fruits of human authorship. They reveal the truth and truth is but 
one. The contradictions, therefore, are only apparent and must be 
reconciled. So the process of elucidation, reconciliation and syn- 
thesis began and must have been carried on for years, maybe for 
centuries, until we reach the sutras of the Vedanta and of other 
schools of philosophy. 

The composition of sutras marks a stage in the development of 
Indian philosophy but, within the body of the sutras of each system 
of philosophy, there are marks of a more or less steady growth. 
Within them, we find refutation of other systems of thought. These 
refutations, therefore, must have been incorporated in the sutras 
after all the other systems had been fully developed. We cannot 
imagine that all the systems started their career at exactly the same 
time and grew side by side in equal pace. We have, therefore, to 
conclude that after the original nuclei of sutras were composed, ad¬ 
ditions were made to them in subsequent years to suit the exigen¬ 
cies of clash with other philosophies. But, after a time, these sutras 
became rigid and there was no further change. The main schools 
of these Sutras are six in number, Vaiseshika, Nyaya, Sankhya, 
Yoga, Purva Mimamsa, and Uttara Mimamsa or Vedanta. These six 
systems are usually regarded as constituting three pairs according 
to their affinities and similarities. The first two form one pair, the 
second two another, and the remaining two the third. This was 
their relation for a long time. But in the third pair a cleavage 
occurred in later times, leading to the complete isolation and in¬ 
dependence of the last school, viz. Vedanta. After this Vedanta 
acquired a special importance, but was eventually sub-divided into 

. Kena, iv. 31. 

. Chhand, iii. 14-1. 

. ii, 7. 

. vi. 2. 


476 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


several more or less famous schools. The founders of the six 
orthodox systems were : Kanada (Vaiseshika), Gautama Akshapada 
(Nyaya), Kapila (Sankhya), Patanjali (Yoga), Jaimini (Purva 
MImamsa), and Badarayana (Vedanta). 

So far we are on tolerably sure ground, but the moment we 
think of fixing a date for the composition of these Sutras, we find 
ourselves in difficulty. Chronology has always been a knotty point 
in both the political and cultural history of ancient India, and we 
find a wide divergence of opinion among scholars regarding the 
relative chronological position of the different Sutras as weir as 
the dates to which they are to be assigned. A detailed discussion of 
this question is unnecessary for our purpose. 

It will suffice here to state that generally speaking Vaiseshika 
and Nyaya Sutras are regarded as the earliest and Sankhya as the 
latest. Dr. S. N. Das Gupta regards Vaiseshika as pre-Buddhistic, 
while Prof. Kuppuswami Sastri thinks that the final redaction of 
Vaiseshika and Nyaya Sutras took place between the fourth and 
second centuries B.C., the Vaiseshika being earlier than the Nyaya. 
Dr. Das Gupta places the Sankhya Sutras after A.D. 900, but Prof. M. 
Hiriyanna places what according to him is the earliest Sankhya book, 
viz. Isvarakrishna’s Sankhya-Kcirika, in the fifth century A.D. Of 
the other Sutras, Purva-Mimariisa and Vedanta Sutras are placed 
by Dr. Das Gupta about 200 B.C., while Prof. Hiriyanna brings them 
down respectively to A.D. 200 and 400. As regards the Yoga Sutras, 
Dr. Das Gupta refers them to about 147 B.C., but they are placed 
by some as late as the fifth century A.D. Thus the proposed dates 
for the different Sutras vary over a wide range of more than a 
thousand years between the fifth century B.C. and fifth or ninth 
century A.D. According to Prof. Radhakrishnan, however, the 
Sutra period begins with A.D. 200. 

We must guard ourselves against a possible confusion between 
the systems and the Sutras. The systems of philosophy certainly 
had their beginnings much earlier, earlier perhaps than even Buddha, 
but the texts of the Sutras which embody their conclusions were 
composed later. We may provisionally accept the view of Prof. 
Radhakrishnan and refer the composition of the Sutras between two 
to five centuries after rather than before the Christian era. In view 
of the chronological uncertainties we shall only briefly indicate here 
the leading philosophical thoughts and tendencies of the period. 


477 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The systems into which they crystallised will be dealt with in the 
next volume. 

2. The Lines of Thought and the Problems 
(i) Astika and Ndstika (Orthodox and Heterodox) Philosophy 

In the Upanishads themselves we find an important distinction 
drawn between apard and para vidyd , or lower and higher know¬ 
ledge 1 and also between a vidyd and vidyd , false and true knowledge. 2 
It is also pointed out that the lower knowledge is the knowledge ol 
the Vedas proper and their adjuncts, whereas the higher knowledge 
is that of the Indestructible ( aksharam ). 3 This is a very important 
distinction. The voluminous Vedic literature with all its auxiliaries 
and the mass of sacrifices and ceremonies which it inculcated were 
gradually losing their importance in the eyes of thinking men. These 
sacrifices, however, were supported by the authority of the Vedas. 
A revolt against the Vedas themselves was thus already brewing. 
But a part of these very Vedas-—their latter part or the end, i.e. 
the Vedanta—talked of a higher knowledge than that of the sacri¬ 
fices. It was to this, then, that the philosophic mind turned for 
enlightenment. This introduced the distinction between work (karma) 
and meditation (j nana); a higher value was assigned to meditation 
and this gave us our philosophy. 

This tendency to drift away from the massive and elaborate Vedic 
sacrifices did not stop with the discovery of a philosophy. More in¬ 
trepid thinkers arose, who wanted to discard the Vedas completely 
and openly rebelled against them. One such minor rebellion is typified 
in Charvaka. We do not know his exact date; we do not even know' 
whether it is a personal name or only a descriptive epithet. But 
the teachings associated with this name have been partially preserv¬ 
ed. They are in short a complete denunciation of the Vedas, their 
authors and the religion they taught. This attack, if the account 
that we have of it is faithful, sometimes verges on vulgarity. Thus 
it is averred that the Vedas were the work of three kinds of men— 
cheats, hypocrites and flesh-eaters—and that the language of the 
Vedas was utter gibberish; reference is also made to certain unclean 
customs connected with the horse-sacrifice. But the more power¬ 
ful, systematic and philosophic attack upon the Vedic cult was led 

1. Mun(iaka, i, 4. 

2. Katha, i, 2. 5. 

3. Mundaka, i, 5. 

478 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


by two well-known names in history—the founders of Jainism and 
Buddhism. 

When an accepted creed is attacked, naturally defenders also 
come forward on its behalf. When there were persons who de¬ 
nounced karma (sacrificial work), there were others who supported 
it; and when there were people who attacked the Vedic religion, 
others arose to take up cudgels for it. A battle of in f ellect and of 
words raged furiously for several centuries before and after the 
birth of Buddha. 

Two questions gradually emerged out of this turmoil, viz. the 
validity of the Vedas and the reality of the Vedic gods. The first 
grew into the problem of knowledge and the second into the pro¬ 
blem of reality. The first question was about ‘how we know and 
what our sources of knowledge are’, and ‘whether the Vedas were a 
source of knowledge at all’; and the other question was about 
‘what it was, in the last analysis, that we know’. 

Thought engaging itself with these questions split up into two 
lines called the astika and the nastika —the believing and the un¬ 
believing. Though these words have been used in more than one 
sense, usually an astika is one who accepts the Vedas and believes 
in their validity, and a nastika is an unbeliever who rejects the 
Vedas. The one is orthodox while the other is heterodox. These 
were the connotations in which the terms were used by Hindu 
writers who coined them. Heterodoxy, however, is a relative term. 
If the rejection of the Vedas is heterodoxy to a Hindu, rejection of 
Buddha is equally so to a Buddhist. But as the victor in a war 
dictates the terms of peace, the Hindu meaning of these terms has 
prevailed in India; and a modern writer has no option but to accept 
it 

(ii) Source of Knowledge 

The technical name in Sanskrit for a source of knowledge is 
pramaua. The question that came to the forefront, as between the 
heterodox and orthodox thinkers, was the one about the pramdna 
The heterodox thinkers rejected the Vedas. Now, the Vedas are 
a collection of words which were revealed, according to the orthodox 
view, to inspired seers. To reject the Vedas, therefore, meant the 
rejection of testimony or the evidence of other men as a source of 
knowledge. This is exactly what the unbelievers were believed to 
have done. 


479 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

The extreme heterodox view, associated with the name of 
Charvaka, was that perception was the only source of knowledge. 
That which could not be perceived by the senses did not exist. This 
is too gross a proposition to stand scrutiny and it was easily answer¬ 
ed. When Charvaka went out of his home on any occasin, his wife 
could not see him for a time. Did she become a widow forthwith 
and began to mourn his loss? So, even that which is not seen is 
known and believed to exist, as Charvaka was by his wife. 

This defect was mended in the Buddhist view that inference 
also was a source of knowledge, but this did not carry philosophy 
far enough. Inference is based on what we have perceived and 
generalised: on general propositions like ‘All S is P,’ which are 
obtained by uncontradicted experience. The root of inference is 
in experience or perception. Deeper spiritual truths—truths about 
God, the other world, etc.—could not be known by inference of this 
kind. 

All orthodox thinkers agreed that the Vedas were a source of 
knowledge. In fact this belief was the real criterion of orthodoxy. 
About other sources of knowledge, divergence of views existed and 
was allowed. So, to perception and inference, they added the Vedas 
or sabda (word), as they were technically called, and the number 
became three. To these a fourth was added by some, viz., analogy. 
If you are told that X is like Y and then see a thing which is like Y, 
you know at once that it is X. To these four, two more sources of 
knowledge were gradually added, viz. non-perception and presump¬ 
tion. You know that there is no elephant in your room because you 
do not see any. And if you see a fat man but never see him take 
any food during day-time, you may presume that he takes food 
unseen, maybe at night. This list of sources of knowledge was 
further enlarged by some by the addition of tradition and a few 
others. 

The central theme, however, remained the authority of the 
Vedas. When even tradition was added to the list of sources of 
knowledge, the desire perhaps was to augment the authority of the 
Vedas. If you continuously hear from people that there is a ghost 
in yonder tree, are you not inclined to believe it? Yet, that is only 
heresay which, according to modern law, is no evidence at all. But 
if you can accept continued tradition as a source of knowledge, how 
much more credence should you give to the Vedas—the eternal 
word which has been revealed to man? 


480 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


In the acceptance of the Vedas as a source of knowledge, all 
orthodox thinkers agreed. They also agreed in holding that life was 
full of ills, and escape from it was the highest object of desire. 
They further agreed that this escape could be effected only by 
meditation on the highest truth. Barring the acceptance of the 
Vedas as a source of knowledge, they agree so far with the heterodox 
thinkers, but they differ among themselves and also from the hete¬ 
rodox thinkers in their account of Reality. 

(iii) Reality in Orthodox Philosophy: The World 

Orthodoxy clung to the view that there was some permanent 
reality, whereas heterodoxy was not wedded to any such view. As 
to the character of this reality, opinions varied. About the external 
world around us, orthodoxy was not committed to any particular 
theory, and wide divergence of views has existed. And if we take 
into account the heterodox views also, it will be found that most 
of the theories about the world that philosophy has known up till 
now were put forward in some shape or other by the thinkers of 
India. 

Three orthodox views come out in sharp contrast: (1) Some held 
that the world was a conglomeration of atoms which were them¬ 
selves uncreated. These atoms exist independently of our thought. 
They are of four kinds, having the qualities of smell, taste, touch and 
light. When they combine, they make the things of the world; and 
when they disintegrate, these things are destroyed. Causation, 
therefore, implies the introduction of new things into the world. 
The effect is not inherent in the cause. 

(2) Another theory is that the world is due to a mysterious in¬ 
teraction between a plurality of eternal and unchanging individual 
souls, which are conscious, and an unconscious principle, which is 
akin to the feminine principle in nature and becomes active as 
soon as it contacts a soul. According to this theory, the world is 
already inherent in the feminine principle which has been given the 
technical name of prakriti; the effect is always in the cause, just as 
curd is potentially present in the milk. Causation implies only a 
change of state. 

(3) According to the third view, there was only one eternal, 
unchanging substance which manifested itself in the manifold 
changes of the world, the variety of things and qualities, and finite 
selves. This substance was a conscious principle. But the world 

481 

A.I.U.— 31 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


with its manifold, changing phases was only an appearance and not 
a reality. It was only an error, an illusion that we believed in this 
multiplicity of things. In ultimate knowledge, the differentiation 
between one thing and another and between self and not-self has no 
basis. It is all a huge error. That one thing produces another, that 
the non-existent comes into existence is a difficult proposition to 
accept. Causation cannot be understood as a change of state, for 
the unchanging substance cannot change; nor can it be the beginning 
of a new thing, for a non-existing thing cannot come into existence. 
If the world is not an illusion, at least its appearance must be re¬ 
garded as a great Mystery (anirvdchya ), inexpressible and inexpli¬ 
cable. 

(4) To these three, a fourth may be added, which is a combina¬ 
tion of the second and the third. According to this view, the source 
of the world is a conscious principle but the world is not an illusion; 
it is real; it expresses the ultimate substance and is its vehicle so to 
say, and it belongs to the substance like a quality to a thing. 

The question of Reality is not exhausted by an account of the 
external world only. It includes also the question of the individual 
soul and of a creative God. On these questions also the orthodox 
thinkers have differed widely. And if we take into account the 
heterodox views also alongside of them, it will be found that be¬ 
tween a total denial of the soul and an affirmation that it varies in 
size with the size of the body, different views about its character 
and destiny have been held. And about God also, between the as¬ 
sertion of His non-existence and an identification of Him with the 
Universe, He has been delineated in several other ways. 


482 


CHAPTER XX 

ART 

A. ARCHITECTURE 

The numerous objects and buildings unearthed in the Sindhu 
valley, which have been described above, 1 constitute the earliest 
examples of the art and architecture of India. Then follows a long 
gap, and it is not till about the third century B.C. that we once more 
come across the vestiges of a flourishing artistic culture. It is 
difficult to believe that the powerful traditions of the earlier age 
died out altogether, and it is not unlikely that the products of the 
intermediate period still lie hidden under the soil or, being made of 
perishable materials like wood, have vanished altogether without 
leaving any trace. In any case, though the link between the Sindhu 
valley and Mauryan art is missing, and a complete hiatus separates 
the two, literary evidence leaves no doubt that the activities of both 
architects and sculptors continued during the intervening period. 

I. Cities 

The Buddhist canon 2 testifies to the existence in India of popu¬ 
lous cities with large buildings long before the time of the Buddha. 
Very few vestiges of these early cities have, however, been pre¬ 
served. It is stated by Arrian, who is believed to have based his 
Indica on the accounts of Megasthenes, that cities on the banks of 
rivers and in other low-lying spots were built of wood; and those in 
more commanding positions, where they were less exposed to floods, 
of mud or brick. It is because of the impermanent character of the 
materials used in the buildings of these ancient cities that they have 
crumbled into ruins, and nothing exists above ground, except a part 
of the city walls of Raj agriha. These were built, in cyclopaean 
fashion, of massive unheaven blocks of stone pierced by gateways 
(pi. II, 2), each flanked on either side by a semi-circular bastion, over 
which probably rose the watch-tower, an almost invariable feature 
of these fortress cities. 

References of cities and municipal organisations are found in 
Buddhist literature, in the Kautiliya Arthasdstra and in the epics; 

1 . Vol. I, Ch. IX. 

2. Mahaymrinibbana Sutta ( SBE. XI), 99. 

483 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


and a graphic picture of the plan and lay-out of an early Indian city 
is given in Milinda-panha. 1 It speaks of a city “fine and regular, 
measured out into quarters, with excavated moats and ramparts 
about it, with stout gatehouses and towers, with market-places, cross¬ 
roads, street-corners and public squares, with cleanly and even main 
roads, with regular lines of open shops, well provided with parks, 
gardens, lakes, lotus ponds and wells, adorned with many kinds of 
temples of the gods, free from every fault and standing in all its 
glory.” 

This description appears to hold good for earlier periods too 
and, shorn of its superfluities, the standard scheme of an early city 
may be summarised as follows: it is surrounded by a moat or moats 
and further protected by a wall ( pdkdra, prdkara) running all around. 
The plan is rectangular, usually square, with gate or gatehouses 
( dvdra , dvdrakotthaka) in the middle of each side, the gateway being 
approached by a bridge across the moat. Four main streets from 
the four gateways led to the centre of the city, which is laid out in 
quarters ( bhagaso mitam). 

Ahichchhatra, the capital of the Pahchala country, as now 
excavated, appears to have been a city of this type. Its walls, built 
of burnt brick, still rise to a height of 40 to 50 feet. Details of the 
planning of the city are not yet clear, but in the centre stood a large 
temple to which the main thoroughfares of the city converged. 2 

An idea of what these early cities looked like may be obtained 
from representations of some of them in the reliefs of Bharhut, 
Sanchi, Amaravati, Mathura, etc. In these reliefs, many of the his¬ 
toric cities of ancient India like Raj agriha, Sravasti, Varanasi, Kapila- 
vastu, Kuslnagara, etc. have been shown. An outer view of the city 
wall with its gatehouse and defensive towers, and occasionally some 
glimpse of the buildings inside, may be had from these reliefs. The 
moat surrounding the city is indicated in the reliefs by lotuses 
(pi. II, 3), actual water being shown in many cases. The city walls 
are usually shown as made of brick, though in one Sanchi relief a 
wooden wall of palisade construction may clearly be recognised. 
The walls are sometimes provided with re-entrant angles. They are 
finished off at the top either by a coping or more usually by battle¬ 
ments. The gatehouse is flanked by two high towers ( dvara-attdlaka, 
gopura-attdlaka), projecting from the gatehouse, joined to each other 

1 . I. 34 and 330 IT; SBE, XXXV, 53; XXXVI, 208-9’ 

2. The author is indebted to the manuscript of the late Rao Bahadur K. N. 

Dikshit for the information about Ahichchhatra. 


484 



ART 


by a porch (said). The gatehouse is equal in height to that of the 
wall; the gatehouse towers soaring higher up add to the strength and 
dignity of the entire scheme. The towers rise to several storeys, the 
topmost one having a barrel-vaulted roof with gable ends. The 
dimensions of the gatehouse are often wide enough to provide 
passage for chariots and horses and elephants with riders, as is 
shown in some of the reliefs (pi. Ill, 4). Accessory defence towers 
also occasionally occur just inside the gateway building. 

Quite distinct from the gatehouse stand occasionally toranas, 
usually represented as situated at the far end of the bridge commu¬ 
nicating with the gateway. Such toranas were made of two free¬ 
standing upright pillars supporting one or more architraves at the 
top, evidently imitated from wooden construction, if not actually 
made of wood. Apparently they had no value for defensive purposes 
and were probably meant as ornamental accessories. 

An idea of the buildings within the city may also be gleaned 
by reference to early Indian reliefs. The buildings usually consist 
of several storeys, the topmost storey having a wagon-vaulted roof 
with gables at either end with pointed finials at the top. They 
usually face a court, occasionally enclosed on either side by subsi¬ 
diary structures, but left open in front (cf. Sanchi, east gate). Some¬ 
times a torana, consisting of two upright pillars surmounted by two 
or three architraves, leads to the court in front of the building 
(Amaravati). The upper storeys are provided with balustraded 
verandahs ( alindas) in front. They are sometimes found to be 
supported on pillars, in which case the ground floor partakes more 
of the character of an open pavilion intended probably as an assembly 
hall. The pillars are either square or round, sometimes with the 
so-called “bell capitals” at the top (cf. Bharhut). The upper floor is 
negotiated by stairways supported on a framework of beams and 
rafters resting on pillars. In a relief from Mathura (c. second 
century A.D.) we have the view of an external stairway which is 
roofed at the top and provided with railings at the sides (pi. IV A, 6.). 
It is entered through an archway with a latticed screen at the top. 
The same relief gives us the replica of a pleasure palace within a 
garden rising in three storeys, the topmost one having probably a 
tiled roof (pi. TV A, 7). 

The appearance of the buildings, shown in early relief carvings, 
leaves no doubt that they were made of impermanent materials, 
particularly of wood, the essentials of wooden technique being scru- 


485 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

pulously imitated in these relief representations. In the facades 
of the early caves probably survive the frontages of these early 
buildings (pi. Ill, 5), and here, too, the stamp and impress of wooden 
construction are clear and explicit. Nevertheless, they were usually 
large and imposing structures, their beauty and decorative richness 
being amply testified to not only by the relief carvings of early 
Indian art but also by the elaborate cave fagades, which are clear 
copies of the structural modes and patterns in wood. Such cities as 
are represented in early relief carvings were apparently being built 
even from the beginning of the period under discussion. On account 
of the limited scope of the material there was very little change in the 
shape and form of the buildings, but gradually they become richer 
and overlaid with a wealth of ornament, the like of which can very 
seldom be seen. These buildings thus appear to present a strong 
contrast to the earliest Indian buildings of secular character, viz. 
those of the Sindhu valley cities, which were strictly of a utilitarian 
character and devoid of any ornament. 

Some idea of the grandeur of ancient cities and buildings can 
be formed from the description of Pataliputra by classical writers 
and Fa-hien. 1 Fragments of the huge wooden palisade of the city 
have been unearthed by Dr. Spooner at Bulandi Bagh (pi. V, 8) near 
modern Patna and these prove by their size that the classical 
accounts of the dimensions of the city walls are by no means exag¬ 
gerated. Subsequent excavations at the site of Kumrahar nearby 
have unearthed the remains of the palace, unfortunately extremely 
fragmentary in character. The palace appears to have been an 
aggregate of buildings, the most important of which was an immense 
pillared hall supported on a high substratum of wood. The pillars 
were set in regular rows, thus dividing, the hall into a number of 
smaller square bays. Fragments of stone pillars, including one 
nearly complete, with their round tapering shafts and smooth polish 
indicate that the great Asoka was responsible for the construction of 
the hall, or at least for the stone columns which replaced the earlier 
wooden ones. The comparison of the palace buildings of Pataliputra 
with those of Susa and Ecbatana by the classical writers is perhaps 
not without some significance, and a close parallel to the Mauryan 
palace, as excavated, may be recognised in the Achaemenid Hall of 
Hundred Columns at Persepolis. 2 

1. Above, pp. 67, 86. 

2. Spooner in JRAS, 1915, pp. 63 ff, 403 ff. But his views have not been generally 
accepted. Cf. also R. P. Chanda, Beginnings of Art in Eastern India (MASI 
No. 30), p. 12. 


486 



ART 


II. Religious Architecture 

It has often been remarked that Indian art is the handmaid of 
religion, and this remains substantially true of architecture as well 
as of the other formative arts, in spite of the grandeur of secular 
buildings. The desire for a permanent habitation was more keenly 
felt in religious than in secular architecture and hence the change 
from perishable to more durable materials occurred much earlier in 
respect of sacred buildings. The rise of new religious sects, describ¬ 
ed in Chapter XIX, must have given a great impetus to art. The 
stiipa, which represents a domed structure of brick or stone masonry, 
chapels, usually known as chaitya halls, and monasteries formed 
important monuments of the Jain and Buddhist faith. The Bhakti 
cult gave a great impetus to the construction of images and deva- 
grihas or ‘houses of gods’. It was the custom to erect dhvaja - 
starabhas, or columns bearing the emblems of the gods, in front of 
such sanctuaries, and several of them, associated particularly with 
the worship of Vishnu in his Vyuha forms, still stand in and around 
Besnagar in the old Gwalior State. There is thus clear evidence of 
prolific architectural activity in religious buildings of the different 
denominations. Our knowledge of the sanctuaries of the structural 
order, built, as they were mostly, of impermanent materials, is, how¬ 
ever, very meagre. We can only trace a continuous movement in 
respect of the stupa and give some account of the chaityas and 
monasteries hewn out of rock. 

1. The Stupa 

In the Mahaparinibbana Suttanta 1 Buddha enjoins Ananda to 
erect at the crossing of four highways ( chatummahdpathe ) a stupa 
over the remains of his body, after it has been burnt on the funeral 
pyre, in the same manner as the stupa of a universal monarch. It is, 
therefore, clear that the custom of rearing stupas was pre-Buddhist. 
The Jains also erected this form of memorial in early times, but it 
is the Buddhists who particularly selected and adapted it to their 
own use. In course of time it acquired a special Buddhistic asso¬ 
ciation as containing a relic ( dhatu ) of the Master or of his chief 
disciples, and as making a spot associated with some important 
event in the life of the Buddha or in the history of Buddhism. As 
enshrining a relic symbolising the Master himself, a devotional 
aspect was also implicit from the very beginning, and stupas were 
set up as votive objects in sanctuaries, known as chaitya halls. They 


1. Digha Nikdya, XVI, 5, 11; SBE, XI, 93. 

487 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

were also erected on sacred Buddhist sites as pious works, the gift 
of a stupa being reckoned as meritorious as that of an image, even 
when the latter came to be in prolific use. Apart from objects for 
which they were raised, there is, however, no other indication by 
which they can be distinguished from one another, and architectu¬ 
rally all these classes must be treated as one. The origin of the stupa 
has given rise to many theories. The most probable view seems to 
be that this hemispherical structure emerged out of the earthen 
funeral mounds ( smasdnas ), under which, according to the Vedic 
rituals, the ashes of the dead were buried. 

The earliest of the stupas now extant represents a plain and 
simple structure consisting of a hemispherical dome ( anda ), placed 
on a low circular base and surmounted by a square box ( harmika ), 
which is further crowned by the parasol or umbrella ( chhatra ), the 
symbol of universal paramountcy. The dome was the principal ele¬ 
ment of the stupa and was surrounded by a pradakshinapatha, or 
passage for circumambulation, occasionally fenced off by a railing 
or wall. 

This original form of the stupa may be recognised in the Great 
Stupa at Sanchi (Bhopal State), 1 which represents one of the earliest 
specimens now extant. Originally built of brick in Asoka’s time, 
the Great Stupa was enlarged to nearly twice its size and envelop¬ 
ed in stone, perhaps a century later, when the stone railings and 
the gateways were also added. As the diagram opposite shows, the 
stupa presents an almost semi-circular dome, truncated near the top, 
and is supported on a sloping circular base, which was approached 
by a broad double ramp on the southern side, and was formally 
used as an upper procession path (6 feet wide) for pradakshind 
around the monument. On the flattened summit there was a small 
square pavilion (harmika), surrounded by a railing, from the centre 
of which rose the shaft of the umbrella discs (pi. V, 9). 

The original brick stupa was in all probability enclosed by a 
wooden fence, later replaced by the massive stone balustrade which 
now surrounds the enlarged monument encased in stone. It con¬ 
sists of octagonal upright posts ( thaba , from Sanskrit stambha) 
capped by a continuous coping stone (uhnisa, from Sanskrit 

1. The Great Stupa is the principal monument among a number of such remains 
at Sanchl and the adjacent region, collectively known as the Bhilsa topes. 
Within an area of about 10 miles by 6 miles there may be found five or six 
groups of stupas containing nearly sixty individual examples. None of them 
may be dated prior to the time of Asoka, and some are distinctively later. 


488 



ART 




Fig. 1. Sanchl, Great Stupa. 
489 



































































































































































THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


ushnisha ), rounded at the top and fixed to the posts by means of 
tenons socketed to mortices. The posts are further connected with 
one another by three horizontal rails or cross-bars ( suchis ), which 
are slipped into the lense-shaped holes cut on the sides of the upright 
posts. The mode of construction of this stone rail is essentially 
wooden, every joint being practically the same as that employed by 
a carpenter working in wood. On the four sides of the stilpa are 
four gateways ( toranas ), each projecting a little from the line of the 
ground balustrade. In design and dimensions they resemble one 
another. Each of them consists of two upright posts, surmounted by 
three architraves, placed horizontally one above the other (pi. IV, 10). 

The same process of wooden technique is manifest in its con¬ 
struction, the architraves being morticed into the posts and the pro¬ 
jecting ends, separately affixed on either side, being supported by 
means of brackets of various shapes and designs. The crowning 
finials, representing the various symbols of the faith like the triratna, 
the dharmachakra, etc., are also morticed into the topmost archi¬ 
trave. All the four gateways are covered with the most elaborate 
sculptures, 1 2 in contrast to the rails which are kept severely plain. 
Stupa No. 3 at Sanchi is also surrounded by a similar rail, but with 
a single gateway. The stupa at Bharhut in the old Nagod State, 
Madhya Bharat, was also surrounded by rails and gateways of similar 
design, a portion of which may now be seen in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta. The Bharhut rail, however, instead of being plain, was 
richly carved. Carvings of analogous but cruder workmanship also 
characterised the ground balustrade of stupa No. 2 at Sanchi. The 
style of the carvings of both would place these rails to a period 
earlier than those of the Sanchi toranas. 

The structure which obtained the greatest celebrity in Asia 
was the relic-tower or pagoda which Kanishka erected at Puru- 
shapura (Peshawar) over the relics of the Buddha. Chinese 
pilgrims furnish us with graphic accounts of this remarkable monu¬ 
ment, which consisted of “a basement in five stages (150 feet), a 
superstructure of carved wood in thirteen storeys (400 feet), sur¬ 
mounted by an iron column with from thirteen to twenty-five gilt 
copper umbrellas (88 feet), making a total height of 638 feet.”- 
Because of its graceful proportions, Fa-hien describes it to be of 
incomparable beauty and adds: “tradition says that this was the 

1. The carvings of the different gateways offer well-marked divergences in style, 
a fact that may indicate that the gateways were erected at different periods, 
though not far removed from one another. Cf. the next section on Sculpture, 

2. HIIA, p. 53. 


490 



ART 



Fig. 2. Manikyala, Great Stupa: Section 




Fig. 3. Barabar Sudama Cave: Plan and Section 


491 



























































THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


highest tower in Jambudvlpa.” The tower was already in decay 
when Hiuen Tsang visited it, and gradually every vestige was obli¬ 
terated by its own crumbling ruins. The site has been identified 
with Shah-jl-kl-Dheri and excavated, revealing a base that appears 
to have been 286 feet in diameter; the monument may hence be 
regarded as having been the largest of its kind in India. The casket 
containing the relic has also been found and is now a priceless 
possession of the Peshawar Museum. 

The region round Peshawar—ancient Gandhara—has preserved 
the remains of quite a large number of stupas, showing the different 
stages of its evolution. The traditional hemispherical form as pre¬ 
sented by the great stupa at Sanchl is clearly recognised in the small 
stupa at Chakpat in the Swat valley and in the great stupa at 
Manikyala (Fig. 2) in the Punjab. The characteristic tendency to the 
elongation of the stupa is also equally apparent in Gandhara. This 
may be recognised in the provision of a tall drum or a series of drums, 
raised over a square plinth of one or more terraces approached by 
stairways. The topmost section of the drum supports the hemis¬ 
pherical dome with a square harmikd and crowned by a many-tiered 
chhatravali of conical shape. The last is made up of flat round discs 
rising one above the other in gradually diminishing sizes, the upper¬ 
most one tapering to a point. Although the height and elongation 
of the structure are thus clearly emphasised, the hemispherical dome 
still retains its position of importance. The body of the stupa , 
especially of the plinth and the drum, is richly carved with sculp¬ 
tures set in niches between pilasters all around, and this arrangement 
forms the characteristic mode of ornamentation of the Gandharan 
stupas, particularly those of the post-Christian era. Miniature votive 
stupas (pi. VI, 11) of this distinctive shape and form have been 
found in large numbers in different sites throughout Gandhara and 
gives us an idea of what the bigger monuments of this order, now 
mostly ruined, looked like in their original state. 

Stupas were also erected in southern India from a fairly early 
period, and the Andhra region seems to have been literally studded 
with them. The most important of these monuments were situated 
at Amaravati, 1 Bhattiprolu, Jaggayyapeta, 2 Ghantasala, Nagarjuni- 

1. The monument in its earliest form seems to have been built about 200 B.C. 
but as nothing remains except the foundations, the original shape and form 
of the earlier monument are not known. The form presented by the replica 
on the casing slab was that of the stupa as reconstructed about the second 
century A.D. 

2. These two stupas were probably co-eval with the original stupa at Amaravati. 

492 



ART 


konda, etc. Unfortunately, not one of these monuments can now be 
seen in its entirety. But the sculptured replicas on the casing slabs 
(pi. VI, 12) of these stupas enable us to ascertain the distinctive 
characteristics of the stupa monuments of this region. The technique 
of building up these stupas is somewhat singular. The foundation 
and the body of the stupa were built in brick, which in the earlier 
examples was solid. Later on, probably to reduce weight and to 
economise material, the inner body was composed of two circular 
walls, one at the hub and the other at the outer end, with radiating 
partition walls joining the two, the intervening spaces being packed 
with earth; and thus the entire monument was given the required 
shape. This inner body was next encased with slabs of stone, usually 
richly carved marble, the top being finished in moulded stucco. 

The lofty circular terrace, which formed the drum and em¬ 
phasised the height of the stupa, was provided with a rectangular 
projection on each cardinal face. The sides of the projection formed 
stairways leading to the upper processional path, while the front 
was converted into an altar piece. The top of the projected offset, 
ending in a platform on a level with the upper terrace, supported 
five free-standing slender pillars, known as ayaka-khambas ( aryaka - 
stambhas) or the ‘worshipful columns’. This is a distinctive feature, 
not met with elsewhere, and adds considerably to the architectural 
appearance of the monument as a whole. Another distinctive 
characteristic of these southern stupas is the fact that not only the 
ground balustrade which surrounds the monument but even the 
drum and the hemispherical dome are richly carved. 

A study of the evolution of the stupa would show that there was 
a general tendency towards the elevation of each component part. 
This gave it an elongated appearance, and the term ‘tower’, by which 
the Chinese pilgrims usually designate it, is not altogether inappro¬ 
priate. The changed character is clearly borne out by a comparison 
of the early pre-Christian stupas with their mediaeval successors in 
India and Further India. In the earliest of the stupa monuments, the 
almost hemispherical dome is the principal member of such a struc¬ 
ture, and the base and the finials are but accessory parts, having a 
proportionate relation of subordinance in comparison with the main 
element. But due to the growing tendency towards height and 
elongation, the stupa ultimately attains a spire-like shape, in which 
the original hemispherical dome loses its dominating importance, 

Though early, they already exhibit distinctive features like the ayaka pro¬ 
jection in each of the cardinal points, the lofty drum, etc. 

493 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 




496 


Junnar, Circular Cave: Plan and Section 




















































ART 



Fig. 5. Bhaja, Chaitya and Vihdra : Plan 



Fig. €. Bedsa, Chaitya and Vihdra: Plan 

497 


A. x. u.—ta 










THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Lomasa Rishi cave at Barabar (pi. VII, 13) has been finished with 
great care and is important as representing the beginnings of tho 
elaborate scheme of ornamentation that characterised the decoration 
of the fagades in the chaitya halls of later days. Possibly it is 
copied from structural examples. 

The plan and arrangements of the Sudama and Lomasa Rishi 
caves are similar in all essential details, and evidently represent a 
circular shrine preceded by an assembly hall (mandapa of later 
days). It is possible that the earliest form of such a shrine consisted 
of the circular cella alone to which the Buddhists added a votive 
chaitya, and the outer hall was later added to accommodate the 
gradually increasing congregation. This supposition gains some 
support from the interesting circular chaitya hall at Junnar (Fig. 4), 
56 miles to the north of Poona, in which a votive chaitya is sur¬ 
rounded by a ring of twelve pillars, the central area being domed 
and the circular aisle half-domed. A solid wall, pierced by a 
narrow doorway, separated the cella from the outer hall in the caves 
of the Sudama type; gradually this solid wall was eliminated and 
the apsidal plan of the chaitya hall of the familiar type was thus ob¬ 
tained. A bold move is also indicated by the hall being driven 
axially into the depth of the rock instead of cutting it parallel to the 
face of the rock, as in the Sudama and Lomasa Rishi caves. 

The next stage of evolution, after the Barabar group, is found 
in a cave at Bhaja, near Poona, in the Western Ghats, with twenty- 
seven pillars running along the entire length of the apsidal hall and 
around the votive chaitya, thus dividing it into a central nave and 
two side aisles (pi. VII, 14). The pillars are plain octagonal shafts, 
a little over 11 feet in height, and support the barrel-vaulted roof on 
a framework of curved ribs, originally of wooden construction. The 
side aisles, only 3i feet wide, are half barrel-vaulted (Fig. 5). The 
votive chaitya is placed near the back end, and the entrance, now a 
lofty open archway, just opposite to it. The decoration of the fagade, 
as seen in the upper section, also indicates a definite advance on what 
we have in the Lomasa Rishi cave. Along the entire width of the 
fagade extends the rail, and together with this appears the ogee front 
which, as a decorative device, has been repeated, thereby adding to 
the beauty of the scheme as a whole. The rail-pattern is imitated 
from woodwork, and so are many other features. Indeed the wooden 
character of the Chaitya Hall is nowhere so emphatically stressed 
as at Bhaja. Of approximately the same style and pattern are the 


498 


ART 


ruined c haitya hall at Kondane (pi. VIII, 15), the much decayed 
chaitya cave at Pitalkhora in Khandesh, and also possibly one of the 
early chaitya halls (cave No. X) at Ajanta. These three caves may 
be considered to be contemporary to the Bhaja chaitya hall or very 
nearly so. At any rate, these four represent the oldest specimens 
of their class in western India 1 and, considering their advance over 
the Barabar caves, may be dated in the first half of the second 
century B.C. 

The movement continues for a long time and the march of the 
style may be traced through a series of monuments, such as Ajanta 
cave No. IX, Bedsa, Nasik, etc. to the most celebrated of all, viz. 
the great chaitya hall at Karle. The progress was slow but steady, 
and may be recognised in the gradual emancipation from wooden 
conventions, greater elaboration of the different elements and 
features, and richer and more variegated ornamentation of the 
fagade. The chief interest of the Ajanta cave No. IX lies in its square 
and not apsidal end, as in six of the Junnar caves, and the flat roof 
over the two aisles, but not over the nave which is vaulted as usual. 
At Bedsa (Fig. 6) we find, probably for the first time, a new and 
rational design of the chaitya facade that was to become characteris¬ 
tic of the subsequent chaitya halls, and a portico with its roof sup¬ 
ported on four elaborately carved pillars. The facade forming the 
inner side of the portico is divided horizontally into two distinct 
storeys, the lower with a narrow rectangular doorway surmounted 
by an arch and the upper by an enormous arched window of horse¬ 
shoe shape, which by its association with the chaityas is also known 
as the chaitya window. The entire ornamentation of the fagade is 
mostly made up of miniature rails, regularly interspersed with re¬ 
petitions of window fronts. A semi-circular open work moulding, 
resembling wicker work, also appears occasionally among the usual 
ornamental devices of the fagade. 

The facade of the chaitya hall at Nasik (pi. VIII, 16) is richer 
and more variegated as a result of the introduction of fresh motifs, 
like pilasters with campaniform capitals alternated by representa¬ 
tions of stupas with latticed screens as backgrounds. All the details 

1. The chaitya caves at Junnar (H/EA a I, 155-59) are noteworthy for their 
extreme simplicity and severity, due partly to their rather early date. But 
none of them can be placed as early as the Bhaja-Kondane group. The de¬ 
tails and other arrangements place them in the next group. The chief interest 
of the Junnar series of caves consists, however, in the fact that they contain 
examples of unusual forms, not known elsewhere. Of the ten chaitya caves, 
for instance, there is one circular cave (already mentioned) and six with 
square terminations at the back, flat roofs and without the internal pillars. 

499 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 




Fig. 7. Karle, Chaitya Hall: Plan and Section 



Fig. 8. Bhaja, Small Vihdra: Plan 


































































































































































































ART 


are no doubt copied from wooden forms, but here they have attained a 
lithic character, not at all incongruous in their present context. The 
pillars in the interior are so nearly perpendicular that their inclina¬ 
tion almost escapes detection. Instead of the plain octagonal shafts 
rising directly from the ground (cf. Bedsa, pi. IX, 17), we have octa¬ 
gonal pillars with pot bases and rudimentary capitals, each in the 
shape of a square stepped abacus. The votive chaitya also presents 
a highly elongated form, and we may refer the chaitya hall at Nasik 
to about the close of the first century B. C. 

The largest of all the chaitya caves, and indeed one of the finest 
monuments in the whole of India, is the great chaitya hall at Karle. 
Preceding the main hall there is a portico 15 feet deep and 52 feet 
wide, cut out of the rock and closed by an outer screen, and in front 
of this stood two isolated columns, each surmounted by a campani- 
form capital with addorsed figures of lions supporting a wheel. The 
inner fagade is almost of the same style as at Nasik, the only differ¬ 
ence being that instead of one entrance,, as in the earlier caves, there 
are three doorways in the Karle cave, the middle one leading to the 
nave and those on either side to the two aisles (Fig. 7). 

The general dimensions of the interior (pis. IX, 18; X, 19, 20) 
are imposing, being in excess of 124 feet by 45 feet in area and 45 
feet in height. The effect is at once impressive and magnificent. 
The architectural defects of the earlier examples have been re¬ 
moved. A series of thirty-seven pillars, rising perpendicularly, 
separates the nave from the aisles. Of these, those encircling the 
apse are of plain octagonal pattern, while the remainder, fifteen 
on each side of the nave, are elaborately designed and carved. 
Each pillar consists of a pot base on a square plinth of several 
stepped courses, an octagonal shaft, and a campaniform capital 
with a square abacus supporting a sculptured group of a pair each 
of elephants and horses with riders. Above the sculptures on the 
capitals, and rising to a height of 45 feet at its apex, springs the 
vaulted roof, somewhat stilted at the sides, beneath the soffit of 
which is a series of projecting ribs of wood attached to the roof— 
“one of the last instances of this peculiar vestigial use of woodwork 
in combination with the solid stone.” 1 

Much of the beauty of the interior of the Karle hall depends on 
the effective conception of the colonnade and the vaulting and the 
organic manner in which the two have been combined. Beneath 
the semi-dome of the apse is placed the votive chaitya, cut as usual. 


1. HI1A, p. 29. 


501 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


out of solid rock. It consists of a lofty cylindrical drum which, 
rising in two storeys, each enclosed by rails, supports the hemispheri¬ 
cal dome. The dome spreads out into the square harmikd which 
is crowned by the chhatra discs fixed to a shaft. Though much 
elongated on account of its lofty drum, the votive chaitya retains 
much of its archaic dignity and adds to the grandeur of the hall. 

Palaeographic evidence and stylistic considerations both agree 
in referring the Karle chaitya approximately to the first quarter of 
the second century A.D. This magnificent cave practically brings 
to an end the early phase of this class of architecture, though the 
chaitya halls at Kanheri and Aurangabad may be slightly later in 
date. 

3. The Sahgharama (Monastery) 

Another important form of early Indian architecture is the 
sanghdrdma or vihdra, i.e. monastery, associated with both Buddh¬ 
ism and Jainism, more particularly with the former so far as 
the extant examples go. The monastery in India was designed on 
much the same lines as a private house, i.e. a square block formed 
by four rows of cells along the four sides of an inner quadrangle. In 
the earlier period, they were usually built of wood on a stylobate 
of stone or brick. As the monastic organisation developed, they be¬ 
came elaborate brick structures with many adjuncts. Often they 
consisted of several storeys, and along each side of the inner court¬ 
yard there usually ran a long corridor with the roof supported on 
pillars. 

Remains of early structural vihdras belonging to centuries both 
preceding and succeeding the Christian^ era have been found in 
many places. Unfortunately, in most instances, it is only the founda¬ 
tions that can be traced now, and these do not call for any special 
notice. Rock-cut examples of monasteries have been found in 
abundance, and of these, the Barabar and the NagarjunI groups of 
caves, built for use of the Ajivikas, are the earliest. The Barabar 
group belongs to the time of the great Asoka, and the NagarjunS to 
one of his successors, Dasaratha. The Sudama and the Lomasa 
Rishi caves of the former group have already been noticed in con¬ 
nection with the chaitya halls. The remaining caves of the two 
groups were simple rectangular chambers, cut out of rock, with a 
barrel-vaulted roof above, and characterised by a lustrous polish 
on the interior walls resembling that on the Asokan pillars. Some 
of the caves are provided with raised platforms at one end. The 


502 


ART 


Son Bhandar cave at Rajgir agrees essentially with the above, and 
perhaps belongs to a date not far removed from them. 

The Jain caves at Udayagiri and Khandagiri near Bhuvanesvara 
in Orissa go back to the time of Kharavela. 1 The two groups, con¬ 
sisting of a little over thirty-five excavations, were not laid out on a 
definite and regular plan, but located at convenient places according 
to the physical configuration of the rock. A few of these consist of 
single cells only, or verandahs with cells opening on to them. 2 while 
others, some of which are double storeyed, 3 consist of several cells 
together with a portico and an open courtyard in front. The inner 
facade consists of doorways surmounted by semi-circular arches 
above, the spaces in between the two arches being covered by friezes 
of sculptures, which are the most elaborate in the Ganesa and Ran! 
gumphas. The interpretation of these friezes still remains unsettled. 
The Rani-ka-nur or the Rarii gumpha in the Udayagiri (pi. XI, 21) 
is the largest and best preserved of all the caves. It consists of two 
storeys, each preceded by a verandah supported on pillars (Fig. 9). 

It is in the Buddhist caves of western India that we may trace 
a continuous development of the rock-cut monastery type. In the 
earliest excavations the plan of the monastery is still irregular, the 
cells being disposed in one or two rows only, and often at erratic 
angles. The typical plan, however, soon took shape in the form of a 
square (or oblong in certain instances) central hall (Fig. 8), preceded 
in front by a pillared verandah or vestibule, and opening out on the 
other sides into a number of small square cells carried further into 
the rock. The halls are usually provided with raised benches and 
the cells with similar beds. By the beginning of the Christian era, 
the type appears to have been well established. 

The earliest of the vihdra caves in western India are certainly 
those at Bhaja. The one 4 (Fig. 5) attached to the chaitya is interest¬ 
ing as both are parts of the same design. A further instance of this 
may be found at Bedsa in the unique vihdra cave whose cells are 

1. See above, pp. 213 ff. 

2. Of the single cells one carved in imitation of the open mouth of a tiger 
(Bagh gumpha or the Tiger cave) is rather interesting. 

3. In these caves the upper of the two floors appears to have been first excavated, 
though the interval of time between the two need not necessarily be a long one. 

4. It is problematic whether this vihdra belonged to the Buddhists. On the west 
end of the verandah we have two sculptures on either side of the doorway to 
the cell. In one we have the representation of Surya on his four-horsed 
chariot and in the other we have Indra on his elephant (HIIA, pp. 24-27, 
Figs. 24 and 27). The style and workmanship of these reliefs would also sup¬ 
port the antiquity of this excavation. It should further be noted that this is 
the only cave of the early series which contains figure sculptures. 


503 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 



504 


Udayagiri, 

















ART 


ranged round an apsidal central hall (Fig. 6), manifestly copied from 
the plan of the chaitya itself. 

Of the other vihdras of the pre-Christian period, mention should 
be made of those at Ajanta 1 Kondane, Pitalkhora, 2 and the early 
group at Nasik, which were more or less contemporary to the res¬ 
pective chaityas described above. The rock-cut vihdra type of the 
early series may be seen in its most decorative form, particularly in 
the treatment of the fagade, in three caves at Nasik, belonging to the 
second century A.D. Each one of them consists of a pillared 
verandah and a large central hall, without pillars, which open out 
into the cells ranged on three sides. The pillared frontage (pis. XI, 
22; XII, 23) endows the vihdras with an imposing appearance, the 
scheme along with the design of the pillars being characteristic of 
the age. The graceful design of the pillars and the harmonious rela¬ 
tion between the different component elements of the fagade make 
cave No. X one of the finest of the early series of rock-cut vihdras . 
Cave No. Ill, only slightly later in date, closely follows the above, 
but with certain elaborations as may be noticed in the carved balus¬ 
trade behind which the pillars are placed, and a fine frieze of animals 
rendered with exceptional merit on the entablature. In these res¬ 
pects, and in the figures of giants portrayed on the side of the plinth 
as carrying the structure, a marked originality may be recognised 
in this class of monuments. On the back wall of these caves, between 
the doorways of two cells in the central hall, is carved the relief 
representation of a stupa flanked by a female figure on either side. 

Rock-cut vihdras of the form and type as presented by the above 
caves are also found at other places, the Ganesa lend at Junnar (pi. 
XII, 24) being one of the most significant. At'Karle, we find exam¬ 
ples of storeyed vihdras of the rock-cut order, which indicate a 
beginning that was to have significant developments in the next 
phase of the rock-cut vihdra , at once grand and magnificent. 3 

1. Nos. XII and XIII. ~ 

2. The vihdra attached to the chaitya hall at Kondane and that at Pitalkhora 
introduce an innovation that becomes characteristic of the later development 
of the rock-cut monastery type. The central halls in these two vihdras, tm- 
like all extant examples of early date, are not plain but pillared. The Ganesa 
Lena (pi. XII, 24) at Junnar is one of the latest in the early series of vihdras , 
as its date can on no account be placed earlier than about the middle of the 
second century A.D. The dimensions of the hall are large, being 50 feet by 56 
feet, but even in spite of that no pillars have been introduced for support of 
the roof. 

3. Brahmanical monuments belonging to the period under discussion have been 
excluded from this chapter as, though their existence both in structural as well 
as in rock-cut form is known, the remains are either much too fragmentary 
or insignificant and commonplace to be of any real help to the study of the 
early architectural types and forms. 

505 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


B. SCULPTURE 
I. MAURYAN ART 

The sculpture of this period, like architecture, begins with the 
Mauryas and flourished under the patronage of the imperial court, 
especially of Asoka. The best specimens are furnished by a number 
of monolithic columns with their majestic animal capitals found in 
Bakhira (near Basarh or Vaisali), Rampurwa, Lauriya Nandangarh, 
Rummindei, Samkisya, Sarnath, Sanchl and other places, remnants 
of a large number—more than thirty—which the emperor is known 
lo have erected. A clear idea of their general appearance and con¬ 
stituent parts is afforded by the pillar, which is still in situ at 
Lauriya Nandangarh (pi. XIII, 25). Generally speaking, each 
column consists of two parts, the shaflf and the capital. The shaft, 
circular in section and slightly tapering, is made from a single block 
of stone and has a graceful and elegant proportion. The capital, 
monolithic like the shaft, was divided into three pat^s by an inverted 
lotus often described as a Persepolitan “bell”, abacus, and a crown¬ 
ing sculpture in the round. The surface of both the shaft and the 
capital is chiselled with that extraordinary precision and accuracy 
which characterise the workmanship of the Mauryan age, and have 
never been surpassed in Athens or elsewhere. As the shaft alone 
is more than 30 feet high, and the heaviest weighs about 50 tons, 
the construction and conveyance of these monolithic columns, often 
to a great distance, testify to the high engineering and stone-cutter’s 
skill of the age. 1 In some cases, as in the Rummindei column, the 
transition from the shaft to the “bell” of the capital is abrupt, while 
in other instances it is made easy and^ gradual by the introduction 
of intermediate mouldings of variable stages and designs. The sur¬ 
face of the gently arched “bell” is decorated with highly stylised 
longitudinal lotus-petals with sharp and thin ridges in the middle 
and wide and roundish border mouldings, the spaces between the 
ends of the petals being filled in with short mouldings. But here, 
too, there is a progressive attempt towards a clearer and sharper 
definition of the middle ridge and of the border mouldings, and 
increasing stylisation; both are fully in evidence in the Sarnath 
specimen. The real aesthetic significance of the beautifully arched 
and elegantly ribbed floral bell of the Mauryan capital lies in its 
gentle curve, its rhythmic proportions and in its very effective con¬ 
trast with the chaste and elegant, plain and smooth, tall and taper¬ 
ing shaft that it crowns. 

1, See above, p. 87. 


506 




ART 


The abacus, either circular or rectangular, is often carved on 
its sides with elegant floral designs or figures of birds and animals. 
It supports the crowning figure or figures of animals which are some¬ 
times of the highest workmanship ever known in animal sculptures 
anywhere in the world. 

It is possible to trace a gradual evolution in the style of these 
monolithic columns. The Bakhira pillar (pi. XIII, 26), with its ill- 
proportioned clumsy shaft, plain abacus and uncouth figure of a lion 
on the top, shows the crude beginning of the artistic effort which cul¬ 
minated in the fine elegant column at Lauriya Nandangarh and the 
wonderful capital of Sarnath, with the four animals carved on the 
abacus and the quadripartite semi-lions on the top. The Samkisya 
elephant and Rampurwa lion (pi. XIV, 27) show steady advance on 
the Bakhira specimen and represent the intermediate stages. But 
the Sarnath quadripartite (pi. XIV, 29) is architectonically on a 
superior level and must be admitted to be a very successful solution 
of a problem—the relation of the crowning animals with other ele¬ 
ments of the capital—which confronted the Maury an artists from 
the very beginning. Of all Mauryan sculptures it is the most well- 
known and most highly spoken of; but at the same time it must not 
be lost sight of that the entire conception and execution are conven¬ 
tional from beginning to end. Compositionally, the accumulation 
of form of the four semi-lions is schematic though, from considera¬ 
tion of technique, clever and efficient. The extravagance of form 
saps the life out of the object that it represents though, from a 
technical point of view, the art is fully developed and appears con¬ 
scious and sophisticated. The Sanchi counterpart of Sarnath belongs 
to the same conception of form and is equally conventional and 
stylised. 

Compared to these lions the elephant, carved in the round on 
the rock at Dhauli in Orissa (pi. XIV, 30) above the inscribed record 
of Asoka, shows much more sense of creative form and is artistically 
far superior. Indeed, such plastic presentation of bulky volume, 
such feeling for live flesh rendered with remarkable naturalism of a 
dynamic character, such knowledge of physiognomical form of the 
subject treated and such sense of dignified movement and linear 
rhythm has no parallel in Mauryan animal sculptures. Compared 
to this, even the Rampurwa,lion or the Sarnath quadripartite, with 
their tight and coagulated treatment of the veins and muscles shown 
in meaningless tension, and in spite of full reproduction of volume 
and advanced proof of visualisation, appear lifeless. The loud 


607 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


exhibitionism of this latter group cannot stand comparison with the 
quiet dignity of. the former. Indeed, the Dhauli elephant symbol¬ 
ises His Imperial Majesty King Asoka presenting himself in quiet 
dignity before the people of Kalinga, while the Sarnath quadripartite 
is an exhibition of imperial pomp, power and authority. Of all Maur- 
yan animal sculptures the Rampurwa bull (pi. XIV, 28) alone seems 
to partake a little of the character of dynamic naturalism that im¬ 
parts potency and strength to the Dhauli elephant. This bull is 
architectonically less advanced than the lion from the same place, 
but it exhibits a remarkable sense of form, of plastic volume and 
of the quality of the living flesh; realistic vision and close observa¬ 
tion of nature helped to a clearer understanding of the subject repre¬ 
sented, and nothing conventional or stylised or abstract blurred the 
mental image of the artist or stood in the way of its execution. This 
becomes clearer when we compare it with the striding bull on the 
Sarnath abacus; the latter is frankly stylised and conventional. 
Indeed in the Dhauli elephant and the Rampurwa bull, a different 
asethetic vision and tradition seems to have been at work. 

All Maurya columns are chiselled out of grey Chunar sandstone 
and have a lustrous polish due to the application, perhaps of silicious 
varnish, on the stone. This same source of the material probably 
suggests that there was at or near Chunar an art-centre established 
and patronised directly by the Maurya court, an assumption further 
supported by the fact that all the component parts of the columns, 
including the crowning animal, abacus and shaft, tend towards 
increasing success. 

The origin of this court-art of the Mauryas has been a subject 
of keen dispute among scholars. But the general opinion seems 
to be that the impetus originally came from outside, from Iran of 
the Achaemenid emperors. Indeed, few have seriously doubted 
that West-Asiatic art-forms and inspiration, indirectly and in gene¬ 
ral, and Achaemenian impetus and inspiration, directly and in 
particular, were at work at the root. But this must not mean that 
the Achaemenian pillar-type and form were bodily adopted by the 
Mauryan court-artists. Indeed, the differences that separate the 
Maurya columns from the Achaemenian ones are considerable and 
must not be lost sight of. The Mauryan shaft is plain, the Achae¬ 
menian, fluted; the Mauryan, monolithic, the Achaemenian, built of 
separate pieces or segments of stone; the Mauryan partakes of the 
character of a wood-carver’s or carpenter’s work, the Achaemenian, 


508 


ART 


that of a mason. The form and character of the capital differ widely 
in the two cases; the Maury an has no base, the Achaemenian has 
one which takes the form of an inverted lotus. The Achaeme¬ 
nian column, intended invariably as part of a larger architectural 
conception, is composed of too many component parts presenting 
harsh contrasts and looking complex and complicated, while the 
Mauryan column, intended to produce the effect of an independent 
monument, is simpler, more harmonious in conception and execu¬ 
tion, and gives the feeling of more stability, dignity and strength, 
born perhaps of other primitive and elemental origins. The indi¬ 
genous and original contribution to the creation of this item of 
Mauryan art is therefore undeniable. Equally undeniable also is the 
fact that in its lustrous polish, in its adoption and adaptation of the 
bell-shaped capital, in the higher plane of conception and driving 
idea, and in the general monumental and dignified quality and 
appearance, the Mauryan column seems to reveal the debt it owes 
to Achaemenian art, also to Hellenistic art so far as some of its 
crowning members and part of the general effect are concerned. 
The twisted rope design, the acanthus leaf and palmette designs, etc. 
may, however, have been derived from older and common West- 
Asiatic heritage. 

But whatever we might think of the origin, the total aesthetic 
effect of Mauryan columns has never been surpassed in later Indian 
art. In the whole realm of independent monumental columns of 
the world Mauryan columns occupy a proud position by reason of 
their free and significant artistic form in space, the rhythmic and 
balanced proportion of their constituent elements, the unitary and 
integrated effect of the whole, their chaste and elegant shaft and 
capital and, no less, by the conscious, proud and dignified attitude 
of the crowning components. 

.But with all its urban, conscious and civilised quality, its advanc¬ 
ed power of visualisation and full comprehension of the third dimen¬ 
sion, Mauryan court-art only constitutes an episode in the history of 
Indian art. It was indeed a hothouse plant reared up by the will, 
care and patronage of a court heavily under the influence of con¬ 
temporary international culture and ideology of the Asiatic West and 
Mediterranean East. In course of time, the glass walls fell to pieces 
and the plant withered. Mauryan court-art failed to make any 
notable permanent contribution to the growth of Indian art except 
that it directly helped the fixation of the latter in permanent mate¬ 
rial. The individual taste and preference of the Maurya monarchs 


509 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


for ideas and objects of Medo-Achaemenian and Hellenistic Orient 
furnished the impetus and inspiration, and Indian art was raised 
from the position of handicraft and primitive art to the status and 
dignity of high art, just as Maury an imperialism and Aiokan policy 
of Dhammavijaya (conquest by the Law of Piety) drew India out 
of her local and tribal outlook and raised Buddhism to the status of 
an international religion. 

One of the most important functions of Mauryan court-art, like 
Achaemenian court-art, was to impress and overawe the populace 
with the power and majesty of its rulers. To this function can be 
traced the compactness of the solid animal figures, their exaggerated 
forms and their conventional appearances, also the most imposing 
stateliness of the columns. Mauryan court-art is thus individual¬ 
istic in its essential character and ideology. Like Asoka’s Dhamma¬ 
vijaya, it lacked deeper roots in the collective social will, taste and 
preference, and was therefore destined to have an isolated and short 
life, coeval and coexistent with and within the limits of the power- 
, ful Mauryan court. This explains why Mauryan court-art, with 
all its dignified bearing, monumental appearance and civilised 
quality, forms but a short and isolated chapter of the history of 
Indian art. Like the columns and the animal figures themselves, 
Mauryan court-art stands aloof and apart! 

II. 6UNGA-KANVA ART: MADHYADEsA AND 

EASTERN INDIA 

The art of the time of the Sungas and Kanvas, which immediately 
follows that of the Mauryas, is clearly a negation of the Mauryan 
attitude. Indeed, the bas-reliefs on the railings of Bharhut, Bodh 
Gaya and Sanchi or on the friezes of the Khan<Jagiri-Udayagiri 
(Bhu vanes vara) caves that, chronologically speaking, follow closely 
on the art of the Mauryan court and, from the point of view of 
subject-matter, are predominantly Buddhist, reflect more of the 
mind, tradition and culture-ideology of the larger section of the 
people than Mauryan art was capable of doing. Sunga-Kanva art, 
formally and spiritually, is opposed to all that Mauryan art stands 
for, and is different in motive and direction, technique and signific¬ 
ance. 

The bas-reliefs of Bharhut, Bodh Gaya, Sanchi, Amaravatl and 
other sites provide more than anything else an illuminating com¬ 
mentary on contemporary Indian life and attitude towards life as 
conceived and planned in early Buddhism. These reliefs, whether 


510 


ART 


in medallions or rectangular slabs, also seem to be nothing but 
charana-chitras , l with appropriate labels as in Bharhut, translated 
into stone and hence not portable. Besides, the method of arrange¬ 
ment of various scenes depicted on the upright pillars and posts of 
the gates and the railings of Bharhut, Bodh Gaya and Sanchi, i.e. 
their general lay-out in square or rectangular panels, one below the 
other, in more or less continuous narration, cannot but invariably 
suggest similar arrangement of scenes in charana-chitras or pata- 
chitras of later folk-pictorial tradition. One may go still further 
and argue that the top horizontal panels of the Bharhut and Sanchi 
gateways, with their sides rolled up at the two ends, are nothing 
but adaptations in stone of pata-chitras, spread out for exhibition 
with their sides rolled up. 

1. Sanchi: Railing of Stupa II; Bharhut; Bodh Gaya: 

C. 100-50 B.C. 

The artists of the Mauryan court had not to grapple with the 
problem of the third dimension as they had a ready-made solution 
at their disposal. Under ordinary circumstances one would have 
expected this solution to be one of the heritages of Sunga art. Quite 
the contrary is the case, however. The ground balustrade of Stupa 
II of Sanchi (pi. XV, 31), which presumably is the earliest phase of 
this art, is wholly worked in very low and flat reliefs, so low and flat 
that these reliefs may be said to be just essays in linear composition. 
The Bharhut repository consists invariably of low and flat reliefs, 
portrayed more as silhouettes sharply detached from their back¬ 
grounds. Forms are conceived and presented, not in terms of depth 
but of surface, and what optically should have been presented as 
hidden or partly covered is shown in part or in entirety (cf. pis. XV, 
32-33; XVI, 34-37). 

Objects are represented as large or small according to the mean¬ 
ing in the story depicted, i.e. according to their comprehensibility 
or reality, not in accordance with the optical impression. Over- 
secting and foreshortening are frankly resorted to, whenever and 
wherever necessary, but nowhere is there any attempt to achieve 
any illusion of depth. Besides such reliefs there are independent 
large size human figures of yakshas, yakshinis, etc. in high and bold 
relief, and occupying prominent positions on unframed railing posts. 
These figures, unlike those of the reliefs, are round modelled shapes 

1. Continuous series of portable pictures, usually depicting familiar topics of 
popular interest, painted on long narrow pieces of thick cloth or canvas, which 
, may be easily rolled up, and opened for exhibition. 


511 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


either in rigid parallelism and frontality as we see in the figure of 
Sirima Devata (pi. XVI, 35), or in variegated ‘bhahgas’ and ample 
turns and bends in movements as one sees in the figure of Sudar&ana 
yakshini (pi. XVI, 36). In the former case, the treatment is compact 
and conglomerated, while in the latter it has a swaying grace and a 
flowing plastic consistency. But in both cases there is the unmista¬ 
kable evidence of an attempt to relate the three-dimensional exten¬ 
siveness to the flatness of the surface. It is not difficult to imagine 
that from the silhouette-like low and flat reliefs of the ground 
balustrade of Stupa II of Sanchl to the reliefs and the large size 
figures of Bharhut, there is a frank attempt at progressive realisation 
of what had originally been a two-dimensional form in charana - 
chitras or scroll-paintings in terms of relief on such durable material 
as stone. This phase of early Indian art may thus be said to be a 
quest for the third dimension, for depth and hence for more free 
movement in space, and these reliefs but exemplify the devices the 
artists adopted for the purpose. 

i 

A most characteristic formal quality of 6unga art is its flowing 
linear rhythm that binds all isolated objects in one continuous stream 
of life as it were. Look at any coping stone of a railing, and you will 
find a huge lotus stalk flowing in rhythmical waves from form to 
form, not only binding each isolated object itself, including the limbs 
of human beings, but also the animals and trees, with the same 
flowing linear rhythm. Wherever luxuriant vegetation finds a place 
—and nowhere else in Indian sculpture is the vegetal world so inti¬ 
mately, engrossingly and luxuriously rendered than in the Bharhut, 
Bodh Gaya, Sanchl and Bhuvanesvara reliefs—its radiating and con¬ 
tinuous linear movements dominate the composition, and all the 
figures of men or animals, irrespective of action and status, are swayed 
and permeated by the movement and become equal and integral 
parts of the whole. The so-called Prasenajit Pillar reliefs, the scene 
of the Chudamaha festival in the Sudharma Hall, and the figures of 
Chandra, Alakananda and Sudarsana Yakshinls may be cited as exam¬ 
ples of this flowing and rhythmical linear movement. 

But there is another trend in Bharhut equally powerful, a trend 
characterised by a disregard of this flowing linear rhythm. This 
trend is best illustrated in such scenes as those on the so-called 
Ajatasatru Pillar where the figures are hard and isolated and the 
compositions are regulated in a schematic manner by vertical and 
horizontal lines (cf. pi. I, 1). It is only an agitated display of light 


512 


ART 


and darkness that disturbs the otherwise static character of the 
scenes. The trend is equally marked in several frameless figures 
standing on upright posts; such are the figures of Virudhaka Yaksha, 
Gangeya Yaksha, Chakravaka Nagaraja, Sirima Devata and of others. 
It seems, however, that this latter trend was gradually yielding place 
to the former, which means that isolated, compact and static rush 
of forms was progressively being subordinated, so far as Bharhut 
and Both Gaya are concerned, to the free and rhythmic flow of lines 
and swaying balance. 

The general tone of the art of Bharhut is very modest, sober 
and restrained; the participants in the stories seem to be untouched 
by any dramatic moment or by any high tide even when such occa¬ 
sions present themselves. The modesty and sobriety of diction are, 
however, no bar to clarity of expression, which is one important 
characteristic of this art. The stories are told with scrupulous ex¬ 
haustiveness; no single detail is left out, and labels are added for 
identifying the scene. In Bodh Gaya, however, stories are told more 
summarily, but suggestively. A comparison of two scenes of the 
same subject, e.g. that of the Jetavana story, would offer an interest¬ 
ing illustration. Descriptive labels also disappear, evidently the 
narratives had already become well known, and there was no more 
need for labelling them or portraying every single detail (pi. XVII, 
38-40). 

In order to make the fables represented easily comprehensible 
to the illiterate, the artists of Bharhut adopted what is known as 
the method of continuous narration, in which the main stages of a 
given story, localised in the same spot but happening at different 
times, are portrayed in one and the same relief with the hero of the 
story repeatedly shown. Sometimes successive stages of a story 
are divided into several panels so that the sequence of the story can 
be clearly followed from panel to panel. 

The &unga-Kanva artists appear to delight in the handling of 
the human figure; the joy of a new discovery seems to urge them on 
to depict the human body in every conceivable position and attitude. 
In Bharhut the attempt is still full of effort; the individual parts of 
the body are shown clearly and distinctly, but they are not always 
linked integrally. In Bodh Gaya, the parts reach an integration 
and the body moves more freely and becomes a living entity. In¬ 
deed, technically as well as from the point of view of visual percep¬ 
tion, Bodh Gaya is a step forward from Bharhut. Reliefs are less 

513 

A-I.U.—83 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


either in rigid parallelism and frontality as we see in the figure of 
Sirima Devata (pi. XVI, 35), or in variegated ‘bhahgas’ and ample 
turns and bends in movements as one sees in the figure of Sudar&ana 
yakshini (pi. XVI, 36). In the former case, the treatment is compact 
and conglomerated, while in the latter it has a swaying grace and a 
flowing plastic consistency. But in both cases there is the unmista¬ 
kable evidence of an attempt to relate the three-dimensional exten¬ 
siveness to the flatness of the surface. It is not difficult to imagine 
that from the silhouette-like low and flat reliefs of the ground 
balustrade of Stupa II of Sanchl to the reliefs and the large size 
figures of Bharhut, there is a frank attempt at progressive realisation 
of what had originally been a two-dimensional form in charana- 
chitras or scroll-paintings in terms of relief on such durable material 
as stone. This phase of early Indian art may thus be said to be a 
quest for the third dimension, for depth and hence for more free 
movement in space, and these reliefs but exemplify the devices the 
artists adopted for the purpose. 

I 

A most characteristic formal quality of gunga art is its flowing 
linear rhythm that binds all isolated objects in one continuous stream 
of life as it were. Look at any coping stone of a railing, and you will 
find a huge lotus stalk flowing in rhythmical waves from form to 
form, not only binding each isolated object itself, including the limbs 
of human beings, but also the animals and trees, with the same 
flowing linear rhythm. Wherever luxuriant vegetation finds a place 
—and nowhere else in Indian sculpture is the vegetal world so inti¬ 
mately, engrossingly and luxuriously rendered than in the Bharhut, 
Bodh Gaya, Sanchl and Bhuvanesvara reliefs—its radiating and con¬ 
tinuous linear movements dominate the composition, and all the 
figures of men or animals, irrespective of action and status, are swayed 
and permeated by the movement and become equal and integral 
parts of the whole. The so-called Prasenajit Pillar reliefs, the scene 
of the Chudamaha festival in the Sudharma Hall, and the figures of 
Chandra, Alakananda and Sudarsana Yakshinis may be cited as exam¬ 
ples of this flowing and rhythmical linear movement. 

But there is another trend in Bharhut equally powerful, a trend 
characterised by a disregard of this flowing linear rhythm. This 
trend is best illustrated in such scenes as those on the so-called 
Ajatasatru Pillar where the figures are hard and isolated and the 
compositions are regulated in a schematic manner by vertical and 
horizontal lines (cf. pi. I, 1). It is only an agitated display of light 


512 


ART 


and darkness that disturbs the otherwise static character of the 
scenes. The trend is equally marked in several frameless figures 
standing on upright posts; such are the figures of Virudhaka Yaksha, 
Gangeya Yaksha, Chakravaka Nagaraja, Sirima Devata and of others. 
It seems, however, that this latter trend was gradually yielding place 
to the former, which means that isolated, compact and static rush 
of forms was progressively being subordinated, so far as Bharhut 
and Both Gaya are concerned, to the free and rhythmic flow of lines 
and swaying balance. 

The general tone of the art of Bharhut is very modest, sober 
and restrained; the participants in the stories seem to be untouched 
by any dramatic moment or by any high tide even when such occa¬ 
sions present themselves. The modesty and sobriety of diction are, 
however, no bar to clarity of expression, which is one important 
characteristic of this art. The stories are told with scrupulous ex¬ 
haustiveness; no single detail is left out, and labels are added for 
identifying the scene. In Bodh Gaya, however, stories are told more 
summarily, but suggestively. A comparison of two scenes of the 
same subject, e.g. that of the Jetavana story, would offer an interest¬ 
ing illustration. Descriptive labels also disappear, evidently the 
narratives had already become well known, and there was no more 
need for labelling them or portraying every single detail (pi. XVII, 
38-40). 

In order to make the fables represented easily comprehensible 
to the illiterate, the artists of Bharhut adopted what is known as 
the method of continuous narration, in which the main stages of a 
given story, localised in the same spot but happening at different 
times, are portrayed in one and the same relief with the hero of the 
story repeatedly shown. Sometimes successive stages of a story 
are divided into several panels so that the sequence of the story can 
be clearly followed from panel to panel. 

The £uhga-Kanva artists appear to delight in the handling of 
the human figure; the joy of a new discovery seems to urge them on 
to depict the human body in every conceivable position and attitude. 
In Bharhut the attempt is still full of effort; the individual parts of 
the body are shown clearly and distinctly, but they are not always 
linked integrally. In Bodh Gaya, the parts reach an integration 
and the body moves more freely and becomes a living entity. In¬ 
deed, technically as well as from the point of view of visual percep¬ 
tion, Bodh Gaya is a step forward from Bharhut. Reliefs are less 

513 

A-I.U.—33 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


crowded, all non-essentials being left out. The medley of forms of 
the Ajatasatru Pillar of Bharhut has given place to order, brevity 
and clarity, and the figures have all been brought out clearly and 
exhaustively. They are now shown in fuller roundness; their heavi¬ 
ness of form still persists, but it has already shed its static weight 
and stolidity. From mere definition of the body, Bodh Gaya sets 
the stage to suggest that the body is warm blood and soft flesh as 
well. 


2. Sanchi ; Gateways of Stupas I and III. C. 50 to 1 B.C. 

Sanchi is in the continuous line of evolution from Bharhut and 
Bodh Gaya. Here, in the bursting and boisterous reliefs of the four 
gates (cf. pi. XVIII, 41) of the Great Stupa (South, North, East and 
West in chronological and stylistic order) and in the only remaining 
gate of Stupa III, the beholder can see the contemporary life of mid- 
India spread out before his eyes in all its mundane love and delight, 
pageantry and grandeur, peace and beauty, idyllic romanticism and 
violent struggle. The reliefs illustrate episodes from the life of 
the Buddha and incidents that enlivened contemporary history (pis. 
XIX, 45-47; XX, 48; XVIII A, 43-44); they do it no longer softly\, 
modestly and clumsily as in Bharhut. but with great delight, some¬ 
times even in riotous mirth and gaiety. Sometimes stories are re¬ 
peated from one gate to the other; the artists and their patrons 
were evidently fond of particular stories like those of the War of 
the Relics, the Chhaddanta Jataka, the siege of Kusinara, the visit 
of Asoka to the Bodhi Tree, etc. 

The Sanchi artists seem to take an engrossing interest in all that 
pertains to the life of this world. The human figure (cf. pi. XVIII 
A, 42) is endowed with a new form and bearing. It is no longer con¬ 
stituted of different parts joined together, no more shy, hesitating 
and faltering in its movements, but as an integrated and harmonious 
whole, free and happy, without being easy and sensuous as in Bodh 
Gaya. A rich world of flora and fauna finds a feeling and natural¬ 
istic expression at the hands of the Sanchi artists; the elephants, deer 
and antelopes, the lotus creepers, pipal and a host of other trees 
and plants which lend their characteristic form, colour and charm 
to Indian art are portrayed for the first time here and in certain 
panels of the Rani gumpha near Bhuvanesvara. 

But not all the reliefs of Sanchi belong to this dynamic creative 
impulse which is most potent and fruitful in certain reliefs of the 
South and West Gates. Undoubtedly this is the main and the 


514 


ART 


most important trend in Sanchl. But the old tight and schematic, 
rigid and mechanical compositional trend of the Ajatasatru Pillar of 
Bharhut is not altogether absent. 

Bharhut, Bodh Gaya and Sanchl represent the first organised 
art activity of the Indian people as a whole, which stands directly 
counterpoised to the court-art of the Mauryas. It reflects for the 
first time the results of the ethnic, social and religious fusion and 
integration that had been evolved through centuries on the Indian 
soil, more particularly in the Madhyadesa of Buddhist conception. 
It is quite possible that artists from the north-west worked side by 
side with artists nearer home at Bharhut, and perhaps also at Sanchi. 
Equally unmistakable is the meaning of the use of certain West- 
Asiatic forms and motifs at all these places. But all such forms and 
motifs have been so completely fused and integrated into local forms 
and idioms that the foreign originals are only vague memories. Con¬ 
sidered from this point of view, this art inaugurates the first chapter 
of national and indigenous Indian art and expresses the Indian mind 
in all its grades and shades. It was in this art that the basis of not 
a few of the essential qualities of what we call Indian plastic art 
was laid down. These essential qualities would persist through the 
ages, throughout the modulations brought about by the passage of 
time and by the ethnic conditions of the country. 

3. Orissa: Udayagiri and Khandagiri Reliefs. C. 100 B.C. — A.D. 150 

A few caves, presumably Jain in religious affiliation, in the 
Udayagiri and Khandagiri hills near Bhuvanesvara, contain a num¬ 
ber of sculptured friezes and panels which, though belonging to the 
common denominator of the art of Madhyadesa, speak nevertheless 
a distinct local or provincial dialect. The Manchapuri cave relief 
in Udayagiri and Anantagumpha reliefs in Khandagiri are both 
characterised by a robust vitality and vigorous movements; masses 
modelled in high relief produce strong contrasts of light and dark¬ 
ness. This seems to connect these reliefs with the main trend of 
Sanchl; the treatment of elephants and foliage are particularly noti¬ 
ceable; but the general treatment is coarse, movement less vital; 
technically the reliefs are less advanced, and isolated and compact 
figures prevent forceful composition. On the whole, Madhyadesa 
affiliations are unmistakable; equally unmistakable is the fact that 
the reliefs follow the same narrative principle, though we know little 
about the stories themselves. 


515 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

The long friezes of the Rani gumpha (pis. XXVII, 70; XXVIII, 
71) and Ganesa gumpha came much later, belonging probably to a 
date not earlier than the first and early second century A.D. They 
are also equally provincial in outlook, but very much advanced in 
theme and conception, treatment and composition. The crude and 
coarse workmanship of the reliefs cannot, however, conceal the 
maturity of their conception and representation. 

4. Western India: Bhaja and Kdrle. C. 50 B .C.-A-D. 150 

The large rock-cut reliefs of Bhaja in the Western Ghats con- 
form to the same common denominator, 1 but are conceived from the 
roots of aboriginal, almost primeval, depths, and executed with an 
expansive vitality that knows neither limits nor restraint (the Surya 
relief (pi. XX, 49) and the Airavata relief, for example). The com¬ 
position is of exceptionally large proportions; fully and expansively 
modelled masses of heavy weight 2 move surgingly forward as far 
as their inner urge or the rock-surface would allow them. There can 
be no doubt that the Bhaja reliefs basically were ethnically condi¬ 
tioned; they are indeed aboriginally Indian. 

A century later, at Karle, the surging plastic expansiveness of 
Bhaja becomes chastened by the vigorous discipline of fluid and 
rhythmical design. The free human figure of Sanchl ( yaksha figure 
panel of upright torana, West Gate) is touched by the plastic exuber¬ 
ance of Bhaja and at the same time vigorously disciplined within 
a massive frame; it is thus transformed into a free, proud, stately 
and heroic specimen of humanity, strong, self-assured and animated 
(cf. pi. XXV, 64). The deeply heaving hmgs seem to expand the 
body to the last limits of the frame and model it into fully deve¬ 
loped form at the same time. Man and woman stand close side by 
side, each in his or her own way and complete in themselves; yet 
the two together make the whole, each being complementary to the 
other; the man, proud and self-assured, but slightly erotic in pose 
and attitude. But it is wrong to call them mithuna couples since 
they hardly betray any conscious erotic suggestion. 

5. Yaksha Primitives. C. 50 B-C.-A.D. 50 

While from Bharhut onwards a new and civilised art and a com¬ 
mon denominator, in spite of local or provincial aspects determined 
ethnically or otherwise, were being gradually evolved, an older and 

1. Cf. the figures of Dvarapalas at Bhaja. 

2. Cf. the demon over which pass the chariot of Surya and also India’s elephant. 

516 



ART 


perhaps primitive art form, originally practised, presumably in 
wood and clay, was getting fixed in stone along a different line of 
evolution and steadily approaching the civilised conception and 
technique. The yakshaas and yakshinis were malevolent deities of 
primitive tribal conception and were worshipped in every village. 
They hold a definite and important place in both Buddhist and Brah- 
manical myths, legends and religion. Since they held power over 
men’s life and death and were reputed to be hoarders of unspent 
wealth, they were conceived as having a physical form of large 
proportions and huge bulk, and since they owed their existence to 
tribal primitive imagination, they had a heavy earthly character of 
form. Earliest stone specimens of such divinities hail from Patna 
(pi. XXI, 52), Parkham (near Mathura) (pi. XXI, 50), Baroda (also 
near Mathura), Besnagar (pi. XXI, 51), Pawaya (near Gwalior) (pi. 
XXII, 54, 56) and other places. 

These life-size plastically round independent statues belong to 
different aspects and phases of early Indian art. They are all pri¬ 
mitively Indian in form, but they also reflect the currents of the 
flowing traditions and fashions of contemporary civilised practice. 
Their heavy bulk, their almost archaic stolidity and weighty volume, 
the conflict between fully rounded and modelled volume as seen in 
the arms, breast and abdomen on the one hand and flat surface at 
the back on the other, the treatment of the drapery and the phy¬ 
siognomical form and appearance—all seem to indicate that they 
have a close relation with the figures of the dvdrapdlas on the East 
and West Gates of the Great Stupa of Sanchi as well as with the 
primitive Bodhisattvas of Mathura. The disposition of the feet and 
their full three dimensional aspect seem to point to a date later 
than Bharhut. 

Special reference should be made to the elegant figure of a 
female chattn-bearer found at Didarganj (Patna), which shows a 
more powerful, developed and highly civilised conception and feel¬ 
ing (pi. XXI, 53). Though still exhibiting certain primitive charac¬ 
teristics, it can in no way be considered archaic or primitive, not even 
in spite of the relatively more emphasised importance of the front 
view. Here one witnesses perhaps an earlier urban, conscious and 
sophisticated female type and form, immortalised in later Indian art 
and literature. The statue, plastically fully round, is bound by no 
law of frontality and is meant to be seen from all sides. Its heavy 
but loose mass of hair, its full soft bosoms and the firmness of flesh 
at the back, its attenuated waist with soft abdominal muscles and the 


517 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


broad hips, and its expression of conscious elegance and daintiness 
recall the still daintier and more lively yakshinis of the Mathura 
reliefs of the second century A.D. 

6. Cult Images 

The origin of cult images has been discussed above. 1 It seems 
to be quite clear that while the practice of image-worship was im¬ 
ported by foreigners like the Greeks and the Central Asian tribes, 
it was prevalent among a large section of the peoples who inherited 
it from earlier times. A study of the extant images shows that 
while imported anthropomorphism made its influence felt in the 
Punjab and north-west, the innate anthropomorphism of the Indians 
asserted itself with vigour and created the divine images of the new 
religious cults, especially Buddha, in Mathura. The Buddha Bhaga- 
van was shaped, as it were, out of the form and content of the Yaksha 
Bhagavan. 2 Indeed, the earliest Buddha figures from Mathura 3 that 
are called, out of deference to old scruples, Bodhisattvas and not 
Buddhas, have, formally and psychologically as well as in treatment, 
intimate relations with early Indian human figuration, not a few of 
which must have been idealised portraits. Like the yakshas and 
dvdrapdlas of Sanchl, the Buddha-Bodhisattvas of Mathura are 
characterised by a heavy earthiness of form; a rustic robustness and 
a relaxed largeness impart to them a simple dignity that is purely 
temporal. Compared to these, the earliest Gandhara Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas, though crude in workmanship, are sophisticated in 
appearance and expression, but have not the dignity, either tem¬ 
poral or spiritual, of a Chakravartin. 

The two types belong to two different social and psychological 
spheres. The Gandhara type is eclectic and syncretistic, ignorant 
of the Indian tradition, and unconscious of the dignity that underlies 
the idea of a ‘Chakravartin’; Indian notions and West-Asiatic, mainly 
Hellenistic, forms make of the Buddha a lifeless human being of 
ordinary stature. The Mathura Buddha type is essentially and 
aboriginally Indian, closely linked with the old tradition of pri¬ 
mitive image-making (cf. pis. XXI, 55; XXIII, 57). 

HI. GANDHARA ART. c. 50 B. C.—A. D. 500 

So far as can be judged from actual finds, Gandhara along with 
the Punjab seems to have been one of the most prolific schools of 

1. See Ch. XIX, Sections on ‘Images’. 

2. See above, pp. 395-6. 

3. Katra seated fig. c. A.D. 80; Aniyor seated fig. c. A.D. 80; seated fig. Munich, 
c. A.D. 80; standing figs, erected by Friar Bala at Mathura, Sravasti, Allaha¬ 
bad, Samath, c. A.D. 80-100. 


518 





ART 


early Indian art, active from about the middle of the first century 
B.C. to about the fifth century A.D. Geographically this region was 
so situated that it lay exposed to all sorts of foreign contacts and 
influences—Persian, Greek, Roman, Saka and Kushana. But it is 
somewhat strange that this so-called Graeco-Buddhist art of Gan¬ 
dhara does not come to view before Greek domination of the north¬ 
west became a thing of the past, and that the patrons of this art 
were principally the Central Asiatic Sakas and Kushanas, who 
carried the traditions and culture of their Hellenistic predecessors 
and played the role of protectors and interpreters of West-Asiatic 
Hellenism in this region. 

From the very prolific nature of Gandhara art it seems that 
sculptural objects representing stories and legends of cults that were 
new and foreign to these peoples, but w T hich they had come to adopt 
for their own, were very much in demand. They seem to have been 
turned out in large numbers from workshops established for the 
purpose, almost in a mechanical manner as it were. This explains 
why, in spite of the strict fidelity to Indian traditions, myths, legends 
and iconography, in spite of their depicting the entire Buddhist 
/legendary and historical cycle in all its minutest details, the reliefs 
appear to be mechanical and without any character, bereft of any 
emotional sympathy or spontaneity, and lacking in sincerity. Un¬ 
doubtedly those responsible for these products were mere craftsmen, 
mediocre artisans mechanically turning out wares to meet the 
demands of an aristocratic but unimaginative and unappreciative 
clientele. Animals, throughout the entire range of the Gandhara 
school, are but very poorly treated, and even the monsters in the 
Mnradharshana 1 scenes lack character—ail absolute proof of the 
colourlessness and the mechanical character of Gandhara art. 

The Hellenistic inspiration of this art is undeniable, even though 
transformed by Saka-Kushana and Indian tastes and perceptions. 
Figures of the Buddhist pantheon, including that of the Buddha 
himself (pis. XXVI, 65-68; XXVII, 69), with iconographic marks and 
attributes of Indian tradition, are rendered in terms of identical 
characters of the Graeco-Roman pantheon, sometimes with the 
moustache, turban or ornaments added according to current local 
taste; their draperies are arranged in the style of a Roman toga and 
treated as in Hellenistic art in separate volumes; Indian sages and 

1. Defeat and fight'of Mara, the evil spirit of Buddhist literature, who came with 
his beautiful daughters and satanic hosts to tempt, or frighten, Gautama on 
the eve of his attaining Buddhahood. 

519 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


priests and anchorites in the stories correspond to bearded philo¬ 
sophers and sages of the classical tradition; yakshas, garudas, ruigas 
and even Vajrapani, with their usual attributes, are conceived and 
represented in terms of the bearded genii, Atlantes, Bacchants, Zeus, 
Herakles, Eros, Hermes or Poseidon. Relief composition as a whole, 
modelling of the facial and physiognomical features, well-rounded 
forms, and the relation of depth and surface, treatment of drapery, 
wavy treatment of the hair, relation, balance and distribution of 
weight of parts of the human frame, certain motifs and patterns, etc. 
all indicate a full and close knowledge of Graeco-Roman art which 
the artisans unhesitatingly made use of in the context of a new life, 
religion and iconography that were but ill-realised either in imagi¬ 
nation or in actual experience. Large size independent figures of 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, it must be admitted, betray in certain 
cases a character of their own, both in features and treatment, and 
they are aesthetically as well as historically much more important. 
But here it was a case of an individual with individual traits and 
character, not one of depicting Indian life as a whole. 

\ 

To understand the syncretistic character of the long-lived 
Gandhara school, it is necessary to study the finds in chronological 
sequence. The Bimaran reliquary, which is usually considered to 
be the earliest product of the school (c. 50 B.C. at the earliest), is 
followed about half a century later, i.e. in the first century A.D., by 
two headless standing images of the Buddha—one from Loriyan 
Tongai (A.D. 6) and the other from Hastnagar (A.D. 72)—the 
Kanishka reliquary from Shah-ji-ki-dheri (A.D. 78-100), a standing 
Harlti figure from Sakrah Dheri (A.D. 7J and a few others that may 
be dated only somewhat approximately. These are followed in the 
second century A.D. by a large number of finds—stone and stucco 
reliefs—at the various sites of Taxila, which may also be dated 
approximately with the help of the data furnished by Sir John Mar¬ 
shall’s excavations. The third, fourth and fifth centuries are charac¬ 
terised by a large number of finds in stucco and terracotta; indeed, 
stone sculptures become rare during these centuries, and the few 
examples that are known are qualitatively on a level lower than 
that of stucco and terracotta figures. The most representative speci¬ 
mens of this phase hail from Jaulian and Dharmarajika stupa at 
Taxila, but more profusely from Hadda, near Jalalabad. In fact, 
the quality and character of the later phase of Gandhara art are not 
a little conditioned by the use of these two pliable materials. 


520 


ART 


The figures and their draperies of the Bimaran reliquary, shown 
in agitated movement, strongly recall Hellenistic ideals. The dra¬ 
pery is treated plastically as separate volume with its own weight. 
In the free standing Buddha, dated A.D. 6, from Loriyan Tongai, the 
drapery is still separated from the body, but it is so disposed that 
certain parts of the body are made visible from underneath the 
garment, the fold-lines of which remain agitated. In the Charsadda 
Buddha, dated A.D. 72, this is more clearly manifest, and already in 
the known examples of the latter half of the first century the trans¬ 
parency of the drapery with agitated fold-lines becomes the chief 
theme. Preference for long and rhythmic lines, a strong outline of 
the structure, a wide and vast treatment of the ushnisha and loose 
wavy hair are also equally manifest. 

Towards the end of the century, with the Kushanas establishing 
themselves firmly and spreading their sway, a sort of all-round 
schematisation in art begins. The drapery is shown in small and 
narrow folds symmetrically arranged, and at times becomes reduced 
to a decorative display. The figures themselves are shorter in sta¬ 
ture, stumpy in appearance and treated in a rough manner, exhibit¬ 
ing a kind of crude, rustic strength. Throughout the second century 
these characteristics have their sway in the main, and schematisa¬ 
tion, with the fluted drapery shown in flat parallel folds, holds the 
ground. It is not unlikely that this debased and degenerate art was 
at least partially due to Saka-Kushana influences from the Mathura 
region, and partly also to those of the art of the later Roman Empire 
with its rather squat forms. 

From the third century onwards, there seems to be a revival of 
artistic forces that were current in the first century. The works of 
this later phase of Gandhara art, especially those from Hadda and 
Jaulian, are characterised by an intensity of feeling, a telling realism, 
and an individuality of character that are strongly reminiscent of 
the classical tradition and are far removed from the sapless, conven¬ 
tional commonplaces of the earlier phase of progressive decadence. 
It is this phase of Gandhara art that was borne on the shoulders of 
Buddhism and Buddhist monks through Hadda and Bamiyan to Cen¬ 
tral Asia and China and it was into this phase that contemporary art 
of the Ganga-Yamuna valley poured a little of its contents and spirit. 

From the Indian point of view, the importance of Gandhara art 
lies in the fact that here one can see how a phase of Indian life, 


521 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


religion and iconography looked like in a foreign eclectic garb. From 
a Hellenistic point of view, it represents an eastward extension of 
Hellenistic art, as transformed by Saka-Kushana and Iranian tastes 
and forms, in an Indian setting and as applied to Indian subjects. 
As Kramrisch says: “Gandhara . .. occupies a position apart. For, 
it is Indian and colonial from a Hellenistic point of view, it is 
Hellenistic and colonial when viewed from India.” 

IV. MATHURA: c. A.D. 150-300 

The earliest finds from Mathura, represented by a few frag¬ 
mentary sculptures, are closely related to the art of Bharhut, going 
back to the middle of the second century B.C.; but it is from about 
the beginning of the Christian era that the Mathura school seems to 
have become active and begun producing unceasingly for centuries 
those varied works of art which earned for her an enviable position 
in the art world of contemporary India and enabled her, at a 
later stage, to export images to such centres as Central Asia and 
Taxila on the one hand, and Sravasti and Sarnath on the other. The 
unmistakable identification mark of all Mathura sculptures is the 
spotted red sandstone from Sikri. 

A few specimens (the Amohini relief, a standing female figure, 
the Lonasobhika dyagapata (pi. XXV, 63), the Kankali Til a dydgapa - 
tas, etc.), that seem to belong to pre-Kanishka decades, show a char¬ 
acter of relief composition that emphasises the stature of the main 
figure by raising its height and grading the subsidiary figures 
accordingly. All figures are carved boldly and against the plain 
surface of the ground. A certain heaviness of form, earth-bound and 
of primitive significance, can be traced from the very beginning 
(compare the yokslna tradition); those in action, especially the 
feminine figures, betray a conscious sensuality as well. 

This heavy physicality is soon partly relieved by a relaxation 
of the flesh and an open-eyed smiling countenance which charac¬ 
terise the seated and standing Buddhas and Bodhisattvas (cf. pi. 
XXIV, 61) and also Jinas of the last quarter of the first and the 
second century. These sculptures are all in the round or in very 
high relief. Broad masculine chest and shoulders and a firm body- 
form expressive of enormous pent-up energy are some of their invari¬ 
able positive characteristics that have hardly any relation to the 
contemporary art of the Gandhara Buddha. Without any attempt at 
expressing grace, sweetness or calm repose, qualities that are connoted 


522 


ART 


by the Buddha-Bodhisattva idea, these figures clearly relate them¬ 
selves to a primitive earthbound tradition as exemplified by the 
yakshas and yakshinis. The right shoulder of the Buddha-Bodhisat- 
tvas is left bare, the drapery, arranged in schematic folds, closely 
clings to the body that shines through, and the scarfs, twisted into 
bulging ropes and loops, dangle on one side. Modelling is sum¬ 
marised up to the waist, stiff and hard below, where the two legs 
stand stiffly like stumps; the outline is consistently firm. 

The Gandhara Buddha type was, however, not unknown in 
Mathura; indeed, it seems to have been copied in not a few examples 
that exhibit a kind of refined treatment. The Gandharan composi¬ 
tion is also evident in certain reliefs and decorative motifs; but this 
does not happen before the first half of the second century. 

The heavy life-size portrait statues of the Saka-Kushana kings— 
Kanishka (pi. XXIV, 60), Wema Khadphises (?) and Chashtana (?), all 
belonging to the last quarter of the first century, and clad in Central 
Asian Scythic dress—are in a class and style apart. The dress and 
footwear of the Kanishka statue and the inscription across the sur¬ 
face of the lower part of the enormous heavy and angular robe at 
once indicate that the artist was not an Indian but most probably a 
Scythic national. Rigorously frontal in setting, its main effect is 
entirely gathered on the surface, and the solid and compact drapery 
is treated in harsh angles and flat lines sharply chiselled. It is not 
unlikely that this Scythic tradition, as reflected in these statues, 
passed on its angularity of compositional arrangement to the com¬ 
position of the seated or standing Buddha-Bodhisattva images of 
Mathura. 

Roman influences, too, seem to have touched Mathura, probably 
directly by the sea-route. A well-known example, that of the so- 
called Herakles and the Nemean lion, and a number of Bacchanalian 
scenes in relief (cf. pi. XXIII, 58) are not only Western in theme, 
but also seem to have been inspired by Roman aesthetic ideals and 
artistic treatment. 

The continuity of the indigenous tradition is best represented by 
a series of high relief sculptures on the front sides of pillars and 
pillar-bases from various sites of Mathura. Most of these appear to 
belong to the second century and, while a few represent Buddhas, 
Bodhisattvas and male figures, the great majority are nude or semi¬ 
nude female figures (pi. XXIV, 59, 62 )—yakshinis or vrikshakas or 
apsarases in erotic attitude suggesting fertility—or women engaged 


523 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

in their toilet. An intimate connection with Sunga and Kushana ter¬ 
racottas is at once suggested, both in theme and treatment, and a 
lineal relationship with the yakshinls and vrikshakds of Bharhut, 
Bodh Gaya and Sanchl is also equally undeniable. But what had 
been spontaneous movement has now become conscious gestures, and 
what stood for symbols or emblems have now become vehicles of 
sensuous and erotic suggestiveness. Full round breasts and full 
heavy hips are no longer just conveyors of the idea of fertility, but 
suggest warm and living flesh, relaxed or tight. Frankly, the aim is 
sensual, and this is further emphasised by the outward thrust of the 
hip, the slight turn of the head or the hand, a definitely erotic and 
suggestive attitude. Even in the male figures, living flesh is clearly 
suggested by the modelling. 

V. VENGI: JAGGAYYAPETA, AMARAVATI, NAGARJUNI- 
KONDA, GOLI, ETC. c. 150 B.C.—A.D. 400 

The earliest specimens of sculptural art from the Krishna-Goda- 
vari delta, known in ancient times as Vehgi, hail from Jaggayya- 
peta (cf. pi. XXVIII, 72, 73) and Amaravati, and comprise a number 
of carved marble slabs, presumably of stupas and railings. These 
low and highly linearised reliefs frankly belong to the common 
denominator of form of Bharhut and early Sanchl, but lines in Vehgi 
are much more sensitive and the human forms with their elongated 
limbs are much more tall and slender. At Amaravati (cf. pis. XXIX, 
74-76; XXX, 77-78) the reliefs are slightly rounder and the model¬ 
ling fuller and more delicate. On the whole, men, animals and 
vegetation are more elastic and treated more elegantly than in the 
north. The material par excellence of Vehgi artists was marble. 
Never so far was the delicate and voluptuous beauty of the human 
frame so richly and luxuriously conceived, and never were technical 
skill and efficiency more adequate for realisation of the conception. 

There is no doubt that the Vehgi region carries on the tradition 
of early Indian art, and serves as a link between the earlier art 
of Bharhut, Bodh Gaya and Sanchl on the one hand and the later 
Gupta and Pallava art on the other. As in Bharhut and Sanchl, the 
marble reliefs from the various sites of Vehgi depict the Buddhist 
legendary cycle in all its details, but the art was hardly religious at 
all, far less Buddhist; it does not speak of nor aim at suggesting the 
Buddhist ideal of renunciation or nirvana, or of discipline or strict 
ethical virtues including avoidance of women. Rather, it is frankly 
naturalistic and even sensuous; an innocent and spontaneous joy 

524 


ART 


and the most pagan love of life pervade the entire world unfolded 
before our eyes. The female forms of the yakshinls, the vrikshakas 
and the dancing girls have been rendered with infinite love and 
grace; their full busts, heavy hips and their living flesh have all been 
touched with a saturating sensuousness. 

In the reliefs from Vengi, nature recedes to the background; it 
still serves its symbolic purpose, but is no more to be seen in its 
fertile abundance. The main interest passes on to the human figure 
itself. Scene after scene teems with tall and slender human figures; 
they are everywhere in abundance, in all poses and attitudes, in 
action and movement, in ease and relaxation, in high tension and 
elegant languor, sitting, standing, bending, flying, dancing, hanging, 
hovering—always exhibiting sturdy but delicately modelled bodies 
with heavy heaving shoulders borne on a pair of slender supple legs, 
all definite in their precise but exuberant outline and characterised 
by an amazing elasticity of movement. 

Yet, the mature art of Vengi, as represented at Amaravatl, is 
not entirely steeped in the physical and sensuous; here is neither 
the simple and spontaneous naturalism of Sanchi nor the unabashed 
lewdness of Mathura. The sensuousness of Vengi is much more 
refined, elegant and sophisticated, lifted to a subtler plane, which 
is due not a little to a complete mastery of an advanced technique. 

This mastery of technique is evident in a variety of directions. 
The relief matures in depth whence the figures seem to emerge and 
achieve the full roundness of form in the process of becoming. 
Oversecting and foreshortening, already evident at Bodh Gaya, 
Orissa and Sanchi, have also attained the fullest maturity and are 
exploited to the utmost. The flexibility of the body itself, with the 
joints all rounded off, has grown to swaying movements which carry 
the figure in dynamic rhythm. But the movements do not cease with 
the individual figure; the rhythm transcends the outermost limits 
of the figure, extends to the group which it binds together with the 
same dynamic movement, and finally to the entire composition with 
all its groups in one large sweeping movement, often in the form 
of a parabolic curve—a favourite device at Amaravatl. Vengi thus 
brings to final consummation the problem of dynamic compositional 
unity which began haltingly and reticently at Bharhut in the Prase- 
najit Pillar. The modelling, too, has grown to full maturity in 
plasticity and naturalism; it is subtler, more delicate and more sensi¬ 
tive than that of even Mathura of the first century A.D. But the most 
important advance in technique lies in the treatment of the relative 


525 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


weight of the different parts of the body. The Hellenistic tradition 
of contrapost, of carrying the weight of one’s body not by any 
mechanical or functional device as in early Indian art, but by the 
subtler process of balance and equilibrium, seems to have served the 
Vengi artists admirably well. 

The above general description of the Vengi school refers to the 
highest level of the art reached at Amaravati towards the middle 
of the second century A.D. The reliefs of Gumadidurru, Nagarjuni- 
konda and Goli, although belonging to one common school, rarely 
attain this level. Some of these have a heavy and spreading plastic 
form like those of the Amaravati reliefs of the first century, but the 
modelling of the former is definitely softer and weaker than those 
of the latter. Others plastically belong to the last phase of Amara¬ 
vati, i.e. the third century, when the clearly tangible outline of the 
second century softens down to almost feverish agitation and nervous 
mobility. The modelling, too, degenerates into a sort of tremulous 
mannerism trying to express a passion—wild, trembling and almost 
bursting with extravagance, in which the very sap of life was being 
consumed. The second century successfully tried to transcend the 
limits of the human body by intensifying the body-experience it¬ 
self, but this could only be done by a disciplined mind through a pro¬ 
cess of rigorous discipline of the body. In the third century, this 
discipline is relaxed, in mind as in art, and the very intensification 
that served so well in the preceding century spells doom on the 
Vengi school, once so gay, luxuriant and animated. Not before the 
fifth and sixth centuries, in Gupta art of the Ganga valley, was the 
experience of the second century given a new name and form in 
which the body itself was relieved of the weight of its physical sub¬ 
stance and became illumined by a highly intellectualised spiritual 
experience. 

VI. GENERAL REVIEW 

With Mathura and Amaravati the curtain is drawn on an art 
that began its career at Bharhut, where men and women are part 
of nature itself and live a common life with trees and animals. A 
healthy pleasure in material life is taken for granted, but every¬ 
body takes it with earnestness, dignity and in calm self-evidence 
of enjoyment. At Bodh Gaya, the dignity and earnestness are 
equally valued, but the initial restraint gives way to slow swaying 
movements. Sanchl brings gaiety, emotion and vivacity born of a 
fuller acceptance of life and its spontaneous joys and movements* 
its calm and composed forms are innocent of transient and hysterical 

526 


ART 


moments. Karle is characterised by a calm strength and dignity; 
men and women there are mundane and earthly but in an ethnically 
primitive significance; it stands on life’s stable and permanent foun¬ 
dations. This is equally true of the yakshas, yakshinls, nagas, and 
the Buddhist primitives of Mathura. The reliefs of Mathura bring 
the sense perception of Sanchi to maturity, and the joy in life expres¬ 
ses itself in easy serenity and a general cheerfulness of disposition. 
The human figures are enlivened by a careless enjoyment of life. 
The bourgeois ladies of Mathura, even while loving, toying with pets, 
or gossiping and dallying, never behave coquettishly. But the aristo¬ 
cratic ladies of the upper classes of the urban and sophisticated 
society of Amaravatl are definitely coquettish in an elegant though 
extravagant manner. The wildest joy and most violent passion 
shake them to their foundations. For the first time, Indian art 
becomes conscious of psychological conditions and learns to differ¬ 
entiate betw 7 een the subtle and the violent shades and emotions of 
the human heart; they are given full expression to, not intellectually 
but through the lineaments of the body. Conceived not as a part 
of nature but confined within the physical frame and in a narrowly 
mundane manner and, further, abandoned to the fullest and nervous 
enjoyment of transient pleasures, life exacted its toll by drying 
itself up. 

The fundamental change in the attitude and disposition towards 
life between Bharhut and Sanchi on the one hand, and Mathura and 
finally Amaravatl on the other, can admittedly be explained by the 
general laws of optical evolution; it was to a very large extent the 
result of the natural growth of an aesthetic process. But possibly 
the difference was, at least partly, due to changes in the socio-eco¬ 
nomic structure, and hence in the social psychology of the people 
responsible for this art. 

The change just referred to begins to assert itself roughly from 
about the middle of the first century A.D. Before that time both 
the Ganga-Yamuna valley and the Deccan (to which belong Bhar¬ 
hut, Bodh Gaya, Sanchi, early Mathura, Karle and early Vengi) 
nurtured a civilisation and a structure of society that was mainly 
rural and agricultural. The art of such a social economy naturally 
reflected the essential oneness with nature, a healthy and spontane¬ 
ous joy in, and acceptance of, life, preference for stable and perma¬ 
nent values and faith in calm and composed strength. But from 
about the middle of the first century A.D. India, more particularly 
the Deccan and the South, came quickly to share in a very rich mari- 

527 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


time trade with the Mediterranean world, and gold and luxury pro¬ 
ducts from the Roman West began freely to flow into the country. 
Slowly, but surely, the Deccan and also the North began to develop, 
along the river valleys, big emporiums of trade and commerce out of 
their old cities, and rural agricultural civilisation began to be trans¬ 
formed into a mercantile one, at least in the large centres of life and 
activity. With the creation of a real bourgeois society, a change in 
the social taste and also in the attitude towards life was but inevita¬ 
ble. This change is first noticeable at Mathura even in the selection 
of motifs, which range from toilet and love scenes to scenes of toying 
with birds and drinking bouts. But Mathura was hinterland and, 
moreover, too strong and eclectic a centre of past traditions and of in¬ 
fluence from a variety of directions. Amaravatl, on the other hand, 
lay not very far from the rich coastal ports of the eastern Deccan, a 
few of which at least sheltered rich Roman trading settlements. 
The art of Amaravatl thus naturally reflects the disposition and atti¬ 
tude of a mercantile social economy which manifests preference for 
transient pleasures and temporary values, exuberant expression of 
joy and passion, and courtly elegance and sophistication. 

C. PAINTING AND OTHER ARTS 

i 

I. PAINTING 

Both Buddhist and Brahmanical literature, some of which un¬ 
doubtedly go back to centuries before Christ, contain abundant 
references to the art of painting. The Mahdbhdrata mentions Chitra- 
lekha, a maid of honour to princess Usha, as a gifted portrait-painter 
and describes a painted hall. According to the Vinaya Pitaka, 
Amrapall invited painters from various countries and asked them to 
paint on her walls the figures of kings, traders and merchants seen 
by them; and it was by seeing the portrait of Bimbisara so painted 
that she fell in love with him. The Vinaya Pitaka also makes several 
references to the pleasure-houses of king Prasenajit, containing 
chittdgdras or picture-halls or galleries. Besides portraiture and 
mural paintings, we also find mention of such widely-known prac¬ 
tices as lepya-chitras, lekhya-chitras, dhuli-chitras, etc. Lepya-chit - 
ras are nothing but continuous narratives in line and colour on tex¬ 
tiles, and partook of the nature of pata-chitras of later tradition; 
lekhya-chitras are probably line-drawings of a decorative nature like 
dlimpanas or dlpanas of later tradition, while dhuli-chitras are also 
of the same nature and character, but the material used is powdered 
rice, white or coloured. Literary records having a direct bearing 

528 


ART 


on the art of painting are indeed numerous, and they go to show 
that from very early times painting, both secular and religious, was 
considered an important form of artistic expression and widely prac¬ 
tised by the classes and masses alike. The theoretical basis of the 
art in relation to the world of vision and imagination is also alluded 
to in the Brahmanas and the Buddhist sutras and gathas. This indi¬ 
cates that there were very early tradition and practice which even¬ 
tually led at a later period to the formulation of definite principles 
of theory, technique and classification of various kinds of painting. 

We have, however, no extant specimen of such ancient prac¬ 
tice. The earliest historical example of which we have any definite 
knowledge consists of a few rows of human figures in yellow and 
ochre earth colours, arranged in sections in accordance with the 
shape of the irregularly vaulted ceiling of the Sitabenga or Jogimara 
cave in the Ramgarh hills in the Surguja State of the Eastern States 
Agency. Besides the irregular compositional bands, there is also 
another band with representations of large aquatic animals, makara, 
etc., also in the same yellow and ochre earth colours. The composi¬ 
tions have all been covered over by a layer of paintings subsequently 
added, but enough remains to indicate that these murals were exe¬ 
cuted in what is known as ‘tempera’, that the figures, which are 
mostly in three-quarter profile, are lively and freely rhythmical, and 
though loosely set at a distance from one another and arranged in 
parallel rows, they are well balanced in alignments and inherently 
connected with one another. Foreshortening and oversecting are 
easily employed, and the third dimension is intelligently under¬ 
stood. 

All these bespeak considerable past knowledge and practice, 
and perhaps also a consciousness of parallel practice in such cubical 
materials as wood, stone and clay. Indeed a comparison of the 
garment —dhoti and uttariya —of some of the Jogimara figures with 
those of early Sanchl (Stupa II) and Jaggayyapeta reliefs will estab¬ 
lish strong similarities in form and motif. It is not, therefore, with¬ 
out good reason that these paintings have generally been assigned to 
about the middle of the first century B.C. Indeed, their maturity 
is more or less on a level with contemporary sculpture. 

A century and a half later follows the next phase of Indian 
mural paintings as exemplified on the walls of caves Nos. IX and 
X of Ajanta (cf. pis. XXXI, 79; XXXII, 80). 

529 

A.l.U.—34 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Only scanty specimens of the earliest Ajanta phase are pre¬ 
served, but they are mature works and belong creditably to the 
contemporary denominator of Indian plastic art. In certain respects, 
as in the driving diagonal direction of the composition emphasised 
by the cubical and voluminous slanting rocks and the trees, in sway¬ 
ing movement, in its forward direction from depth to the surface, 
and in the general fullness of composition, they sometimes surpass 
even the contemporary sculptural vision and treatment. Only seme 
of the Amaravatl reliefs can vie with them in aesthetic effect. 

% 

The paintings are laid over a fine coat of plaster, finished by 
another coat of finely polished white priming. The outlines were 
drawn first in broad sweeps, and details were added afterwards. Na¬ 
tural earth, found locally, formed most, if not all* of the pigments in 
which red in different tones, green, grey, brown, yellow and white 
predominate. The compositions are arranged in friezes and panels; 
while narrating a Jataka story, scenes are arranged in compartments. 
The ground is divided, as in the Chhaddanta Jataka scene of Cave X, 
by two or three horizontal bands of colour, a principle followed also 
in later murals of Ajanta (e.g. Cave XVII). 

The two important scenes, one a frieze representing super¬ 
imposed rows of human figures in Cave IX and another representing 
a group of elephants of the Chhaddanta Jataka story in Cave X, bring 
out the main principles of this phase of painting. Both, so far as 
their forms are concerned, correspond to contemporary relief tradi¬ 
tion; indeed they are painted versions of such carved and modelled 
groups, and in density and relief can stand comparison with similar 
representations in SanchT. Both men and animals are modelled in 
colour in a variety of positions; indeed, they attest to much know¬ 
ledge and experience in the modelling capacity of both line and 
colour. The implication of depth and the direction of coming for¬ 
ward to the surface, which in the later Ajanta phase are brought to 
consummation, find their full level already in these paintings. The 
full masses of the figures reach the outermost level where they 
spread up to their limits. The figures themselves, though densely 
packed and of smooth movement, betray hardly any emotional state 
and are unconnected with one another. Sturdy in shape, of distinct 
ethnic class and sartorial types, the human figures are detached and 
reticent, and are very near in appearance to figures as carved in Bodh 
Gaya and SanchT. 


530 


ART 


Certain faint traces of early painting arc also found in the 
Chaitya cave at Bedsa, but these are obscured by later white¬ 
washing. On the whole, despite numerous references to painted 
halls, palaces, etc., to lepya, lekhya and dhuli-chitras in early Bud¬ 
dhist literature and in the epics, those that have survived and arc 
known to us are very limited in quality and variety. Nevertheless, 
it is in these early specimens that we see the beginnings of the later 
schools which have preserved the continuity of pictorial tradition for 
more than a millennium. 

II. TERRACOTTA 

Terracotta was the material for artistic expression of the humb¬ 
ler people to whom stone, not very easily obtainable in the plains of 
northern India, was a precious and costly material. A large num¬ 
ber and variety of finds have been made on various levels of excava¬ 
tions at a number of important city sites, such as Pataliputra (com¬ 
prising Bulandibagh, Kumrahar and Patna), Buxar, Taxila, Mathura, 
Ahichchhatra, Vaisali (Basarh), KausambI, Rajghat (Banaras), 
Bangarh and Mahasthan (N. Bengal). It seems that the art of terra¬ 
cotta, either fashioned directly out of clay by hand or shaped and 
modelled by moulds, provided the most popular objects for house¬ 
hold worship and decoration, plaques and figures in the round for 
popular magic and religious purposes, seals for purposes of docu¬ 
mentation, children’s toys, ornaments for the poor, medals, amulets, 
and animal figurines of totemistic significance or children’s play¬ 
things. Much more than their pure aesthetic significance is their 
value as materials for the history of Indian culture and life of the 
common people. The terracotta seals, often inscribed, provide most 
important material for political, socio-economic and religious history, 
while toys, ornaments and household materials are of great value 
for a comparative study of our culture at different periods. On the 
whole, terracotta art of India, though not attaining to the dignity 
of a major art like sculpture, is nevertheless an important vehicle of 
human expression of undoubted sociological significance and deserves 
to be more seriously studied. 

Any study of Indian terracottas from a standpoint of historical 
or chronological sequence is rendered difficult by a large number of 
finds of supposedly ‘archaic’ or ‘primitive’ type and form. Kram- 
risch has labelled them “ageless” or “timeless”, as they remain 
essentially unchanged by variations of time and perhaps also of loca¬ 
lity. This type may occur side by side with the normal one on 


531 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the same excavation level which is different in principle as well as 
in form. The products of the timeless type are as numerous and 
varied, and also as important to the people at large, as those on which 
sequence of time leaves its impress. The former type, which one 
can witness from the Sindhu valley onwards up to the present day, 
is made always and invariably by hand and includes such objects as 
figurines of the mother-goddess seated or standing (or earth-goddess 
or goddess of fertility), children’s toys, chariots, human images, 
figures of horse, elephant, ram, humped bull, monkey, dog, bird, 
lizard, frog, fish and Makara. Figures, whether human or animal, 
are invariably fashioned in a way that reduces the physiognomical 
form of the subject to a distribution of the simplest volumes answer¬ 
ing the main parts of the body, i.e. the head, the trunk and the limbs. 
Within this principle there are indeed differences in degree as well 
as in technique. The female figurines are invariably characterised 
by heavy bulging hips and narrow waists, sometimes also by the navel 
and the mekhala —all being notions of potential motherhood. Some 
of the figurines have animal snouts, and the head is either drawn in 
horn shapes or bulges out in bumps; both are basically the same and 
have a primitive significance that connects the head with spiritual 
illumination. This horn or bump shape explains the ushnlsha of the 
Buddha and the historical terracotta figures of men and women with 
unicorn or bicornate head-dresses from various sites of the Ganga- 
Yamuna valley. The large majority of the ageless types that have 
come down to us belong mainly to the excavated sites at Buxar, 
Pataliputra, Taxila, KausambI and Basarh. Sometimes the date and 
locality even of such ageless types can be approximately fixed mainly 
by reason of contemporary fashions in dress and ornaments, form 
and technique, local traits and peculiarities, etc. 

Historical or time-bound terracottas of pre-Gupta date are 
generally moulded, while head-dresses are affixed; the faces at least 
are in all cases moulded, registering stylistic characteristics, and they 
are affixed to bodies modelled by hand (cf, pi. XXXIII, 82). This com¬ 
plex technique gives way to completely moulded—not modelled_ 

figures in the Gupta period. More than stone sculpture or anything 
else, this enormous corpus of terracottas, though only a small fraction 
of the total output, represents a rich inventory of contemporary Indian 
art form and style as well as of social tastes and tendencies. The large 
city-sites, already referred to, along with such widely distributed 
sites as Lauriya Nandangarh (Bihar), Sari-Dheri (N.-W.F.), Maski 


532 


ART 


(Hyderabad), Pawaya (Gwalior), Saheth-Maheth (old &ravastl), Gaya 
(Bihar), etc. have yielded terracottas that are easily distinguishable 
by their local features of form and style. But the most represen¬ 
tative types and forms hail mostly from Pataliputra, Mathura and 
Buxar, all in the Ganga-Yamuna valley. 

Barring one steatite plaque from Pataliputra, inscribed in 
Mauryan characters, and a few other objects (Patna, KausambT, 
Buxar), no regular terracottas that can more or less definitely be 

ascribed to the Maurya period have yet come to light from any of 

the early sites. Generally they were baked to various shades of 
ochre, red, grey or black. But neither the method of baking, nor 

the quality of clay, nor the shade of colour, is any sure or exclusive 

index as to date or locality. 

In the Sunga-Kanva period, i.e. from about 200 B.C. to about 
the first century A.D., the major corpus seems to have consisted of 
female figures. These are richly dressed, slim, with a heavy counte¬ 
nance, and have magnificently modelled busts, well disciplined bodies 
with delicate modelling of the chest, skirts with flutters and extra¬ 
vagant loops, and a rather high and wide head with lateral bumps 
accentuated further by elaborate hair-dressing or heavy head-wear 
(cf. pis. XXXIV, 83-84; XXXV, 85-86). To this period may also 
be assigned some of the finds from Basarh, Buxar, Pataliputra and 
Mathura, with definitely Hellenistic heads and faces, Hellenistic 
modelling and, in a few cases, also Hellenistic drapery. 

Terracottas with definitely Saka-Kushana stylistic impress 
exhibit a great variety of ethinic types and nomad fashions, especially 
conspicuous in the male figures from Mathura, which must have been 
due to the influx of new racial types and new fashions and tastes. 
Faces of female figures are characterised by either a smile or at least 
an animation noticeable on the cheek-bones set below a pair of flat 
wide-open eyes. Musicians with a great variety of instruments ap¬ 
pear for the first time during this period, many of them distinguished 
by their long noses. Horsemen and riders holding reins, gene¬ 
rally in moulded figures, are also seen for the first time. On the 
whole, both in variety and in design, in sturdiness of form and 
differentiated modelling, the terracottas of the Kushana period, 
found in excavations at Pataliputra, Ahichchhatra and Mathura, 
provide a rich wealth of material for the study of contemporary art 
form and design. This can well be supplemented for the Deccan 
and the South by rich material recently unearthed from Maksi 
in Hyderabad. 


538 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


TIL COINS, SEALS, INTAGLIO GEMS, ETC. (pi. XXXVII) 

Though the history of Indian coinage begins with silver and 
copper punch-marked coins, datable from about 600 B.C. onwards, 
their value as aesthetic objects to the historian of art is almost 
negligible, despite their undoubted importance to the historian, 
numismatist and anthropologist. Formally and psychologically 
they are tribal in origin and primitive in conception; the shapes 
are irregular, the execution rude, and the punches, impressed sepa¬ 
rately and irregularly and sometimes clumsily, show no artistic 
design. The symbols never go beyond a representational signifi¬ 
cance; while human figures are rare, the animal devices are some¬ 
times creatively conceived and executed with considerable spirit, 
but crude workmanship prevents a refined achievement. 1 Local 
and tribal coins, equally indigenous in origin and conception, and 
datable in the centuries immediately preceding and succeeding 
the Christian era, show a decided advance in shape and design as 
well as in workmanship and execution. They are either cast or 
die-struck; a large number of devices are merely symbolical, but 
the animal devices are at times rendered naturalistically with an 
eye to plasticity of movement. 2 The type and treatment of the 
human figure recall either the figure of the gold-plaque earth- 
goddess from Lauriya Nandangarh 3 4 or the average human figura¬ 
tion of early Indian relief sculpture. In the former case, they 
merely serve a symoblical purpose. Of some of the anonymous 
tribal coins, datable in the third and fourth centuries of the 
Christian era, not only the form and treatment of the human figure 
but the design and shape as well are clearly inspired by contempo¬ 
rary Kushana and Gupta coins, which in their turn were derived 
from Hellenistic, Roman and Parthian models. So far as the 
Indian coinage is concerned, vegetal devices are rarely artistically 
conceived, but in at least one tribal coin 5 the palm-tree motif has 
been rendered with singular charm and remarkable concreteness 
of vision. 


But of coins and gems, artistically the most interesting are 
those that were inspired by Hellenistic, Roman and Parthian models. 


1. Smith, CCIM, pi. XIX, fig. 10. 

2. /bid, pi. XIX, figs. 15, 18; pi. XX, figs. 7, 11, 18. 

3. Ibid , pi. XX, fig. 12; pi. XIX, fig. 20; pi. XXI, fig. 15. 

4. Ibid , pi. XX, fig. 11. 

5. Ibid , p l. XIX, fig. 17. 


534 



ART 


They are all datable from about the second century B.C. to about 
the first century A.D. and belong to the Bactrian and Scytho- 
Parthian kings who held sway for a considerable time in the 
Punjab and the North-West. 1 The stylistic history of these coins 
and gems is clear and coherent; with very few exceptions the coins, 
and also the intaglio gems, are aesthetically of a high order. Their 
chaste and elegant execution, their refined workmanship, and their 
general design are in the best of Hellenistic tradition, particular¬ 
ly in the earliest examples where the legends are invariably in Greek. 
While the portraits they bear are unmistakably characterised by the 
refined realism of Hellenistic portraiture, the mythological types 
are derived from Greek mythology and rendered formally strictly 
along the lines of those in Hellenistic art. At a slightly later stage, 
Bactrian and Indo-Greek coinage comes ifito dontact with Indian 
coinage whence they derive some of their peculiarities and result, 
at least in certain instances, in either square (Apollodotus) or 
clumsily rectangular shapes (Agathocles and Pantaleon). The 
Attic standard gradually fades away and is replaced by one of 
Achaemenian origin; legends become bilingual—Greek and Indian 
in either KharoshthI or Brahmi; and with time, as Hellenistic inspi¬ 
ration fades away, the portraits begin to lose their fine realism, the 
Hellenistic figure-types are steadily replaced by Indian or Scytho- 
Parthian, and the coins as a whole suffer in the chastity of design 
and elegance of execution. 

Though inspired by Bactrian and Indo-Greek coinage both in 
type and form, the Indo-Parthian coins are generally clumsy in 
execution and crowded in design, and record the impress of in¬ 
creasingly more Indian feeling and forms, especially in animal and 
human devices. 2 Certain nomadic barbarian elements are also 
equally noticeable, 3 which go to show that the engravers were not 
just mere copyists but were giving expression to their own ideas. 
Still more increasingly Indian in feeling and figure-types are the 
early Kushana coins, though in dress and demeanour the portraits 
retain their northern characteristics. In execution and design these 
early Kushana coins are much more elegant and refined than the 
Indo-Parthian ones. Later Kushana coins of about the third'cen¬ 
tury, however, tend to be more and more clumsy and crowded in 
design; though the execution remains clear and precise, the types 

1. Cf. Chs. VII, VIII, IX. 

2. Smith, CCIM, pi. XIII, figs. 1. 4, 14. 

3. Ibid, pi. IX, figs. 1, 4, 8. 


535 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


and forms are heavily influenced by those of Persian and Sassanian 
origin. The silver coinage of the Western Kshatrapas, on the other 
hand, was based essentially on the Greek hemidrachmae. They are 
neat, regular, and are very elegantly executed. Formally and his¬ 
torically Gupta coinage takes its cue from early Kushana coins on the 
one hand and Western Kshatrapa coins on the other. Andhra coins 
of the second and third centuries A.D., though at times irregular in 
shape and heavy in design, belong altogether to a different aesthetic 
form and are essentially indigenous in character. Their symbols 
and figure-devices have a characteristic local flavour and a tribal 
conception. 

A large number and variety of engraved gems—cornelian sard 
of different hues, jacinth, sardoine, black garnet, etc.—have been 
picked up from different sites all over north-western India. They 
are all invariably Hellenistic in conception and execution, and reveal 
a highly developed sense of relief and composition. Motifs and sub¬ 
jects are invariably derived from Greek mythology, and some of 
them are often found repeated from one gem to another. There can 
be no doubt that these gems were very much in fashion and demand. 
Athena, seated or standing, fighting warriors, Aphrodite, a spirited 
lion or elephant, gods and goddesses of Greek legends, etc. are the 
most common motifs, and the gems bear legends in Greek and early 
Brahmi or Kharoshthi characters. Towards the beginning of the 
Christian era, probably due to a lessening of demand, the art began 
to deteriorate; the delicacy of technique, refinement of execution and 
elegance of vision seem definitely to have been on the wane. In the 
first and second centuries A.D. the Greek inspiration was replaced 
by the Roman, perhaps from Asia Minor, and, borne on the shoulders 
of Roman trade and commerce, a new type of intaglio work, charac¬ 
terised by a distinctive sensuousness of figure conception, came into 
vogue. But neither tlie Greek nor the Roman art of intaglio gems 
seems to have taken root on the Indian soil. 

IV. POTTERY 

Objective and systematic study of early Indian pottery is only 
just beginning, and it is difficult to deal with the subject in correct 
historical sequence. Pottery is shortlived, but it may on occasion 
travel very extensively; in fact, recent excavations at Arikamedu 
near Pondicherry have yielded products that were probably made, as 


536 


ART 


far away as Italy on the one hand and in China on the other. They 
are thus invaluable material for the history of commerce, chrono¬ 
logy and culture. 

Recent exploration in a large number of sites in North India 
has yielded a typical pottery (including dishes and bowls) of fine 
grey ware with a wide range of black painting. Stratigraphic evi¬ 
dence obtained previously at Ahichchhatra and now at Tilpat near 
Delhi and Hastinapura, District Meerut, shows that it partly over¬ 
lapped and largely preceded the northern black polished ware. 1 
The pottery of the Mauryan period found at Pataliputra, Kasrawad, 
Bairat, Sarnath, Raj ghat and other places includes the well-known 
polished black ware bowls which in many cases must have travelled 
from important centres to outlying provinces. Some of the broken 
fragments found at Bairat and Kasrawad show repairs being executed 
locally by means of copper wires and rivets, proving that this 
pottery was, at that period and in that particular social stratum 
where the articles were used, considered valuable and was not easily 
replaceable. 

Ahichchhatra potteries of the earlier levels (c. 600-100 B.C.) 
are limited to few varieties of shape; a large number of these con¬ 
sist of grey wares, and a few with a black slip. These vessels are 
mostly plain, but there are a few red wares bearing stamped designs. 
This early group is practically devoid of any painted decoration 
of any sort, and moulds are never used. Grey and black polished 
wares are altogether absent in the next phase (100 B.C.-A.D. 350), 
which is also marked by the absence of any incised and painted 
decoration or of slip or wash. But they bear stamped symbols the 
like of which one can find on contemporary coins and sculptures. 
The evolution of the cooking pot, as shown by the successive stages 
of such ware from Ahichchhatra, indicates that rimless wares were 
the earliest which were followed by thin-rimmed ones. Large open 
bowls of grey colour are conspicuous in the early period (c. 300- 
100 B.C.). Straight-edged, lipped and broad-mouthed bowls pre¬ 
dominate among the grey wares of this period, while among the 
red wares of the next phase jars with straight necks or no well- 
defined necks are typical. A few major changes seem to take place 
in the two centuries immediately preceding and succeeding the 

1. Mr. A. Ghosh of the Archaeological Department has kindly supplied this in¬ 
formation. 


537 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Christian era (100 B.C.-A.D. 100); but cooking pans with small lug- 
handles and jars with no well-defined necks are the more important 
types in the pottery of this period. Rare and distinctive types, e.g. 
the bowl-shaped stopper, bellied jar with small bottle-neck, etc. are 
also characteristic of the period. Kushana potteries hail in large 
numbers from all important sites in the Punjab and the Ganga- 
Yamuna valley including Mathura. New types and surface decora¬ 
tions with stamped symbols like the Triratna, Swastika, Nandipdda, 
etc. are characteristic features of this phase. Among new types 
mention may be made of the flat-based drinking bowl, and the wide¬ 
mouthed jar with thick walls and beater-marks over the body with 
its different variants. In Ahichchhatr,a this period is associated 
with the glorious days of the Panchala kingdom which may account 
for the variety, originality and abundance of the pottery types; but 
it is also likely that all over northern India the Kushana culture- 
complex may have produced a livening effect as well as furnished 
certain new types. 

In respect of the pottery of the Deccan and the south, it has 
long been known that Buddhist sites of the Krishna valley have 
yielded pots which reveal the stages of change from the Iron Age 
types to those of the Satavahana period. In several places dark 
polished wares found along with the Iron Age cemeteries must 
approximate" in date the typical black polished ware in northern 
India. Some special wares, such as the painted bowls with grit or 
cross-lined patterns, are found widely in sites from Hyderabad, 
Mysore, and Bellary and Anantapur districts of Madras. These can be 
assigned to roughly about 300 to 100 BjC., but in the absence of 
systematic excavation, the data afforded by these cannot be con¬ 
sidered authentic. Nor has the abundant pottery from such sites 
as Kondapur yet been properly studied. But it is clear that in the 
south, the soft loamy clay, which forms the bulk of the natural 
soil, was commonly used, while other varieties suitable for special 
wares, such as China clay, were also to be found in different local¬ 
ities and were naturally responsible for the different shades of 
colour met with in southern wares. In any case the richness and 
variety of the productions of the Satavahana period in the south are 
indisputable. 

The recent excavations at Arikamedu have furnished a very 
rich treasure for the study of south Indian pottery. These finds 
come from what was once a considerable town that comprised, 


538 


ART 


among many other things, a warehouse, a textile manufactory and 
at least several bead-making establishments. A kind of red-glazed 
pottery, presumably manufactured in Italy in the centuries imme¬ 
diately preceding and succeeding the Christian era, Roman lamps 
and glass wares, and two-handled jars or amphorae, characteristic 
of contemporary Mediterranean wine-trade, are amongst the objects 
picked up, and they go to prove that Arikamedu was once a prosper¬ 
ous south Indian settlement of Western trading people including 
Romans. Generally, the imported Arikamedu potteries fall into 
three categories: (a) red-glazed ware, the glaze varying in degree 
and kind, called ‘Arretine’ ware, with imported copies, (b) wine 
or oil jars with double handles of various shapes or amphorae, and 
(c) rouletted black ware. There are potters’ stamps on a few Arre- 
tine wares which help us to identify their place of origin. Copies 
of Arretine ware were locally made, but they are of a hard greyish 
buff colour with polished surface. The Arretine type may be assign¬ 
ed to A.D. 1-50. Imported amphorae are of a pink fabric with 
yellow slip; some of the handles are of a rectilinear and high¬ 
shouldered profile. These may be ascribed, on European parallels, 
to the middle of the first century A.D., when presumably the intro¬ 
duction of Arretine ware had ceased. Rouletted black ware is the 
characteristic Arikamedu type; it has an incurved and beaked rim 
with a faceted edge, with a remarkably smooth surface and the 
flat interior decorated with two or three concentric bands of roulet¬ 
tes; it is thin, brittle and well-burnt, and has an almost metallic 
ring. This type is also presumably Mediterranean in origin, but 
varieties of inferior fabric were probably made locally. 

Besides the imported ones, there was also a very large mass of 
local wares, usually turned on the wheel, excepting a class of port¬ 
able ovens, rings of ring-wells, large-size troughs and local jars. A 
few of these local products were inscribed in early Brahmi script. 
The colour of the fabric is either pink or grey or greyish red, or 
light red, according to the degree of heat and the chemical compo¬ 
sition of the clay. Slips were commonly applied but decorations 
are rare, and the types are distinctly plain and utilitarian. They 
may be assigned to about the first and second centuries A.D. Arika¬ 
medu has also yielded a small number of Chinese celedon wares but 
they are invariably late in date and hence outside the scope of this 
volume. 

There are very few affinities between the northern and south¬ 
ern pottery types of India. The southern wares are coarser, and in 


539 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


design have a less sophisticated range, the majority being mostly 
plain and utilitarian. The north furnishes a highly polished fabric 
and offers a large variety of design and decoration. One or two 
types only establish more or less a fundamental traditional affinity. 
The dish with convex base and incurved side is common to both 
Arikamedu and Ahichhhatra; its fabric is also more or less com¬ 
mon. There are also one or two types from Arikamedu that may 
be profitably compared with identical types from Ahichchhatra, 
Maholi near Mathura, and Taxila. 

V. MINOR ARTS 

Among the minor miscellaneous arts of this period, the jeweller’ 
art easily occupies the first place of importance. This is evidenl 
not only from actual finds of gold and silver jewelleries at different 
sites, notably Taxila and Pataliputra, but also from representations 
in stone sculpture, terracotta and ivory from about the second cen¬ 
tury B.C. to about the third century A.D. A typical terracotta 
specimen with elaborate jewellery is provided by the terracotta 
figurine (pi. XXXV, 86) from the Oxford Institute, originally from 
Tamluk, which exhibits perhaps the most elaborate scheme of orna¬ 
mentation ever found on an Indian male or female figure. Reference 
may also be made to a recent find of an Indian ivory YakshinI figure 
from the ruins of Pompeii, with sumptuous and complicated jewellery 
and belonging to about the second century A.D. Ordinary men and 
women wearing ornaments, as seen in the stone reliefs and terra 
cottas, also indicate the great place the jeweller’s art occupied in 
ancient India. Indeed, in no other field did India maintain her 
unquestioned skill and resourcefulness throughout the ages as in 
the art of the goldsmith and the silversmith. The possession of 
gold and silver ornaments has become part and parcel of the 
cherished material equipment of an average Indian householder, 
and this, partly at least, explains the high level of the jeweller’s art 
through the centuries. Excavations carried out at great depths in 
connection with certain sewage operations in the city of Patna have 
brought to light a wealth of material for reconstructing the tech¬ 
nique of this art by providing the raw materials of every stage, the 
tools used, finished and unfinished products, etc. The excavations 
at Taxila also have yielded important hoards of gold and silver 
jewellery of every sort, utensils of silver and lesser metals and orna¬ 
ments of inferior metals, all indicating a high level of culture. Some 
at least of these works were inspired without doubt by Hellenistic 
models, such as the silver repousse, the bust of Dionysus and the 


540 


ART 


bronze figure of the Egyptian god Hippocrates(?); but broadly speak¬ 
ing, the ornaments (all sorts of ear-ornament, neck-wear, head 
ornaments, bracelets, anklets, girdles, etc.) were manufactured in¬ 
digenously with great skill and minuteness of detail. It is quite 
possible that this jeweller’s art was originally introduced into India 
by the northern nomads, who excelled in this line and whose art 
was characterised by abstract geometric designs and patterns and 
also by the flowing linear rhythm of vegetable and animals forms. 
Indeed, quite a good many forms, patterns and designs of the Indian 
goldsmith’s art of today can directly be traced to northern nomadic 
forms of Scythian art which were brought into India by West-Asia- 
tic people and the Sakas and Kushanas. This is perhaps one of the 
reasons why goldsmiths and their craft in India from very early 
times are among the castes and callings that are considered low. 

Copper and ironsmiths also held an important place amongst 
the artisans, and literary references to them are quite abundant 
from the Rigveda downwards. In the Jatakas and Kautilya’s 
Arthasdstra, frequent references are made to them, and every an¬ 
cient Indian city site, excavated so far, reveals the considerable 
attention given to metallurgical works. Indeed, such a monument 
of wrought iron industry as the great Iron Pillar of king Chandra 
of the fourth century A.D. at Meharauli near Delhi not only shows 
the perfection to which the art of Indian metal workers had attained 
in the fourth century, but indicates the skill and resourcefulness of 
generations of indigenous metal workers. Similarly in respect of 
the carpenter’s art. Numerous indigenous references to their craft 
from the Rigveda downwards, the descriptions of Greek writers of 
the wooden palaces of Pataliputra, and the remains of early Indian 
lithic monuments (gates and railings of Stupas, Chaitya fagades, 
halls, etc.), which are but translation into stone from wooden origi¬ 
nals, are enough positive evidence of the high level and efficiency 
of the carpenter’s art. 

Ivory carving was another art which was highly cultivated and 
is comparable only with the art of the goldsmith. It is well known 
that the ivory carvers of the city of Vidisa imparted something of 
their fine skill to the reliefs of the Sanchl gates. The recent dis¬ 
coveries in Afghanistan and of the YakshinI figure from Pompeii, 
referred to above, all of which bear the impress of strong West- 
Asiatic influences including Hellenistic, are some of the finest work¬ 
manship of the Indian dantakdra or dantaghdtaka, and are basically 
of indigenous initiative and talent (pi. XXXVI, 87-90). 


541 


CHAPTER XXI 

SOCIAL CONDITION 

We possess manifold sources of information for the social, eco¬ 
nomic and cultural conditions of the period under review. These 
consist mainly of religious literature (Brahmanical, Buddhist and 
Jain), accounts of foreign travellers and epigraphic records. These 
different authorities do not always agree, partly because they refer 
to different periods and localities, and partly because they look at 
the social condition from different angles of vision. This no doubt 
causes some confusion and difficulty, but is also a great advantage 
for the historian, who has no longer to depend, as in the previous 
period, upon the Vedic texts alone, but is in a position to check and 
supplement their accounts and draw 7 up a more reliable and com¬ 
prehensive picture of the society as a whole. 

I. CASTE 

As in the closing period of the Vedic Age, the Varna (the classes 
or the castes) and Asrama (the four orders or stages of life) are the 
dominent features of society. They gradually become rigid and 
fixed, but the Hindu society was far from attaining its normal and 
standardized form in this age.* 

As many of the extant Grihya-sutras and Dharma-sutras were 
compiled during the first part of this period, w^e may presume that 
the rules of castes and orders, domestic rites and ceremonies, and 
general manners and customs, described above in Vol. I, Chapter 
XXVII, were prevalent at the beginning of this period also. It is 
not necessary to refer to them again except by way of further eluci¬ 
dation and the addition of details. 

The duties of the different castes, as enumerated in the Dharma 
sutras, have been very pithily put in his inimitable analytical man¬ 
ner by Kautilya in his Arthasastra. He enumerates the duties of the 
Brahmana as (1) Adhyayana (study), (2) Adhyapana (teaching), (3) 
Yajana (worship), (4) Yajana (officiating at worship), (5) Dana 
(making gifts) and (6) Pratigraha (accepting gifts). The svadharma 
or duties of the Kshatriya comprised (1) Adhyayana , (2) Yajana 
(3) Dana, (4) Sastrdjlva (profession of arms as source of livelihood) 
and (5) Bhutaralzsliana (protection of living beings). The duties of 

* See Preface. 


542 





SOCIAL CONDITION 


the Vaisya are (1) Adhyayana, (2) Yajana, (3) Dana, (4) Krishi 
(agriculture), (5) Pasupdlya (cattle-rearing) and (6) Vdnijya (trade). 
The functions assigned to the Sudra are (1) Dvijdtisnsrushd (menial 
service of the three twice-born castes), (2) Vdrtd (production of 
wealth), (3) Kdrukarma (Arts) and (4) Kusilavakarma (Crafts). It 
will be seen from the above that Kautilya points out the common 
duties of the three higher castes as Study ( Adhyayana ), Worship 
(Yajana), and Making Gifts (Dana). 

These ideas are more or less stereotyped in the Dharma-sastras, 
which reflect the spirit of the Vedic literature in all respects, espe¬ 
cially in assigning the highest status and dignity to the Brahmanas. 
In Manu-samhitd, for example, the highest supremacy in every 
respect is claimed for a Brahmana, though emphasis is also laid on 
the superior knowledge and qualifications on which that status rests. 
He must be well versed in his grasp of the Absolute or Brahma 
(Brahma-dharana) 1 and his observance of vows ( niyama-dharana ) 2 
and must cultivate Universal love. He filled the highest offices of State 
and society by his character—those of teacher, priest, judge, 3 prime 
minister, 4 assessor 5 and member of the Dharma Parishad, the stand¬ 
ing legal commission in the administration. 6 He was punishable 
in law, but not by capital punishment. 7 

A Brahmana lost his status if he violated the restrictions pre¬ 
scribed as to food and gifts, occupation or profession, 8 and sought 
for livelihood on the strength of his mere birth or caste without: 
its virtues or ideals. 9 But in actual life, specially in times of distress, 
he was allowed to follow occupations not theoretically prescribed 
for him. This rule applied to other castes also. 

As regards the Sudra, “service was his portion in life”. 10 He 
was not eligible for sacraments (Samsk&ras) , nor for hearing sacred 
texts except their substance. 11 But he was not denied the rites of 
marriage, cooking of daily food in the grihya fires, and funeral cere¬ 
monies (Srdddha). Manu even mentions Sudra teachers and 

1. Manu, I. 93. 

2. X. 3. 

3. VIII. 9. 

4. VII. 58. 

5. VIII. 10, 11. 

6. VIII. 20; XII. 110 ff. 

7. VIII. 380. 

8. III. 150-166. 

9. I. 103 ff; IV. 2 ff. 

10. VIII. 410, 413. 

11. IV. 99; X. 4. 


543 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

pupils, 1 showing that the Sudra was not denied the right to learn¬ 
ing. 2 As representing, however, the lowest level of culture, “a 
Sudra majority in a country” (Sudra-bhuyishtham ), it was believed, 
“would spell its doom.” 3 

On the whole the lot of a Sudra was an unenviable one. The 
formidable array of regulations in the Manu-smriti against the 
Sudra would make dismal reading. He had few privileges and 
many obligations. The discriminating laws against him and his 
social disabilities, uttered with brutal frankness, were an inherit¬ 
ance of the past. But Manu treats him exactly like a slave 4 and 
prescribes barbarous punishments as already noted above. 5 To 
crown all, it is laid down that a Brahmana shall perform the same 
penance for killing a Sudra as for killing a cat, a frog, a dog, or 
a crow! 6 

To what extent these regulations represent the actual state of 
things it is difficult to say. But the Jataka stories also describe 
how the Chandalas were treated as despised outcastes doomed to 
live outside the city or village, and their very sight was regarded as 
impure. On one occasion two of them approached the city-gate to 
sell their wares, where two girls of aristocratic birth chanced to 
meet them on their way to a festival. They regarded it as a bad 
omen and returned after washing their eyes with perfumed water. 
The crowd, angry at the abandonment of a gathering where they 
would have been served with free food and drink, mercilessly be¬ 
laboured the two Chandalas. Subsequently, concealing their birth, 
they went to Taxila for study. One of them made good progress 
but, eventually, their identity was discovered and they were again 
beaten and driven out. They went out into the woods, took to an 
ascetic life, and died shortly after. 7 

We find in this story the beginning of those ideas of untouch 
ability which have cast a slur on Indian civilization. But as yet 
the Sudras were not included in this category. It is, moreover, re¬ 
freshing to come across some instances in Buddhist literature where 
men of low caste were distinguished by culture. 

Like the Dharma-sutras, the Smritis also sanction intermarriage 
between males of higher and females of lower castes (i.e. Anuloma ), 

1. III. 156. 

2. II. 238, 240. 

3. VIII. 22. 

4. VIII. 413-14, 417. 

5. See pp. 337 ff. 

6. XI. 132. 

7. Jataka, IV. 244. 


544 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


but not vice versa ( Pratiloma ). Though Manu 1 clearly supports the 
marriage of a Brahmana male with a Sudra female, this is expressly 
condemned in the rules that immediately follow. Such contradic¬ 
tions, which also occur in the Mahabharata 2 and Dharma-sutras, 
prove that the practice was looked upon with disfavour and was 
gradually disappearing. 

As regards interdining, Manu lays down that a Brahmana must 
not eat cooked food (given) by a Sudra who performs no graddhas . 3 
This, by implication, shows that food cooked by a Sudra was not 
absolutely prohibited. But elsewhere, in Manu, 4 such food is both 
permitted and forbidden. Similar contradictions are also found in 
the Dharma-sutras. 5 Manu gives a long list of persons whose food 
is forbidden, 6 but the restriction is based on considerations of per¬ 
sonal virtues, not of caste. On the whole the idea of untouchability 
or impurity, even of the Sudras as a caste, was gradually growing, 
but had not yet become a rigid law or practice. No definite state¬ 
ment is made by Manu about changing one caste for another, but 
possibilities of such change are at least theoretically conceded. For 
example, it is laid down in Manu 7 that “if the female issue of a 
Brahmana male and a Sudra female bears children to one of the 
highest caste, the inferior (tribe) attains the highest caste within 
the seventh generation. Thus a Sudra attains the rank of a Brah¬ 
mana and (in a similar manner) a Brahmana sinks to the level of a 
Sudra, The same thing happened with the offspring of a Kshatriya 
or of a Vaisya.” This rule merely expands and clarifies the principle 
enunciated in Gautama Dharma-sutra 8 and indirectly supports the 
view that intermarriage even between Brahmanas and Sudras was 
not altogether unknown, and not always so severely condemned as 
in some rules of Manu and later Dharma-sutras. 

The most significant development in the caste system is the 
large increase in the number of mixed castes. The existence of 
these castes in the earlier period, as mentioned in the Dharma-sutras, 
has been noted above, 9 but we get the most elaborate account of 

1. III. 13. 

2. XIII. 48, 4-5. 

3. IV. 223. 

4. IV. 253, 211. 

5. Cf. Ap. Dh. S. II, 2, 3, 4, with I, 6, 18, 13. 

6. IV. 205 ff. 

7. X. 64-65. 

8. TV. 22. 

9. Vol. I, pp. 509f. 


A.I.U_35 


545 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


it in Manu. 1 It first enunciates the principles that there are only 
four castes and no fifth, 2 and then proceeds to explain the origin of 
the numerous other castes as due to the marriage between different 
castes. The issue of parents ‘equal’ in caste, of course, belongs to 
the same caste, and ‘sons begotten by twice-born men (i.e. the first 
three castes) on wives of the next lower castes’ belong to the father’s 
caste, though blamed on account of the fault (inherent) in their 
mothers. 3 But the issues born of women two or three degrees 
lower than their husbands form a separate caste. Then the inter¬ 
marriage between these mixed castes themselves and with the three 
higher castes, and the further intermarriage between the resulting 
castes multiply the number of castes. The offspring of the Prati - 
loma form of marriage (i.e. between a male of a lower caste and 
a female of a higher caste) as well as of those who are degraded on 
account of not fulfilling their sacred duties, and called Vratya, 4 add 
to the growing number of these mixed castes. Thus, by the two¬ 
fold theories of Sankara, intermarriage, and Vratya, Manu has 
sought to explain the origin of all mixed castes or social units in 
the country including even the Yavanas, Sakas, Chinas, Pahlavas, 
Dravidas, etc. 5 He has also prescribed the occupations by which 
they shall subsist. 6 Kautilya also describes some of the mixed castes 
as the fruits of intermarriage between different castes. 7 

The above review will make it clear that while the old theory 
of caste, adumbrated in the Vedic, especially the Sutra, texts, was 
developed and elaborated in this age, no new principle was enun¬ 
ciated. Further, though the caste system was gradually becoming 
more and more rigid, and the lot of the Sudras was becoming harder 
and harder, it had not yet reached the stereotyped form in which 
we find it today. 


The picture of the caste system as given above is, however, 
very different from what we find in the Buddhist and Jain texts, 
and even in some parts of the epics. Thus the Mahdbhdrata 8 lays 
down that one does not become a Brahmana by birth but by his 
conduct, a theory frequently met with in an elaborate form in 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 


X. 4 ff. 
X. 4. 

X. 5-6. 

X. 20. 

X. 20-44. 
X. 47 ff. 
III. 7. 


Bombay Edition III. 313 108. The Critical Edition regards the passage as an 
interpolation (Aianyaka Parva, p. 1032, note under III, 297, 61) 


546 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


Buddhist texts. The Mahdbhdrata also declares 1 that the son of a 
Brahmana is a Brahmana, even though his mother be a Kshatriya 
or Vaisya. This view is also repeated in Buddhist texts. We are 
told that when Prasenajit came to learn that his queen was really 
a slave woman, he reported the matter to the Buddha who said: 
“Wise men of old have said, what matters the mother’s birth? The 
birth of the father is the measure.” He also cited a famous in¬ 
stance in support of this view. When the king of Kosala heard 
this, he was pleased and treated the queen and her son as suited 
their rank. 

The Buddhist and Jain texts also always openly declare the 
Kshatriyas to be less superior to the Brahmanas, and name the Ksha- 
triyas first in enumerating the four castes. Thus, although the general 
framework of the caste system is admitted, the supremacy of the 
Brahmanas is challenged in these texts. This view is also indirectly 
supported by the Mahdbhdrata. Although in theory priestly power 
is higher than the royal power, and the king is a creation of the 
priest, in practice the king often gets the upper hand. This is quite 
natural, as the whole political organisation was behind the king, 
whereas the priesthood had not been organised into a worldly power 
(on the lines, say, of the Church in Europe) independent of the 
State. In any case the epic, not rarely, indicates that the king 
dictated and the priest obeyed. 

The Buddhist texts and other evidence also leave no doubt that 
the so-called mixed castes really resulted from organisations, like 
guilds, of people following different arts and crafts. The general 
theory of intermarriage leading to the different mixed castes is 
puerile in the extreme, and hardly deserves serious consideration. It 
was a desperate attempt to explain existing social conditions on the 
basis of the orthodox theory of the four castes. But it has one great 
value. It shows how the different non-Aryan tribes like Khasas and 
Dravidas, and even foreigners like Sakas, Yavanas, Chinas, etc., were 
gradually incorporated into Hindu society and formed an integral 
part of it. The gradual absorption of these foreign elements in the 
Hindu society is one of the most striking features of the period and 
testifies to the catholic spirit of the Hindus of that age. Even the 
hordes of nomadic tribes of Central Asia, not to speak of the civilized 
Greeks and Parthians, who came to India as conquerors, adopted 
Indian culture and civilization, and were so completely merged in the 


l. XII. 47, 17. 


547 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Hindu society that no trace was left of their individuality or separate 
existence as a community. 

The Buddhist texts also show that caste was not rigidly tied to 
craft in those days. They tell of a Kshatriya working successively 
as a potter, basket-maker, reed-worker, garland-maker, and cook, 1 
also of a Setthi (Vaisya) working as a tailor and a potter, 2 without 
loss of prestige in both cases. We find Kshatriyas of the &akya and 
Koliya clans cultivating their fields.. The Dasa-Brdhmana-Jataka 
states how Brahmanas in those days pursued ten occupations against 
rules: as (1) physicians, carrying sacks filled with medicinal roots 
and herbs; (2) servants and wagon-drivers; (3) tax-collectors who 
would not leave a household without collecting alms; (4) diggers of 
the soil in ascetic garb with their long hairs and nails and covered 
with dust and dirt; (5) traders selling fruits, sweets and the like; (6) 
farmers; (7) priests interpreting omens; (8) policemen with arms to 
guard caravans and shops, like Gopas and Nisadas; (9) hunters in the 
garb of hermits killing hares, cats, fish, tortoises and the like; and 
(10) menials of kings who helped them in their baths in the garb of 
Yajnikas. Similarly, the Vdsettha Sutta refers to Brahmanas work¬ 
ing as cultivators, craftsmen, messengers, sacrificers and landlords. 
The fragment on Silas mentions Brahmanas following many diverse 
occupations as physicians, sorcerers, architects, story-tellers, cattle- 
breeders, farmers and the like. The Jatakas refer to Brahmanas 
pursuing the following callings: tillage, tending cattle, trade, hunt¬ 
ing, carpentry, weaving, policing of caravans, archery, driving of 
carriages, and even snake-charming; and hold up a Brahmana 
peasant as a supremely pious man and even a Bodhisattva. 

Both Jain and Buddhist works describe the normal Brahmana 
either as a citizen serving society or as a hermit who has renounced 
society. The second type is called a tdpasa or a rishi living in his 
dsrama in the forest. The first class of Brahmanas served as the 
king’s priests and sacrificers, as well as ministers, ambassadors and 
military officers. 

Besides the four established castes of Hindu society the Bud¬ 
dhist Pali text-books speak of the peoples ranking socially below 
them as hina-jati, “low tribes”, marked out by their pursuits of 
‘low crafts’, hina-sippa, and instance the workers in rushes, fowlers 

1. Jataka, V. 290. 

2. Jataka, VI. 372. 

548 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


and cart-makers, who were aboriginal peoples; as also mat-makers, 
barbers, potters, weavers and leather workers. Some texts apply 
the general term Milakkha ( —Mlechchha ) to peoples lying outside 
the pale of Aryan society. 1 2 3 These include the hinci-jatis, mentioned 
as five in the Vinaya-Siitta-Vibhahga ' 1 viz. Chandala, Vena, Nesada, 
Rathakara and Pukkusa. Some of these counted as Sudras belonging 
to Aryan society, while others lay outside its pale. The former are 
called by PaninP aniravasitci (abahishkrita) Sudras and the latter, 
niravasita. As examples of the latter, the Assalayana Sutta men¬ 
tions the Yonas and Kambojas whose society knew of only two 
classes, employers and employed, or rather master (ayya) and slave 
( ddsa ). 

A graphic account of the caste system is given by Megasthenes, 
the Greek ambassador at the court of Chandragupta Maurya. He 
enumerates seven classes or castes into which the whole popula¬ 
tion of India is divided, viz. (1) Philosophers, (2) Husbandmen, 
(3) Herdsmen, (4) Artizans, (5) Military, (6) Overseers or Spies, and 
(7) Councillors and Assessors. He adds that “no one is allowed to 
marry out of his own caste, or to exchange one profession or trade 
for another or to follow more than one business.” 

This is undoubtedly a characteristic of the rigid caste system as 
enunciated in the Brahmanical texts, but it is dimcult to believe that 
the seven categories mentioned by Megasthenes really conformed to 
this. Neither of the last two classes of officials could really form such 
a close social corporation, and the fourth class, the artizans, must 
have included a number of such social units. There is no doubt that 
Megasthenes confused the castes with the professions or occupations 
with which he was more familiar than others. It is significant 
that he makes no mention of the fourfold divisions of caste, and his - 
obvious confusion between castes and occupations probably indicates 
that the broad division of society was based on this latter factor 
rather than on the theoretical classification in the Brahmanical texts 
of the period. 

Whatever we might think of the accuracy or otherwise of 
Megasthenes's observations about the caste-divisions in general, we 
get interesting glimpses of the social conditions of his time from the 
particulars he records of them. Special interest attaches to his des¬ 
cription of the ‘Philosophers' whom he divides into two classes— 

1. E.g. Dlgha Nikaya., III. 264. 

2. Anguttara, I. 107: IT. 86. 

3. II. 4. 10. 

549 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

Brachmanes and Sarmanes. There is no doubt that the first of these 
refers to the Brahmanas. The second is generally taken as the 
Buddhist Sravianas, but most likely refers to ascetics as a class 1 
irrespective of the particular religious sect to which they belonged. 

The Brahmana’s life is broadly divided into two stages. In the 
first he lives in a simple style, in a grove in front of the city; he 
abstains from animal food and sexual pleasure, and spends his time 
listening to serious discourses or imparting his knowledge to others. 
After living in this manner for 37 years he retires to his home 
where he lives the rest of his days in ease and security. He marries 
as many wives as he pleases, eats flesh and uses fine dresses and 
costly ornaments. In this account we may easily detect an attempt 
to describe the first two stages of a Brahmana’s life, viz. those of 
studentship and householder. 

The other class of philosophers, viz. the Sramanas, are divided 
into two classes. The more distinguished among them, the Hylobioi, 
lived an ascetic life in the woods, where they subsisted on leaves of 
trees and wild fruits, and wore garments made from the bark of trees. 
The other class were the physicians, who lived in society and obtain¬ 
ed their food, consisting of rice and barley-meal, from the house¬ 
holders for the mere asking, presumably for the valuable medical 
services rendered by them free of charge. We are told that they 
effected cures rather by regulating diet than by the use of medicines, 
among which the most esteemed were ointments and plasters. The 
Indians were also highly reputed for cure of snake-bites for which 
no adequate remedy was known to the Greeks. 

The Brahmanas and ascetics, whom Megasthenes brings together 
under one group, formed the highest class in society which, though 
inferior in point of number to the other classes, was pre-eminent 
over all in point of dignity. They were engaged by the king and 
private persons to perform religious ceremonies, and some of them 
gave a forecast of the weather, health and other topics which might 
be of use to the public. 

It seems to be clear that Megasthenes has described here not so 
much any particular class or group, far less any caste, as a body 
of people who struck him as possessing the highest intellectual and 
spiritual powers and thus forming a class apart. Megasthenes’s high 
estimate of this class of people is fully borne out by the literary 
evidence referred to above, and the account of individual ascetics 
by the Greeks, to be referred to later. 


550 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


It appears from what has been said above that the Hindu society 
became something like a federation of castes and sub-castes, whose 
members did sometimes intermarry, more frequently in earlier than 
in later ages, but which nevertheless retained their separate identity. 
Society consisted of a large number of groups which had been 
brought into the same spiritual and cultural framework, but which 
had been only partially fused together. Caste was not altogether 
static, for new sub-castes frequently arose from migration, fusion 
or sub-division. Old sub-castes sometimes lost their identity and 
rose or fell in status. All the same, the institution acquired a per¬ 
manent character and coloured all organization, law, custom and 
social philosophy. Every caste or rather sub-caste, more strictly the 
local segments of sub-castes, enjoyed a very large measure of auto¬ 
nomy in their social code, cultural tradition and even in judicial 
matters. This state of things, as we have seen, was reflected at every 
step in political organization and political thought. Here it may be 
stressed that caste resolved function into a purpose, into something 
like an ethical principle, almost a religious conception, and exalted 
the group to the detriment of individual values. This is one of the 
reasons why Hindu political theory speaks frequently of the duties, 
but rarely of the rights of the individual. In society, individuality 
derives its worth and significance from its contribution of service to 
the universal whole. Personality is thus taught to transcend itself 
by giving its devotion to something beyond itself. To everyone, 
theory prescribes a way of life which accords best with the duties he 
has to discharge. For instance it inculcates a life of poverty and 
austerity to priests, scholars and teachers, of whom the Brahmanic 
order was composed or ought to be composed. Caste furnished an 
additional incentive to that functional organization and self-govern¬ 
ment which are natural to all economic occupations, especially to 
industry and commerce. So arose multitudes of local and functional 
jurisdictions and intermediate associations in a State. In such a 
community social control could not be concentrated at a single poini. 
Sovereignty could not be monistic in the rigid Austinian sense of the 
term. It was pluralistic and was diffused among a variety of groups 
and associations. 

II. ORDERS OR STAGES OF LIFE 

We have abundant testimony to the effective part played by the 
four Asramas or stages in life during the period under review. As 
noted above, 1 this fourfold division of life dates back to the Vedic 

1. Vol. I. pp. 447, 493 ff. 

551 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


age, and we get a fairly comprehensive account of it in the Dharma- 
sutras. As this was a distinctive characteristic of Indian civilization 
and accounts for much of the religious development of the age, we 
may refer to it in some detail. The first stage is that of the Brahma - 
chart, whose is a life of study, of which the characteristic requisite 
is that he must leave the home of his parents and get himself admit¬ 
ted into the home and family of his chosen teacher with whom he 
has to live. The Brahmacharl might be of two classes known as 
(1) Upakurvdna, one who undergoes student-life for a period, after 
which he marries and becomes a householder, and (2) Naishthika, 
one who remains a student and a celibate throughout life, which he 
consecrates wholly to pursuit of learning. 

The second Asrama is that of the Grihastha with his manifold 
duties broadly marked out as comprising (1) Yajha (sacrificial wor¬ 
ship), (2) Adhyayana (study), and (3) Dana (liberality). The Gri¬ 
hastha who sets up a home and rears up a family has to recognise 
three debts which he must repay in his worldly life, viz. (1) debt to 
the gods to be repaid by worship called Yajna, (2) debts to Pitris or 
ancestors, to be redeemed by his offspring prepetuating his family, 
and (3) debt to Rishis or the fathers of learning and founders of 
religion, to be redeemed by contributions to learning and religious 
life such as ‘observance of continence on parvan days.’ 

The third Asrama is that of the Bhikshu, who has to live a life 
of restraint and denial, marked by the following characteristics: 
(1) Anichaya, not given to hoarding, (2) Urddhvareta (continence), 
(3) abstaining from movement in the rains, (4) going to a village 
for the exclusive purpose of begging, and that after the villagers 
had finished their meals, or when alms were readily given without 
any blessings in return as inducement to charity, with restraint of 
speech, eyes, and action, (5) wearing only loin-cloth or old rag, duly 
washed, to cover nakedness, (6) abstaining from plucking leaves or 
fruits for eating and thus injuring plant-life, (7) not staying out of 
season (i.e. after rains when movement was permitted) for a second 
night in the same village, and (8) not destroying seeds for purposes 
of food (e.g. by pounding rice by a pestle) but depending on cooked 
food if given as alms. 

The fourth Asrama carries with it more rigid austerities and 
abstentions. One belonging to it is called by significant terms— Pari - 
vrajaka, Sannydsi, or Vaikhdnasa by Baudhayana. The Vaikhanasa 
is so called because he follows the rules of the sage Vikhanas. He is 


552 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


to live in the forest and to subsist on roots and fruits (avoiding cook¬ 
ed food) found in the forest and not grown in the village. He must 
not live on land that is ploughed, nor enter a village, nor store up 
food for a year. He should allow his hair to grow, and wear only 
bark and skin. 

The Sannydsl or Parivrdjaka of the fourth Asrama is described 
as one who “abandoning truth and falsehood, pleasure and pain, the 
Vedas, this world and the next, seeks only the Atman.” He was 
generally recruited from the Naishthikas, widowers, childless house¬ 
holders, and persons above 70 years of age having sons to take 
charge of their home and family. 

This account, based on the Brahmanical religious texts, is fully 
corroborated by Kautilya’s Arthasdstra, 1 which describes in detail 
the duties assigned to the four Asramas. 

Kautilya further points out the virtues which should be culti¬ 
vated in common in all the four Asramas, viz. non-violence towards 
all, truthfulness, purity, freedom from jealousy, appreciation of the 
good points of others, freedom from cruelty, and forbearance. 

The scheme of the four Asramas was designed to give wide scope 
to individuals in the choice of a vocation in life which was best suited 
to their intellectual capacity and mental inclinations. As remarked 
before, 2 it was not necessary that one should strictly follow the four 
stages one after another. Though this might be regarded as a normal 
procedure by the orthodox section, and one that was largely follow¬ 
ed in practice, still the choice was left to every individual, who was 
not forced either to lead a householder’s life or to renounce it against 
his will. But on the whole the different stages very well reflect the 
different ideals which inspired society. 

This voluntary system worked well so long as there was no 
preponderating attraction for an ascetic life, for the neglect of house¬ 
hold duties on the part of a large section disturbs the economy of 
society. The great wave of renunciation at the beginning of the 
period under review, which may be regarded both as the cause and 
effect of the rise of heterodox sects like Jainism and Buddhism, was 
a menace to orthodox Hindu society and to the V arnasrama-dharma 
upon which it was based. Its integrity was threatened by the growth 
of various ascetic orders and brotherhoods based upon renunciation 

1. Bk. I, Ch. in. 

2. Vol. I, p. 493. 


/ 


553 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


of the world and of social obligations. The reaction to this anti¬ 
social development is reflected in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra, which does 
not at all approve of a premature renunciation of the world and the 
duties of domestic life without the formal sanction of the legal autho¬ 
rities and without making provision for son and wife. Kautilya 
accordingly goes to the length of banning the entry into villages of 
such unlicensed ascetics as a disintegrating factor in rural society. 

There is no doubt, however, that the ascetics or hermits who 
renounced the world for developing spiritual life formed a unique 
feature in Indian society. The Greek writers have left an interest¬ 
ing account of some of those whom they actually met. Thus Onesi- 
critus met at Taxila fifteen of them, all given to meditation. When 
told that the Yavana king wanted to learn their wisdom, one of them 
replied that “no one coming in the drapery of European clothes— 
cavalry cloak and broad-brimmed hat and top-boots, such as Mace¬ 
donians wore—could learn their wisdom. To do that he must strip 
naked and learn to sit on the hot stones beside them.” 

More details have been preserved of another hermit named 
Dandamis “whose home was the woods where he lay on a pallet of 
leaves.” The account, as given by one of the Greek writers, is worth 
quoting in extenso. 

“King Alexander, accordingly, when he heard of all this, was 
desirous of learning the doctrines of the sect, and so he sent for this 
Dandamis, as being their teacher and president. 

“Onesicritus was therefore despatched to fetch him, and when 
he found the great sage he said: “Hail to thee, thou teacher of the 
Bragmanes. The son of the mighty god Zeus, King Alexander, who 
is the sovereign lord of all men, asks you to go to him, and if you 
comply, he will reward you with great and splendid gifts, but if you 
refuse will cut off your head.” 

“Dandamis, with a complacent smile, heard him to the end, 
but did not so much as lift up his head from his couch of leaves, and 
while still retaining his recumbent attitude returned this scornful 
answer:—“God, the Supreme King, is never the author of insolent 
wrong, but is the creator of light, of peace, of life, of water, of the 
body of man, and of souls. He alone is the god of my homage, who 
abhors slaughter and instigates no wars. But Alexander is not God, 
since he must taste of death; and how can such as he be the world’s 
master, who has not yet reached the further shore of the river 
Tiberaboas, and has not yet seated himself on a throne of universal 


554 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


dominion?.Know this, however, that what Alexander offers 

me, and the gifts he promises, are all things to me utterly useless; 
but the things I prize, and find of real use and worth, are these leaves 
which are my house, these blooming plants which supply me with 
dainty food, and the water which is my drink, while all other posses¬ 
sions and things, which are amassed with anxious care, are wont 
to prove ruinous to those who amass them, and cause only sorrow 
and vexation, with which every poor mortal is fully fraught. But as 
for me, I lie upon the forest leaves, and, having nothing which 
requires guarding, close my eyes in tranquil slumber; whereas had I 
gold to guard, that would banish sleep. The earth supplies me with 
everything, even as a mother her child with milk. I go wherever I 
please, and there are no cares with which I am forced to cumber 
myself, against my will. Should Alexander cut off my head, he can¬ 
not also destroy my soul. My head alone, now silent, will remain, 
but the soul will go away to its Master, leaving the body like a torn 
garment upon the earth, whence also it was taken. I then, becom¬ 
ing spirit, shall ascend to my God, who enclosed us in flesh, and left 
us upon the earth to prove whether, when here below, we shall live 
obedient to his ordinances, and who also will require of us, when we 
depart hence to his presence, an account of our life, since he is judge 
of all proud wrong-doing; for the groans of the oppressed become 
the punishments of the oppressors. 

“Let Alexander, then, terrify with these threats those who wish 
for gold and for wealth, and who dread death, for against us these 
weapons are both alike powerless, since the Bragmanes neither love 
gold nor fear death. Go, then, and tell Alexander this: ‘Dandamis 
has no need of aught that is yours, and therefore will not go to you, 
but if you want anything from Dandamis come you to him.’ 

“Alexander, on receiving from Onesicritus a report of the inter¬ 
view, felt a stronger desire than ever to see Dandamis, who, though 
old and naked, was the only antagonist in whom he, the conqueror 
of many nations, had found more than his match.” 1 

This simple narrative of an eye-witness give us a vivid idea of 
an Indian hermit—his mode of plain living and high thinking, his 
easy and graceful manner, complete indifference and aversion to 
material good, lofty spiritual ideals and practical realisation of the 
Upanishadic doctrine of Soul and God resulting in utter fearlessness 
of bodily pangs, even of death. All this gave him courage to defy 

1. McCrindle, Megasthenes, pp. 124-126. 


555 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Alexander,—a courage which can come only from an innate spiri¬ 
tual strength. Dandamis’s rebuke to Alexander as the instigator 
of war and perpetrator of slaughter is not without significance to 
the modern world. Dandamis represents the typical Indian hermit 
who, irrespective of any particular religious sect or doctrine, is an 
embodiment of those virtues and spiritual truths which have ani¬ 
mated India from the earliest times and have never ceased to play 
an effective part in her life from the days of Asoka to those of 
Mahatma Gandhi. 


III. FAMILY LIFE 

The joint family system characterised the society, and we get 
an ideal picture of it in the epics. Implicit and unquestioned obe¬ 
dience to the father is held up as the highest duty for a son in nume¬ 
rous stories and incidents in both the epics. Rama cheerfully gave 
up the kingdom and betook himself to the life of an exile in the 
jungles, merely to enable his father to keep his word, and Bhishma 
voluntarily took the vow of lifelong celibacy and renounced his 
claim to his father’s kingdom, to remove all obstacles in the way 
of his father’s marriage with a fisherwoman. At the same time the 
fact that Dasaratha, father of Rama, could not survive his sepa¬ 
ration from the latter demonstrates how deep a father’s love could 
be. The attitude of respect and devotion to father was but the 
logical conclusion of the great veneration shown generally towards 
all elders in the family, especially towards the elder brother, of which 
we get an ideal picture in both the epics, in the careers of the sons 
of Dasaratha and Pandu. There are also numerous instances of cor¬ 
dial and affectionate feelings between different members of the 
family, especially between a wife and her husband’s parents, brothers 
and sisters. But we have also examples, in other texts, of serious 
disagreement. There are instances of both daughters-in-law and 
mothers-in-law seeking refuge in nunnery to escape from the tyranny 
of the other. One daughter-in-law even connived at a cunning plot 
to kill her mother-in-law. In one case four daughters-in-law drove 
the father-in-law out of the house. Lastly, we have the case of a 
son who refused to marry on the ground that wives generally show 
scant respect to their parents-in-law and even domineer over them. 1 
Such instances are, however, exceptions and only prove that indivi¬ 
dual temperaments had as much play in those days as at present. 

1. Altekar. The Position of Women in Hindu Civilisation, pp. 107-8. 


556 



-a. to ho 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


The epics also draw a brilliant picture of conjugal fidelity and 
ideal relationship between husband and wife which have always 
formed a distinguishing feature of Hindu society. But here again 
we have indubitable evidence that the ideal was not unoften far 
removed from practice. Megasthenes makes a general statement to 
the effect that “the wives prostitute themselves unless they are com¬ 
pelled to be chaste.” 1 This remark of a foreigner would have been 
lightly dismissed but for the fact that Manu exactly echoes this 
sentiment, and even elaborates the idea in verses 2 which would not 
bear repetition in decent society. Megasthenes further observes 
that “a woman who kills the king when drunk becomes the wife of 
his successor.” 3 He was probably thinking of the last queen of the 
Sisunaga dynasty, referred to above. The Jatakas also mention 
many cases of conjugal infidelity. While these instances do not 
necessarily imply any general moral lapse in society, they should 
prove a corrective to those who would fain draw an ideal picture of 
conjugal faith and love in ancient India. 

The family life must have been considerably affected by the 
growth of intermarriage, and consequently also of polygamy, for the 
first marriage usually took place with a girl of the same caste, and 
others were added later. Megasthenes observes that the Indians 
“marry many wives; some they marry hoping to find in them willing 
helpmates; and others for pleasure and to fill their houses with chil¬ 
dren.” 4 This is, in a way, corroborated by the Smritis and the 
examples furnished by the epics, for Krishna, Duryodhana, Bhima, 
Arjuna and Dasaratha had each many wives. 

The wife who belonged to the same caste as her husband enjoy¬ 
ed special privileges, and the legal status of the sons, at least in the 
matter of inheritance, depended upon the caste of the mother. This 
inequality of treatment must have considerably disturbed the peace 
and harmony of the family and adversely affected the nature of, 
and normal relation between, husband and wife. This growth of 
polygamy also led to the frequent supersession of the wife, even on 

1. This is the translation of McCrindlc (p. 71). But the passage is obscure and 
Mr. Bevan takes it to mean that “where conjugal infidelity in a wife was due 
to husband’s omission to exercise vigorous control, it was condoned by public 
opinion” (CHI, I. 414). Nearchus remarks: “Indian women, if possessed of 
uncommon discretion, would not stray from virtue for any reward short of an 
elephant, but on receiving this a lady lets the giver enjoy her person. Nor do 
the Indians consider it any disgrace....” (McCiiodLe, Megasthenes:, p. 222) 

IX. 5-G, 14-16. 

McCrindle. op. cit. p. 71. 

/bid. 


557 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


flimsy grounds, to which reference will be made later. The bring¬ 
ing together of wives of different habits and types of culture must 
have not only altered the character of home life, but also degraded 
the status of the wife, of which the Smritis furnish abundant evi¬ 
dence. 

The extent to which polyandry prevailed in ancient India is a 
debatable point. The Mahabharcita furnishes an instance of it in the 
marriage of Draupadi with the five Pandava brothers. This, and a 
few other cases cited in the same epic, can only be regarded as poly¬ 
andry in a limited sense, viz. marriage of one woman with several 
brothers. But it is quite clear, from the various explanations offer¬ 
ed, that the custom had ceased to be favoured or even tolerated in 
Aryan society at the time the epic was put in its final shape. Various 
attempts have been made by modern scholars to solve what they call 
the ‘Draupadi puzzle’. It is perhaps best to accept polyandry as a 
custom actually in vogue in ancient times. A passage in Apastamba 1 
seems to refer to the practice of marrying a girl to a whole family 
which is at present forbidden. Brihaspati, however, refers to this 
practice (Kale Kanydpraddna) as actually prevailing in his time in 
other countries. It may be noted that the custom of several brothers 
marrying only one woman is even today more common in India 
than is generally believed, not only among non-Aryans, but also 
among the Brahmanas and Rajputs of Kumaun . 2 

IV. MARRIAGE AND POSITION OF WOMEN 

Marriage between members of the same caste was preferred, 
though, as noted above, intermarriage between different castes was 
prevalent. There were certain restrictions even in respect of mar¬ 
riage within the caste. Thus marriage with a girl of the same gotra 
or pravara, and also within a certain degree of Sapinda relationship, 
was prohibited. The actual meaning and details of these prohibi¬ 
tions are difficult to follow. On the whole they forbid marriage- 
relation between agnates and cognates up to a certain limit. A re¬ 
markable exception to this was the custom of marrying the maternal 
uncle’s daughter prevalent amongst southerners which, though for¬ 
bidden by Manu 3 and most other Smritis, is approved by Brihaspati , 4 

1. II. 27, 3-4. 

2. Jolly, Hindu Law and Custom , pp. 102-3; KHDS, II. 554. 

3. XI. 172-173. 

4. GOS Ed. I. 128; II. 401. 


558 



SOCIAL CONDITION 


who also sanctions the marriage of a brother’s widow prevailing in 
north-west India in his time. 1 

The eight forms of marriage, mentioned in the Dharma-sutras. 
are repeated in Manu. 2 These are:— 

1. Brahma, where the father gives hi. daughter, decked with 
ornaments and jewels, to a learned man of good conduct invited by 
him. 

2. Daiva, where the father gives his daughter, decked with 
ornaments, to a priest who duly officiates at a sacrifice, during the 
course of its performance. 

3.. Arsha, where the father gives his daughter after receiving 
from the bridegroom a cow and a bull or two pairs. 

4. Prajapatya, where the father gives his daughter after ad¬ 
dressing the couple with the text:' ‘May both of you perform together 
your duties.’ 

5. Asura, where the bridegroom receives a maiden after hav¬ 
ing given as much wealth, as he can afford, to the kinsmen and to 
the bride herself. 

6. Gandharva, or the voluntary union of a maiden and her 
lover. 

7. Rakshasa, or the forcible abduction of a maiden from her 
home. 

8. Paisacha, where a man by stealth seduces a girl who is 
sleeping, intoxicated or disordered in intellect. 

The first three, four, or six are approved by different authori¬ 
ties. The last one is universally condemned and the seventh is gene¬ 
rally commended only in the case of a Kshatriya. On the whole, 
though the authorities differ in their opinion both as regards the 
number of the forms of marriage as well as their suitability, all of 
these seem to have been in vogue. It is interesting to note that 
according to Megasthenes the Indian’s marriage is marked by the gift 
of “a yoke of oxen”. This proves the popularity of the Arsha form 
of marriage (No. 3) in the fourth century B.C. 

The condemnation of the last four forms proves that the basic 
idea of a proper marriage was that the father or guardian of the gir] 
should freely select the bridegroom on account of his qualifications, 
and no party should be influenced by any consideration of wealth 


i'. II. 403. 

2. III. 27-34. 


559 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


which the other might give. The difference between the first and 
the fourth is not very clearly marked. It is held by some that the 
formula mentioned in the fourth practically forbids the husband to 
marry another wife or to enter the ascetic life without his wife. But 
the Brahma marriage also, by virtue of the mantras recited, enjoins 
upon the husband and wife to be inseparable companions of each 
' other in the spheres of religion, love and wealth. On the whole this 
spirit pervades the first four forms of marriage, which are regarded 
as a religious sacrament and no mere secular contract. 

Examples of the Asura form of marriage, where the bride is pur¬ 
chased with gifts and money, are the marriage of Madri, sister of 
Salya, to Pandu, and that of Kaikeyi to Dasaratha. The Rdkshasa 
form is exemplified in the marriage of Arjuna and Subhadra, and 
that of Vichitravirya, on whose behalf Bhlshma abducted Ambalika 
and Ambika, daughters of the king of Kasl. Probably the abduction 
of Sita by Ravana is to be explained as due to a similar marriage 
custom among the Rakshasas—a tribe of whom Ravana was the 
chief. But the most interesting type of marriage described in the 
epics is the Svayamvara (self-choice), confined originally to the 
Kshatriya class, wherein a princess selected her husband of her own 
free will from among the assembled suitors, or as the result of a 
tournament or contest in the use of warlike weapons. Formally it 
may be affiliated to the Gdndharva form of marriage. DraupadI and 
Sita are both described as won in marriage in this manner. 

According to Nearchus the Indians “marry without either giving 
or taking dowries, but the women, as soon as they are marriageable, 
are brought forward by their fathers and exposed in public, to be 
selected by the victor in wrestling or boxing or running, or by 
some one who excels in any other manly exercise.” 1 This probably 
refers to a modified form of Svayamvara. 

As regards the age of the bride at the time of marriage, 2 the 
evidence of the Mahdbharata is overwhelmingly in favour of the 
marriage of well-developed and grown-up girls. The cases of 
Kshatriya women like Draupadi, Kunti, Uttara and the Brahmana 
Devayam, as well as the continuance of the custom that consum¬ 
mation was a part of the marriage ceremony, may be noted in this 
connection. The Rdmdyana in one passage 3 states that Sita was six 
years and Rama thirteen years of age at the time of marriage. But 

1. McCrindle, op. cit., p. 222. 

2. Altekar, op. cit . pp. 58 ff. 

3. Aranya Kinda, 47. 10-11. 

560 



SOCIAL CONDITION 


other and more reliable passages indicate that she was fully develop¬ 
ed at the time. Mahdbhdrata also in one passage 1 mentions 30 
and 10 or 21 and 7 as the proper ages of the bridegroom and the 
bride! These, however, must be adjudged as exceptions proving the 
rule of the marriage of grown-up girls. The Buddhist texts also 
support this view. 

/ 

As noted above, there was already a tendency in the Sutra texts 
to lower the age of marriage for girls. While Manu prescribes that 
a man of thirty shall marry a maiden of twelve, or a man of twenty- 
four, a girl of eight, 2 he at the same time lays down that a maiden, 
though marriageable, should rather stop in (the father’s) house until 
death, than that he should ever give her to a man destitute of good 
qualities. 3 On the whole we may reasonably conclude that while 
child-marriage was gradually coming into vogue, the older custom 
of marriage at a mature age was neither uncommon nor regarded 
with disapprobation. Further, it was considered extremely unde¬ 
sirable, if not a positive sin for the father, to let mature girls remain 
unmarried, and there is an almost unanimous agreement that in such 
cases the girl could find out her own husband, after a period of wait¬ 
ing which varied from three months to three years in the different 
Smritis. Later Smritis like Yajnavalkya insisted that girls should 
be married before the age of puberty. But this was merely a fore¬ 
taste of what was going to happen, rather than any settled or even 
generally followed rule during the period under review, for Narada, 
which is a later work, recommends marriage after puberty. 4 5 On 
the whole the insistence on marriage of girls, and that at an early 
age, is a marked feature of the time and was probably mainly due to 
an anxiety to maintain their bodily purky. 

It has been suggested 3 by some that the rules in the Smritis 
about the marriage of girls at an early age applied only to the Brah- 
manas and not to the other castes. This is supported by the fact 
that the heroines in Sanskrit dramas are almost always grown-up at 
the time of marriage, and the actual historical examples such as 
that of RajyasrI, sister of Harsha-vardhana, also support this view. 
It is also pointed out that in a late work, Saiiiskdra-prakcLsa, it is 
expressly laid down that there is no prohibition against marrying a 

1. Anusasana parvan. 44, 14. 

2. X. 94. 

3. IX. 89. 

4. XII. 27. 

5. KHDS, II. 416. 


561 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


girl who has passed the age of puberty, for Kshatriyas and others. 
But such restrictions are not even hinted at in the earlier Smriti 
works, and the arguments cited merely prove that the injunction 
about child-marriage was not scrupulously followed in actual life. 

The lowering of the marriageable age must have affected the 
general education and culture of women in an adverse way. Extreme 
emphasis was now laid on the physical chastity of woman and her 
unquestioned obedience to husband, to the detriment of other aspects 
of her life. The result was a gradual deterioration in her general 
status and position. But the final stage in this downward movement 
was not reached during the period under review. It was rather a 
transitional period, and we really find two entirely different pictures 
of women reflected in literary works. In one set of verses in the 
epics we find women described as fickle, quarrelsome, untruthful— 
in other words, a veritable pot of poison! She must, therefore, 
remain (we are told) under control all her life; in girlhood under the 
guardianship of her father, in youth under the domination of the 
husband, and in old age in the charge of her sons. In the other set 
of verses, woman is ‘the glory of the home’, the symbol of prosperity 
to the family, (the better) half of the husband, his friend, philosopher 
and guide, and therefore worthy of all attention and respect. As a 
mother, she is superior to ten fathers, superior to anything else on 
earth. 

The same sort of contradiction appears in the Smriti works. 
Manu, for example, declares 1 that gods are pleased with (those 
households) where women are held in honour, and that a husband 
should be punished by the king if he cast off the wife, who is not 
guilty of any crime causing loss of caste. 2 At the same time, he 
lays down that the husband had absolute rights over the wife to the 
extent of inflicting corporal punishment 3 and could discard her 
immediately she says anything disagreeable to him. It is also dec¬ 
lared that “by a girl, by a young woman, or even by an aged one, 
nothing must be done independently, even in her own house.” 4 A 
wife was to ‘worship, as a god, her husband even though he might be 
destitute of virtue or seeking pleasure elsewhere, or devoid of good 
qualities’, 5 and is to remain chaste and faithful to him whether he 
is alive or dead; but a husband, after the funeral of his wife, may 

1. III. 55-59. 

2. VIII. 389. 

3. Vin. 299. 

4. V. 147. 

5. V. 154. 


562 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


marry again. 1 Besides, as already noted, Manu 2 gives expression 
to some general sentiments about women which are most dishonour¬ 
able and humiliating to the class as a whole, and to which it is 
difficult to find a parallel in a book held in respect by a large section 
of humanity. 

There are, however, clear indications that during the first half 
of the period under review, at any rate, there were highly educated 
women, holding an honourable position in society and household. 

Two classes of women students are mentioned: Brahmavddini 
or lifelong students of sacred texts, and Sadyodvdha who prosecuted 
their studies till their marriage. Panini 3 refers to women students 
of Vedic Sakhas. Katyayana, in his Varttika, 4 refers to women 
teachers who were called Upddhydyd or Upddhydyl f as distinguished 
from Upadhydydnis , i.e. wives of teachers. The necessity of coining 
a new term shows that the women teachers were large in number. 
Patanjali also refers to a special designation for the women scholars 
who made a special study of Mimamsa philosophy. 

The Buddhist and Jain texts also refer to women of the Brahma¬ 
vddini class, i.e. those who remained unmarried to carry on their 
studies. Most of the Buddhist nuns, whose songs have been pre¬ 
served in the Therigdthd, were maidens born in well-to-do families, 
who renounced the world for the sake of spiritual salvation. The 
Jain texts refer to Jay anti, daughter of the king of Kausambi, who 
remained unmarried in order to devote herself to religion and philo¬ 
sophy. She carried on discussions with Mahavira himself on ab¬ 
struse questions of philosophy, and eventually became a nun. The 
Mahdbhdrata has also portrayed an exalted picture of womanhood 
in Draupadi who is called Pandita (learned) and fearlessly argues 
with her husband on all topics, not excluding political ones. Her 
spirited behaviour on many a critical occasion shows a worldly 
woman at her best. 

In addition to, or in place of, higher education, the women 
generally received training in fine arts like music, dancing and 
painting. But some of them went in for military training also. 
This is indirectly proved by the term Saktiki, a female spear-bearer, 

1. V. 168. 

2. IX. 2-19. 

3. IV. 1. 63. 

4. On IV. 1, 48. 


563 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL, UNITY 


mentioned by Patanjali. 1 But a more direct evidence is furnished 
by Megasthenes who refers to the Amazonian bodyguard in attend¬ 
ance on Chandragupta Maurya, when he went out to hunt. “Of 
the women” we are told, “some are in chariots, some, on horses, and 
some even on elephants, and they are equipped with weapons 
of every kind, as if they were going on a campaign.” 2 The Bharhut 
sculptures portray a woman riding a fully caparisoned horse and 
carrying a standard. The female bodyguard of the king is also 
mentioned in Kautilya’s Arthamstra which directs that ‘the king, on 
getting up from his bed, shall be received by troops of women 
armed with bows’. 3 

Women are sometimes known to have carried on administra¬ 
tive work. According to Megasthenes the Pandaean nation was 
governed by females. This is not unlikely, as matriarchy prevailed 
in south India. The Satavahana queen Nayanika acted as regent 
during the minority of her son. 4 

As against this bright picture of the high intellectual, moral 
and physical education of women depicted above, we find also 
steadily growing disabilities. Formerly the girls went through 
the Upanayana ceremony like the boys, but this gradually came 
to be merely formal. Manu prescribes 5 that in the case of women 
Upanayana should be performed without the recitation of sacred 
texts. In the following verse he lays down that the marriage 
ceremony was equal to the Upanayana in the case of women, 
“serving the husband being equivalent to the residence in (the 
house of the) teacher, and the household duties (the same) as the 
(daily) worship of the sacred fire.” Yajnavalkya 6 took the further 
and more logical step of prohibiting * the Upanayana ceremony al¬ 
together for girls. This was the signal for the gradual “spiritual 
disfranchisement” of women. Minor religious rituals like Jata~ 
karma, Namakarma, Chu&akarana, etc. also came to be performed 
for them without the Vedic mantras. The wife, who formerly per¬ 
formed Vedic sacrifices, was denied the right to do so 7 and could not 
even recite the Vedic mantras . Thus was the woman reduced, at 

1. On IV. 1, 15, 6. 

2. McCrindle, op. cit. p. 72. 

3. KAT. p. 47. 

4. Altekar, op. cit. p. 220. 

5. II. 66. 

6 I 13 

7. Manu , IV. 205-6; IX. 18; XI. 36. 


564 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


least spiritually, to the status of the Sudra, and this is clearly reflected 
even in the Bhagavadgita . l 

In contrast to this, Buddhism and Jainism offered a more honour¬ 
able career to women. No wonder a large number of them became 
nuns, and some of them became famous preachers. 

The growing importance attached to physical chastity explains 
the gradual discouragement of widow remarriage, divorce, and 
levirate, and encouragement of the system of sail. The rules about 
remarriage in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra closely follow those laid down 
in the Dharma-sutras. 2 They permit remarriage of a woman, whose 
husband is dead, has become an ascetic, or has gone abroad, after 
a period of waiting which varies according to circumstances. Both 
Manu 3 and Yajnavalkya 4 forbid the remarriage of widows, 5 but 
Narada 6 7 permits it, and following it, even later texts like Parasara- 
Smriti and Agni-purdna lay down that a woman can remarry even 
during the lifetime of her husband if he is lost ( i.e . unheard of), has 
become an ascetic, is impotent or is an outcaste. Such a remarried 
woman was called Punarbhu? 

As regards divorce or repudiation, we learn from Kautilya’s 
Arthasdstra that ‘if a husband either is of bad character, or is long 
gone abroad, or has become a traitor to his king, or is likely to en¬ 
danger the life of his wife, or has fallen from his caste, or has lost 
virility, he may be abandoned by his wife.’ Divorce on the ground 
of ill-feeling was also possible by mutual consent, but not at the will 
of one party alone*. Kautilya, on the whole, places the husband and 
wife almost on an equal footing in this respect, but Manu places 
the wife in a decidedly inferior position. He gives a long list of 
‘grounds’ on which one could supersede his wife by another, 8 and 
then adds that a wife who, being superseded, in anger departs from 
her husband’s house, must either be instantly confined or cast off in 
the presence of the family. 9 He also propounds the theory that 
the wife is not released from her marital obligations even if she is 

1. IX. 32. 

2. KAT. p. 201. 

3. V. 156-7. 

4. I. 75. 

5. But both of them sanction such marriages in certain cases (Manu, IX. 176; 
Yaj, I. 67). 

6. Xn. 45 ff; 96 ff. 

7. Vas . XVII. 19-20. 

8. IX. 80-82. 

9. IX. 83. 


565 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


sold or repudiated by the husband. 1 A wife showing disrespect 
to a husband who is addicted to some evil passion, is a drunkard, 
or diseased, shall be deserted for three months (and be) deprived 
of her ornaments and furniture, 2 though for the same, or much less 
heinous offence, she may be superseded by her husband. Indeed 
Manu’s injunctions regarding a wife are painful reading, and clearly 
show how orthodox Brahmanical view was deliberately aiming to 
relegate her to a position of inferiority. 

Narada is on the whole more considerate towards women. He 
lays down the general principle that, ‘when husband and wife leave 
one another from mutual dislike, it is a sin.’ 3 He, however, re¬ 
commends the expulsion of the wife not only on the grounds of 
wasteful expenditure, procuring abortion, adultery or attempt on 
the husband’s life, 4 but also for less serious offences like ‘showing 
malice, making unkind speeches or eating before her husband.’ 5 
He asks the husband not to ‘show love to a barren woman, or to 
one who gives birth to female children only, or whose conduct is 
blamable, or who constantly contradicts him.’ 6 But it is doubt¬ 
ful whether divorce is meant. On the other hand, Narada says that 
“if a man leaves a wife who is obedient, pleasant-spoken, skilful, 
virtuous, and the mother of male issue, the king shall make him 
mindful of his duty by inflicting severe punishment on him.” 7 
Narada further lays down that ‘when faultless maiden has been 
married to a man, who has a blemish unknown (before his mar¬ 
riage)’, she should not only be permitted to leave her husband and 
‘repair to another’, but ‘enjoined to do so by her relations.’ 8 

The account of the births of Pandu, Dhritarashtra and the 
Pandavas, considered along with the injunctions in the Dharma- 
sastras, leaves no doubt that the system of levirate was in use, 
though gradually coming into disfavour. Manu, curiously enough, 
mentions it with approval and lays down detailed rules and regu¬ 
lations for its control in five verses 9 but violently condemns it in 


1. IX. 46. 

2. IX. 78. 

3. XII. 90. 

4. XII. 90, 92. 

5. XII. 93. 

6. XII. 94. 

7. XII. 95. 

8. XII. 96. 

9. IX. 59-63. 


566 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


the next five. 1 Yajnavalkya, however, does not condemn it, 2 and 
both Vishnu 3 and Narada 4 permit it within certain limits. 

The Mahdbhdrata records (probably in its late portions) a few 
cases of sati (widow burning). MadrI burns herself on the funeral 
pyre of her husband Pan$u, and the bereaved wives of Krishna 
immolate themselves in Indraprastha after his death. The Adipar- 
van 5 has a verse recommending the practice, but the epic is strangely 
silent regarding the fate of the widows of Duryodhana and nume¬ 
rous other kings who died on the battlefield. In view of the testi¬ 
mony of Greek writers regarding the prevalence of this practice in 
the Punjab, the possibility has to be conceded that the practice of sail 
was in vogue during this period. It is possible that the practice 
was confined to the warrior class, as Onesicritus says, and the other 
Indo-Germanic parallels suggest. It is held by some that the prac¬ 
tice was encouraged by the examples of the Scythians who ruled 
in India during this period and among whom the custom of burning 
the wife of a chief along with the remains of her husband was 
quite common. 

In spite of the barbarous nature of the custom, it is interesting 
to note that sometimes it was not only an absolutely voluntary 
choice, but one that was made by the wife with eager delight. The 
testimony of the Greek writers leaves no doubt on the point. When 
the leader of an Indian contingent died in battle in Iran, in 316 B.C., 
both his wives were eager to immolate themselves on his funeral 
pyre. The Macedonian and Greek generals prevented the elder 
wife, who was with child, and gave permission to the younger. What 
followed may be described in the words of the Greek writer: 

“The elder wife went away lamenting, with the band about 
her head rent, and tearing her hair, as if tidings of some great disaster 
had been brought her; and the other departed, exultant at her victory, 
to the pyre, crowned with fillets by the women who belonged to her, 
and decked out splendidly as for a wedding. She was escorted by 
her kinsfolk who chanted a song in praise of her virtue. When she 
came near to the pyre, she took off her adornments and distributed 
them to her familiars and friends, leaving a memorial of herself, as 
it were, to those who had loved her. Her adornments consisted of 

1. IX. 64-68. 

2. I. 68-9. 

3. 15, 3. 

4. XII. 80 ff. 

5. Cr. Ed. I. 116, 31. 


567 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


a multitude of rings on her hands, set with precious gems of diverse 
colours, about her head golden stars not a few, variegated with diffe¬ 
rent sorts of stones, and about her neck a multitude of necklaces, 
each a little larger than the one above it. In conclusion, she said 
farewell to her familiars and was helped by her brother onto the 
pyre, and there, to the admiration of the crowd which had gathered 
together for the spectacle, she ended her life in heroic fashion. Be¬ 
fore the pyre was kindled, the whole army in battle array marched 
round it thrice. She meanwhile lay down beside her husband, and 
as the fire seized her no sound of weakness escaped her lips. The 
spectators were moved, some to pity and some to exuberant praise. 
But some of the Greeks present found fault with such customs as 
savage and inhumane.” 1 

This vivid account recalls the description of similar scenes by 
eye-witnesses in modern age. It is, however, permissible to as¬ 
sume that, as in later days, every case of satl was not voluntary. 
Aristobulus learnt on inquiry that the widow sometimes became a 
sati of her own desire, and that those who refused to do so lived 
under general contempt. 2 This undoubtedly implies that the pub¬ 
lic encouragement to the practice accelerated its growth. At the 
same time we must remember that the practice is not sanctioned 
either by the Dharma-sutras or by the Smritis. Manu and Yajna- 
valkya are reticent about it, though Vishnu seems to commend it in 
passages which are regarded by many as later interpolation. It is 
recommended only in the late Vaikhdnasa Grihya-sutra and later 
Smritis like those of 6ankha, Ahgiras, Daksha, Parasara and Vyasa. 

No discussion of the position of women would be complete 
without reference to a class of courtesans who enjoyed a social 
standing not accorded to them anywhere else in the world, save 
perhaps in Athens. The great prestige attached to this class of 
women appears vividly from the story of Amrapali in the Vinaya 
Texts of the Mulasarvastivadas. 3 She was a daughter of Maha- 
nama, a rich citizen of Vaisali. Many suitors, including princes, 
having sought her hand, her father brought the matter to the notice 
6f the Lichchhavi gana and it was discussed by the Assembly. When 
the members saw Amrapali, they decided that she was a strl-ratna 
(jewel of a woman), and so, we are told, according to the convention 
already laid down, she was not to be married to anybody but was 

1. Diodorus XIX 34, quoted in CHI, I. 415, 

2. Aristobulus, Frag. 34. 

3. B. C. Laio Vol. I. 137. 


568 



SOCIAL QONDJTION 


to be enjoyed by the gana. Amrapall agreed to lead the life of a 
public woman, but asked for five privileges which were granted. 

King Bimbisara, ‘engaged in conversation on good topics with 
his ministers,* asked them what sort of courtesan each of them had 
seen. Being told that Amrapall (or Ambapali) was exceedingly 
charming and accomplished in all the sixty-four arts, Bimbisara de¬ 
cided to visit her at Vaisali, even though the Lichchhavis were 
hostile. His son by her enjoyed a high position in court. The Pali 
Vinaya Texts tell us that a merchant, after having described the 
charms of Ambapali of Vaisali to king Bimbisara, requested him ‘to 
install a courtesan’ in Raj agriha, and this was done. 

Kau^ilya’s Arthasastra also reveals the same state of things. 
A prostitute, noted for her beauty, youth, and accomplishments, was 
to be appointed superintendent of prostitutes on a salary of 1,000 
pawas (per annum), together with a rival prostitute on half that 
salary. Detailed rules are laid down for regulating the profession, 
and two days’ earning every month had to be paid to the State. 

The prostitutes had to attend court and were regularly em¬ 
ployed in the royal household on a big salary. They held the royal 
umbrella, golden pitcher and fan, and attended upon the king seated 
on litter, throne, or chariot. They were also employed in the store¬ 
house, kitchen, bathroom, and the harem of the king. 

As to the accomplishments of this class, Kautilya tells us that 
“those who teach prostitutes, female slaves and actresses, arts such 
as singing, dancing, acting, writing, painting, playing on the instru¬ 
ments like lyre, pipe and drum, reading the thoughts of others, 
manufacture of scents and garlands, shampooing, and the art of 
attracting and captivating the mind of others, shall be endowed with 
maintenance from the State.” 1 

When Gautama Buddha visited a locality in the neighbourhood 
of Vaisali, Ambapali paid a visit to him with a number of magni¬ 
ficent vehicles. She sat down near him and, having heard his dis¬ 
course, invited him and his companions to take their meal at her 
house the next day. The Buddha agreed, and refused the invitation 
of the Lichchhavis which almost immediately followed. “Amba¬ 
pali,” said the Lichchhavis, “give up this meal to us for a hundred 
thousand.” “My Lords,” replied Ambapali, “were you to offer all 

1. KAT. 155-56. 


569 


4 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


• 

Vaisali with its subject territory, I would not give up this meal.” 
After the meal Buddha again gladdened the courtesan Ambapall 
by his religious discourse, and she presented a park, named after 
her, to the Buddha. 1 

It would appear from what has been said above that the 
courtesans as a class were not held in odium, and neither great 
kings nor renowned religious teachers looked down upon them. 
Some of them were highly accomplished and, in point of culture 
and standing, resembled the Hetairai of Athens. 

V. SLAVES 

Slavery was a recognised institution of Indian society from 
the oldest Vedic times. The Smritis not only distinguish between 
different classes of slaves but lay down various rules regarding 
their status. According to Manu and Narada, slaves could be ac¬ 
quired by birth in the master’s house, by purchase, by gift, by in¬ 
heritance, by maintenance during famine, by pledge, by release 
from a heavy debt, by capture in war, by gain in wager, by volun¬ 
tary surrender of freedom, by apostacy from asceticism, by con¬ 
nexion with a female slave, and by several other processes. Slavery 
was also the judicial punishment for crime. In keeping with the 
orthodox view of the gradation of varnas Yajnavalkya and Narada 
forbid slavery in the pratiloma order. The slaves, according to 
Narada, are to perform impure work. Though the disabilities of 
the slaves according to the Smriti law are very great, they are not 
without personal rights. A slave is not entitled to any property 
according to Manu and is not to be a judicial witness except in the 
last resort. According to Narada a legal act done by a slave is void 
except when done with the master’s permission. On the other 
hand the master, according to Manu, is to bear without resent¬ 
ment the offence of his slave who is his “shadow”. Manu also men¬ 
tions slaves along with parents, wife, and children with whom a 
householder should not quarrel. Again, according to Narada, a debt 
contracted by a slave for the benefit of a householder is binding 
upon him. Finally both Yajnavalkya and Narada lay down liberal 
rules for the emancipation of slaves. Thus we learn that a slave 
who saves his master’s life when in peril is forthwith released from 
slavery and becomes entitled to a son’s share. Again, persons cap¬ 
tured and sold by a robber as well as those enslaved by forcible 
means are to be emancipated by law. Other clauses lay down 

1. SBE, XVII, 105-8. 


570 



SOCIAL CONDITION 


specific acts by which different classes of slaves can win their free¬ 
dom. Even those slaves who are born in the master’s house, those 
who are received as gifts and those who are obtained by inheritance 
can be released at the master’s pleasure. Only an apostate from 
asceticism and one self-sold are absolutely disqualified for release 
from servitude. 1 

According to Megasthenes “all the Indians are free and not 
one of them is a slave.” He amplifies it by stating that “the Indians 
do not even use aliens as slaves and much less a countryman of 
their own.” It would be a remarkable feature, indeed, of Chandra- 
gupta’s times, if it were true. But there are so many references 
to the system of slavery in the Smritis and other Indian literature 
that it is difficult to accept Megasthenes’s statement as true. He 
probably applied to the whole of India what was true of a parti¬ 
cular region, or was misled by the humane treatment generally 
meted out to the slaves. 

As Rhys Davids justly remarks: “We hear nothing of such later 
(western) developments of slavery as rendered the Greek mines, 
the Roman latifundia or the plantations of Christian slave-owners, 
scenes of misery and oppression. For the most part the slaves (in 
India) were household servants, and not badly treated, and their 
numbers seem to have been insignificant.” 2 Such mild treatment, 
which offered a striking contrast to the system of slavery with which 
Megasthenes was familiar, probably led him to believe that there 
were no slaves in India. 

VI. DRESS AND ORNAMENTS 

In spite of inevitable differences in different localities, we may 
form a general idea of the dress and ornaments from the literature, 
sculptural representation and the description of the Greeks. Accord¬ 
ing to Nearchus, the Indians used two garments of cotton, ‘an under¬ 
garment which reaches below the knee half-way down to the ankles, 
and an upper garment which they throw partly over their shoulders 
and partly twist in folds round their head.’ 3 The nearest approxi¬ 
mation to this would be the dhoti (or sari) and chddar used by the 
people of Bengal, Orissa, Madras and other parts of India. The 
upper garment was generally not used inside the house, a part of 
the lower one being wrapped round the upper part or thrown over 

1. Ydj, II. 182-183; Ndrada, V. 2*6-43; Manu, IV. 180, 185; VIII. 70, 415-17. 

2. Buddhist India, p. 55. 

3. McCrindle, Megasthenes, p. 219. 


571 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the shoulders. When Draupadi was surprised in her private 
apartment and dragged rudely to the assembly hall by the Kau- 
ravas, she is described as ekavastrd (wearing one garment only). 
Similarly, the servant class probably made shift with a single (lower) 
garment. Draupadi, disguised as a servant in the palace of king 
Virata, wore only one garment. Ladies of the upper strata of 
society normally wore coloured garments, as widows are described 
as clad in white. The public or the formal dress of the higher 
classes included a turban or headgear consisting of a longish piece of 
cloth wrapped round the head in a number of ways according to local 
custom. Poor people probably made shift with the upper garment 
wrapped round the head like a turban. Kirlgs, of course, wore 
crowns. 

Ascetics and anchorites were dressed in garments made of kusa 
grass or rushes. What the texture of the Valkala—the favourite 
dress of a hermit—was, is uncertain, though it is popularly supposed 
to be made of the barks of trees. 

Although cotton was the material generally used, cloths made 
of silk, linen and wool were also in great demand, especially among 
the women and the rich. Kautilya 1 refers to an extensive textile 
industry all over India, and the Vinaya Texts refer to a complete 
weaving outfit. 2 The cloth was fastened at waist by a girdle, 
and a variety of girdles are mentioned in the Vinaya Texts, 3 such as 
those made of many strings plaited together, those made like the 
head of a water-snake, those with tambourines or beads on them, 
or those with ornaments hanging from them. The same texts 4 
refer to the variety of ways in which undergarments were arranged. 
All these are corroborated by the sculptural representations. 

The difference between the male and female dresses was much 
less marked than at present. Both used head-dress and ornaments, 
though gradually the women gave up the former, and the men, the 
latter. The sculptures of the period, especially those at Bharhut 
and Sanchl, give interesting specimens of dress and ornaments. On 
rare occasions we find women putting on the lower garments in 
sakachchha fashion like the males or Maharashtra women of today, 
i.e. by passing one end of it between the legs and tucking it up 

1. KAT. 93-4. 

2. Chv. V. 28.2. 

3. Chv. V. 29.2. 

4. Chv. V. 29.4. 


572 



SOCIAL CONDITION 


behind at the waist. This practice appears to have been confined 
to the north-west in ancient times. 

The sculptured female figures exhibit two striking peculiarities. 
They do not wear a veil and, more often than not, the upper part of 
the body is bare, revealing in full the bosom and the navel. The 
first is generally accepted as an evidence that the purdah system 
was not in vogue, 1 though some literary references seem to indicate 
that aristocratic ladies did use a veil when appearing in public. But 
many scholars refuse to believe that women actually appeared in 
public without covering the upper part of their body, as it offends 
against decency and is in conflict with literary descriptions, and 
they attribute the sculptures to the artistic convention of the age. 2 
But it must be remembered that notions about decency and inde¬ 
cency are more or less conventions that differ from age to age. 
There is abundant evidence that nudity, either of men or of women, 
was not viewed in the same light in ancient times as in the present. 
We know from the Vinaya Texts 3 that the Buddhist nuns, together 
with courtesans, took their bath in a river without any clothing. 
We are also told that the Buddhist monks “when naked saluted one 
another, and received salutes; did service to one another, and 
received services; gave to one another and accepted; ate both hard 
food and soft; tasted; and drank.” It is true that the Buddha for¬ 
bade these practices. But the very fact that they were prevalent 
to the extent indicated above proves that nudity was not regarded 
in those days as indecent, as in modern times. The scantiness of 
female dress in ancient paintings and sculptures may, therefore, be 
as much due to convention of art as a reflection of the actual state 
of things. The realistic description of the female bosom and navel 
in Classical Sanskrit literature also supports this view. It may be 
noted in this connection that no upper garment is worn by the 
women in the island of Bali, which still retains the Hindu culture 
it received from India. 

Foreign rulers like the Greeks and Scythians introduced new 
fashions of dress. The Kushana kings are represented as wearing 
trousers and^hig overcoat, and this was imitated by the Indians. 
Women, too, began to wear blouses, jackets and frocks in imitation 
of the Greeks and Scythians, but the fashion did not become a gene- 

1. This point will be discussed, with references, in the next volume. 

2. Altekar, op. cit. 338-44. 

3. Mv. VIII. 15. 11. 


573 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


ral one. The complete outfit for sewing described in Vinaya Texts 1 
indicated that stitched clothes were coming into fashion, although 
there is no explicit reference to it either in the Sutras or in the 
epics. 

Megasthenes observes that “in spite of the general simplicity 
of style the Indians love finery and ornament. Their robes are 
worked in gold and ornamented with precious stones, and they wear 
also flowered garments made of the finest muslin.” 2 The ornaments 
which decorated the bodies of both men and women were also costly 
and of various types and design. Every part of the body from head 
to foot had its appropriate ornaments made of gold, silver, pearls, 
gems and precious stones. It would be tedious to describe them in 
detail, and one may form a clear notion of them from the numerous 
sculptures and the actual specimens excavated from ancient sites. 
We may get an idea of the ornaments in common use, even by the 
men, from the fact, mentioned in Vinaya Texts, 3 that at first even 
monks “used to wear ear-rings, ear-drops, strings of beads for the 
throat, girdles of beads, bangles, necklaces, bracelets and rings”. 
Nearchus says that ear-rings of ivory were only worn by very 
wealthy people. The only ornaments referred to as worn by women 
alone were waist-bands and anklets. 

Nearchus tells us that Indians “wear shoes made of white 
leather, and these are elaborately trimmed, while the soles are 
variegated and made of great thickness to make the wearer seem 
so much the taller.” 4 The variety of shoes is also referred to in the 
Vinaya Texts 5 such as shoes with one, two, three or even more lin¬ 
ings; shoes adorned with skins of lion, tiger, panther, antelope, otter, 
cat, squirrel and owl; boots pointed with horns of rams and goats, 
ornamented with scorpions’ tails, sewn round with peacock feathers; 
boots, shoes and slippers of all hues such as blue, red, yellow, brown, 
black and orange. Sometimes the shoes were ornamented with 
gold, silver, pearls, beryls, crystal, copper, glass, tin, lead or bronze. 
Poorer people used wooden-shoes, shoes made of leaves of palmyra 
and date-palm, or of various kinds of grass. Shoes were also made 
of wool. 

1. Chv. V. 11. 2. —— 

2. McCrindle op. cit. p. 70. 

3. Chv. V. 2. 1. 

4. McCrindle, op. cit., p. 220. 

5. II. 14. ff. 


574 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


We have elaborate references to toilette in the Vinaya Texts. 
Hair was besmeared with pomade or hair-oil of bees-wax, and then 
smoothed with a comb or a special instrument shaped like a snake’s 
hood. Scents, perfumes, garlands and unguents were used, and 
faces were rubbed with ointment and painted. The body was also 
painted, and feet were rubbed with sandstone, gravel and seafoam. 
To keep long hair seems to have been the fashion. A Brahmana 
generally shaved his head, keeping a crest lock or two, while an 
anchorite kept matted hair. Women who had their husbands living 
parted their hair in the middle, the parting being coloured red with 
vermilion or other powder. Beards were either removed by razor 
(as in the case of a Brahmana) or allowed to grow long (as in the 
case of hermits). Sometimes they were kept on the chin like a 
goat’s beard, or so cut that they had four corners. The beards were 
also dyed blue, red, purple or green according to individual taste. 
The hair on the belly was sometimes cut into figures, and some had 
whiskers. Nails were polished, or cut with nail-cutters, and tooth 
sticks were used. 


Daily bathing was not a common practice in eastern India 
according to the Vinaya Texts, 1 though special importance was 
attached to it in Avanti and the southern country. 2 When bathing, 
people used to rub their bodies—thighs, arms, breast and back— 
against wooden pillars or walls. Chunam (lime) was also rubbed 
over the body by means of a wooden instrument in the shape of a 
hand or a string of beads. 3 Special bathing pools or tanks are also 
referred to. They were floored or faced with brick, stone or wood, 
and had walls or steps of the same materials. To prevent water 
becoming stale, pipes were laid to drain it off. There were also 
arrangements for hot-bath rooms with chimney and fire-place, and 
roof covered with skins. The bathers put scented clay over their 
faces and took their bath seated on stools. There were cells to be 
used as cooling rooms after the steam bath. 4 


1. According to Patimokkha, Pachittiya Dhamma V. 57, “Whatsoever Bhikkhu 
shall bathe at intervals of less than half a month, except on the proper occa¬ 
sions—that is a Pachittiya”. 

(Proper occasions are 2h months of hot weather, sickness, journey, and when 
there has been wind and rain.) 

2. Mv. V. 13. 6. 

3. Massage was evidently very popular. Megasthcnes says that the king was 
“rubbed with cylinders of wood” by ‘four attendants’ in the open court even 
when he was engaged in judicial work (McCrindle, op. cit., p. 72). 

4. Chv., V. 14. 


575 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


VII. HOUSE AND FURNITURE 

An account of the cities and big buildings has been given above. 1 
The Vinaya Texts 2 give us an idea of the common dwelling houses, 
which were made of stone, brick or wood, and had roofing of five 
kinds—brick, stone, cement, straw and leaves. The walls and roof 
were plastered within and without. The sleeping rooms were white¬ 
washed, the floors were coloured black, and the walls red. They 
were decorated with paintings and engravings such as human figures, 
wreath-work and creeper work. Provision was made for windows 
with shutters and curtains, elaborate doors with key-holes, veran¬ 
dahs, covered terraces, inner verandahs and overhanging eaves, 
dwelling rooms, retiring-rooms, store rooms, closets, and wells with 
lids and covered by sheds with skin roofs. Hygienic arrange¬ 
ments were kept in view while constructing privies. The house had 
sometimes two or more storeys, and it was fashionable to have 
verandahs supported on pillars with capitals in the forms of heads 
of animals (like elephant). 

The rooms were provided with ceiling cloth, movable screen, 
curtains that could be drawn aside, cupboards, and bone-hooks for 
hanging clothes. A long list of furniture is given in the Vinaya 
Texts. There was a large variety of chairs such as rectangular, 
cushioned, cane-bottomed, straw-bottomed, the one raised on a 
pedestal or with many legs, arm-chair and state chair, and sofas with 
or without arms. There were also different types of bedsteads with 
legs carved to represent animals’ feet, and chairs of the same design. 
Some bedsteads had lofty supports with arrangements for rocking 
backwards and forwards, and the bed, comprising mattresses stuffed 
with cotton and pillows half the size of a man’s body, was strewn 
over with flowers. Bolsters stuffed with wool, cotton cloth, bark, 
grass or talipot leaves, and chairs and bedsteads covered with 
upholstered cushions to fit them were in use. For poorer people 
there were mats made of grass and bedsteads made of laths of split 
bamboo. 

For reclining their bodies people used lofty and large things 
such as large cushions; divans; coverlets with long fleece; counter¬ 
panes of many colours; woollen coverlets, white or marked with 
thick flowers; mattresses; cotton coverlets dyed with figures of 

1. See Ch. XX. A. “ " 

2. The description that follows of the houses and furniture is based on Chulla- 
vagga, Sixth Khandhaka. 


576 






SOCIAL CONDITION 

animals; rugs with long hair on one or both sides, carpets in- 
wrought with gold or with silk; large woollen carpets with de¬ 
signs such as a nautch girl’s dance; couches covered with canopies or 
with crimson cushions at both ends. There were also rich elephant 
housings and horse-rugs or carriage-rugs. Sheep-skins, goat-skins, 
and deer-skins were used as coverlets, especially in Avanti and the 
southern country, and fine skins, such as those of lion, tiger, panther 
or antelope, were either used for reclining upon or cut into pieces 
and spread inside or outside the couches and chairs. We also hear 
of sun-shades, mosquito-curtains, filters for straining water, mosquito- 
fans, flower-stands, and fly-whisks ( chdmara ) made of tails of oxen 
and peacocks or of bark and grass. 

Costly utensils were used such as bowls of various kinds made 
of beryl, crystal, gold, silver, copper, glass, tin, lead or bronze, and 
some of them were painted or set with jewels. Even circular sup¬ 
ports of bowls were made of gold or silver. As most of these uten¬ 
sils and articles of furniture are mentioned in the Vinaya Texts as 
being used by the monks till some of them were forbidden by the 
Buddha we may presume that they were used by the middle class 
people. 


VIII. FOOD AND DRINK 

It appears from the epics that rice, barley and wheat were the 
chief foodgrains, rice being very popular. Rich people and the 
Kshatriyas ate rice mixed with flesh. An interesting verse in the 
Udyoga-parvan 1 says that the food of the rich consists of flesh, that 
of the middle class, of milk and its products, and that of the poor, of 
oil preparations. Quite a large number of dainties, delicacies and 
sweetmeats were known. Milk and its products formed part of the 
daily diet, and ghee was particularly valued as very substantial and 
nourishing. 

The Vinaya Texts refer to many articles of food such as rice, 
beans, tila seeds, fresh honey, rice-milk, honey-lumps, congey, 
curries, salt, molasses, oil, pot-herbs, fruits, fish, meat and the five 
products of the cow, viz. milk, curds, ghee, buttermilk and butter. 

In spite of the growing spirit of ahimsa (non-injury to animals) 
fostered by the Jains and Buddhists, and enforced by emperors like 
Asoka, various kinds of fish and meat, not excluding beef, were ex¬ 
tensively taken by the people. According to Kautilya the State 

1. Cr. Ed. 34. 37. 

577 

A.I.U.—37 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

maintained preserved forests for animals and birds ancl also a 
slaughter-house. 

Among drinks in general use were grape-juice, honey, syrups 
made from various fruits (such as mango, jambu, plantain) and 
edible roots (water-lily) and the juice of fruits. Drinks were also 
made from various kinds of pot-herbs and flowers. 

Various kinds of liquor were used, and Kautilya gives a detailed 
description of their manufacture, which was a State monopoly. The 
sale of liquor was regulated by the State, and Kautilya directs that 
it shall be sold to persons of well-known character only and in small 
quantities. But on festive occasions the people enjoyed to the full 
the unrestricted right of manufacture of liquor for four days. 
According to Manu 1 the drinking of spirituous liquor is a mahapdtaka 
(mortal sin), meriting serious punishment, and one who sells it 
should be banished by the king. Megasthenes also says that the 
Indians do not drink wine except at sacrifices. But this seems to 
be an orthodox Brahmanical ideal which did not coincide with 
actual practice in life; for, even apart from the clear testimony of 
Kautilya’s Arthasdstra, there is enough evidence to show that the 
habit of drink was common, especially among Kshatriyas, the 
nobility and kings. Arjuna and Krishna are described as taking 
wine when exhausted, and the Yadavas were notorious addicts to 
wine. And yet there are passages in the Great Epic which, like 
Manu, condemn drinking and class it among the five most heinous 
sins. These contradictory passages can be explained only by sup¬ 
posing that the teetotalling tendency gradually grew towards the 
close of the period under review, thanks mainly to the high moral 
ideals preached by the Brahmanas, Buddhists and Jains. The 
Brahmanas as a class seem to have been comparatively free from 
the evil. 

The Vinaya Texts refer to the practice of taking food lying 
on decorated divans. According to Megasthenes, ‘a table, like a 
tripod, is set before each person. There is placed upon it a golden 
bowl, into which they first put rice boiled as one would boil barley, 
and then they add many dainties.’ He further observes that the 
Indians u eat always alone and have no fixed hours when meals are 
to be taken by all in common, but each one eats when he feels in¬ 
clined”. This habit, strange to say, has persisted throughout the 
2,200 years that have elapsed since Megasthenes wrote, and he 

1. IX. 225; 235-7. ~~ 


578 



SOCIAL CONDITION 


rightly remarks that “the contrary custom would be better for the 
ends of social and civil life.” 1 

IX. GENERAL LIFE 

On the whole, compared with the preceding period, social life 
has become richer in content and far more comprehensive in its 
outlook and range of activities. 

In spite of pessimistic views on life in the religious literature, 
causing a strong tendency towards asceticism, common people had 
a liking for the enjoyment of the good things of life. The sculp¬ 
tures of the period show the vivacious side of life, full of bustle and 
activity and marked by a sense of humour. Literature also reflects 
this lighter side of life. Apart from singing, dancing, music and 
dramatic performances, entertainments were provided by buffoons, 
mimic players, rope-dancers, jugglers, and wandering bards or 
heralds ( charanas ). Gardening and the art of making garlands by 
various combinations of flowers provided amusement to many. 
Various kinds of games, both indoor and outdoor, are mentioned. 
The former include dice, trapball, guessing other people’s thoughts, 
etc. Among the latter may be noted hunting, chariot-races, archery 
matches, wrestling, boxing, shooting marbles with the fingers, and 
ploughing with mimic ploughs. Festive assemblies known as utsava, 
samdja and vihara provided not only entertainment but also dainty 
dishes and intoxicating drinks, and the kings often arranged such 
celebrations for the amusement of the people. Apart from such 
assemblies, delicacies like meat were sometimes freely provided. 
According to the Mahabhdrata, a king called Rantideva killed every 
day two thousand cattle and two thousand kine in order to dole out 
meat to the people. When Asoka tells us in his R.E. I, that many 
hundreds of thousands of animals were every day slaughtered in his 
kitchen for curry, we can easily infer that a similar practice was 
followed by the Maurya Emperors. Gambling and drinking wine 
formed the besetting sins in the life of the people, and the evils of 
the former are clearly depicted in the Mahabhdrata. 

Aioka refers in his edicts 2 to some general features of life. 
Kings, we are told, for a long time past, used to go out on pleasure 
tours, in course of which there were the chase and other similar 

diversions. Asoka also mentions 3 that the people, especially women, 

* 

1. McCrindle, op. cit., p. 70. 

2. R.E. VIII. 

3. R.E. IX. 

579 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


performed various rites on occasions of sickness, marriage and birth 
of children. These no doubt refer to the various religious sarhskdras 
mentioned in the Sutra literature and referred to before. 1 Asoka 
condemns them as useless and trivial, and recommends in their 
place, the practice of Dhamma, which was really a code of morality 
as defined above. 2 But there is no doubt that even before the reli¬ 
gious propaganda of Asoka, the people were marked by a high sense 
of morality. Megasthenes observes: “Truth and virtue they hold 
alike in esteem. Hence they accord no special privileges to the old 
unless they possess superior wisdom.” 3 The ideal of truthfulness 
permeates the whole literature of the period, and both the epics 
preserve many classical examples of unswerving adherence to truth, 
even at the cost of life. It need not surprise us, therefore, when we 
are told that “they seldom go to law. They have no suits about 
pledges or deposits, nor do they require either seals or witnesses, 
but make their deposits and confide in each other.” 4 

Fully in keeping with this high ideal are the humane laws of 
warfare referred to above. 5 

The Greeks were struck by the fact “that Indians do not rear 
monuments to the dead, but consider the virtues which men have 
displayed in life and the songs in which their praises are sung suffi¬ 
cient to preserve their memory after death.” 6 This is corroborated 
by the absence of sepulchral monuments of ancient times. Megas¬ 
thenes has correctly described in the following passage the spiritual 
outlook of Indians, which was sufficiently prominent to strike even 
a casual foreign observer. 

“Death is with them a very frequent subject of discourse. They 
regard this life as, so to speak, the time when the child within the 
womb becomes mature, and death as a birth into a real and happy 
life for the votaries of philosophy. On this account they undergo 
much discipline as a preparation for death. They consider nothing 
that befalls men to be either good or bad, to suppose otherwise being 
a dreamlike illusion.” 7 

This indicates the real spirit which animated and sustained In¬ 
dian civilization. It would, however, be a mistake to suppose that 

1. Vol. I, pp. 474, 507. 

2. See pp. 82-83. 

3. McGrindle, op. tit., p. 70. 

4. Ibid. 

5. See pp. 317-18; also Vol. I, pp. 302-3. 

6. McCrindle, op. cit., pp. 67-8. 

7. Ibid., p. 100. 


580 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


the common man in ancient India was averse to wordly enjoyments 
and material welfare. The need to maintain a balance in life was 
fully recognised, and dharma, artha, and kdma (religion or spiritua¬ 
lity, wealth and happiness) were regarded as the three ends in life 
to be simultaneously pursued without giving undue prominence to 
any of them. This principle is clearly enunciated in the Arthasdstra 
of Kautilya 1 and it is emphasised that any one of these ends, if pur¬ 
sued to excess to the detriment of the other two, “hurts not only the 
other two but also itself.” This threefold end in life, to which a 
fourth, moksha (emancipation), was added later, has been the ideal 
of life in India throughout ancient times, but, as often happens, in 
actual practice one or the other has sometimes gained prominence 
according to individual inclinations or special circumstances of the 
time. Kautilya, for example, insists that artha (wealth) was the chief 
of the three, as the other two, dharma (religion) and kdma (enjoy¬ 
ment), depend upon it for fulfilment. In religious texts, on the 
other hand, the main stress is laid upon dharma, to the exclusion of 
the other two. Nevertheless, the harmony of the three pursuits of 
life may be regarded as the ideal which formed the background of 
social life in ancient India. 


1. Ch. VII; KAT. p. 14. 


581 



CHAPTER XXII 


EDUCATION 

The Dharma-sutras carry on the Vedic traditions and practices 
of education and codify them into regular systems. Education had 
its own rituals and ceremonies to emphasize its religious aim and 
character as an aid to self-fulfilment and the educing of personality. 
Education was treated as a matter of growth, a process of life, which 
was controlled in its totality. The very tenor of life was changed 
for the pupil who had to leave the home of his parents to live in a 
new home, the home of his spiritual parent, the guru or teacher. 

1. PUPILS AND TEACHERS 

The first educational ceremony was Vidydrambha, to be per¬ 
formed by the pupil at the age of 5, by learning the alphabets and 
offering worship to the appropriate deities. According to Kautilya, 
the pupil, at Vidydrambha, was also introduced to writing (iipii 
and numbers or arithmetic ( samkhyd ). 

Next followed the ceremony of ZJpanayana, marking the turning 
point in the pupil’s life. Manu describes it as spiritual birth, Brahma - 
janma, where the mother is Sdvitri and father the Achdrya. 1 

The essential features of this ceremony have been described 
above, 2 but the texts of the period add elaborate details about the 
life of strict discipline led by the pupil in his teacher’s house, as a 
Brahmachdri. 

Normally, the pupil was admitted by the teacher without pay¬ 
ment of any fee to him. According to Manu 3 a student should not 
pay any fees to his teacher before he finishes his education. A 
teacher teaching for fees is condemned as an Upapdtakin. Usanas 4 
brands him as a Vrittika. 

Admission to study depended solely upon the pupil’s fitness for 

it. Studious pupils worked night and day. Some who could not 

—————— 

2. Vol. I, p. 455. 

3. II. 245. 

4. IV. 24. 


582 



EDUCATION 


get oil for their lamps would burn dried cow-dung and read in its 
light in an isolated corner. But there were also indifferent pupils 
who found study too irsksome and difficult, and deserted; or could not 
stand the strict discipline of the teacher; or would be dismissed by 
the teacher for an offence; or would leave studentship prematurely 
for a life of ease and be branded as a Khatvdrudha, i.e. as one who 
started sleeping on a cot when he should be sleeping on the ground. 1 

Sometimes, a pupil would change teachers and schools too 
often and earn the uncomplimentary epithet of Tirthakdka, i.e. 
fickle as a crow that does not stop long at a place of pilgrimage. 
Other similar terms of opprobrium applied to erring pupils are: (1) 
Kumari-Ddkshdh } those who entered as pupils of Daksha for the 
sake of the girls living with him; (2) Bhikshd-Mdnava, a pupil 
entering upon study for appropriating the proceeds of begging; 
(3) Odana-Pdniniydh, those who seek the study of Panini for the 
advantage of getting free food like boiled rice; (4) Ghrita-Raudhiyah , 
the Raudhlyas seeking after ghee; and (5) Kambala-chdrdyaniydh, 
those hankering after blankets. 2 

A famous teacher is called Y aujanasatika, i.e. one whom stu¬ 
dents would seek from a distance of hundreds of miles. 3 

Manu mentions two classes of teachers: (1) Upddhydya who 
took to teaching as a profession for his livelihood and taught only 
a portion of the Veda or Vedanga, 4 and (2) Achdrya who taught the 
Veda with its Kalpasutras and Upanishads 5 without charging fees. 
The pupil after completing his education was to give him such pre¬ 
sents as he could afford—field, gold, cow, horse, umbrella, shoes, 
grain, vegetables or clothes. 6 7 The paid teacher and the paying 
pupil were condemned as unworthy of invitation to an important 
social cermony like Sraddha. 1 Besides the ordinary teachers, Manu 
mentions educational experts 8 who were proficient in pedagogy. 

The ancient educational system evolved its own appropriate 
methods of study. Kautilya enumerates the following steps of Vedic 
study: (1) Susrushd (eagerness to listen to the words of the teacher 

1. Patanjali on II. 4.32, and III. 1. 26(2); I 4.26, 28; II 1. 26. 

2. Patanjali on II. 1.41, and 1.1. 73(6); Kasikd on VI. 2. 69. 

3. Patanjali on V. 1. 74(2). 

4. II. 141. 

5. II. 140. 

6. II. 246. 

7. III. 156. 

8. IV. 102. 


583 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


as they fall from his lips), (2) gravcniam (grasping by the ear 
the lessons of the teacher), (3) Grahanam (apprehension of the 
teacher’s words), (4) DMranam (retention), (5-6) Uhapoha (discus¬ 
sion), (7) Vijnana (full knowledge of the meaning conveyed by the 
teacher’s words or lessons), and (8) Tattv^bhinivesha (comprehen¬ 
sion of the underlying truths of the teacher’s lessons). A stray 
verse puts the position in a nutshell thus: “The student learns a 
fourth from his Ach&rya, a fourth by his own intelligence by him¬ 
self, a fourth from his fellow-pupils, and the remaining fourth in 
course of time by experince.” 


2. ART OF WRITING 

The art of writing was now fully developed. The oldest alpha¬ 
bet, known as Brahml, is employed in the majority of the records 
of Asoka, and from it have been derived the various scripts used 
today all over India. The Aramaic script was introduced into the 
Punjab by its Achaemenian conquerors. From it was derived the 
KharoshthI alphabet, written from right to left. It was confined to 
north-western India, and was thence carried to Central Asia, but it 
went out of use after the third or fourth century A.D. 

The knowledge of writing might have been expected to intro¬ 
duce a great change in the system of education, but this does not 
appear to have been the case. There is abundant evidence to show 
that the teaching continued to be mainly oral, and the study of 
manuscripts was positively condemned. Certain passages in the 
Buddhist canonical literature indicate that, although the art of writ¬ 
ing was in vogue, the sacred books were not written but committed 
to memory, even though the monks realized the danger that a por¬ 
tion of the canon might thus altogether be lost. Similar notions 
prevailed among the Brahmanas and the followers of other religious 
sects. It is difficult to explain this attitude. It has been suggested 
that the art of “writing was introduced into India at a late period 
in the intellectual development of its people—so late that, before 
they knew of it, they had already brought to perfection another 
and a very excellent method (i.e. learning by heart! of handing 
down literary productions.” 1 In other words, being accustomed to 
preserve massive literature by stupendous feats of memory, they 
would not realize the use or necessity of writing it down. The 


1. Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, pp. 112-13. 

584 



EDUCATION 


advantage of the latter course is, however, so obvious that the expla¬ 
nation cannot be regarded as very satisfactory. Another argument 
advanced is that even when the Indians came to know of writing, 
they had not the necessary materials for writing lengthy records. 

Both these assumptions are based on the view that the art of 
writing was introduced into India, from western Asia in about the 
ninth century B.C. But the correctness of this view, which was once 
generally held, can no longer be regarded as beyond dispute. 1 Even 
if it were true, it would indeed be very strange that materials like 
birch bark, for writing lengthy records, were not thought of during 
the next three or four hundred years, or that although these were 
known, people could not realize the obvious utility of books even 
as a supplementary aid to oral teaching. In the case of the Brah- 
manas, the growing desire to withhold the sacred mantras from the 
people and retain teaching as an exclusive privilege for themselves 
might act as an incentive to oral teaching to the exclusion of books. 
But the same motive could not possibly operate in the case of the 
heterodox sects like the Buddhists. When we remember the vast 
mass of literature, even in the fourth or fifth century B.C.. and the 
extensive use of writing for administrative purposes in the time of 
Asoka, it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that books were much 
more extensively in use than is now commonly believed, or was 
admitted by priestly writers and monks. They emphasized per¬ 
haps rightly, the role of the teacher in an educational system which 
sought not merely to impart knowledge to but also to develop the 
personality of, the pupil, and hence insisted that the teacher, rather 
than the books, should be the main source of instruction. 

3. SUBJECTS OF STUDY 

It appears from the Manu-smriti that the subjects of study in 
those days comprised, besides the entire Vedic literature, Dharma- 
sastras or Smritis; 2 Itihasa and Parana : 3 Vaikhanasa-sutra for re¬ 
cluses; 4 heretical Sastras; 5 Economics and allied subjects , 6 Anvik- 
shiki (Dialectics), and Dandanlti or Politics . 7 The last two, with the 
Vedic study (Trayi) and Vdrtci (economics, etc.), are referred to as 
the four important subjects of study in the Kautiliya Arthasdstra. 

1. See Vol. I, Ch. XIX § 4. " 

2. II. 10; III. 232. 

3. III. 232. 

4. VI. 21. 

5. XII. 95. 

6. IX. 329 IT. 

7. VII. 43. 


585 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The education of the prince followed other lines. In addition 
to the four important subjects mentioned by Kautilya, 1 he had to 
receive military training relating to the operation of the different 
elements of the army such as elephants, horses, chariots and weapons 
of war ( praharana ). He had also to study history or Itihasa which 
included (1) Pur ana, (2) Itivritta (history), (3) Akhydyika (tales), 
(4) Uddharava (illustrative stories), (5) Dharmasastra and (6) 
Arthasdstra. 

The Buddhist text Milinda-panha also gives a long list of the 
subjects of study for a Brahmana, which comprised the following: 
the four Vedas, Itihasas, Puranas, lexicography, prosody, phono- 
logy, verses, grammar, etymology, astronomy, astrology, and the 
six Vedangas; knowledge of auspicious marks (on the body); inter¬ 
pretation of omens, dreams, and signs; prognostications from 
comets, thunder, junction of planets, fall of meteors,' earthquakes, 
conflagration and signs in the heaven and earth; study of the 
eclipses of the sun and moon, of arithmetic, of casuistry; interpreta¬ 
tion of the omens to be drawn from dogs, deer and rats, and mix¬ 
tures of liquids and the sounds and cries of birds. The Kshatriyas 
had to acquire knowledge of elephants, horses, chariots, bows, 
rapiers, the art of war, documents and currency, 2 while the Vaisyas 
and Sudras had to learn husbandry, merchandising and the care of 
cattle. 3 Elsewhere, king Milinda is said to have a knowledge of 
19 arts and sciences, viz . Sruti (Vedas and Smriti; Sankhya, Yoga, 
Nyaya and Vaiseshika systems of philosophy; arithmetic; music; 
medicine, archery; 4 Puranas; Itihasa; astronomy; magic; causation; 
spells; the art of war; poetry; and currency. 5 

The Mahabharata gives some interesting information about 
education. It contains the singular injunction that persons of all 
the four castes should listen to discourses on Vedas or to Vedic 
recitations (sravayet chaturo varnan). 6 An interesting fact is that 

1. “After investiture with the sacred thread, he shall study the triple Vedas, the 
science of Anvikshiki under teachers of acknowledged authority ( sishta ), the 
science of vartd under government superintendents, and the science of 
dandaniti under theoretical and practical politicians ( vaktriprayoktribhyah )” 
KAT. p. 11. 

2. Muddd, which is translated in SBE (XXXV, 247) as “law of property”, probably 
means a knowledge of coins or currency. 

3. IV. 3, 26. 

4. SBE (XXXV, p. 6) has ‘four Vedas’. But as there is already a reference to 
Sruti the reading dhanur-veda in the Edition of R. D. Vadekar (p. 4) is to be 
preferred. 

5. I. 9. 

6. XII. 327, 49. 


586 



EDUCATION 


Brahmana teachers gave instruction not only in all academic sub¬ 
jects, including politics, but also in non-academic ones like archery, 
the science of war in general, and other arts and crafts. This was 
so probably because they were credited with occult knowledge of 
charms, spells and incantations, which turned, as though by a 
miracle, the ordinary arrow into a weapon of the most devastating 
type. Not only astrology and medicine but agriculture was also 
taught by the Brahmanas. Among the subjects of study, in addi¬ 
tion to the Vedangas, were the training of elephants and horses, the 
driving of a chariot, engineering, etc. 

A glimpse of industrial education is given by Narada 1 who ex¬ 
plains the rules relating to apprenticeship and admission to an in¬ 
dustrial school. The young man must first secure the consent of 
his guardian before he is apprenticed to his master. He will then 
settle with him the period of apprenticeship. He is to live with his 
master, whose home is his workshop, and is to be treated and in¬ 
structed by the master as his son. He is not to be exploited and 
employed on work not connected with his chosen craft. He cannot 
leave his master before the stipulated period of apprenticeship even 
if he has completed his training, the gains from which are to go 
to the master. An apprentice deserting a master, not lacking in 
character or as a teacher, deserves corporal punishment and con¬ 
finement. At the end of his pupilage, the apprentice must reward 
his master as best as he can, or may accept service under terms 
settled. It was this efficient industrial training which gave ancient 
India the palm in handicrafts, feeding her rich export trade for 
centuries from Pliny to Tavernier. The Chatuhshashti-Kalas, the 
traditional 64 arts and crafts in ancient India, were also the products 
of this industrial system and training. 

We may conclude this section by a reference to the story of 
medical education given in Buddhist canonical texts. The story 
centres round the early education of Jivaka, who was the physician- 
in-ordinary to the Magadhan emperor Bimbisara, and was also de¬ 
puted by the emperor as physician-in-attendance on Buddha, as the 
best medical expert of the times. He was of obscure origin and the 
son of a courtesan of Raj agriha, a foundling thrown on a dust-heap 
from which he was rescued by Bimbisara’s son, prince Abhaya, 
‘who brought him up till he repaired to Taxila to learn an art as a 

1. V. 16-21. 


587 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

source of livelihood without depending upon the uncertainties of 
royal patronage.’ 

He studied medicine at Taxila under a “world-renowned phy¬ 
sician” for the prescribed period of 7 years. But before he was 
given the licence to practise medicine, he had to undergo a sort of 
practical examination prescribed by his teacher, who directed: 
“Take this spade and seek round about Takkasila a yojana on every 
side, and whatever plant you see which is not medicinal, bring it to 
me.” After a good deal of botanical investigation, Jivaka could 
not discover any plant that was devoid of medicinal properties. 
The teacher was satisfied and gave him a little money with leave 
to go home and practise as a physician. His money sufficed for his 
journey up to Saketa where he was forced to earn. His first earn¬ 
ing came from his successful treatment of a rich Setthi’s wife who 
had a chronic disease of the head which no physician could cure. 
Jivaka had one pasata (handful) of ghee boiled up with various 
drugs and had it administered to the patient through the nose. She 
was at once cured and gave Jivaka the princely fee of 16,000 Kahd- 
panas, together with a present of a coach, horses and 2 servants. 1 
These earnings Jivaka tendered to his patron, prince Abhaya, as a 
return for bringing him up. 

Next, he treated emperor Bimbisara himself and cured him of 
a fistula. His third important case and call came from Banaras, 
where a merchant’s son had a strangulation of the intestines, caused 
by a gymnastic feat. It was a surgical case. He “cut through 
the skin of the belly, drew the twisted intestines out and showed 
them to his wife;” then “disentangling the twisted intestines, he 
put them back into their right position, stitched the skin together, 
and anointed the wound with a salve.” Very soon the patient was 
cured, and his father paid the surgeon a fee of 16,000 Kahapanas. 
King Pradyota of UjjayinI was his next important patient. He was 
suffering from jaundice, and asked Bimbisara for the loan of the 
services of his physician. Jivaka cured this royal patient by medi¬ 
cated ghee and was rewarded with costly gifts of textiles. Once 
he cured the Buddha of constipation by making him smell three 
medicated lotuses, bathe in warm water, and live on liquid food 
for some days. 

1. Chv. V. 27. 4. Many other similar stories, with minute details of treatment, are 
given in the first section of the Chi vara vastu of the Vinaya Texts of the Mula~ 
sarvastivadas (Gilgit Manuscripts III. 2, pp. 1-52). 


588 




EDUCATION 


The texts speak of medicines prepared from roots, leaves, 
fruits, gums {e.g. Hingu) and salts, from which were also made 
astringent decoctions; chunam as a remedy against itches and boils; 
dried cow-dung and some kinds of clay against skin-diseases; eye- 
ointments; medicated oils; and the like. They also testify to pro¬ 
gress in surgery. We read of a lancet operation to cut off proud 
flesh; of compresses, bandages and oils for the treatment of wounds; 
of a fistula cured by lancing and treated by ointment; and of the 
use of a clyster. 1 . 

4. ASRAMAS OR HERMITAGES 

The Mahabharata tells of numerous hermitages where pupils 
from distant and different parts of the country gathered for instruc¬ 
tion around far-famed teachers. A full-fledged Asrama is described 
as consisting of several departments which are enumerated as 
follows:— 

(1) Agni-sthana, the common hall for prayer and worship of 
Agni; (2) Brahma-sthana, college of divinity, the department of 
Vedic study; (3) Vishnu-sthana, taken to mean the department for 
the study of Raja-niti, Artha-mti and Vdrtta; (4) Mahendra-sthana , 
the Military School; (5) Vivasvata-sthana, department of astrono¬ 
my; (6) Soma-sthana , department of botany; (7) Garuda-sthana, deal¬ 
ing with transport and conveyances; and (8) Kdrttikeya-sthdna, for 
study of military organization, methods for forming patrols, batta¬ 
lions, and armies. 

A most famous Asrama or hermitage of the time was Naimisha, 
located in a forest named after it. Its principal was Saunaka, called 
a Kulapati as teacher of 10,000 pupils. He performed a twelve 
years’ sacrifice which attracted a vast concourse of learned men, 
who carried on constant discussions of religious, philosophical and 
scientific topics. 

Another such hermitage was that of Rishi Kanva, on the MalinI, 
a tributary of the Sarayu, a centre around which grew up numerous 
other hermitages representing a wide variety of subjects and acade¬ 
mic interests. In that assemblage or federation of hermitages were 
to be found specialists in different branches of knowledge, including 
physical sciences and arts, such as the art of constructing sacrificial 


1. Mahdvagga, VI. 22. 


589 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


altars of different dimensions and shapes (on the basis of a know¬ 
ledge of solid geometry); knowledge of the properties of matter 
( Dravya-guna ) of physical processes and their results; and zoo¬ 
logists who had special knowledge of monkeys and birds. 

Ayodhya figures as a noted seat of learning in the Rdmayana , 
The Rdmayana tells us of its unique institution called Mekhalinam 
Mahd-samgha, a federation of the Samghas or Brotherhoods of 
Brahmachdns, who approached the king with their grievances and 
views on public questions. Students are also mentioned as resi¬ 
dents of Asramas and Avasathas, which were like the licensed 
lodging-houses recognized by modern universities. The Asramas 
were situated outside the city, whose citizens flocked thither to hear 
the learned discourses and discussions held there chiefly by the 

w 

Lokayatas, notorious for their zeal for debate and casuistry. There 
were also Puranic schools of Sutas and Magadhas at Ayodhya, which 
were crowded by the bards and chroniclers of the country, of whom 
the chief in those days was Arya Chitraratha. Ayodhya had also 
its ladies’ clubs called Vadhu-Samghas, dramatic societies called 
Nataka-Samghas, which organized festivities called Utsavas and 
Samdjas at the suburban parks, with the main programme consist- 
in of acting and dancing. The Rdmayana also refers to educational 
institutions conducted by private citizens in the city which offered 
lectures and lessons attended by various bodies of students. These 
citizens included the Sutas and Magadhas, king’s officers, artists and 
craftsmen of all kinds, and merchants who had travelled widely. 

The biggest Asrama of the times was that of Bharadvaja at Pra- 
yaga, which accommodated prince Bharata and all his royal retinue 
in its stables for elephants and horses (chatuh-salas), mansions 
(harmyas ), palaces ( prdsadas ) and royal guest-house ( rajavesma ), 
provided with beds, seats, coverlets, carpets, stores of food and 
vehicles. 


5. BUDDHIST VIHARA 

Interesting information about the educational system is also 
furnished by typical Buddhist canonical texts as well as the Jata- 
kas. Buddhist texts knew of two classes of teachers, Upadhyaya 
and Achdrya, but rank the former higher, unlike the Brahmanical 
texts. Buddhaghosha, commenting on Mahavagga, V. 4, 2, states 
that the Upadhyaya was to be of 10 years’ and Achdrya of 6 years’ 
standing as a monk. The former took charge of the pupil’s study 


590 


EDUCATION 


of sacred texts and doctrines, and the latter of his life and conduct, 
like the modern tutor, and was aptly called Karmdchdrya. 

The duties of teacher and pupil follow the same lines in Bud¬ 
dhist and Brahmanical systems. The main difference between them 
lies in the character of the educational institution. In the Brah¬ 
manical system, it was the Guru-kula or hermitage, based upon 
individual relationship between the teacher and the pupil. This 
individual treatment of the pupil limited the number of pupils whom 
a teacher could admit and instruct by himself. In the Buddhist 
system, education was imparted in the Vihdra or monastery, giving 
scope to a collective life and spirit of brotherhood and democracy 
among the many resident monks, who came under a common 
discipline and instruction. The Buddhist Vihdra was built up as a 
self-sufficient colony, growing its own food by agriculture and dairy¬ 
farming in its own grounds, which came into its possession as gifts 
from its supporters. Thus there was need of more external orga¬ 
nisation and machinery in the Buddhist system. The Brahmanical 
Asrama or hermitage, on the other hand, was a home that hardly 
called for any organization to deal with the problems created by 
large numbers and a congregational life. It has, however, to be 
noted that even the collective monastic life in a Buddhist Vihdra 
gave scope for an individual life of study and meditation, provided 
for in the cell assigned to a monk, and also in the particular group 
to which he was assigned, under the personal direction of his tutor 
or upddhydya. What, however, was absent from the monastery was 
the domestic touch of the Brahmanical system of education. 

Monks were graded for study in the monastery. Their instruc¬ 
tion comprised “giving of recitation, holding examination, making 
exhortation, and explaining Dhamma.” 1 There was also specialis¬ 
ation in different branches of Buddhist canon. The different classes 
of monks were lodged in separate hostels lest their mixing up should 
cause disturbance to their different studies. 2 

6. EDUCATION IN THE JATAKAS 

The Jatakas are full of stories giving interesting glimpses of 
ancient Indian education. A story full of significant details is given 
as follows in Jataka No. 252: 

“Once on a time, Brahmadatta, king of Banaras, had a son nam¬ 
ed prince Brahmadatta. Now kings of former times, though there 


1. Chv. Vin. 7, 4. 

2. Chv. IV. 4. 


591 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

might be a famous teacher living in their own city, often used to 
send their sons to foreign countries afar off to complete their edu¬ 
cation, so that by this means they might learn to quell their pride 
and highmindedness, and endure heat or cold, and be made acquaint¬ 
ed with the ways of the world. So did this king. Calling his boy, 
then sixteen years old, he gave him a pair of one-soled sandals, a 
sun-shade of leaves and a thousand pieces of money, with these 
words: ‘My son, get you to Takkasila, and study there/ 

“The boy obeyed. He bade his parents farewell, and in due 
course arrived at Takkasila. There he enquired for the teacher’s 
dwelling, and reached it after the teacher had finished his lecture 
and was pacing up and dqwn at his front door. When the lad set 
eyes upon the teacher, he loosed his shoes, closed his sunshade, and 
with a respectful greeting stood still where he was. The teacher 
saw that he was weary, and welcomed the new-comer. The lad ate 
and rested a little. Then he returned to the teacher and stood res¬ 
pectfully by him. After a few preliminary inquiries about his home 
and parentage the teacher asked: ‘Have you brought the teacher’s 
fee? or do you wish to attend on me in return for teaching you?’ T 
have brought a fee with me’, said the prince, and laid at the teach¬ 
er’s feet his purse of a thousand pieces. The resident pupils attend 
on their teacher by day and at night they learn of him; but they 
who bring a fee are treated like eldest sons in his house, and thus 
they learn. And this teacher, like the rest, gave schooling to the 
prince every night and auspicious day. 1 Thus the young prince 
was taught.” 

This and other Jataka stories show that Taxila was then a pro¬ 
minent centre of learning and education, to which flocked scholars 
from distant parts of India. The richer students paid in advance 
the entire fee for the course of education which, in the case of medi¬ 
cal education, extended even up to 7 years. The amount of the fee 
was fixed at 1,000 pieces. The majority of the students were, how¬ 
ever, poor and rendered service to their teachers in lieu of fees. 
They “attended on their teacher by day” and received instruction 
from him at night. Sometimes the expenses of a poor school were 
paid by a philanthropic public. Thus there is a case of a school of 
500 Brahmana boys at Banaras whose charitable “folks used to give 
day by day commons of food to poor lads, and had them taught 
free” by their teacher who was of “world-wide fame.” 2 Some¬ 
times the householders would invite the poor schools of their 

1. Cf. Translator’s note. Jataka, Vol. II, p. 194. 

2. I. 239. 


592 





EDUCATION 


\ 


neighbourhood to meals, 1 and such invitations, coming by turns, 
would work like a permanent provision of food for the schools. 
There were also available State scholarships for supporting students 
for study at a distant place like Taxila. 2 Sometimes, students might 
accompany princes as their companions to receive education at their 
expense. The sons of the royal chaplains at the court of Banaras 3 
and of Raj agriha 4 thus accompanied their respective princes to 
Taxila. 

There were day-scholars along with resident pupils in the 
schools of those days. Mention has been made of prince Junha of 
Banaras keeping house for himself as a student of Taxila. Some of 
these day-scholars might be married and regular householders. The 
Jatakas mention cases of some whose studies were hindered by their 
wives, one of whom always feigned sickness when her husband 
was about to go to school. 5 

The Jatakas tell of the standard number (500) for a school and 
of the different castes and ranks of students making up that number 
—Brahmana and Kshatriya, princes from distant kingdoms, sons of 
magnates or magnificos, some of whom were Brahmanas, sons of 
merchants and tailors and even fishermen; and also of a teacher 
who admitted to his instruction all castes equally—“fishermen and 
the like.” 6 Chandalas, however, were not admitted to study. 7 

Studies were chosen freely and not according to caste. We 
read of Brahmana students learning divination at Taxila, but set¬ 
tling down as hunters in the forests of Banaras, 8 studying magic 
charms, 9 archery, 10 science, 11 the three Vedas and 18 accomplish¬ 
ments or crafts. 12 Princes at school had to share a common, simple, 
democratic life of equality with their poorer comrades. The food 
of the boys at school was very simple. Rice-gruel was served for 
breakfast by the maid of the teacher’s house, 13 while at invitations 
they were given a meal of sugar-cane, molasses, curd and milk. 14 

1. I. 317; III. 171. ~~ 

2. V. 127. 

3. V. 263. 

4. III. 238 and V. 247. 

5. I. 463; I. 300-302. 

6. III. 171. 

7. See above, p. 538. 

8. II. 200. 

9. II. 99. 

10. III. 219. 

11. III. 18. 

12. II. 87; III. 115, 122. 

13. I. 318. 

14 . I. 448. 


A.I.U.— 38 


593 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

There were both public schools and community schools. We 
read of schools confined only to Brahmana students 1 or to Brahmana 
and Kshatriya pupils 2 or only to princes, “to the number of 101.” 3 

The Head Master of a school was helped in his work by a staff 
of assistant masters who might be also his pupils. 4 

A school kept a cock to serve as a clock or alarm-bell to rouse 
students early from their bed. 5 It had also tittiri birds trained to 
recite Vedic mantras and help the boys to remember them. Thus 
birds were tamed as aids to study! 6 

Taxila, as a centre of education, attracted students from far 
and near, even scholars from distant Greece if we are to believe in 
the story of Apollonius of Tyana. According to the Jatakas, the 
students came to Taxila to complete their education in the three 
Vedas on the one hand, and in the 18 Sippas or crafts on the other. 
Taxila thus offered the highest education in humanities and the 
sciences, arts and crafts. It had special schools of law, medicine and 
military science. It also offered courses of study in elephant-lore, 7 
hunting, 8 animals’ cries, 9 archery 10 and the like. There is an 
interesting story of a Brahmana boy named Jotipala, a native of 
Banaras, whose king sent him at his expense to Taxila for education 
in archery. When he finished his education and was returning 
home, his teacher presented him with his own sword, a bow and 
arrow, a coat of mail and a diamond, and asked him to take his 
place as the head of a school of 500 pupils, to be trained up by him, 
as he was himself old and about to retire. 11 

The Jatakas tell of Banaras as another centre of learning. It 
was to some extent built up by the graduates of Taxila who set up 
there as teachers. 12 Banaras also produced its own teachers of 
world-wide fame with their schools of 500. 13 The son of a Brahmana 
magnate worth 80 crores was educated at Banaras, 14 which was 
evidently good enough for his education. Banaras was noted for 
its school of music under an expert who was “the chief of his kind 
in all India.” 15 


GENERAL REFERENCES 

1 R. K. Mookerji —Hindu Civilization. 

2 R. K. Mookerji —Ancient Indian Education. 


1 . 

I. 317, 412, etc. 

9. III. 415. 

2. 

III. 158. 

10. III. 219, etc. 

3. 

V. 457. 

11. V. 127. 

4. 

II. 100; V. 457. 

12. Nos. 130. 185, etc. 

5 . 

I. 436. 

13. I. 239; IH. 18, 233. 

6 . 

Tittira Jdtaka, III. 536. 

14. IV. 237. 

7. 

Hatthi-Sutta, II. 47. 

15. No. 243. 

8. 

II. 200. 



594 



CHAPTER XXIII 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 

The period under review witnessed an all-round development 
of agriculture, industry and trade. This was due partly to private 
enterprise, and partly to State-control and State-management. This 
_ latter-aspect-is delineated in Kautilya’s Arthasdstra and forms a 
special feature of the economic system of the period. 

1. AGRICULTURE 

Agriculture was the mainstay of a large section of the people. 
Rural economy had its centre in the grama or village, a collection 
of grihas (houses) and kulas (families) numbering from 30 to 1,000. 
It was enclosed by a wall or stockade provided with gates. Beyond 
this enclosure lay the arable land of the village, the grama-kshetra, 
which was protected by fences and field-watchmen against pests like 
birds and beasts. This land was distributed among individual hold¬ 
ings separated by ditches dug for co-operative irrigation. Usually 
these holdings were small enough to be cultivated by their owners 
and families, with the help of hired labour, if necessary. The land¬ 
less labourer, hiring himself out for work, ranked below the slave. 
The sorry spectacle of sturdy peasants leaving at home their own 
empty barns and toiling as hirelings on the estates of the royal capi¬ 
talist is deplored as a symptom of social decadence. 

Large holdings were not unknown. We read of estates of 1,000 
karlsas (probably acres) and more, farmed by Brahmanas, and of 
one large enough to require for its cultivation as many as 500 
ploughs and a host of hired labourers to ply these ploughs with 
their oxen. 

Beyond the arable land of the village lay its pastures, which 
were common for the grazing of its cattle, and also those belonging 
to the State, under a common neatherd called Gopdlaka, whose 
duty was to pen the flocks at night or to return them to their own¬ 
ers by counting heads. Besides pastures, villages had their subur¬ 
ban groves like the Veluvana of king Bimbisara at Rajgriha, Anjana- 
vana of Saketa, or the Jetavana of Sravastl. Kautilya’s scheme of 
village-planning had also a place for these sylvan retreats for pur¬ 
poses of religious study and practices. 


595 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Kautilya gives a very graphic and realistic view of the village 
of those days. 1 The land of the village was made up of the follow¬ 
ing parts: (1) Krishta (cultivated), (2) Akrishta (uncultivated wastes 
or fallow land), (3) Sthala (high and dry ground), (4) Keddra (fields 
sow r n with crops), (5) Aram a (grove), (6) Shanda (plantations of 
fruits like plantains), (7) Mula-vapa (fields for growing roots like 
ginger, turmeric and the like), (8) Vdta (sugarcane plantations). 
(9) Vana (forest for supply of firewood and other needs), (10) 
Vivlta (grazing ground for the village cattle), and (11) Pathi (area 
covered by roads). 

Besides these, the village proper as a human settlement must 
be marked by the following features or fixtures: (1) Vastu (area 
covered by houses), (2) Chaitya (sacred trees), (3) Devagriha 
(temples), (4) Setubandha (embankments), (5) Smasana (cremation 
grounds), (6) Sattra (alms-house), (7) Prapd (storage of drinking 
water), (8) Punyasthdna (sacred spots), and (9) halls for public 
amusements such as music, dancing, theatrical performances 
(Prekshd ) and public dinners (Pravahana). 

Among the crops, vegetables and fruits grown in those days 
are mentioned the following: Rice of different varieties; Kodrava, 
coarse grain; Tila, sesamum; Priyangu, pepper and saffron; Pulses, 
like Mudga, Masha, and Masura; Kuluttha , Yava, Godhuma (wheat), 
Kaldya, Atasi (linseed); Sarshapa (mustard); vegetables called 
Sdka and Miila; fruits such as plantains, pumpkins, gourds and 
grapes ( Mridvika ); and sugarcane ( Ikshu ). 2 

Agrici ure depended upon cattle comprising cows, buffaloes, 
goats, sheep, asses, camels, pigs and dogs. 3 The State maintained 
cattle-, stud-, and dairy-farms, and employed on their staffs the 
following workers: (1) Gopalaka , the cowherd, (2) Pindaraka in 
charge of the buffaloes, (3) Dohaka or milker, and (4) the Man- 
thaka or churner, assisted by a body of hunters ( Lubdhakas ) and 
keepers of hunting hounds (Svaganinah) to keep the pastures clear 
of wild animals and beasts of prey. 4 The cattle-farms reared 
calves, steers, draught oxen, stud-bulls and buffaloes. Wild cattle 
were also tamed. There was also the Government poultry farm. 5 

1. KA, Book II. Ch. 35; III. 10. ' 

2. KA, Bk. II, Ch. 24. 

3. V, 2. 

4. II. 34; 29. 

5. V. 2. 


596 




ECONOMIC CONDITION 


The importance of cattle-breeding, which occasionally meant 
also cattle-lifting, is stressed in the Mahdbharata. It is possible, 
however, that in very early times, before the extensive pursuit of 
agriculture and the development of trade, the masses of people as 
such were employed as ranchmen who tended cattle. In the epic 
they have become partly cattle-raisers and partly farmers, and the 
occupation of ranchmen seems to have fallen into the hands of the 
aborigines or barbarians who could not understand Aryan speech. 
In the Mahdbharata 1 Duryodhana went to see his herd of cattle in 
Dvaitavana and marked them by signs, and then held sports, heard 
the singing, and watched the dancing of the cowherds. In the 
Virata-parvan the king of the Matsya country goes out into the 
country to enjoy a royal picnic on the occasion of ‘cattle brand¬ 
ing’, when the ears of the cattle are marked for the year. 2 Here, 
however, the barbarians are shown merely as cow-boys who are in 
charge of the royal cattle. It is on this occasion that the Kurus lift 
the cattle of the Matsyas. Such cattle-lifting was fairly common. 
The Mahdbharata 3 tells us that these cow-boys and herdsmen were 
paid in kind (in the shape of cows or their milk) for tending the 
herd, according to the number of cattle tended by each. The 
breeding and tending of cattle almost developed into a science in 
the epic days. Sahadeva, who takes service under king Virata as a 
tantipdla, describes how, under his fostering care, cows multiply in 
a short time and are free from disease. 4 

The village administration employed a paid staff of workers, 
Grama-bhritakas, among whom are included (1) Kuttaka (carpen¬ 
ter), (2) Karmdra or Ayaskara (blacksmith), (3) potter, (4) the in¬ 
evitable Ndpita (barber), 5 (5) washerman, 6 (6) Medaka (digger of 
earth), i7) Rajjuvartaka (rope-maker), (8) Ariikastha (trainer of 
elephants), and (9) Asvadamaka (trainer of horses). The purely 
administrative staff included (1) the Adhyaksha (superintendent), 
(2) Sarhkhydyaka (accountant), (3) Gopa and (4) Sthdnika, together 
with (5) the medical officer (Chikitsaka) , and (6) postman or courier 
( Jamghakdrika) ? 

The village had its own police force recruited from the follow¬ 
ing classes of people: (1) Vagurikas (Trappers), (2) Sabaras (Bhils), 

1. Cr. Ed. Ill, 229, 1-13. ~~ “ 

2. Mbh. IV. 10: cf. CHI, I, p. 269. 

3. XII. "60, 25. 

4. Cr. Ed. IV. 9. 8-13. 

5. II. 1; V. 2. 

6. V. 3- 

7. II. 1. 


597 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


(3) Pulindas (Kiratas), (4) Chan^alas and (5) Aranyacharas (forest¬ 
ers). 1 

The State levied on agriculture a variety of impositions such 
as (1) tithe on raw produce, (2) forced labour, (3) special levy on 
produce for State granaries against emergencies like war or famine, 

(4) occasional contributions to the king, like ‘milk-money’ e.g. at 
the birth of his heir. Hindu law fixes the State’s share of agri¬ 
cultural produce at one-sixth down to one-twelfth. Asoka reduced 
this share ( bhdga ) to one-eighth at the village Lumbini, as the birth¬ 
place of the Buddha. 

Kautilya describes the taxes on agriculture as comprising (1) 
Bhdga, State’s share of produce; (2) Bali, an undefined cess over 
and above Bhdga; (3) Kara, a tax on property levied periodically; 
(4) Vivita, a levy on pastures; (5) Rajju, the cess payable for sur¬ 
vey and settlement; and (6) Chorarajju, police cess or chowkidari 
tax. 2 

The village ended in the uncleared jungles from which were 
derived its supply of firewood and litter. They were the haunts of 
wild animals and brigands preying on the caravan traffic passing 
through them. 

Kautilya’s scheme contemplates different kinds of forests to 
be cultivated for their economic uses. There would be (1) a re¬ 
served forest for royal hunt, which was rendered safe by stocking 
it with wild animals like tiger, bison and elephant, with their 
teeth and claws cut off; (2) ordinary forests as the abode of all ani¬ 
mals (3) plantations of forests producing timber, bamboo or bark; 
creepers like cane; fibres like hemp; roping material like Munja; 
leaves for writing, such as palm-leaf; flowers as material for dyeing, 
such as Kirhsuka, Kusumbha, or Kunkuma; medicinal herbs, roots, 
and flowers. The State also took charge of the forests of the coun¬ 
try producing these materials. There were model Government 
agricultural farms, where were collected the seeds of various crops 
to be grown. Government also maintained flower-, fruit-, and 
vegetable-gardens, and raised commerce crops like cotton (Kar- 
pdsa) and jute (Kshanma). Forests were also grown for the breed¬ 
ing of elephants so necessary for economic and military purposes, 
under a special conservator of forests called Ndgavanddhyaksha. 3 

v 

1. II. 1. 

2. Ghoshal, Revenue System, pp. 34, 36, 41-2, 53. 

3. II. 2. 


598 



ECONOMIC CONDITION 


i 


The forests also yielded other valuable animal products such 
as hides, skins, sinews, bones, teeth, horns, hoofs, and tails of 
such creatures as leopard, tiger, lion, elephant, buffalo, yak, croco¬ 
dile, tortoise, snake and birds. 

Out of the forest products were also manufactured articles 
like plough, pestle, mortar, implements, weapons and carts, by quali¬ 
fied artisans in the forest factories (Dravyavanakarmantah). 

2. TRADE AND INDUSTRY 

Remarkable progress in trade and industry is noticeable during 
this period. A large number of arts, crafts and occupations are not 
only referred to in literature and epigraphic records, but also re¬ 
presented in the sculptures. The Jatakas are always referring to 
the standard number of 18 important handicrafts such as those of 
wood-workers, the smiths, leatherers, painters, workers in stone, 
ivory-working, weaving, confectionery, jewellery, work in precious 
stones, pottery, making of bow and arrow, and the like. The 
mining industry had grown very important, and Megasthenes states 
that gold, silver, copper and iron were extracted in large quantities, 
and articles of utility and ornament as well as implements and 
accoutrements of war were made of them. The carpenter was much 
in evidence for constructing carts of different kinds, called ydna, 
ratha and sakata; furniture; the woodwork of buildings; and sea¬ 
going ships. 

The lower crafts ( hina-sippas ) were, as already indicated, those 
of hunters and trappers, fishermen, butphers and tanners, whose 
work was tainted by destruction of life; snake-charmers, dancers, 
musicians, rush-weavers and the like—the usual occupations of 
aboriginal folks. 

There was localisation of industries. We come across mention 
of villages of potters, woodwrights, or ironsmiths producing arti¬ 
cles like razors, axes, ploughshares, goads, and needles; of trappers 
supplying game, skins, ivory and the like. The same localisation 
was seen in towns where different handicrafts were settled along 
their own streets or in their own areas. Thus we have mention of 
ivory-workers’ street ( vithi ), the dyers’ street, the vessas ’ street or 
the weavers’ locality ( thana ). 

Markets for perishable foods were located outside the towns 
at their gates. We read of a market for fish at a gate of Sravasti, of 
greengroceries at the four gates of Uttara-Panchala, and of venison 


599 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


at the cross-roads outside Banaras; of four nigamas or market- 
towns located at the four suburbs of the city of Mithila and called 
Yava-majjhako, an example of which is figured on a sculpture at 
Bharhut. 

With the towns were located workshops and bazaars. We 
read of Apana or shop, stocking for sale goods like carriages or ar¬ 
rows, and of Antarapana or stores. We read of bazaars for sale of 
textiles, groceries, oils, grain, greengroceries, perfumes, flowers, 
works of gold and jewellery and of taverns for sale of liquor. Trade 
in strong drinks, poisons, flesh, daggers and slaves was disapproved 
for people who care for morals. It appears from the Jataka stories 
that the prices were left to be settled by haggling, competition and 
custom. The State did not control prices except for its own pur¬ 
chases. It had its own valuer who had a difficult task in buying at 
the cheapest rates and declining bribes offered by tradesmen to 
secure higher rates, while'he might still fail to please the king who 
would grant him a niggardly bonus for all his pains! 1 

Barter prevailed along with money economy. A vagrant buys 
a meal from a forester with his gold pin. A dog is bought for a 
cloak or coin. But money used to indicate prices and measure the 
values of “fees, pensions, fines, loans, hoarded treasure, and in¬ 
come.” 

Buddhist texts use the term Kahdpana (= Kdrshapana) for a 
coin. They know of its varieties called Nikkha and Suvanna of gold, 
and bronze and copper pieces called Kdmsa, Pdda 3 Mdsaka and 
Kakanika. Their values varied with time and place. For instance, 
we find it stated in the Vinaya 2 that “at that time (of Bimbisara or 
Ajatasatru), at Raj agriha, 5 Mdsakas were equivalent to 1 P&da.” 

Loans were given on security of gold like a ring or debtor’s 
personal guarantee. We read of one’s wife or children being pledged 
or sold for debt, of IOU’s or schedules of debt. 

Loans carried interest called Vriddhi. Money-lending is approv¬ 
ed as an honest calling along with tillage, harvesting and trade. 

Wealth or treasure was stored up in a variety of ways; under 
the ground or river bank in brazen jars, or as deposit with friends, 
with its particulars recorded on gold or copper plates. In palaces, 
it was hoarded in a niche above the doorway. Money was lent for 

1. Jataka, I. 124: II. 31; IV. 138. Psalms of Brethren 25, 212. 

2. III. 45. 


600 




ECONOMIC CONDITION 


interest on promissory notes to be renewed every year. 1 Debtors 
were protected by law which disallowed (1) compound interest, (2) 
interest above customary rate, (3) interest equal to the amount of 
the principal, (4) personal service in lieu of interest, and (5) exorbi¬ 
tant interest agreed to under coercion. The usual rate of interest 
was 15% per annum. Higher rates were given for unsecured loans. 2 

Both trade and industry were highly organised. The term Srenl, 
which frequently occurs in the literature and inscriptions of this 
period, is defined as a corporation of people belonging to the same 
or different castes but following the same trade or industry. It 
thus corresponds to the guilds of mediaeval Europe. The Jatakas 
refer to eighteen guilds which, though a conventional number, show 
the extensive character of the organisation. There are scattered 
references in literary texts to such organizations of various branches 
of trade and industry which, together, considerably exceed the 
number 18. It would appear that almost every important art or 
craft in a locality formed a guild-organisation. The craftsmen, who 
were mostly hereditary and settled in a well-defined region, orga¬ 
nised themselves under a Jetthaka or Pamukha, an officer who was 
something like an alderman or a president. The guild possessed 
both executive and judicial authority, 3 and had for this purpose a 
body of executive officers who were held in high respect in court 
and were entitled to arbitrate between its members. 

According to Buddhist canonical texts, the sanction of the guild 
was necessary for the ordination of the wife of any of its members. 
Many passages in Kautilya’s Arthas&stra indicate the great wealth 
and importance of the guilds, for which separate quarters are reserv¬ 
ed in an ideal planning of a town. The guilds worked as banks and 
received permanent deposits, undertaking to devote the annual 
interest for specific charities. Some of the guilds also maintained a 
regular army, and it is included among the various classes of troops 
which the king might call upon to serve under him. Different guilds 
also federated under a common President, called Bhaydagarika, to 
check their internal disunion. 

There were also merchant-guilds under their chiefs called 
Setthis. One such chief was Anathapindika, who was the Mahd- 

] . Manu-smfiti, IX. 333, X. 115, VIII, 154-55. 

2. Ibid., VIII. 140-153. This will be more fully discussed in the next "volume. 

3. See above, p. 313. 


601 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


setthi, the president of a commercial federation, with numerous 

Anusetthis under him. 1 
• • 

Caravan traffic, with the special dangers and difficulties to 
which it was exposed, called for a similar co-operative organisation. 
Different merchants, with their carts loaded with their goods and 
their men, made up a company under a common captain called 
Satthavaha, who gave them directions as to halts, watering, routes, 
fording and danger-spots. There was also another common officer 
called Thala-niyyzmaka or land-pilot who conducted the caravans 
safely against the dangers and difficulties of travel from “drought, 
famine, wild beasts, robbers, and demons”. 

The texts also tell of partnerships which were permanent, tem¬ 
porary or occasional. We read of traders of Banaras combining 
in work and play; of concerted action in freights between dealers; 
of merchants chartering a common vessel. 

Trade was both foreign and inland, sea-borne and river-borne, 
export and import. We read of prince Mahajanaka sailing from 
Champa to Suvarnabhumi; of a whole village of defaulting wood- 
wrights escaping at night in a ship down the Gaiiga from Banaras 
out to the sea; of passengers safely brought by ships from the sea 
by river up to Banaras; of traders coasting round India from Bharu- 
kachchha on the west to Suvarnabhumi in the east, and touching 
on the way at a port in Ceylon; of a newly arrived ship laden with 
cargo which was bought up at the landing place by a hundred wait¬ 
ing and competing merchants; and of ships large enough to carry 
500 and 700 passengers. The eastern sea-borne trade was extended 
as far as China, and led to an extensive colonization, as will be des¬ 
cribed in Chapter XXV. 

The history of Indian trade with the West will be dealt with in 
the next chapter. As will be noted there, the earlier centuries of 
the Christian era witnessed the growth of a brisk foreign trade 
between India and the West, with the Roman Empire as its chief 
customer. There was a great demand in the West for Indian manu¬ 
factures and articles of luxury, such as precious stones and pearls, 
scents, spices and perfumes, silks and muslin. Roman dames, deck¬ 
ed in seven folds of Indian muslin, paraded the streets and became 
such a menace to the city’s morals that the Senate intervened and 
laid an embargo upon the import of that fine stuff from India. 

1. For guilds cf. CLAI, Ch. I. The Smriti rules on the subject will be discussed 
in the next volume. 


602 






ECONOMIC CONDITION 


According to Pliny, India in those early centuries was annually 
draining the Roman Empire of its gold valued at fifty million 
sesterces and established a favourable trade balance in the foreign 
markets. Traces of this profitable sea-trade are left in hoards of 
Roman coins found at several places close to the south Indian coast 
on which also grew up several port towns. Kaverlpattanam, the 
capital of the Chola Kingdom at the mouth of the Kaveri, was fre¬ 
quented by Yavana (Ionian) merchants, as stated in Tamil works. 

One of these Yavana merchants has given a very interesting 
account of the inland and foreign trade of India in his book called 
the “Periplus of the Erythraean Sea”. 1 The name of the author is 
unknown, but he was an Egyptian Greek and a merchant in active 
trade who personally made the voyage to India in the second half 
of the first century A.D. He has given a detailed account of his 
voyage noting the names of the harbours and the articles of import 
and export in connection with each of them. The first harbour of 
importance was Barygaza, a Greek corruption of ancient Bhrigu- 
kachchha, the modern Broach, at the mouth of the Narmada river. 
Merchandise from UjjayinI and other remote places in the north, as 
far as Kashmir and the Hindu Kush mountains, were brought here 
for export to foreign countries. Beyond Barygaza were many in¬ 
land market-towns such as Pratishthana (Paithan) 2 and Tagars (Ter), 
and many harbours such as Sopara and Kalyana on the Bombay coast 
which are still well known. Further south were ‘Naura and Tyndis’, 
the first markets of Damirica, and then Muziris and Nelcynda; all 
these were on the Malabar coast, between Cannanore and Cochin. 3 
The last two are Greek renderings of Muchiripattanam and Nlla- 
kantha, mentioned in literature and inscriptions of south India. 
Muziris, we are told, “abounds in ships sent there with cargoes from 
Arabia and by the Greeks.” 

Passing round Cape Comorin, the Greek merchant came across 
many harbours on the eastern coast, of which two alone can be 
located with some certainty, viz. Masalia near Masulipatam, and 
Gange at the mouth of the Ganga. Indians loaded ships with mer¬ 
chandise from these harbours and sent them to Arabian and African 
harbours. A colony of Indians also settled in the island of Socotra 
for purposes of trade. 

1. Edited by Schoff, with notes and identification of places named in the text. 

2. See above, pp. 192, 201. 

3. See Map. 


603 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The chief articles of export from India were spices, perfumes, 
medicinal herbs, pigments, pearls, precious stones like diamond, 
sapphire, turquoise and lapis lazuli, iron, steel, copper, sandalwood, 
animal skins, cotton cloth, silk yarn, muslin, indigo, ivory, porcelain 
and tortoise-shell. The principal imports were cloth, linens, per¬ 
fumes, medicinal herbs, glass vessels, silver, gold, tin, lead, pigments, 
precious stones and coral. 

The development of tirade and industry is reflected in the 
general economic condition of the people. We have abundant 
references to very rich merchants—millionaires of these days—both 
in literature and inscriptions. One of them Anathapindika, is said 
to have purchased the Jetavana park for Buddha by covering the 
whole surface of it with gold coins. 1 Another defrayed the entire 
cost of construction of the great Chaitya cave at Karle. Many 
others made costly gifts to different religious sects. The wealth of the 
middle classes appears clearly from their dress, ornaments, houses 
and furniture described above. 2 There is no reference to extreme 
poverty or paupers as a class. On the whole people lived happily 
in peace and prosperity. 

According to Kautilya’s Arthasastra there was considerable 
State-control in both trade and industry. 3 The State had a monopoly 
of industries which depended upon risky, costly and pioneering 
enterprise. Mines were nationalised as the main source of the 
State’s revenue. There were mines of gold, silver, diamond, gems, 
precious stones, copper, lead ( sisa), tin ( trapu ), iron ( fikshna or 
ayas), and bitumen ( silajatu ). The State explored the ocean mines 
to obtain their precious products like M.uktd (pearl), Sukti (mother 
of pearl), Sankha (conch-shell) and pravala (coral). The State 
also worked the oil-fields (yielding rasa like mercury). It also 
engaged in extracting minerals from ores. It had a monopoly in 
the manufacture of salt for which it granted licences to private 
lessees of salt-fields. It had its own cotton, oil, and sugar factories 
and controlled the manufacture of wines and liquors and their 
sale. The armament industry as well as the building of boats and 
ships was a government monopoly. Coining was a monopoly of 
government whose officers under the Mint Master called Laksha- 
nddhyaksha received from the public bullion to be struck into coins 
on payment of seigniorage charges. 

1. This scene is illustrated in a Bharhut sculpture. 

2. See pp. 571 ff. 

3. The statements that follow are based on Kautilya’s Arthasastra , Book II. 

604 



ECONOMIC CONDITION 


Prisons had factories worked by penal labour. The State spin¬ 
ning house turned out yarns of cotton, silk, wool and jute, and manu¬ 
factured clothing of all kinds, mail-armour (uarma), ropes, blankets 
(dsiarana) and curtains ( pmvarana ). It employed helpless and 
purdah women who were given orders through its women-staff for 
spinning yarn. 

The State controlled trade and prices. Goods were not to be 
sold where they were produced, at field or factory, but only at the 
appointed market where the dealer had to declare their particulars 
as to quantity, quality and price, which were examined and register¬ 
ed in the official books. A trader had to get a licence, and a foreign 
trader, a passport in addition. The Superintendent of Commerce 
fixed the wholesale prices of goods as they were entered in the 
customs house, and the retail prices with a margin of profit. Smug¬ 
gling or adulteration of goods was severely punished. Speculation 
and cornering to influence prices were not allowed. Strikes of 
workmen to raise wages were declared illegal. The State protected 
the public, customers and consumers against unauthorised prices 
and fraudulent transactions and had to employ for the purpose an 
army of spies and market-inspectors. 

The State also controlled weights and measures. The official 
standard was fixed a little lower than the public so as to yield some 
revenue amounting to a vydjl of 5 per cent. 

Trade was taxed all along its way by export and import duties, 
octroi and excise. Its progress through the country was punctuated 
by halts, enforced for payment of taxes at different stages. The 
foreign merchants were mulcted of their profits on the frontier by 
transit duties ( vartani ) and tolls ( sulka ), and by octroi at the gates 
of cities, which were carefully guarded by officers in charge of the 
customs houses, provided even with a place for detention of mer¬ 
chants found guilty of evading the law. 

But if trade was thus taxed, it had its compensation in the 
security granted to it. It was guarded all along its way. Losses in 
transit were made good by government through its agents concerned; 
the village head-man was held liable for the loss suffered in the 
village; beyond the village, the VivUadhyaksha, beyond his juris¬ 
diction, the general rural police, the chora-rajjuka, and, farther on, 
was the Sima-svami, the warden of marches, similarly liable. 

Trade had to be protected in those days against gangs of pro¬ 
fessional dacoits at large called chora-gcinas, the turbulent Mlechchha 


605 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


tribes such as the Kiratas and the wild forest-folks (Atavikas) , who 
were all out to prey upon trade and for plunder. 

3. TRADE-ROUTES AND TRANSPORT 

Inland trade was carried on by carts and caravans, as we have 
seen. Its principal routes are indicated by the old Pali texts. The 
caravan of the merchant-prince Anathapindika, going south-east 
from Sravasti to Raj agriha, passed along the foot of the hills up to 
Kusinara, between which and its end at Raj agriha there lay 12 halts 
including one at Vaisali, with only a single crossing of a river-— 
Ganga at Patna—as will appear from the itinerary of the Buddha. 
Another route led from Sravasti south-west to Paithan with six inter¬ 
mediate halts and frequent crossings of rivers. A third route led 
westward to Sind, the home of horses and asses, and to Sauvlra and 
its ports, with its capital called Roruva or Roruka. 

We read of caravans going overland towards east and west and 
across deserts, requiring days to cross (the deserts of Rajputana), 
steering in the coolness of nights by the stars, under their guide. 

Lastly, there was the old Grand Trunk Road leading from Raja- 
griha through Banaras, Saketa and Sravasti towards Taxila and the 

frontiers, linking India with central and western Asia. 

* 

As regards trade-routes of later times, there is the interesting 
evidence of Megasthenes testifying to the Royal Road leading from 
the North-West Frontier up to Pataliputra with a length of 10,000 
stades ( — about 1,156 miles). 1 Apart from these arterial routes, 
the whole country was connected by a network of roads, some of 
which at any rate had milestones to indicate distances. Amenities 
were provided for travellers in the shape of shady trees, rest-houses 
and wells on the roadside. The establishment of the Maurya Empire 
brought the different parts into closer contact, and the same language 
was understood all over the great subcontinent. According to 
Kautilya, ‘Passes’ were necessary for crossing the boundary, where 
toll, carriage-cess and transit duties were collected. Permission was 
also necessary to ford or cross rivers, “lest traitors may cross them 
(and escape).’’ 

As means of conveyance we hear of litter, sedan chair, horse- 
carriage, and carts drawn by two cows with a bull between them or 
two bulls with a cow between them. The very rich rode on 


1. Strabo, XV. 1, 11. 


606 



ECONOMIC CONDITION 


elephants, and the animals used by the ordinary people were camels, 
horses and asses. 

According to Nearchus, 1 the conveyance which ranked next 
in honour to elephants, used by the king and the wealthy, was the 
chariot and four; the camel ranked third, while to be drawn by a 
single horse was considered no distinction at all. The ass was used 
by the common people for riding. Ships and boats, both large and 
small, were used for navigation, and rivers were crossed by either 
boats or rafts of wood or basket work. The State maintained boats 
for hire and took steps to destroy pirate ships. 

4. COINAGE 2 

One of the most remarkable features of the period is the intro¬ 
duction of a regular coinage in business transactions. The old sys¬ 
tem of barter had not altogether passed away, as noted above, 3 but 
gradually coins came into use and became the chief currency. 

Herodotus tells us that the Achaemenian emperors received 
360 talents in gold dust as annual tribute from their Indian pro 
vince. This shows that even in the sixth century B.C. the dust or 
ingots of gold and other metals, calculated by weight, served the 
purpose of the higher currency. It is not long, however, before we 
find the transition from this stage to that of the coin proper, viz. 
a piece of metal of recognized weight and fineness guaranteed by 
the stamp of authority, for we have extant specimens of Indian 
coins—ingots of silver marked with three dots or bent bars of silver 
with some symbols—which probably go back to the sixth century 
B.C., if not earlier still. They were replaced by “rectangular or 
circular flat pieces cut from a hammered sheet of metal and clipped 
to the proper weight.” From the fact that one or more devices or 
symbols were marked on these coins by punches, they are called 
punch-marked coins. Some cast coins with devices are, however, 
also known. Many thousands of punch-marked coins have come to 
light in different parts of India. 

The most ancient coinage of India was based on the system of 
weight as given in Manu. 4 Its unit was the rati or gunja-berry, 
weighing approximately T.83 grains or .118 grammes. The standard 
gold coin was the suvarna of 80 ratis of which no actual specimens 

1. McCrindle, Megasthenes, p. 222. 

2. Rapson, Indian Coins; C. J. Brown, The Coins of India. 

3. See p. 600. 

4. Vin. 152 ff. 


607 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


are known, but numerous specimens of silver purdna or dharana of 
32 ratis and of the copper Karshapana of 80 ratis, as well as their 
various multiples and sub-divisions, have been discovered all over 
India. These coins were issued by rulers, merchants, and corpora¬ 
tions who stamped on them a symbol of their authority guarantee¬ 
ing the correct weight and purity of the metal. There is a large 
variety of these signs or symbols, more than three hundred in 
number, and sometimes several of them are found on one or both 
sides of the coins. 

The Indian system of coinage was influenced by the foreigners 
who established their rule in India. The most important of these 
were the Bactrian Greeks who issued a fine series of coins with the 
name and portrait of the ruler engraved on them. Some of these 
portraits and other symbols—mostly figures of deities—show a 
standard of artistic excellence which has never been approached in 
Indian mints. The Graeco-Bactrian coins and the large influx of 
Roman coins 1 profoundly influenced those of the Sakas, Parthians, 
and Kushanas, and through them, the coins of the later Indian rulers 
which became gradually more and more abundant. Not only the 
form, character and the standard weight of the Indian coins were 
changed, but even foreign names like dinar a (denarius) and dramma 
(drachma) were applied to them. The fashion of issuing a circular 
coinage bearing superscription of the ruler in whose name they 
were issued was derived from the West though, except in the case 
of the Guptas, it never seems to have taken root. Hence, although 
we do not possess any coins bearing the name of the Nanda and 
Maurya Emperors, far less powerful kings, even local rulers and 
small tribal states, of later periods, issued coins with their names. 
We presume that only the punch-marked coins, with symbols and 
devices but no royal names, served as the currency up to the end of 
the Mauryan period. They were probably in use even in later times. 
It is not unlikely that along with them cowrie-shells also served as 
currency for smaller transactions. They must have been used as 
currency from very early times and we can trace their use down to 
the eighteenth century A.D. 

5. INFLUENCE OF CANON LAW UPON ECONOMIC 

DEVELOPMENT 

In conclusion some reference should be made to the effect of 
the canonical view of life on the economic condition of the age. The 

1. See Ch. XXIV. 


608 




ECONOMIC CONDITION 


Smriti rules relating to the occupations of castes have an important 
bearing upon the problems of production. The Smriti law in 
general looked upon agriculture as well as industry and trade with 
high disfavour. The extreme view on this point is illustrated by 
the epithets pramrita (‘what causes many deaths’) and satydnrita 
(‘mixture of truth and falsehood’) applied by Manu to agriculture 
and trade respectively. It is also reflected in Brihaspati’s descrip¬ 
tion of wealth acquired by agriculture, trade and crafts as occupying 
an intermediate grade between wealth earned by Vedic learning, 
valour, ascetic practices and so forth and that obtained by dice, 
gambling, robbery and the like. With this may be compared Manu’s 
rule which included the practice of handicrafts, pecuniary trans¬ 
actions, trading in cows, horses and carriages as well as agriculture 
among the causes leading to the destruction of families. 1 The 
general attitude of the Smritis is reflected in the fact that while 
allowing Brahmanas to live in times of distress by a Vaisya’s occu¬ 
pation, they expressly prohibit him from following various specified 
branches of industry and trade. 2 According to the general Smriti 
law, again, the worker in many branches of trade and industry was 
liable to serious social, religious and even legal disabilities. 3 The 
list of such forbidden or despised occupations comprises agriculture, 
pasturage and various kinds of industry and trade. It is character¬ 
istic of Manu’s attitude that he declares trade to be the best of occu¬ 
pations open to a Vaisva, while he condemns agriculture as involving 
injury to the earth and the beings living therein. 4 The attitude of 
the Buddhist and Jain canonical law was hardly less unfavourable to 
economic progress than that of the Smritis. By the fundamental 
rules of Buddhist monastic discipline, comprised in the prdtimoksha, 
monks were forbidden to cultivate land. The Jain canonical law 
forbade laymen to live by agriculture and agricultural operations as 


1. Manu, IV. 5-6, II. 64; Ndr, Rinadana vv. 45-48; Bri, p. 70, vv. 2-5. cf. Par, II. 
2 8-13 

2. Manu, X. 83 f; Gaut, VII. 8-15; Ap, I, 7, 20; I, 11, 30; Baudh, II. 24-29; Ydj, 
III. 35-39. 

3. Manu, VIII. 102 (Brahmanas who tend cattle or are traders or mechanics or 
usurers to be treated at law-court like §udras); XI. 70 (traders unworthy to 
receive gifts); IV. 84 (gifts not to be received from oil-manufacturers); IV. 
210, 214-16, 218-20 (food given by carpenter, usurer, tailor, blacksmith, gold¬ 
smith, basket-maker, leather-cutter, washerman, dyer, dealer in weapons and 
artizans in general not to be eaten by a snataka). For similar lists of despised 
occupations, cf. Manu, III. 152f, XI. 64; Ydj, I. 161-165, III. 234, 240; Bri, p. 373 
vv. 4f. 

4. Manu, X. 80, 83. 

G09 


A.i.u— a» 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


well as a large number of trades and industries. 1 Above all it 
must be remembered that unlike the canonical law of the Brah- 
manas, that of the Buddhists and the Jains habitually exalted the 
houseless state of life above that of the householder. 2 


Although, as noted above, these rules were often violated in 
practice, their general tendency is sufficiently obvious. The Brah- 
manical as well as Buddhist and Jain sacred law, by placing agri¬ 
culture as well as a number of basic industries and trades under a 
ban, could not but retard the application of capital and enterprise 
to their development. Again, the Smritis, by confining the produc¬ 
tive occupations to the Vaisyas, could not but restrict the free move¬ 
ment of labour and capital. On the other hand it must be admit¬ 
ted that apart from the reference to ethnic groups following parti¬ 
cular occupations, the Smritis do not support the restriction of sepa¬ 
rate crafts and trades to different sub-castes. On the contrary, we 
find in Manu and his successors a growing recognition of the Sudra’s 
right to productive occupation. 3 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

R. K. Mookerji, Hindu Civilization. 

Kautiliya Arthasdstra. 


1. SBE. III. 33 (rule in pratimoksha ); Uvdsagadasdo I, 51, expanded in Hari- 
bhadra’s Yogasdstra III. 98 f. (fifteen ways of earning livelihood forbidden to a 
layman include those concerned with making and selling charcoal and plants, 
making, selling or driving carts, hoeing and ploughing fields, digging wells, 
draining lakes, rivers and tanks for preparation of agricultural land, crushing 
by machinery, trafficking in ivory, lac, juice and so forth). 

2. Gaut, III. 3; Baudh, II. 6. 21 f; Vas, VIII, 14-17; Manu, III. 77-78, VI. 89-90 
(hou9e-holder’s life is highest, according to Gaut. and Baudh. the only asrama). 

3. Sudras unable to live by personal service tor practise handicrafts {Manu, X. 
99-100), and in addition, trade (Yaj, I. 120). Sudras normally to live by prac¬ 
tising as artizans, rearing cattle and carrying on trade {Mark, Pur, XXVIII. 
7-8). Occupations of Sudras are agriculture, pasturage, carrying loads, trade, 
painting, dancing, singing and playing musical instruments (Devala quoted bv 
Vij. on Yaj, I. 120). 



610 



CHAPTER XXIV 

INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 

I. INTERCOURSE BETWEEN INDIA AND THE 
WESTERN COUNTRIES 


1. The Pre-Achaemenid Period 

The remarkable discoveries at Mohenjo-daro in Sind have un¬ 
mistakably shown that there was intercourse between this region 
and western Asia in the third millennium before Christ. As has 
been noted above, Mohenjo-daro was probably a great port carrying 
on trade by sea with Ur and Kish, and perhaps also with Egypt. It 
has also been indicated that there was intercourse by land between 
the Sindhu Valley and western and central Asia. 1 


Whether the intercourse between India and the West continued 
unbroken since the epoch of the Sindhu Valley civilization down to 
the historical period for which we have positive evidence, it is diffi¬ 
cult to say. But evidences, both philological and archaeological, 
exist to prove such connection at a later period. Indeed, on the 
strength of these evidences it was generally held, even before the 
discovery of Mohenjo-daro, that there were trade relations between 
India and the western world from times immemorial. It is not 
necessary to discuss such evidences at length, but they may be briefly 
stated. 2 


According to the Jewish chronicles, during the reign of Solo¬ 
mon (c. 800 B.C.) a navy equipped by Hiram, king of Tyre, 
a triennial voyage to the East, bringing back with it “gp^ an( j 
silver, ivory, apes, peacocks and great plenty of Almug , . 

precious stones.” The port at which they shipped ^ - n 

named Ophir. Many scholars have proposed to lo * ie * 

India and looked for its equivalent in such pla . 0 _ . . 

„ - -n i o it*ra m the Septuagint, 

or Suppara. For ‘Ophir also appears as Sop 1 


1 . 

2 . 


Cf. Vol. I, Ch. IX. or convincing and naturally there 

The evidences are not always very dehnit holars For a g00 d summary, Cf. 

are wide differences of opinion among t 1 ? ^ Western World, pp. 10 ff; Ken- 
Rawlinson, Intercourse between Ir>du£z' k to prove that the sea-trade 

nedy in JRAS, 1898 p,x 250 the seventh century B.C. but did 

no W ex2t earher He" h^ ^ssed in detail the various evidences on wh.ch 
such an eariyTrade was presumed by older writers. 

611 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


and Sophir is a term applied in Coptic to southern India. It is, of 
course, also possible to recall other well-known Indian names such 
as Sauvira, which corresponds to the name Sophara. But such pho¬ 
netic resemblance cannot be regarded as conclusive evidence of 
identity, and some scholars are inclined to locate the famous port 
on the Arabian coast. But apart from this location, it has been 
urged that the names of most of the articles of commerce are de¬ 
rived from Indian originals. “Thus ‘ivory’ is in the Hebrew text 
shen habbin, ‘elephant’s teeth’, a literal translation of the Sanskrit 
ibha-danta. The ‘almug’ is in Sanskrit and Tamil valgu, and the 
Greek santalon (sandal) is obviously derived from Sanskrit chan - 
dana. The word used for ‘ape’ is not the ordinary Hebrew one, but 
koph, most probably the Sanskrit kapi. ‘Peacocks’ are thuki-im,, 
the Tamil tokei.'’ The use of these Indian names for merchandise 
raises a strong presumption in favour of their Indian origin. Simi¬ 
larly, the word Sindhu, found in the library of Assurbanipal, is 
used in the sense of Indian cotton, and the Hebrew karpas is ob¬ 
viously derived from the Sanskrit karpdsa. It is possible to add to 
the list of such loan-words. 


On the Indian side, we have allusions to sea-voyages even in 
the Rigveda, 1 but these are vague and uncertain. Of greater im¬ 
portance are the references in Buddhist literature of distant sea- 
voyages, in which sailors going far into the sea made use of shore¬ 
sighting birds. 2 One Jataka makes a particular reference to a 
trading-voyage to the kingdom of Baveru, 3 and scholars have re¬ 
cognised it as the Indian form of Babylon. This story undoubtedly 
preserves an interesting reminiscence of Indian trade with Babylon, 
but as the date of its composition is not known with certainty, we 
'hardly use it as evidence for commerce with Babylon in the 
^rly ages. 


T*0i, 

to the fieu arc h a eological evidence, reference may be made 

a pes, Indian elephants and Bactrian camels on the 

w m 7? er 111 < 860 Next in point of time is the 

Mueheir rr° teak found in the Temple of the Moon at 

Sar^ LrbLtf.o'r* 68 ’ 01 Neb “ had - 

thesp S S . Sixth century B.C. On the basis of 

__ 5 we ma y certainty pu S fo back the beginning of inter- 

2. Was, I8 9 f r 432 Vo1 - r> pp - 244 ’ 396 fr ~ 

Cowell, Eng. Transl. Jataka III. 83. 


612 






INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


course between India and western Asia to a date at least as early as 
the ninth century B.C. 

The most important archaeological evidence is furnished by 
the Boghaz Koi inscriptions of the fourteenth century B.C. 1 These 
records contain the names of deities, Mitra, Varuna, Indra and the 
heavenly twins, the Nasatyas,—names well known in Vedic mytho¬ 
logy. Numerals and other words which appear to be Aryan in ori¬ 
gin have also been identified. It is noticeable that the words do not 
exhibit the changes which distinguish Iranian from Indian forms. 
The words, therefore, must date back to a period when the Aryan¬ 
speaking people were not yet distinguished as Iranians and Indians. 
If we accept this view, we find here remarkable evidence of very 
close contact between India and western Asia before the fourteenth 
century B.C. 

But we must admit that, beyond indicating in a very general 
way the existence of trade relations, and to some extent cultural 
contacts, between India and the Western countries, the available evi¬ 
dence does not throw much light on the precise nature and extent 
of international relationship. It is possible, however, to give some 
indication of the trade-routes through which merchandise passed 
between India and the West, 

From remote antiquity India had trade relations with western 
countries both by land and sea. The overland route ran through the 
Khyber Pass and across the Hindu Kush to Balkh, to which con¬ 
verged all the principal highways from Central Asia and China on 
the east 2 and the Mediterranean and Black Sea ports on the west. 
One of the western routes went down the Qxus across the Caspian, 
and then along the Kur and Phasis to the Black Sea ports. 3 The 
other passed through (or near) Herat, the northern border of the 
Karmanian desert, and the Caspian Gates to Antioch by way of 
Ctesiphon and Hecatompylos. 4 Reference is also made to two other 
routes, via Kandahar, one joining the above-mentioned route at 
Herat and the other proceeding through Persepolis and Susa. 5 

Sea-going vessels generally kept close to the coast and made 
the long voyage along the shores of India, Baluchistan, Persia and 

1. JRAS, 1909, pp. 1094-1109; CAM. II. 13. 

2. These have been described in Vol. I, p. 92. 

3. W. W. Tarn, Hellenistic Civilisation, p. 211. The Caspian Sea and the Aral 
were joined by one or more salt water connections (ibid. 210). 

4. These routes are described both by Pliny and Strabo. (McCrindle, Ancient 
India , pp. 96, 99, 100, 110). 

5. McCrindle, Ancient India, pp. 204-5. 


613 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Arabia, through the Red Sea, to its head near Suez. From this point 
merchandise was carried by land to Egypt on the west and to 
famous ports like Tyre and Sidon on the north. The same ship or 
set of traders, however, did not always go all the way from the be¬ 
ginning to the end of these routes, for the goods often changed hands 
at important towns and harbours. Sometimes the ships from India 
made the coastal voyage only up to the head of the Persian Gulf, 
and then proceeded along the Euphrates until they touched the over¬ 
land route as will be noted below. 

Relations between India and the western world, before the 
Achaemenid rule in Persia, were mainly commercial. No political 
relationship is known, stories like the invasion of India by Semi- 
ramis being hardly credible. Some amount of cultural influence is 
a natural effect of commercial intercourse, but this seems to have 
been very meagre. Names of Indian articles found a place in the 
languages of the West, as already noted above. Some common folk¬ 
tales current in India and the West might have been the result of 
such intercourse. But the Babylonian origin of the story of the 
flood in Satapatha Brahmana or the influence of Chaldaean astro¬ 
nomy and Babylonian weights and measures upon India is more 
problematic. The theory that India owes its alphabet to Semitic 
sources has also considerably lost its importance after the discovery 
of the picture-writing in Mohenjo-daro. On the whole, while it is 
unreasonable to deny the possibility or even great probability of 
such reciprocal influence, it would be unwise to accept superficial 
resemblance and partial analogy as evidence of such influence. 

2. The Achaemenid Period 

The rise of the Achaemenids in Persia definitely broke the 
barriers that shut off India, at least politically, from the rest of the 
world. By a series of conquests within a quarter of a century (549- 
525 B.C.) they created a vast empire that embraced nearly the 
whole of Iran, Asia Minor, Syria, Phoenicia and the ancient king¬ 
dom of Egypt. It was not long before the Persian suzerainty was 
extended to the Sindhu valley and probably some territory to the 
east of that river. 1 

The common subjection to the great empire must have brought 
India into closer contact with the western world. A Greek mercen¬ 
ary, Scylax, was sent by Darius to explore the Sindhu, and an 

1. Cf. Ch. Ill, Section I; also 1HQ, XXV. 153. 


614 




INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


Indian contingent formed part of the Persian army which led the 
memorable expedition against Greece. These are the earliest posi¬ 
tive evidences we possess of the close contact between Indians and 
the Greeks to any considerable extent. It is reasonable to infer that 
in spite of the failure of that expedition India and Greece came 
directly into each other’s view, and this intimacy was not altogether 
lost in subsequent times. This is partly borne out* by the account 
of India left by Herodotus (born in 484 B.C.), the first reliable Greek 
account of India that has so far come down to us. Another Greek, 
Ctesias, wrote an account of India, but though he lived for twenty 
years (418-398 B.C.) as royal physician in the Persian court and 
had thus ample opportunity of gathering information about India, 
the portions of his book, which have survived in quotations and 
abridgments of later writers, are full of marvellous stories and con¬ 
tain little of historical value. An Indian philosopher is said to have 
visited Socrates some time before 400 B.C. 1 

3. India andl Greece 

The next important stage in the contact between India and the 
West was inaugurated by the invasion of Alexander the Great. The 
large number of Greeks and Indians who formed the retinue of 
Alexander must have given a unique opportunity to both for a pro¬ 
per understanding of one another, and even the short-lived Greek 
rule in India must have contributed to the same end. Even when 
the Indian dominions were lost by Alexander’s successors, India 
had a close touch with the western world through the Seleucidan 
kingdom which reached its border. 

The first three Mauryan Emperors had intimate connection with 
the Greek kingdoms of the west. Even if we leave aside the story 
of Chandragupta’s marriage with a daughter of Seleucus, which is 
at best very doubtful, we have other evidences to prove that India 
and the western world came to a much closer relation than before. 
In the first place we know that first Megasthenes and then Dai'ma- 
chus lived in the Mauryan court as ambassadors of the Seleucid 
king, and Ptolemy Philadelphus, king of Egypt, sent an envoy named 
Dionysius to the same court. All the three wrote valuable accounts 
of India, though they are now mostly lost; and it is highly probable 
that there were other Greek envoys. That the Mauryan kings also 
sent similar ambassadors admits of little doubt. The anecdote con¬ 
cerning Bindusara that he had requested Antiochus Soter, successor 

1. 1AL. X. 58. 


615 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


of Seleucus, to send him some figs and sweet wine and also a 
Sophist, may not be regarded as credible, but even such a story 
presupposes cordial relations between the two courts. But the best 
evidence of this is furnished by the thirteenth Rock Edict of Asoka 
in which five Greek rulers are specifically named, and it is claimed 
that on account of the activities of Asoka’s missionaries his dhammn 
or the Law of Piety was followed in their dominions. The names 
of these rulers—Antiochus (of Syria), Antigonus Gonatas (of 
Macedonia), Alexander (of Epirus or Corinth) Ptolemy (of Egypt) 
and Magas (of Cyrene)—show that India had at this time intimate 
intercourse with the western world. The fact, stated by Megas- 
thenes, that there was a special department in the city of Patali 
putra (and probably in other big cities) to look after foreigners 
indicates an influx of them into India about this time. Diodorus 
also refers to the admiration of a king of Palibothra (probably a 
Maury an king) for the Greeks. 

4. India and Egypt 

Some interesting evidence is available regarding the growing 
intimacy between India and Egypt. Athenaeus tells us that in the 
processions of Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-246 B.C.) were to be seen 
Indian women, Indian hunting dogs and Indian cows, among other 
strange sights; also Indian spices carried on camels. The same 
authority tells us that Ptolemy Philopator’s yacht had a saloon lined 
with Indian stone. 1 

It is difficult to judge of Asoka’s claim that his dhamma was 
followed by the peoples of the kingdoms mentioned by him. 
Greece knew nothing about Buddhism previous to the rise of Alex¬ 
andria in the Christian era. Buddha is first mentioned by Clement 
of Alexandria (A.D. 150-218). Centuries later Alberuni observed 
that ‘in former times, Khorasan, Persia, Iraq, Mosul and the country 
up to the frontier of Syria was Buddhistic’. 2 That Indian culture 
spread to these regions during this period can hardly be doubted, 
but its extent cannot be estimated till more positive evidence is 
available. 

The foundation of the kingdom of Parthia shut off India from 
any direct political contact with the Greek world of the West. 
Antiochus the Great of Syria, who made a final but unsuccessful 
effort to re-assert his authority over the eastern provinces about 


1. Rawlinson, op. cit. 93-4. 

2. Sachau, Alberuni’s India, p. 21. 


616 



INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 

206 B.C., was the last Greek ruler of the West to maintain any 
direct contact with India. The Parthian, and its successor-state the 
Sassanid, empire served for more than eight hundred years as a 
buffer-state between India on the one hand, and the kingdoms of 
the West, including the mighty Roman empire, on the other. 1 

Several other circumstances, such as the inroads of the Scythians 
and the Yueh-chis into Bactria, and the growing anarchy in Syria 
considerably curtailed the facilities of the land-route and naturally 
increased the popularity and importance of the sea-route between 
India and the western world. 

The all-sea route was not, however, much in vogue in the earlier 
days. The more important route, followed in the third century B.C., 
was by sea to the Persian Gulf and then up the Tigris to Seleucia, 
where it joined the overland route from India and other eastern 
countries. From Seleucia the old road, east of the Tigris, crossed 
the river at Jeizireh or Libba, and proceeded to Nisibis and Edessa, 
whence one road led to Damascus and Tyre, and the other, crossing 
the Euphrates at Zeugma, which superseded Thapsacus, led to 
Antioch. There was also a new Seleucid road from Seleucia, up 
the Euphrates, to Antioch. From Antioch a great through route 
ran by Tarsus and Apamea in Phrygia to the sea at Ephesus. 2 

As this land route ran through the territory of the Seleucids, 
the Ptolemies of Egypt were naturally eager to develop the all-sea 
route to India, particularly after they had lost possession of Syria 
and the supremacy in the Aegean, at the beginning of the second 
century B.C. 

Egypt, unlike other parts of the Hellenistic world, was directly 
accessible by sea, and the maritime intercourse between India and 
Egypt was facilitated by two important acts of Alexander, viz. the 
destruction of Tyre and the foundation of Alexandria, the famous 
port on the Mediterranean. 

At first Egyptian ports were not much favoured by Indian 
mariners owing to the serious difficulties of the journey through 
trackless desert, between the Nile and the Red Sea. The merchants 
preferred the alternative route through Petra, to be described later. 

1. It is difficult to say how far the establishment of the Parthian and the Sassanid 
kingdoms affected the trade between India and the Western countries. Cun¬ 
ningham held the view ‘that the strong Sassanian government from A.D. 230 
to 450 formed a very effectual barrier to intercourse between Rome and N.-W. 
India’ ( JASB. LVIII. p. 149). 

2. Tarn, op. cit. 211-12. 


617 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


The famous town of Petra was the converging ground of trade 
routes from all parts of Arabia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Palestine and 
the Levantine ports. From these last, Indian goods travelled to 
Egypt by land, and to other western countries by sea. 1 

Ptolemy Philadelphus (285-246 B.C.) built a port at Berenice on 
the Egyptian coast of the Red Sea and connected it with the trad¬ 
ing section of Coptos, on the Nile, by a desert-road, 258 miles long, 
furnished with convenient bases. Goods were carried along this 
road to Coptos, and then floated downstream to Alexandria. The 
desert road was furnished with watering places and the journey 
from Berenice to Coptos took about eleven or twelve days. In 274 
B.C. Philadelphus built a new port at Myos Hormos. It was 180 
miles north of Berenice and the journey to Coptos took about a 
week. Being also a much safer harbour than Berenice, it soon cast 
the latter into shade and became the most important centre for 
Indian trade. 2 

It is probable that in the early days a large part of the Indian 
trade with Egypt was indirect. Merchantmen, before the first cen¬ 
tury A.D., kept close to the shore and dared not sail direct from the 
mouth of the Red Sea straight across the ocean to the Indian coast. 
Consequently Indian and western merchants met half way, probab¬ 
ly at Muza or Aden, two ports at the mouth of the Red Sea, and 
transhipped one another’s goods. Most likely, the Arabs were the 
principal intermediaries of this trade. Agatharcides (second century 
B.C.), speaking of the great riches of Arabia Felix (i.e. Aden), says 
that they were partly due to the Indian' traders who came in great 
numbers from Potana (Patala), founded by Alexander on the 
Sindhu. 3 The same information is conveyed in the following passage 
of the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea which refers to Arabia Eu- 
daemon or Aden:—“It was called Eudaemon, because in the early 
days of the city when the voyage was not yet made from India to 
Egypt, and when they did not dare to sail from Egypt to the ports 
across this ocean, but all came together at this place, it received the 
cargoes from both countries, just as Alexandria now receives the 
things brought both from abroad and from Egypt. But not long 
before our own time Charibael destroyed the place.” 4 

1. McCrindle, op. cit., p. 101. 

2. Ibid, 6, 101, Rawlinson, op. cit. 91. 

3. Rawlinson, op. cit. 94. 

4. Schoff’s Transl. p. 32. 


618 



INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


We would not, however, be justified in assuming that direct 
voyages between India and Egypt were altogether unknown. As 
early as the sixth century B.C. Scylax of Caryanda, being deputed 
by Darius to explore the Sindhu, sailed down this river to the Indian 
Ocean and ultimately reached Egypt. Strabo’s statement that ‘in the 
time of the Ptolemies scarcely any one would venture on this voyage 
and commerce with the Indies’ 1 implies that at least some did it. 
The famous explorer Eudoxus twice made the voyage to India in 
the latter part of the second century B.C. His story, known from 
the writings of Poseidonius, and preserved in Strabo’s book, 2 shows 
that he owed the idea of this voyage to a ship-wrecked Indian who 
had set out from India but lost his course and drifted for months till 
the companions had perished, one by one, of hunger. He was found 
in the ship by the coast-guards alone and half-dead, off the entrance 
to the Red Sea, and brought to Alexandria. These incidents prove 
that direct voyages up to the end of the second century B. C. were 
not unknown, though extremely rare. But the next century saw a 
great change in this respect. 

The Ptolemies secured the straits of Bab-el-Mandeb by refound¬ 
ing Deine on the straits as the southern Berenice, and their ships 
sailed direct to India. “By 78 B.C. the general of Thebaid had be¬ 
come also general of the Red Sea and the ‘Indian Sea’, a new name 
which points to regular connection with India. Indian traders on 
their side began to come direct to the Somali ports, and Indians 
appeared in Egypt; one, Sophon, travelled over the caravan route to 
Coptos”, and this visit is recorded in an inscription found in the ruins 
of a shrine at Redesiye on the route between Edfu, on the Nile, and 
Berenice. 3 The existence of an Indian colony at Memphis has been 
presumed by the discovery of Indian figures. 

The close of the century witnessed still further development 
in this direct trade relation between India and Egypt. Strabo, who 
lived in the reign of Augustus, himself visited the port of Myos 
Hormos and found that about one hundred and twenty ships sailed 
from that port to India (probably in a single season). A few bold 
sailors, we are told, even reached the mouth of the Ganga. 4 On 
the other hand we hear of Indians, sailing for the purpose of 

1. McCrindle, op. cit. p. 98. 

2. Ibid, 97. 

3. Tarn, op. cit. 216; Rawlinson, op. cit. 99; JRAS, 1904, p. 402. 

4. Anc. Ind. 9. 


619 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


commerce, being driven by storms into Germany. 1 This was a strik¬ 
ing change in comparison with the state of things a century earlier. 

5. India and the Roman Empire 

The active part taken by Indians in trading with the western 
countries, in the first century A.D. and earlier, is proved by certain 
statements in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea. In the first place, 
the author of this work refers to the island of Dioscorida (Socotra) 
as inhabited by foreigners, ‘a mixture of Arabs and Indians and 
Greeks who have emigrated to carry on trade there.* Secondly, he 
states that large vessels are regularly sent from Barygaza (Broach 
on the Bombay coast) to the market-town of Persia called Ommana. 

There are also some grounds for the belief that the Hindus 
had active trade intercourse with Madagascar and also settled there, 
as in Socotra. The Indonesian language, mixed with Sanskrit 
vocabulary, was current in Madagascar. The ancient name of this 
island was Malay, and her people have a tradition that their 
ancestors came from Mangalore. 

Thus there is ample evidence to show that there was a large 
volume of sea-borne trade between India and the western countries, 
as far as Africa, before the beginning of the Christian era. 

The policy of the Roman Empire during the first two centuries 
of the Christian era was to encourage direct sea-trade with India, 
and diminish as far as possible the overland trade through the hostile 
land of Parthia. An expedition was sent by Augustus in 25 B.C. 
to secure the command of the sea-route to India, and Aden was soon 
after occupied by a colony of Egyptians and Greeks. 

As already noted above, the direct sea-voyage was a long and 
tedious one, as the sailors had to keep close to the coast. This state 
of things was changed by the great discovery which. Hippalus made 
about A.D. 45. He noted the “existence of the monsoon winds, 
blowing regularly across the Indian Ocean,” which would enable 
the ships to sail right across the Indian Ocean. 2 With the help of 

1. These Indians were presented by the king of the Suevi to Q. Metellus Celer, 
the Pro-Consul in Gaul ( Anc . Ind. 110). Metellus became Consul in 60 B.C. 
Some scholars discredit the story. Cf. Sastri, Foreign Notices of South India, 
p. 6, f.n. 10. 

2. This is the general view (cf. Rawlinson, op. cit. 109); but Kennedy maintains 
that ‘the monsoons must have been known from the earliest times to all who 
sailed along the African and Arabian coast and that the normal trade-route 
from the Persian Gulf to India can never have been along the inhospitable 
shores of Gedrosia’ (JRAS, 1898, pp. 272-3). The direct voyage across the sea 

620 



INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


these monsoon winds, a ship, starting from Okelis, the port at the 
mouth of the Red Sea, would reach Muziris (Cranganore on the 
Malabar coast) or other south Indian ports in forty days or even 
less. Thus in less than three months’ time Indian goods could reach 
Alexandria, the great emporium of the western world. 

Apart from shortening the duration of the journey, the direct 
voyage across the sea reduced the danger from pirates. The result 
was a great increase in maritime trade. Whereas before Hippalus’s 
discovery hardly twenty ships a year made the voyage, after it, 
on an average, a ship a day left the ports of Egypt for the East. 
The whole of the western coast of India was well known to the 
sailors of these ships. * 1 

In addition to Hippalus’s discovery, two other circumstances 
fa 1 * ired the growth of trade between India and the western coun¬ 
tries. The first and foremost was the foundation of the Roman 
Empire, which gave peace, facilitated communications and secured 
the trade routes. Secondly, as already noted above, 2 articles of 
luxury from India were in great demand in Rome. The result was 
an unprecedented increase in the volume of trade. We learn from 
a Chinese notice of the Roman province of Syria in A.D. 125 that 
the gain from trade with India and Parthia was ten to one. As has 
already been mentioned, Pliny estimated that nearly fifty million 
sesterces (half a million sterling) flowed every year from Rome to 
India to pay for the balance of trade. 3 That this statement is no 
mere rhetoric is proved by the actual discovery of a very large 
number of Roman coins in India. An idea of how large this num¬ 
ber is may be formed from the following account of the discovery 
of Roman coins belonging to the period from Augustus to Nero 
alone (31 B.C. to A.D. 68). 

Tn northern India some denarii of Augustus and Tiberius were 
found in the Hazara district of the Punjab, and the smallness of 
their number is due to the melting and re-striking of these coins 
by the Kushanas. 

Tn southern India, we have in actual number 612 gold coins 
and 1,187 silver, besides hoards discovered, which are severally 


is described in detail by Pliny (McCrindle, op. cit., Ill) and in the Periplus 
(Schoff’s Transl. 45). 

1. Oakeshott, W.F., Commerce and Society (Oxford, 1936) p. 32. 

2. See p. 602. 

3. Rawlinson, op. cit. 103. 


621 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


described as follows: 

‘Of gold coins “a quantity amounting to five cooly-loads ; and 
of silver coins, (1) “a great many in a pot,” (2) about 599 in an 
earthen pot,” (3) “a find of 163,” (4) ‘some,’ (5) ‘‘some thousands” 
enough to fill “five or six Madras measures,” i.e. perhaps a dozen 
quart measures; also (6) of metal not stated, “a pot-full. These 
coins are the product of fifty-five separate discoveries mostly in the 
Coimbatore and Madura districts.’ 

After a minute analysis of these and other coins Sewell, who 
has made a detailed study of these coins, 1 arrives at the following 
conclusions:— 

1. There was hardly any commerce between Rome and India 
during the Consulate. 

2. With Augustus began an interchange which, enabling the 
Romans to obtain oriental luxuries during the early days of the 
empire, culminated about the time of Nero, who died in A.D. 68. 

3. From this time onward trade declined till the date of 
Caracalla (A.D. 217). 

4. From the date of Caracalla it almost entirely ceased. 

5. It revived again, though slightly, under the Byzantine 
emperors. 

And as regards the object of the trade:— 

(a) Under the early emperors there was a great demand for 
pepper, spices, fine muslins, perfumes, unguents, pearls and precious 
stones, especially the beryl. 

(b) In the declining period between Nero and Caracalla, there 
was little or no demand for mere luxuries, and the activity of mer¬ 
chants was directed towards cotton and industrial products. 

(c) Under the Byzantine emperors the trade was mostly with 
Travancore and the south-west coast, commerce with the interior 
and the Deccan having declined. 

Dr, Sewell also concludes from the discovery of a very large 
number of Roman copper coins in different parts of Madura, in¬ 
cluding a class minted locally, that in all probability Roman mer¬ 
chants continued to reside in Madura and also in other parts of 

1. JR AS. 1904, p. 591 ff. 

G22 




INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


southern India either permanently or temporarily. 1 The Peutin- 
gerian tables, which appear to have been copied from fresco paint¬ 
ings in Rome executed in the second century A.D., place near 
Muziris a temple of Augustus, but no traces of this are known to 
survive, and it is impossible to say to which emperor it was dedicated. 
Dr. Caldwell considered that these geographical tables or maps were 
prepared at a date somewhat earlier than Ptolemy. 

The evidence of coins is fully supported by the south Indian 
literature of the Sangam age which may be placed in the early 
centuries of the Christian era. Reference is thus made to ‘Yavanas 
of graceless harsh speech’ who possessed many precious utensils 
and a large quantity of diamonds. Mention is also made of seaport 
towns like Mamallapuram, Puhar and Korkai. Many foreign mer¬ 
chants lived in these towns and reference is made to the “activities 
of busy customs officials and those engaged in loading and unload¬ 
ing vessels in the harbour.” Poetical description is also given of 
the ships in the harbours, the flags waving on their masts being 
compared to huge elephants chafing at their posts. 2 

We must therefore conclude that there was a large volume of 
trade between India and Rome during the first century A.D. As 
to the condition of trade in subsequent periods, it is difficult to 
accept the findings of Sewell as they are rejected by other author¬ 
ities and are based merely on negative evidence, for, besides these 
coins, mostly discovered in south India, others are also known, 3 and 
a large number must have been lost or still lie hidden underground. 
Further, the coins in southern India are merely evidence of mari¬ 
time trade, and we must remember that there was also a large 
volume of overland commerce which, in spite of the rise of the 
Parthian and Sassanid kingdoms, continued as an important factor 
for several centuries. That the trade between India and the 
western countries flourished even in the fourth century A.D. is proved 
by the fact that “silk worth in Aurelian time its weight in gold, and 
a luxury of the rich and noble, was in the reign of Julian sold at 

1. Hultzsch also thinks that there was a Reman settlement and mint at Madura 
( JRAS, 1904, p. 403). 

2. NHIP, VI, 225-28; cf. also p. 603 above. 

3. Cunningham observes: “Roman gold coins are plentiful down to the time of 
Severus and Caracalla (A.D. 217). They then disappear until the time of 
Justin (526 A.D.), Marcian (A.D. 450), Leo (A.D. 474) and Anastasius (A.D. 
491-518).” JASB. LVIII, 1889, p. 149. Reference may be made to the dis¬ 
covery of two Roman coins from Bilaspur (C.P.) and two from Vizagapatam 
districts. Of the former one is of Commodus (A.D. 189-90) and the other an 
imitation of a coin of Macrinus (A.D. 236-38) ( JNSI . V. 171). 


623 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


a price which brought it within every man’s reach.” 1 

The famous emporia of Palmyra and Petra had now become 
the chief centres of Indian trade. Palmyra was reached by land 
from Vologesia on the Euphrates to which Indian goods were brought 
by sea. Similarly, goods were carried by land to Petra from the 
Red Sea through its two ports on the Arabian coast, viz. Aelana 
(ancient Ezion Geber) and Leuke Rome. At first Petra was the 
chief centre of distribution of goods to the Mediterranean ports of 
Ghaza and Rhinokolura. These consisted, among others, of fine 
muslins, pearls, beryls, precious stones, incense and drugs. When 
Petra was destroyed in A.D. 105, Palmyra gained commercial pre¬ 
eminence. After it was sacked by Aurelian in A.D. 273, Indian 
trade was diverted to Batne, near the Euphrates, and a day’s jour¬ 
ney from Edessa. About the same time or somewhat later, Alexan¬ 
dria, too, fell into decay and the Indian trade of the west passed 
into the hands of the Arabs. Adule, a petty village on the African 
coast, developed into the principal port of Ethiopia and became a 
great centre of commerce. Even when Roman trade with the East 
revived under Constantine, Roman vessels proceeded only up to 
Adule, beyond which the trade was carried on by the Indians and 
the Arabs. The trade between India and the western world con¬ 
tinued in this way, and it was in a flourishing condition even so late 
as the sixth century A.D. 2 

It would appear from what has been said above that active 
commerce between India and the Roman empire, through Palmyra 
and Alexandria, flourished till the third century A.D. We can¬ 
not therefore agree with Sewell that its decline commenced after 
the reign of Nero or that it ceased altogether after A.D. 217. Priaulx 
argued ‘that it was during the reigns of Severus, his son Cara- 
calla, and the pseudo-Antonines, that Alexandria and Palmyra were 
most prosperous, and that Roman intercourse was at its height.’ 3 
Sewell rejects this view, but it was fully endorsed by V. A. Smith. 4 
Priaulx further remarks, in support of his contention, that during 
this period “Roman literature gave more of its attention to Indian 
matters, and did not, as of old, confine itself to quotations from the 
historians of Alexander or the narratives of the Seleucidan ambas¬ 
sadors, but drew its information from other independent sources.” 

1. G. B. Priaulx, The Indian Travels of Apollonius of Tyana and the Indian Em¬ 

bassies to Rome (London, 1873), p. 252. 

2. Ibid. pp. 330 ff, 244. 

3. Ibid. 132. 

4. JASB. LVIII (1889), 158. 


624 



JNDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


The correctness of this observation will be demonstrated later, and 
the position of Priaulx is further strengthened by the accounts of 
Indian embassies to Rome. 

It has already been noted above that one or more Indian states 
sent embassies to Augustus. We also hear of other Indian embas¬ 
sies to Rome during the first four centuries of the Christian era. 
There are specific references to Indian embassies visiting Trajan 
(A.D. 98-117), Hadrian (117-138), Antoninus Pius (138-161), Helio- 
gabalus (218-222), Aurelian (270-275), Constantine (323-353) and 
Julian (361-363). 1 Two more Indian embassies were probably sent 
to Justinian in A.D. 530 and 552. 

One important result of the development of this commercial 
and political intercourse was that an increasingly large number, 
both of Indians and Roman subjects, visited each other’s country. 2 
Alexandria, according to all accounts, was the great meeting ground 
between the East and the West, and must have been visited by a 
large number of Indians, mostly traders. 3 Dio Chrysostom (c. A.D. 
117) refers to Indians as forming part of the settled population of 
Alexandria and notes that they came by way of trade. A grave¬ 
stone with wheel and trisula (trident) attests the presence of 
Indians in Alexandria. 4 It is interesting to note that some Brah- 
manas who visited Alexandria in A.D. 470 were the guests of Con¬ 
sul Severus. 5 By means of this personal contact both India and 
the Roman world gained a more correct and intimate knowledge of 
each other. 

6. India in Western Literature 

The great increase in the West’s intercourse with India is re¬ 
flected in its literature. Mention has already been made of Strabo, 
an Asiatic Greek who lived in the reign of Augustus. But Strabo 
derived much of his information from Eratosthenes (240-196 B.C.), 

1. For the political embassies to Rome, c/. Anc. Ind. pp. 212-3; Priaulx, The 
Indian Embassies to Rome; Warmington, The Commerce between the Roman 
Empire and India (Cambridge, 1928), pp. 35-7. 77, 95, 99, 103, 124, 137-9. 
Orosius (A.D. 420) says that one of the embassies from India “reached Caesar 
(Augustus) at Tarraco in Hither Spain, having thus traversed the world from 
end to end.” (Anc. Ind. p. 213). Priaulx thinks that there was only one 
Indian embassy to Augustus (op. ctt.). 

2. Priaulx (op. cit.) refers to a large number of such visits and incidental notices 
of India by Western writers down to the sixth century A.D. 

3. The presence of Indians in Alexandria is noted both by Dio Chrysostom 
(c. A.D. 117) and Ptolemy (Anc. Ind. p. 177; JR AS. 1904, p. 611). For the 
visit of Egyptians to India, cf. JRAS. 1904, p. 402. 

4. Tam, op. cit . 216. 

5. Priaulx, op. cit. 189. 

625 

A.I.U.—40 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


the learned President of the Alexandria Library, and considered 
his account of India as superior even to that of Megasthenes. 
Eratosthenes on his part relied mostly on the data supplied by Patro- 
cles, an officer who held an important command over the eastern 
provinces of the Syrian empire under Seleucus Nicator and Antio- 
chus I. Strabo’s account was thus largely based on older writers, 
and adds little that was true of his own times. The same thing 
is also true of the Indika of Arrian written about 150 B.C. Far 
different was, however, the work of Pliny. His Natural History, 
completed in A.D. 77, not only contains a fairly detailed account of 
the voyage from Egypt to India, but also a very interesting list of 
Indian animals, minerals, plants and drugs. 

About the same time was published the Periplus of the Ery- 
thraen Sea, to which a detailed reference has been made above. 
Next comes Ptolemy, the great Alexandrine geographer (c. A.D. 150), 
who wrote on the basis, mainly, of information collected by Marinus 
of Tyre. He showed greater knowledge of the Asiatic coast than 
his predecessors, but his object was not to describe the localities, 
but to determine their latitude and longitude. His view of the 
configuration of India was unfortunately very faulty, and his cal¬ 
culation is therefore often wrong. But, in spite of these drawbacks, 
his book contains much valuable geographical data. 

There were a few other writers of less repute who have left 
some interesting account of India. Dio Chrysostom (c. A.D. 117), 
who has already been mentioned, states that the poetry of Homer 
had been translated into the Indian languages. This, however, 
merely refers to the general resemblances between the Odyssey and 
the Indian epics. 

A Greek farce composed in the second century A.D. is contain¬ 
ed in a unique papyrus discovered at Oxyrhynchus. It contains 
the story of a Greek lady named Chrition, shipwrecked on the Kana- 
rese coast, and the people of the locality actually use Kanarese dia¬ 
lect in the drama. 1 Aelian, who flourished about the middle of 
the second century, noticed a number of Indian animals in his famous 
zoological work. 

The western literature of the third century A. D. shows a more 
comprehensive knowledge of India. The account of Clement of 

1. For a detailed account cf. JRAS. 1904, pp. 399 If. Some scholars, however 
deny that there are Kanarese words (Barnett in Journal of Egyptian Archaeo - 

[°9y> Vol. XII, 1936, pp. 13-15). For other views cf. N. Sastri, Foreign 
Notices of South India , p. 6, f.n. 10. y 


626 



INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


Alexandria, who died about A.D. 220, contains a fairly accurate 
account of the Brahmanical doctrine of transmigration and the 
Buddhist worship of stupas . Bardesanes, the Babylonian, who lived 
in the third century A.D., also possessed an intimate knowledge of 
India. His work on the Indian Gymnosophists is lost, but the few 
quotations that can still be traced contain interesting information 
of both Brahmanas and Buddhists. Among other writers may be 
mentioned Archelaos of Carrah (A.D. 278), St. Jerome (A.D. 340), 
Philostratus (c. A.D. 180-250) and Dion Cassius (c. A.D. 155-230). 
The first two refer to Buddha and give the traditional account of 
his birth. 1 

Different views have been held about the legendary history of 
Apollonius of Tyana by Philostratus. Rawlinson calls Apollonius 
a ‘prince of imposters’ and regards Apollonius’s account as purely 
fictitious. 2 But Priaulx thinks it may be a genuine account, in its 
main parts, though containing mistakes here and there. 

Like literature, the Greek and Roman art also reflects a know¬ 
ledge of India. Callistratus describes the statue of a drunken and 
reeling Hindu. 3 An ivory statuette, discovered amid the ruins of 
Pompeii, is a typical product of ancient Indian art and belongs pro¬ 
bably to the first century A.D. or a somewhat earlier date. 4 In 
a silver dish at Lampsacus India is represented as a woman. 5 

II. EFFECT OF THE INTERCOURSE 6 

It may be regarded as almost a universal law that two coun¬ 
tries which come into contact in course of trade or conquest borrow 
ideas from each other. Neither India nor western countries, even 
including Greece, can be regarded as an exception to this rule. It 
would be as much ridiculous to suggest that India was altogether 
impervious to the influence of the West, as to hold ‘that Indian 
civilization was a bye-product of the Macedonian or Achaemenian 
Invasion 5 . 

1, Influence of the West on India 

It is, however, very difficult to estimate even the probable 
effect of the intercourse between India and the western countries, 

1. For an account of the writers named cf. Anc. Ind. pp. 184-5. 

2. Op. cit. 146. 

3. Priaulx, op. cit., 136-7. 

4. ABIA, 1938, p. 1. 

5. JUPHS. XVI. Part II, p. 3. 

6. Cf. Smith, JASB, LVIII (1889), p. 197 ff; Rawlinson, JBBRAS, XXIII. 217 ff; 
and the authorities referred to in these articles. 


627 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


as described above. But some of its aspects can be broadly stated. 
Reference has already been made to the probable influence of Baby¬ 
lonia and Chaldaea. The contact with the Achaemenids led to more 
definite results. There can hardly be any doubt that Mauryan 
India was affected by Persian ideas, and this can be particularly 
traced in the system of administration, the introduction of a num¬ 
ber of Iranian and Greek words and of the Aramaean script and its 
derivative the KharoshthI, and in court etiquette and manners. 

More doubtful is the influence upon art and religion, of which 
too much has been made by some scholars. The Graeco-Roman in¬ 
fluence is more obvious. Indian art and coinage bear strong marks 
of Hellenistic influence. Indian astronomy was also considerably 
influenced by western systems. This is freely admitted in the fol¬ 
lowing passage in the Gdrgi Samhita: ‘‘The Yavanas are indeed 
barbarians, but astronomy originated with them and for this 
they must be venerated as gods”. Of the five Siddhantas (Indian 
astronomical works) Romaka Siddhanta and Paulisa Siddhdnta 
(named after Paul of Alexandria, c. A.D. 378) are evidently of west¬ 
ern origin. More doubtful is the claim that ‘Indian medical science 
shows distinct traces of western influence’, for although Vogel finds 
in the works of Charaka strong traces of a knowledge of Hippo¬ 
crates, his view is not shared by all. The Greek influence on Indian 
drama is also a very debatable point. Little reliance can be placed 
on the statements of some classical writers that Homer’s epic and 
the Greek tragedies were known in India, and the view of V.A. 
Smith that Kalidasa could read not only Menander but Terence is 
now hardly credited by any scholar. 

It is difficult to estimate the influence of western religion on 
India. There is no doubt that a large number of deities worship¬ 
ped in Greece, Rome and western Asia were known in India, for 
we find their names and portraits on the coins of the Indo-Greek 
and Kushana kings. But there is little to show that they influenc¬ 
ed Indian religion in any way. The date of the introduction of 
Christianity in India is a disputed point. The legend that the Apostle 
Thomas visited the court of an Indian ruler (usually identified 
with the Indo-Parthian king Gondophernes, mentioned above 1 ) 
cannot be traced earlier than the third century A.D. But it may 
be admitted that Christian missionaries visited India, and small 
Christian communities were established there before the end of the 

1. See p. 130. 


628 





INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


second century A.D. 1 The Christian Church was firmly established 
in south India during the two succeeding centuries, and we have 
references to it in the Romance History of Alexander of the Pseudo- 
Kallisthenes (fifth century A.D.). But there is no evidence that 
Christianity exercised any influence on Indian religion. A great deal ' 
was at one time made of the parallelism between the Krishna legend 
and the Gospel story, and of the supposed resemblances between the 
Gospels and the Bhagavadgitd. But the discovery of the Heliodorus 
pillar at Besnagar has proved the existence of the Krishna cult long 
before Christ, and no one would now seriously contend that early 
Vaishnava doctrines and legends were influenced in any way by 
Christianity. In view of the prevalence of the Brahmanical religion 
in western Asia before, and at the time of, the rise of Christianity, 
its striking resemblances, if any, to Vaishnavism should rather be 
ascribed to the influence of the latter. It is not necessary to discuss 
other views based on similarly vague data. 

2. Influence of India on the West 

We may now consider the influence of India on the West. We 
need not attach great importance to the introduction of oriental 
luxury in food, clothing and ornaments as evidenced by the great 
demand for spices, aromatic articles, fine fabrics and precious gems, 
which were regularly exported from India; nor need we emphasise 
such isolated elements as the use of elephants in wars by Hel¬ 
lenistic rulers and by Hannibal, which must undoubtedly be traced 
to Indian influence. These are comparatively minor matters; of 
far greater importance is the influence exerted in the domains of 
literature, science, philosophy and religion which was more abiding 
in character. 

In view of the great influence exerted by Indian science and 
literature upon western countries in the subsequent periods as will 
be described in the next volume, it is legitimate to assume that such 
influence must have already been at work during the period under 
review, but it is not possible to give any precise account. It is 
held by many scholars that Greek physicians had a knowledge of 

1. According to the story of St. Thomas, Christianity was preached in India as 
early as the first century A.D. But it is difficult to believe the story ( EHF, 
p. 231 ff). Eusebius (third cent. A.D.) says that Pantaenus (second cent. 
A.D.), who went to India to preach Christianity, found that the Gospel had 
already been introduced there and some Indians had embraced Christianity 
( Anc . Ind. pp. 214-5). 


* 


629 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Indian medical science. According to Parsi tradition, the Sassanid 
king Shapur I (A.D. 241-272) “caused to be included among the 
holy books secular works on medicine, astronomy and metaphysics 
found in India, Greece and other countries.” 1 It is said also that 
king Shapur had an Indian medical man resident in Susa. The 
doctor not only treated the patients but also taught medical science. 
After his death his pupils provided the whole of Iran with profes¬ 
sionals in medicine. 2 

It has been claimed that Indian philosophy exercised a certain 
influence upon Greek philosophy. 3 Clement of Alexandria even 
went so far as to say that the Greeks ‘stole their philosophy from 
barbarians.’ Sir Willian Jones was the first to point out the ana¬ 
logies between the Sankhya system and the Pythagorean philo¬ 
sophy, and many eminent scholars hold that the latter was derived 
from the former. These may, however, be mere coincidences. As 
Pythagoras lived in the latter half of the sixth century B.C., doubts 
have been expressed about the accuracy of this view on the ground 
that there was hardly any intercourse between India and Greece at 
this period. 4 It must be remembered, however, that the establish¬ 
ment of the Achaemenian empire, which touched the borders of 

ju ■ 

India and Greece, made Persia an admirable centre for such contact. 
A fact recently brought to light definitely proves that, even long 
before the invasion of Alexander, there was cultural contact bet¬ 
ween India and Greece. Rawlinson has drawn our attention, for 
what it is worth, to a statement of Eusebius which runs as follows: 5 
‘Aristoxenus, the musician, tells the following story about the 
Indians. One of these men met Socrates at Athens and asked him 
what was the scope of his philosophy. ‘An enquiry into human 
phenomenon’, replied Socrates. At this the Indian burst out laugh¬ 
ing. ‘How can a man enquire into human phenomena’, he ex¬ 
claimed, ‘when he is ignorant of divine ones’? 

Aristoxenus was a pupil of Aristotle and lived in 330 B.C. He 
might therefore have heard of the interview between Socrates 
and the Indian philosopher, from some of their contemporaries. The 
dialogue is highly characteristic of the difference in the Indian and 

1. CAH, XII. 112. 

2. PIHC , V. 248. 

3. For a brief but comprehensive treatment of this subject cf. Richard Garbe, 
Philosophy of Ancient India (Chicago 1897) pp. 32-56. 

4. For this and other grounds against the theory cf. Keith in JR AS , 1909, 
pp. 569-606. 

5. ML. X, p. 58. 

630 




INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


Greek attitude of mind. But whatever we might think of it, the 
anecdote quoted by Aristoxenus leaves no doubt that even in the 
fifth century B.C. Indian philosophers travelled in the West and 
learnt Greek language and philosophy sufficiently well to be able to 
hold discourses with eminent philosophers like Socrates. 

We have no reason to believe that there was any material im¬ 
provement furthering the prospects of such contact during the in¬ 
terval between the foundation of the Achaemenid empire and the 
Indian invasion of Alexander the Great. There is thus no inherent 
impossibility that either in Greece, or somewhere in Persian empire, 
if not in India, Pythagoras could have come into contact with the 
Indians and derived his main philosophical ideas from them. As 
Schroeder 1 has pointed out, not one or two chance ideas, but almost 
all the doctrines ascribed to Pythagoras, both religio-philosophical 
and mathematical were current in India. As the most important 
of them appear in Pythagoras without connection or explanatory 
background, whilst in India they are rendered comprehensible by 
the intellectual life of the times. Schroeder definitely pronounces 
India to be the birth-place of the ideas. The same view was empha¬ 
tically asserted by Colebrooke 2 and is shared by Garbe. 3 The last- 
named scholar has further pointed out the numerous coincidences 
between Indian and Greek philosophy. He has referred to the most 
striking resemblance between the doctrine of the One in the Upa- 
nishads and the philosophy of the Eleatics, and between the theory 
of Thales, the father of Greek philosophy, that everything sprung 
from water, and the Vedic idea of the primeval water out of which 
the universe was evolved. He has also traced fundamental ideas of 
the Sankhya philosophy among the Greek physiologers such as 
Anaximander, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Democritus and 
Epicurus. 

It has been argued that these resemblances do not necessarily 
indicate Indian influence, for it is possible that the Greeks and the 
Indians reached similar conclusions independently of each other 
But the same argument cannot be urged in the cases of similar 
resemblances noticed in some mystery cults and the teachings of 
Pythagoras and Plato. For, these show a great departure from the 
Greek tradition of rationalism and humanism. In mystery cult 
associated with the name of Orpheus, faith in the immortality of 

1. Pythagoras und die Inder (Leipzig, 1884). 

2. Miscellaneous Essays, 2nd Ed. I. 436-37. 

3. Op. cit. 390 ff. 


631 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


soul is a cardinal feature, and the idea of transmigration is fully 
worked out, the wheel of birth going on until the soul escapes from 
it by attaining release. “Orphic religion is different from the anthro- 
pormorphic worship of the Greeks, and Orphic cosmogony and 
eschatology are foreign to the Greek”. But Professor Burnet has 
shown that it has some striking resemblances to the beliefs preva¬ 
lent in India about the same time such as rebirth, the immortality 
and godlike character of the soul, the bondage of the soul in the body 

the possibility of release by purification. If we add to them 
metaphors like the wheel of birth and the world egg, the Indian 
influence seems to be the only reasonable explanation. For it is 
difficult to explain all these resemblances in doctrines novel in the 
Greek world as due to mere natural coincidence”. 

There was a close analogy between these mystic cults and the 
doctrines of Pythagoras who lived in the second half of the sixth 
century B.C. He enjoined asceticism and abstention from meat, 
believed in re-births and is said to have remembered his previous 
births. 

The mystic tradition finds its full expression in Plato (427-347 
B.C.). Attention may be drawn to a few characteristic traits of his 
doctrines. 

1. Truth cannot always be proved. It appeals to the whole 
nature of man and not simply to the intellect. 

2. The soul is unperceived, simple, indissoluble, immortal and 
has been many times reborn. It is purified by these rebirths and 
ultimately escapes when completely purified. 

3. Body is a fetter to which we are chained and we must look 
forward to a future world in which we will be freed from the body. 

All these and many things more are fundamentally opposed to 
the Greek spirit, which was more concerned with all that pleased 
the senses and satisfied the emotions. 

Lassen denies Indian influence upon Greek philosophy in the 
pre-Christian period. He, however, adopts it for Christian Gnosti¬ 
cism and Neo-Platonism, 1 and there is a general consensus of opinion 
in support of this view. Barthelemy Saint-Hailaire 2 has traced the 
ideas of the Sankhya philosophy in Plato and believes the analogies 
to be too numerous to be explained away as mere coincidences. 
Professor Weber has traced the influence of the Indian conception 

1. Indische Alterthumskunde III. 379. 

2. Premier Memoire sur le Saiikhya (Paris 1852), pp. 512-22. 


632 





INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


of vdch upon the idea of the Logos, which appears in Neo-Platonism 
and passed from there into the Gospel of St. John. 1 Garbe has 
pointed out that the conception of the Logos did not first appear in 
Neo-Platonism, but may be traced through Philo and the Stoics 
ultimately to Heraclitus. This corroborates the view, noted above, 
of Heraclitus’s indebtedness to Indian philosophical views. 

That the interest in Indian philosophy continued in western 
countries for many centuries is proved beyond doubt by many 
positive evidences. Reference may be made in this connection to 
Scythianus, a Saracen, born in Palestine, who traded with India. 
During his visits to India Scythianus acquired a knowledge of Indian 
Philosophy and settled afterwards in Alexandria. 2 There is no 
doubt that Alexandria was a great international centre, where not 
only commercial products but philosophical and scientific ideas were 
exchanged between the East and the West. 

The influence of Indian religion in the western countries can¬ 
not also be doubted. Reference has been made above to the spread 
of Buddhism in western Asia, Africa and Europe as early as the 
days of Asoka. The existence of Buddhism on the Persian border¬ 
land is demonstrated by the ruins of a Buddhist monastery in the 
terminal marshes of the Helmund in Seistan. That Buddhism had 
a strong hold in Parthia is shown by many references in the Chinese 
annals. As will be noticed later, even a Parthian prince abdicated 
the throne and became a Buddhist monk in the second century A.D. 
Alberuni has definitely stated that in former times Khorasan, Persia, 
Iraq, Mosul and the country up to the frontier of Syria was 
Buddhistic. 

There are unmistakable traces of Buddhist influences on the 
Manichaean religion, which was preached in the third century A.D. 
A Manichaean treatise written in the form of a Buddhist Sutra 
speaks of its founder Mani as the Tathagata, and mentions Buddha 
and the Bodhisattva. Curious parallels are also noticeable between 
Buddhism and Orphism. 

We have also very interesting evidence that the Brahmanical 
religion prevailed in western Asia. According to the Syrian writer 
Zenob there was an Indian colony in the canton of Taron on the 
Upper Euphrates, to the west of Lake Van, as early as the second 
century B.C. 3 The Indians built there two temples containing 

1. Indische Studien, IX. 

2. Anc. lnd., p. 185, if.n. 1. 

3. JR AS. 1904, p. 309. 

633 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


images of gods about 13 and 22 ft. high. When, about A.D. 304, 
St. Gregory came to destroy these temples, he was strongly opposed 
by the Indians. But he defeated them and smashed the images, thus 
anticipating the iconoclastic zeal of Mahmud of Ghazni. 

The facts stated above leave no doubt that, when Christianity 
arose, Indian culture and religion was already an important factor 
in the region of its early activity. The similarities which un¬ 
doubtedly exist between the two may not therefore be mere coin¬ 
cidences. Thus resemblances betv/een the internal arrangements 
of the Christian church and a Buddhist Chaitya Hall, the rigorous 
asceticism pursued by some early Christian sects such as Thebaid 
monasticism, metempsychosis, relic-worship and the use of the rosary, 
might all have been borrowed by Christianity from Indian religious 
ideas. There is hardly any doubt that the Gnostics were profoundly 
influenced by Indian ideas. It is also a well-known fact that 
several religious leaders in the West took the name of Buddha, 1 
and that Gautama Buddha, under the title of St. Josaphat, is still 
recognised as a Christian saint. 

We may conclude this brief sketch with the observation that 
the facts definitely known are few, and hence the picture drawn is 
necessarily vague and incomplete. But one thing is certain. India 
did not, as many fondly believe, lead an isolated life, but main¬ 
tained a close and intimate contact with the great civilizations of 
the West through trade and commerce. This led to cultural, and 
occasionally even political, relations, which began in hoary antiquity 
and continued right up to the middle of the first millennium of the 
Christian era and perhaps even later still. 


1. Priaulx, op. cit., p. 174. According to Archelaos (A.D. 278) Terebinthus de¬ 
clared himself to be a new Buddha (McCrindle, Anc. Ind. 185). 


634 



CHAPTER XXV 

COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

A, CENTRAL ASIA AND CHINA 


As we have seen in the last chapter, India’s contact with the 
western world was mainly inspired by trade and commerce, though 
it brought in its train some cultural influence on either side. Far 
different, however, was the case with the countries in the north, 
east and south-east. Although original intercourse might have been 
inspired by commercial enterprise, it was soon overshadowed by 
missionary activity leading to a more or less complete cultural con¬ 
quest over extensive regions. Besides, the Indians set up colonies 
and established political influence in many of these countries, which 
brought into existence what may properly be called Greater India. 

China is the only country in this region which can boast of an 
ancient civilization. Broadly speaking, there were three routes in 
ancient times which connected India with China. The first was the 
great overland route which ran across Afghanistan over the passes 
of the Hindu Kush to Bactria and thence, through Central Asia to 
the western border of China. The second, also an overland route, 
passed from eastern India through upper Burma to the south¬ 
western provinces of China. The third, an all-sea route, passed 
along the coasts of Indo-China and the islands of the East Indies. 
The cultural and colonial expansion of India proceeded along these 
three routes. 

I. Afghanistan 

The territory between the Sindhu and the Hindu Kush moun¬ 
tains may be regarded culturally as a part of India during almost 
the whole of the Hindu period. The reference in the Rigveda to 
the rivers Kubha (with its tributary the Suvastu), the Krumu and 
the Gomatl, which have been identified respectively with the Kabul, 
the Swat, the Kurrum and the Gomal rivers, and the tribes like the 
Alinas, Bhalanases and the Pakthas who played a prominent part 
in the battle of the ten kings 1 leaves no doubt that the Indo-Aryans 
in the Punjab were intimately associated with Afghanistan. Their 


1. See Vol. I, p. 246 ff. 


635 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


progress towards the east gradually lessened the bond between the 
two countries. But the eastern regions of Afghanistan were always 
regarded politically as parts of India, and the rest of the territory 
remained Indian in culture and predominantly within the political 
orbit of India, although subjected, like the Punjab, to the influence 
of the Persians, the Greeks, the Parthians, the Scythians and the 
Kushanas. The Mauryas exercised effective rule over the whole 
of Afghanistan and Baluchistan, and both Buddhism and Brahma¬ 
nism had a strong influence over the whole area until the advent 
of Islam. Most of the dynasties that ruled in Afghanistan and Balu¬ 
chistan came under the influence of Indian culture, which had taken 
deep root in the soil. Their coins and inscriptions, works of art. 
religion and literature are Indian in character and, so far as record¬ 
ed evidence goes, we can hardly distinguish eastern Afghanistan and 
Baluchistan from India from either a political or cultural point of 
view. Even in the second century A.D. Ptolemy included this 
region in India. We learn from Isidor of Charax (first century A.D.) 
that Arachosia (Kandahar region) was called “White India” by the 
Parthians. How strong this conviction has been throughout the 
ages is proved by an old saying quoted by Abul Fazl that Kabul and 
Kandahar were the twin gates of India. The great French scholar 
James Darmesteter inferred from the Iranian scriptures that ‘Hindu 
civilization prevailed in those parts (Kabul and Seistan), which in 
fact, in the two centuries before and after Christ, were known as 
White India, and remained more Indian than Iranian till the Musul- 
man conquest.’ 1 

II. Central Asia 

The territory beyond the Hindu Kush mountains was also pro¬ 
foundly influenced by Indian culture. The Mauryan Empire, which 
included a part of these territories, and the missionary zeal of Aioka 
must have contributed directly to this end. The Greeks, the Sakas, 
the Yueh-chi and the Parthians, who ruled later in this region, 
adopted Indian religion and used Indian scripts and language. As 
these peoples extended their rule over parts of India, the peoples 
beyond the Hindu Kush came into more intimate contact with Indian 
culture. 

We have evidence to show that Buddhism, and along with it 
Indian culture, was spread among the Parthians, the Yueh-chi, the 
Sogdians and various other peoples of Central Asia before the begin- 

1. SBE (2nd Ed.) IV, 2. Also cf. CHI, I, 326-7. 


636 




COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


ning of the Christian era. Even the Sassanians of the third century 
A.D. regarded Bactriana as virtually an Indian country and the 
Oxus, a river of Buddhists and the Brahmanas. The Greek writers 
always cite Bactriana with India and state that thousands of Brah¬ 
manas and Samanas (Buddhist monks) reside there. The recent ex¬ 
plorations in Chinese Turkestan have revealed the existence of a 
large number of flourishing cities with rich sanctuaries, and intro¬ 
duced us to a new world of Indian culture which calls for a more 
detailed study. 

In order to understand properly the expansion of Indian cul¬ 
ture in this region, we must have a clear idea of the different routes 
between India and China passing through Central Asia. The main 
route proceeded along the valley of the Kabul river and reached the 
Hindu Kush mountains through Purushapura (Peshawar), Nagara- 
hara (Jalalabad), Bamiyan and other cities. Beyond the Hindu 
Kush lay Bahlika (Bactriana, modern Balkh). From this region 
three well-known roads led to the Tarim basin. The one, which was 
mostly used by the ancient caravans, “ascended the Qizil Su or 
Surkh Ab to the Pamir-like valley of the Alai and thence crossed 
the saddle above Irkeshtam to the head-waters of the river of 
Kashgar and thus down to the oasis itself”. Another, and more 
northern, route crossed both the Oxus and the Jaxartes and, pass¬ 
ing by Tashkend and Lake Issiq Kol, debouched through the passes 
of the Tien Shah mountains to Uch Turfan or Aqsu to the north¬ 
west of the Tarim basin. The third, and the southernmost, route 
went- at first almost due east from Balkh, via Badakhshan and Wa- 
khan, and then crossed either by the Wakhjir Pass or other passes 
over the Pamirs, into Sariqol, south of Muztagh Ata. From Tash 
Qurghan, the ancient capital of this region, different tracks through 
very confined gorges led down to the utterly barren foothills on the 
sides of the Tarim basin and so on to the oases of Kashgar and Yar¬ 
kand on its western border. There was also a much shorter and 
direct, but difficult, road from Kashmir, along Gilgit and the Yasin 
valleys, and through the Darkot and Baroghil Passt*s, to the last- 
mentioned route in the Wakhan valley. 

The Tarim basin, to which all the three routes led, is popu¬ 
larly known as Chinese Turkestan, and corresponds to the modern 
province of Sinkiang. This region lies immediately to the west 
of China, and was for long under her political control both in ancient 
and modern times. It is almost entirely surrounded by mountains. 


687 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


To the north is the mighty Tien Shan, and to the west the Pamir 
mountains. In the south the snowy Kun-lun range separates it from 
the plateau of Tibet. To the east the Nan Shan range, the marshes 
of Lop-Nor and the border of the Gobi desert separate it from China 
proper. 

Although this region is about 900 miles long from east to west, 
and about 330 miles from north to south at its widest part, it is al¬ 
most entirely occupied by the “huge central desert of bare sand- 
dunes which is popularly known as the Taklamakan. Its borders 
to the west, north and east are marked by the belts of vegetation 
accompanying the Tiznaf, the Yarkand and the Tarim rivers”. To 
the south of the desert lies a string of oases, mostly small, fed by 
the streams descending from the Kun-lun. Only one of these rivers, 
the Khotan, succeeds in making its way through the desert during 
a few summer months. For the rest, they are lost in the sands of 
the desert at a greater or less distance. It may be observed, how¬ 
ever, that this distance has been systematically reduced in course 
of ages, for modern explorations have proved the existence of culti¬ 
vated grounds further north than the corresponding ‘terminal oases’ 
of the present day. 

On account of the lack of rain or snow-fall, cultivation was only 
possible by canal irrigation and was confined to a comparatively 
very small area between the desert and the mountain ranges en¬ 
circling it. The ground capable of settled life was thus confined to 
strings of oases of which only a few could sustain even a moderately 
small community. To this may be added the extremes of climate, 
the sands rising to boiling point in summer, and every drop of water 
being frozen in winter. No wonder that the Tarim basin could 
never be the permanent home of a large population. But this very 
evil was a blessing in disguise, for it kept the region comparatively 
free from the depredations of the great migrating tribes of Wusun, 
&akas, Yueh-chi, Hunas, Turks and Mongols, to whom the big open 
grazing grounds on the northern slopes of the Tien Shan held far 
greater attraction than the narrowly circumscribed life of a culti¬ 
vator in the Tarim basin. Though ready to make occasional raids, 
they could never think of making this region their permanent or 
even temporary home. 

It was mainly for this reason that this inhospitable region 
attained an importance quite out of proportion to its resources. For 
more than two thousand years it served as the great highway of 


638 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


commercial, cultural and political intercourse between China on 
the one hand and India and western Asia on the other. It was 
subsequently a meeting ground of diverse peoples and cultures, such 
as Indians, Persians, Turks, Chinese, Tibetans, Buddhists, Jews, Chris¬ 
tians and Manichaeans. Two roads passing along its northern and 
southern fringes led from the west of China. Kashgar, on the 
western border, may be regarded as the starting point of both these 
routes which met on the Chinese frontier in the east at a place called 
Yu-men-kuan or the Jade Gate, not far from the hills of Tunhwang 
which contain the caves of the thousand Buddhas. 

A few sites on both the roads from Kashgar to China have been 
explored by various parties in recent times. The antiquities and 
archaeological remains discovered in course of these explorations 
have revealed almost a new world. They include ruined cities with 
hundreds of sanctuaries, images, wall-paintings, etc. and clearly de¬ 
monstrate that Indians settled in large numbers in various localities 
all over this region and introduced their art, religion, language, script 
and system of political administration. It is almost certain that 
they also set up small kingdoms, some of which flourished for a fairly 
long period. It is not possible to write a continuous or connected 
history of the Indian settlements in this region, but we may give 
a brief account of some of the localities which can be definitely in¬ 
cluded within the zone of Indian culture and colonisation. 

Along the southern route there were Indian colonies at Shule 
or Sailadesa (Kashgar), So-Khiu or Chokkuka (Yarkand), Khotamna 
(Khotan), and also at Domoko, Niya, Dandan-Oilik, Endere, Lou- 
lan, Rawak and Miran; and along the northern route at Po-lu-kia 
or Bharuka (Aqsu district, near Uch-Turfan), Kuchi (modern 
Kucha), Yen-ki (or Yen-chi) or Agni-desa (modern Qara Shahr), 
and Turf an, in addition to various other localities. Future explora¬ 
tion would no doubt considerably add to this number. 

Buddhism was the prevailing religion in all these localities. 
This is proved not only by the discovery of images and the remains 
of Buddhist stupas, shrines and vikaras built after Indian models, 
but also by a large number of Buddhist texts, written in Sanskrit 
and Prakrit as well as in local languages of Central Asia, and in 
Indian scripts, both Brahml and Kharoshthi. Large numbers of secu¬ 
lar documents have also been discovered. These are written in 
Indian languages and scripts on wooden tablets, leather, paper and 


639 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


silk. The wooden tablets were used for short communications of 
an official character, such as instructions to the local officials by the 
Mahcinuava Maharaya (Mahanubhava Maharaja or the high-souled 
great king) or information of a personal or official nature issued by 
one official to another. We find therein reference to law-suits, in¬ 
ventories, list of provisions or presents, arrangements of guards, 
appointments, transport of arms, etc. Some of them contain the 
names of ruling princes, officials and their relations. The docu¬ 
ments on leather and paper are similar in character. A short text 
on a silk strip contains fragments of a letter or order. Another 
document on silk contains nine inscriptions in Prakrit containing 
a prayer for the health of an individual and his family. It is inte¬ 
resting to note that some of the phrases used in the prayers are al¬ 
most identical with those found in the Indian inscriptions of the 
Kushana period. It may be added that many documents in non- 
Indian languages were written in Indian script, and tables contain¬ 
ing complete alphabets of the Brahml script have been found in 
Central Asia. 

Most of the documents are in the form of letters with the names 
of the addressees written on the covering tablet. Many of the 
persons who wrote them, or to whom they were sent, bear names 
which are either purely Indian such as Bhima, Bangusena, Nanda- 
sena, Shamasena, Sitaka, Upajiva, etc. or else look like Indian 
adaptations such as Angacha, Kushanasena, etc. Some of the offi¬ 
cial designations are also Indian, for example, char a (spy), dutiya 
or duta (envoy). Stein has pointed out how the style of writing in 
these records follows closely the instructions given in the Kash¬ 
mirian manual Lekhaprakdsa. 

These documents were probably written during the first four 
centuries of the Christian era. The use of Indian language, style 
and script for purposes of administration, as far as the Lop-Nor 
region to the extreme east of the Tarim basin, at the very threshold 
of China, shows the extent of the political influence of Indian 
colonists. 

Khotan seems to be a particularly important centre of Indian 
colonisation. A KharoshthI inscription refers to the Khotanese 
king Maharaja Rajatiraja deva Vijita-Simha. About forty coins 
were found here bearing Chinese legends on the obverse and Indian 
Prakrit ones in KharoshthI characters on the reverse. Like the 
documents mentioned above, these also indicate that the language 
and scripts used by the local administration were Indian. 


640 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


The archaeological evidence certainly lends some colour to the 
tradition that Khotan was colonised by Indians and ruled by Indian 
chiefs. This tradition, with a long list of Indian kings, is preserved 
in Tibetan literature. Sen Konow has critically examined the 
different versions of this tradition and his provisional conclusions 
may be summarised as follows: 1 

‘Kustana, the son of Asoka, is said to have founded the royal 
dynasty at Khotan. But Kustana’s son Ye-u-la, who is said to have 
founded the capital of the kingdom, is most probably identical with 
the king Yii-lin mentioned in the Chinese chronicles as ruling over 
Khotan about the middle of the first century A.D. 

‘Ye-u-la was succeeded by his son Vijita-Sarhbhava, with whom 
begins a long series of Khotan kings whose names all begin with 
Vijita. 2 If there is any truth in the Chinese statement that Wei-chi 
or Vijita was the family name of the kings, it is of interest to 
note that this ‘Vijita’ dynasty, according to Tibetan tradition, be¬ 
gins where the Han annals place the foundation of the national 
Khotan kingdom. 

‘Buddhism was introduced into Khotan in the fifth year of 
Vijita-Sambhava. Eleven kings followed, and then came Vijita 
Dharma who was a powerful ruler and constantly engaged in war. 
Later, he became a Buddhist and retired to Kashgar. We know 
from Chinese sources that Kashgar had formerly developed great 
power, but that it became dependent on Khotan during A.D. 220- 
264. It is then probable that this was the time of the powerful 
king Vijita-Dharma. 

‘Vijita-Dharma was followed on the throne by his son Vijita- 
Simha, and the latter by his son Vijita-Klrti. Vijita-Klrti is said to 
have carried war into India and to have overthrown Saketa, toge¬ 
ther with king Kanika (or the king of Kanika) and the Guzan king. 
Guzan here evidently stands for Kushana.’ 

So much for the Tibetan version. According to the other Bud¬ 
dhist traditions, the colonisation of Khotan is connected with the 
well-known story of Kunala, son of Asoka and viceroy of Taxila, 
who, disgusted with the machinations of his step-mother, left the 
country, went to Khotan and set himself up there as king. 3 

1. Sten Konow in JRAS. 1914, pp. 344 fl. 

2. Sten Konow at first took this word to be Vijaya (ibid), but later (IHQ. XVI. 
259) definitely held that the dynastic title was Vijita and not Vijaya. 

3. A slightly different account is given by Hiuen Tsang who also adds other tradi¬ 
tions. HTB, II. 309. 


A I U - 41 


641 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


We need not attach much importance to these attempts to asso¬ 
ciate the ruling family of Khotan with the great Maurya dynasty, 
but everything indicates that it migrated from India and introduced 
Indian culture and civilization in this region. This probably took 
place in the first century A.D. and was facilitated by the extensive 
Kushana empire which formed a sort of connecting link between 
India and Central Asia. 

Khotan was a very important centre of Buddhism. Its famous 
monastery, Gomati-vihara, was one of the biggest institutions of 
Buddhist learning in Central Asia. A number of able Indian scho¬ 
lars lived there, and many Chinese pilgrims, instead of coming to 
India for special instruction, stayed in Khotan. The learned monks 
of Gomati-vihara composed texts which were regarded almost as 
canonical. 1 

There were other Indian colonies on the southern route like 
Khotan but, beyond archaeological remains, we have no historical 
information about any of them. 

On the northern route, Kuchi (modern Kucha) was the lead¬ 
ing centre of Indian culture. 2 Its ancient rulers bore Indian names 
such as Suvarnapushpa, Haripushpa, Haradeva, Suvarnadeva, etc. 
It was a flourishing city with a number of large Buddhist monas¬ 
teries and splendid buildings. Kuchi had received Buddhism from 
India at a very early period and the whole of the local civilization 
was Buddhist. The literature discovered at Kuchi throws interest¬ 
ing light on the method of studying Sanskrit, the sacred language 
taught in the local monasteries. The students began with learning 
the alphabet, and many alphabetical tables have been dug out, 
traced by more or less skilled hands. 

Sanskrit grammar was then studied according to the Katantra 
system, presumably because it was more fitted than Panini for non- 
Indians. Then the students made verbatim translations from Sans¬ 
krit into Kuchean. In addition to famous religious texts like 
Udanavarga, we have actual examples of astronomical and medical 
texts treated in this manner. This incidentally shows how, in addi¬ 
tion to religion and its handmaid art, Indian astronomy, or rather 
astrology, and medicine were spread in this region. There was an 
extensive Kuchean literature, but all the works are based upon 
Sanskrit originals. At Ming-Oi, west of Kuchi, Brahml fragments in 

1. Bagchi, India and China, pp. 14-15. 

2. Cf. S. Levi’s account of Kucha in JRAS. 1914, pp. 959 ff. 

(142 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


Sanskrit have been found which belong to the second century A.D. 1 
Kuchi was also an important centre for the propaganda of Bud¬ 
dhism in other countries. 

Beyond Kuchi, Qara Shahr was also an important Indian 
colony. It was known as Agnidesa and its kings had Indian names 
like Indrarjuna, Chandrarjuna, etc. Like Kuchi it also played an 
active part in the spread of Buddhism to China and other coun¬ 
tries. Another important site is Bazaklik. It was an important 
Buddhist centre with hundreds of temples which had vail-paintings 
of Indian monks in yellow robes with names written in Brahml to 
distinguish them from other monks in violet robes, with names 
written in Chinese and Tibetan. 

It is not possible here to refer in detail to all ancient sites 
which were colonised by the Indians and the antiquities discovered 
in them. Taken as a whole, the artistic remains—architecture, 
sculpture and painting—and the large number of written texts, 
discovered in Central Asia, constitute a massive and most enduring 
monument of Indian culture and civilization which must have been 
widely spread all over the region in the early centuries of the 
Christian era. Although Buddhism was the prevailing religion, 
Brahmanical culture was not altogether absent. This is proved by 
the seals with effigies of Kubera and Trimukha, discovered at Niya, 
and the painted Ganesa at Endere. Both HInayana and Mahayana 
forms of Buddhism were prevalent, but by far the largest number 
of paintings and sculptures belong to the latter. 

Among the numerous texts discovered, only a few may be 
noted here. A text of the Dhqmmapada was found in a place about 
13 miles from Khotan. It is written in the KharoshthI character of 
the first or second century A.D. and contains verses of the Pali 
Dhammapada in a Prakrit dialect which has not been found hither¬ 
to in any other Buddhist literary work. Dr. Biihler was of opinion 
that the text was written in India and taken to Chinese Turkestan 
by a Buddhist monk. According to Sten Konow, it was composed 
in a dialect of north-western India but was written down in Khotan 
where it was discovered. He is of opinion that the language of the 
text has peculiarities of its own, not noticed in any other Prakrit 
dialect in India, and they must be due to the influence of the local 
dialect of Khotan. 

1. C1I, II, Part 1. p. lxxiii. 


643 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Fragments of some important Sanskrit texts, now lost in India, 
have been found in Central Asia. One is Uddnavarga , a work of 
the Sarvastivada school of Buddhism, which had probably the same 
place in the canon of that school as the Pali Dhammapada in that of 
the Theravada school. The work was very popular and was trans¬ 
lated into Chinese. Tibetan and various languages of Central Asia. 
The work was known only in translations before the discovery of 
the original Sanskrit in various fragments found in Central Asia, 
the oldest of which from Tunhwang belongs to the Kushana period. 
To the same period belong the palm-leaf manuscripts from Turfan 
which contain the concluding chapter of the drama ‘Sdriputra-pra- 
karana composed by Asvaghosha and portions of two other dramas, 
probably by the same author. These are the earliest Sanskrit 
dramas so far known, and prove that most of the techniques found 
in later dramas had already been evolved in the first century 
A.D. Fragments of two dramas, written in the dialect of Kuchi, 
not only prove the influence of Indian dramaturgy, but also fill up 
the gap between the Indian and the Chinese theatres. 

We need not refer in detail to various other texts found in this 
region. Apart from their value as evidence of a close association 
with Indian culture, these texts throw important light on the deve¬ 
lopment of Buddhist literature in India. It has been known for a 
long time that, side by side with the Pali canon of the Theravadins. 
there was also a corresponding Sanskrit canon from an early date. 
There was. however, no trace of it in India until the recent dis¬ 
covery of Gil git manuscripts, and its existence was only known 
from the Chinese and Tibetan translations. The discoveries in 
Central Asia help us in reconstructing the original literature for, 
apart from the find of actual texts, there is no doubt that the trans¬ 
lations in Khotanese, Kuchean (Tokharian) and other languages 
were made from Sanskrit originals. 

In conclusion, we may emphasise the fact that, as in religion and 
literature, so in art, Central Asia was deeply influenced by India. 
Sten Konow has stressed “the close agreement which exists in re¬ 
gard to general architectural arrangement between all Turkestan 
stupas examined by him and the corresponding structures, extant in 
the Kabul valley and on the Indian north-west-frontier” He fur¬ 
ther remarks that “the art of Buddhist Khotan can be shown to have 
remained to the last under the predominating influence of Indian 
models.” Though other influences, like Iranian and Chinese, might 


644 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


have been at work, the Graeco-Buddhist art of Gandhara contri¬ 
buted more than any other influence to shape the development of 
Buddhist art in Central Asia. 

III. China 

The name of China was familiar' to the Indians from a very 
early period. It is mentioned in the Mahahharata and Manusmriti, 
and the varieties of Chinese silk are referred to in Kautiliya Artha- 
sastra. It is generally held that the. name China is derived from 
that of the first Tsin dynasty (221-209 B.C.), and therefore the lite¬ 
rary references to it must belong to a period later than 220 B.C. It 
is, however, not impossible that the name is derived from the small 
state of that name which existed in the fourth century B.C., and 
even earlier, in Chan-si in the north-west of China. It is likely 
that the name was first used in Central Asia, and was derived from 
that of the kingdom through which one entered China from that 
region. An analogy is furnished by the use of the name of Sindhu 
(Hindu) for the whole of India. 

We have clear evidence that there was regular commercial 
intercourse, both by land and sea, between India and China, long 
before the beginning of the Christian era. When the Chinese envoy 
Chang Kien was in Bactria (c. 127 B.C.), he found to his great 
surprise that bamboo and textiles from south-western China w.ere 
sold in the local market. On enquiry he learnt that these were 
brought to eastern India through Yunnan and Burma, and then 
carried the whole way across north India and Afghanistan. Certain 
passages in a Chinese text, written in the first century A.D., mention 
trade relations of China by sea with countries along the Sea of 
China and the Indian Ocean. One of the places named Huang-che 
has been identified by some with Ranchi. 

This country is said to have sent tribute from the time of 
emperor Wu (140-86 B.C.), which means that there were regular 
trade relations between it and China. During the period A.D. 1-6 
the Chinese emperor sent rich presents to the king of Huang-che 
and asked him to send an embassy. Whatever we might think of 
the identification of Huang-che, the above passage clearly proves 
that in the second or first century B.C., the sea-route between India 
and China was fairly known. The Chinese are said to have come 
to Huang-che by foreign ships. From what we know of the trade 
and colonisation of the Indians all along this sea-route we can 
reasonably infer that Indian vessels had a large share, if not the 


645 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


monopoly, of this trade. The maritime intercourse between India 
and China in the second century B.C. is also confirmed by the find 
of a Chinese coin at Mysore. This coin most probably belongs to 
138 B.C. 

It may be reasonably assumed that the relations between the 
two countries were at first purely commercial. Chinese silk, as al¬ 
ready noted above, was highly prized in India. The fact that the 
words Sindura (vermilion) and kichaka (bamboo) are derived from 
Chinese tsin-tung and ki-chok proves that these two commodities 
also came from China. 

But, as always happens, ideas were carried along with wares, 
and led to the introduction of Buddhism in China. As this soon 
changed the whole aspect of the relation between the two countries, 
we have to examine it a little more closely. 

According to Chinese tradition, Buddhist missionaries from 
India proceeded to China as early as 217 B.C., but this can hardly 
be accepted as historical. According to another account, a Chinese 
general, who led a military expedition to Central Asia in 121 B.C., 
brought a golden statue of the Buddha, and thus the Chinese first 
came to know of Buddhism. This is also very doubtful. It is, how¬ 
ever, definitely known that in the year 2 B.C. the Yueh-chi rulers in 
the Oxus valley presented some Buddhist texts to the Chinese court. 

The official account of the introduction of Buddhism into China 
places the event in A.D. 65. In that year the Han emperor Ming-ti 
saw a golden man in a dream and was told by his courtiers that it 
was the Buddha. He accordingly sent ambassadors to the west, 
who brought with them two Indian monks named Dharmaratna 1 
and Kasyapa Matanga. These missionaries brought a lot of sacred 
texts and relics on a white horse. Hence, the monastery built for 
them by Imperial order at the capital city was called “The White 
Horse Monastery”. The two monks spent the rest of their lives in 
China, translating Buddhist texts into Chinese and preaching Bud¬ 
dhism among the people. 

This story is probably substantially correct. But Buddhism 
must have also passed into China by the other overland route from 
India through Burma. There are good grounds to believe that 
Buddhist missionaries came by this route and were already active 
in China by the middle of the first century A.D. 

1. Bagchi (op. cit.) gives the name Dharmaraksha on pp. 7 and 32 and Dharma¬ 
ratna on p. 217. The last is also given in Le Canon Bouddhique en Chine. p. 4. 

646 




COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

Thus, Buddhism must have got a definite footing in different 
parts of China in the first century A.D. The interest taken by the 
court and the nobility in the new religion, and the sympathy and 
support they extended to the first missionaries, encouraged other 
Buddhist missions to follow them. It appears from the Chinese 
account that these mostly came from Central Asia, and the mission¬ 
aries belonged to various nationalities, such as the Yueh-chi, the 
Parthians, the Sogdians, the Kucheans, the Khotanese, etc. A sort 
of cultural internationalism was thus created through Buddhism 
right across the great continent of Asia. 

Reference may be made to a few of these missionaries only. 
She-kao (Lokottama) was a Parthian prince who abdicated the 
throne and was converted to Buddhism at an early age. He was a 
profound scholar and settled in the White Horse Monastery with a 
collection of Buddhist canonical texts and a number of Parthian 
and Sogdian monks. They spent their lives there translating Bud¬ 
dhist texts and preaching Buddhism about the middle of the second 
century A.D. Seng-hui (Sanghabhadra) was born in the first quar¬ 
ter of the third century A.D. in a Sogdian family which had settled 
in India for several generations. Seng-hui’s father went to Tonkin 
for purposes of trade and settled there. On the death of his father, 
Seng-hui became a Buddhist monk and carried on missionary acti¬ 
vity in south China. He is said to have converted the Wu emperor 
of Nanking. He built a monastery at Nanking (A.D. 247) and 
founded a Buddhist school. He built temples and set up images, 
and Buddhism flourished in this region. 1 

Fa-hu (Dharmaraksha) was the most famous of the Yueh-chi 
missionaries in China. He was born at Tunhwang and educated 
there by Indian teachers. He travelled with them all over Central 
Asia and visited some countries on the frontiers of India. It is said 
that he knew thirty-six languages, including Sanskrit and Chinese. 
He settled in the Chinese capital about the middle of the third cen¬ 
tury A.D., and spent his whole life preaching Buddhism and trans¬ 
lating Sanskrit texts into Chinese. 

The Chinese have preserved the names of a large number of 
other missionaries who distinguished themselves by similar activities 
during the first three centuries of the Christian era. These ac¬ 
counts leave no doubt that Buddhism, and with that Indian cul¬ 
ture, had grown into a powerful civilizing force in a wide belt of 

1. BEFEO, XXXII. 212-13. 


647 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


territory in Asia, from Parthia in the west to China on the east 
Tnnh-wang, on the western frontier of China, and near the junction 
of the two roads over the Tarim basin, became an important centre 
of Buddhism. In the third century, some Indian families were 
settled in this territory and it was the meeting place of Buddhists 
of all nationalities coming from the west. 

It must however, be remembered that, whereas the whole of 
the region between the Hindu Kush and China was peopled by races 
with a primitive type of civilization and no developed religious faith, 
China itself was highly civilized and professed the Confucian faith 
with its high philosophy. We can therefore easily understand why 
Buddhism made more rapid progress in Central Asia, and the influ¬ 
ence of Indian culture was deeper and more thorough in that region, 
than was the case with China. But China paid a high compliment 
to Buddhism when she consented to learn it from the monks of 
Central Asia, which was in her eyes a country of the barbarians. 
The Chinese had not yet come into direct contact with a large 
number of Indian monks, and it could hardly be expected that the 
higher ranks in China would be affected by Indian ideas to the same 
extent as the primitive peoples of Central Asia. 

Nevertheless, Buddhism was slowly making its influence felt 
even among the Chinese scholars and aristocracy. Mou-tseu, a 
great Chinese scholar (second century A.D.), wrote in defence of 
Buddhism and pronounced it as even superior to the doctrines of 
Confucius. The rulers of the various small principalities, into which 
China was divided, patronised the new religion. The emperors of 
the western Tsin dynasty, who brought about the unity of China, 
were also great patrons of Buddhism, and under their rule Bud¬ 
dhism came to be an important factor in Chinese life. During the 
reigns of the emperor Wu (A.D. 265-290) and Min (A.D. 313-316) 
monasteries were built in various parts of the country, and 180 
religious establishments were founded in Nanking and Chang-ngan. 
The total number of Buddhist monks during this period is said to 
have been 3,700. 

The stronghold of Buddhism in China is also evidenced by a 
growing desire of the Chinese to visit the Holy Land. A Chinese 
monk named Chu She-hing started for India in A.D. 260 in order 
to study Buddhism under learned teachers. After visiting differ¬ 
ent centres in Central Asia he came to Khotan. As he found Bud¬ 
dhist texts and competent teachers there, he did not proceed to 


648 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


India but stayed in Khotan till his death. From Khotan he sent a 
collection of Sanskrit manuscripts to China. 

I-tsing records a tradition that, about five hundred years before 
his time, twenty Buddhist priests came from China to India by the 
overland route through Burma. The Indian ruler Srlgupta built a 
temple in Bengal for these priests, and being impressed by their 
pious demeanour, he gave them the land and the revenues of about 
twenty villages as an endowment. This temple was known as the 
China temple even in I-tsing’s time. It was then in ruins, but I-tsing 
was told by the local king that he was willing to give back the temple 
land and the endowment to any priest coming from China. 1 This 
incident illustrates the growing strength of Buddhism in China and 
the beginning, as early as the third century A.D., of that ardent 
desire of pilgrimage to the Holy Land of India, which prompted 
hundreds of Chinese in subsequent ages to brave the perils of the 
long and arduous journey both by land and sea. 

We have so far dwelt upon the religious aspect of the inter¬ 
course between India and China. But although less important and 
less known, there were also political relations between the two 
countries. 

Apart from what has been said above, 2 political relations may 
be traced as far back as the time of Kanishka. Hiuen Tsang re¬ 
lates that the great emperor kept a Chinese prince as hostage in a 
part of the Punjab, which, for this reason, came to be known as the 
Chinabhukti. This Chinese hostage is said to have introduced two 
fruits, peach and pear, into India, and these were consequently 
called “Chinani” and “China-rajaputra” respectively. 

An interesting light is thrown on the relation between India 
and China by the following passage in the History of the Later Han 
Dynasty covering the period A.D. 25 to 220. 3 

“This country (India) produces elephants, rhinoceroses, tor¬ 
toise-shell, gold, silver, copper, iron, lead and tin. From the west 
coast it is in communication with Ta-ts’in (the Roman province of 
Svriya) and precious objects from Ta-ts’in are found there. There 

1. For the location of this temple cf. HBR. 69. Srlgupta has been identified with 
the founder of the Imperial Gupta dynasty. This point will be discussed in 
Vol. Ill in connection with the history of the Guptas. 

2. See pp. 122 f. 

3. K. A. N. Sastri, Foreign Notices of South India, p. 11. The passage is, how¬ 
ever, not an extract from the report of Pan Young as Mr. Sastri supposes 
(p. 10); cf. JDL. 1920, p. 73 ff. 


649 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

are also fine fabrics, woollen carpets of good quality, perfumes of 
all kinds, sugar-candy, pepper, ginger and black salt.” 

“In the epoch of the emperor Ho (A.D. 89-105) they sent on 
several occasions ambassadors carrying tributes and presents. 
Later, the countries of the West having revolted, these relations 
were interrupted. Then in the years A.D. 159 and 161 they came 
again on two occasions from beyond Je-nan”. 

It would thus appear that intercourse with China through 
Central Asia was interrupted shortly after A.D. 105 and was con¬ 
tinued thereafter either by sea or by the overland route through 
Burma. Musicians and jugglers from Ta-ts’in passed through the 
latter route in A.D. 120. The embassies of A.D. 159 and 161 either 
followed this route or proceeded by sea. A Chinese chronicle refers 
to Indian ambassadors coming by the Southern Sea to China during 
the period A.D. 147-167. 

IV. Tonkin 

China proved to be an important base for the further spread 
of Buddhism and Indian culture towards the north, east and south. 
Mongolia, Korea and Japan received Buddhism from China, though 
we possess no definite details for the period under review. We are, 
however, more fortunate in respect of Tonkin, which was at that 
time politically subject to China. It appears from the meagre 
accounts that have been preserved that Buddhism was preached in 
Tonkin as early as the second and third centuries A.D., both by 
Chinese and Indian missionaries. The Indian monks proceeded 
there by both land and sea. As a matter of fact, Tonkin formed an 
important intermediate station in the sea route between India and 
China, and was visited by missionaries of both countries in the course 
of their journey from the one country to the other. According to 
some reliable texts, Buddhism obtained a secure footing in Tonkin 
about the same time as in China and had made even more rapid 
progress there at the beginning. 1 

Tradition has preserved the names of the first Buddhist mis¬ 
sionaries who played an important part in the introduction of Bud¬ 
dhism in Tonkin. The earliest of them is the Chinese Mou-tseu to 
whom reference has been made above. 2 When, after the death of 
Ling-ti in A.D. 189, civil war broke out in China, only the southern 

1. For an account of the introduction of Buddhism in Tonkin, cf. BEFEO, XXXII. 

211 . 

2. See p. 647. 


650 




COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


province of Tonkin remained comparatively calm and many dis¬ 
tinguished persons of China migrated there. Mou-tseu, although 
a Taoist, embraced Buddhism and his example was followed by 
others (c. A.D. 194-195). 

About the middle of the third century, Seng-hui began his mis¬ 
sionary activity in Tonkin. His origin and activity in China have 
been mentioned above. 1 But it was from Tonkin that he proceeded 
to China to convert the king of the Wu dynasty to Buddhism. He 
was one of the greatest translators of Sanskrit texts into Chinese, 
and some of these works were accomplished in Tonkin. 

The third important missionary in Tonkin was Marajivaka or 
Jivaka. He was born in India and came to Fu-nan in southern Cam¬ 
bodia 2 in a merchant vessel. He then proceeded to Tonkin and 
Canton. He preached Buddhism wherever he went and largely con¬ 
tributed to its development all along the sea-route to China. He 
visited the capital city Lo Yang towards the close of the reign of 
emperor Houei of the Tsin dynasty (A.D. 290-306) and later, on 
account of political troubles in China, returned to India. 

The last of the four missionaries was an Indo-Scythian, the 
Chinese form of whose name has been taken to represent either 
Kalaruchi or Kalyanaruchi. He translated some Buddhist texts 
between A.D. 255 and 257. 

Thanks to the efforts of these and perhaps other missionaries, 
Tonkin became a stronghold of Buddhism. By the end of the third 
century A.D. there were more than 20 chaityas and five hundred 
monks in the district of Leileu (now represented by the village of 
Lung-khe in the province of Bac-ninh). Although Tonkin did not 
become an Indian colony like southern Annam, a large number of 
Indians were settled there. A Chinese text of the fourth century 
A.D. mentions the presence of a large number of Indians in the en¬ 
tourage of the provincial governor. An Annamite text gives some 
particulars of an Indian named Khauda-la. He was born in a Brah- 
mana family of western India and was versed in magical art. He 
went to Tonkin by sea, probably about the same time as Jivaka, 
mentioned above. He lived in caves or under trees, and was also 
known as Ca-la-cha-la (Kalacharya—black preceptor?). 

1. See p. 647. 

2. See p. 657. 

651 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


B. SOUTH-EAST ASIA 

I. EARLY TRADE INTERCOURSE AND THE BEGINNING OF 

COLONISATION 

To the ancient Indians, the Indo-Chinese Peninsula and the East 
Indies were vaguely known as Suvarna-bhumi and Suvarna-dvipa, 
the land or the island of gold. It was a veritable El Dorado, with 
an abundance of spices, gold, and all precious metals and minerals. 
The lure of wealth attracted them and they braved the perils of the 
sea to seek fortunes in these distant unknown lands. 

Although we have no systematic account of this early trade with 
the Far East, we have a number of popular stories and folk-tales 
that grow out of this spirit of adventure. These have been pre¬ 
served in the Jatakas, the various recensions of Brihat-Kathd, the 
Katha-Kosa and other books of this type. We read in them how 
princes and merchants sailed in ships from Bhrigukachchha or 
Tamralipti, reached Suvarna-dvipa or Suvarna-bhumi, and returned 
with fabulous riches. Sometimes these trading voyages ended in 
disaster, though the ship-wrecked merchants often had a narrow 
escape according to these stories. They sometimes mention indi¬ 
vidual towns and ports as the destination of the merchant-vessels, 
but more often vaguely refer to Suvarna-bhumi or Suvarna-dvipa. 

Intercourse with Suvarna-dvipa is also reflected in more serious 
literature. The Buddhist text Milinda-panha refers to sea-voyages 
to Suvarna-bhumi, Takkola and China. Kautilya’s Arthasdstra 
mentions aguru (aloe) of Suvarna-bhumi. 

Indians also proceeded to the Far East by land-routes through 
Bengal, Manipur and Assam. They reached lower Burma through 
Arakan, and upper Burma through the various passes in the Patkoi 
range or Manipur hills. As already noted, Chinese wares passed 
through this land route from Yunnan and Szechwan to northern 
India in the second century B.C. There are good grounds to 
hold that this route, though difficult, was frequently used in olden 
times. 

Indian familiarity with the Far East is reflected in the Puranic 
cosmology and geographical divisions into Varshas and Dvipas. 
There is no doubt that some of them refer to localities in this re¬ 
gion, though it is hazardous to identify any Puranic name with any 
particular locality. Ptolemy (second century A.D.) and the author 


652 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

of the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea (first century A.D.) refer to 
Indian intercourse with these countries. The former shows that 
some localities like Yava-dvipa already bore Indian names. 

We get a comprehensive view of ancient Indian trade in the 
Far East, and the risks and troubles it involved, from a passage in 
the Buddhist text Niddcsa , which may be referred to a period not 
later than the second century A.D. It describes the various kinds of 
torments which a sailor experiences while, overpowered by the 
desire for wealth and enjoyment, he sails the high seas in a boat 
and visits different countries. It specially names twenty-four loca¬ 
lities to which the merchants voyaged, and ten difficult routes which 
they had to follow on land. No less than eight of these localities 
can be definitely located in, and cover a fairly large part of, 
Suvarna-bhumi and Suvarna-dvipa. 

The extraordinarily difficult routes mentioned in the Niddesa 
are explained by the story of Sanudasa, which may be summed up 
as follows:— 

“Sanudasa joins the gang of the adventurer Achera, who 
is preparing an expedition to the Land of Gold (Suvarna- 
bhumi). They cross the sea and land at the foot of a mountain. They 
climb up to the top by catching hold of creepers (vetra). This is the 
‘creepers’ path’ ( Vetrapatha). On the plateau there is a river which 
changes into stone everything that falls into it. They cross it by 
holding on to the bamboos which overhang the banks. This 
is ‘the bamboo’s path’ (Vamsapatha ). Further on, they meet a 
narrow path between precipices. They light a fire with wet 
branches; the smoke attracts some Kirdtas who come and propose 
to sell them some goats; the adventurers get on those goats, the only 
animals sure-footed enough to be able to follow the narrow edge 
without feeling giddy. This is the ‘goats’ path’ ( Ajapatha ). The 
adventurers do not come to the end of it without some difficulty, as 
another gang is approaching from the opposite direction. A strug¬ 
gle ensues, but Achera’s troops are able to pass through after having 
thrown their enemies into the ravines. Sanudasa begins to feel 
indignant at the fierceness of the gold-seekers. Achera orders his 
followers to slay the goats and to put on their skins with the inside 
out. Huge birds will mistake these men for a heap of raw meat, 
come and carry them away to their aerie. It is there that the gold 
is! Sanudasa attempts to save the goat he was riding, but his com¬ 
panions are pitiless. Everything takes place as Achera foretold, 


653 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


but the bird which carries off Sanudasa is attacked by another 
bird which attempts to steal his prey. The goat’s skin bursts open 
and Sanudasa falls in a tank which is in the heart of a luxurious 
forest. The next day he comes to a river the banks of which are 
of golden sand; near by, there is a hermitage from which a hermit 
comes out.” 

The above story refers to several 'paths’ or ingenious means 
of passing through difficult territory. A few more of these paths 
are referred to in various early books. There is Jannupatha where 
one has to crawl on hands and knees. Sahkupatha was a difficult 
and laborious procedure for ascending a mountain. An iron hook, 
attached to a rope of skin, is thrown up on to the mountain-side 
where it gets embedded. Having climbed up the rope, the man 
makes a hole on the hill-side with a diamond-tipped iron rod and 
fixes a spear. Having caught hold of this, he detaches the hook 
and repeats the performance till the spear is again fixed up in the 
mountain. Then he ties the rope to the spear, and having caught 
hold of the rope with one hand, strikes it by a hammer with the 
other till the spear is detached. Then he climbs up again, again 
fixes the spear, and repeats the process till he ascends to the top of 
the hill. Last comes Chhattapatha, the means of coming down from 
a steep height. One jumps down from a precipice with an open 
parasol made of skin, and descends slowly to the ground on account 
of the resistance of the air. In other words, it acted as a parachute. 

These various kinds of 'paths’ give us some idea of the diffi¬ 
culties which Indians had to surmount while travelling in un¬ 
known foreign lands to which they were attracted by lure of wealth. 

Literature is justly regarded as the echo of national life. The 
stories quoted above and numerous other Indian folk-tales about 
merchants going beyond the sea indicate that the spirit of explo¬ 
ration and adventure was a characteristic feature of ancient India. 

We possess reliable evidence regarding the sea-routes follow¬ 
ed by Indians. Beginning from the north, there was first the 
famous port of Tamralipti, which is now represented by Tamluk 
in the Midnapore district, Bengal. From this port there was regu¬ 
lar sailing of vessels, which either proceeded along the coasts of 
Bengal and Burma, or crossed the Bay of Bengal and made a direct 
voyage to the Malay Peninsula, and then to the East Indies and 
Indo-China beyond it. There were other similar ports of 


654 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


embarkation, one at Palura near Gopalpur (Ganjam) in Orissa, and 
three near Masulipatam (Madras), from which ships sailed across 
the Bay of Bengal to the Far East. There was a regular coastal 
voyage from the mouth of the Ganga along the eastern coast of 
India to Cylon, and thence along the western coast up to Broach at 
the mouth of the Narmada river, and perhaps even beyond it. 
People from all parts of India came by land or river to the nearest 
sea-port, and then made a coastal voyage to Tamralipti, Palura, or 
one of the harbours near Masulipatam, whence ships made a direct 
voyage to the Far East across the Bay of Bengal. The South Indian 
peninsula as well as Ceylon also contained several harbours from 
which such direct voyages were made in ancient times. 

The literary evidence leaves no doubt that trade was the chief 
stimulus of this intercourse between India and the Far East. Apart 
from the fact that the folk-tales deal mostly with merchants and 
seekers of wealth, the geographical names, applied by the Indians, 
all refer to minerals, metals or some industrial and agricultural pro¬ 
ducts. In addition to Suvarna-dvlpa and its variant forms, we may 
{refer to Rupyaka-dvlpa, Tamra-dvipa, Yava-dvlpa Lanka-dvipa, 
Sankha-dvlpa, Karpura-dvlpa, Narikela-dvlpa, etc. 

In course of time, trade and commercial activity led to the 
establishment of political and cultural relations. The traders spread 
Indian culture along with their wares and, as opportunities offered, 
some of them permanently settled in these places and even seized 
political power. Adventurous Kshatriya princes came to seek 
their fortunes and established kingdoms. Individual monks or 
bands of missionaries also came to preach their religious doctrines. 
It is said that Sona and Uttara, two missionaries of Asoka, visited 
Suvarna-bhumi. But no satisfactory evidence has yet come to 
light in support of this. There is, however, no doubt that as early 
as the second century A.D., Indians ruled over kingdoms in the 
remotest parts of Indo-China. Colonisation, as distinguished from 
the establishment of political authority, evidently took place much 
earlier, and the beginnings of trade relations, which preceded colo¬ 
nisation, may be placed at least two or three centuries before the 
Christian era, if not earlier still. 

II. EARLY COLONIES 

1. General Review 

Local traditions refer to the establishment of political authority 
by immigrant Indians almost all over south-east Asia. According 


655 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


to the Burmese chronicles, Abhiraja, a prince of the Sakya clan of 
Kapilavastu, marched with an army to upper Burma, founded the 
city of Sankissa (Tagaung) on the upper Irrawadi, and set himself up 
as king of the surrounding region. His elder son ruled over Arakan, 
while the younger continued at Sankissa. Thirty-one generations 
later, during the time of Buddha, a second band of Kshatriyas came 
from the Gangetic valley. After they had ruled for sixteen genera¬ 
tions, they lost upper Burma and founded a new kingdom in lower 
Burma, with their capital at Sri-Kshetra (near Prome). According 
to the traditions current among the Mons or Talaings in the coastal 
districts of lower Burma, Indian colonists from the lower courses 
of the rivers Krishna and Godavari had at a remote time crossed the 
sea and formed settlements in the delta of the Irrawadi and on the 
adjoining coast. Local tradition in Yunnan (S. China) affirms that 
the royal family was descended from Asoka. According to the tradi¬ 
tions of Arakan, the first king of the province was the son of a king 
of Banaras. The founding of Ligor in the Malay Peninsula is ascribed 
to a descendant A (oka. According to the Cambodian annals an 
exiled prince of Indraprastha founded the kingdom of Cambodia. 
According to another tradition current in the southern part of Cam¬ 
bodia, and recorded by a Chinese in the third century A.D., a Hindu 
named Kaundinya founded a kingdom in that region. Many legends 
current in Java associate the original colonists and their leader Aji 
Saka with the heroes of the Malidbharata ruling at Hastinapura. 
Another cycle of legends gives the credit for the colonisation of 
Java to the people of Kalinga. In one of them we read that twenty 
thousand families were sent to Java from Kalinga. 

These traditions cannot, of course, be regarded as historical, but 
taken collectively they may be regarded as fair evidence of the early 
colonisation of this region by Indians. Fortunately, this conclusion 
is corroborated by more positive evidences. Thus, the settlement of 
Indians in Burma, long before the second century A.D., is proved by 
Sanskrit place-names, mentioned by Ptolemy, which have been locat¬ 
ed with a fair degree of certainty in Burma. The discovery of isolat¬ 
ed Indian Brahmi alphabets on stones in Burma also points in the 
same direction. According to the Chinese chronicles of the third 
century A.D., a kingdom called Lin-yang, which has been located in 
central Burma, had an ardent Buddhist population of over 10,000 
families, including several thousand monks. Archaeological remains 
in Burma also prove that the Indian language and literature, both 
Sanskrit and Pali, were cultivated, and Indian religions, both Brah- 


656 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

manicai and Buddhist, were adopted by the people in the early cen¬ 
turies of the Christian era. The Hindus must have also established 
political authority in Java by the beginning of the second century 
A.D., for in A.D. 132 king Devavarman of Java sent an embassy to 
China. There were probably several other Hindu kingdoms in Indo- 
China and the East Indies, though we know nothing definite about 
them before A.D. 300. But we possess a somewhat detailed account 
of two kingdoms founded in Cambodia and Annam. 

2. Fu-nan ( Cambodia ) 

An account of a Hindu kingdom in Cambodia has been preserv¬ 
ed by the Chinese. They call it ‘Fu-nan’. It was founded by a Hindu 
named Kaun<Jinya in the first century A.D. The people of Fu-nan 
were almost savages. They went about naked and decorated them¬ 
selves with tattoo marks. Kauntfinya introduced the elements of 
civilised life among them; in particular, he made the women wear 
clothes. His kingdom comprised Cochin-China and the southern 
part of Cambodia. 

Kaundinya’s descendants ruled for 100 years, after which the 
kingdom passed to the general Fan-che-man, who was elected king 
by the people (c. A.D. 200). He organised a powerful navy and con¬ 
quered a large number of neighbouring states, which henceforth 
became vassals of Fu-nan. Nearly the whole of Siam and parts of 
Laos and the Malay Peninsula acknowledged the authority of Fu- 
nan, which thus became the first Hindu colonial empire in Indo- 
China. The Indian form of the name Fan-che-man cannot be ascer¬ 
tained, but Fan, which forms a part of every name, is evidently a 
corruption of Varman. 

The next king Fan-chan sent an embassy to China in A.D. 243. 
He also sent one of his relations named Su-Wu as an ambassador to 
India. Su-Wu embarked at Teu-kiu-li, probably the famous port 
of Takkola, and reached the mouth of the Gahga after about a year. 
He was cordially welcomed by the Indian king and returned to 
Fu-nan after four years, with two envoys and some presents sent 
by the latter. 

These four years witnessed some palace-revolutions, after which 
Fan-siun became king of Fu-nan. During his reign the Chinese 
ambassador K’ang T'ai visited Fu-nan, probably between A.D. 245 

657 


A.I.U.—42 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


and 250. K’ang T’ai wrote an account of Fu-nan, which has supplied 
us with the interesting details given above. He pointed out that 
the men of Fu-nan went about naked, but king Fan-siun stopped this 
indecent habit. Fan-siun had a long reign and sent embassies to 
China in the years A.D. 268, 285, 286 and 287. 

3. Champa (Annam) 

The Hindu kingdom in Annam was called Champa. Its capital 
was Champa-nagarl or Champa-pura, whose ruins lie at Trakieu, a 
little to the south of Quang Nam. The people were accordingly 
called Cham. The first historical Hindu king, so far known, is 
SrI-Mara, who established a dynasty about the second century A.D. 
He probably freed the country from the yoke of the Chinese, whose 
dominions included the whole of Tonkin and a considerable part of 
northern Annam. 

The downfall of the Imperial Han dynasty in China in A.D. 220 
offered an opportunity to the Hindu kings of Champa to extend and 
consolidate their kingdom. Some time between A.D. 220 and 230 
the king of Champa sent a diplomatic mission to the governor of 
Kia-cha (Tonkin) at the invitation of the latter. But in A.D. 248 
the Cham king made a naval attack, ravaged even the provincial 
capital with several other towns, and defeated the fleet that was 
sent against him. At last a treaty was concluded by which the dis¬ 
trict of Kiu-su, corresponding to modern Thua-Thien, was ceded to 
Champa. 

The Hindu kings of this period are known from Chinese sources 
alone, and as is the case with those of Fu-nan, their names begin 
with Fan ( Varman ). Fan Hiong, who succeeded to the throne of 
Champa some time between A.D. 270 and 280, was probably a de¬ 
scendant of Sri-Mara on the female side. He continued the policy 
of extending his kingdom to the north at the cost of the Chinese. 
He made an alliance with the king of Fu-nan for this purpose and 
frequently ravaged the Chinese possessions in Tonkin. For ten 
years the struggle went on and the Chinese were reduced to great 
straits. At last, peace was concluded in A.D. 280, probably on terms 
unfavourable to the Chinese. 

Fan Hiong was succeeded by his son Fan-yi who had a peaceful 
and prosperous reign of more than half a century and who devoted 
his energies to increasing the military power and strengthening the 

658 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


defensive works of the kingdom* He sent an embassy to the Impe¬ 
rial Court in China in A.D. 284 and died in A.D. 336. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

A 

M. A. Stein— Ancient Khotan. 

Do. —“Innermost Asia: Its Geography as a factor in History.” Geo¬ 

graphical Journal , 1925, p. 377. 

Dr. P. C. Bagchi— India and China (1944). 

Dr. N. P. Chakravarti— India and Central Asia. 

Dr. U. N. Ghoshal— Ancient Indian Culture in Afghanistan. 

A good account of the different archaeological expeditions into Central Asia 
and their publications is given by Dr. U. N. Ghoshal in JGIS. IX. 62 ff. 

B 

Dr. R. C. Majumdar— Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East. 

Vol. I.—Champa. 

Vol. II, Parts I, II.— Suvarna-dvtpa. 

Dr. R. C. Majumdar— Kambuja-desa. 

Dr. B. R. Chatterji —Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia. 


659 


LIST OF BIBLIOGRAPHIES 

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. Original Sources: Literary Texts and Translations 

(1) Indian Sources: 

(A) Brahmanical: 

(i) Philosophical Sutras; 

(ii) Epics; 

(iii) Puranas; 

(iv) Dharmasastra; 

(v) Arthasastra. 

(B) Buddhist: 

(i) Canonical texts and translations; 

(ii) Non-canonical texts, commentaries, and translations. 

(C) Jain: Texts and Translations. 

(2) Non-Indian Sources: 

(A) Greek and Latin: Texts and translations. 

(B) Chinese: Texts and translations. 

(C) Tibetan. 

( ,4 

II. Original Sources: Inscriptions and Coins. 

' (1) Inscriptions. 

(2) Coins. 

III. Modern Works: 

(A) Histories of India dealing with the period; 

(B) Histories of Literature; 

(C) General Works. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Chapter I 
Chapter II 

99 

99 

99 

Chapter XXV 


660 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. ORIGINAL SOURCES: 

Texts and Translations . 

(1) Indian Sources: 

(A) BRAHMANICAL: 

(i) PHILOSOPHICAL SUTRAS: 

1. Brahma Sutras (or Vedanta Sutras) of Bddarayna 

Ed. in ASS. Poona, 1890-91. 

Eng. Trans. (Vedanta Sutras with the com¬ 
mentary of Sankaracharya and Ramanuja) 
by G. Thibaut. SBE. Oxford, 1890-1904. 

2. Mimamsa Sutras of Jaimini 

Ed. with Sabarasvamin’s commentary by M. 

Vidyaratna. BI. Calcutta, 1873 ff. 

Ed. with &abarasvamin’s comm, in ASS. 
Poona, 1929-34. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. SBH. Allahabad, 1910. 
Eng. trans. of 6abarabhashya by G. Jha. GOS. 
Baroda, 1933-36. 

3. Nyaya Sutras of Gautama 

Ed. with the comm, of Vatsyayana by J. 

Tarkapanchanana. BI. Calcutta, 1865. 

Ed. and trans. by J. R. Ballantyne. Allahabad, 
1851-53. 

Ed. and trans. by S. C. Vidyabhushana, SBH. 
Allahabad, 1911. 

4. Sdnkhya Sutras of Kapila 

With extracts from Vijhanabhikshu’s comm. 
Ed. and trans. by J. R. Ballantyne. BI. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1862-65. 

with Aniruddha’s comm. Ed. and trans. by R. 
Garbe. Calcutta, 1888-92. 

5. Vaiseshika Sutras of Kanada 

Ed. with the Upaskara comm, by J. Tarka- 
panchanana. BI. Calcutta, 1860^61. 

Eng. trans. by A. E. Gough. Benares, 1873. 

6. Yoga Sutras of Patanjali 

Ed. with the comm, of Vyasa and the gloss 
of Vachaspati by R. Bodas. BSS. Bombay, 
1892. 


661 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Mahabharata 


Bhagavadgxtd 


Ramdyana 


Eng. trans. by J. H. Woods. HOS. Cambridge, 
Mass, 1^14. 

Eng. trans. by Rama Prasada. SBH. Allahabad, 
1910. 

(ii) EPICS: 

(Bom. Ed.) with the comm, of Nilakantha, Ed. 

by R. Kinjawadekar. Poona, 1929-33. 

(Cal. Ed.) Ed. by N. Siromani and others. BI. 
Calcutta, 1834-39. 

(Kumbhakonam Ed.) Ed. by T. R. Krishna- 
charya and T. R. Vyasacharya. Bombay, 
1905-10. 

(Southern Recension) Ed. by P. P. S. Sastri. 
Madras, 1931 ff. 

(Critical Edition): I: Adiparvan, Ed. by V. S. 

Sukthankar Poona, 1927-33. 

II. Sabhaparvan, Ed. by F. Edgerton. Poona, 
1943-44. 

Ill & IV. Aranyakaparvan. Ed. by V. S. 
Sukthankar. Poona, 1941-42. 

V. Virataparvan. Ed. by Raghu Vira. Poona, 
1936. ' 

VI. Udyogaparvan. Ed. by S. K. De. Poona, 
1937-40. 

Poona, 1945-47. 

Eng. trans. by K. M. Ganguly. Pub. P. C. Roy. 
Calcutta, 1884-96; New Ed., Calcutta, 1926. 

VII. Bhlshmaparvan. Ed. by S. K. Belvalkar. 
1932. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta 1895-1905. 
Being Reprint of the relevant parts of the 
Bhlshmaparvan from the Critical Edition of 
the Mahabharata, Ed. by S. K. Belvalkar. 
Poona, 1945. 

With Sahkaracharya’s comm, and Anandagiri’s 
comm. Ed. by K. S. Agashe. ASS. Poona, 
1909. 

•Eng. trans. (with the Sanatsujatlya and Anu- 
gTta) by K. T. Telang. SBE. 2nd Ed., Oxford, 
1908. 

Eng. trans. by W. D. P. Hill. Oxford, 1928. 
(Bengal rec.) Ed. by G. Gorresio. Turin, 
1843-67. 

(North and South) Bombay, 1902. (South) 
Madras, 1933. 

(North-Western Indian) Ed. by Pandit Rama 
Labhaya and others. Lahore, 1923 ff. 
(Critical Ed.) First fasc. Ed. by Raghu Vira. 
Lahore, 1938. 


662 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Agni Purdna 


Bhagavata Purdna 


Bhavishya Purdna 
Brahma Purdna 
Brahmdn$a Purdna 
Gambia Purdna 

Harivamsa 
Kurma Purdna 

Linga Purdna 
Markandeya Purdna 

Matsya Purdna 


Padma Purdna 


The Purdna Text 
of the Dynasties 
of the Kali Age 
Siva Purdna 
Varaha Purdna 
Vdyu Purdna 

V i^anu Purdna 


Yuga Purdna 


Trans, into English verse, by R. T. H. Griffith. 
Benares, 1915. 

Trans, into English prose, by M. N. Dutt. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1892-94. 

(iii) PURANAS: 

Ed. by R. Mitra. BI. Calcutta, 1873-79. 

Ed. ASS. Poona, 1900. 

Eng. trans. M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1901. 

Ed. with French trans. by E. Burnouf, and con¬ 
tinued by Hauvette-Besnault and Roussel. 
5 Vols. Paris, 1840-98. 

Ed. by V. L. Pansikar. Bombay, 1920. 

Eng. trans. M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1895. 

Eng. trans. by Swami Vijnanananda. SBH. 
Allahabad, 1921-23. 

Eng. trans. by S. Subba Row. Tirupati, 1928. 
Eng. trans. by J. M. Sanyal. Calcutta, 1930-34. 
Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1910. 

ASS. Poona, 1895. 

Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1913. 
Bombay, 1906. 

Eng. trans. M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1908. 

Ed. R. Kinjawadekar. Poona, 1936. 

Ed. Nilamani Mukhopadhyaya. BI. Calcutta, 
1890. 

Ed. J. Vidyasagara. BI. Calcutta, 1885. 

Ed. K.M. Banerjea. BI. Calcutta, 1862. 

Eng. trans. by F.E. Pargiter. Calcutta, 1904. 
ASS. Poona, 1907. 

Eng. trans. by a Taluqdar of Oudh. SBH. 2 
Vols. Allahabad, 1916-17. 

Ed. V. N. Mandlik. ASS. 4 Vols. Poona, 
1893-94. 

Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1895. 

By F.E. Pargiter. Oxford, 1913. 


Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay. 

Ed. P. Hrishikesa Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 1893. 
Ed. R. Mitra. 2 Vols. BI. Calcutta, 1880-88. 
ASS. Poona, 1905. 

Bombay, 1889. 

Eng. trans. by H. H. Wilson. 5 Vols. London, 
1864-70. 

Eng. trans. by M.N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1894. 

Ed. and trans. by K.P. Jayaswal. JBORS, 
XIV. 397-421. 

Ed. and trans. by K. H. Dhruva. JBORS , XVI. 
18-66. 


663 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Bfihaspati Smriti 


Kdtydyana Smriti 
Saroddhara 


Manava Dharma - 
sdstra (or Manu- 
smriti) 


Ndrada-smriti 


Vaishnava Dharma - 
sdstra for Vishnu - 
smriti) 


Ydjnavalkya- 

smriti 


Arthasdstra of 
Kaupilya 


(iv) DH ARMAS ASTRA: 

Ed. A. Flihrer. Leipzig, 1879. 

Eng. trans. by J. Jolly. SBE, XXXIII. Oxford, 

1889. 

Reconstructed by K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar. 
GOS. Baroda, 1941. 

(Katyayana Smriti on Vyavahara, Law and 
Procedure) Ed. with reconstructed text, 
trans. notes and introduction, by P. V. Kane. 
Bombay, 1933. 

Ed. by Jolly. London, 1887. 

Ed. with Kulluka’s comm. Bombay, 1929. 

Ed. with Medhatithi’s comm, by J. R. Ghar- 
pure. Bombay, 1920. 

Eng. trans. by W. Jones. Calcutta, 1794. 

Eng. trans. by G. Buhler. SBE. Oxford, 1886. 
Eng. trans. with notes, by G. Jha. 5 Vols. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1922-29. 

(Institutes of Narada together with copious ex¬ 
tracts from the Naradabhashya of Asahaya 
and other standard commentaries) Ed. by J. 
Jolly. Calcutta, 1885. (Shorter version). 

Eng. trans. by J. Jolly. London, 1876 (Shorter 
version). 

Eng. trans. by J. Jolly. SBE, XXXIII. Oxford, 
1889. (Longer version). 

Ed. by J. Jolly (together with extracts from 
the comm, of Nanda Pan^ita, and critical 
notes etc.). BI. Calcutta, 1881. 

Eng. trans. by J. Jolly. SBE, VII. Oxford, 
1880. 

Ed. by M. N, Dutta (Dharmasastra Texts, Vol. 

II). Calcutta, 1909. 

Ed. by A. F. Stenzler. Berlin, 1849. 

Ed, with the comm. Mitakshara. Bombay, 
1909. 

Ed. with the comm, of Aparaditya. ASS. 
Poona, 1903-04. 

Ed. w r ith the comm, of Visvarupa. Trivan¬ 
drum, 1922-24. 

Eng. trans. of Adhyayas I and III, by S. C. 
Basu, and S. N. Naraharayya. SBH. Allah¬ 
abad, 1918, 1913. 

Eng. trans. by J. R. Gharpure. Bombay, 
1936 ff. 

(v) ARTH AS ASTRA: 

Ed. by R. Shamasastri. Mysore, 1919. 

Ed. by J. Jolly and R. Schmidt. 2 Vols. Lahore, 
1923-24. 


664 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Ed. with comm. Primula by T. Ganapati Sastri. 

3 Vols. Trivandrum, 1924-25. 

Eng. trans. by R. Shamasastry. 3rd Ed. Mysore, 
1929. 


(B) BUDDHIST: 


Texts marked with an asterisk have 
also been published in India in Deva- 
nagari. 


(i) CANONICAL TEXTS AND TRANSLATIONS: 


Anguttara Nikdya 


Apadana 
* Arya-Manjusn - 
Mulakalpa 
*Buddhavcmsa 


*Chariydpitaka 


*Dhammapada 


Ed. R. Morris and E. Hardy. PTS. London, 
1885-1900. 

Eng. trans. Pt. I by E. R. J. Gooneratne. Galle, 
Ceylon, 1913. 

Eng. trans. Pt. II by A. D. Jayasundara (Ed. 
by F. L. Woodward). Adyar, 1925. 

Eng. trans. (The Book of Gradual Sayings) 
Vol. I, II and V by F. L. Woodward, and 
Vol. Ill and IV by E. M. Hare. PTS. London, 
1932-36. 

Ed. Mary E. Lilley. PTS. London, 1925-27. 

Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. Trivandrum, 1925. 

Ed. by R. Morris. PTS. London, 1882. 

Eng. trans. (The Minor Anthologies of the 
Pali Canon, Part III) by B. C. Law. PTS. 
London, 1938. 

Ed. R. Morris. PTS. London, 1882. 

Eng. trans. (The Minor Anthologies of the Pali 
Canon, Pt. Ill) by B. C. Law. PTS. London, 
1938. 

Ed. S. S. Thera. PTS. London, 1914. 

Eng. trans. by F. Max Muller. SBE. Oxford, 
1898. 


*Dhammasangani 


Dhatukatha 
*LHgha Nikdya 


Ed. and trans. (The Minor Anthologies of the 
Pali Canon, Pt. I) by Mrs. Rhys Davids. 
SBB. London, 1931. 

Ed. E. Muller. PTS. London, 1885. 

Eng. trans. by Mrs. Rhys Davids. 2nd Ed. 
London, 1923. 

Ed. E. R. Gooneratne. PTS. London, 1892. 

Ed. T. W. Rhys Davids and J. E. Carpenter. 3 
Vols. PTS. London, 1890, 1903, 1911. 

Eng. trans. (Dialogues of the Buddha) by T. W. 
Rhys Davids. 3 Vols. SBB. London, 1899, 
1910, 1921. 

Selections. Trans, by T. W. Rhys Davids. SBE. 
Oxford, 1881. 


665 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


*Itivuttaka 


Jdtaka 


Kathavatthu 


* Khuddakapdtha 


*Majjhima Nikdya 


Niddesa 


Patisambhiddmagga 

Patthana-Pakarana 
• • • 

or Mahd Pawa - 
rana 

*Petavatthu 

Puggalapannatti 


Sarhyutta Nikdya 


*Sutta Nipata 


Ed. E. Windisch. PTS. London, 1889. 

Eng. trans. (Sayings of Buddha) by J. H. 

Moore. New York, 1908. 

Eng. trans. by F. L. Woodward. SBB. London, 
1935. 

Ed. V. Fausboll. 7 Vols. (Vol. 7 Index, by D. 

Andersen). London, 1877-97. 

Eng. trans. under the Editorship of E. B. 

Cowell. 7 Vols. Cambridge, 1895-1913. 

Ed. by A. C. Taylor. PTS. London, 1894. Eng. 
trans. (Points of Controversy or Subjects of 
Discourse) by S. J. Aung and Mrs. Rhys 
Davids. PTS. London, 1915. 

Ed. and trans. by R. C. Childers. ( JRAS, 1870, 
309-339) 

New Ed. Helmer Smith and Mabel Hunt. PTS. 
London, 1915. 

Text and trans. (The Minor Anthologies of the 
Pali Canon, Pt. I) by Mrs. Rhys Davids. SBB. 
London, 1931. 

Ed. by V. Trenckner and R. Chalmers. PTS. 
London, 1888-1902. 

Eng. trans. (Further Dialogues of the Buddha) 
by Lord Chalmers. 2 Vols. SBB. London, 
1926-27. 

Selections. Trans, by T. W. Rhys Davids. SBE. 
Oxford, 1881. 

Mahaniddesa, Ed. by L. de la Vallee Poussin 
and E. J. Thomas. PTS. London, 1916-17. 
Chullaniddesa. Ed. by W. Stede. PTS. Lon¬ 
don, 1918. 

Ed. by A. C. Taylor. PTS. London, 1905-07. 
Tika Patthana. Ed. by Mrs. Rhys Davids. PTS. 
London, 1921-23. 

Duka Patthana, I. Ed. by Mrs. Rhys Davids. 

PTS. London, 1906. 

Ed. by J. Minayeff. PTS. London, 1888. 

Ed. by R. Morris. PTS. London, 1883. 

Eng. trans. (Designation of Human Types) by 
B. C. Law. PTS. London, 1923. 

Ed. by Leon Freer. PTS. London, 1884-98. 

Indexes by Mrs. Rhys Davids. London, 1904. 
Eng. trans. (Book of the Kindred Sayings or 
Grouped Suttas) by Mrs. Davids and F. L. 
Woodward. PTS. London, 1917-30. 

Ed. by D. Andersen and H. Smith. PTS. Lon¬ 
don, 1913. 

Eng. trans. by V. Fausboll. SBE. Oxford, 1898. 
Text and trans. by R. Chalmers. HOS. Cam¬ 
bridge, Mass, 1932. 

666 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


*Theri-gathd 


*Thera—gatha 


*Uddna 


Vibhanga 
*Vimanavatthu 
Vinaya Pifaka 


Vinayavastu 

Yamaha 


Metrical trans. (Woven Cadences of Early 
Buddhists) by E. M. Hare. SBB. London, 
1944. 

Ed. by H. Oldenberg. PTS. London, 1883. 

Eng. trans. (Psalms of the Brethren) by Mrs. 

Rhys Davids. PTS. London, 1913. 

Ed. by R. Pischel. PTS. London, 1883. 

Eng. trans. (Psalms of the Sisters) by Mrs. 
Rhys Davids. PTS. London, 1909. 

Ed. by P. Steinthal. PTS. London, 1885. 

Eng. trans. by D. M. Strong. London, 1902. 
Eng. trans. (Verses of Uplift) by F. L. Wood¬ 
ward. SBB. London, 1935. 

Ed. by Mrs. Rhys Davids. PTS. London, 1904. 
Ed. by E. R. Gooneratne. PTS. London, 1886. 
Ed. by H. Oldenberg. PTS. London, 1879-83. 
Eng. trans. (Vinaya Texts) by T. W. Rhys 
Davids and H. Oldenberg. SBE. Oxford 
1881-85. 

(Gilgit Manuscripts). Ed. by Dr. N. Dutt. 1942. 
Ed. by Mrs. Rhys Davids assisted by G. Dib- 
ben, M. C. Foley, M. Hunt and M. Smith. 
PTS. London, 1911-1913. 


(ii) NON-CANONICAL TEXTS, COMMENTARIES, 

AND TRANSLATIONS: 


*AtthasaXini 


Chulavaihsa 


Dhammapada Com¬ 
mentary 


Digha Nikaya Com¬ 
mentary: 
LHpavamsa 
Divyavadana 

Jatakamald of Arya 
Sura 

Lalitavistara 


Ed. by E. Muller. PTS. London, 1897. 

Eng. trans. (The Expositor) by Maung Tin, Ed. 
and revised by Mrs. Rhys Davids. PTS. 
London, 1920-21. 

(the more recent part of the Mahavaihsa). Ed. 
by W. Geiger. 2 Vols. PTS. London, 1925- 
1927. 

Trans, by W. Geiger into German, and by C. 
Mabel Rickmers into English. 2 Vols. PTS. 
London, 1929-30. 

Ed. by H. C. Norman. 5 Vols. PTS. London, 
1906-15. 

Eng. trans. (Buddhist Legends) by E. W. Bur¬ 
lingame. 3 Vols. HOS. Cambridge, Mass. 
1921. 

See “Sumangala Vilasim.” 

Ed. and trans. by H. Oldenberg. London, 1879. 
Ed. by E. B. Cowell and R. A. Neil, Cam¬ 
bridge, 1886. 

Ed. by H. Kern. Boston, 1891. 

Eng. trans. by J. Speyer. SBB. London, 1895. 
Ed. by S. Lefmann. Halle, 1902-08. 

Ed. by R. Mitra. Calcutta, 1877. 


667 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


*Mahavamsa 


Mahdwamso 


Mahavastu 

*Milindapanho 


Netti Pakarana 

Petavatthu Com¬ 
mentary 

*Saundarananda of 
Asvaghosha 


Sumangala Vildsini 

Sutralamkdra of 
Asvaghosha 
Therlgdtha Com¬ 
mentary 


Achdrdnga 

Achardnga, 1st 
Srutaskandha 
Antaga4adasdo and 
Anuttarovavdiya - v 

dasdo j 

Aupapatika Sutra 
Dasaveyuliya Sutta 
and Nijjutti 
Kalpasutra (Brihat 
Kalpasutra 


Trans, (i-v) (German) by S. Lefmann. Berlin 
1874. 

(earlier portion of the chronicle by Maha- 
nama). Ed. by W. Geiger. PTS. London, 1908. 

Eng. trans. (The Great Chronicle of Ceylon) 
by W. Geiger assisted by Mabel H. Bode. 
London, 1912. 

Text in Roman characters, with trans. and an 
introductory essay. Part I (Chs. 1-36) by G. 
Tumour. Colombo, 1887; Part II (Chs. 37- 
100) trans. by L. C. Wijesinha. Colombo, 
1909. 

Ed. by E. Senart. Paris, 1882-97. 

Ed. by V. Trenckner. London, 1880. 

Eng. trans. by T. W. Rhys Davids. SBE. Oxford, 
1890-94 

Ed. with extracts from Dhammapala’s comm, 
by E. Hardy. PTS. London, 1902. 

Ed. by E. Hardy. PTS. London, 1901. 

Critically edited with notes, and translated 
from the original Sanskrit of Asvaghosha by 
E. H. Johnston. 2 Vols. London, 1932. 

Ed. by H. P. Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 1910. 

Commentary on the Digha Nikaya. 

Ed. by T. W. Rhys Davids. PTS. London, 1886. 

French Translation (from the Chinese version) 
by E. Huber. Paris, 1908. 

Ed. by E. Muller. PTS. London, 1893. 


(C) JAIN: 

Texts and Translations: 

Ed. by H. Jacobi. PTS. London, 1882. 

Eng. trans. by H. Jacobi. SBE. Oxford, 1892. 
Ed. by W. S. Schubring. Leipzig, 1910. 


Ed. with Abhayadeva’s comm. Bombay, 1920. 
Eng. trans. by L. D. Barnett. London, 1907. 

Ed. by E. Leumann. Leipzig, 1883. 

Ed. by E. Leumann. Leipzig, 1892. 

Ed. with introduction, translation, notes and 
introduction by W. S. Schubring. Leipzig, 
1905. 

of Bhadrabahu Ed. by H. Jacobi. Leipzig, 
1879. 

Eng. trans. by H. Jacobi. SBE. Oxford, 1892. 
668 


Kathakosa (or 
Treasury of 
Stories) 

Mahanisitha Sutra 
Niraydvaliao 


Nisitha 

Parisishtaparvan 

Parisishtaparvan 


Rajdvali Kathe 

Sthavirdvalicharita 
or Parisishtaparvan 

Suyaga4anga 

Uttaradhyayana 

TJvdsagadasdo 


Vavahdra 


Arrian Anabasis 
Indica 

Ctesias. Fragments 
of the Persica 
and of the Indica 

Herodotus. History 

Isidore of Charax 
Mansiones Par - 
thicae, Geographi 
Graeci Minores 
Justin. Epitome 
McCrindle, J. W. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Translated by C. H. Tawney from Sanskrit 
MSS. with App. containing notes by E. Leu- 
mann. London, 1895. 

Ed. by W. Schubring. Berlin, 1918. 

Ed. by S. Warren. Amsterdam, 1879. 

Ed. with Chandrasuri’s comm. Ahmedabad, 
1922. 

Ed. by W. Schubring. Leipzig, 1918. 

See Sthaviravalicharita. 

Extracts trans. into German by J. Hertel 
(Erzahlungen aus Hemachandras Parisishta¬ 
parvan) Leipzig, 1908. 

a compendium of Jain history (cf. Fleet, Indian 
Antiquary, 1892, p. 157). 

Being an appendix of the Trishashtisalaka- 
purushacharita of Hemachandra. Ed. by H. 
Jacobi, BI. Calcutta, 1883-91; 2nd Ed. 1932. 

Ed. with Silankacharya’s comm. Bombay, 1917. 

Eng. trans. by H. Jacobi. SBE. Oxford, 1895. 

Ed. by J. Charpentier. Uppsala, 1922. 

Eng. trans. by H. Jacobi. SBE. Oxford, 1895. 

Ed. in original Prakrit with Sanskrit comm, of 

Abhayadeva and Eng. trans. by A.F.R. 
Hoernle. BI. Calcutta, 1885-88. 

Ed. with Abhayadeva’s comm. Bombay, 1920. 

Ed. by W. Schubring. Leipzig, 1918. 

(2) Non-Indian Sources: 

(A) GREEK AND LATIN: 

Ed. by A. G. Roos. Leipzig, 1907. 

Ed. by R. Hercher Leipzig, 1885. 

Both trans. by E. J. Chinnock. London, 1893. 

Ed. by C. Muller in Dindorf’s Herodotus. 
Paris, 1844. Eng. trans. in McCrindle’s 
Ancient India as described by Ktesias the 
Knidian. Calcutta, Bombay, London, 1882. 

Ed. by C. Hude. 2nd Ed. Oxford, 1913-14. 

Eng. trans. by G. Rawlinson. London, 1860. 

Eng. trans. by G. C. Macaulay. London, 1904. 

Ed. by C. Muller, Paris, 1855. 

Ed. and trans. by W. H. Schoff (Parthian 
Stations of Isidore of Charax). Philadelphia, 
1914. 

Eng. trans. in McCrindle’s Invasion. 

Ancient India as described in Classical Litera¬ 
ture. Westminster, 1901. 

Ancient India as described by Ptolemy (Cal¬ 
cutta 1825). Ed. by S. N. Majumdar. (Cal¬ 
cutta 1927). 


669 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Megasthenes. Frag¬ 
ments of Indica 


Periplus Maris 
Erythraei 


Pliny. Naturalis 
Historia 

Plutarch. Life of 
Alexander 

Moralia 

Quintus Curtius 
Rufus. Historiae 
Alexandri Magni 

Strabo. Geographi- 
ca 

Xenophen, Cyro- 
paedia 


Fa-Hsien 


(Fa-Hien) 
Hiuen Tsiang 


(Yuan Chwang) 


I-tsing 


Tdrandtha 


Ed. by E. A. Schwanbeck, Bonn, 1846. 

Eng. trans. by McCrindle, Ancient India as 
described by Megasthenes and Arrian. Cal¬ 
cutta, Bombay, London, 1877. 

Ed. by Fabricius. Leipzig, 1883. 

Eng. trans. (The Commerce and Navigation of 
the Erythraean Sea, etc.) by J. W. McCrindle. 
Calcutta, Bombay, London, 1879. 

Eng.- trans. (The Periplus of the Erythraean 
Sea) and annotations by W. H. Schoff. Lon¬ 
don, 1912. 

Ed. by C. Mayhoff. Leipzig, 1892-1909. 

Ed. by K. Sintenis. Leipzig, 1881. 

Ed. by G. N. Bernardakis. Leipzig, 1888-96. 

Ed. by E. Hedicke. Leipzig. 1908. 


Ed. by Meineke. Leipzig, 1866-7. 

Eng. trans. by H. C. Hamilton and W. Falco¬ 
ner. London, 1854-7. 

Ed. and trans. by W. Miller. London, New 
York, 1914. 


(B) CHINESE: 

Trans, by H. A. Giles (The Travels of Fa-Hsien, 
or Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms). Cam¬ 
bridge, 1923. 

Trans, by J. Legge. Oxford, 1886. 

Trans, by S. Julien (Memoires sur les Contrees 
occidentalis). Paris, 1857-8. 

Trans, by S. Beal (Buddhist Records of the 
Western World). London, 1884. 

Trans, by T. Watters. (On Yuan Chwang’s 
Travels in India). Ed. by T. W. Rhys Davids 
and S. W. Bushell. 2 Vols. London, 1904-5. 

Trans, by J. Takakusu (A record of the Bud¬ 
dhist religion as practised in India and the 
Malay Archipelago). Oxford, 1896. 


(C) TIBETAN: 

Trans, by F. A. Von Schiefner (Geschichte des 
Buddhismus in Indien). St. Petersburg, 
1869. 


670 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


II. ORIGINAL SOURCES 
(1) Inscriptions, (2) Coins 
(1) Inscriptions: 

Barua, B. M. % Old Brdhmi Inscriptions in the Udayagiri and 

Khan^agiri Caves. Calcutta, 1929. 

Asoka and his inscriptions. Calcutta, 1946. 
Barua, B. M- and Barhut Inscriptions. Calcutta, 1926. 

Stniia, G. 

Bhandarkar, D. R. Inscriptions of ; Asoka. Calcutta, 1920. 
and Majumdar, S. 

N. 


Boyer, E. M., Rap- 
son, E. J. and 
Senart, E. (Ed.) 


Herzfeld, E. 


Hultzsch, E. 

Konow, Sten 

Krishna Sastri, H 

Sabma, Ramavatara 

Sen, Sukumar 
Senart, E. 

Sircar, D. C. 

Vogel, J. Ph. 


Kharoshthi Inscriptions discovered by A. Stein 
in Chinese Turkestan. Part I: Text of In¬ 
scriptions discovered at the Niya Site, 1901. 

Part II: Text of Inscriptions discovered at the 
Niya Endere and Lou-lan sites, 1906-7. 

Part IIL Text of Inscriptions discovered at 
Niya and Lou-lan sites, 1913-16. Oxford, 
1920-29. 

Paikuli: Monument and Inscription of the 
Early History of the Sassanian Empire. 2 
Vols. Texts and Plates. Berlin, 1924. 

New Inscriptions of Darius from Hamadan. 
MASI. Calcutta, 1928. 

Inscriptions of Asoka. New Ed. CII, Vol. I. 
London, 1925. 

Kharoshthi Inscriptions with the exception of 
those of Asoka. CII. Vol. II, Part I. London, 
1929. 

The New Asokan Edict of Maski. Hyderabad 
Archaeological Series, No. 1. Calcutta, 
1915. 

Piyadasi Inscriptions, with Sanskrit and Eng. 
trans. and various recensions and notes. 
Muradpur, 1915. 

Old Persian Inscriptions of the Achaemenian 
Emperors. Calcutta, 1941. 

Les Inscriptions de Piyadasi. Paris, 1881, 86. 

“The Inscriptions in the Caves at Nasik.” El, 
VIII, pp. 59-96. 

Select Inscriptions bearing on Indian History 
and Civilization. Vol. I. (From the sixth 
century B.C. to the sixth century A.D.). 
Calcutta, 1942. 

“Prakrit Inscriptions from a Buddhist site at 
Nagarjunikonda.” El, XX, pp. 1-37. (cf. 
also Lliders’ “List of Brahml Inscriptions 
up to 400 A.D.” in El, Vol. X. and N. G. 
Majumdar’s “List of Kharoshthi Inscrip¬ 
tions’’ in JPASB XX, pp. 1-39) ' 

671 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 
(2) Coins: 


Allan, J. 

Banerji, R. D. 
Bhandarkar, D. R. 
Bidyabinod, B. B. 

Brown, C. J. 
Chakraborty, S. K. 

Cunningham, A. 


Durgaprasad 

Gardner, Percy 

Herzfeld, E. 

Paruck, F. D. J. 
Rapson, E. J. 


Smith, V. A. 
Valentine, W. H. 


Whitehead, R. B. 


Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India (in 
the British Museum). London, 1936. 

Prachina Mudrd (Bengali. Calcutta, 1322 
B.S. Hindi trans. Benares, 1925). 

Carmichael Lectures on Ancient Indian 
Numismatics. Calcutta, 1921. 

Supplementary Catalogue of the Coins in the 
Indian Museum, Non-Muhammadan Series. 
Calcutta, 1923. 

Coins of India, Calcutta, 1922. 

A study of, Ancient Indian Numismatics. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1931. 

Coins of Alexander’s Successors in the East, 
the Greeks and Indo-Scythians. Part I. 
The Greeks of, Baktriana, Ariana and India. 
London, 1869. 

Coins of Ancient India from the earliest times 
down to the seventh century A.D. London, 
1891. 

“Coins of the Indo-Scythians.” Rep. Num 
Chron. London, 1888-92. 

“Later Indo-Scythians.” Rep. Num. Chron 
London, 1893-95. 

Articles on Punchmarked Coins in JRASB, 
XXX, Num. Suppl., p. 5 N. and in JRASB 
(L) III, Num. Suppl. p. 51 N. 

The Coins of the Greek and Scythic kings of 
Bactria and India. London. 1886. 

Kushano-Sassanian Coins. MASI. Calcutta, 
1930; also MASI, Nos. 59, 62. 

Sassanian Coins. Bombay, 1924. 

Indian Coins. Strassburg, 1897. 

Catalogue of the coins of the Andhra dynasty . 
the Western Kshatrapas, the Traikutaka 
dynasty and the Bodhi dynasty (Cat. of 
Indian Coins in the British Museum, Vol. 
IV). London. 1908. 

Catalogue of, the Coins in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta, including the Cabinet of the Asia¬ 
tic Society of Bengal. Vol. I. Oxford, 1906. 

Sassanian Coins arranged from works on the 
subject by Mordtmann, Stickel, Rawlinson, 
Thomas and Longperier with drawings of 
coins in the British Museum. London, 1921. 

Catalogue of Coins in the Punjab Museum, 
Lahore, Vol. I: Indo-Greek Coins. Oxford 
1914. 


672 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(A) HISTORIES 

Bhandarkar, D. R. 


Dutt, R. C. 
JayasWal, K. P. 

Majumdar, R. C. and 
Altekar, A. S. (Ed) 
Masson-Oursel 
(and others) 
Mookerji, Radha- 

KUMUD 

Oldenberg, H. 
Rapson, E. J. 
Rapson, E. J. (Ed..) 

Raychaudhuri,H. C. 

Rhys Davids, T. W. 
Smith, V. A. 

(B) 

Dasgupta, S. N. (Ed.) 

and De, S. K. 
Farquhar, J. N. 

Frazer, R. W. 
Geiger, W. 


Go wen, H. H. 

Kane, P. V. 

Keith, A. B. 

Krishnamachartar, 

M. 

Law, B. C. 

Macdonell, A. A. 
Oldenberg, H. 

WlNTERNlTZ, M. 


III. MODERN WORKS 
OF INDIA DEALING WITH THE PERIOD 
Lectures on the Ancient History of India 
(Carmichael Lectures, 1918). Calcutta, 

1919. 

History of Civilization in Ancient India. 
London, 1893. 

History of India 150-350 A.D. Lahore, 1933. 
Imperial History of India. Lahore, 1934. 

A new History of the Indian People. Vol. VI: 

The Vakdtaka-Gupta Age. Lahore, 1946. 
Ancient India and Indian Civilization. Lon¬ 
don, 1934. 

Hindu Civilization. London, 1936. 

Ancient India. 2nd Ed. Chicago, 1898. 

Ancient India. Cambridge, 1914. 

Cambridge History of India, Vol. I. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1922. 

Political History of Ancient India. 4th Ed. 

Calcutta, 1938; 5th Ed. Calcutta, 1950. 
Buddhist India. London, 1903. 

Early History of India, 4th Ed. Oxford, 1924. 

HISTORIES OF LITERATURE 

A History of Sanskrit Literature. Vol. I. 
Calcutta, 1947. 

An Outline of the Religious Literature of 
India. Oxford, 1920. 

Literary History of India. London, 1898. 

Pali Literatur und Sprache. Strassburg, 1916. 
Eng. trans. by B. K. Ghosh (Pali Literature 
and language). Calcutta, 1943. 

A History of Indian Literature. New York, 
1931. 

History of Dharmasdstra. 3 Vols. Poona, 
1930-46. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. Oxford, 1928. 
The Sanskrit Drama. Oxford, 1924. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature. Mad¬ 
ras, 1937. 

History of Pali Literature. 2 Vols. London, 
1933. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. London, 1900. 
Die Liter atur des alten Indien. Berlin, 1903. 
History of Indian Literature (Eng. trans. by 
Mrs. S. Ketkar) Vols. I and II. Calcutta, 
1927, 1933. 

Geschichte der indischen Literatur. Band III. 
Leipzig, 1920. 


A.I.U.—48 


673 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Aiyangar, S. K. 
Bhandarkar, R. G. 


Cunningham, A. 
Fick, R. 


Jouveau-Dubreuil, 

G. 


(C) GENERAL WORKS 

Ancient India and South Indian History and 
Culture. 2 Vols. Poona, 1941. 

Early History of the Dekkan . (Collected 
Works, Vol. Ill (pp. 1-198). Poona, 1927); 
3rd Ed. Calcutta, 1926. 

Ancient Geography of India (Ed. S. N. 

Majumdar Sastri). Calcutta, 1924. 

Die sociale Gliederung im norddstlichen 
Indien zu Buddha’s Zeit. Kiel, 1897. Eng. 
trans. by S. K. Maitra ( The Social Organi¬ 
zation in North-East India in Buddha’s time). 
Calcutta, 1920. 

Ancient History of the Deccan (Eng. trans.) 
Pondicherry. 1920. 


In the Bibliographies to the different chapters, the original 
sources mentioned above are not repeated. Detailed references to 
them will be found in footnotes or general references given in each 
chapter. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
CHAPTER I 

NORTH INDIA IN THE SIXTH CENTURY B.C. 

Original Sources 

[See General Bibliography I (1)] 

Modern Works 

Law, B. C. Kshatriya Clans in Buddhist India. Calcutta, 

1922. 

Ancient Mid-Indian Kshatriya Tribes. Vol. I. 
Calcutta, 1924. 

Some Kshatriya Tribes of Ancient India. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1924. 

Geography of Early Buddhism. London, 1932. 
India as described in the early texts of Bud¬ 
dhism and Jainism. London, 1941. 

Tribes in Ancient India. Poona, 1943. 


CHAPTER II 

RISE OF MAGADHAN IMPERIALISM 
Original Sources 

The Puranas [See General Bib. I. lA(ii)] 

Modern Works 

Bhandarkar, D. R. Carmichael Lectures , 1918 (Lecture II). 
Chattopadhyaya, K. “The Kings of Magadha from the Briha- 

drathas till the Mauryas.” PIHC, * IV 
pp. 140-147. 


674 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Pargiter, F. E. 

Rapson, E. J. 
Sankar, K. G. 


Purdna Text of the Dynasties of the Kali Age. 
London, 1913. 

“The Puranas”. CHI, I, pp. 296-318. 

“Some Problems of Indian Chronology.” 
ABORI, XII, pp. 301-361. 


CHAPTER III 
FOREIGN INVASIONS 

(I) PERSIAN INVASION 
Original Sources 

(See General Bibliography, 1, 2. A: Greek and Latin sources; 

II. 1. Inscriptions: Herzfeld, Sen and Sircar) 

Modern Works 

A. V. W. Jackson in CHI. I, XIV. 

“Notes and Allusions to Ancient India in 
Pahlavl Literature and in Firdausi’s 
Shah-namah.” Festschrift Ernst Windisch, 
pp. 209-12 (Leipzig, 1914). 

(II) MACEDONIAN INVASION 
Original Sources 

(See General Bibliography, III. A. Histories of India and 1,2,A 

for McCrindle’s Works) 

The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great 
as described by Arrian, Q. Curtius, Diodoros, 
Plutarch and Justin. New Ed. Westminster, 
1896. 

Modern Works 

“Alexander the Greats. CHI, I. pp. 345-390. 
Alexanders Kamf gegen Poros . Stuttgart. 
1933. 

The Life and Eocploits of Alexander the Great 
(Syriac version). Cambridge, 1889. 

Gates of India . London, 1910. 

“Alexander, Porus and the Punjab.” IA , 
XXXIV. pp. 253 ff. 

India in Greece. London. 1852. 

India as described by early Greek writers. 
Allahabad, 1939. 

Arrian’s History of Alexander’s Expedition. 
On Alexander’s Track to the Indus. Macmillan, 
1929. 

Alexander, the Great. 2 Vols. Cambridge, 1950. 
The Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. VI. Chs. 
XII-XV. Cambridge, 1933. 


McCrindle, J. W. 


Bevan, E. R. 
Breloer, B. 

Budge, E. A. W. 

Holdich, T. H. 
Pearson, C. 

Pococke, E. 
Puri, B. N. 

Rooke 
Stein, Aurel 

Tarn, W. W. 


675 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


CHAPTER IV 

CHANDRAGUPTA AND THE MAURYA EMPIRE 

[See General Bibliography: I. 1(A): Brahmanical Works: 
(iii) Purdnas; (v) Arthasdstra; (B) Buddhist Works, 
specially, Divyavaddna, Mahdvmhsa, Sutralamkara; (C) 

Jain Works, specially, Parisishtaparvan, Rdjdvalikathe, 
Vichdrasreni; 1. 2(A): Greek and Latin sources, specially 

McCrindle’s Works]. 


Mahabodhivamsa 
or Bodhivamsa 
Mudrdrdkshasa of 
Visdkhadatta 


Bhargava L, P, 
Jayaswal K. P. 

Louis de la Vallee 
Poussin 

Mookerji, R. K. 


Ed. by S. A. Strong. PTS. London, 1891. 

(A drama in Sanskrit). 

Ed. by A. Hillebrandt. Breslau, 1912. 

Ed. by K. T. Telang. Bombay, 1893. 

Eng. trans. by R. S. Pandit. Bombay, 1944. 

Modern Works 

Chandragupta Maury a. Lucknow, 1935. 

Hindu Polity. Calcutta, 1924; 2nd Ed. Banga¬ 
lore, 1943. 

LTnde aux temps de Maury as. Paris, 1930. 

Chandragupta Maurya and His Times. Madras, 
1943. 

(For works on Architecture and Art during 
the Mauryan Age, see Bibliography to Chap¬ 
ter XX, infra). 


CHAPTER V 
AS OKA THE GREAT 
Original Sources 

[Brahmanical, Buddhist and Jain sources as mentioned in Chapter 
IV, supra; also General Bibliography, 1, 2(A, B, C) Greek and Latin 
sources, and Chinese and Tibetan sources. References to Inscriptions 

will be found in General Bibliography] 

Modern Works 


Barua, B. M. 
Bhandarkar, 
Buhler, G. 

Burnouf, E. 
Hardy, E. 


(See References in Chapter IV) 

Inscriptions of Asoka. Calcutta, 1934. 

Asoka and His Inscriptions. Calcutta, 1946. 

D. R. Asoka (Carmichael Lectures, 1923). 2nd Ed. 
Calcutta, 1932. 

“Erklarung der Asoka-Inschriften”. ZDMG, 
1883, 87. 

“Asoka Edicts.” El, I and II. 

Introduction a Vhistoire du Buddhisme Indien. 
2nd Ed. Paris, 1876. 

Indiens Kultur in der Bliitezeit des Buddhis- 
mus: Konig Asoka. Mainz, 1902. 


676 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Macphail, J. M. 
Mookerji, R. K. 
Smith, V. A. 

Thomas, F. W. 


Woolner, A. C. 


Asoka. Calcutta. 

Asoka (Gaekwad Lectures). London, 1928. 
Asoka, the Buddhist emperor of India. 3rd Ed. 
Oxford, 1920. 

“Les vivasdh rAgoka.” JA, 1910 (xv). 

“Asoka, the imperial patron of Buddhism.” 
CHI, I, 495-513. 

Asoka Text and Glossary. 2 Vols. Calcutta, 
1924. 


CHAPTER VI 

THE FALL OF THE MAGADHAN EMPIRE 

Original Sources 

(See Puranas in General Bibliography, I. 1. A, iii; and Divyavadana 
in I. 1. B. iii. Also Allan and Cunningham in General Bibliography. 

II. 2: Coins) 

(A drama in Sanskrit) 

Ed. S. P. Pandit. BSS. Bombay, 1889. 

Eng. trans. C. H. Tawney. Calcutta, 1875. 

Modern Works 

A peep into the early history of, India, from 
the foundation of the Maurya Dynasty to 
the downfall of the Gupta Dynasty . With a 
preface by H. G. Rawlinson. Bombay, 1920. 
“The Puranas.” CHI, I, pp. 296-318. 

“Indian Native States after the period of the 
Maurya Empire.” CHI, I, pp. 514-538. 

CHAPTER VII 
THE YAVANAS 
Original Sources 
(i) LITERARY 

[See General Bibliography, 1. 2(A) Greek and Latin sources; I. 1. B. 
(ii) Milindapanha; I. 1, A (iii) Yugapurana; and Mdlavikdgnimitra in 

Chapter VI]. 

(ii) COINS AND INSCRIPTIONS 
(See General Bibliography, II). 

Buhler, G. “Kharoshthi Inscriptions on Indo-Grecian 

Coins.”‘WZKM, VIII. 

Cunningham, A. The Coins of Alexander’s Successors in the 

East. London, 1873. (Num. Chron., 1868-73). 


Mdlavikagnimitra \ 
of Kalidasa 


B HAND ARK AR, R. G. 


Rapson, E. J. 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Rapson, E. J. “Coins of the Graeco-Indian Sovereigns Aga- 

thocleia, Strato I Soter, and Strato II Philo 
pater.” Corolla Numismatica, Numismatic 
Essays in honour of Barclay V. Head. Ox¬ 
ford, 1906. 

Wroth, W. Coins of Parthia. British Museum Catalogue, 

London, 1903. 


Modern Works 


(General Bibliography, III A. Histories of India; C. General Works; 

Bhandarkar, R. G. in Chapter IV.) 


Bevan, E. R. 
Fleet, J F. 


Rapson, E. J. 
Rawlins on, H. G. 
Von Sallet, A. 
Tarn, W. W. 


The House of Seleucus . London, 1902. 

“Sakala, gakala, the city of Milinda and 
Mihirakula.” Trans. Int. Or. Congress, 
Algiers, Part I. 1905. 

“The Successors of Alexander the Great.” 

I, pp. 540-62. 

Bactria, the History of a forgotten Empire. 
London, 1912. 

Die Nachfolger Alexanders des Grossen in 
Bactrien und Indien. Berlin, 1883. 

The Greeks in Bactria and India. Cambridge, 


1938. 

CHAPTER VIII 

THE SAKAS AND THE PA.HLAVAS 


Original Sources 
(i) LITERARY 

(See Greek, Latin, and Chinese sources in General Bibliography, 

1. 2. A, B). 

(ii) INSCRIPTIONS AND COINS 
(See General Bibliography, H. 1, 2). 

Banerji, R. D. “Notes on Indo-Scythian Coinage.” JASB. 

Num. Suppl., IV, 81-96. 

Modern Works 


(General Bibliography, III. A Histories of India; C. General Works, 
Von Sallet and Tarn in Chapter VII, supra). 


Banerji, R. D. 

Banerji-Sastri, A.P. 

Fleet, J. F. 
Herzfeld, E. 
Jayaswal, K. P. 

Konow, Sten 


“The Scythian Period of Indian History”. IA, 
1908. 

“Sakas and Kushanas in I and II centuries.” 
IHQ, XIII, p. 199 ff. 

“Moga, Maues, and Vonones.” JRAS, 1907. 
Sakastan. 1932. 

“Problems of &aka Satavahana History”. 

JBORS. XVI, pp. 227-316. 

“Notes on Indo-Scythian Chronology”. JIH. 
XII. pp. 1-46. 


678 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Levi, S. 

“Notes sur les Indo-Scythes”. JA, 1896 (viii); 
1897 (ix). 

McGovern, W. M. 

“Notes on the Indo-Scythians” extracted and 
rendered into English, by W. R. Phillips. 
1A. XXXII, pp. 381 ff, 417 ff; XXXIII, 
pp. 10 ff, 110 ff. 

The Early Empire of Central Asia . Chapel Hill, 
1939. 

Rapson, E. J. 

“The Northern Kshatrapas”. JRAS, 1894. 

“The Scythian and Parthian Invaders”. CHI, 

Smith, V. A. 

I, pp. 563-585. 

“The Indo-Parthian Dynasties”. ZDMG, 1906. 

Specht, E. 

“The Sakas in Northern India”. ZDMG, 1907. 
“Etudes sur l’Asie centrale, d’ apres les his- 
toriens chinois”. JA, 1883 (ii). 

“Les Indo-Scythes et l’epoque du regne de 
Kanichka, d’apres les sources chinoises”. 
JA, 1897 (x). 

Thomas, F. W. 

Van Lohuizen de 
Leeuw, J. E. 

“£akastana”. JRAS, 1906, pp. 181-216; 460-4. 
The Scythian Period. Leiden, 1949. 

CHAPTER IX 

THE KUSHANAS 

• 


Original Sources 

(See General Bibliography, II. Inscriptions and Coins). 

Modern Works 

(General Bibliography, III. A. Histories of India; C. General Works; 
Banerji, Konow, Levi, Smith and Specht in Chapter VIII, supra). 


Chavannes, E. 

Documents sur les Tou-kiue (Turcs ) occi¬ 

Kennedy, J. 

dental^. St. Petersburg, 1903. 

“The Secret of Kanishka”. JRAS, 1912. pp. 
665 ff, 920 ff. 

Kingsmill, T. W. 

“The Intercourse of China with Eastern Tur¬ 

Konow, Sten 
Majumdar, R. C. 
Martin, M. F. C. 

kestan and the adjacent countries in the 
second century B. C.” JRAS, 1882, pp. 74 ff. 
“Further Kanishka Notes.” IHQ, III. 

“The Kushan Chronology”. JDL, I, pp. 65-112. 
“Coins of the Kidara Kushanas” (Num. Suppl. 
XLVII, pp. 23-50 — JRASBL, III) Calcutta, 
1937. 

Smith, V. A. 

“The Kushan, or Indo-Scythian, Period of 
Indian History”. JRAS, 1903. 

Stein, M. A. 

Zur Geschichte der Sdhis von Kabul . Stutt¬ 
gart, 1893. 

For the date of Kanishka, see PHAI, pp. 388- 
394; and Winternitz, HIL, II, App. V. pp. 
611-4 for important references, 


679 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


CHAPTER X 

THE VIKRAMA SAMVAT AND SAKABDA 

Original Sources 

Dvdtrimsatputta - Edited with new commentary by Ashubodha 

likd-simhasanam Vidyabhushana and Nityabodha Vidyaratna. 

(or Vikramarka- 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1916. 

charita) 

Kdlakachdryaka - Texts, history, legends etc., by W. N. Brown. 

thd (The story of Washington, 1933. 

Kdlaka) 

Vikramacharita or Edited in four different recensions of the 
Svmhdsana-dvd- Sanskrit original and translated into English 

trimsiha ( Vikrama’s Adventures) by F. Edgerton. 2 

Vols. HOS. Cambridge, Mass., 1926. 


Altekar, A. S. 


Banerji, R. D. 
Bhandarkar, D. R. 


Burgess, J. 

Deb, H. K. 

Dvivedi, H. N. 

Edgerton, F. 
Fergusson, J. 

Fleet, J. F. 


Modern Works 

“Maukhari Inscriptions on Yupas”. El, XXIII, 
No. 7. El, XXIV, No. 34. 

“Vikrama Samvatsara” (in Marathi). Sahyddn 
(Marathi monthly magazine, Poona), Oct. 
1943, pp. 693-701. 

“Salivahana Saka” (in Marathi). Sahyddri, 
Feb. 1944, 100 ff. 

“Who founded the Vikrama Era?” POC, XII, 
vol. II, pp. 501-2. 

“The Riddle of the Vikrama Era.” Vikrama 
Volume, pp. 1-19. 

“Nahapana and the Saka Era.” JRAS, 1917, 
pp. 273 ff. 

“Vikrama Era.” Bhandarkar Comm. Vol., pp. 
187-194. 

“The Years called Krita or the origin of the 
Vikrama Era.” IA, LXI, pp. 101-3. 

“Vikrama Samvat, its Origin and Nomencla¬ 
ture in Different Periods.” Vikrama Volume, 
pp. 57-69. 

“Prof. Kielhorn on the Vikrama Era”. JRAS, 
1891, pp. 483 ff. 

“Vikramaditya and his era”. ZII, I, pp. 250- 
302; JBHU, VIII, pp. 163-206. 

“Vikramaditya and the Vikrama Era”. Vik¬ 
rama Volume, pp. 115-136. 

VikrarruVs Adventures, Intro., pp. lxi ff. 

“Saka Samvat and Gupta Eras”. JRAS, 1880, 
pp. 259 ff. 

“On the Nomenclature of the Principal Hindu 
Eras and the use of the word Samvatsara 
and its abbreviations”. I A, XII, pp. 207 ff; 
291 ff. 


680 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Jayaswal, K P. 
Karandikar, J. S. 

Kielhorn, F. 

Kingsmill, Th. W. 

Konow, Sten 

Majumdar, R. C. 
Mookerji,R.K. (Ed.) 

PUSALKER, A. D. 

Raychaudhurt, H. 

c. 

Sastri, H. P. 

Saraswati, A. R. 
Shembavnekar, K.M. 


Sircar, D. C. 

Thomas, F. W. 
Vyas, K. B. 


“The Saka Era”. JRAS. 1910, pp. 818 ff. 

“Salivahana and the Saka Era”. JRAS , 1916, 
pp. 809 ff. 

“Malavaganasthiti”. JRAS, 1914, pp. 745 ff; 
1915, pp. 138 ff, 202 ff. 

“Problems of £aka Satavahana History”. 
JBORS, XVII, pp. 227-316. 

“Vikramadityavar nava prakasa” (in Marathi). 

“New light on Vikramaditya.” Sahyadri, April 
1944, pp. 203-15. 

“Examination of Questions connected with the 
Vikrama Era”. IA, XIX, pp. 20 ff. 166 ff, 
354 ff; XX, pp. 124 ff, 397 ff. 

“Vikramaditya Sarhvatsara and the founding 
of the Kushana kingdom”. JASB, 1911, 
721-51. 

CII, Vol. IT, Part I, pp. lxxxv f; lxxxvii ff. 

“Kalawan copperplate inscription of the year 
134”. JRAS, 1932, pp. 949-965. 

“King Vikramaditya and Vikrama Samvat.” 
Vikrama Volume, pp. 289-302. 

Vikrama Volume. Ujjain, 1948. 

“Vikramaditya in the Puranas” Bharatiya 
Vidyd, VIII 129 ff. 

“Vikramaditya in the Brihat Katha”. Dr. C. 
Kunhan Raja Presentation Volume, 262 ff. 

“Vikramaditya in History and Legend.” Vik¬ 
rama Volume, pp. 483-511. 

“Mandasore Inscription of the time of Nara- 
varman”. El, XII, pp. 315-321. 

“Founder of the Vikrama Era”. QJMS , XII, 
268-82; 506-10. 

“A Puzzle in Indian Epigraphy”. JIH, X. 

“Samvat Kalagananecha samsthapaka Para- 
maravam&ya Vikramaditya” (in Marathi) 
“Vikramaditya of the Paramaras, the 
founder of the Samvat Era.” Sahyadri, 
December 1943, 789-90; (Altekar’s reply on 
pp. 791 ff). 

“‘Vikrama Samvat.” POC, XII, pp. 510-11. 

“The Vikrama Samvat.” Vikrama Volume, 
pp. 557-586. 

“Malavaganasthiti.” JRAS, 1914, 413 ff, 1010 ff; 
1915, 533 ff; 1916, 162 ff. 

“The Vikramaditya Problem: A fresh ap¬ 
proach” ABORI, XXVII. 209 ff. 


681 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


CHAPTER XI 

NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE KUSHANAS 

Original Sources 

(For literary sources, see General Bibliography, I. A. iii Puranas, 
For inscriptions and coins, General Bibliography II). 

Altekar, A. S. “Nandsa Yupa Inscriptions”. El, XXVII, 

252 ff. 

“New Naga Coins and the Identity of Bhava- 
naga”. JNSI, V. pp. 21-26. 

“Some Alleged Naga and Vakataka Coins”. 
JNSI, V, pp. 111-34. 

Moti Chandra “Hoard of Kausambi Coins from Fatehpur”. 

JNSI, II, pp. 95-108. 

Modern Works 

(General Bibliography, III. A. Histories of India; C. General Works; 
Jayaswal and Pargiter in Chapter II, supra). 

Altekar. A. S. “Maghas of South Kosala”. JGJRI, I, pp. 

149-60. 

Cunningham, A. Archaeological Survey of India, Report II. 

Simla, i871. 

CHAPTER XII 

THE SAKA SATRAPS OF WESTERN INDIA 

Original Sources 

(See General Bibliography II, Inscriptions and Coins). 

Acharya, G. V. “Hoards of the Coins of the Western Kshatra- 

pas.” (Num. Supp. XLVII, pp. 95 ff JRASBL. 
Ill) Calcutta, 1937. 

Altekar, A. S. “Was Jivadaman a Mahakshatrapa more than 

once?” JNSI, I, pp. 18-19. 

“Interregnum in the reign of Mahakshatrapa 
Rudrasena”. JNSI, VI. 

Bhandarkar, D. R. “Kshatrapa Coins from Sarvania”. ASR, 1913-4, 

pp. 227 ff. 

Modern Works 

(General Bibliography III. A. Histories of India, C. General Works). 

Bakhle, V. S. “Satavahanas and the contemporary Kshatra- 

pas”. JBBRAS , NS, III, pp. 44-100; IV, pp. 
39-79. 

Banerji, R. D. “Nahapana and the Saka Era”. JRAS, 1917, 

pp. 273 ff. 

Bhagwanlal Indraji “The Western Kshatrapas”. JRAS, 1890. 
and E. J. Raps on. 


682 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER XIII 

THE SATAVAHANAS AND THE CHEDIS 

(Jnginal Sources 

(See General Bibliography, I. A., iii. Puranas; II. 1 and 2 

Inscriptions and Coins). 

Mirashi, V. Y. “A New Hoard of Satavahana Coins from 

Tarhala.” JNSI, II, pp. 83-94. 

Senart, E. “Satavahana Inscriptions”. El, VII, VIII. 

Smith, V. A. “Andhra History and Coinage.” ZDMG. 

1902-3. 

Modern Works 


(General Bibliography, III. A. Histories of India, C. General Works). 

“Satavahana and Satakarni”. Bull. Sch. Or. 

Studies. London, Vol. IX, part 2. 

“Deccan of the Satavahana Period”. IA, 
1918-19. 

Early History of the Andhra Country. Madras. 
1941. 

“Satavahana and Satakarni”. ABORI, XXVII, 
pp. 237-287. 

History of the Early Dynasties of Andhradesa. 
Madras, 1942. 

Pre-Aryan and Pre-Dravidian in India. 

(Eng. trans. by P. C. Bagchi). Calcutta, 1929. 
“The Chronology of the Satavahanas”. Sir 
Asutosh Memorial Volume, Part II, pp. 
107-17. Patna, 1926. 

Successors of the Satavahanas in the Lower 
Deccan. Calcutta, 1939. 

Buddhist Remains in Andhra and the History 
of Andhra between 225 and 610 A.D. 
Madras, 1932. 

“On the home of the so-called Andhra kings.” 
ABORI, I, 21. 

CHAPTER XIV 

DECCAN AFTER THE SATAVAHANAS 


Barnett, L. D. 
Bhandarkar, D. R. 
Gopalaciiari, K. 
JoGLEKAR, S. A. 
Krishna Rao, B. V. 
Levi, S. 

Majumdar, R. C. 

Sircar, D. C. 
SuBRAMANIAN, K. R. 

SUKTHANKAR, V. S. 


Original Sources 

(For inscriptions and coins see General Bibliography II and the 

footnotes to the Chapter). 

Altekar, A. S. “Some Alleged Naga and Vakataka Coins”. 

JNSI, V. 111-34. 

Mirashi, V. V. “Vakataka Inscriptions in Cave XVI at Ajanta” 

(Hyd. Arch. Series, XIV), Hyderabad, 1914. 
Basim Plates El, XXVI, 137; 1HQ, XVI, 182, XVII; 110; IC; 

VIII. 394. 


683 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Modern Works 

(General Bibliography, III. A. Histories of India; C. General Works; 
also Jayaswal and Pargiter in Chapter II supra). 

“The Vakatakas and their place in the History 
of India’’. ABORT, V. pp. 31-54. JIH, V. VI. 
“Original Home of the Vakataka Dynasty”. 

Journ. U. P. Hist. Soc . XVIII. 204. 

Mysore Archaeological Survey Report, 1929, 
pp. 197 ff. 

“History of the Vakatakas”. JIH. XXIV. 124. 
“The Chronology of the Vakatakas”. JRASBL. 
XII. 1. 

“Genealogy and Chronology of the Vaka¬ 
takas”. JIH, XIV. pp. 1-26; 165-204. 

“The Vakataka Dynasty of Berar in the 4th 
and 5th Centuries.” JRAS, 1914, pp. 317 ff. 

CHAPTER XV 

SOUTH INDIA AND CEYLON 
(A) SOUTH INDIA 
Original Sources ; Literary 

[General Bibliography, I. 1. A. Brahmanical, (iii) Puranas; 1. 2. A. 

Greek and Latin Sources]. 

Original Sources: Inscriptions and Coins 

(General Bibliography, II). 

Elliot, W. Coins oj Southern India. London, 1885. 

Sewell, R. “Roman Coins found in India”. JRAS, 1904. 

Smith, V. A. “Andhra History and Coinage”. ZDMG. 

1902-3. 


Aiyangar, S. K. 

Bajpai, K. D. 

Krishna, M. H. 

Kale, Y. M. 
Majumdar, R. C 

Pai, M. G. 

Smith, V. A. 


South Indian Inscriptions 

Modern Works 


(General Bibliography, III. A. Histories of India; C. General Works; 
also Gopalachari, Sircar from Chapter XIII supra). 


Barnett, L. D. 

Dikshitar, V. R. R. 

Gopalan, R. 

Iyengar, T R Sesha 
Mtnakshi, C. 

Moraes, G. M. 

Pillai, K. N. Siva 
Raja. 


“The Early History of Southern India”. CHI, 
I, pp. 593-603. 

Studies in Tamil Literature and History. 
London, 1930. 

History of the Pallavas of Kanchi. Madras, 
1928. 

Dravidian India. Madras, 1925. 

Administration and Social Life under the 
Pallavas. Madras, 1938. 

Kadambakula. Bombay, 1931. 

The Chronology of the Early Tamils. Madras, 
1932. 


684 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


PlLLAI, V. 

Kanakasabhai 
Rick, B. L. 

Sesha Aiyar, K. G. 


The Tamils Eighteen Hundred Years Ago 
Madras, 1904. 

Mysore and Coorg from Inscriptions. London. 
1909. 

Chera Kings of the Sangam Period. London, 
1937. 


(B) CEYLON 

Original Sources: Literary ; Pali 

(General Bibliography, I. 1. B. ii: Non-Canonical Pali Texts, 

Chiilavamsa, Dipavamsa, and Mahavamsa; Mahdbodhivamsa in 

Chapter IV, supra). 

Ddthdvamsa Ed. and trans. by B. C. Law, Lahore, 1925. 

Hatthavanagalla - Ed. by James d’Alwis. 
vihara-vamsa 


Original Sources: Literary: Sinhalese 


Attanagalu-vansa 

Daladapujavaliya 
Daladasirita 
Nikdya Sangraha 


Pujavaliya , Ch. 34 


Rdjaratnakaraya 

Rdjdvaliya 


Ed. by M. Kumaranatunga. Colombo, B. E. 
2466. 

Ed. by K. M. Perera. Colombo, 1893. 

Ed. by E. S. Rajasekhara. Colombo, 1920. 

Ed. by D. M. de Z. Wickremasinghe. Colombo, 
1890. 

Eng. trans. by C. M. Fernando, with an intr. 

by W. F. Gunawardhana. Colombo, 1908. 

Ed. by M. Medhankara Thera, and trans. by 
B. Gunasekhara (A Contribution to the His¬ 
tory of Ceylon). Colombo, 1895. 

Ed. by Simon de Silva. Colombo, 1907. 

Ed. by B. Gunasekhara. Colombo, 1911. 

Eng. trans. by B. Gunasekhara. Colombo, 1900 


Original Sources: Inscriptions and Coins 


CODRlNGTON, H. W. 

Geiger, W. 


Levi, S. 


Muller, E. 

Rhys Davids, T. W. 


Ceylon Coins and Currency (Memoirs of the 
Colombo Museum ). Colombo, 1924. 
“Konigsnamen in den Brahml Inschriften 
Ceylons”. Festschrift Winternitz, pp. 313-21. 
Leipzig, 1933. 

“Les Mission de Wang Hiuen-Tse dans 
LTnde”. ( JA , 1900, pp. 297 ff; 410 ff). The 
portion relating to Ceylon has been trans¬ 
lated into English by J.M.S. Seneviratne. 
JRAS, Ceylon Branch. XXIV pp. 74 ff. 
Ancient Inscriptions in Ceylon. London, 
1883. 

Ancient Coins and Measures of Ceylon. Lon¬ 
don, 1877. 


685 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


“Inscriptions of Mahanama at Bodhgaya.” 
I A, XXX, pp. 192-7. 

“The Early History of Ceylon”. CHI , I, pp. 
604-11. 

History of Ceylon. London, 1926. 

Ceylon . Wiesbaden, 1898. 

Ancient Ceylon. London, 1909. 

Historical, Political and Statistical Account of 
Ceylon and its Dependencies. 2 Vols. Lon¬ 
don, 1849. 

An Epitome of the History of Ceylon. 1836. 

CHAPTER XVI 
LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

(A) SANSKRITIC 

[A Select list of important texts in Sanskrit, Pali and Ardhamagadhi 
is given in General Bibliography I, 1, A (Brahmanical), B (Buddhist) 
and C (Jain). Further accounts of the individual texts will be found 
in Winternitz: History of Indian Literature, and other Histories 
of Literature given in General Bibliography, III. B. Accounts of 
recent studies (1917-1942) in (i) the Epics, Puranas and Bhagavadgxta , 
(ii) Prakrit, and (iii) Linguistics will be found in the survey articles 
contributed to the Progress of Indie Studies, Poona, 1943, by (i) 
Pusalkar, (ii) Ghatage, and (iii) S. K. Chatterji; Bapat has given the 
account of recent studies in Pali in POC, XII, Vol. II, pp. 99-130]. 


Smith, V. A. 


Barnett, L. D. 

CODRINGTON, II. W. 

Geiger, W. 
Parker, IT. 
Pridham, C. 


Turnour, G. 


Belvalkar, S. K. 
Bhandarkar, R. G. 


De, S. K. 

Holtzmann, A. 
Hopkins, E. W. 


Jacobi, H. 
Jagirdar, R. V. 
Kane, P. V. 
Keith, A. B. 
Konow, S. 

Levi, S. 


Systems of Sanskrit Grammar. Poona, 1915. 
Vaishnavism, Saivism, etc. Strassburg, 1913. 
Wilson Philological Lectures . Bombay, 1914. 
Articles on Panini, Katyayana, and Patanjali. 
Collected Works -of Sir R. G. Bhandarkar. 
Vol. I. Poona, 1933. 

Studies in the History of Sanskrit Poetics. 

2 Vols. London, 1923, 25. 

Das Mahabharata. 4 Vols. Kiel, 1892-95. 

The Great Epic of India. New York, 1901. 
Epic Mythology . Strassburg, 1915. 

“Family Life and Social Customs as they ap¬ 
pear in the Epics”. CHI , I, pp. 227-250. 
“Princes and Peoples of the Epic Poems.” CHI, 
I, pp. 251-276. 

Das Rdmdyana. Bonn. 1893. 

Drama in Sanskrit Literature . Bombay, 1947. 
History of Alahkdra Literature. Bombay, 1923. 
Sanskrit Drama . Oxford, 1924. 

Das indische Drama . Berlin, 1920. 

Le theatre indien. Paris, 1890. 

680 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Luders, H. 


Michelson, T. 

Oldenberg, II. 
Printz, W. 


PlJSALKER, A. D. 
Schrader, F. O. 

Sukthankar Memo¬ 
rial Edition 
Vaidya, C. V. 

Weber, A. 


Aiyangar, M. Srini¬ 
vasa 

Caldwell, R 


Dikshitar, V. R. R. 
Ilankovadigal 


Iyengar, M. Raghava 
Konar, A. Karmega 
Mudaliar, A. R. 

Govindaraja 
P lLLAI, K. N. 

SlVARAJA 
PlLLAI, M. S. 

Purnalingam 
P lLLAI, V. 

Kanakasabhai 


Bruchstucke buddhisticher Dramen. Berlin, 
1911. 

Bruchstucke der Kalpandmanditika des 
Kumdraldta. Leipzig, 1926. 

“Linguistic Archaisms of the Ramayana.” 

JAOS, 15, pp. 89-145. 

Das Mahabharata. Gottingen, 1922. 

Bhasa’s Prakrit. Frankfurt, 1921. (Eng. trans. 
in the Journal of Sri V enkatesvara Oriental 
Institute, Vol. IV). 

Bhasa—A Study. Lahore, 1940. 

Introduction to the Panchardtra and the Ahir- 
budhnya Samhitd. Adyar, 1916. 

2 Vols. Edited by P. K. Gode. Poona, 1944, 
1945. 

Mahabharata: A Criticism. Bombay, 1905. 

The Riddle of the Ramayana. Bombay, 1906. 
“Uber das Ramayana”. Abhandlungen der 
Berliner Akademie der Wiss., philol.-histor. 
Klass&, 1870. 

y -S 

(B) DRAVIDIAN 
Tamil Studies. Madras, 1914. 

A. Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian or 
South-Indian Family of Languages. 2nd 
Ed. London, 1875. 

Studies in Tamil Literature and History. 
London, 1930. 

Silappadikaram (Eng. trans: The Lay of the 
Anklet , by V. R. R. Dikshitar. Oxford, 
1939). 

Seran Senguttuvan (Tamil). 

Nallisai Pulavargal (Tamil). 

Sang a Nool (Tamil). 

The Chronology of the Early Tamils. Madras. 
1932. 

Tamil Literature. Tinneveily, 1929. 

The Tamils eighteen hundred years ago, 
Madras, 1904. 


CHAPTER XVII 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE SYSTEM 

Original Sources 

(General Bibliography, I. 1. A. iv: Dharmasdstra and v: Arthasdstra: 
Chullavagga and Mahdvagga in Vinaya Texts—General Bibliography 

I. 1 B.i.). 


687 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Kdmandaktya Nlti - Ed. by R. Mitra. BI. Calcutta, 1849-84. 

sara Ed. with the comm, of Sankararya, by T. 

Ganapati Sastri. Trivandrum, 1912. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1896. 
Sukra. Nitisdra Ed. by Gustav Oppert. Madras, 1882. 

Eng. trans. by B. K. Sarkar. 2nd Ed. Allaha¬ 
bad, 1923. 

Modern Works 

(General Bibliography, III. A. Histories of India: C. General Works). 


Aiyangar, K. V. 

Rangaswami 
Bandyopadhyaya, 
N. C. 


Some Aspects of Ancient Indian Polity. 2nd 
Ed. Madras, 1935. 

Development of Hindu Polity and Political 
Theories. Parts I and II. Calcutta, 1927, 


Basu, P. 
Beni Prasad 


Bhandarkar, D. R. 

Berloer, B. 

(Miss) Dharma, P. C. 
Dikshitar, V. R. R. 


1938. 

Kautilya, or an exposition of his social ideal 
and political theory. Vol. I. The Art of 
good government. Calcutta, 1927. 

Indo-Aryan Polity. London, 1925. 

The State in Ancient India. Allahabad, 1928. 
Theory of Government in Ancient India. 
Allahabad, 1927. 

Some Aspects of Ancient Hindu Polity. 
Benares, 1929. 

Kautilya Studien. Bonn, 1927-34. 

The Rdmayana Polity, Madras, 1941. 

Hindu Administrative Institutions. Madras. 
1923. 


Ghoshal, U. N. History of Hindu Political Theories. London, 

1923. 


Hillebrandt, A. 
Jayaswal, K P. 

Jolly, J. 

Law, N. N. 

Nilakanta Sastri, 
K. A. 

Panikkar, K. M. 
Sinha, H. N. 

Stein, O. 


A History of Hindu Public Life. Part I. 
Calcutta, 1945. 

The Beginnings of Indian Historiography and 
other Essays. Calcutta, 1944. 

Alt-indische Politik. Jena, 1923. 

Hindu Polity. Calcutta, 1924; 2nd Ed. Ban¬ 
galore, 1943. 

Recht und Sitte. Strassburg, 1896. (Eng. trans. 
by B. K Ghosh, Hindu Law and Custom. 
Calcutta, 1928). 

Inter-State Relations in Ancient India. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1920. 

Studies in Ancient Hindu Polity. Longmans, 
1914. 

The Theory of, pre-Muslim Indian Polity. 
Madras, 1912. 

Origin and Evolution of Kingship in India. 
* Baroda, 1938. 

Sovereignty in Ancient Indian Polity. Luzac 
1938. 

Megasthenes und Kautilya. Wien, 1921. 


688 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER XVIII 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


Original Sources 

[General Bibliography, I. 1. A. (iv) Dharmasastra, and 

(v) Arthasastra]. 


Modern Works 

(General Bibliography, III. A, and C. Also Bandyopadhyaya, Jayaswal 

and Jolly in Chapter XVII, supra). 

Manu and Ydjnavalkya: a comparison and a 
contrast. Calcutta, 1930. 

Tagore Law Lectures, 1883. (Outlines of an 
History of the Hindu Law of Partition , In¬ 
heritance and Adoption as contained in ori¬ 
ginal Sanskrit treatises ). Calcutta, 1885. 

A Treatise on Hindu Law and Usage. 

Hindu Law of Adoption. Calcutta, 1891. 

The General Principles of Hindu Jurispru¬ 
dence. Calcutta, 1918. (Tagore Law Lecture 
for 1909.) 

CHAPTER XIX 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 
Original Sources 

[General Bibliography, I. 1. A (Brahmanical), B (Buddhist) and C 

(Jain) sources]. 


Jayaswal, K. P. 
Jolly, J. 


Mayne, J. D. 
Sarkar, G. C. 
Sen, P. N. 


Barnett, L. D. 
Barth, A. 

Bhandarkar, R. G. 

Eliot, Sir Charles 
Farquhar, J. N. 
Hopkins, E. W. 
Keith, A. B. 


Macdonell, A. A. 
Macdonell, A. A. 

and Keith, A. B. 
Monier Williams, 
W. 


(A) GENERAL 
Modern Works 

Hindu Gods and Heroes. London, 1923. 

The Religions of India. (Authorised Eng. trans. 

by J. Wood, London, 1882). 

Vaishnavism, gaivism and Minor Religious 
Systems. Strassburg, 1913; Indian Edition, 
Poona, 1928. 

Hinduism and Buddhism. 3 Vols. London, 
1921. 

Outline of the Religious Literature of India. 
Oxford, 1920. 

The Religions of India. Boston, 1895. 

Epic Mythology. Strassburg, 1915. 

Religion and Philosophy of the Veda and 
Upanishads. 2 Vols. HOS. Cambridge, 
Mass., 1925. 

Vedic Mythology. Strassburg, 1897. 

Vedic Index of Names and Subjects. 2 Vols. 
London, 1912. 

Religious Thought and Life in India. 4th Ed. 
London, 1891. 


M.13.— 44 


689 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


CoOMARASWAMY, A.K. 
Dahlke, P. 

David-Neel, 

Alexandra 


Dutt, N. 


Keith, A. B. 

Kern, H. 
Law, B. C. 


McGoye rn,W. M. 
Oldenberg, H. 


Rhys Davids, Mrs. 
C. A. F. 


Rhys Davids, T. W. 

Rockhill, W. W. 
Stcherbatsky, Tii. 
Thomas, E. J. 


(B) BUDDHISM 

Modern Works 

Buddha and the gospel of Buddhism 19281 

Buddhism and its Place in the Mental Life of 
Mankind. London, 1927. 

Le Buddhisme, ses Doctrines et ses Methodes. 
Eng. trans. Buddhism, its doctrines and its 
methods by H. N. M. Hardy and Bernard 
Miall. London, 1939. 

Aspects of Mahdydna Buddhism and Its Rela¬ 
tion of Hinaydna. London, 1930. 

Early Monastic Buddhism. Vols. I, II. Calcutta. 

Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon. 
Oxford, 1923. 

Manual of, Indian Buddhism. Strassburg, 1896. 

Asvaghosha. Calcutta, 1946. 

Buddhaghosha. Bombay, 1946. 

On the Pali Chronicles of Ceylon. Calcutta, 
1947. 

A Manual of Buddhist Philosophy. London, 
1923. 

Buddha: sein Leben, seine Lehre, seine 
Gemeinde. Berlin, 1890 (Eng. trans. Buddha; 
his life , his doctrine, his order by Hoey. 
London, 1882). 

The MiUnda Questions: An Enquiry into the 
place of Questions of King Milinda in the 
History of Buddhism, with a theory as to 
its author. London, 1930. 

Buddhism: Its Birth and Dispersal. London, 
1934. 

History of, Indian Buddhism. London, 1897. 

Early Buddhism. London, 1908. 

Buddhism: Its History and Literature. New 
Ed. London, 1926. 

The Life of the Buddha. 2nd Ed. London 
1884. 

The conception of Buddhist Nirvana. Lenin¬ 
grad, 1927. 

The Life of Buddha as legend and history. 
London, 1927. (1949)* 

(C) JAINISM. 

Modern Works 


Barodia, U. D. 
Bloomfield, M. 
Bool Chand 


History and Literature of Jainism. Bombay, 
1909. 

The Life and Stories of the Jaina Saviour 
Pdrsvandtha. Baltimore, 1919. 

Lord Mahavira. Banaras, 1948. 


690 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Buhler, G. 


Charpentier, J. 

Glasenapp. H. 
Guerinot, A. 
Jacobi, H. 

Jaini, J. L. 

Kapadia, H. R. 


Law, B. C. 
SCHUBRING, W. 

Sen, A. C. 

Smyth, H. W. 

Stevenson, Mrs. 
Winternitz, M. 


Uber die indische Secte der Jainas. Vien, 1887. 
(Eng. trans. by J. Burgess: The Indian Sect 
of the Jainas. London, 1903). 

“The History of the Jains”. CHI, I, pp. 150- 
70. 

Der Jainismus. Berlin, 1926. 

La religion Djaina. Paris, 1926. 

“On Mahavira and his predecessors.” I A. IX, 
pp. 158 ff. 

Outlines of Jainism. Ed. with preliminary note 
by F. W. Thomas. Cambridge, 1916. 

History of the Canonical Literature of the 
Jainas. Bombay, 1941. 

Jaina Religion and Literature. Vol. I. Part I 
Lahore, 1944. 

Jainaguru Mahavira. 

Wrote Mahavira. Gottingen, 1926. 

Die Lehre der Jainas. Leipzig, 1935. 

Schools and Sects in Jain Literature. Calcutta, 
1931. 

“Weber’s sacred Literature of the Jainas”. 

1A, XVII-XXI. 

S- The Heart of Jainism. Oxford, 1915. 

Some Problems of Indian Literature. Calcutta, 
1925. 


(D) VAISHNAVISM 


Original Sources 


(General Bibliography, I. 1A. Brahmanical; ii. Mahdbhdrata 3 
Bhagavadgitd, Rdmdyana; iii. Bhdgavata, Harivamsa, Matsya, 
Vayu } Vishnu; Schrader in Chapter XVI A). 

Mahanardyana Ed. by G. A. Jacob. BSS. Bombay, 1888. 

Upanishad 


Modern Works 


[Bibliography to sub-section (A) above]. 


Banerjea, J. N. 
Bhandarkar, R. G- 
Chanda, R. P. 
Raychaudhuri, H.C. 


“The Worship of Samba among the early 
Pancharatrins”. PIHC. VII, pp. 82-90. 

V aishnavism, Saivism, and other minor reli¬ 
gious systems. Strassburg, 1913; Poona, 1928. 

Archaeology and Vaishnava Tradition MASI. 
Calcutta, 1920. 

Materials for the Study of the Early History 
of the Vaishnava Sect. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 
1936. 


691 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


(E) SAIVISM 
Original Sources 

[See General Bibliography, I. 1A. (ii) Epics, and (ii) Puranas], 

Modern Works 


Aiyangar, S. 

Krishnaswami, 
Arbmann, E. 

Contribution of South India to Indian Culture, 
Calcutta, 1923. 

Rudra, Untersuchungen zum altindischen 
Glauben und Kultus. Uppsala, 1922. 

Iyer, C. Y. Nara- 

YANA 

The Origin and Early History of Sawism m 
South India. Madras, 1936. 


Subramanian, K. R. Origin of Saivism and its History in the Tamil 

Land. Madras, 1929. 

Venkataramanayya Rudra-Siva. Madras, 1941. 

N. 

(F) MINOR RELIGIOUS SECTS 
Original Sources 

[General Bibliography, I. l.A. (Brahmanical), 

B. (Buddhist), C. (Jain)] 


Barua, B. M. 
Bhandarkar, D. R. 

Modern Works 

Ajivikas. Calcutta, 1920. 

“Lakulisa”. ASR. 1906-7. 

Fergusson, J. 

Ajivikas”. IA, XLI, pp. 286 ff, 296 ff. 

Tree and Serpent Worship. 2nd Ed. London, 
1873. 

Payne, E. A. 

Vogel, J. Ph. 

The Saktas. Calcutta, 1933. 

Indian Serpent Lore, or the Ndgas in Hindu 
Legend and Art. London, 1926. 

Woodroffe, Sir J. 

Shakti and Shakta . Madras, 1929. 

(G) PHILOSOPHY 


Original Sources 

General Bibliography. I. 1. A. i: Philosophical Sutras). 


Das Gupta, S. N. 

Modern Works 

History of Indian Philosophy. 3 Vol. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1932-40. 

Garbe, R. 

Grousset, Rene 
Masson-Oursel, P. 
Max Muller, F. 

Philosophy of Ancient India. Chicago, 1897. 

Le Philosophie Indiennes. Paris, 1931. 

Le Philosophie en Orient, Paris, 1938. 

Six Systems of Indian Philosophy. London 
1889. 

Radhakrishnan, S. 

Indian Philosophy. 2 Vols. London, 1923, 
1927. 

Strauss, Otto 

Indische Philosophie. Munchen, 1925. 

(H) ICONOGRAPHY 

Banerjea, J. N. 

Development of Hindu Iconography, Calcutta, 
1941. 

Bhandarkar, D. R- 

“Jaina Iconography.” IA, XL, pp. 125 ff: 
153 ff. 


692 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Biiattacharya, B.C. 


Bhattacharyya, B. 
COOMARASWAMY, A.K. 

Foucher, A. 

Gopinath Rao, T.A. 

JoUVEAU- DUBREUIL 

G. 

Macdonell, A. A. 


Indian Images : Vol. I. Brahmanic Icono¬ 
graphy. Calcutta, 1931; Vol. II. Jain 
Iconography. Lahore, 1939. 

Indian Buddhist Iconography. Oxford, 1924. 

Elements of Buddhist Iconography. Harvard, 
1935. 

L’Iconographie bouddhique de VInde. Paris, 
1900, 1905 

Elements of Hindu Iconography. 2 Vols. 
Madras, 1914, 1916. 

Iconography of Southern India (Trans, from 
the French by A. C. Martin) Paris, 1937. 

“Early Hindu Iconography.” JRAS, 1917. 

“Development of Early Hindu Iconography.” 

Festschrift Windisch. 

“History of Hindu Iconography”. Rupam, 
No. 4, 1920. 


CHAPTER XX 
ART 

(A) ARCHITECTURE 


Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Reports. 


Brown, Percy 
Burgess, James 
Coomaraswamy, A.K. 


Fergusson, J. 

Fergusson, J. and 
Burgess, J. 
Marshall, Sir John 

Waddell, L. A. 
Wauchope, R. S. 


Indian Architecture (Buddhist and Hindu). 

Second Edition. Bombay, 1949. 

Buddhist Stupas of Amaravati and Jaggayya- 
peta. London, 1837. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. London, 
1927. 

“Early Indian Architecture: I. Cities, City- 
gates, etc.” Eastern Art , II, pp. 209-25. 
“Early Indian Architecture: III. Palaces.” 

Eastern Art , III, pp. 181-217. 

History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. 
2nd Ed. Revised and Edited by J. Burgess 
and R. P. Spiers. London, 1910. 

Cave Temples of India. London, 1880. 

“Monuments of India”. CHI, I, pp. 612-49. 
Guide to Sanchi. 2nd Ed. Delhi, 1936. 

Guide to Taxila. 3rd Ed. Delhi, 1936. 

Report on the Excavations at Pdtaliputra. 
Calcutta, 1903. 

Buddhist Cave Temples of India. Calcutta, 
1933. 


693 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


(B) SCULPTURE AND OTHER ARTS 

(Catalogues and Guides to Museums at Calcutta, Delhi, Gwalior, 
Lahore, Lucknow, Madras, Mathura, Patna, Peshawar, Sanchl and 

Sarnath). 


Bachiiofer Ludwig 

Brown, Percy 
Chanda, R. P. 

CoDRINOTON K.dc B. 
COOMARASWAMY, A.K. 


Foucher, A. 


Ghosh, A. and 
Panigrahi, K. C. 
Gordon, D. H. 
Grousset, Rene 

Grunwedel, A. 


Hackin’ J. 


Kala, S. C. 


Kramrisch Stella 


Early Indian Sculpture. 2 Vols. Paris, 1929. 
Zur Datierung der Gandhara-Plastik, 1925. 
Indian Painting, 1930. 

Beginnings of Art in Eastern India. MASI. 
Calcutta, 1927. 

Four Ancient Yaksha Statues. JDL, IV. 1921. 
Mathura School of Sculpture. ASR, 1922-23. 
Ancient India from the earliest times to the 
Guptas. Vol. I. London, 1926. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. 
London, 1927. 

“The Indian Origin of the Buddha Image.” 
JAOS, 1926. 

“The Origin of the Buddha Image. Art Bul¬ 
letin, X. 1927. 

“Buddhist Reliefs from Nagarjunikonda and 
Amaravati”. Rupam, 1929. 

“Ancient Sculptures”. Bull. M.F.A. XXVII. 
1929. 

“Early Indian Terracottas”. Ipek. 

UArt qreco-bouddhiques du Gandhara. Paris. 

1923. 

Beginnings of Buddhist Art . London, 1918. 
“Pottery of Ahichchhatra (U.P.).” Ancient 
India No. 1, 1946. 

“Indian Terracottas”^ JISOA, XI. 

The Civilizations of the East, Vol. II. India. 
London, 1932. 

Buddhist Art in India. Eng. Ed. London, 1901. 
(Buddhistische Kunst in Indien. 2nd Ed. 
Berlin, 1919). 

La Sculpture Indienne et Tibetaine au Musee 
Guimet, 1931. 

Les Antiquites bouddhiques de Bamiyan (with 
A. and Y. Goddard). 

“Bharhut Sculptures in the Allahabad 
Museum”. Journ. U. P. Hist. Soc. XVIII. 
91. 

Indian Sculpture. London, 1933. 

Grundzuge der Indischen Kunst . Dresden, 

1924. 

“Indian Terracottas”. JISOA, VII. 


694 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Marshall, J. H. 


Ray, Niharranjan 
Smith, Vincent A. 


Spooner., D. B. 


Vogel, J. Ph. 


Wheeler, R. E. 
Mortimer, Kre 
shana Deva and 
A. Ghosh. 


Altekar, A. S. 

Banerjee, G. 

Fick, R. 

Sarkar, S. C. 

Siddhanta, N. K. 
Vaidya, C. V. 


Monuments of Ancient India; Guide to 
Sanchi; Guide to Taxila; See (A) above. 

‘‘Excavations at Sahet-Mahet”. ASR, 1910-11. 

“Excavations at Bhita”. ASR , 1911-12. 

“Buddhist Gold Jewellery”. ASR, 1902-03. 

Maury a and Sunga Art. Calcutta, 1945. 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. 2nd 
Ed. revised by K. de B. Codrington. Oxford, 
1930. 

“Excavations at Takht-i-Bahi”. ASR, 1907-08. 

“Excavations at Sahri Bahlol”. ASR, 1909-10. 

“Excavations at Shah-ji-ki-Dheri”. ASR, 
1908-09. 

Handbook to the Sculptures in the Peshawar 
Museum. Bombay, 1910 Revised Ed. by 
H. Hargreaves. Calcutta, 1930. 

“Excavations at Basarh”. ASR, 1913-14. 

“The Mathura School of Sculpture”. ASR, 
1906-07; 1909-10. 

“Excavations at Sahet-Mahet”. ASR. 1907- 
1908. 

Catalogue of the Archaeological Museum at 
Mathura. Allahabad, 1910. 

“Explorations at Mathura.” ASR, 1911-12. 

Buddhist art in India, Ceylon and Java. Trans, 
from the Dutch by A. J. Barnow. Oxford, 
1936. 

“Arikamedu; an Indo-Roman trading station”. 
Ancient India. No. 2, 1946. 


CHAPTER XXI 
SOCIAL CONDITION 

Position of Women in Hindu Civilization. 
Benares, 1938. 

Hindu Law of Marriage and Stridhana. 

Tagore Law Lectures. Calcutta, 1896. 

See General Bibliography, III. C. 

Some Aspects of the Earliest Social History of 
India. London, 1928. 

The Heroic Age of India. London, 1929. 

Epic India. Bombay, 1907, 


695 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


CHAPTER XXII 
EDUCATION 
Original Sources 

(See General Bibliography, Vinaya Pitaka and Jatakas in Buddhist 

Works). 


Altekar, A. S. 

Modern Works 

Education in Ancient India. 3rd Ed. Benares, 
1948. 

Das, S. K. 

The Educational System of the Ancient 
Hindus. Calcutta, 1930. 

Mookerji, R. K. 

Hindu Civilization. London, 1936. 


Ancient Indian Education. London, 1947. 
Venkateswara, S.V. Indian Culture through the ages. 2 Vols. 

London, 1928, 1932. 

CHAPTER XXIII 
ECONOMIC CONDITION 
Original Sources ; Literary 

(Arthasdstra in General Bibliography, I. 1. A. v; and Jatakas in 

I. 1. B. i). 


Sewell, R. 

Coins 

“Roman Coins found in India”. JRAS, 1904. 
pp. 591-637. 

Modem Works 

Aiyangar, K. V. 

Rang as w ami, 
Bandyopadhyaya, 
N. C. 

Aspects of Ancient Indian Economic Thought. 
Benares, 1934. 

Economic Life and Progress in Ancient India. 
Vol I. Hindu Period , Part I, From the Earli¬ 

Das, S. K. 

est times to the rise of, the Maury a Empire. 
2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1945. 

Economic History of Ancient India. Calcutta, 
1925. 

Ghoshal, U. N. 

Contributions to the History of the Hindu 
Revenue System. Calcutta, 1929. 

The Agrarian System in Ancient India. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1930. 

Majumdar, R. C. 

Corporate Life in Ancient India. Calcutta, 
1922. 

Mookerji, R. K. 

Local Government in Ancient India. Oxford 
1919. 

Pran Nath 

A Study in the Economic Condition of Ancient 
India. London, 1929. 

Samaddar, J. N. 

Economic Condition of Ancient India. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1922. 

696 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Subba Rao, N. S. Economic and Political Conditions in Ancient 

India. Mysore, 1911. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

INDIA AND THE WESTERN WORLD 


Original Sources 


(See General Bibliography, Greek and Latin Texts I, 2A) 
Sewell, R. “Roman Coins found in India”. JRAS, 1904, 

591-637. 


Banerjee G. N. 


Cary and Warming- 
ton 

Oharlesworth, M. P. 

Kennedy, J. 

Nilakanta Sastri, 
K. A. 

Oakeshott, W. F. 
POCOCKE, E. 

Priaulx, Osmond de 
Beauvoir 
Rawlinson, H. G. 


Smith, V. A. 

Tarn, W. W. 
Warmington, E. H. 


Modern Works 

/ 

Hellenism in Ancient India. Calcutta, 1920. 

India as known to the Ancient World. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1921. 

The Ancient Explorers. 

Trade-route and Commerce of the Roman 
Empire. Cambridge, 1921. 

“Early Commerce with Babylon.” JRAS , 
1898. pp. 250 ff. 

Foreign Notices of South India. Madras, 1939. 

Commerce and Society, Oxford, 1936. 

India in Greece. London, 1852. 

Indian Travels of Apollonius of Tyna and the 
Indian Embassies to Rome. London, 1873. 

“Foreign Influence in the Civilisation of 
Ancient India”. JBBRAS, XXIII, p. 217 ff. 

Intercourse between India and the Western 
World. Cambridge, 1916. 

“Graeco-Roman Influence on the Civilisation 
of Ancient India”. JASB, LVIII, pp. 107 ff. 

Hellenistic Civilization. London, 1930. 

Commerce between the Roman Empire and 
India. Cambridge, 1928. 

CHAPTER XXV 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


(A) CENTRAL ASIA AND CHINA 


Bagchi, P. C. 
Chakravarti, N.P. 


Le Canon Bouddhique en Chine. 2 Vols. Paris, 
1927, 1938. 

India and China. Calcutta, 1944. 

India and Central Asia. Calcutta, 1927. 


697 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Ghoshal, U. N. 
LeCoq, Albert Von 
Stein, M. A. 

Waley, Arthur 

Bose, P. 

Chatterji, B. R. 

CoEDES, G. 
Majumdar, R. C 


Ancient Indian Culture in Afghanistan. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1927. 

Buried Treasures of Chinese Turkestan (tr. 
by Anna Barwell.) London, 1928. 

Ancient Khotan. Oxford, 1907. 

Serindia. Oxford, 1921. 

Innermost Asia. Oxford, 1928. 

Old Routes of Western Iran. 1940. 

A Catalogue of paintings recovered from Tun- 
Huang by Sir Aurel Stein (1931). 

(B) SOUTH-EAST ASIA 

The Indian Colony of Champa. Adyar, 1926. 

The Hindu Colony of Cambodia. Adyar, 1927. 

Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1928. 

India and Java. Calcutta, 1933. 

Les Etats Hindouises D’Indochine et DTndo - 
nesie. Paris, 1948. 

Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East: Vol. 
I. Champa. Lahore, 1927; Vol. II Suvarna - 
dvipa. Parts 1 and 2. Dacca, 1937-38. 

Kambujadesa. Madras, 1944. 

Hindu Colonies in the Far East. Calcutta, 
1944. 


698 


CHRONOLOGY 


B.C. 

623 

566 

558-530 
544-543 
c. 544-493 
530-522 
528 

522-486 

c.520 

c.518 

c.518 

517 


c.515 
c. 493-462 

486 

486-465 
c. 484-468 
c.484 

468 

462-430 
c. 430-364 
c. 364-324 

330 

330 

327-325 

327 (beginning) 


326 (Spring) 

326 (May) 

326 (July) 

325 (September) 
325 

c. 324-300 
323 
321 
c. 305 
c. 300-273 
285-247 

278-239 


Traditional date of Buddha’s birth. 

Probable date of Buddha’s birth. 

Cyrus, king of Persia. 

Buddha’s death, according to tradition. 

Reign of Bimbisara. 

Cambyses, king of Persia. 

Traditional date of Mahavlra’s death. 

Darius, king of Persia. 

Behistun inscription. of Darius. 

Darius conquers Gandhara, Sindhu, etc. 
Persepolis inscription of Darius. 

Darius sends expedition under Scylax to 
explore the Sindhu. 

Naksh-i-Rustam inscription of Darius. 

Reign of Ajatasatru. 

Probable date of Buddha’s death. 

Xerxes, king of Persia. 

Ajatasatru’s wal* with Lichchhavis. 

Gosala’s death. 

Probable date of Mahavira’s death. 

Four successors of Ajatasatru. 

Sisunaga and his successors. 

Nanda dynasty. 

Darius III indents upon India for a supply of 
troops to resist Alexander’s invasion. 
Alexander defeats Darius III, and burns his 
capital Persepolis. 

Alexander’s invasion of India. 

Alexander completes conquest of Eastern Iran 
beyond the Hindu Kush. 

Alexander crosses the Sindhu. 

Fight between Alexander and Porus. 
Alexander’s retreat from the Beas. 

Alexander leaves India. 

Assassination of Philippus, satrap in the upper 
Sindhu valley. 

Reign of Chandragupta Maurya. 

Alexander’s death. 

Partition of Alexander’s empire at Triparadisus. 
Seleucus reaches Sindhu. 

Bindusara. 

Ptolemy II Philadelphus, of Egypt, a contem¬ 
porary of Asoka. 

Antigonus, of Macedonia, a contemporary of 
Asoka. 


699 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


c. 273-236 
c.269 
261-246 

c.250 

246-226 

226-223 

223-187 

221-209 

217 

c.212 

c.208 

c.206 

c.206 

c. 200 
c. 190 
c. 190-165 
c. 187 

c. 187-75 
c. 187-151 
c. 171-136 
c. 171 
c. 165 

c. 165 
162 

c. 150 
c. 150 
138 

138-128 
128-123 
c. 125 

123-88 

121 


c. 115-90 
c. 75-30 
73-48 
58 
58 

57-38 


Reign of Asoka. 

Coronation of Asoka. 

Antiochus II Theos, of Syria, a contem¬ 
porary of Asoka. 

Parthia and Bactria revolt against Antiochus ll 
Theos. 

Seleucus II. 

Seleucus III. 

Antiochus (III) the Great. 

First Tsin dynasty. 

Buddhist missionaries from India proceed to 
China, according to Chinese tradition. 
Antiochus III appears in the east. 

Antiochus III turns his arms against Bactria. 
Demetrius concludes formal alliance with 
Antiochus III. 

Antiochus III leads expedition against N.-W. 
India. 

Salisuka, Maury a king. 

Death of Euthydemus. 

Demetrius, Indo-Greek king. 

Assassination of Brihadratha, the last Maury a, 
by Pushyamitra; end of Maurya dynasty. 
Suhgas. 

Pushy amitra. 

Mithradates I, of Parthia. 

Eucratides occupies Bactrian throne. 

Yueh-chi were defeated and expelled from 
Chinese Turkestan. 

Death of Demetrius. 

Timarchus, satrap of Babylon, revolts against 
Seleucid Emperor. 

Indika of Arrian. 

Eucratides murdered by his son. 

Probable date of the Chinese coin found at 
Mysore. 

Phraates II, of Parthia. 

Artabanus I, of Parthia. 

Chinese envoy Chang Kien visits the Yueh-chi 
capital. 

Mithradates II, of Parthia. 

Chinese general who leads a military expedi¬ 
tion in Central Asia brings a golden statue 
of Buddha. 

Menander. 

Kanvas. 

Chinese Emperor Hsuan-ti. 

Initial year of the Vikrama Era. 

Vonones begins his viceregal career. 

Orodes I, of Parthia. 


700 


CHRONOLOGY 


C.54-A.D. 24 
48-33 

31-A.D. 68 
c. 30 

27-A.D. 14 
C.20-A.D. 22 
c. 18 
c.18-1 

C.5-A.D. 30 
2 

A.D. 1-6 

10-40 

14- 37 
15 

15- 65 
21-50 
21 

c. 28-40 
c. 35-79 
c. 39-47 
41-54 
43-44 


45 

46 
65 

c. 67 


c. 65-75 
68 

c. 70-80 

77 

78 

c.78-101 (or 102) 
89-105 
98-117 
102-106 
105 

106-138 
c.106-130 
117-138 

119 

c.119-125 

120 


Strabo. 

Chinese Emperor Yuan-ti. 

From Augustus to Nero. 

Simuka. 

Augustus of Rome. 

Maues (Moga). 

End of Vonones’s career. 

Spalirises. 

Azes I, Saka king. 

Yueh-chi rulers in the Oxus valley present 
Some Buddhist texts to the Chinese court. 
Chinese Emperor sends presents to the king of 
Huang-che (? Kanchl). 

Artabanus III, of Parthia. 

Tiberius. 

Mahakshatrapa Son^asa. 

Kadphises I. 

Gondophernes. 

Laika Kusuluka, viceroy of Maues. 

Azilises. 

Azes II. 

Vardanes of Parthia. 

Claudius. 

Apollonius of Tyana visits Taxila, and 
Phraotes, a Parthian, in possession of Taxila, 
according to Philostratus. 

Hippalus makes the great discovery of the 
monsoon wind. 

Takht-i-Bahi inscription. 

Ming-ti sees a golden man (Buddha) in dream. 
Kasvapa Matahga introduces Buddhism into 
China. 

Kadphises II. 

Death of Nero. 

“Periplus of the Erythraean Sea” written by 
an Egyptian Greek. 

Completion of Pliny’s Natural History. 

Initial year of the §aka Era. 

Kanishka. 

Emperor Ho-ti. 

Trajan of Rome. 

Vasishka. 

Destruction of the Nabatean kingdom of Petra. 
Huvishka. 

Gautamiputra Satakarni. 

Hadrian. 

Kanishka II. 

Nahapana. 

Musicians and jugglers from Ta-tsin pass 
through Burma on their way to China. 

701 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


C. 125 

129- 30 

130- 31 
c. 130-159 

138-161 
c. 140 
c. 140 


c. 145-176 
150-151 
155-230 
c. 159-166 
159-165 
164-66 
c.167-174 
16P 

c. 174-203 
178 

c. 180-250 
180-81 
181-189 
185 
188-91 
188-190 

191-197 
197-99 
201-223 
c. 203-209 
208-17 
c. 209-219 
217 

218-222 
c. 219-227 
c.220 

222- 223 

223- 237 
226-241 


227-239 

230 

237- 240 

238- 239 

239- 251 
247 


Nahapana defeated and killed by Gautamlputra 
Satakarni. 

Maharaja Bhimasena. 

Chashtana ruling jointly with Rudradaman. 
Vasishthiputra Pulumavi. 

Antoninus Pius. 

Geography of Ptolemy. 

Pulumavi on the throne of Pratishthana, ac¬ 
cording to Ptolemy’s Geography. 

Vasudeva, Kushana. 

Junagarh inscription of Rudradaman. 

Dion Cassius. 

SivasrI Satakarni. 

Kausikiputra Bhadramagha of Kausambl. 
Kautsiputra PraushthasrI (Magha king). 
Sivaskanda Satakarni. 

Bhadradeva (Magha king). 

Yajna Satakarni. 

Maha-kshatrapa Jivadaman. 

Philostratus. 

Kshatrapa Rudrasimha I. 

Maha-kshatrapa Rudrasimha I. 

Maharaja Vaisravana of Kausambl. 

Rudrasimha I issued coins as a Kshatrapa. 
Date of coins of Mvaradatta (according to 
Bhandarkar). 

Maha-kshatrapa Rudrasimha I. 
Maha-kshatrapa Jivadaman. 

Maha-kshatrapa Rudrasena I. 

Vi jay a (Satavahana). 

Maharaja Bhlmavarman of Kausambl. 
Chandrasri (or Chandasrl) (Satavahana). 
Caracalla. 

Heliogabalus. 

Puloma (Satavahana). 

Death of Clement of Alexandria. 
Maha-kshatrapa Sanghadaman. 

Maha-kshatrapa Damasena. 

Ardashir I Babagan, founder of the Sassanian 
Dynasty. 

Emperor Ming. 

Yueh-chi king Po-t’iao (? Vasudeva) sends 
ambassador to China. 

Date of coins of Isvaradatta (according to 
Rapson). 

Maha-kshatrapa Yasodaman. 

Maha-kshatrapa Vijayasena. 

Seng-hui (Sahghabhadra) builds a monastery 
at Nanking, and founds a Buddhist school 
there. 


702 


CHRONOLOGY 


248-249 

Starting year of Kalachuri or Chedi era 

251-255 

Maha-kshatrapa Damajadasri III. 

255-257 

Marajlvaka translates Buddhist texts. 

255-277 

Maha-kshatrapa Rudrasena II. 

265-290 

Emperor Wu. 

270-275 

Aurelian. 

273 

Aurelian sacks Palmyra. 

275-279 

Kshatrapa Visvasirhha. 

278 

Archelaos of Carrah. 

279-282 

Kshatrapa Bhartridaman. 

282-295 

Maha-kshatrapa Bhartridaman. 

290-306 

Emperor Houei-Ti of Tsin dynasty. 

293-305 

Kshatrapa Visvasena. 


703 


GENEALOGY 


(Figures within brackets after the names of kings refer to 

regnal years) 

I. UP TO THE END OF THE NANDA DYNASTY 

(According to Mahavamsa) 

A. Haryanka Kula. 

1. Bimbisara (52) 

i 

2. Ajatasatru (32) 

3. Udayabhadra (16) 

i 

4. Anuruddha ] 

I y (8) 

5. Minima J 

I 

6. Nagadasaka (24) 

B. Sisunagas. 

i 

7. Susunaga (18) 

i 

8. Kalasoka (28) 

i 

9. Ten sons of Kalasoka (22) 

C. Nine Nandas. (22). 

(According to the Puranas) 

A. Sisunaga Dynasty. 

1. Sisunaga (40) 

2. Kakavarna (36) 

i 

3. Kshemadharman (20) 

i 

4. Kshatraujas (40) 

5. Bimbisara (28) 

i 

6. Ajatasatru (25) 

i 

7. Darsaka (25) 

! 

8. Udayin (33) 

9. Nandivardhana (40) 


704 


GENEALOGY 


10. Mahanandin (43). 

B. Nanda Dynasty. 

11. Mahapadma (88 or 28). 

12. 8 sons (12). 

[N.B. The regnal years are differently given in the different 
Puranas. The figures given are taken from DKA pp. 68 ff.] 


II. MAURYA DYNASTY 


(According to the Puranas) 

1. Chandragupta (24) 


3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 


2. Bindusara (25; 28 according to Mahavamsa) 

3. Asoka (36; 37 according to Mahavamsa) 


Matsya Purana 
Asoka 

(Asoka’s grandson) (?) 
Dasaratha (8) 


Samprati (9) 
Satadhanva (6) 


Vdyu and Brahmanda 

3. Asoka 

4. Kunala (8) 

i 

5. Bandhupalita (8) 

6. Indrapalita (10) 


7. Brihadratha (70, prob. 7. Devavarma (7) 

a misreading of 7) 

8. Satadhanu (8) 

9. Brihadratha (7) 

[Some versions of Vayu add Dasona (after Bandhupalita), his 
son Dasaratha, his son Samprati, and Salisuka, ruling respectively 
for 7, 8, 9, and 13 years. Matsya, Vishnu and Bhagavata give the 
total number of kings as 10 while Vayu (generally) and Brahmanda 
give the number as 9.] 

III. SUNGA DYNASTY 

1. Pushy ami tr a (36) 

i 

2. Agnimitra (8) 

3. Sujyeshtha or Vasujyeshtha (7) 

4. Vasumitra (10) 

5. Andhraka (? Bhadraka, Ardraka, Antaka) (2) 

i 

6. Pulindaka (3) 

I 

7. Ghosha (or Ghoshavasu) (3) 


705 


/ 


A.I.U.—15 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


8. Vajramitra (9) 

9. Bhagavata (32) 

10. Devabhumi (10) 

IV. KANVA DYNASTY 

1. Vasudeva (9) 

! 

2. Bhumimitra (14) 

3. Narayana (12) 

4. Susarman (10) 

V. ANDHRA OR SATAVAHANA KINGS 
(According to Matsya Purana) 

1. Simuka (23) 

2. Krishna, younger brother of 1 (10) 

3. Satakarni (10) 

4. Purnotsanga (18) 

5. Skandhastambhi (18) 

6. Satakarni (56) 

7. Lambodara (18) 

i 

8. Apilaka (12) 

9. Meghasvati (18) 

10. Svati (18) 

11. Skandasvati (7) 

12. Mrigendra Svatikarna (3) 

13. Kuntala Svatikarna (8) 

14. Svatikarna (1) 

15. Pulomavi (36) 

16. Arishtakarna (25) 

17. Hala (5) 

18. Mantalaka or Pattalaka (5) 

19. Purikashena or Purlndrasena (21) 


706 


GENEALOGY 


20. Sundara Satakan^i (1) 

21. Chakora Satakarni (6 months) 

22. Sivasvati (28) 

23. Gautamlputra (21) 

24. Puloma (28) 

25. 6ivasri Puloma (7) 

26. Sivaskandha Satakarni (3) 

27. Yajnasrl Satakarni (29) 

28. Vijaya (6) 

29. ChandasrI Satakarni (10) 

30. Pulomavi (7) 

VI. INDO-SCYTHIANS 

1. Maues 

2. Azes 

3. Azilises 

4. Azes II 

VII. KUSHANAS 

1. Kujula Kadphises I 

2. Wema Kadphises II 

3. Kanishka I 

4. Vasishka 

5. Huvishka 

6. Kanishka II 

7. Vasudeva I 

8. Kanishka III 

9. Vasudeva II 


707 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


VIII. WESTERN £AKA SATRAPS OR KARDAMAKAS 

(Roman numerals denote the succession of Mahakshatrapas. The 
rest ruled only as Kshatrapas. The known dates in Saka years are 

given within brackets). 

I. Chashtana (52) 

f 

Jayadaman 

II. Rudradaman I (72) 


i i 

III. Damajadasri I (Damaysada) V. Rudrasirhha i 

| ' (103-110, 113-18) 


1 

Satyadaman IV. 

i 

Jivadaman (100, 119-20) 

! 

i 

i 


i 

VI. Rudrasena I 

i 

VII. Sanghadaman VIII. 

Damasena (14i 

5-58 

(122-44) 

i 

i 

(144-5) 

- 


i 

Prithvlsena (144) 

! 

Damajadasri II 

(154-55) 


ii ii 


1 ! I I 

Viradaman (156-60) IX.Yasodaman X. Vijayasena XI. Damajadasri 111 


(160) (161-72) (173-7) 

XII. Rudrasena II (177-98) 


i j 

XIII. Visvasimha XIV. Bhartridaman (204-17) 

I 

Visvasena (215-226) 

IX. LIST OF CEYLONESE KINGS 

(The dates are given on the authority of W. Geiger ( Culavamsa, Eng. 
Transl. Part II, p. IX). Figures in italics denote mere traditional 
dates, whereas the others rest on more or less probable calculation). 


Vijaya Dynasty 




B.C. 

1. 

Vijaya 

(483-445 ) 

2. 

Pandu Vasudeva 

(444-414) 

3. 

Abhaya 

(414-394) 

4. 

5. 

Pan^ukabhaya \ 

Ganatissa / 

(394-307) 

6. 

Mutasivd 

(307-247) 

7. 

Devanariipiyatissa 

(247-207) 

8. 

Uttiya 

( 207-197) 

9. 

Mahasiva 

(197-187) 

10. 

Suratissa 

(187-177) 


708 










GENEALOGY 


11. 

Sena \ 

(177-155) 

12. 

Guttika f 

13. 

Asela 

(155-145) 

14. 

Elara 

(145-101) 

15. 

DutthagamanI 

(101-77) 

16. 

Saddhatissa 

(77-59) 

17. 

Thulathana 

(59) 

18. 

Lanjatissa 

(59-50) 

19. 

Khallatanaga 

(50-43) 

20. 

Vattagamani 

(43) 

21-25. 

Pulahattha and 



4 others 

(43-29) 

20. 

Vattagamani 



(Restored) 

(29-17) 

26. 

Mahachull 

(17-3) 

27. 

Choranaga 

(3 B.C.-A.D. 9) 
A.D. 

28. 

Tissa 

(9-12) 

29. 

Queen Anula 

(12-16) 

30. 

Kutakannatissa 
• • • 

(16-38) 

31. 

Bhatikabhaya 

(38-66) 

32. 

Mahadathikamahanaga 

(67-79) 

33. 

AmandagamanI 

(79-89) 

34. 

Kanirajanutissa 

(89-92) 

35. 

Chulabhaya 

(92-93) 

36. 

Slvall 

(93) 

37. 

Ilanaga 

(93-102) 

38. 

Chandamukhasiva 

(103-112) 

39. 

Yasalalakatissa 

(112-120) 


End of Vijaya 

Dynasty 

40. 

Subharaja 

(120-126) 


Lambakanna Dynasty 

41. 

Vasabha 

(127-171) 

42. 

V ankanasikatissa 

(1-71-174) 

43. 

Gaj abahugamani 

(174-196) 

44. 

Mahallanaga 

(196-202) 

45. 

Bhatikatissa 

(203-227) 

46. 

Kanitthatissa 

(227-245) 

47. 

Khujjanaga 

(246-248) 

48. 

Kunchanaga 

(248-249) 

49. 

Sirinaga I 

(249-268) 

50. 

Voharikatissa 

(269-291) 

51. 

Abhayanaga 

(291-299) 

52. 

Sirinaga II 

(300-302) 

53. 

Vijayakumara 

(302-303) 

54. 

Samghatissa 

(303-307) 

55. 

Sirisahghabodhi 

(307-309) 

56. 

Gothabhaya 

(309-322) 

57. 

Jetthatissa 

(323-333) 

58. 

Mahasena 

(334-361) 


709 


INDEX 


Abastanes, 50. 

Abbhutadhanuna, 396. 

Abda, 157. 

Abdagases, 129. 

Abhaya, 20. 

Abhayagiri, 379. 

Abhayagirivihara, 240. 

Abhayanaga, 241. 

Abhidhammapitaka, 379, 383, 396, 401, 
407, 408. 

Abhidhdna-chintdmani, 427. 
Abhinavagupta, 273. 

Abhiraja, 656. 

Abhlras, 152, 160, 178, 221-3. 

Abhisara, 46, 48, 50, 53. 
Abhisaraprastha, 134. 

Abiria, 121. 

Abul Fazl, 636. 

Achaemenians, 39, 42, 43, 54, 62, 71,101, 
102 . 

Achaemenid Hall of 100 Columns 
(Persepolis), 468. 

Achaemenids, 120. 

Achdrakovai, 299. 

Achardnga , 413, 421. 

Achera, 653. 

Achyuta, 172, 173. 

Adhi (pledge), 358. 

Adhikrita, 353. 

Adhyaksha , 353. 

Adi-naga, 472. 

Adisesha, 292. 

Adraistai (Adhrishtas, Arashfrakas), 
49. 1 

Aelian, 626. 

Afghanistan, 42, 103, 105 106, 107, 108, 
109, 111, 112. 

colonial & cultural expansion of India 
in, 635-36. 

Agalassoi, 50. 

Agastya, 229, 290, 291, 292, 293 ; 294. 
Agastyam (Akattiyam ), 291, 292, 293. 
Agatharcides, 93, 618. 

Agathocleia, 111, 112, 116, 117, 327. 
Agathocles, 104, 109, 114, 117. 

Agenor, 53, 58. 

Agesilaus, Greek engineer, 147. 

Agni, 468. 


Agnimitra, 95, 96, 97, 100, 172, 174, 472. 
Agnivarman, 222. 

A grammes, 31, 33. 

Agrianes, 44. 

Agriculture in early India, 595-99. 
cattle & their care, 596-7. 
character of holdings, 595. 
crops grown, 596. 
description of a village, 596. 
forests & agriculture, 598-99. 
forest factories, 599. 
taxes on agriculture, 598. 
village administration, 597. 
village police, 597-98. 

Ahandnuru, 297, 459. 

Ahapporul, 292. 

Ahi-budhnya , 471. 

Ahichchhatra, 98, 171-73, 484, 531, 533, 
537, 538. 

Ahimsa, 362. 

Ainkurunuru, 292, 296, 297. 

Aitareya Brdhmana , 194, 197. 

Aiyangar, S. K. 293. 

Ajadatta, 177. 

Ajamitra (Aryamitra), 162. 

Ajanta, 499, 505. 

description of paintings in caves IX 
and X, 539-30. 

Ajatasatru, 18-20, 22-30, 37, 38, 334, 368, 
415. 

Aji 6aka, 656. 

Ajlva, 425. 

Ajlvika, sect, 414, 450, 462-64. 

Akara, 201. 

Alasanda (Alexandria), 103, 113. 
Alberuni, 142, 146, 149, 159, 616, 633. 
Alexander the Great, 31, 33, 34, 40, 43, 
44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 54, 57, 58, 60; 
92, 102, 106, 112, 163, 269, 331, 554, 
615, 616, 617, 618, 630. 
general review of campaign, 51-53. 
his retreat, 50-51. 

Alexander of Epirus, 88, 93. 

Alexandria, 43, 44, 84, 102, 103, 617, 618, 
619, 625, 631. 

Alexandria-among-the-Arachosians, 43, 

102 . 

Alexandria Library, 626. 


710 





INDEX 


Alexandria-under-the-Caucasus, 43, 46, 

102 . 

Altekar, 186. 

Alvars, 288. 

Amaravatl, 225, 484, 485, 492, 510, 524, 
525, 526, 527, 530. 

Amaru, 403. 

Amatyas, 353. 

Ambhi, 44, 48, 50, 53. 

Ambika, 466, ff. 

Amoghabhuti, raja of Kunindas, 161. 
Amrapali (Ambapali), 20, 528, 568, f. 
Amitraghata, 69. 

Amritananda, 266. 

Amtalikita, 115. 

Amtiyaka (Antiochus II), 78. 

Amu Darya, 136. 

Amyntas, 112, 118. 

Anagara-Slham , 21. 

Ananda, 369, 487. 

Anantanaga, 449. 

Anathapindika, 601, 604, 606. 

Anauoi, i28. 

Andaka, 45. 

Andhra-bhrityas, 192. 

Andhraka (Udaka), 98. 

Andhras, 78, 79, 95, 99, 100, 193, 194, 
289, 326. 

Anga, 20. 

Angabahira, 422. 

Angas , 396, 421-3. 

Anguttara Nikaya, 29, 400, 409, 437, 462. 
Anio, 150. 

Aniruddha, 447-50. 

Ankura (Kura) dynasty of Kolhapur, 

210 . 

Annam (Champa), 656, 658. 

AnQni-Kjin 1 

Antialcidas, 98,” 112, 115, 116, 117, 327 , 
432. 

Antigonus Gonatas, 616. 

Antigonus of Macedonia, 88, 93. 
Antimachus, 104, 112, 114. 

Antioch, 613. 

Antiochus, I, 104, 626. 

Antiochus I Soter, 70, 615. 

Antiochus II, 84, 88, 103. 

Antiochus III, 102,103, 104, 105,109, 110. 
Antiochus the Great, 616. 

Antonius Pius, 625. 

Anula, 239. 

Anuloma marriage, 545. 

Anupa, 201. 

Anuradhapura, 239. 

Anuruddha, 19, 29. 

Aornus, 47. 

Apadana, 401, 406, 409. 

Aparanta, 101, 119, 201. 

Aparantaka, 84. 

Apastamha Grihyasutra, 453. 

Apllaka, Sivasrl, 210. 


Apollodorus, 106, 107, 112, 113. 
Apollodotus, 106, 112, 114, 115, 117, 126. 
Apollonius, 128, 132. 

Apollophanes, 112, 117. 

Apsaras, 474. 

Arachosia (Kandahar), 42, 43, 109, 110, 
119, 124, 128. 

Arada Kalama, 366, 367. 

Ara inscription of Kanishka, 146, 327. 
Archebius, 112, 117. 

Archelaos, 627. 

Ardashir I Babagan, 152. 
ArdhamagadhI, 259, 270, 282. 

Ardoksho, 150. 

Aria (Herat), 42, 128. 

Ariana (Iran and modern Herat), 106. 
Arikamedu pottery finds, 536, 538, 539, 
540. 

classification, 539. 
link with Italy, 539. 

Aristobulius, 568. 

Aristotle, 310, 630. 

Aristoxenus, 630, 631. 
Ariyapariyesanasutta , 366, 367. 

Arjuna, 162. 

Arjunayanas, 159, 160, 162-3, 167. 
Arrian. 39, 40, 43, 48, 63, 286, 331, 483. 
626. 

Arsaces, 50, 103, 104, 132. 

Arsacidera, 127. 

Arsha marriage, 559. 

Art & architecture, earliest examples 
in India, 483. 

Arta, 134. 

Artabanus I, 121. 

Artabates, 42. 

Arthasastra (See under Kautilya also), 
56, 57, 60, 66, 80, 229, 274-76, 278, 
303, 309, 315-25, 331, 334, 335-37, 344, 
345, 348, 449, 453, 483, 542, 546, 569. 
caste system referred to, 542, 546, 569. 
compared to the Kural , 324-25. 
conception of the State. 309-10. 
date and authorship, 285-87, 304. 
diplomatic intercourse, 318. 
political alliances, 315-16. 
reference to asrama, 553. 
selection of ministers by the king, 
321-22. 

Artimidorus, 112, 118. 

Arya Sura, 267. 

Aryadeva, 305, 315. 

Aryaka, 264. 

Arya Chitraratha, 590. 

Aryarakshita, 416, 422. 

Asahaya, 349, 350, 351. 

Asana, 392. 

Asanga, 267, 388, 389. 

Asela, 237. 

Ashadhasena, 98, 172, 175, 214, 


711 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Ashtadhyayl, 102, 165, 263. 
Ashtamahgalas, 428. 

Asii-Asiani, (the Yueh-chi), 111. 

Asita, 365. 

Asmaka, 201. 

Asoka, 36, 38, 61, 70, 71, 72, 75, 76, 77, 
78, 81-94, 99, 102, 103, 105, 106, 236, 

‘ 282, 283, 284, 382, 383, 463, 486, 488, 

494, 495, 502, 506, 507, 508, 510, 556, 
577, 579, 580, 584, 585, 616, 633, 636, 
641, 655, 656. 

accession and chronology, 72, 88, 92, 
93. 

date of, 92 ff. 
and ahimsa, 83, 91. 
and Dharma or Law otf Piety, 81. 
general reference books on, 94. 
administration, 78. 
art and architecture, 86. 
benevolence, 85. 
conversion to Buddhism, 75, 76. 
edicts and their distribution, 77. 
extent of empire, 77, 78. 
missionary work, 76, 84. 
personal and family life, 87. 
principal inscriptions, 71-72, 282-84. 
Asoka’s successors, 89. 

Aspa, 131. 

Aspasioi (Asvayana), 45, 46. 
Aspavarman, 129, 133. 

Aspionus (Aria), 110. 

Asramas for education in early India, 
551-56, 589-90. 
departments in, 589. 

Naimisha, famous hermitage, 589. 
Assagetes, 47. 

Assakenoi (Asvakayana), 45, 46, 47, 49, 
57. 

Assakenos, 46. 

Astakenoi, 45, 57. 

Astes (Ashtakaraja), 45. 

Asura marriage, 559. 

Asvaghosha, 147, 153, 174, 258-60, 

266-67, 270, 277, 279, 325, 384, 388. 
his dramas, 282, 284. 

Aivakas, 49. 

Asvalayana Grihyasutra, 251. 

Asvasena, father of Parsva, 411. 
Atavi-&antisri, 225. 

Athama, 132. 

Atharvaveda, 276. 

Athenaeus, 616. 

Athsho, Persian Atash, 147. 

AtltavattUy 404. 

Atreya, 277. 

Atthakatha, writing otf, 239. 
Atthakathd-Makd-varnsa, 234. 
Atthakavagga, 402. 

Audumbaras, 161 f. 

Augrasainya, 31. 

Augustus, 108, 139, 619-22, 625. 
Aulikaras, 164, 165. 


Aupapatika Sutra, 26, 

Aurelian, 625. 

Avaddnakalpalata, 113. 

Avadana literature, 267-8. 
Avadanasataka , 268, 331. 
Avalokitesvara, 395. 

Avanti, 25, 26, 29, 30, 70, 90, 201, 577. 
Avantikd, 265. 

Avantis, 152. 

Avassayas, 422. 

Avassayavairitta, 422. 

Avasyaka Sutra, 416. 

Avestan passages, 39. 

Avimdraka, 263. 

Avinayarrcy 294. 

Avvai, 297, 298. 

Aya, 124, 131. 

Ayodhya, 32, 95, 96, 106, 173-74, 590. 
Ayodhya Inscription of Dhanadeva, 159. 
AyudhajlvinSy 163. 

Azes, 126, 127, 128, 129. 

Azes I, 467. 

Azes II, 130-134, 178. 

Azilises, 127. 


Bactria, Bactrians, 39, 43, 90, 92, 97, 98, 
103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111. 
Bagapharna, 132. 

Bahasatimita (? Brihatsvatlmitra, Bri- 
haspatimitra), 214, 215. 
Bahudhanyaka city, 167. 

Baimbika, 95. 

Bairat, 77, 537. 

Bakhira, 506, 507. 

Bakhtrish, 41. 

Bala, Maukhari Maha-senapati, 164. 
Balabhuti, 171. 

Balacharita, 262. 

Baladeva, 449, 473. 

Balamitra, 100, 155. 

Balarama, (see also Sankarshana), 459. 
473. 

Bali island, 473. 

Bana, 30, 90, 95, 97, 98, 274. 

Banaras, centre of learning, 594. 
Bandha (deposit), 358. 

Banerjea, 448. 

Bangarh, 531. 

Bapaka, 221. 

Barabar, 86, 495, 502. 
plan & section of Sudama Cave at, 
491, 495, 498, 502. 

Lomasa Rishi cave at, 495, 498, 502. 
Bardesanes, 627. 

Barhadratha dynasty, 18. 

Barha-takin, 149. 

Barth, 407, 434. 

Barthelemy St. Hailaire, 632. 


712 




INDEX 


Barygaza (Broach), 112. 

Basarh, 532. 

Basti (in Oudh), 100. 

Bathing, and bathing pools and tanks 
in early India, 575. 

Baudhayana-Dharma-sutra, 194, 225, 

435 f. 

Beards in early India, 575. 

Bcdsa, 499. 501, 503, 531. 

plan of Chaitya and Vihara at, 497. 
Bedsteads in early India, 576. 
Behistun inscription, 41. 

Berenice port, 93, 618, 619. 

Besnagar (Bhilsa) inscription, 98, 107, 
159, 432, 438, 487, 517. 

Bhadda, 29. 

Bhaddakachchana-Yasodhara, 366. 
Bhadrabahu, 61, 416, 419, 422. 
Bhadrabala, 176. 

Bhadradeva (Bha<jladeva), 176. 
Bhadra-ghosha, 100, 172. 

Bhadraka, 98. 

Bhadramagha, 174, 176, 177. 
Bhadrayasas, 117. 

Bhagabhadra, 115, 116. 

Bhagabhadra Kaslputra, 98. 
Bhagavad-Gxta , 249, 402, 433, 438, 440-7. 
Bhdgavata , 98. 

Bhagavata, king, 172, 175. 

Bhagavata cult, ( see also Vaishnavisra 
and Vasudeva cult), 432-58. 
relation with other creeds, 450-8. 
Bhagavatisutra, 414, 463. 

Bhaggas, 17. 

Bhaglratha, 457. 

Bhaja, 498, 503, 516. 
plan of Chaitya and Vihara at, 497. 
plan of small vihara, 500. 

Bhakti, 360 ff., 451, 474. 
origin o£, 432. 

Bhandarkar, D.R., 72, 190, 432. 
Bhandarkar, R.G., 99, 436, 448, 451, 454. 
Bhanumitra, 100, 155, 172, 472. 
Bharadvaja, 21, 95. 

Bharadvaja asrama, 590. 

Bharanadasa, 135. 

Bharasivas, 169, 170, 220. 

Bharata, 289. 

Bharhut, 27, 66, 95, 97, 99, 216, 484, 485, 
490, 510, 511, 512, 514, 515, 516, 522, 
524, 526, 527. 
sculptures, 216, 386, 512-3. 
Bhartridaman, 189, 190. 

Bharuka, 639. 

Bhasa, 29, 260-4, 277, 279, 284. 

Bhdsha (declaration), 355. 

Bhashyas, 475. 

Bhattiprolu, 492. 

Bhavabhuti, 170. 

Bhavadatta, 171. 

Bhavadattavarman, 177. 


Bhavanaga, 169, 170, 220. 

Bheda, 277. 

Bhela Samhitd, 277. 

Bhikkuni pdtimokkha , 376. 
Bhikkunx-vihhanga, 397. 

Bhikshu asrama, 552. 

Bhlmasena, Vasishthlputra, 176. 
Bhlmavarman, 175, 176. 

Bhogaldpha (interest), 358. 

Bhogin, 169. 

Bhojakas, 214. 

Bhojas, 78. 

Bhumaka, 179, 180. 

Bhumimitra, 99, 100, 162, 172. 
Bhutapala, 31. 

Bhfita-puranam, 292. 

Bibliographies, list of, 660. 

Bimbisara, 18-23, 26, 33, 37, 38, 41. 366. 

368, 528, 569, 587, 588, 595. 
Bindusara, 56, 61, 71, 92, 615. 

reign of, 69-70. 

Bishop Heber, 86. 

Bloch, 93, 94. 

Bodh Gaya, 100, 510-515, 524, 526, 530. 
Boclhi, attainment of by Buddha, 386. 
Bodhimanda, 27. 

Bodhis, 223-4. 

Ecdhisattva ideal, 386. 

Boeotian campaign. 43. 

Boghaz Koi inscriptions. 613. 

Bower manuscript, 277. 280. 

Brahma, 464. 

Brahmachdri, 371. 

Brahmacharya, 551. 

Brahmadatta, 20, 591. 

Brahma marriage, 559. 

BrahmajdlasvLtta , 398. 

Brahmamitra. 100, 171. 

Brahmanism and Buddhism, 373 f. 
Brahmanyadeva (Karttikeya), 166. 167. 
Brick buildings, 576. 

Brihadaranvaka Upanishad , 95. 
Brihadratha, 89. 90, 92, 107, 191. 
Brihayjdtakci , 450. 

Brihaspati, 303, 335, 343, 347, 350, 352. 
Brihaspatinaga, 171. 

Brihaspati-Smriti. 257, 352-56. 
civil & criminal laws, 356. 
courts of justice, 353-54. 
judicial procedure. 354-55. 
rules relating to evidence, 355-56. 
Brihat-katha, 154. 285, 652. 
Brihat-Pardsara Smriti. 329. 
Brihatphalayanas, 226 iT. 
Brihat-samhitd 1 159, 1.61, 167, 448, 465. 
Brihatsvatlmitra, (Brihaspatimitra), 98, 
172, 174, 175. 

Broach (Barygaza) in Periplus, 178, 193. 
(Bhrigukachchha), 181. 

Bstan-hgyur, 113. 

Bucephala, 102. 


713 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Buddha, the, 365-70. 
deification of, 386 f. 
early life, 365-67. 
footprints on Samantakuta, 235. 
missionary life, 368-70. 
nirvana of, 237, 365, 450, 569. 

Buddhacharita, 266, 366. 

Buddhaghosha, 333, 590. 

Buddha images, worship of, 387. 

Buddha Images and Buddhist Sculp¬ 
ture, 153, 391-5. 

Buddha Maitreya, 394. 

Buddhavamsa, 401, 406, 409. 

Buddhism, 360, 472, 479. 
history of, 377-91. 
schism in, 240. 

Buddhism and caste, 546 ff. 

Buddhist ballad poetry, 402. 

Buddhist Council, First, 377. 

Buddhist Council, The Great, 146, 384. 

Buddhist Councils, 398, 408. 

Buddhist literature, (see Pali Canon). 

Buhler, 352, 643. 

Bulandi Bagh, 486. 

Buston, 388. 

Buxar terracottas, 531, 532, 533. 


Callimachus, 93. 

Calliope, 118. 

Callistratus, 627. 

Cambodia (Fu-nan), 656, 657, 658. 
Cambyses, 40. 

Canon law and economic development, 
608-10. 

Cape Comorin, 603. 

Caracalla, 622. 

Cassius, Dion, 627. 

Caste and craft, 543, 548. 

Caste in early India, 542-51. 

Ceylon, History of, 236-42. 
colonisation by Aryans, 234-6. 
invasion by Cholas, 230. 

Chaitya Hall, 494-502. 
evolution & progress of. 499. 
oldest specimens of, 499. 
rock copies o»f wooden buildings. 494. 
Chakpat, 492. 

Chaldean documents, 104. 

Champa (Annam), 20, 26, 29, 658. 
Chanakya ( see also Kautilya), 35, 56. 

59, 60, 66, 69, 274, 303. 

Chandali, 265. 

Chandamukha Siva, 239. 

Chanda Pradyota, 26. 

Chandrabodhi, (Sri), 224. 


Chandragupta Maurya, 34, 37, 38, 52, 53, 
54, 55-62, 70, 77, 79, 87, 92, 274, 303, 
304, 417, 419, 615. 
conquest of Magadha, 59-60. 
extent of. his empire, 61. 
his army, 57. 
his birth, 55-56. 
his last days, 61. 
his war of liberation, 58-59. 
peace with Greeks, 60. 
system of administration, 62. 
Chandra-gupta II, 145, 165, 169, 178. 
Chandrata, 277. 

Chang-Kien, 137, 139, 645. 

Charaka, 147, 277. 

Charakasamhita, 276. 

Charibael, 618. 

Charitra, 354, 355. 

Chariydpitaka, 267, 401, 406, 409. 
Charudatta, 261-4. 

Charvaka, 478-80. 

Chashtana, 182-4, 190, 328. 

Chatuhsatikd, 267. 

Chatur-vyuha, see Vyuha doctrine. 
Chaucer, 107. 

Chedi era, 222, 223. 

Chedis, 211-6. 

Chellana, 19, 21, 22. 

Chera Kings, Tamil poems on, 296. 
Chera people, customs of the, 296. 
Cheran Senguttuvan, 296. 

Cheras, 78, 228-33. 

Chetaka, 19, 23, 25. 

Chetaka, uncle of Mahavlra, 414 f. 
Chey, 232. 

Chhandas sutra, 271. 

Chhdndogya Upanishad, and the Gita, 
433. 

Child marriage, 561. 

China, Indian colonial and cultural ex¬ 
pansion in, 645-50. 

China, reference in Arthasdstra , 275, 
287. 

Chitaldroog, 77. 

Chitta, 370 f. 

Chodas (Cholas), 78. 

Chola Kingdom, 295. 

Cholas, 228-34. 

Choranaga, 239. 

Chremonidean war, 93. 

Christianity and Buddhism, 373. 
and Bhakti, 451. 

Chukhsa, 133. 

Chnlamani, 300 f. 

Chullavagga, 397f; 402, 408f. 
Chulla-nidesa ) 406, 437, 462. 


714 






INDEX 


Chunar Hills, 87. 

Chunar sandstone, 508. 

Chu She-hing, 648. 

Chutukadananda, 208. 

Chutu-kula, 207. 

Chutu-Satakarnis, or Kuntala, 225. 
Cities in ancient India, 483-6. 
buildings in, 485. 
plan & lay-out of, 484. 

Civil and Criminal Law according to 
Brihaspati, 357-9. 

Civil Law of Narada, 351. 

Claudius, Emperor, 139. 

Clement, 626, 630. 

Clement of Alexandria, 616. 

Cleophes, 46. 

Cochin-China, 657. 

Coinage in early India, 607-8. 
foreign influence on, 608. 

Manu’s system of, 607-8. 
use of gold in, 607. 

Coins, seals & intaglio gems in early 
India, 534-36. 

Hellenistic, Roman & Parthian, 534. 
Kushana and Gupta, 534, 535. 

Coins replace barter, 607. 

Colebrooke, 631. 

Colonial & Cultural Expansion, 635-59. 
Companion to Greek Studies, 93. 
Constantine, 625. 

Coomaraswamy, 461. 

Coorg, 78. 

Cophaeus, 47. 

Corinth, 88. 

Coryate, Tom, 86. 

Cosmas Indicopleustes, 153. 

Cotton textiles trade, 229. 

Courtesans in early India, 568. 

Courts of Justice, 353. 

Craterus, 49. 

Criminal law, 401. 

Criminal Law of Narada, 351. 

Ctesias, 39, 615. 

Ctesiphon, 123. 

Cult images in early Indian art, 518. 
Cunningham, 45, 100, 109, 439, 452. 
Curtains, & cushions, 576. 

Curtius, 30, 31, 33, 44, 46, 57, 66, 331. 
Cyrene, 84. 

Cyrus, 39-41, 43. 


Dahanu, 181. 

Dai'machus, 615. 

Daiva marriage, 559. 

Daivaputra-Shahi-Shahanushahi, 145, 

153. 


Dakshamitra, 181. 

Damagupta, 172. 

Damajadasrl II, 188. 

Damajadasrl III, 189. 

Damangariga, 131. 

Damaraxus, 49. 

Damasena, 187, 188, 189. 

Damaysada (Damagbsada, Damajadasrl 
I), 185. 

Damila, 289. 

Dana, 386. 

Dancing, account of, by Kousikanar, 
295. 

Dandamis, 554ff. 

Dandaniti, 304, 306. 

Dandin, 274. 

Dardistan gold mines, 41. 

Darius, 39, 40, 41, 71, 101, 102, 614, 619. 
Darmesteter, James, 636. 

Darsaka, 19, 29. 

Dasakunvdracharita , 264. 

Dasaratha, 72, 89, 463, 502. 

Dasarupaka, 258. 

Dasasiddhaka, 31. 

Dasasvamedha Ghat, 169. 

Das Gupta, 477. 

Dattamitra, 107. 

Dattamitrl, 107. 

Dattamitrlyaka, 107. 

Davids, Rhys, 399, 407, 571. 

Davids, Mrs. Rhys, 370, 410. 

Deimachos, 70. 

Demetriaspolis, 108. 

Demetrius, 93, 97, 105-14, 116. 
Derbikes, 39. 

Deussen, 447. 

Devabhuti (Devabhumi), 98, 99, 195. 
Devadatta, 27, 366. 

Devamitra, 174. 

Devanaga, 171. 

Devanampiya (Asoka), 73. 
Devanariipiyatissa, 236, 237. 

Devata Samyutta, 400. 

Dhakki (Takki), 265. 

Dhamma, 370-74, 377. 

first promulgation of, 386. 

Dhamnmpada, 401, 402, 409, 643, 644. 
Dhammapala, 411. 

Dhammapitaka, date of, 408. 
Dhammasangani, 407. 

Dhana, 31. 

Dhanadeva, 173, 175. 

Dhanaka, 225. 

Dhana Nanda, 34, 54, 59. 

Dharma, 354. 

Dharma and Hindu State, 307, 308, 319. 
Dharmachakra-pravartana, 371, 429. 
Dtiarmamrita of Nayanasena, 226. 


715 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Dharmarakshita, 84. 

Dharmaratna, 646. 

Dharma-sastras, 254-57, 335, 336, 345, 
350. 

Dharmasunyatd, 387. 

Dharmavivardhana (Kunala, Asoka’s 
son), 79. 

Dhdtu-chaityas, 28. 

Dhatukatha, 407, 409. 

Dhauli, 71, 77, 507, 508. 

Dhavald, 423. 

Dhruvamitra, 172. 

DhyanI Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, 427. 
Digha Nikdya, 370, 392, 398. 

Dikshit, K.N., 484. 

Dikshitar, V.R.R., 293, 300, 301. 
Dimita, 117, 214. 

DInaka, 181. 

Dio Chrysostom, 625, 626. 

Diodorus, 63, 616. 

Diodotus, 103, 104, 112. 

Diomedes, 112, 118. 

Dionysius, 40, 70, 112, 117, 615. 

Dipa, author of Parivarapdtha, 408. 
Dlpankara. 386. 

Dipavaihsa, 234-7, 241, 379. 

Divans, 576. 

Divorce, 565 f. 

Divydvaddna, 69, 70, 72, 73, 79, 86, 89, 
95, 107, 268. 

Domoko, 639. 

Dramaturgy, 269-71. 

Dramida, 289. 

Dramii, 289. 

Drangiana, 39, 42, 109, 110, 118, 120, 123, 
124, 127, 128. 

Dravida, 289. 

Dravidian languages and literature, 287. 
Dravidian languages and Sanskrit, 
287-9. 

Dress in early India, 571-4. 
Dridhabala, 276. 

Dridhamitra, 171. 

Drink & food in early India, 577-79. 
Drishtivdda, 423. 

Drcysen, 109. 

Duhklia, 370, 372. 

Duhkhanta, 454 ff. 

Durga, 467. 

Durgdsaptasaii, 467. 

Dutaghatotkaclm, 262. 

Dutavakya, 262. 

DutthagamanI, 238. 

Dvaraka, 15. 

Dvaraka (Baraca) in Periplus, 178. 
Dvdtrimsat Puttalikd, 154, 197. 


Ecbatana, 486. 

Economic condition in early India, 
595-610. 

Ed. Meyer, 40. 

Education in early India, 582-94, (see 
also ‘Subjects studied’). 

Banaras as centre of learning, 594. 
public & community schools, 594. 

Education in the Jatakas, 591-94. 
Ekanala, 20. 

Ekuttara , see Aiiguttara Nikdya. 

Elddi, 300. 

Elapatra, 472. 

Elara, 237 f. 

Elela Singan, 237. 

Elu (Helu) dialect, 236. 

Embassies from India to China, 650. 
Embassies from India to Rome, 625. 
Emetrius, 107. 

Epander, 112, 117. 

Epics, 243 ff. 

Epirus (Corinth), 84. 

Equity and Custom, 351. 

Eratosthenes, 625, 626. 

Erythraen Sea, 39. 

Ettuthokai, 294, 296. 

Eucratides, 97, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 
114, 115, 116, 117, 118. 

Eucratidians, 126. 

Eudemus, 58, 59. 

Eudoxus, 619. 

Eusebius, 630. 

Euthydemians, 126. 

Euthydemus, 104-8, 112, 116, 118. 
Euthymedia, 108. 

Evidence according to Brihaspati, 355-7. 


Fa-hien, 79, 86, 149, 486, 490. 

Fa-hu, 647. 

Family life in early India, 556-8. 
Fan-che-man, 657. 

Fan Hiong, 658. 

Fan-siun, 657, 658. 

Fan-yi, 658. 

Fausboll, 402. 

Ferghana, 3. 

Firishta, 152. 

Firuz Shah Tughlak, 87. 

Fleet, 144, 156. 

Food & drink in early India, 577-79. 
Footwear in early India, 574. 
Fu-nan (Cambodia), 657 f. 

Furniture, 576 ff. 

Fyzabad, 106. 


716 





INDEX 


Gaggara, 4. 

Gajabahu (kagamani), 239 f. 
Ganapatinaga, 170. 

Gana-rajas, 7, 23. 

Ganas, 354. 

Gandak, 4, 35. 

Gandhara, 13, 14, 39, 41, 45, 79, 80, 393- 
96, 492. 

Gandhara Art, 518-22. 

Bimaran reliquary, 520, 521. 
character of, 519. 
later phase of, 521. 
origin of, 519. 

§aka-Kushana, source of, 519. 
Gandharva marriage, 559. 

Gandharvas, 474. 

Gandhi (Mahatma), 556. 
Gandlstotragdthd, 266. 

Ganendra or Ganapa, coins of, 170. 
Ganesa, 150, 469. 

Gangaridae, 33, 34, 49. 

Garbe, 447, 631, 633. 

Gardabhilla dynasty, 155. 

Gardner, 109. 

Gargi-samhitd , 90, 106, 107, 113. 
Garhasthya, 552. 

"Garland of Tiruvalluvar”, 293. 
Garuda Pillar, 98. 

Gathd, 396, 404. 

Gdthd-narasamsis, 244. 

Gdthdsaptcisati , 207, 285 
Gaugamela, 43. 

Gautama, 456. 

Gautama Dharma-sutra, 545. 

Gavimath, 77. 

Gaya terracottas, 533. 

Gedrosia, 40, 51. 

Geiger, 237, 407. 

Geography, Ptolemv’s 180, 183, 191, 202, 
204, 216, 221, 226. 

Geyya, 396. 

Ghata Jataka, 439. 

Ghataka, 135. 

Ghora, preceptor of Krishna, 433-4. 
Ghorband valley, 40, 109. 

Ghosna, 100. 

Gilmore, 39. 

Girivraja, 20, 21, 29, 30. 

Girnar, 77, 87. 

Glauganikai, 49. 

Gogra, 35. 

Goli, 524, 526. 

Gomati-Uihara, 642. 

Gomitra, 171. 

Gonarda, 98. 

Gondi, 287. 

Gondophernes, 119, 128, 129, 130, 131, 
132, 133, 452, 461, 628. 

Gopall, queen, 172. 

Gopftlika-Vaihidari, queen, 172. 
Gopinatha Rao, 460. 

Goraihagiri. 214. 


Gosala Maiikhaliputta, 26 f., 414, 417, 
450. 

Gotama Ferry, 25. 

Gotama Gate, 25. 

GotamI, 365, 368 f. 

Gothabhaya, 241. 

Govishanaka, 31. 

Goyama, Jain monk, 412. 

Gramakas, 21. 

Grammar, 268-9. 

Granavhryaka, 134. 

Great Naga Dynasty, 19. 

Gregory, St., 634. 

Grihya sutras, 469. 

Grumbates, Kushana king, 152. 
Gudnaphar, i.e. Goundaphoros, 130. 
Guha, 468. 

Gumadidurru, 526. 

Gunadhya, 285. 

Gunaratna, 456. 

Guptas, 100, 161, 166. 

Gurzala inscription, 226. 


Hadda, 520, 521. 

Hadrian, 625. 

Hagamasha, 135. 

Hagana, 135. 

Hair-oil, use oif, in early India, 575. 
Hala, 284-5. 

Halla, 20, 23. 

Hamadan inscription. 41. 

Haribhadra. 456. 

Harlta, 277. 

Harivamsa, 249. 

Harshacharita, 30, 90, 95, 170, 264, 463. 
Harshata, 273. 

Haryahka-kula, 19. 

Hashtanagar, 45. 

Hastinaptira, 537. 

Hastinayana, 2. 

Hastisirhha, 213. 

Hathigumpha, 32, 117, 212, 226. 
Haung-che (Kanchi), 645. 

Havell, 460. 

Heber, Bishop, 86. 

Helioeles, 109, 110, 111, 112, 116. 117. 
1241 

Heliodorus, 98, 115, 432. 

Heliogabalus, 625. 

Helios, 147. 

Hemachandra, 21, 37, 89, 286. 
Hephaestion, 45, 47. 

Heracles, 40. 47, 150, 432, 439, 456. 
Heraclitus. 633. 

Herat, 42, 60, 78, 613. 

Heraus, 132. 

Hermaeus, 112, 118, 119, 124, 128, 13S. 
Herodotus, 39, 41, 42, 120, 405, 607. 615. 


717 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Hetupratyaya, 371. 

Hillebrandt, 257. 

Hinayana, 373. 

Hindu State, 328-41. 
administration of justice in, 340-41. 
administrative unit in, 323-4, 326. 
civil law in, 340. 

compared to Greek & Roman States, 
311. 

council of ministers in, 321-22. 
criminal law and punishment in, 337. 
curriculum for prince’s education, 
325 

departmental chiefs in, 322. 
international law in, 317-18. 
ministers in, 320. 

non-monarchical constitution in, 
330-34. 

place of the king in, 312. 
relations between one another, 315. 
republican constitution in, 333. 
revenue taxation in, 328-30. 
rights and duties of a king in, 319-20. 
sources and topics of law in, 335. 
Hippalus, 620, 621. 

Hippostratus, 112, 117, 126. 

Hiram, King of Tyre, 611. 

Hiranyakas, 225. 

Hiranyarash^ra, 225. 

Hiriyanna, 477. 

History of the Later Han Dynasty , 649. 
Hiuen Tsang, 34, 114, 142, 146, 149, 161, 
204, 210, 380, 383, 384, 492, 649. 
Hiung-nu, 122, 136. 

Holtzmann, 447. 

Homer’s Odyssey, 626. 

Hopkins, 434, 447, 451. 

Hormazd II, 152. 

Hot-bath rooms in early India, 575. 
Ho-ti, 143. 

Houses and furniture in early India, 
576 ff. 

HrI, 470 f. 

Hsiian-ti, 122. 

Hnlt7c;ph 93 94 

Huvishka (Hushka), 145, 148, 150, 327, 
439, 449, 461, 467, 472. 

Hycodes, 132. 

Hydrakes, 40. 

Hyphanis, 114. 

Hyphasis, 50, 114. 


lchchumai, 114. 
Ikshumati, 114. 
Ikshvakus, 206, 224-6. 
Ilanaga, 239. 
Ilandiraiyan, 231, 294. 
liango-Adigal, 301. 


Image worship in early India, 363-4, 
452 f. 

Imaiyavaramban Nedunjeral Adan, 232. 
India, five traditional divisions of, 101. 
India & the Western World, 611. 

India in Western Literature, 625 ff. 
India’s influence on the West, 629-634. 
influence on philosophy, 630-31. 
influence on religion, 633. 
influence on science, 629-30. 

Indian colonial and cultural expansion 
in Afghanistan, 635-36. 

Indian colonial and cultural expansion 
in Central Asia, 636-45. 
discovery of valuable Sanskrit & Pali 
texts, 643-44. 

evidence of religious and secular 
documents, 639-640. 

Indian rulers at Khotan, 641. 

Indian rulers at Kucha, 642. 
prevalence of Buddhism, 642-43. 
routes from India to China through 
Central Asia, 637-39. 

Indian colonial & cultural expansion in 
China, 645-50. 

Buddhism goes to China, 646. 
Buddhism spreads among upper 
classes, 648. 

China known to India from very 
early times, 645. 

Chinese silk in India, 646. 

Indian ambassadors to China, 650. 
pilgrimages to India from China, 648- 
49. 

political relations between India & 
China, 649-50. 

Indian colonial & cultural expansion in 
South-East Asia, 652-59. 
books of general reference, 659. 
development of political & cultural 
relations, 655. 
different islands, 655. 
difficulties of access, 654. 
early colonies, 655. 
early trade intercourse, 652-55. 
Hindu Kingdom in Annam, 658. 
Hindu Kingdom in Cambodia, 657. 
Kingdom founded in Burma, 656. 
popular stories & folk-tales, 652. 
Indian colonial & cultural expansion in 
Tonkin, 650-51. 
missionary activities, 651. 
presence of Indians, 651. 
stronghold of Buddhism, 651. 

Indian colonies on Kashgar-China 
routes, 639-43. 

Indian colony at Alexandria, 625. 
Indian colony at Memphis, 619. 

Indian colony at Taron, 634. 


718 





INDEX 


Indian culture, diffusion beyond the 
sea, 216. 

Indian temples at Taron, 634. 

Indian troops (for first time) in Europe, 
42, 43. 

Indika, 483, 626. 

Indra, 475. 

Indramitra, 100, 172. 

Iniavai-narpathu, 299. 

Inna-narpathu, 299. 

Innilai, 300. 

Institutes of Ndrada (London, 1876), 
348. 

Intaglio gems, coins & seals in early 
India, 534-36. 

Intercourse between India & the West¬ 
ern countries, 611. 

Achaemenid period, 614-15. 

India & Egypt, 616-20. 

India & Greece, 615-16. 

India & Homan Empire, 620-25. 
pre-Achaemenid period, 611-14. 
Interdining in early India, 545. 
Interest, 358. 

Intermarriage in early India, 544. 
Inter-State Relations in Ancient India, 
313. 

Ionian Greeks, 101. 

Iraiyanar, 292. 

Iron Pillar of King Chandra at Mehar- 
auli, 541. 

Ironsmiths in early India, 541. 
Irrigation canals of Cholas, 231. 
Irundayur Kurungolimosi, 292. 
Isai-Nunukkam, 292. 

Isamus, 114. 

Isidor, 107, 121, 128, 636. 
isvaradatta, 186, 206, 221, 222. 
Isvarasena, Mathariputra, 222. 
Itivuttaka, 396, 401, 402. 

I-tsing, 75, 266, 380, 649. 

Ivory Carving in early India, 541. 

Vidisa skill, 541. 

Iyer, V.V.S., 297. 


Jacobi, 363 , 420. 

Jaggayyapeta, 225, 492, 524, 529. 

Jain canon, its language & date, 421-3. 
Jain doctrines, 419-21. 

Jain Icons, 425-31. 

Jainism, 360 ff., 372, 411-31, 450, 472, 
after Mahavlra, 415-19. 
and Bhagavatism, 450. 
and caste, 546 ff. 
and Serpent-worship, 529. 

Jain Philosophy, 423-5. 

Jain writers in Tamil, 298, 300. 


Jalandhara, 95. 

Jalauka, Asoka’s son, 89, 90. 

Jamali, 416. 

Janakapura, 7. 

Janapadas, Prachya, 3. 

Jataka, 386, 396, 401, 404, 405, 406. 
Jatakamala, 267. 

Jatakas, popularity of, 386. 

Jatila, 462. 

Jatukarna, 277. 

Jaugada, 71, 77. 

Jaulian, 520, 521. 

Java, 656. 657. 

Jaxartes, 111, 120. 

Jayadaman, 183, 184. 

Jayadeva, 273. 

Jayadevachhandas , 273. 

Jayadhavala, 423. 

Jayagupta, 172. 

Jayamitra, 172. 

JayantI, 563. 

Jayapatra, 357. 

Jayaswal, 220. 

Jayavarman, 227. 

Jerome, St., 627. 

Jetavana, 368. 

Jetavana-vihara, 241. 

Jethamitra, 100. 

Jewellery in early India, 540-41. 

high level of the art, 540. 

Jewish chronicles, 611. 

Jihonika, 134. 

Jinakalpa, 417. 

Jinaprabhasuri, 89. 

JIva, 424-5. 

Jivadaman, 186, 187, 190. 

Jivaka, 22, 27, 587, 588. 

Jivaka chintamani, 300, 301, 302. 
Jhana, 372, 478. 

Jnatrikas, 6, 7. 

Johnson, Dr., 295. 

Jolly, 256, 348, 352, 353. 

Judicial procedure according to Bri- 
haspati, 354-5. 

Julian, 623. 625. 

Junagarh inscription, 61, 79, 87, 327, 
418. 

Junnar, 498, 499, 505. 
plan & Section of Circular Cave at, 
496. 

Jushka, 148, 150. 

Justin, 55, 57, 58, 59, 61, 92, 93, 104, 
108, 110, 112. 

Justinian, 625. 

Jyeshthamitra, 174. 


Kabul (Cophen), 40, 43, 45, 46, 47, 52, 
60 102, 103. 


719 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Kachchha, 15. 

Kadambarl, 264. 

Kadambas, 233. 

Kadphises I, 118, 128, 129, 131, 138, 139, 
149, 150. 

Kadphises II, 131, 132, 139, 141. 
Kadphises, Kujula-kara, 141. 

Kadphises, Wema, 461. 

Kaflristan, 46, 109, 118. 

Kailasa (Mount), 290. 

Kaivarta, 31. 

Kaiyata, 269. 

Kakavarna, 19, 30. 

Kakavarnm, 19. 

KakavarnI SaisunagI, 30. 

Kakkai padinayam, 294. 

Kakkai Padiniar, 296. 

Kalachuri era, see Chedi era. 
Kalachuris, 222. 

Kalakacharya, 155. 

Kdlakdchdrya-kathd, 155. 

Kalariavirai, 292. 

Kalasl-grama, 113. 

Kalasoka (Kaka-varnin), 18, 19, 30, 378. 
Kalavali-ndrpathu, 299. 

Kalavar, 233. 

Kalawan epigraph, 131. 

Kalhana, 148. 

Kali , 292. 

Kali a^e 112. 

Kalidasa,’ 90, 95, 96, 97, 119, 149, 150, 261, 
269, 274, 403. 

Kdlika kdrita, and kayika (kinds of 
interest), 358, 422. 

Kallnadi, 114. 

Kalinga, 61, 71, 73, 79. 
conquest by Asoka, 74, 75. 

Kalinga-chakravartin, 213. 

Kalinga Edicts, 71, 92. 

Kalihgas 95, 211, 212, 213. 

Kalithokai, 297. 

Kalpaka, 34. 

Kalpandmanditika, 267. 

Kalsi, 77. 

Kalyan (Calliena) in Periplus, 178, 198. 
Kalyana, 603. 

Kamadatta, 171. 

Kamandaka, 306. 

Kdmandaka Nitisara, 274. 

Kdmasutra of Vatsyayana, 207, 286. 
Kamboja, 15. 

Kambojas, 78, 79, 80, 103. 

Kanada, 456. 

Kanaikkal Irumporai, 232. 
Kanakasabhai, 301, 324. 

Kanauj, 90. 

Kanchanaka, 217. 

Kanchipuram, 295. 


Kandahar, 42, 43, 49, 57, 60, 105, 613. 
Kane, P.V., 257, 349, 351. 

K’ang T’ai, 657, 658. 

Kanheri, 502. 

Kanishka, 113, 135, 140, 141-51, 158, 258, 
276, 384, 461, 465, 472, 649. 
coins of, 147-48. 
date of, 143-46. 
religion of, 146-48, 384. 

Kanishka I, 161, 175, 179. 

Kanishka II, 150, 151. 

Kanishka III, 151. 

Kannada, 287, 289. 

Kanniar, 294, 295. 

Kantakssulos (Kantaka-saila), 227. 
Kanthaka, 366. 

Kanvas, 99, 100. 

Kanvayanas, 99, 100. 

Kao-fu, 129, 137, 145, 152. 

Kapatapuram, 292, 293. 

Kapilar, 238, 292, 294, 295. 296, 297. 
Kapilavastu, 16, 331, 484. 

Kapisa, 40, 116. 

Kapisi, 109, 115. 

Kappasutta, 417. 

Karana, 454. 

Kardamakas, 164, 166, 182-90, 202. 
Karikala-Chola, 230, 231, 232, 238. 239, 
294, 295. 

Karle, 499, 501, 502, 505, 516, 527. 
fluid design of carving at, 516. 
plan & section of Chaitya Hall at, 500. 
Karma, 362, 372, 478. 

Karman, 248, 403. 

Karmayoga, 442. 

Karnabhdra , 282. 

Kar-narpathu, 299. 

Karttikeya ( see also Brahmanyadeva, 
Kumara, Mahasena, Muruga and 
Skanda), 166 l, 224, 431, 457, 468. 
Karttikeya cult, 153. 

Karuvaki, 87. 

Kdrya, 454. 

Kashgar, 639, 641. 

Kashmir, 50, 84, 89, 90. 

Kail, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 30. 

Kdsikd, 49. 

Kasrawad, 537. 

Kassapas, 21. 

Kasyapa, 95, 272. 

Kasyapa Matanga, 153, 646. 

Kathaioi, (Kathas), 50. 

Katlva-Kosa , 652. 

Kathasaritsdgara, 264. 

Kathavatthu, 383, 407, 408, 410. 
Kathiawar, 77, 106, 107. 

Katyayana, 268, 269, 279, 280, 347, 349, 
351, 563. 

Kdtydyana-Smriti, 257, 349, 351, 354. 
Kaundinya, 657. 


720 






INDEX 


KausambI, 78, 174, 531, 532, 533. 

Kautilya (see also Arthasastra), 55, 56, 
59, 66, 80, 81, 274, 303, 304, 305, 306, 
309, 310, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 
321, 322, 324, 330, 331, 334, 335, 336, 
337, 338, 339, 342, 343, 348, 463, 577, 
578, 580, 582, 583, 585, 595, 596, 598, 
601, 652. 

Kaverippurhpattnam, 459. 

Kaviraja-marga, 289. 

Kdvyamxmamsa, 153,'206. 

Kayarohana, 454. 

Keith, A.B., 257 f., 407, 435. 

Kena Upanishad, 453. 

Kennedy, 451. 

Keralaputra (Chera), 78. 

Kesi, Jain monk, 412. 

Khan<jlagiri, 503, 511, 515. 
robust vitality of the art of, 515. 

Khandavagga, 400. 

Khandhaka, 307. 

Khanumata, 21. 

Kharapallana, 141. 

TCViaranQta 1^4 

Kharavela, 117’ 198, 212-6, 226, 426, 503. 
KharoshthI, 107, 109. 

Khasas, 70, 74. 

Khauda-la, 651. 

Khawak Pass, 43. 

Khema, 19, 21. 

Khotan, 639, 640, 641, 642. 647, 649. 
Khuddaka Nikaya, 370, 386, 401, 406, 
409. 

Kielhorn, 114. 

K’ieou-tsieou-k’io, 137, 138. 

Kilakilas. 217, 218. 

Ki-pin (Kafiristan), 122, 123, 127, 137, 
139, 145, 152. 

Kisa Samkichchha, 463. 

Kish, 611. 

Knight’s Tale , 107. 

Kodagu, 287. 

Koliyas, 16. 

Konakamana (Kanakamuni), 86. 
Kondane Chaitya hall, 499, 505. 
Kondapur, 538. 

Konguvelir, 302. 

Koothu, 292. 

Kopbal, 77. 

Kosala, 22, 23, 24, 26, 30, 32, 90. 
Kouei-chouang, 137. 

Kousikanar, 294, 295. 

Kovur-Kilar, 297. 

Kramrisch, 522, 531. 

Krimisa, 107. 

Krishna Vasudeva (see also Bhagavad 
and Vishnu), 433-42, 456. 
date of, 434. 

Krishnabena, 213. 

Krishna Satavahana, 197, 198. 

Krita, 164. 


Krita era, 157, 164. 

Kriya (adducing of proof), 355. 
Kshaharata Satraps, 179-82, 201. 
Ksharapani, 277. 

Kshatrapas (and Maha-Kshatrapas), 
326. 

Kshemadharman, 19. 

Kshemendra, 113, 285. 

Kshetrajna, 444. 

Kshudrakas (Oxydrakai), 40, 50, 62,163. 
Kuberaka, 191. 

Kuberanaga, 170. 

Kubera-Vaisravana, 464. 

Kuchi (modern Kucha), 639, 643. 
Kuhn, Ernst, 248. 

Kujula Kadphises, see Kadphises 1. 
Kukkutardma y 29. 

Kukura, 201. 

Kulas, 354. 

Kulutas, 161. 

Kumara, 150, 468. 

Kumaralata, 267. 

Kumarl, 290. 

Kumrahar (Patna), 100, 486. 

Kunala (Asoka’s son), 79, 80, 641. 
Kunar, 45. 

Kundakunda, 423. 

Kundalakesi, 300, 301. 
Kundala-Vana-Vihara, 147. 

Kunika, 20, 22, 23, 26, 29. 

Kunindas, 161. 

Kunramerinda Murugavel, 292. 
Kuntala, 32. 

Kuppuswami Sastri, 477. 

Rural , 293, 324. 
brief account of, 297-8. 

English renderings, 297. 
Kurinchippattu, 295. 

Kurukshetra, 245. 

Kuruku, 292. 

Kurungolimdsi, 292. 

Kuruhjipattu, 238. 

Kurunthokai, 292, 296. 

Kurus, 245. 

Kuru war, 251. 

Kushanas, 112, 149, 153, 161, 166, 327. 
identified with T\irushkas, 149. 
the age of, 153. 

Kushan Pass, 44. 

Kusika, 454. 

Kusllavas, 245. 

Kusinagara, 17, 484. 

Kusinara, 28. 

Kusumapura, 29. 

Kutakannatissa, 239. 


Ladha, 1, 15. 

Lakshmi (£rl), 469 ff. 


721 


A.I.U.—46 










THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Lakulin (see . also Nakulin), 454. 

Lala, Dandandyaka, 141. 

Lalaka 2i3. 

Lalitavistara, 280, 366, 386, 464. 
Lambakanna clan, 239, 241. 

Lanjatissa, 238. 

Lanka, 84. 

Laodice, 109, 110. 

Laos, 657. 

Lassen, 633. 

Lata (Ariaca) in Periplus, 178. 

Lauriya Araraj, 77. 

Lauriya Nandangarh, 506, 507, 533, 534. 
Law, N. N., 313. 

Lekhita, 355. 

Leumann, 423. 

Levirate, 566. 

Liaka, 141. 

Liaka Kusulaka, 133. 

Lichchhavis, 2, 6, 7, 23 , 24, 25, 26, 142, 
331, 332, 333, 334. 

Lichchhivikas, 7. 

Life in ancient India, 397, 399. 

Linga, worship af, 459-61. 

Linga Purana, 454. 

Liquor, use of, in early India, 578. 
Literature, Western, and India, 625-27. 
Lo Yang, 651. 

Lock of Berenice , 93. 

Lopamudra, 290. 

Loriyan Tongai, 520, 521, 532. 

Love, fivefold aspects described by 
Tolkappiyar, 296. 

Lumbini, 77, 365. 

Lysias, 112, 116, 117. 


Macedonian Invasion, 43. 

Machatas, 52. 

Madhavasena, 96. 

Madhavavarman I, 219. 
Mddhyamakakdrikd, 267. 

Madhyamd pratipat , 371. 
Madhyamavyayoga, 262. 

Madhyamika, 96, 107, 113. 

Madra, 19. 

Madrakas, 160. 

Maduraikkdnchi, 295. 

Magadhan Empire, fall of, 95. 
Magadhan Imperialism, rise of, 18. 
MagadhI, 259, 265* 283-4. 

Magas of Cyrene, 88, 92, 93, 616. 
Maghas (Meghas), 175, 176, 177. 
Magnesia (in Asia Minor), 104. 
Mahabharata, 90, 96, 103, 107, 163, 165, 
166, 221, 245-52, 255, 276, 303, 304, 
305, 320, 331, 334, 402, 405, 447, 453, 


458, 464, 528, 586, 589, 597, 656. 
authorship of, 246. 
date of, 251, 254. 
language of, 279. 
reference to caste, 546. 
recension and editions, 249. 
war of, 229. 

Mahabhdshya, 221, 269, 438 f., 448, 451, 
456, 467. 

Mahdbhinishkramana, 396. 

Mahachuli Tissa, 239. 

Mahadeva, 84, 453. 
Mahadharmarakshita, 84. 

Mahagovinda, 20. 

Mahakachchhayana (Nalaka), 365, 410. 
Mahakassapa, 28, 377. 

Mahamatras, 21. 

Maha-Meghavahana (Chedi) dynasty, 
211-6. 

Mahanama, 235. 

Mahanandin, 19, 30, 31. 

Maha-niddesa, 406, 437, 462. 

Mahapadma Nanda, 31-33, 36 f. 
Mahdparinibbdna Sutta, 333, 369, 385, 
399. 

Mahdparinibbdna Suttanta , 487. 
Mahaparinirvana, 386, 392-3, 396. 
Maharakshita, 84. 

Maharashtri, 270, 283-4. 

Mahasanghikas, 386. 

Mahasena, god, 150, 224, 225. 

Mahasena, King, 241. 
Mahasenapati-Mahatalavara, 224. 
Mahasildkantaka , 25. 

Mahasthan, 531. 

Mahavagga , 21, 325, 397, 398, 400, 402, 
408. 

Mahavamsa, 28, 84, 86, 230, 234-42. 
Mahavamsatlka, 57, 59. 

Mahdvibhanga, 397. 

Mahavihara, 21, 26, 27, 28, 36, 37, 240, 
379, 413. 

Mahayana, 153, 373, 381, 385-91. 
emergence of, 387. 
test of, 386. 

Mahdydnasraddhotpada, 266, 450. 
Mahayanasutralankara, 267. 
Mahayanism, rise of, 385-391. 

versus Hlnayanism, 388. 

Mahendra, 84, 87, 89, 201. 

Mahendra (Mahinda), 379, 408 f. 
Mahesvaranaga, 169. 

Mahlmitra, 162. 

Mahishaman^ala, 84. 

Maisoloi, 226. 

Majjhantika, Buddhist missionary, 84. 
Majjhima Nikdya, 103, 370, 399, 409. 
Makkhali Gosala, 27. 

Makran, 42. 

Maldipadukaddm , 295. 








INDEX 


Mdlavikagnimitra, 90, 95, 96, 97, 107. 
Malatirrvddhava, 170. 

Malava era, 156. 

Malavas, 159, 160, 163-6, 181. 

Malay Peninsula, 201, 657. 

Malayalam, 287, 289. 

Malayalis, ancestors, of 296. 

Malinl, famous federation of hermi¬ 
tages, 589. 

Mallaki, 23. 

Mallas, 56, 332. 

Mallika, 368. 

Mallol (Malavas), 50, 52, 57. 
Mambarus, 178, 179. 

Mamulanar, 297. 

Manchapuri cave sculptures, 216. 
Man^ala, doctrine of, 314. 

Mandasor, 164. 

Mandavya, 272. 

Manibhadra worship, 464. 

Manigula, 133, 134. 

Manigula Kshatrapa, 133. 

Mani Yakshaka, 235. 

Manikiala inscription, 134, 327. 
Manikyala Stupa, 491 f. 

Manimekhalai, 236, 300, 301, 302, 459. 
Manjusri, 395. 

Mansehra edicts, 77. 

Manu, 274, 306, 307, 317, 318, 319, 322, 

323, 328, 329, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 

342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 347, 348. 349, 

350, 351, 352, 354, 357, 578, 582, 583, 

607, 609, 610. 

Manu-Samhita, 103, 122, 194, 255, 256, 
305, 352. 

Manu-Smriti, 335, 340, 343, 352, 543, 585. 
Mao, moon-god, 147, 150. 

Mapurdnavi, 292. 

Marajlvika, 651. 

Mardonius, 43. 

Mdrga, 370. 

Mdrgabhumisutra, 145. 

Marinus, 626. 

Marriageable age, 560. 

Marriage in early India, 558-63 
Marriage of cross-cousins, 225. 
Marshall, Sir John, 86, 520. 
Maruthanar, 294, 295. 

Mary, the Virgin, 451. 

Maski, 77, 532. 

Massaga (Masakavatl), 45, 46, 47. 
Massage in early India, 575. 

Ma^hara, minister of Kanishka, 147. 
Matharlputra Saksena, 207, 211. 
Matharlputra VIrapurushadatta, 225. 
Mathura, 100, 106, 118, 327, 394, 484, 485 
517, 518, 525, 526, 527, 528, 531, 533. 
character of sculpture, 523. 
distinctive sculpture of, 522. 
portrait-statutes, 523. 

Matrigupta, 269. 


Mats and mattresses in early India, 576. 
Matsya Purdna, 89. 

Ma-twan-lin, 122. 

Maudgalyayana, 259, 368. 

Maues, 118, 124, 125, 126, 127, 461. 
Maurya Empire, 54-93. 
causes of downfall, 90, 91. 

Maya, 365. 

Mayftrasarman, Kadamba, 209, 223. 
McCrindle, 45. 

Medes, 40. 

Medhatithi, 256. 

Medicine, 276-7. 

Medo-Persian, 39. 

Megasthenes, 33, 40, 61-68, 194, 211, 229, 
254, 274, 275, 331, 432, 437, 439, 456, 
483, 549, 557, 559, 564, 571, 574, 578, 
580, 606, 615, 616, 626. 
his account of caste, 549. 
his account of Chandragupta’s ad¬ 
ministration, 62-65. 
his account o£ Chandragupta’s court 
life, 66-67. 

his account of the life of the people, 
67-68. 

Meghakumara, 20. 

Mekhalinam Maha-Samgha, famous 
brotherhood of brahmacharls, 590. 

Menadra (Menamdra), 113. 

Menander, 97, 106, 108, 112, 113, 114, 
115, 116, 126, 384, 409. 

Meroes, 49. 

Merutunga, 154, 155. 

Metrics, 271. 

Mevaki Miyika, 133. 

Miaw, 132. 

Middle path, 371. 

Mihira cult, 153. 

Milinda, 108, 113, 114, 586. 
Milinda-panha , 113, 384, 408-10, 484, 
652. 

Millionaire merchants, 604. 

Mimamsa, 476. 

Min, 121. 

Minayeff, 407. 

Mingti, 646, 648. 

Mining industry, 599, 604. 

Min-nagara, 128, 132, 178. 

Mirashi, 209, 222. 

Mitaksham , 346, 358. 

Mithra (Miiro-Mihira), 465. 
Mithradates, 108, 110, 111. 

Mithradates I, 118, 119, 123, 124. 
Mithradates II, 121, 123. 

Mithyd , 371. 

Mitradeva, 97. 

Mitra kings, 172. 

Mitraka, 454. 

Mitras, 100. 


723 







THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Miuro, i.e., Mithra, Mihira, 147. 

Mixed castes, 545. 

Moga (Maues), 131, 133, 134. 
Moggaliputta Tissa, 84, 382, 407. 
Mohenjo-daro age, 472, 611. 

Moli, 15. 

Monarchical states, 168. 

Monastery, Buddhist, 374. 

Mon-tseu, 648, 649, 651. 

Moriyas, 17, 56. 

Mrichchhakatika, 263-5, 278. 
Muchilinda, 472. 

Mudananda, 208. 

Mudrd, 392, 394. 

Mudrdrakshasa, 35, 55, 57, 60, 161. 
Mudukurukuy 292. 

Mudumolik-Kdnchi, 299. 

Mudundrai, 292. 

Mugheir, 612. 

Mukhalihga, 461. 

Muladeva, 173. 

Mulaka, 201. 

Mullaippdttu, 295. 

Munda, king, 18, 29, 368. 

Muranjiyur Mudinagarayar, 292. 
Muruga, 292, 294, (see also Karttikeya). 
Musicanus, 51. 


Nabhakas, 78. 

Nabhapamtis, 78. 

Nabhavahana, 155. 

Nacchinarkiniyar. 294. 

Nadir Shah, 53. 

Nagabhat^a, 169. 

Naga-Darsaka, 168. 

Nagadasaka, 18, 29. 

Nagadvlpa, 235. 

Naga kingdoms, 168-71. 

Naga Kumdra Kdvyam, 300. 
Nagamulanika, 208. 

NaPanar 

Nagarjuna, 145, 147, 153, 204, 206, 210, 
267, 277 , 388 , 389. 

NagarjunI Hills, 86, 89. 
Nagarjunikonda, 492, 502, 524, 526. 
Nagarjunikonda inscription, 119, 225. 
Nagas, 145, 151, 160. 
of Ceylon, 235. 
of Vidisa, 218. 

Nagasena, 113, 170, 409. 

Naga (Serpent) worship, 471 ff. 
Nahapana, 180-2, 201, 202. 
Naigamesha, 431. 

Nail polish in early India, 575. 
Naimisha, famous early Indian 
hermitage, 589. 

Naish^hika brahmacharl, 552. 
Naiyayikas, 456. 


Nakkirar, 292, 294, 459. 
Naksh-i-Rustam, 41. 

Nakulin (see also Lakulin), 453. 
Naladiyar, 298. 

Nalakagama, 21. 

Nalaka-sutta, 402. 

Nallia-Kodan, 295. 

Nalopakhyana, 247. 

Nana, Sumerian mother-goddess, 147. 
Na-narpathu, 299. 

Nandangarh, 77. 

Nanda, Arhat, 388. 

Nandas, 30, 31, 34, 35, 37, 38, 55, 56, 59, 
60, 155. 

Nanda Vachchha, 463. 

Nandi , 422. 

Nandin , 151. 

Nandivardhana, 14, 19, 30, 31, 413. 
Nandsa inscription, 164. 
Ndnmanikkadikai, 298. 
Nannayya-Bhafta, 289. 

Napputhanar, 294, 295. 

Narada, 335, 343, 347, 353, 355, 356, 357, 
358, 359. 

Narada-Smritiy 256, 257, 343, 348, 350, 
351, 352, 354, 355. 

English translation, 348. 
reference to civil law, 351. 
reference to criminal law, 351-52. 
reference to judicial procedure, 348- 
351. 

Naradatta, 173. 

Narayana, 99, 435-7, 467. 

identification with Vishnu, 436. 

Nasik Chaitya hall, 499, 501, 505. 
Naththatham, 294. 

Naththathanar, 294, 295. 

Natrinai, 292, 296. 

Natural History by Pliny, 626. 
Natyadarpana, 261. 

Ndtyasdstra, 257, 263, 265, 269, 272. 
Navanitaka, 277. 

Nayanika, 197. 

Nearchus, 40, 560, 574. 
his account of Mauryan military 
equipment, 65. 

Nebuchadnezzar, 612. 

Nedunalvadai, 294. 

Nedun-Jellyan, 232, 294, 295. 
Nedunthokai, 292, 297. 

Nero, 621, 622. 

Nettipakararuiy 409 f. 

Ngan-si, 129, 137. 

Nibbana y 371. 

Nicaea, 43, 44, 102. 

Nicanor, 46, 49, 57. 

Nicias, 112. 

Nidanavagga, 400. 

Niddesa, 401, 406, 464, 472, 653. 
Niggantha Nataputta (Mahavira), 27. 
Nigliva, 78. 


724 



INDEX 


Nihdyas, 386, 398-401, 407. 

age of, 408. 

Nllakesi, 300. 

Nilanaga, 168. 

Nirayavali Sutra , 7. 

Nirgrantha (Jain), 46, 62. 

Nirnaya, 355. 

Nirodha, 370. 

Nirukta, 268. 

Nirvana, 371, 386. 

Niryuktis , 423. 

Nripatunga, 289. 

Nudity in early India, 573. 
Nutraimbathu, 292. 

Nyaya, 476. 

Nyaya-Vaiseshikas and the Sarvasti 
vadins, 380. 

Nysa city state, 46, 331. 


Odyssey, 405, 

Ohind, 47. 

Oldenberg, 257, 407. 

Onesicritus, 554, 567* 

Ophir, 611. 

Ordination, Buddhist, 374. 

Orissa, 71, 79. 

Orlagno, Persian Bahrain, 147. 

Orosius, 110. 

Ossadii, 3, 51. 

Overland route between India and 
China, 635, 637-39. 
between India and the Far East, 652. 
between India and the West, 613. 
Oxyartes, 52. 

Oxycanus (Porticanus), 51. 


Pabbajja-sutta, 402. 

Pabhosa cave inscriptions, 98, 172, 175. 
Pachchuppannavathu, 404. 

Pdchittiyas, 397. 

Pacores, 130, 131, 132, 133. 

Padam Pawaya, ancient Padmavatl, 169. 
Pa^ha, 15. 

Padhana-sutta, 402. 

Padinenkilkanakku , 294. 

Paditruppattu, 292. 

Padmapani, 395. 

Padmatantra, 440. 

Padmavatl, 23, 29. 

Pahlavas, 122. 

Paikuli inscription, 152. 

Painting in early India, 528-31. 
earliest historical example of, 529. 
its evolution and progress in Ajanta, 
530. 

various branches of, 528. 


Painting of the body, 575. 

Paisacha marriage in early India, 559. 
Paisachi, 285. 

Paithan, 603. 

Palai Kanthamnar, - 296. 

Palaka, 29, 264. 

Palamoli, 299. 

Pali, origin o£, 283. 

Pali- literature, non-canonical, 409-11. 
Pali canon, 396-411. 
chronology of, 407. 
division of, 408. 

Palikundu, 77. 

Pallavas, 207, 231, 234-5. 

Palura, 655. 

Panchadhydyi or Pahchdrthavidyd, 454. 
Panchala, 100, 106. 

Panchao, 142, 143. 

Panchardtra, 262, 274, 435, 447, 454. 
Pandugati, 31. 

Panduka, 31. 

Pandu-Vasudeva, 236. 

PaAdyas, 15, 78, 228, 229; 291, 292; 295. 
P&nini, 45, 47, 49, 95, 102, 268, 269, 278, 
279, 290, 331, 432, 437, 440, 549, 563. 
Panini’s Sanskrit, 279-80, 282. 

his Bhasha, 280. 

Panjkora, 45, 115. 

Panj shir, 43, 109. 

Panjtar inscription, 130, 131, 139, 140, 
141. 

Pan-ku, 137. 

Pantaleon, 109, 112. 

Paradas, 122. 

Pdrajikds, 397. 

Paramitd, 386. 

Paranar, 292, 296, 297. 

Parasara, 277. 

Parayana vagga, 402. 

Parlkshif, 168. 

Parimdas, 78. 

Parinirvana, 114. 

Paripadal, 292, 296. 

Parisishtaparvan, 57. 

Parittdy 401. 

Parivdra, 398. 

Parivdrapdtha, 409. 

Parivrajaka, 462. 

Pariyatra, 202. 

Parkham sculptures, 517. 

Paropanisus (Hindu Kush), 40, 46. 
Parsva, i.e. Parsvika, Buddhist philoso¬ 
pher, 147. 

Parsva, Jain Tirthankara, 411, 417, 472. 
Parthia, Parthians, 42, 103,104, 108, 110, 
111 . 

Partnerships, 602. 

Parushya (insult), 358, 


725 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Parvata, 174. 

Parvataka, 57. 

Parvatl (Haimavatl), 467. 

Pasana, 151. 

Pashtus, 44. 

Pasiani, 111. 

Pasupatas, 453-56. 

Patala (Capital of Patalene), 107. 
Patalene, 121. 

Pa^aliputra, 24, 25, 26, 29, 33, 34, 35, 56, 
59, 60, 62, 67 , 84, 86, 87, 95, 100, 106, 
486, 531, 532, 533, 537, 540, 606, 616. 
Patanjali, 90, 96, 98, 103, 107, 113, 121, 
266, 269, 275-76, 278-81, 440, 463, 
468, 563. 

Patika Kusuluka, 133. 

Patikavagga , 398. 

Patimokkha, 374 ff., 396-7, 409. 
Patisambhiddmagga , 401, 409. 

Patrocles, 626. 

Pattala, 51. 

Pattana, 407. 

Patthuppdttu (The Ten Idylls), 294 f. 
Pattinappalax, 295. 

PattinidevI temple, 240. 

Paul, K. T., 297. 

Pausanias, 93, 94. 

Pavararva, 376. 

Pavaya, 422. 

Pearl trade, 229. 

Perdiccas, 45. 

Perfumes, use of, in early India, 575. 
Periplus, 106, 112, 121, 128, 132, 178, 179, 
180, 199, 216, 221, 287. 

Periplus oj the Erythrean Sea, 603, 
618, 620, 626, 652. 

Perisax, 292. 

Persepolis, 41, 43. 

Persian Invasions, 39. 

Perum Serai Adan, 232. 
Perumpanattrupadaiy 295. 
Perum-Sittiranar, 297. 

Perunkathal, 302. 

Perunthalai Sathanar, 297. 

Peruvaludi, Mudukudumi, 232. 
Petakopadesa, 409, 411. 

Petavatthu, 401, 403, 409. 

Peucelaotis, 45. 

Peucolaus, 112, 118. 

Phalgunlmitra, 172. 

Phamazathres, 42. 

Pharro, fire-god, 147. 

Phegelas (Bhagala), 50. 

Philadelphus of Egypt, 88, 93. 

Philip, 46, 48, 50, 52. 

Philippus, 53, 57. 

Philostratus, 129, 132, 627. 

Philoxenus, 112, 118. 

Phraates II, 121. 

Phraotes, 128, 129, 131, 132. 
Phseigacharis, 132. 


Phryni, 106. 

Pillar Edicts of Asoka, 71, 77, 81, 85, 87. 
Pingala, 271-3. 

Pipphalivana, 17, 56. 

Pitakas, 396. 

Pitalkhora, 505. 

Pithon, 53, 58. 

Pithuda, 214. 

PLtundra (Prithuda, Pithuda), 226. 
Piyadasi (A£oka), 73. 

Plastering of walls in early India, 576. 
Plataea, battle of, 101. 

Plato, 112, 310, 633. 

Plato’s Dialogues, 410. 

Pliny, 40, 70, 194, 211, 603, 621, 626. 
Plutarch, 61, 92, 112, 113. 

Polkal-Alvar, 299. 

Polity, Science of, 274-6. 

Polyandry in early India, 558. 

Polybius, 90, 93, 104. 

Polyxlenus, 112. 

Pompeius Trogus, 108, 111. 

Pope, G.U., 297. 

Popley, H. P., 297. 

Porphyry, 94. 

Porunaratruppadai, 295. 

Poms, 33, 34, 44, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 58. 
Porus II, 49. 

Poseidonius, 619. 

Po-t’ias, Ta-Yueh-chi king, 145, 146, 
151. 

Pottery in early India, 536-40. 
Ahichchhatra specimens, 537. 

Deccan and the south, 538. 
distribution of, 536. 

Kushana period, 538. 

Poussin, 450. 

Prabhudama, 187. 

Prachya dialect, 282. 

Pradyota, 20, 155, 369, 588. 

Pradyotas, 18, 29, 30. 

Pradyumna, 447-50. 

Prajapati-Brahma, 464, 470. 
Prajapatimitra, 172, 174. 

Prajapatya marriage in early India, 559. 
Prajnd , 370 f. 

Prajnaparamitd, 387 f. 

Prakrit languages, 281-5. 
evolution of, 282. 
popularity of, 284. 

Prakriti, 444. 

Prasada, 361. 

Prasenajit, 23, 368, 528. 
Pratijnayaugandhardyanay 263. 
Pratiloma marriage in early India, 545. 
Pratishthana, 202. 

Pratitya-samutpada, 371. 

Pratydkalitay 355. 

Praushthadatta (or -deva), 173. 
Praushthasri, 174, 176. 


726 





INDEX 


Pravarasena I, (Puranic Pravlra), 217, 

220 , 221 . 

Prayaga, 590. 

Priaulx, G. B., 624, 625, 627. 

Prison factories, 605. 

Prithivlsena, 187. 

Prithivlshena I, 219. 

Priyadarsana (Asoka), 38. 

Przyluski, 193. 

Ptolemy II, 88. 

Ptolemy III, 93, 94. 

Ptolemy (of Egypt), 616, 653. 

Ptolemy (the geographer), 108,121, 135, 
626, 636, 656. 

Ptolemy Philadelphus, 70, 104, 615, 616, 
667. 

Ptolemy Philopator, 616. 

Pudgala, 425. 

Pudgalasunyata, 387. 

Pug as, 354. 

Puggalapannatti, 407, 409. 

Puhar, 295. 

Puklyas, 224: 

Pukkusati, 14, 20. 

Pulahamavi, 210. 

Pulahatta (Brihastha), 238. 

Puiika, 14. 

Pulindas, 194. 

Pulumavi, 180, 202, 204, 205. 

Pulumavi, 6ivasri, 210. 

Pulumavi, Vasishthlputra, 183, 195, 203, 
204, 207, 209. ' 

Pulumavi inscription, 326. 

Punika, 14. 

Pupils & teachers in early India, 582- 

584. 

Buddhist system, 590-91. 
kinds of erring pupils, 583. 
kinds of teachers, 583, 587, 590. 
oral teaching, 584. 

writing, art of—in early India, 584- 

585. 

Puram, 459. 

Purananuru, 297. 

Purdah system, 573. 

Purnabhadra, 464. 

Purnalingam Pillai, 294, 301. 

Purohita, 353. 

Purusha, 444. 

Purushadatta, 171. 

Purushapura (Peshawar), 14, 490. 
relic-tower of the Buddha at, 149, 
490-92. 

Purushottama’s Trikandasesha, 221. 
Purvapaksha (plaint), 355. 
Pushkalavatl, 45, 46, 115, 116, 118, 471 
Pushkarasarin, 14. 

Pushpapura, 107. 

Pushyagupta, 61, 79. 


Pushyamitra, 89-92, 95-98, 100, 106, 113, 
155, 174, 383. 

Pythagoras, 630, 631. 


Qara Shahr, 639, 643. 


Ratfha, 1. 

Radhagupta, 73, 79. 

Radhakrishnan, S., 477. 

Radhamitra, 174. 

Raghava Iylengar, R., 289. 

Raghuvamsa, 19, 133. 

Rahula, 366, 368. 

Rahulabhadra, 380. 

Raivataka, 87. 

Rajadharma in Mahabharata, 303. 
Rajagopalachari, C., 297. 

Rajagriha, 5, 14, 20, 21, 24, 26, 28, 35, 
484. 

Rajajha, 354. 

Rajakumara, 21. 

Rajamitra, 174. 

Rajanyas, 159. 

Rajasekhara, 153. 

Rajataranginly 89, 90, 142, 148, 150, 264. 
Rajdvalikathe, 69. 

Rajghat, 531, 537. 

Rajgir, Son Bhandar Cave at, 503. 
Rakshasa marriage in early India, 559. 
Rakshita 84. 

Rama 435. 

Rdmacharitam, 289. 

Ramadatta, 171. 

Ramagama, 2. 

Ramayana , 234, 252-54, 265, 266, 456, 
590.' 

authorship of 253. 
date of, 254. 
recensions of, 253. 

Ramgarh hills, Jdgimara cave in, 529. 
Rampurwa, 77, 506, 507, 508. 
Rangaswami Aiyangar, K.V., 352. 

Rahj uvula, 117, 134 f. 

Rantideva, 579. 

Rapson, 186, 188, 208, 209, 210, 221. 
Rashtrapala, 31. 

Rashtrikas, 214. 

Rata, 272. 

Rathamusala, 25. 

Rawlinson, 627 , 630. 

Raychaudhuri, 436. 

Religion and philosophy, 360-482. 

Renu (King), 2. 

Retreat, 376. 

Rice, E. P., 287. 


727 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Rigveda, 635. 

Rikshavat, 201. 

Ripuhjaya, 18. 

Rishabha, Tirthankara, 450. 
Rishabhadatta (Ushavadata), 181, 201. 
Ftishika-nagara, 213. 
ijishi Kanva, 589. 

River-worship, 474. 

Rock Edicts of Asoka, 71, 73, 74, 76, 77, 
79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 87 , 88, 93, 103, 
616. 

Rohilkhand, 100, 106. 

Roman coins discovered in India, 621- 
622. 

Roman merchants living in India, 623. 
Rome, Indian embassies to, 625. 

Rome’s trade with India, 621-25. 
Romka, 2. 

Rudra, 453, 468. 

Rudrabhuti, 221. 

Rudradaman, 202, 203, 205, 327, 328. 
Rudradaman I, 183-5. 

Rudradaman’s Junagarh inscription, 61, 
79. 

Rudradhara-bhattarika, 189, 225. 
Rudragupta, 172. 

Rudraka, Rkmaputra, 366, 367. 
Rudramati, 177. 

RudranI, 466. 

Rudran Kannanar, 294, 295. 

Rudrasena I, 169, 189. 

Rudrasena II, 189, 225. 

Rudrasimha I, 186, 187, 206. 

Rudrasimha II, 190. 

Rudravarman of Vemaki tribe, 161. 
Rulupurushadatta, 226. 

Rummindei Asoka inscription, 78, 365, 
506. 

Rupnath, 77. 

Rush^a, 454. 


Sabarasvamin, 272. 

Sabarcae republican state, 331. 
Sabbdthaka, 21. 

Sabhyas, 353. 

Sacae (die 6akas), 111. 

Sacarauli, 111. 

Sadachandra, 169. 

Sadakana (Satakarni) Kalalaya Maha- 
rathi, 208. 

Saddharmapundarika, 450. 

Saddhatissa, 238. 

Sagatha-vagga, 400. 

Sagotra marriage, 558. 

Sahasa (violence), 358. 

Sahya, 202. 

Saila Buddhist school, 387 f. 

Saisunaga dynasty, 30. 


Saiva gods, 466-69. 

Saivism, 153, 360, 453-61, 472. 
as a popular cult, 450-58. 
earliest records of, 456. 
in South India, 459. 

Saka (Scythia), 41. 

Saka era, 144, 154, 158. 

Saka Haumavarga, 120. 

Saka-Kushana style terracottas, 533. 
gakala (Sialkot), 95, 97, 107, 108, 113. 
Sdkdri, 265. 

6akas, 103, 161,166, 221. 

Saka satraps, 178. 

Saka settlements, 120-23. 

Sakatala, 35. 

Saka Tigrakhauda, 120. 

Saketa, 106, 107, 113, 173. 

6akra, 465. 

Sakrah Dheri, 520. 

6aktikumara, 199. 

Sakyakumarl, 87. 

Sakyas, 16, 331, 365. 

Salayatana-vagga, 400. 

^alisuka, 89, 90,106, 113. 

Samavatl, 369. 

Sarnannaphala-suttCL, 399. 

Samarya, 422. 

Samayika, 421. 

Samba, 447-50. 

Sambhuttara, 15. 

Samglti, 28. 

6amkarasimha, 177. 

Samkhya and Jain Philosophy, 423-^o. 
Samkisya, 506, 507. 

Samodhana, 404. 

Samprati, grandson of Aioka, 89, 90, 
418. 

Samudaya, 370. 

Samudra-gupta, 145, 165, 170, 219. 
Samyutta Nikaya, 370, 399. 

Sanabares, 132. 

Sanchi, 78, 88, 99, 484, 485, 488, 490, 492, 
499, 506, 507, 510, 511, 515, 524, 525, 
527, 529, 530, 540. 
gateways of Stupa I and III, 514. 
Great Stupa at, 488-90. 
railing of Stupa II, 511-12. 

Sanchi sculptures and popularity of 
Jatakas, 386. 

Sandares, 178, 179. 

Sandrocottos (Chandragupta), 58, 69. 
Sangala (Jandiala), 50. 

J§ahgam ‘Tamil’, 291-300. 
account of work, 292. 
first 292. 
second, 293. 
third, 294. 


728 





INDEX 


Sahgha, Buddhist, 362, 374-77, 397. 
constitution of, 376. 

dress, food and medicine, 375. 
monastery, 375. 
nuns, special rules for, 376. 
ordination, 374. 
story of formation, 397. 
uposatha 375. 
vassavasa, 376. 

Sanghadaman, 187. 

Sanghamitra, 87. 

Sanghamitta, 241. 

Sangharaksha, 147. 

6angharama (monastery) of Buddhists 
and Jains, 502-505. 
evolution and progress, 503. 

Sahjaya, 45. 

Sankala, 268. 

Sahkarshana, 447-50. 

Saiikhumagha, 175. 

Sankhya, 476. 

Sdnkhyayana srauta sutra , 251. 

Sannyasa, 552. 

Sanskrit Drama, 257-265. 
origin of, 257 f. 

Sanskrit K§vya, 265-7. 

Sanskrit language, 278-81. 

Sanskrit literature, 243-77. 
avadana literature, 267-68. 
dharmasastra or Smritis, 254-57. 
drama, 257-65. 
epics, 243-54. 
general review, 277-78. 
scientific literature, 268-77. 
secular poetry, 265-67. 

Santamula (Chamtamula) I, 224 f., 456. 

^antamula II Ehirula, 225. 

Santiparva in Mahdbhdrata, 303, 334. 

Sanudasa, 653, 654. 

Sapaleizes, 132. 

Sapedana, 129, 131, 133. 

Sarapo, 150. 

Sarasotos (Surashfra), 106. 

Sarasvatl, 430, 470. 

Sariputra, 21, 259, 368, 405. 

Sariputra-prakarana, 258, 643. 

Sarnath, 78, 88, 494, 506, 507, 508, 537. 

Sarvanaga, 170. 

Sarvastivada, 380. 

Sarvastivadins, 386. 

Sasa, 129, 130, 131. 

Sasaram, 77. 

Sassanians, 145. 
and Kushanas, 152. 
type coins, 153. 

Sastri, H. P., 156. 

Sastri, T. Ganapati, 285. 

Satadhanva, 89. 

Satakarni, 178, 197, 213. 

Satakarni I, 198, 199. 

Satakarni, ChandrasrI (ChantfasrI), 206. 

Satakarni, Gautamlputra, 119, 180, 182, 
183, 191, 200-204, 209, 210, 211. 


Satakarni, Hala, 207. 

Satakarni, Haritlputra Vishpukatfa 
Chutukulananda, 208, 209. 
Satakarni, Krishna, 209. 

Satakarni, Kumbha, 209, 210. 

Satakarni Kuntala, 207. 

Satakarni, Rudra, 206. 

Satakarni, Saka, 209. 

Satakarni, 6ivaskanda, 205. 

Satakarni, Sivasrl, 205. 

Satakarni, Vasishthlputra, 183, 205. 
Satakarni, Vijaya, 206. 

Satakarni, Yajna, 183, 187, 205, 206, 209, 
210, 217, 222. 

Satavahanas, 191-211. 

Satavahanas of Pratishthana, 155, 181. 
Satavastra, 129, 131, 133. 

Sati, 254, 567. 

Satiyaputra, 78. 

Satpurusha, 353. 

Sattagydia, 39, 42. 

Sattapakarana, 407. 

Sattapanni cavte, 28. 

Satyadaman, 187. 

Saunaka, famous teacher of 10,000 
pupils at Naimisha, 589. 
Saundarananda, 266, 325. 

Saunglputra, 95. 

SaurasenI, 259, 265, 283-84. 

Saurashtra (Syrastrene) in Periplus, 
178.' 

Sauvira, 107, 611. 

Savitryupdkhydna, 247. 

Dayana imagles, 392. 

Scents, use of, in early India, 575. 
Schroeder, 631. 

Sculpture in Mauryan Art, 506-10. 
best specimens of monolithic columns, 
506. 

description of a column, 506. 
differences between Mauryan and 
Achaemenian columns, 508-9. 
reason for decline, 510. 

Scylax, 41, 101, 614, 619. 

Scythians, 110, 178, 633. 
Scytho-Parthians, 112. 

Seals, coins and intaglio gems in early 
India, 534-36. 

Sea routte between India and China, 
635, 645. 

between India and the Far East, 652, 
653, 659. 

between India and the West, 613-14, 
617, 619, 620, 621. 

Sea-voyages from and to India—infer¬ 
ences in Buddhist literature, 612. 
Sechanaka, 23. 

Seistan, 42, 105. 

Sela-sutta, 402. 

Seleucids, 102, 103, 105, 109, 110. 
Selteucus, 60, 61, 78, 102, 103, 104, 615, 
616, 626. 


729 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Semiramis, 40. 

Senanayaka, 21. 

Senart, 450. 

Sehganan, 232. 

Seng-hui, 647, 651. 

Senguttuvan, 296, 301, 459. 

Seres (land of the Chinese and Tibe¬ 
tans), 106. 

Serpent-worship, 168. 

Sesna, 169. 

Seshadatta, 171. 

Seven Pillar Edicts of Aioka, 71. 
Sewtell, 622, 623, 624. 

Seyanaga, 23. 

Shaddarsanasamuchchaya, 456. 
Shahbazgarhi, 77. 

Shah-jl-ld-Dheri, 492, 520. 

Shapur I, 630. 

Shapur II, 152. 

Shalmaneser III, 612. 

Shamasastry, R., 285, 303. 

Shaonano Shao (Shahan Shah and 
Shahdnushahl), 148. 
Shatkhandagama, 423. 

Shaving, in early India, 575. 

She-kao, 647. 

Shilada, 151. 

Shinkot inscription, 113, 114. 

Siam, 657. 

Sibae (Sivis), 50. 

Sibis, 159, 160. 

Siddhartha, father of Mahavlra, 413. 
Sigerdis (probably Cutch), 106. 
Sikhavriddhi (interest), 358. 

Sikri red sandstone, 522. 

Slla, 370 f. 

Silakkhandha, 398. 

Silappadikaram, 237 , 240, 300, 459. 
English translation, 300. 
story of, 301, 302. 

Silavat, 20. 

Simhala-dvlpa (Serendib, Ceilao), 235. 
Simhasena, 69. 

Simhavahu, 235. 

Simuka, 195-98. 

Sindhu-Sauvlra, 25. 

Sinhalese chronicles, 36, 37, 38, 70, 72, 
75. 

Sirat-i-Firuz Shalu, 87. 
Sirupdnatruppadai , 295. 
Sirupanchamulam, 299. 

Sisikottos (Sasigupta), 44, 47, 49. 
Sisuka, king of Purika, 218. 

Sisunaga, 18, 19, 29, 30, 31, 37, 38, 168. 
Sitrisai, 292. 

Sittalal Sattanar, 292, 300, 301. 

Siva (see also Saivism), 151, 152, 290 
292, 459, 467, 472. 

Siva, Persian Oesho, 147. 

Sivabodhi, 224. 

Sivadatta, 135, 173, 222. 

Sivaghosha, 135. 

Sivakotyacharya, 289. 


Sivalakura, Mathariputra, 210, 211. 

SI vail, 239. 

SivaliAga, worship of, 459-61. 
Sivamagha, 174, 177. 

Sivasena, 134. 

SivaskandanagasrI, 208. 
Sivaskandavarman, 226. 

Skanda, 150, 456. 

Skanda Purdna , 264. 
"Skanda-Karttikteya, 167, 224, 467. 
Skandanaga, 171. 

Skandanaga Sataka (Satakarni), 208. 
Slaves, 570 f. 

Smith, V. A., 88, 624. 

Smritichandrikd, 354. 

Smritis, 254-57. 

Snake-bite, 550. 

Socrates, 615, 630. 

Sogdi, 51. 

Sogdiana, Sogdians, 42, 103, 105, 110, 

111 . 

Sogdian Alexandria, 102. 

Solomon, 611. 

Somadeva, 285. 

SomadevI, 238. 

Sona, 84, 655. 

Son^asa, 126, 133, 134, 135. 

Sonari, 494. 

Sopara inscription of Asoka, 62, 77, 603. 
Sophon, 619. 

Sophytes (Saubhuti), 50. 

Soter, 116. 

South India Saiva Siddhanta Publish¬ 
ing Society, 292. 

Spalagadama, 124. 

Spalahora, 124. 

Spalirises, 124, 125, 126, 127, 328. 
Spalyris, 124. 

Sparta, 331. 

Spooner, Dr., 486. 

Sravana Belgola, 61. 

SravastI, 23, 173, 484, 522. 

SrenlS, 354. 

Srenika, king of Magadha, 415. 

Sri, 469. 

Sribodhi, 223. 

Sridharavarman, 188. 

Srigupta, 649. 

Sri-Mara, 658. 

Srinaga II, 241. 

Srinivasa Aiyangar, M., 296. 

Sriparvata (Nallamalur range), 224. 
Sriparvatlya Andhras, 224. 

Sri Rama, 289. 

Sri-Vaishnava Peligion, 447. 

Sriyaka, 35. 

Steam bath in early India, 575. 

Stein, 640. 

Sten Konow, 134, 139, 156, 257, 640, 643, 
644. 

Sthanaka, 392. 

Sthavirakalpa, 417. 

Sthulabhadra, 35, 422. 


730 



INDEX 


Stone image, one of the earliest, 425. 
Stone structures and storied houstes in 
early India, 576. 

Strabo, 39, 63, 69, 106, 107, 108, 111, 112, 
286, 331, 619, 625, 626. 

Strato I, 111, 112, 116, 117, 327. 

Strato Philopater, 117. 

Stupas , 385, 487-94. 
description and distribution, 487. 
earliest specimen, 488. 
evolution, 493. 
purposes of, 488. 

Subha, 239. 

Subhagastena, 90, 105. 

Subjects studied in early India, 585-89. 
Brahamana’s and Kshatriya’s educa¬ 
tion, 586. 

industrial education, 587. 
medical education, 587. 
prince’s education, 586. 

Subrahmanya (see also Brahmanya- 
deva and Karttikleya), 292, 459. 
Sudarsana reservoir, 87. 

Sudraka, 264-65, 284. 

Suguda, 41, 120. 

Suhmottara, 15. 

Suhrillekha, 267. 

Suidas, 93, 94. 

Sujata, 367. 

Sujyeshtha, 97. 

Sultan Mahmud, 53. 

Sumalya, 31. 

Sumitra, 97. 

Sunga-Kanva Art, 510-18. 
display of new discovery by artists, 
513-4. 

organised art activity of people, 515. 
Sunga-Kanva period terracottas, 533. 
Suhgas, 95, 97, 98, 99, 100. 

Sung-yun, 149. 

Sunldha, 24. 

Sun-worship, 433. 

Sunyavada, 422. 

Suppabuddha, 366. 

Suramitra, 174. 

Surashtra, Surashfras, 102, 106, 152, 201, 
326. 

Suratissa, 237. 

&urparaka (Sopara), 181, 199. 

Surya, 472. 

worship of, 465. 

Suryamitra, 171-72, 177. 

Susa, 486. 

Susa inscription, 41. 

Susarman, 99, 195. 

Suslma (Sumana), 70, 72. 

Sutrdlankdra, 325. 

Susruta, 277. 

Susruta Samhita, 276. 

Sutas, 245. 

Sutrakritdnga, 421. 

Sutras, 475. 

Sutta, 396, 398, 399, 400. 


Suttanipata, 193, 365-6, 401-3, 409. 
Sutta Pitaka, 370 f., 396, 398, 406, 407, 
410. 

origin of, 377. 

Pali and Sanskrit vtersions, 377 
Sutta Vibhahga, 397, 408, 409. 
Suvarnabhuml (Burma), 84, 383. 
Suvama-dvlpa, 216, 652. 

Suvamagiri, 79. 

Su-Wu, 657. 

Svapnavasavadatta, 29, 261, 263. 

Svaia (Khasa?), 73. 

Svayambhu, 273, 285. 

Svayamvara, 560. 

6vetadvlpa, 436. 

Svetambara canon, 283. 

Svetasvatara Upanishad, 453. 
Swaminatha Aiyar, V., 296, 300, 301. 
Swat, 45, 115. 

Syadvada, 423-25. 

Syr Daria (Jaxartes), 44. 


Ta-hia, 122, 137, 145, 152. 

Taittirlya Aranyaka, 435 f. 
Takht-i-bahi inscription, 129, 130, 139. 
Takkasila, 14. 

Takkola, 657. 

Takshaka, 168. 

Takshasila, 14, 115, 116, 118. 
Talaiyalanganam, Battle of. 232. 

Tamer lane, 53. 

Tamilakam, 289, 290, 300. 

Tamils Eighteen Hundred years Ago, 
324. 

Tamil Studies, 296. 

Tamluk, 540. 

Tamralipti (modern Tamluk), 235, 652, 
654, 655. 

Taranadasa, 135. 

Taranatha, 69, 90, 95, 384, 387 f. 
Tarikh-i-Firuz Shahi, 87. 

Tarn, 93, 110. 

Tattvdrthadhigamasutra, 423. 

Taxila, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 53, 56, 58, 70, 
73, 77, 79, 91, 98, 520, 522, 531, 532, 
540. 587, 588, 592, 593, 594. 
Ta-Yueh-chi, 122, 145, 152. 

Teaching in ancient India, see under 
Pupils. 

Teleas, 104, 110. 

Telephus, 112. 

Telugu (Andhra), 287, 289. 

Tenmoll, 289. 

Terracotta art in early India, 531-33. 
characteristics of, 532. 
two types of, 532. 
valuable material for history, 531. 
Terry, Chaplain, 86. 

Textile industry in early India. 572. 


731 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Thales, 631. 

Theophilus, 112. 

Theos, 84, 88, 132. 

Theragatha, 401, 403. 

Thteravada, 283, 380. 

Therdvali, 155. 

Therigatkd , 401, 403, 563. 

Thermopylae, 43. 

Tholamolltheyar, 301. 

Thomas, Apostle, 130. 

Thomas, F. W., 289 
Thomas, St., 628. 

Thulathana, 238. 

Tiberius, 139, 621. 

Tien-chou, 129, 152. 

T’ien-tchou, 138, 139, 146. 

Tilaura Kot, 16. 

Tilpath, 537. 

Timarchus, 108. 

Timitra, 107. 

Tirhut, 6. 

Tirikadukam, 299. 

Tiripuramerittha Virisadaikkadavul 
(Siva), 292. 

Tirthas, 474. 

Tirumurukdttruppadai, 294, 459. 
Tiruthakkathevar, 302. 

Tiruvalluvar, 293, 297, 298. 324. 

Tisa, 79, 240, 408. 

Tisa, author of Kathavatthu, 408. 
TIvara, 87. 

Tochari, 111. 

Tolkdppiyam, 292, 297, 299. 

account of, 293-94. 

Tontfaimantfalam, 231, 233. 

Tonkin, 650, 651, 658. 

Tooth sticks use of, 575. 

Topra, 71, 87. 

Tasall (Parthalis), 79, 211. 

Trade and Industry in early India. 
599-606. 

bazaars and barter, 600. 
caravan traffic, 602. 
chief articles of export, 604. 
coining by state, 604. 
currency and credit, 600. 
exports and imports—foreign and 
inland, 602. 
guilds in trade, 601. 
important handicrafts, 599. 
localisation of industries, 599. 
markets for foods, 599-600. 
millionaire merchants, 604. 
mining industry, 599, 604. 
nationalisation and monopoly, 604. 
partnerships, 602. 
prison factories, 605. 
protection to traders, 605. 
safeguarding money, 600. 
sea-borne and river-borne trade, 602. 
state control of trade and industry, 
604, 605. 

taxes on trade, 605. 


trade with Rome, 602-3. 
voyages to India, 603. 
workshops, 600. 

Trade-routes and transport in early 
India, 606-7. 

Grand Trunk R'oad, 606. 
means of conveyance, 606-7. 
overland caravans, 606, 613, 635-9, 
652. 

principal inland routes, 606. 

Royal Road, 606. 

Traikutaka era, 145. 

Traikutakas, 145, 223. 

Trajan, 625. 

Tree-worship in early India, 473. 

Tribal Republics, 162-68. 

Trigarttas, 165. 

Triparadisus, 58. 

Tripitaka, 372, 396. 

Chinese, 145. 
writing of, 239. 

Tripura, destruction of, 459. 

Trisala, mother of Mahavlra, 413. 

Tulu, 287. 

Turiva (Arachosia), 110. 

Tushaspha, 62, 79, 106. 

Tyriespes, 46. 

Ts’ien-Han-shu, 122. 


Udaka (Andhraka), 98, 175. 

Udana , 396, 401. 

Uddnavarga , 644. 

Udayabhadra, 18, 29. 

Udayagiri, 503, 511, 515. 

plan of Ramgumpha at, 504. 
Udayana, 9, 14, 29, 369. 

Udayana Kavyam , 300. 

Udayana, king, 369. 

Udayi Bhadda, 27. 

Udayin, 19, 29. 

Uddehikas, 159. 

Udena, 9. 

Udichya dialect, 282. 
Udyoga-parvan, 577. 

Ugra, 292. 

Ugrasena, 31, 32. 

Ujjain, 73, 79. 

UjjayinI, 202, 603. 

Ukkachela, 7. 

Ukkatfha, 4. 

Uma, 290, 453, 467. 

Umasvati, 421, 423. 

Untouchability, in early India, 544. 
Upakurvana brahmachari, 552. 

Upali, 377. 

Upanishads, 475. 

Uposatha , 374, 397. 

Ur, 611. 

Uragavagga, 402. 

Uraiyur, Chola Capital, 240. 


782 




INDEX 


Uraiyur, Enicherl Mudamosiyar, 297. 
Urjayat, 87. 

Uslnara, 3. 

Utkalika, 422. 

Utpala, 450. 

Uttamabhadras, 160. 

Uttamadatta, 171. 

Uttara, 84, 355, 655. 

Uttaradhyayana , 412. 

Uttaradhyayana Sutra , 21. 
Uttarapatha, 15, 101. 


Vadamoli, 289. 

Va^uka, 216. 

Va^ukar, or Vadavar, 228. 

Vaggas , 400. 

Vaidehl Vasavl, 19. 

Vaisali, 23, 24, 25, 26, 331, 531. 
Vaiseshika, 476. 

Vaishnava Dharmasastra or Vishnu 
Smritiy 256. 

Vaishnavism (see also Vasudeva and 
Bhagavata cults), 360, 431-53, 463, 
472. 

evolution of, 435-37. 
origin of, 431-35. 
progress of, 437-40. 
reference in Buddhist literature, 437. 
relation with other creeds, 450-52. 
vyuha doctrine, 447-50. 
worship of images, 452-3. 
Vaisravana, 175, 176. 

Vaiyapuri Pillai, Rao Saheb, 299. 
Vajasaneyi Samhita, 466. 

Vajira, 23. 

Vajjian Confederation, 331, 333. 
Vajjians, 24. 

Vajra, 416. 

Vajrasuchi , 266. 

Vakatakas, 210, 217-21. 

Vakradeva, 212. 

Valayapati, 300. 

Vanasphara, 141. 

Vanavasa (country), 225. 

Vanavasi, 84. 

Vanga, 15. 

Vangapala, 172. 

Vanji (Tiruvanjikulam), 232. 
Vankanasikatissa, 239. 

Varahamihira, 163, 273, 463. 

Varana (Aomus) fort, 47. 

Varanasi, 29, 484. 

Vararucha Kavya , 266. 

Vardanes, 132. 

Vari, 292. 

Varsha, 157. 

Varuna (Baruna), 473. 

Varunamitra, 172, 174, 175. 

Vasabha, 239. 

Vasettha-sutta, 402. 


Vasishka, i.e., Vajhishka, 148, 149, 150. 
Vasishtha Dharmasutra, 256. 

Vassakara, 24. 

Vassavasa, 376. 

Vasudeva II, 151. 

Vasudeva, amatya, 195. 

Vasudeva, Kushana king, 98, 99, 145, 
151, 153, 163 , 439, 461. 

Vasudeva Krishna, cult of, 153, 432-40. 
association with Garu^a and San- 
karshana, 438. 

iconic representations of, 439. 
identification with Narayana, Vishnu, 
435-38, 451. 

introduction to South India, 439. 
Vasuki, 168, 473. 

Vasumitra, Buddhist theologian, 147. 
Vasumitra, prince, 96, 97. 

Vasusena, 172. 

Vasu-Uparichara, 212. 

Vata, Persian Oado, 147. 

Va^asvaka coins, 45. 

Vatsa, 25, 30. 

Vatsyayana, 274, 286. 

VattagamanI, 238, 407, 408. 

Vaitakera, 423. 

Vayudeva, 173. 

Vdyu Parana, 29, 72, 73, 83, 217, 447. 
Vebhara rock, 28. 

Vedanta, 476. 

Vedas, 480. 

Vedehx-putto, 20. 

VedisrI, 199. 

Vehalla, 20, 23. 

Vellurkappiyan, 292. 

Vendali, 292. 

Vengi (Krishna-Godavari) art, 524-26. 
comparison with the north, 524. 
evolution of, 524. 
mastery of technique of, 525. 
Venkatam (Tirupati Hills), 290. 
Vespasi, 141. 

Vetala Panchavimsati , 154. 

Vetulya doctrine, 240. 

Veyyakarana , 396, 404. 

Vibhajjavddins, 382. 

Vibhashasdstras, 384. 

Vibhunaga, 171. 

Vidarbha, 90, 92, 96, 201. 

Vidhi 454 

Vidisa, 70,*92, 95, 96, 99. 

Vidyadevls, 429, 430. 

Vidyadhara, 214. 

Vidyapati, 149. 

Vigatasoka (Tishya), 70. 

Vijaya, 235-36, 241. 

Vijayaklrti of Khotan, 145. 
Vijayamakha, 174, 175. 

Vijayamitra, 129. 

Vijayapurl, 224. 

Vijayasena, 189. 

Vijita-Dharma, 641. 

Vijita-Simha, 640, 641. 


738 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 


Vijnanapada, 407. 

Vijnanavada, 422. 

Vijnanesvara, 346. 

Vikramaditya, 154, 156. 

&akari, 165. 

son of Gardabhilla, 155. 
Vikrama-samvat, 163. 

and &akabda, 153-8. 

Vilivayakura Gautamiputra, 210, 211. 
Vilivayakura Vasishfhiputra, 210. 
Village administration, 597 f. 

Vimala Kodanna, 20. 

Vimanavatthu , 401, 403. 

Vimukta, 372. 

Vinaya, 377. 

Vindynkci 469 

Vinaya Pi’taka’, 371, 379, 386-98, 407, 408, 
528. 

origin of, 377. 

Vinaya Texts, 577, 578. 

Vindhyakas, 218. 

Vindhyasakti, 217-20. 

VindhyavasinI, 467. 

Vindhyavedliana, 177. 

Virabhadia, 422. 

VIrabodhi, (-datta). 224. 

VIradaman, 18S, 189. 

Viramitrodaya, 354. 

Virapurushadatta, 189. 

VIrasena, 90. 97, 171. 

Viryavasas, Kuluta king. 161. 

Visakha, 150, 468. 

Visakhadeva. 173. 

Vishnu. 150, 329, 338, 432, 451. 459, 470. 
identification with Vasudeva-Krishna 
Narayana-Hari. 435. 

Vishnudatta, 222. 

Vishnudeva, 177. 

Vishnudhcmnottara, 448. 

Vishnugopa, 434. 

Vishnugupta, 274, 303. 

Vishnukundins, 219. 

Vishnumitra, 171, 172, 439. 

Vishnu Purdna , 55, 56, 89, 106. 
Vishnurakshita, 177. 

Vishnusrl, 175. 

Visvapala, 172. 

Visvasena, 189, 190. 

Visvasimha, 189. 

Visvasphani, 177. 

Visvavarman, 222. 

Viyakamitra, 115. 

V odda-dradhana y 289. 

Vohdrika, 21. 

Vonones, 123, 124, 328. 

Von Sallet, 109. 

Vriji, 15. 

Vriksha-chaityas, 473. 

Vyagghapajja, 16. 

Vyaghranaga, 171. 

Vydlamalai, 292. 

Vyavahdra , 351, 354. 355. 


Vyuha doctrine, 447-50. 


Walleser, 407. 

Weber, 633. 

Wei dynasty, 145. 

Wei-lio, 146, 152. 

Wells, H. G., 71. 

Wema Kadphises, see Kadphises II. 
Western influence on early India, 627- 
29. 

on administration, 628. 
on art, 628. 
on astronomy, 628. 
on religion, 628. 

Whibley, 93. 

“White Horse Monastery” in China, 
646, 647. 

Whittaker, 86. 

Winternitz, 247, 251, 400, 403, 405, 407. 
Women, disabilities of, 564. 
position of, 558-70. 
remarriage of, 565. 
soldiers, 564. 

Wooden buildings, 576. 

Writing, art of, in early India, 584 f. 
Wu, Chinese emperor, 645, 648. 
Wu-sun, 136. 

Wu-t’on-lao, 122. 


Xandrames, 33. 

Xathri (Kshatriyas), 51. 
Xenophon, 39. 

Xerxes, 39, 42, 43. 


Yabgou, i.e., Yavuga, 137. 

Yajnapala, 172. 

Yajnasena 96 

Yajnavalkya, *319, 348-50, 354, 355, 356, 
357, 358. 

Ydjnavalkya-Smriti, 257, 274, 343-48, 
354. 

civil law in, 346. 
criminal law in, 347. 
judicial procedure in, 343. 

Yaksha worship in early India, 474. 
Yakshas and Yakshinis, Jain, 429. 
Yakshas in early Indian art, 516-18. 
Yakshas of Ceylon, 235. 

Yamaka, 407. 

Yarkand, 639. 

Yasalalakatissa, 239. 

Yaska, 268. 

Yasoda, wife of Mahavlra, 413. 
Yasodaman, 188, 189. 

Yasodhara Kavyam, 300, 301. 
Yasodharman, 164. 


734 



INDEX 


Yativrishabha, 423. 

Yaudheyas, 160, 163, 165-68. 

coins and seals of, 165, 167. 

Yauna, 101, 102. 

Yavanas, 78, 79, 80, 84, 90, 96, 97. 98, 
101, 106, 107, 111, 112, 233. 
end of rule in Bactria, 110. 
Indianisation of, 103. 

Yena, 1. 

Yen-chi, 639. 

Yen-Kas-tchen, 138, 139. 

Yerragudi, 77. 

Yin-mo-fu, 122. 

Ynde, 107. 

Yoga , 454, 476. 

Yona, 102. 


Ysamotika, 182. 

Yiian-ti, 122. 

Yudhishthira, 165. 

Yueh-chi, 118, 120, 121, 122, 123, 129, 
136, 137, 139, 142. 

Yuga-Purdna , 90, 106. 

Yugasena, 177. 

Yu-houan, author of Wei-lio, 145. 
Yung-kii, 122. 


Zariaspa (modern Balkh), 104. 
Zeionises (Jihunia), 133 f. 
Zenob, 634. 

Zeus, 109. 

Zoilus, 112, 117. 


735 


















































































. 
















































• 



























































































' 




V 








. ■ 

* 




























. 









. 

i .«• . •: 

. 


















" 













PLATE I 



Fig. 1. Ajatasatru worshipping the Buddha 








PLATE II 





> >tef %i 


Fig. 2. 


Rajagriha: 


Rampart walls of cyclopean masonry. 



Fig. 3. City of Jetuttara—relief on the north gate of the great Stupa at Sanchi 




PLATE III 




Fig. 5. Palace facade—Kdrle Chaitya cave 

Fig. 4. City of Kusinagara—relief from Amaravati. right end of verandah. 









PLATE IV 


















Fig. 10. Sanchi 
Great Stupa: View 
of North Tor ana. 

























PLATE IV-A 



Fig. 6. Pleasure palace with stairway—from a relief from Mathura. 



Iwfc iiail 


Fig. 7. Pleasure palace, General view—from a relief from Mathura. 





































































































































































































PLATE V 



Fig. 8. Bulandibagh, Patna: View of excavations. 



Fig. 9. Sanchi f Great Stupa: General view 


















Fig. 12. Amaravati: Replica of Stupa on a casing slab 


















PLATE VII 



Fig. 13. Bar&bar, Lomasa Rishi cave: Facade. 



f" 


Fig.-14. Bhdjd, Chaitya cave: Facade 









PLATE VIII. Fig. 15, Kondane , Chaitya cave: Facade. 



PLATE VIII. Fig. 16. Ndsik, Chaitya cave: Facade. 









Fig. 17. Bedsa, Chaitya cave: Interior view. PLATE IX Fig. 18. Kdrle, Chaitya cave: Interior view. 













PLATE X 




aisle. Fig. 20. Karle, Chaitya cave: Verandah. 






PLATE XI 



Fig. 21. Udayagiri, Rani gumphd: General view. 



Fig. 22. Nasik, Ushavadata vihara: Front view 














PLATE XII. Fig. 24. Junnar, Ganesa lena: Front view 






































PLATE XIII 




Fig. 25. Lauriya Nandanagarh: Asoka pillar. Fig. 26. Basarh-Bdkhira: Pillar. 




PLATE XIV 



Fig. 27. Rampurwa 
Lion capital. 


Fig. 28. Rampurwa: » 
Bull capital. 


Fig. 29. Sarnath: 
Lion capital. 



Fig. 30. Dhauli: Forepart of an elephant 
















PLATE XV 




3 

i- 

<3 


53 

■—> • 

<•* 

P, O 
53 

H-. 


*« 

CM 53 -t-^ 

3 

51 ) 

V) 


CO 


3 

o 


wg 

• pH «- 



















































PLATE XVI 



Fig. 34. 

Bharhut: Dream 
of Mayddevi. 



Fig. 35. Bharhut: 
Sirima devata. 


Fig. 36. Bharhut: 
Sudarsand yakshi. 


Fig. 37. Bharhut 
Warrior. 











PLATE XVII 



Bodhgayu: Square balustrade, partial view. Fig. 40. Bodhgaya: Rail medallions. 









PLATE XVIII 



Fig. 41. Sanchl } Great Stupa: East Gateway, 







PLATE XVIII-A 




I «S» 

fj ^ 

^ cu ^ 
^ Dl I; 


+j 

v- 
o 
A 

£2 -£ o ^ 
^ O OQ 

tuO^ 

• f-H 

Pm 



Fig. 44. Sdnchl, Great 

Stupa. East gate, Fig. 42 . Sdnchl, Great Stupa: 

Details of carvings. Guardian Figure on East gateway. 











PLATE XIX 





Fig. 45. Sdnchi, Great Stupa: West gate, middle architrave. 


Fig. 46. Sdnchi, Great Stupa: Same: another face. 


Fig. 47. Sdnchi, Great Stupa: West gate, lowest architrave. 
















PLATE XX 




Fig. 48. Sdnchi, Great Stupa: Bodhi Tree Shrine on Fig. 49 Sma u Vihdra: Surya on wall. 

East Gateway. 



























PLATE XXI 








PLATE XXII 





Fig. 54. Pawaya: Manibhadra Yaksha—Front. Fig. 55. Sarnath: Bodhisattva of Fig. 58. Pawaya: Manibhadra Yaksha—Back. 

Friar Bald. 











PLATE XXIII 



Fig. 57. Kdtrd, Mathura: Bodhisattva. Fig. 58. Mathura: Bachhanalian scene. 








PLATE XXIV 





"3 •. 
fc *- 

^ S . 

40 . 1(0 

e RS' 
§ 

tS «o 
% rid 
^ S 


Oi 


tuo 

• r-H 


OQ 


















PLATE XXV 


















PLATE XXVI 



Fig. 65. Loriyan Tangai: Buddha 


Fig. 66. Gandhdra: Buddha. 



Fig. 67. Garldhara: Buddha 
head—front. 


Fig. 68. Gandhdra: Buddha 
head — profile. 













PLATE XXVII 


Fig. 69. Gandhdra: Buddha among disciples. 




Fig. 70. Udayagiri, Rani guvnpha: Sculptures in upper storey. 






PLATE XXVIII 



Fig. 71. Udayagiri, Rani gumphd: Sculptures in upper storey. 



Fig. 72. Jaggayyapeta: Relief carvings 


Fig. 73. 
Jaggayyapeta: 
Pilaster figure. 
















PLATE XXIX 





Fig. 74. Amaravatl: Sculptured jamb. Fig. 75. Amardvatl: Fig. 76. Amaravatl: 

Sculptured jamb—outer Sculptured jamb—inner side. 



















PLATE XXX 



Fig. 77. Amravatl: Coping stone. 



Fig. 78. Amaravatl: Fragment of a sculptured 

jamb. 







PLATE XXXI 



Fig. 79. Ajanta, Cave IX: Group of votaries approaching a stupa. 































































PLATE XXXII 



Fig. 80. Ajanta, Cave X: Shad-danta Jataka—the 
fainting of the queen at the sicjht of the tusk$ f 


























































































PLATE XXXIII 



Fig. 81. Sdrndth: 


Male head. 



Fig. 82. Birol: Terracotta head 




PLATE XXXIV 




Fig. 83. Kausdmbi: Terracotta figurine. Fig. 84. Bangarh: Terracotta figurine. 








PLATE XXXV 




Fig. 86. Tamluk: Terracotta 
figurine. 











PLATE XXXVI 






Fig. 87. Pompei: Indian Fig. 88. Pompei: Indian Ivory Fig. 89. Begram. Fig. 90. Begram : 

ivory figurine — front. Figurine: Back. Indian Ivory relief Indian Ivory relief 

carving. carving. 









PLATE XXXVII 




Fig. 91. Coins and Intaglios , 


I 




V 



THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 

V ; "' : r : , OF THE 

INDIAN PEOPLE 

This is the first history of India, written 
exclusively by her own people, bringing to bear on 
the problems a detached and truly critical 
appreciation. A team of over sixty scholars of 
repute presents herein a comprehensive and up-to- 
date account of the political, socio-economic and 
cultural history of the Indian people. 

.VOLUME I 
THE VED1C AGE 
(up to 600 B.C.) 

VOLUME II 

THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 
(600 B.C. to 320 A.D.) 

VOLUME III 
THE CLASSICAL AGE 
(320-750 A.D.) 

VOLUME I V 

THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 
(750-1000 A.D.) 

VOLUME V 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 
(1000-1300 A.D.) 

VOLUME VI 

THE DELHI SULTANATE 
(1300-1526 A.D.) 

VOLUME VII 
THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

A.D.) 

' 

VOLUME YIII 

THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 
(1707-1818 A.D.) 


VOLUME IX 
BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 



VOLUME XI 











