


Prepared under the directions of 

DR. K. M. MUNSH1, 
President, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 


\ " - 3 


THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 

OF THE 

INDIAN PEOPLE 





























early chapters of this Volume the authors 
1 n as their focal, point in the political history 

, ihe rise, decline and fall of the Gupta Empire 
,ave brought the history of the subsequent period 
xuto perspective. 


The legend of Harshavardhana as the last empire- 
builder has been successfully demolished and his 
history reconstructed after a true sifting of all avail 
able evidence including that of Vakpati and Kalhana 
The entire historical outlook on the post-Harsha 
period has been changed in the light of these new 
conclusions. 




his 

ul¬ 

na. 


Special emphasis has been laid on the work of the 
Chalukyas and the Pallavas in the South who took 
up the thread left by the Guptas in the North and 
achieved political i’*iity in the Deccan and South 
India, thereby r ^mg the political ideal of a 
federation of il-w tnree regional units. The cultural 
movements which accompanied these events have also 
been traced. 


Chapters XV to XXII reveal fully for us that 
‘Golden Age’, the period when India reached the high 
watermark of intellectual development in the most 
widely varied fields of art, science and literature. 
This was the age of Kalidasa, Dandin, Subandhu and 
Banabhatfa. It was then that the six systems of 
philosophy took real shape; Vasubandhu, Amara, 
Aryabhafa, Varahamihira and Brahmagupta stood 
out in bold relief; and Nalanda University attracted 
world-wide attention. In the realm of art we read 
of Sarnath and Ajanta whose excellence are appre¬ 
ciated throughout the world. During this period 
there were established those rock-like foundations 
which were to culminate in the highest peak of Hindu¬ 
ism; of these we may cite the Ramayana and Mahd- 
bharata among the epics, the vast Puranic lore, and 
Vaishnavism and Saivism in the field of religion. 
Then, Sanskrit as the lingua franca of educated India 
cut across all disunity; but more than this, we find 
the cultural hands of India stretching across her 
natural boundaries even as far as Central and Eastern 
Asia, thus establishing “Greater India.*’ 


The contributors to this Volume include—Dr. R. C. 
Majumdar, M.A., Ph.D. F.A.S.; Dr. D.C. Sircar, 
M.A., Ph.D.; Prof. K.A. Nilakanta Sastri, M.A.; 
Prof. R. Sathianathaier, M.A.; Dr. G.V. Devasthali, 
M.A., B.T., Ph.D.; Dr. M.A. Mehendale, M.A., Ph.D.; 
Prof. H.D. Velankar, M.A.; Dr. K.R. Srinivasa Iyen¬ 
gar, M.A., D.Litt.; Dr. U.N. Ghoshal, M.A., Ph.D.; 
Dr. Nalinaksha Dutt, M.A., B.L., P.R.S., Ph.D., 
D.Litt.; Dr. J.N. Banerjea, M.A., Ph.D.; Dr. A.D. 
Pusalkar, M. A., LL.B., Ph.D.; Dr. A.M. Ghatage, M.A., 
Ph.D.; Dr. T.M.P. Mahadevan, M.A., Ph.D.; Prof. 
H.D. Bhattacharya, M.A.; Prof. U.C. Bhattacharjee, 
M.A.; Prof. S.K. Saraswati, M.A.; Dr. Nihar Ranjan 
Ray, M.A., D.Lett. and Phil. (Leiden). 


43 plates adequately illustrate the best specimens 
of the unique artistic achievements of this period. 

Foreword by Dr. K. M. Munshi. 



Rs, 50/ 

























■ sm n^rn JjfW*>*•* W ‘ 


.r-i’n ^ • c* 

IP &■»??*£ . ' " ■ 

P la ft & 5s#w ’ft / ' A 


ivjOT TO BE TAKEN FROM H•& RC/j 


^ U 











BHARATIYA VIb 


HISTORY AND CULTURE OF THE _ 

VOLUME III 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
Public.Resource.Org 




https://archive.org/details/classicalage03bhar 




THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 
OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE 


THE 

CLASSICAL 

AGE 

FOREWORD BY 

K. M. MUNSHI 

B.A., LL.B., D.LITT., LL.D 
President , Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

GENERAL EDITOR 

R. C. MAJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D., F.A.S., F.B.B.R.A.S. 

Principal, College of Indology 
Banaras Hindu University 

Ex Vice-Chancellor and Professor of History 
Dacca University 

Hon. Head of the Department of History 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

ASSISTANT EDITORS 

A. D. PUSALKER 

M.A., LL.B., PH.D. 

Assistant Director and Head of the 
Department of Sanskrit 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

AND 

A. K. MAJUMDAR 

M. A., D. PHIL 

Director , Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan , 

Delhi Kendra 



BOMBAY 

BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 


© BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 1954 


FIRST EDITION 1954 
SECOND EDITION 1962 
THIRD EDITION 1970 


PRINTED IN INDIA 
BY P. A. RAMAN 
AT INLAND PRINTERS 
55 GAMDEVI ROAD, BOMBAY 7 

AND 

PUBLISHED BY 

S. RAMAKRISHNAN, EXECUTIVE SECRETARY 
BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 
CHOWPATTY, BOMBAY 7 


CONTRIBUTORS 


R. C. MAJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D., F.A.S., F.B.B.R.A.S. 

Director, Board of Editors, History of the Freedom Movement, 
Government of India, New Delhi 

D. C. SIRCAR 

M.A., PHD. 

Superintendent for Epigraphy, Government of India, Ootacamund; 
formerly Lecturer in Ancient Indian History and Culture in the 

University of Calcutta 

K. A. NILAKANTA SASTRI 

M.A. 

Professor of Indology in the University of Mysore; 
formerly Professor of History in the University of Madras 

R. SATHIANATHAIER 

M.A. 

Professor of History and Politics in the Annamalai University 

G. V. DEVASTHALI 

M.A., B.T., PH.D. 

Professor of Sankrit in the H. P. T. College, Nasik 

M. A. MEHENDALE 

M.A., PHD. 

Reader in Sanskrit, Deccan College Post-Graduate and Research Institute, Poona 

H. D. VELANKAR 

M.A. 

Joint Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan; formerly Professor of Sanskrit , 

Wilson College, Bombay 

K. R. SRINIVASA IYENGAR 

M.A., D.LITT. 

Professor and Head of the Department of English in Andhra University, Waltair 

U. N. GHOSHAL 

M.A., PHD. 

Formerly Professor of History in the Presidency College, Calcutta 

NALINAKSHA DUTT 

M.A., B.L., P.R.S., PH.D., D.LITT. (London) 

Professor of Pali in the University of Calcutta 

J. N. BANERIEA 

M.A., PHD. 

Carmichael Professor of Ancient Indian History and Culture in the 

University of Calcutta 

A. D. PUSALKER 

M.A., LL.B., PH.D. 

Assistant Director and Head of the Department of Ancient Indian Culture, 

Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 


A. M. GHATAGE 

M.A., PHD. 

Professor of Ardhamagadhi in the Karnatak College, Dharwar 

T. M. P. MAHADEVAN 

M.A., PH.D. 

Head of the Department of Philosophy in the University of Madras 

H. D. BHATTACHARYYA 

M.A. 

Formerly Head of the Department of Philosophy, Dacca University, and 
Honorary University Professor of Indian Philosophy and Religion, 

Banaras Hindu University 

U. C. BHATTACHARJEE 

M.A. 

Formerly Professor of Philosophy in the Presidency College, Calcutta 

S. K. SARASWATI 

M.A. 

Librarian, Asiatic Society, Calcutta; formerly Lecturer in History in the 

University of Calcutta 

NIHAR RANJAN RAY 

M.A., D.LETT., & PHIL, (leiden) 

Bagisvari Professor of Indian Art and Culture in the University of Calcutta 


FOREWORD 

By Dr. K. M. Munshi 

There has been some delay in publishing this volume because 
of the heavy demand for Volume II, the second edition of which had 
to be published soon after the first. It is now planned to publish 
Volumes IV and V simultaneously, and the Bhavan hopes to put 
them on the market by June 1954. 

This Volume covers the period of Indian History from A.D. 320, 
when the Gupta Empire was founded, to about A.D. 740, when 
Yasovarman of Kanauj died. The period can suitably be divided 
into two; one, from A.D. 320 to c. A.D. 467 when Emperor Skanda- 
gupta died, and the other, from A.D, 467 to c.A.D. 740. 

I 

Rightly called the ‘Classical Age* of India, this period saw a 
springtime efflorescence in all spheres of life. The creative urge of 
the time has contributed both character and richness to the evolution 
of the national mind in every succeeding century. With the rise of 
the Imperial Pratlharas in the West, the Palas in the East and the 
Rashtrakutas in the South about the middle of the eighth century, 
there began the next distinctive period dealt with in the next volume* 

Empires rise, decline and fall; communities and nations inte¬ 
grate or disintegrate; the latter either develop a collective mind, 
outlook and will, or lose one or the other only to lose them all even¬ 
tually. In the one case they evolve an articulate personality; in the 

other they cast it off and disappear. 

The integration and disintegration of human aggregates 
form the basic patterns of history as viewed through continuous time. 
To study them, however, they must be viewed in sections, as in this 
volume. If such a study is to have any meaning, the volume and 
direction of the flowing stream must be constantly borne in mind. 

As I stated in my Foreword to the First Volume, “It is not 
enough to conserve, record and understand what has happened: it is 
necessary also to assess the nature and direction of the momentous 
forces working through the life of India in order to appreciate the 
fulfilment which they seek,” 

Throughout the history of India, the process of integration com¬ 
prises two simultaneous movements: one owes its origin to 
Aryan Culture and operates by virtue of the momentum which the 
values of that culture possess; the other works itself upward 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


from the way of life of the Early Dravidian and other non-Aryan 
cultures in the country into the framework of the Aryan Culture 
modifying its form and content, though not the fundamentals, weav¬ 
ing a harmonious pattern continuously. The first movement pro¬ 
vides vitality and synthesis; the second contributes vigour and 
variety. But it is the harmonious adjustment of both that gives 
to India, age after age, her strength, tenacity and sense of mission. 

The adjustment made against the background of racial fusion 
is symbolised by the sacredness accorded both to the Nigama, the 
Vedic tradition, and the Agama, the Dra vidian tradition; by the equal 
ritualistic importance of the Vedic homa and the Dravidian puj®,* 
to the inseverable Godhood of the Aryan Vishnu and the non-Aryan 
Siva. It must never be forgotten that Vyasa, the founder and prophet 
of Arya-dharma , and 6rl Krishna, the World Teacher, whose 
message is its fundamental scripture, are both sons by high-browed 
Aryans of non-Aryan mothers. 

Vedic culture, the culture of the Vedic Aryans, brought an in¬ 
creasing number of people within its fold as it spread through the 
country. Sweeping changes were made in the religious, social and 
cultural outlook and institutions of each successive age. But the 
vitality of the central ideas and fundamental values was never so 
lost as to bring about complete disintegration. In some periods, 
however, the two movements produced adjustments at many, if not 
all. levels; the vitality was converted into irresistible vigour; full 
nourishment was drawn from the soil of race memory and tradition. 
At such times a great Age, like the Age of the Guptas, would dawn in 
India. On the other hand, when the tw T o movements failed either 
by external or internal maladjustments to support each other, conflict 
between the two became inevitable; growth ceased to be vigorous; 
disintegration began as in the beginning of the eleventh century, 
when the raids of Mahmud of Ghazni overwhelmed parts of north 
India, the Age of Expansion ended, the Age of Resistance began. 

II 

The evolution of India, during the period of the Magadhan 
supremacy, dealt w r ith in the Second Volume of this series, began with 
the dawn of history in India in the seventh century before Christ. 
But long before this, Indians, who had adopted the Aryan way of life, 
had developed a common way of life; and their sense of unity 
preserved by tradition and activated by race-memory, recaptured 
in each generation, was expressed through common action. 
By vitalising the fundamental values of their culture, they had create 
ed vigorous adjustments necessitated by the conditions of each age 
During this process, the best elements in the society had, from the 

• t« 

yin 


FOREWORD 


earliest times, developed a ruling purpose—the fulfilment of Rita 
or Dharma —which gave them the capacity to will themselves into 
a well-defined and vigorous social organism. 

The Magadhan Period closed with the invasion of the Yueh-chis. 
Disintegration followed in northern and western India and was 
accentuated by the break up of the Kushana Empire which they had 
founded. The process of integration was also hindered by Buddhism 
which was not organically rooted in race memory and race tradi¬ 
tion, and stood, in many respects, in antagonism to them. But it 
was an expansive movement and naturally attracted foreigners; 
in India, it stimulated the national mind and culture by impact 
rather than by inspiration. The Sungas and the Satavahana con¬ 
querors however drew strength from its roots. 

The third century after Christ is still shrouded in obscurity. 
But, according to the Bhagavata^purdna, northern India was under¬ 
going a period of disintegration. Nagas ruled in Champavatl and 
Mathura; Abhiras ruled in Saurashtra and AvantI; in the region of 
Abu and Malava the rulers were devoid of culture ‘like unto the 
mlechchha’. In Sindh, on the banks of the Chandrabhaga, in the 
land of Kunti in Kashmir, the Sudras, Vratyas and the mlechchhas 
ruled. These rulers, the author says, lacked the power of the Spirit, 
disregarded Dhairma and Truth, and were ‘contemptible and 
irascible ’—phalguddh tlvramanyavah. His only hope lay in the new 
rulers, Visvasphani in Magadha and Vindhyasakti, a Brahmana, 
ruling on the banks of the Narmada. 

But there is little doubt, that by the beginning of the fourth 
century, the forces of disintegration had lost their momentum. In 
Southern India the old forces were being given new forms and 
directions. 

In spite of unsettled conditions, India was free from foreign 
attentions. The race memory looked back with pride on those 
times when chakravarti-samrdp, or universal emperors like 
Mandhata and Bharata held sway over the whole world. The notion 
of a universal emperor, supported by a universal church, so popular 
in mediaeval Europe, was basically different from this concept. The 
chakravarti was the political and military counterpart of Dharma ; 
like Mahavaraha—the great Boar—he was the saviour of Dharma , 
and the supporter of the fundamental law of the Dharma-sdstra; 
like Parasurama, he was the repressor of the lawlessness of kings, 
rajyochchhettd. He was able to conquer the world but only as the 
chakravarti of Aryavarta. 

The popular conception was expressed by Vayu-purdna thus: 


IX 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


“The chakrwvartls are born in each age as the essence of Vishnu. 
They have lived in ages past and will come again in the future. In 
all the three ages—past, present and future—even in the Treta age 
other chakravartts have been and will be born. 

“Strength, Dharma, happiness and wealth, these wondrous bless¬ 
ings shall characterise these rulers. They will enjoy wealth, plenty, 
Dharma, ambition, fame and victory in undisturbed harmony. 

“They will excel the Rishis in their power to achieve results, by 
their lordliness, by providing plenty and by discipline. And they 
will excel the gods, demons and men by their strength and self- 
discipline. ” 

The conception of Aryavarta, the sacred land of the Aryas, was 
a living one; for it was impregnated with an abiding veneration for 
the fathers who had lived and died so that it might live, great and 
eternal. 

The Vishnu-purana expressed the eternal hope of the Indian 
heart: “Even the gods sing thus: ‘Blessed are the men who live 
in the land of Bharata, which is like unto the high road to Heaven 
and to Liberation; for they are higher than gods themselves.’ ” 

In India the concept of Dharma was primarily related to Arya¬ 
varta. Bharatavarsha, Karmabhumi, was the land of Dharma, and it 
stretched from the oceans to the Himalayas. In the popular mind, 
however, the boundaries of Aryavarta extended far beyond those 
defined by the early Dharma-sastras . Aryavarta was the region 
where Aryas flourished and where the mlechchhas, if they overran 
it, could not abide for long. It was Aryavarta, without any frontier, 
geographical or political. Medhatithi, a great commentator on 
Manu, was to give expression to this idea some centuries later: “A 
king of meritorious conduct could conquer even the land of the 
mlechchhas, establish chdturvarnya there, assign to the mlechchhas 
a position occupied by the chanddlas in Aryavarta and render that 
land as fit for sacrifice as Aryavarta itself.” 

Ill 

In the beginning of the fourth century, the powerful Pallava 
king ^ivaskanda-varman in southern India celebrated the asvamedha. 
About A.D. 320, Chandra-gupta I, the founder of the Gupta Empire, 
revived the chakravdrtl ideal in northern India. His marriage with 
KumaradevS, the Lichchhavi princess, probably resulted in the 
union of her principality with Magadha and launched him on a 
career of wide conquests. Fortunately for him, there was no other 


x 


FOREWORD 


rival for imperial supremacy in northern India at the time and no 
foreign invader threatened the country from the north-west. 

Placed between A.D. 335-380, Samudra-gupta, the next emperor, 
laid the foundation of an irresistible military machine which 
probably included a navy. With his large standing army, 
he wiped out the feeble kings and effete republics of the Gangetic 
basin. The territory from Hard war to the borders of Assam was 
consolidated into a compact homeland which he directly administer¬ 
ed under a system which, with suitable modifications, was soon adopt¬ 
ed in many parts of the country and persisted in some form even 
up to the British period. Samudra-gupta’s sacred horse, followed by 
his army, extracted tribute from the kings ruling in most parts of 
the country and served to bring about friendly relations with the 
Shahanushahi kings of the north-west. He reached the zenith of his 
power when he performed the asvamedha sacrifice and gave muni¬ 
ficent donations. 

Politically, this was the age of integration in India. After more 
than three hundred years of fragmentation and foreign domination, 
northern India was again united under the vigorous rule of a power¬ 
ful monarch of versatile talents. A brilliant general, a farsighted 
statesman, a man of culture and a patron of the arts and letters, he 
became the symbol and architect of a mighty creative urge among 
the people which, while drawing vitality from tradition and race- 
memory, took on a new shape and power. 

Samudra-gupta was succeeded by his no less brilliant son, 
Chandra-Gupta II, known as Vikramaditya, acclaimed as the greatest 
of the Gupta Emperors. In his reign, which is placed between A.D. 
376 and 414, the last vestige of foreign rule disappeared from the 
land and the direct sway of Pafaliputra extended from the Bay of 
Bengal to the Arabian Sea. The country to the south of the Narmada 
was dominated by two friendly powers—the Vakatakas and the Pal- 
lavas—who shared the Gupta emperors’ enthusiasm for strengthening 
Dhtfrma. The dominions of the descendants of Vakafaka Vindhya- 
sakti extended from Bundelkhand to Hyderabad. A daughter of 
Chandra-gupta II was married to one of them, and she ruled as regent 
for thirteen years; and till the dynasty disappeared, the Vakafakas 
continued in subordinate alliance with the Guptas. The Pallavas, 
who held unquestioned sway in the south, maintained friendly rela 
tions with the Guptas, even when they were not subject to their hege¬ 
mony. 

Under the leadership of Chandra-gupta II, the Gupta eagles flew 
over parts of IJalkh across the Hindukush. Peace, plenty and power, 


XI 


THE CI&SSB 2 &KAGE 


^otetea il ^itW i %^all^*varti#gom<BEal < ;'^enseq(W^SSjisWVfil li «c,>F?>g»h 

integrateff-stWttflti-iiitSilt^ettJairrinaiacuMr^aeJStefi^ee^gfiWjji^^}® 

«wa«i^&^^P§S 8 ^WgBgDl^^o^S£fi 1 !S 9 ^^l 95 1 ^^ t 

BHt atl ei9ft8i29iii m io noitebnuol sdi bipA 

? WEve$»A m l§#Mmdi£rf th^Wndejvforeign 
K&IdSfhe^std4h& fi^te^alseelebifatioiasrM tbielfiglltqfj# 
^fya-4^nib whbmdthdi gibrioiad>inieniQnj£ Q&othSofE&rt Q^i}#f 

:^3?§atl!d4 dial m fca&astoaf umique;>tritn^ ©SjB§fMs&» 
td c $&i§ ^h&1^9EfS5tw%iJJp^>ls^BMIr BS 

Ihdil, W^bdllfed thdhigtsest? aspiratibnscQf mtdidnaJrjgr^ait^M- m be 
vd bawolloi t 98iori baioaa g4f qug- aibumeS .hoiieq rfeitiia sift oi q.j 
to alisq iaorn: ni grill x j i agnM eifymoil atudot batosifxs aid 

£Fi 2 fndra%lmta was Wlc^¥8^8 °PA^J^ 

m to WfW later, by% ^rSridsB^ Skanda-gupta 

;£OU*H 3YBIL2&&.99niTO^Mb&ngittyA.acfchihajg xi.-._ 


wio Hunas. Both bf them 

stabilised what their predecessors had acquired and dohsolidated/ 
These onie hundidd f andxtifty y^eam bf Qupta rule can rightly: Bf^^lled 

th^iCbidenhFkgteadf IlndiaorjstnsmgBii: r ..ud osiiij rrarlt 

^^^W'Oupta' efS^erprs tipheli} : tiHdrma in all its aspects K ahdpffl 
conseduehpe, its ebhfehf ivas ehriched and its scope enlarged? 1 Ah 
overarching la"w;pf life, though it existed from Vedic times, 
eM uhde^ thern ffie &rm^\yhich in 1 the main it still s 
They &ew ffiefr inspiration "from it, and in so doing* cliKtSf fhS 
people with them. Historical chhtihtSity 1 and conscious iinity^ LS ^Sre 
preserved by a faith in the ^dashas 3! the ^qrca^ofj ^Uj^jig^^dge 
and inspimti@ja.b.:Within the- ir^ae-wqrk f gf fjrafji} 

tions and/rithal^language and literature, tj^-^pgs 
ideals and $nedesc^>f ? life, became integrating/agen|ciqs| Throiigh the 
PurdTias, ^hi#i sang of sacred legends, of riypr% 3 jqf^i%t#n^i#ifei.f^j[ 
of royal hotisls, and c^i^emi-diyjne heroes and sages^ 4h%paatn^ 
mained a 'rglpiieUi/jteritag^itaah^pire the future with fre^ f yigpqjg w 

? ^integrating fdrhe il #as r ’^Hie 
^ x >. — - T isls of Aryan society Mhd the 

mode of social" adj liferent; prescribed laws of inheritance and of 
civil and" criminni^jtt^ficS^fincj 0 ^^^ &owh rules to govern all ffiajor 
*SkL death. Of them all, Manu-smfiii Wh^iiild 

hrbughout tlie country, not only in the Hbrth 

^.-1 i_-- 111 its authority; 

clear iihpress 

of its great influence. 

Theoretically, nebotmiig“to the Dharrna-Mstras, the social struc¬ 
ture Wvi^gedM 1 social groups, chdturvarnya; 



Dharma 


situations 

,8*t 


in the highest san 

Sl3Z VWiV 


FOREWORD 


in fact, it was a hierarchy of such groups ranged according to the 
standard of culture attained by each, with intervening groups to 
accommodate products of racial fusion. The Brahmanas stood at its 
head as devoted to learning, culture and self-discipline. The hie¬ 
rarchy was cultural, not a racial one. Outsiders were allowed to 
enter and benefit by it, but not so fast as to destroy the social equi¬ 
librium. Opportunity was thus given to those who were aliens to 
Indian culture to rise in the scale of life, but never so rapidly as to 
endanger the stability of the existing social order. 


The bed-rock of social organisation inherited from the Vedic 
Aryans was the patriarchal family. The father was its head; the 
mother, its mistress; all members of the family including the help¬ 
less had a secure asylum in it. As a corollary, the devotion of wife 
to her husband and to the family was imperative. Her position has 
never been more beautifully described than in Kanva’s advice to 
Sakuntala in Kalidasa’s play:— 

“Wait on thy betters; act the part of darling friend 
unto ev’ry fellow bride 

Tho’ by thy husband treated ill, in wrathfulness 
do not rend awry thy face; 

Be vastly courteous unto them that on thee wait, 
in thy fortunes take no pride 

thus turn to housewives, women young, while those 

perverse 

are the bane of all the race.” 

(AbhijUdnaSakuntalam iv, 8) 

Castes mixed in marriage with comparative freedom; anuloma 
marriages were very common; the pratiloma marriages were by no 
means rare. 


The Dharma-sdstras were not enforced at the point of the sword. 
Even the backward and the immigrant classes dropped their group- 
customs and usages, and cheerfully adopted the social system pre¬ 
scribed by them. Thus, Aryanisation of India was not achieved by 
the fiats of rulers or mass coercion by superior classes, but by the 
willing acceptance by all those who realised that the dynamics of the 
Dharma-sdstra provided, for the age, the best conditions for social, 
spiritual and cultural uplift. 

Sanskrit, a living language, elastic in structure and rich in 
expression, possessing a rich, varied and beautiful literary achieve¬ 
ment, was the living embodiment of the Dharma and a powerful 
integrating force. Inscriptions began to be written in Sanskrit, 
even in the far South. A new thought or a new literary master¬ 
piece in the language attracted the attention of all the intellectual 


Xlll 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


centres. For instance the works of Kalidasa, a contemporary of 
Chandra-gupta II Vikramaditya, became the models of literary 
beauty throughout the country within a few years of his death. 

Under the Gupta emperors, the Mahdbharata acquired a unique 
position as an integrating psychological force. It immortalized the 
proud and joyous manhood of Bhdratavarsha, and provided a com¬ 
mon source of inspiration in courts, schools and in society as a whole. 

The cultural uprising was based upon the central idea under¬ 
lying Dharma from early time. It predicated an unalterable faith 
in human endeavour, self-restraint ( samyama ) and self-discipline 
(tapas). Emphasis was laid on individual experience and becoming 
rather than on belief and the scriptural word; it was reached only 
when a man could shed his limitations and become divine in this life. 
Running through a diversity of religious beliefs and social outlook, 
it also laid an emphasis on the observance of the great vows— 
mahavratas— of non-violence, truth, non-stealing, continence and 
non-possession as essential steps in progress. All conduct, in order 
to be -worthy of respect, had to be harmonised and regulated by 
ethical and spiritual values calculated to help the fulfilment of this 
ideal. 

The four Gupta emperors,—omitting, of course, the ignoble 
Rama-gupta,—in maintaining the ideals of a chakravartx, made the 
state at one and the same time, powerful, stable, dynamic and happy. 
The age saw the speculative thought among others of Vasubandhu 
and the Nayanmars; the perfect lyric and drama of Kalidasa; 
the astronomical discoveries of Varahamihira; the iron pillar of 
Delhi; the beginnings of the structural temples; the beauty 
of the early Ajanta frescoes; the rise of Vaishnavism and Saivism; 
the completion of the Mahdbharata and the composition of Vayu- 
and the Matsya-Purdnas. The empire was not merely based on 
conquests or administrative efficiency; its greatness lay in its inte¬ 
gral outlook. Its strength was based as much on military strength 
as on internal order and economic plenty; the sap of its vitality 
was drawn from the roots of ancient tradition and race memory 
which they maintained, re-interpreted and replenished. The up¬ 
surge of the Kshatriya hierarchs of Madhyadesa and Magadha, 
loyally pledged to stability, constituted the steel-frame of the impe¬ 
rial structure. Nor was the splendour of the empire an isolated 
phenomenon surrounding the individuality of the rulers. The peo¬ 
ple, having discovered in their traditional way of life something 
noble arid splendid, only saw it reflected in the greatness of their 
rulers* The Vakatakas and the Pallavas of the far south, the two 


xiv 


FOREWORD 


other dominant powers in the country closely allied with the Guptas, 
joined in availing themselves of the agency of the Brahmanas, the 
missionaries and instruments of Dharma, by lavish generosity. 

The Gupta emperors became the symbols of a tremendous 
national upsurge. Life was never happier, our culture never more 
creative than during the Golden Prime of India. 

V 

In the middle of the fourth century of the Christian era, some¬ 
thing resembling a volcanic eruption took place in the history of 
the human race. The Hunas, like a veritable stream of lava, issued 
from their homeland on the northern shores of the Caspian Sea and 
spread over Europe and Asia. Homeless and lawless, they rode 
their horses awake and asleep. Their fierce yells spread terror 
wherever they were heard. They engaged all the civilized peoples 
of the world in fearful cataclysmic wars; and, wherever they could, 
they killed, destroyed, burnt and devastated with demoniac ruthless¬ 
ness. In Europe, Attila the Hun brought about the downfall of even 
the powerful Roman Empire. 

About A.D. 455, the Hunas began to enter India. Emperor 
Skanda-gupta drove them back by a supreme effort. Twelve years 
later, he died. The outposts of the empire, already weak, could 
offer no further resistance. The barbarian hordes, after passing 
through Persia and destroying the Kushana rulers of the north-west, 
began to pour into India. 

A war of succession appears to have followed the death of 
Skanda-gupta, weakening the empire in the hour of its danger. Next 
in order of succession, five emperors including Narasimha-gupta 
Baladitya, between A.D. 500 and 570, held precarious sw T ay over 
parts of the empire, which in spite of its decadence was still a name 
to conjure with. Many parts of the empire outside the bounds of the 
compact core of the empire became independent. In Saurashtra, 
a province of the empire, the Maitraka general practically threw off 
his allegiance on the death of Skanda-gupta. 

By A.D. 512, the Hunas under Toramana, overran north India 
up to Eran in the Saugar district of Madhya Pradesh. Toramana’s 
son, Mihirakula, a veritable terror, spread fire and carnage from the 
Punjab to Gwalior and by A.D. 525 became the master of a vast 
territory. 

Northern Indian soon recovered from the shock of the barbarian 
impact and resisted Mihirakula. The records which have survived 
are much too vague and fragmentary to indicate the nature and 


xv 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


extent of this war of liberation. But the names of two great libera¬ 
tors have come down to us. 

Yaiodharman Vishnu vardhana, who was possibly an ex-feuda¬ 
tory of the Empire, fought the Hu^as grimly. His swift victories 
arrested the progress of Mihirakula, and enforced allegiance. Malwa, 
which included central parts of what is modem Gujarat, once a pro¬ 
vince of the Empire, when liberated, formed part of the domains of 
Ya^odharman, and his conquests are described as having covered 
the territory from the Himalayas to the Ganj5m district. 

Mihirakula met with no less heavy reverses in his eastern 
campaigns. The challenge was taken up by liana-varman Maukhari, 
a quasi-independent feudatory ruling over Madhyadesa represented 
by modern Uttar Pradesh. He barred the progress of the Hu^as to 
the east and in the course of several encounters inflicted a shatter¬ 
ing defeat upon them. 

Emperor Narasiihha-gupta B&laditya, the ruler of the Eastern 
Empire, dealt a final blow to the Huna and sent him reeling 
back to his dominions on the North-West Frontier only to finA, 
according to Hiuen Tsang, that his brother had seized his throne. 
Mihirakula then fell back on Kashmir which he captured, and died 
soon after. 

Ya£odharman Vishnu vardhana blazed a meteoric brilliance and 
vanished into darkness. In A.D. 533, Malwa was being ruled by 
the governor of Isana-varman, the Maukhari conqueror. Two years 
later, Kumara-gupta III, son of Narasimha-gunta Baladitya, re-estab¬ 
lished the imperial sway in Malwa and declared himself ‘Lord of the 
three seas’. But the empire decayed rapidly, and though Gupta 
sovereignty was recognised by the Maitrakas till about A.D. 550, 
and acknowledged in Kalinga even as late as A.D. 569, it is clear 
that the emperor had become a 'roi faineant 

Isana-varman, the great liberator, possibly overthrew the des¬ 
cendants of Yasodharman, conquered the Sulikas of Andhra, and on 
the death of Kumara-gupta III emerged as the unchallenged master 
of Madhyadesa and Malwa. He kept the Gau<Jas at bay and estab¬ 
lished himself at Kanauj which, thereafter, was the imperial capital 
of north India for close upon five centuries. Sarva-varman (A.D. 
576-580), the successor of Isana-varman, maintained the supremacy 
of his dynasty. 

The Hunas disappeared as they came. The Gupta Empire, 
grown very weak, was dissolved; the virile Maukharis emerged 
victorious. But with their rise began a new phase in Indian History. 
Kanauj emerged as the symbol of a new order. 

xvi 


FOREWORD 


The Golden Prime of India became a thing of the past; the 
military superiority of Magadha disappeared. Out of the welter 
emerged a set of new dynasties: the Maukharis of Kanauj, the 
Pushpabhutis of Thaneswar, the Maitrakas of Valabhl and the 
Chalukyas of Badami. The Pallavas of Kanchl alone among the 
old dynasties continued to flourish. In the west, the warrior clans 
of what is now Rajasthan, living in the region of Mount Abu and 
descended from Brahmana ancestors, emerged from obscurity as a 
closely knit hierarchy with the Pratiharas at their head. 

VI 

Due to the exaggerated eulogies of his biographer, Ba^a, and the 
enthusiastic Hiuen Tsang,'£r! Harsha has been given more than his 
share of importance. No doubt he preserved the unity of Madhya- 
desa, but he suffered a serious defeat at the hands of Pulakesin II 
of Badami and had to make terms with the Maitrakas of ValabhI. 
The territories he conquered were neither as extensive as the empire 
of the Guptas who preceded him, nor that of the Pratiharas who 
followed him; nor did he leave behind an empire. 

We learn from the Chinese pilgrim that &rl Harsha not only 
followed Buddhism but also had a marked antipathy to the 
Brahmanical religion. But the seals, which refer to his elder brother 
as Buddhist, describe him as a devoted Saiva. 

Sri Harsha, unlike the Guptas, was not able to release a 
new integrating impulse. The Emperor, with a large army, had 
conquered far and wide, staged spectacular festivals, made gener¬ 
ous gifts; his character stood high. But he left no hierarchs 
and no successors; on his death the fabric he had erected, fell to 
pieces. The causes which led to this sudden collapse of Kanauj 
may be found not only in the circumstances that brought him to 
supremacy, but also in his personal character. The old Kshatriya 
houses in Madhyade^a, who had supported the Gupta Empire, were 
exhausted or hostile; Sri Harsha could infuse no new hope or 
strength in them. Kanauj and Thaneswar, though friendly states, 
were rivals. When Kanauj was faced with extinction at the hands 
of £a£ahka, Sri Harsha was called in as a matter of military 
urgency to a joint rulership over both states. But his hold over 
the two states was personal; the hierarchs of both kingdoms possibly 
hated each other. Sri Harsha failed, where Chandra-gupta I, 
the founder of the Gupta Empire, had succeeded so well; he was 
unable to create a common hierarchy which could carry forward 
his work. 

At the height of his career Sri Harsha was an ardent Buddhist. 
In all probability, he held himself aloof from his ministers, and 

xvii 

C-A.-B 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the leaders of society, superior and self-righteous. He could not 
restore the life-blood of the old social organisation, for he could 
not identify himself with its urges, nor could he revive the chakra- 
vartl tradition. The secret of establishing a military power founded 
on traditional strength, was not his; nor did the mass of the people 
feel that the conquests of Sri Harsha were their own triumph. 
The internationalism, for which Buddhism stood, negatived the 
building up of a compact unity rooted in the land. He could con¬ 
quer; he could not build. The way of the Guptas was, therefore, 
barred to him. 


The empire he had won simply disappeared. After Sri Harsha, 
his daughter’s son, Dharasena IV, the ruler of the comparatively 
small kingdom of Valabhl, assumed the pretentious title of an 
emperor. Within fifty years of Sri Harsha’s death, Yasovarman, a 
powerful ruler and the patron of Bhavabhuti, restored Kanauj to its 
glory—but for a while. 

But the strength and vigour of India, between A.D. 550 and 
750, was found in the South. While the Maukharis were founding 
an empire which had its seat at Kanauj, Pulakesin I, of the Chalukya 
family (A.D. 550), had already founded a kingdom in the Bijapur 
district of Bombay with its capital at Vatapi, modern Badami. About 
the end of the sixth century, his son, Klrtivarman, embarked on wars 
against the kings who ruled to the north of the Godavari. 

Pulakesin II, who had already subdued the Pallavas of Kanchi, 
repelled the invasion of Sri Harsha in c. A.D. 620 and adopted the 
style “Lord of the three Maharashtras containing 999 villages”. 
He annexed Veiig!, modern Godavari district, and appointed his 
brother Vishnuvardhana as its governor on the east coast. Four 
years later, Vishnuvardhana became virtually independent and 
founded the dynasty of the Eastern Chalukyas. Pulakesin with his 
warriors and elephants which ‘marched to victory while intoxicated’ 
founded the empire of Dakshinapatha. After a rule of about two 
centuries, during which the Chalukyas provided the greatest stabi¬ 
lising influence in the country, they were replaced by the 
Rashtrakutas. 


The great Pallava king, Mahendra-varman I (A.D. 600-630) at 
one time defeated even Pulakesin II and captured his capital. Though 
the Chalukyas avenged this defeat soon after, the Pallavas remained 
the most powerful kings in the far south. 


Phioughout the period of over four hundreds years from 
A.D. 320 to 750, India was administered by well-organised govern¬ 
ments. The political interest during this time is primarily confined 
to the history of northern India. This was due mostly to the power 


xviii 


FOREWORD 


arid extent of the Gupta Empire. But the contribution of the 
Chalukyas and the Pallava kings in stabilising the country and 
fostering the integrating forces should not be under-estimated. 

VII 

Conditions in the north and the west zones of India, from and 
inclusive of Afghanistan (then a Hindu territory) up to the Nar¬ 
mada, were thrown into confusion. Within a few years of the 
death of Mihirakula, however, a new and vigorous impulse is also 
visible; an impulse to revive Dharma, to relate it to the new life, to 
fashion values to new conditions, not only in the affected zones, but 
in other parts of India as well, and particularly in the south. The 
foundations of life, shaped during the Gupta period, remained 
unshaken in a large part of the country; its pattern, however, soon 
underwent a change. 

Some aspects of this new impulse, the home of which was in 
the south, can be easily traced. The Purdnas , some of which were 
redacted or newly written in the Gupta times, were the popular 
gospels of the new impulse. They did not serve merely a religious 
purpose. They revived the glories of the distant past; they invested 
new places in the country with stimulating sanctity, weaving the 
unity of Bharatavarsha; they also re-interpreted old values in the 
light of new conditions, giving them a new vigour. 

Saivism, a popular cult long before the rise of the Gupta Empire, 
became a very vigorous integrating movement. The worship of 
Siva as Pasupati is as old as Mohenjo-daro. The new cult, which 
Sahkaracharya called Lakulesa Pasupata had spread over the coun¬ 
try, and was the most influential protagonist of Dhaima and the 
formidable opponent of Buddhism and Jainism. 

In spite of the Gupta Emperors being devoted to Vishnu, the 
worship of Siva was more popular. Mihirakula, the Huna king, like 
some early Kushana kings, was a devotee of Siva; and so were most 
of the members of Sri Harsha’s family; and so were the Maitrakas 
of Valabhl and most of the rulers of the South, including the Vaka- 
takas. Mahendra-varman, the great ruler of the Pallava dynasty, 
became a convert to Saivism, and built magnificent temples in his 
kingdom. Kanchi became a great centre of the faith and his 
successors identified themselves with the renaissance associated with 
Saivism. Many Saiva Nayanmars who flourished during this period 
pressed even Vedanta into the service of Saivism. Manikkavachakar’s 
Tiruvdchakam became the highest Saiva scripture in the Tamil 
language. 

xix 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


VIII 

The Gupta Emperors were very catholic in their religious out¬ 
look; Buddhism was not only tolerated, but like other religions, 
lavishly supported. The lay Buddhists were an integral part of 
society regulated by the canons of the Dhxvrnuv-sdstras. Therefore, 
when Saivism and Vaishnavism became powerful integrating forces, 
Buddhism which at best was a protestant movement, never an inte¬ 
grating force, began to lose its hold over the masses. Its content 
progressively approximated to Hinduism. Its spiritual nihilism, 
when exposed to the Bhakti movements, tried to approximate to the 
latter at least in its external aspects, and finally came to be absorbed 
in the wide fold of Hinduism; and later when Buddha was accepted 
as the avatdra of Vishnu, no trace of its separate existence as a rival 
was left. As a cult, however, it continued for a few more centuries. 

After A.D. 500 the Bhakti cults gave to the religious movements 
the emotional content, which, for centuries, remained of immense 
significance in Indian life; it helped to form enduring values which 
gave strength to the Age of Resistance after the cataclysmic disaster 
which the Turks brought in their wake. The Alvars of Tamil Nad 
were simple-hearted hhaktas; they loved and wooed their gods and 
expressed their feeling with a directness hardly surpassed in emo¬ 
tional content and ardent faith in the religious literature of the world. 

Sanskrit continued to be the language of religion and ritual; of 
state-craft, learning and science; of the law texts which regulated 
social conduct; and of literature, thought, poetry and drama. It was 
the national medium of intercourse. The Sanskrit speaking world 
was one, all-Indian. It was with its aid that in the next century 
Sankaracharya, a Brahmana from Malabar, in all too short a life, was 
to organise religious institutions, dominate the speculative thought 
of the country, and inaugurate a sweeping religious and intellectual 
movement throughout the country. 

The Mahabhdrata, the Rdmayana and the Puranas continued to 
be the source of countrywide unity. The Puranic literature remain¬ 
ed simple and direct; its growth as an influence could be measured 
by the evolution of the literature from the meagre recitals of Matsya 
and Vdyu-Pumnas to the richly magnificent Bhdgavata, again a con¬ 
tribution of the south. The Katha became the most powerful educa¬ 
tive and integrating force. The Pauranikas were the missionaries 
of the new age; an agency of social uplift which brought an ever-ex¬ 
panding circle of adherents into the fold of Aryan culture. 

In North India, the dialects, which the higher classes spoke, 
were not far removed from Sanskrit. But in the south the Dravidian 
languages continued to develop on their own lines, no doubt in- 


xx 


FOREWORD 


fluenced and enriched by Sanskrit. Elements in the population 
speaking dialects, not of Indo-Aryan origin, also began to find a place 
among the higher classes in large numbers. Cultural influences were 
therefore spread not only through Sanskrit, but percolated to the 
masses through the medium of the growing dialects which acknow¬ 
ledged the supremacy of Sanskrit and became subsidiary forces of 
integration. 

Chdturvarnya was called upon to bear a severe strain due to 
the need of absorbing foreigners and of Aryanising non-Aryans who 
were given a place in it. A change therefore came over it altering 
the structure of society. Varmsrama took the shape—though not 
yet distinct—of an organisation of interdependent castes, not a four¬ 
fold social order. Society thus lost the freshness of out-look which 
the dvijas of India, as a class fundamentally one, had imparted to it. 
The history of the following centuries shows how, as the social 
structure grew inelastic, the political sanction of a chakravartt 
was denied to cultural and social solidarity, and the people ceased to 
have an expansive outlook. 

The leading role as a highly trained and purposive agency in 
integration was played by Brahmanas: men of learning and teachers; 
literary men and religious preceptors; ‘svamins* who specialised in 
the sacrificial lore; the Pasupatacharyas who, feared and respected 
by the people, wielded vast influence over kings and founded temples 
and monasteries, a^Ll of which became the centres of the new socio¬ 
religious movement of power. Smdrta Brahmanas were not only 
interpreters, commentators and lawyers, but also expounders of 
Dharma. The influence of the Brahmanas was felt throughout the 
country. They slowly reclaimed and raised millions of backward 
people. Under their inspiration, communities were uplifted and the 
cultural and spiritual elevation of the individual secured. 

During this period, the system of education did not change ap¬ 
preciably from what it was in the preceding age. Universities like 
Nalanda, great centres of learning, came into existence. 

IX 

i 

The Aryavarta consciousness, as stated before, had three aspects; 
Aryavarta was the land of Dharma in which no mlechchha could 
abide; chdturvarnya, the social basis, was its eternal law; the chakra - 
vartl was to maintain both. The sentiment that no mlechchha could 
abide in India was deep-rooted and active; equally active was the 
belief that Dharma prevailed in Bharatavarsha. The chakravartl 
idea, however, clearly lost its meaning; Dhdrma could not, and there¬ 
fore need not, be linked with the duty of maintaining the whole 


XXI 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


country within its fold. Wars of conquests lost their spiritual signifi¬ 
cance; they were not, as in the earlier periods, an expression of a 
people and a culture on the move; they were undertaken only for 
dynastic ends or, more often, to curb the aggressive intentions of 
neighbouring kings. People and culture were one; the Smriti law 
was the universal Dharma; but chdturvarnya became a social pattern 
in its own right. Aryavarta consciousness, in consequence, receded 
into race memory. 

The Kshatriya community was no longer a compact military 
caste of Madhyadesa dominated by a single cultural tradition. It 
came to be infiltrated by the foreign, aboriginal and other non-Aryan 
groups, not yet acclimatized to Dharma. Inter-marriages between 
the Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas became rare; the Kshatriyas 
busied themselves with wars and saw 7 no justification for undergoing 
any rigorous intellectual training. 

The segregation of dvija castes into water-tight compartments 
and difficulty of social fusion, therefore, became disintegrating factors. 

An empire could only be built on the shoulders of a hierarchy. 
Such a w r ell-knit hierarchy had helped to found the Gupta Empire 
in the days of the early emperors; it had been interested in main¬ 
taining the authority of the emperor, howsoever weak or helpless, 
against ambitious neighbours or recalcitrant feudatories in the inte¬ 
rest of a common purpose which they shared with the masses. The 
change in the social structure created conditions in which such a 
hierarchy, homogeneous in culture and looking forward with faith 
to the political unity of Aryavarta, could not be brought into exist¬ 
ence. 

In spite of the conventional encomiums contained in the inscrip¬ 
tions, conquerors were continuously emerging from obscurity who 
cared more for dynastic power than for Dharma. 

After the Guptas, conquest on a large scale became increasingly 
difficult. The army, from ancient times, was divided into four sec¬ 
tions: the elephants, the cavalry, the infantry and the chariots. 
During the period under review, as attested by Harsha-charita and 
as recorded by Hiuen Tsang, chariots were sparingly used in warfare. 
A king rode to w^ar mostly on an elephant; and a king bent on con¬ 
quest had to maintain a large number of elephants. Cavalry was 
used largely, but the horses were generally maintained by the feudal 
chiefs who brought them to the battle-field for use, just as they did 
their own footmen. Usually, the army consisted of Kshatriya feudal 
chiefs who had their own estates, their regional attachments and their 
code of honour prescribed by the sdstras and the traditions. In the 
hands of powerful leaders, they could be heroes, but not mercenaries. 


XX) 1 


FOREWORD 


They were generally rewarded by grants of land, and their leaders 
were mostly connected with the ruling dynasty by blood. The petty 
king, even in war, was no more than “the head of inter-related over¬ 
lordships.” Unless, therefore, a conqueror had sufficient means to 
have an effective elephant force and a paid army of his own, he had in 
practice to depend on his feudal chiefs and could scarcely aspire to be 
a chakravarti. 

According to an old tradition inherited from the era of small 
kingdoms, it was not open to a conqueror to overthrow the ruling 
dynasty of another territory and annex it to his own. He had there¬ 
fore to find a loyal chieftain who could command the loyalty of the 
important Kshatriya families of the conquered territory. The 
Kshatriyas slowly became rooted in their own region. The success¬ 
ful merger of conquered territory necessarily implied the uprooting 
of the local chiefs and their replacement by the feudal chiefs of the 
conqueror and 1 his dynasty. This involved the re-distribution of 
fiefs in the conquered territory among the feudal chiefs of the con¬ 
queror ready to be transplanted to a new and uncongenial soil; and, 
the capacity in the conqueror to support his newly planted chiefs 
as his instrument of power without weakening his own military 
efficiency. These factors appear, during the period under review, 
to have worked against the political consolidation of states. 

Many conquerors tried to disregard these factors; most of them 
failed. Samudra-gupta succeeded because he ruthlessly extirpated 
the small states of Northern India and could rely upon the military 
classed of Madhyade^a. With the fall of the Gupta Empire, North 
India split into smaller units. With the humane traditions of India, 
attempts at extirpating a regional hierarchy could scarcely be 
made except by ruthless conquerors; in consequence, the regional 
attachment of the Kshatriyas increased; and with their patrons, the 
Brahmanas who depended on them also developed regional loyalties. 
The kingdoms became smaller, and small-state-mindedness became 
a part of the national mind. 

The only exception, in the period under review, was the emerg¬ 
ence of the Pratihara, the Chahamana and the Chalukya clans, closely 
allied in marriage and tradition; the Paramaras and the other warrior 
clans of Gurjaradesa were either off-shoots of these three branches 
or were absorbed in the hierarchy in course of time. That was why 
the Pratlharas were able to found an empire. 

In this climate large scale wars resulting in large scale displace¬ 
ment of populations were out of the question. Groups tended to be 
rooted in the region. 

xxiii 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


X 

The third community, that of the Vai£yas—at least in north 
India—belonged to the same class as Brahmanas and Kshatriyas; 
Sri Harsha himself was a Vaisya; his daughter, however, married 
Dhruvasena II, styled Baladitya, the Kshatriya king of ValabhL 
But they were a dynamic element in the social organisation. Between 
the members of the community inter se there was more equality of 
cultural attainments. Foreign trade and the needs of commerce 
brought them into close contact with common people, both Indian 
and non-Indian. Naturally, therefore, they were less fastidious in 
taste and outlook. In many parts of the country, Buddhism and 
Jainism, with their sympathy for the masses, had a greater appeal 
for them. 

The fourth community, the Madras, were not a race of lower 
men, but what may be termed ‘the rest*. They were the redeemables 
of Dharma and formed an essential part of society, not looked down 
upon but only needing attention. Marriages between Sudras and the 
members of ‘other classes’ were common. Bana, the Brahmana 
friend of Emperor 6ri Harsha, had himself a brother bom of a Sudra 
step-mother. 

A vital movement in the social organisation of the country 
enabled one little connubial group, which did not originally form part 
of the Aryanised society, while undergoing the necessary cultural 
discipline, to rise from a lower to a higher status, to the Aryanised 
class. The movement of groups from one order of castes to another, 
or from aboriginal or foreign classes to recognised castes was not 
difficult. Intermarriage led to a free admixture of blood and pre¬ 
vented an impassable cleavage of cultural ideas. Only when a lower 
group attained the status of a higher caste, as was common, it became 
difficult for the group or the family to attain the high standard of 
culture demanded of a Brahmana or a Kshatriya except after some 
generations. 

The administrative machinery, introduced by the Guptas in 
consonance with the Dharma-s&stras and adopted in the advanced 
parts of the whole country, continued to function. During the suc¬ 
ceeding centuries, the administration did not depart very much from 
the canons laid down during the Gupta times which, with some 
changes, and mostly in rural areas, continues in some form even 
now. 

For all practical purposes, administration continued to be in the 
hands of the same class of people and was regulated by age-old tradi¬ 
tion and generally accepted canons of social conduct. Its efficiency 
continued to be enforced, less by official pressure than by the en- 


xxiv 


FOREWORD 


lightened opinion of respectable members of the community, who 
were guided by the leading Brahmanas and Kshatriyas of the locality. 

XI 

About the end of the period under review, the Arabs appeared 
on the Indian scene, but for the first time in their meteoric rise the 
progress of the ‘world conquerors’ was arrested. The naval raids 
against Thana, Broach and Debal were repulsed. The attempts to 
reach India through the Khyber Pass, then guarded by the Hindu 
states of Kabul and Zabul, failed. Though some sort of Arab suze¬ 
rainty was established with difficulty for a brief period (A.D. 700- 
714), for the next century and a half, Kabul and Zabul maintained 
their autonomy practically unimpaired. 

The Arabs also tried to enter India through the Bolan Pass, 
but the strong Jats of Kikan or Kikanan, though often defeated, never 
yielded, and that Pass remained sealed to the invaders. 

The Arabs then attempted to advance through the Makran coast. 
Their army was equipped on a lavish scale; troops were requisitioned 
even from distant Syria. Sindh had just emerged from civil wars; 
Dahar, the ruler, had probably gained control over southern Sindh 
only a few years before the invasion. Very little resistance was 
offered to the Arab fleet carrying military equipment. Nehrun and 
Siwistan, the two main strongholds of southern Sindh, opened their 
gates to the invaders. The unpatriotic character of the Buddhists, 
the general superstition of a section of the people, and the want of 
loyalty towards the family of royal usurpers, left the issue in no 
doubt. Sindh was conquered in A.D. 712. 

The conquest of Sindh was not the outcome of the military supe¬ 
riority of the Arabs; in fact, this was their first and the last achieve¬ 
ment on Indian soil. After this conquest whenever they came in 
conflict with powerful Indian States, their spell of victory was 
broken. About A.D. 725 one Arab army, sent to invade north India, 
met a disastrous setback at the hands of Nagabhata I of the Imperial 
Pratlhara line; another, which had entered Lata (South Gujarat), 
was destroyed by Pulakesin Avanijanasraya in a battle which took 
place near Navsari. In spite of unremitting pressure, exerted for 
over two centuries, the Arabs were only left with the two petty states 
of Mansura and Multan in the ninth and tenth centuries. When 
compared with their dazzling victories over the contemporary states 
in the Middle-East, in Europe and over Persia, this insignificant re¬ 
sult obtained in India was a tribute to the superior military strength 
and political organisation of the Indians. 


xxv 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


XII 

My thanks are due to Dr. R. C. Majumdar, the General Editor, 
and Dr. A. D. Pusalker, the Assistant Editor, for their indefatigable 
and conscientious labours, and to the scholars who have supplied 
their learned contributions for this volume. My thanks are also 
due to Prof. S. K. Saraswati, Librarian, Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 
who has taken immense pains in preparing photographs and arrang¬ 
ing them properly for publication, as also to the Director-General 
of Archaeology, New Delhi; Director of Archaeology, Hyderabad; 
the authorities of the Indian Museum, Calcutta; Mathura Museum, 
Mathura; Saranath Museum, Sarnath; Provincial Museum, Lucknow; 
Gwalior Museum, Gwalior; Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay; 
Varendra Research Museum, Rajshahi (East Pakistan); Karachi 
Museum, Karachi; Calmann Galleries, London; Birmingham Museum 
and Art Gallery, Birmingham; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; and 
Hindu University, Banaras—who have supplied photographs for the 
different illustrations in this volume. Details of materials lent by 
them are given in the separate “Acknowledgments” page. I am 
specially indebted to the Associated Advertisers & Printers Ltd., 
Bombay, who have, in such a short time, seen the Volume through 
the press, and to the staff of the Bhavan and the Press who looked 
after the preparation and printing of this volume with care and zeal. 
It is difficult to express adequately the deep debt of gratitude to 
Shri G. D. Birla, the Chairman, and other members of the Board of 
the Krishnarpan Trust who have so liberally financed the preparation 
of these volumes. 


XXVI 


CONTENTS 


Page 

Foreword by Dr. K. M. Munshi . . . . . . . . vii 

Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . xxxix 

Preface by the General Editor . . . . . . . . xli 

List of Maps . . . . . . . . li 

List of Plates . . . . . . . . liii 

Abbreviations . . . . . . . lv 

CHAPTER I 

THE RISE OF THE GUPTAS 

By R. C. Majumdar, m.a., ph.d., f.b.b.r.a.s., 

Director, Board of Editors, History of the Freedom 
Movement in India, Government of India 

1. Origin and Early History . . . . 1 

2. Chandra-gupta I . . . . . . . . 3 

Gupta Era . . . . . . . . 4 

CHAPTER II 

THE FOUNDATION OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 

By R. C. Majumdar 

1. Accession of Samudra-gupta . . , . 7 

2. Samudra-gupta’s conquests . . 8 

3. Political Relation with Ceylon 11 

4. Samudra-gupta’s Empire . ., . • 12 

5. Personality of Samudra-gupta . . . . 13 

CHAPTER III 

THE EXPANSION AND CONSOLIDATION OF THE EMPIRE 

By R. C. Majumdar 

1. Rama-gupta . . . . . . . . 17 

2. Chndra-gupta II 

His conquests . . . . . . . . 18 

Vikramaditya tradition . . . . . . 19 

His coins . . . . . . . . 21 

Fa-hien’s account . . . . . . . . 22 

3. Kumara-gupta I . . . . 23 

4. Skanda-gupta . . . . . . 25 

Huna invasion . . . . . . . . 26 

CHAPTER IV 

THE IMPERIAL CRISIS 
By R. C. Majumdar 

1. Puru-gupta . . . . . . 29 

2. Budha-gupta . . . . . . . . 30 


xxvii 
















THE CLASSICAL AGE 


CHAPTER V 

THE DISINTEGRATION OF THE EMPIRE 

By R. C. Majumdar Page 

1. Dissensions in the Imperial Family . . . . 33 

2. The Hunas . . .. . . . . . . 34 

Toramana and Mihirakula .... 35 

3. Yasodharman and other rebellious feudatories 39 


CHAPTER VI 

THE FALL OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 

By R. C. Majumdar 

1. Narasimha-gupta .. . . . . . . 42 

2. The last two Gupta Emperors . . . . 43 


CHAPTER Vn 

MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA DURING THE 

GUPTA EMPIRE 

By R. C. Majumdar 

1. The &akas or Western Satraps 

2. The Kushanas 

The Later Kushanas 
The Kidara Kushanas 

CHAPTER VIII 


46 

50 

54 

56 


NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE BREAK-UP OF THE 
GUPTA EMPIRE (Sixth Century A.D.) 


I. 

II. 

III. 


By R. C. Majumdar 


1. Valabhi 


60 

2. The Gurjaras of Raj putana 


63 

3. The Gurjaras of Nandlpuri 

0 

66 

4. The Maukharis 


67 

5. The Later Guptas 


72 

6. Bengal 


76 

7. Nepal 


81 

8. Kamarupa 


88 

9. Orissa 


92 

CHAPTER IX 

HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS 

TIME 


By R. C. Majumdar 

Kingdom of Thaneswar 


96 

Harsha and Kanauj 


99 

Harsha’s Military Campaigns 


102 

1. Valabhi 


103 

2. War with Pulakesin 


105 

3. Sindh 

• • • • 

106 

xxviii 
















CONTENTS 


Page 


4. Eastern Campaign . . . . . . 106 

5. Chronology of Harsha’s Campaigns . . . . 108 

IV. Extent of Harsha’s Empire . . . . • . 110 

V. Estimate of Harsha . . . . . . . . 113 

VI. Harsha’s Relation with China . . . . . . 120 

Appendix 

The Death of Rajy a-vardhana . . . . . . 121 


CHAPTER X 

NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 

By R. 0. Majumdar 


1. The Chinese Raid . . . . . . . . 124 

2. The Later Guptas of Magadha . . . . 126 

3. Yasovarman of Kanauj . . . . . . 128 

4. Kashmir . . . . . . . . . . 131 

5. Nepal 136 

6. Kamarupa . . , . . . . . . . 139 

7. Bengal 142 

8. Orissa . . . . . . . . . . 144 

9. Valabhi 147 

10. Rajputana and Gujarat . . . . . . 153 

(i) Gurjara-Pratiharas . . . . . . . . 153 

(ii) The Gurjara Kingdom of Nandipuri . . 155 

(iii) The Guhilots . . . . . . . .. 157 

(iv) The Chapas . . . . . . . . 161 

(v) The Maury as . . . . . . . . 161 

(vi) The Chahamanas . . . . . . . . 162 

(vii) Minor States . . . . . . . . 163 

11. Sindh and other States on the Western Frontier 164 

12. The Arab Invasion . . . . . . . . 166 

(i) Kabul and Zabul .. . . . . . 167 

(ii) Sindh . 169 

(iii) Western India . . . . . . . . 172 

(iv) North-Western India . . . . . . 173 

(v) Retrospect . . . . . . . . 174 


CHAPTER XI 

DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


By D. C. Sircar, m.a., ph.d., 

Superintendent for Epigraphy, Government of India, 
Ootacamund; formerly Lecturer in Ancient Indian 
History and Culture in the University of Calcutta 

A. Central Deccan 

I. The Vakafakas 

1. The Main Branch of the Vakafaka Family 

2. The Vakatakas of Vatsagulma 

II. The Nalas .. . . 


177 

178 
185 
188 


XXIX 

















THE CLASSICAL AGE 


B. Western Deccan 

I. The Bhojas 

II. The Traikutakas 

III. The Kalachuris 

1. Kj-ishnaraja and Sankaragana 

2. Buddharaja 

3. Nanna and Taralasvamin 

IV. The Early Rashtrakutas 

1. Origin 

2. The Rashtrakutas of Manapura 

3. The Rashtrakutas of Berar 

C. Eastern Deccan 

I. Andhra 

1. The Anandas 

2. The &alankayanas 

3. The Vishnukundins 

II. Kalinga 

1. The Pitribhaktas 

2. The Matharas 

3. The Vasishthas 

4. The Rise of New Powers 

5. The Eastern Gangas 

III. Dakshina Kosala and Mekala 

1. The &arabhapuriyas 

2. The Panduvamsis of South Kosala 

• • 

3. The Panduvamsis of Mekala 

• • 


Page 


190 

192 

194 

195 

196 

197 

198 

198 

199 
201 


202 

202 

204 

206 

211 

212 

212 

213 

214 

215 
217 

219 

220 
222 


Appendix 

The Genealogy and Chronology of the Vishnukundins 223 

By K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, m.a.. 

Professor of Indology in the University of Mysore; 
Formerly Professor of History in the University of 

Madras. 


CHAPTER XII 

THE CHALUKYAS 

By D. C. Sibcar 

I. The Chalukyas of Badami . . 227 

1. Origin and Early History . . . . . . 227 

2. Pulakesin I and Klrtivarman I . . 231 

3. Mangalesa . 233 

4. Pulakesin II . . . . . . . . 234 

5. Vikramaditya I . . . . . . . . 241 

6. Vinayaditya and Vijayaditya .. .. 245 

7. Vikramaditya II and Klrtivarman II . . . . 247 

8. The end of the Chalukya Kingdom of Badami 248 

II. The Eastern Chalukyas . . . . . . . . 250 


xxx 


















CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XIII 


DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


By R. Sathianathaier, m.a.. 


Professor of History and Politics in the 
Annamalai University. 





Page 

I. 

The Pallavas 

255 


1 . 

The Origin 

255 


2. 

Early History 

257 


3. 

Simhavishnu andMahendra-varman I . . 

258 


4. 

Narasimha-varman I and Paramesvara-varman I 

260 


5. 

Narasimha-varman II and Paramesvara-varman II 

262 


6. 

Nandi-varman II Pallavamalla 

262 

II. 

The Cholas of Urayur and Renandu 

263 

III. 

The Kalabhras 

265 

IV. 

The Pandyas 

267 

V. 

The 

Western Gangas 

268 

VI. 

The Kadambas 

270 

VII. 

The Banas 

273 

VIII. 

The Alupas 

274 

IX. 

Kongudesa and Kerala 

274 



Appendix 



Genealogy and Chronology of the Pallavas 

275 



By D. C. Sircar 



1 . 

Rise of the Pallavas 

275 


2. 

Pallavas of the Prakrit Records 

276 


3. 

Pallavas of Kahchl Known from SansKrit 




Charters 

277 


4. 

A Collateral Line of the Pallavas 

279 


5. 

Mahendra-varman and His Successors 

279 


6 . 

Nandi-varman Pallavamalla 

281 


CHAPTER XIV 

CEYLON 

By D. C. Sircar 

CHAPTER XV 

LITERATURE 

I. Sanskrit 

By G. V. Devasthali, m.a., b.t., ph.d., 

Professor of Sanskrit in the H. P. T. College , Nasik. 

1. The Puranas—by Dr. M. A. Mehendale—last 

three paragraphs by R. C. Majumdar . . 291 

2. Dharmasastra and Arthasastra . . 299 

3. Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . 300 

4. Kalidasa (the first paragraph and the last four 

paragraphs by R. C. Majumdar) . . 302 


XXXI 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Page 


5. Drama . . • • . . • • • • 308 

(i) Bhavabhuti . . . . . • • . 308 

(ii) Sri Harsha . . . . . . . . 309 

(iii) Bhatta Narayana and Others . . . • 310 

6. Kavya . . . . • • • • • • 311 

7 Fables and Romances (first two paragraphs by 

R. C. Majumdar) . . . . . . . • 313 

8. Poetics and Metrics (last two paragraphs by 

Prof. H. D. Velankar) . 317 

9. Lexicography . . . . . • • 318 

10. Grammar . . . . . . • • 319 

11. Medicine (last paragraph by R. C. Majumdar) 320 

12. Astronomy (By R. C. Majumdar) . . . . 321 

13. Miscellaneous (By R. C. Majumdar) . . . . 324 

14. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . 324 


II. Prakrit * 

By H. D. Velankar, m.a., 

Joint Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan; Formerly 
Professor of Sanskrit in the Wilson College, Bombay. 

( !: The first and the last two paragraphs by Dr. R. C. Majumdar) 

III. Tamil 

By K. It. Srinivas Iyengar, m.a., d.litt., 

Professor and Head of the Department of English in the 


Andhra University, Waltair. 

1. The Nayanmars and the Alvars .. . . 327 

2. The Saiva Saints . . . . . . . . 328 

(i) Appar or Tirunavukkarasu Nayanar . . 329 

(ii) Sambandar . . . . . . . . 330 

(iii) Manikkavachakar . . . . . . 330 

(iv) Sundarar . . . . . . . . 331 

(v) Other Saiva Saints . . . . . . 332 

3. The Alvars . . . . . . . . 332 

(i) The First Four Alvars . . . . . . 334 

(ii) Nammalvar _ . . . . . . . . 335 

(iii) Periyalvar and Andal . . . . . . 338 

(iv) Kulasekhara . . . . . . . . 338 

(v) Tiruppan, Tondaradippcwji and 

Tirumangai . . . . . . . . 338 

(vi) Iraivanar and Others ... .. .. 339 


CHAPTER XVI 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE 

ORGANIZATION 

By U. N. Ghoshal, m.a., ph.d., 

Formerly Professor of History in the Presidency College, 

Calcutta. 

I. Political Theory . . . . . 341 

II. Administrative Organisation—Northern India . . 348 


XXXll 









CONTENTS 


Page 

1. The Imperial Guptas, their Contemporaries and 

Successors . . . . . . . . 348 

2. Harsha, His Contemporaries and Successors . . 355 

III. Administrative Organisation—Southern India . . 358 

1. The Dynasties of the Deccan . . . . 358 

2. The Dynasties of the Telugu, Tamil and Kannada 

Countries . . . . . . . . 360 

CHAPTER XVII 

LAV/ AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

By U. N.Ghoshal 

1. Court of Justice . . . . . . . . 362 

2. Judicial Procedure . . . . . . . . 363 

3. Civil and Criminal Law . . . . . . 365 

CHAPTER XVIII 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


A. General Review—-by R. C. Majumdar . . 370 

B. Buddhism—by Nalinaksha Dutt, M.A., B.L., 

P.R.S.. Ph.D., D.Litt. (London), Professor 
of Pali in the University of Calcutta . . 373 

I. The Hlnayana . . . . . . . . . . 373 

II. The Mahayana . . . . . . . . . . 374 

1. Ethics of Mahayana . . . . . . . . 374 

2. Monastic Life . . . . . . . . 375 

3. Mahayana Doctrines . . . . . . . . 377 

4. Conception of Buddha . . . . . . 378 

5. Conception of Bodhisattva . . .. . . 379 

III. The Forms of Worship . . . . . . . . 380 

IV. Geographical Distribution of Hlnayana and Mahayana 381 

V. The Four Philosophical Schools ... . . . . 383 

1. The Vaibhashikas . . . . . . . . 383 

2. The Sautrantikas . . . . . . . . 384 

3. The Madhyamikas . . . . . . . . 385 

4. The Yogacharins . . . . . . . . 388 

VI. Historical Survey . . . . . . . . 393 

(Concluding two paragraphs by U. N. Ghoshal). 

VII. Iconography—by J. N. Banerjea, M.A., Ph.D., . . 397 

Carmichael Professor of Ancient Indian History and 
Culture in the University of Calcutta. 

VIII. Nan-canonical Pali Literature—by A. D. Pusalker. 

M.A., LL.B., Ph.D. . 398 

1. Nidana Katha . . . . . . . . 399 

2. Commentaries . . . . . . . . 400 

(i) Buddhaghosha . . . . . . 400 

(ii) Buddhadatta . . . . . . . . 403 

(iii) Ananda . . . . . . . . 404 


.vxxm 

















THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(iv) Dhammapala 

(v) Upasena 

(vi) Kassapa 

(vii) Dhammasiri and Mahasami 

3. Pali Chronicles 

(i) Dlpavaihsa 

(ii) Mahavamsa 

4. Grammar 

5. General Review 


Page 

404 

405 

405 

406 
406 

406 

407 

408 
408 


C. Jainism 

By A. M. Ghatage, m.a v ph.d., 
Professor of Ardhamagadhi 
Karnatak College, Dharwar. 


I. Spread of Jainism . . . . . . . . . . 408 

1. North India . . . . . . . . 408 

2. Deccan . . . . . . . . . . 411 

3. South India .. . . . . . . . . 413 

II. Jain Canon . . . . . . . . . . 415 

III. Iconography—by J. N. Banerjea . . . . . . 418 


D. Vaishnavism 
By D. C. Sircar 

1. The Avataras of Vishnu 

2. Sri or Lakshmi, Wife of Vishnu 

3. Vishnu mythology in Epigraphic Records 

4. Vaishnavism and Other Creeds 

5. Vishnu Worship in the Far South 

6 . Iconography—by J. N. Banerjea 

E. Saivism 

By T. M. P. Mahadevan, m.a., pii.d., 

Head of the Department of Philosophy in the 

University of Madras. 

1. North India and the Deccan 

2. South India 

3. Iconography—by J. N. Banerjea 

F. Minor Religious Sects 

By EL D. Bhattacharyya, m.a., 

Formerly Head of the Department of Philosophy, 
Dacca University, and Honorary University Professor 
of Indian Philosophy and Religion, Banaras Hindu 

University. 

(Iconographic portions by Dr. J. N. Banerjea) 

1. Brahma 

2. Surya 

3. Sakti 

4. Vaishnava Gods 

5. Miscellaneous Deities 


419 

424 

425 

426 

427 

428 


431 

432 
438 


440 

442 

444 

451 

453 


XXXIV 


























CONTENTS 


Page 

G. New Religious Communities from Western Countries 

By R. C. Majumdar 

1. Muslims . . . . . . . . 455 

2. Christian Settlements . . . . . . . . 462 

H. General Development of Philosophy 

By U. C. Bhattacharjee, m.a., 

Formerly Professor of Philosophy in the Presidency 

College, Calcutta. 

I-II. Nyaya-Vaiseshika .. . . . . . . 465 

III-IV. Sahkhya-Yoga . 466 

V-VI. The two Mlmamsas . . . . . . . . . . 468 

CHAPTER XIX 

ART 

A. Architecture 
By S. K. Saraswati, m.a., 

Librarian, Asiatic Society, Calcutta; Formerly Lecturer 
in History in the University of Calcutta . 


I. Cave Architecture . . . . . . . . 471 

1. Chaitya Hall . 471 

2. Sahgharama . . . . . . . . 474 

3. Brahmanical Caves . . . . .. . . 488 

4. Jain Caves . . . . . . . . . . 498 

II. Structural Buildings . . . . . . . . 499 

1. Temples . . . . . . .. . . 499 

(i) The First Group . .. . . 503 

(ii) The Second Group . . . . . . 506 

(iii) The Third Group . . . . . . 513 

(iv) The Nagara and Dravida Styles . . . . 519 

2. Monasteries and Stupas . . . . . . 519 


B. Sculpture 

By Nihar Ranjan Ray, m.a., d.lett. & Phil. (Leiden), 
Bagisvari Professor of Indian Art and Culture in the 

University of Calcutta. 

I. Essential Characteristics . . . . . . . . 521 

II. Evolution of Gupta Sculpture*—Mathura and Sarnath 523 
III. Early Schools of Sculpture (Fourth to Seventh Century) 525 


1. North India .. . . . . . . 525 

2. Eastern India . . . . . . 528 

3. The Deccan . . . . . . . . 529 

IV. Later Schools of Sculpture (Seventh Century) . . 531 

1. Middle and East India . . . . . . 531 

2. Malwa and Rajputana . . . . . . 533 

3. The Deccan . . . . . . 533 

4. The South: Mamallapuram and Kanchipuram 537 


xxxv 












THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Page 

V. Vegetal and Geometric Decorative Carvings . , 539 

VI. General Review . . . . . . . . 540 

C. Painting and Other Arts 
By Nihar Ranjan Ray 

I. Painting . . . . . . . . . . . . 542 

1. Scope and Nature . . . . . . . . 542 

2 . Extant Remains . . . . . . . . 545 

3. Technique . . . . . . . . . . 545 

4. Ajanta: Caves XVI, XVII and XIX; Caves I and II 547 

5. Bagh: Caves IV and III . 550 

6 . Badami: Caves III and II . . . . . . 551 

7. Sittannavasal: Kahchipuram: Tirumalaipuram 552 

II. Terracotta . . . . . . . . . . . . 553 

III. Pottery . . . . . . . . . . . . 556 

IV. Coins and Seals, etc. . . . . . . . . 558 

V. Other Arts . . . . . . . . . . . . 559 

CHAPTER XX 

SOCIAL CONDITION 

By LI. N.Giioshan 

I. Introductory . . . . . . . . . . 560 

II. Social Divisions . . . . . . . . 560 

1. The Four Varnas . . . . . . . . 560 

2 . Low Castes . . . . . . . . 562 

3. Aboriginal Tribes . . . . . . . . 563 

4. Slaves . . . . . . . . . . 563 

III. Marriage . . . . . . . . . . 564 

IV Position of Woman . . . . . . . . 567 

1. Female Education . . . . . 567 

2. The Ideal Wife . 568 

3. Unchaste Wife . . . . . . . . 570 

4. The Widow . . . . . . 571 

5. The Courtesan ( ganikd ) . . . . . . 573 

6 . The General Status of Women . . . . 574 

V. Life of the People . . . . . . . . 574 

L General Character . . . . . . . . 574 

2 . Standard of Living . . . . . . . . 575 

3. Toilette and Personal Hygiene . . . . 577 

4. Food and Drink . . . . . . . . 578 

5. Popular Superstitions . . . . . . . . 579 

6 . Town-life . . . . . . 580 

CHAPTER XXI 

EDUCATION 

By U. N. Ghoshal 

1 . General View . . . . . . 584 

2 . Teachers and Pupils . . . . . . . , 584 

3. Advanced Centres of Learning . . . „ 585 

4. Curriculum of Studies . . . . 536 


XXXVI 











CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XXII 

ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


Page 


By U. N.Ghoshal 


1. Agriculture 

2. Industries 

3. Inland Trade 

4. Foreign Trade 

5. Objects of Trade 

6. Capital and Labour 

(i) Law of Wages 

(ii) Law of Mutual Relations of Labour and 
Capital 

7. Unsecured and Secured Loans 

(i) Types of Loans 

(ii) Law of Interest 

(iii) Relations between Creditors and Debtors 

8 . Guilds and Partnership 

(i) Constitution of Guilds 

(ii) Conventions or Compacts of Guild 

(iii) Rights and Duties of the Individual 
Members 

9. General Economic Condition of the People 


590 

593 

596 

598 

599 
601 
601 

601 

602 

602 

602 

603 

603 

604 

604 

605 
608 


CHAPTER XXIII 

INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 

By R. C. Majumdar 

1. China—Up to the T’ang Period 

2. China—T’ang Period 

3. Central Asia 

4. Afghanistan 

5. Tibet 

6 . Other Countries in the Far East 

7. Western Countries 

(i) Trade and Political Intercourse 
(ii) Influence of India on the West 


608 

617 

627 

631 

633 

635 

637 

637 

640 


CHAPTER XXIV 

COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION IN 

SOUTH-EAST ASIA 


By R. C. Majumdar 

%/ 


I. Sea-voyage to the South-East . . . . . . 642 

II. Indo-China . . . . . . . . . . 643 

1. Cambodia . . . . . . . . . . 643 

2. Champa . . . . . . . . . . 644 

3. Burma and Siam . . . . . . . . 647 

4. Malay Peninsula . . . . . . . . 648 


XXXVll 
















THE CLASSICAL AGE 





Page 

III. East-Indies 

• • • • • • 


650 

1. Sumatra 

• • • • • • 


650 

2. Java 

• * • • • • 


651 

3. Borneo 

• • • • • • 


652 

4. Bali 

* « « • • • 


653 

IV. Hindu Civilisation in 

South-East Asia 


654 

List of Bibliographies 

• « • • • • 


656 

General Bibliography 

• • • • • • 


657 

Chronology 

c • • • • ♦ 


707 

Genealogy 

« • • « • • 


719 

Index 

• • * • • • 

• • 

732 

Maps 1-4 and Plates I-XL1II 

« * • • 

• • 

. . at end 


xxxviii 








ACKNOWLEDGMENT 


We are indebted to the following institutions and individual for permission 
to produce illustration noted against each. While expressing our sincere thanks 
for such courtesies, we should add that reproduction in each case is prohibited 
without the permission of the authority concerned, the copyright being reserved. 

1. Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi: Nos. 1-34, 43, 47-48, 50, 52, 
55-56, 59-60, 62-64, 66, 68-74, 76-85, 87, 89-98; 103-105. 

2. Indian Museum, Calcutta: Nos. 35, 53, 86. 

3. Mathura Museum, Mathura: No. 36. 

4. Sarnath Museum, Sarnath: Nos. 37, 46, 67. 

5. Calmann Galleries, London: Nos. 38-39. 

6. Provincial Museum, Lucknow: Nos. 40-42. 

7. Hindu University, Banaras: No. 44. 

8. Gwalior Museum, Gwalior: Nos. 45, 51, 75. 

9. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston: No. 49. 

10. Karachi Museum, Karachi: No. 54. 

11. Prince of Wales Museum, Bombay: Nos. 65, 88. 

12. Varendra Research Museum, Rajshahi (East Pakistan): Nos. 57, 61. 

13. Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery, Birmingham: No. 58. 

14. Prof. S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta: Nos. 99-102. 

The colour reproductions, Nos. 91 and 92, have been reproduced from Yazdani’s 
Ajanta, Part I. PL XXV, and Part III, PL LXVIII, by kind permission of the 
Department of Archaeology, Hyderabad. 

Our grateful thanks are also due to Prof. S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta, for helping 
the publication by supplying photographs (including those of text figures) for all 
the illustrations, except Nos. 91 and 92. 

The text figures in Chapter XIX have been reproduced from the following 
publications by kind permission, the copyright in each case being reserved by 
the respective Publishers. 

1. Burgess, J., Report on the Buddhist Cave Temples and their Inscriptions 
(Archaeological Survey of Western India, Vol. IV). London, 1883: Nos. 
1 and 4. 

2. Burgess, J., Report on the Elura Cave Temples and the Brahmanical and 
Jaina Caves of Western India (Archaeological Survey of Western India, 
Vol. V). London, 1883: Nos. 9-11. 

3. Fergusson, J. and Burgess J., Cave Temples of India. London, 1880: 
Nos. 14-15, 17-18. 

4. Fergusson, J., A History of Indian and Eastern Architecture (2nd ed.). 
London, 1910: Vol. I: No. 8; Vol. II: No. 13. 

5. Parmentier, H., L’Art Architectural Hindoue dans Linde et en Extreme- 
Orient. Paris, 1948: Nos. 2, 6, 20. 

6. Marchal, H., L’Architecture Comparee dans Linde et LExtreme-Orient. 
Paris, 1944: No. 3. 

7. India Society, London: The Bagh Caves in the Gwalior State. London, 
1927: Nos. 5-7. 

8. Longhurst, A.H., Pallava Architecture; Pt. II (Memoirs of the Archaeo¬ 
logical Survey of India, No. 33): No. 12. 

9. Banerji, R.D., The Siva Temple at Bhumara (Memoirs of the Archaeo¬ 
logical Survey of India, No. 16): No. 23. 

10. Diez, E., Die Kunst Indiens. Potsdam, n.d: No. 19. 

11. Marshall, J., and Foucher, A., The Monuments of Sanchi. Calcutta 1939- 
No. 21. 

12. Cunhingham. A., Archaeological Survey Reports, Vol. X: No 25* Vol 

XXI: No. 22. ’ 

13. Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Reports, 1907-08: No 24- 1903-09- 

No. 26; 1909-10: No. 27. ’ 






























PREFACE 

By Dr. R. C. Majumdar 

General Editor 

The period of history described in the preceding volume drew 
to a close amid chaos and confusion. The great empire of the Maury as 
and the political unity of India which it brought about vanished, 
and the hordes of foreign invaders who dominated over large parts 
of India gradually lost their political power. A number of new peo¬ 
ples and states emerge out of the political chaos, but dislocation 
rather than settlement seems to be the order of the day. The abund¬ 
ant records of the Maurya age give place to the scantiest historical 
materials, so much so that the third century A.D., with which 
Volume II closes, has been described by some historians as “one of 
the darkest in the whole range of Indian history.” 

With the present volume we enter upon a period which offers 
a striking contrast to the one immediately preceding in almost all 
these features. The main theme of its political history is the founda¬ 
tion of the Gupta Empire which, at full maturity, once more brings 
unity, peace and prosperity over nearly the whole of Northern India, 
It was far less extensive than the Maurya Empire, but was more 
enduring, and we can study its gradual growth in much fuller detail. 
The historical records grow larger in number and more varied in 
character. The darkness of the third century passes away and we 
are brought into a fuller light. What is more, for the first time we 
get a clear outline of the political history of India in a definite chro¬ 
nological setting which has continued unbroken to the present day. 

The volume starts with the story how the descendants of a petty 
chieftain named Gupta acquired and maintained and then lost an 
empire which was bigger than any that flourished since in Ancient 
India. It covers the first six chapters. 

During their rule of more than two centuries the Guptas estab¬ 
lished their sway over nearly the whole of Northern India and the 
Imperial writ was obeyed from the Bay of Bengal to the Arabian Sea. 
The dynasty produced a succession of able monarchs who were both 
capable administrators and successful generals. One of them, Samu- 
dra-gupta, carried his victorious arms as far as Madras in the south, 
if not further beyond, and has been deservedly styled ‘Indian Napo¬ 
leon’ by an eminent European historian. His son Chandra-gupta 
advanced probably beyond the Sindhu river, as far as Balkh, and 
finally extinguished the last vestige of foreign domination in India 

xli 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


by defeating the &aka chiefs who had been ruling in Gujarat for 
more than three hundred years. Skanda-gupta, the grandson of 
Chandra-gupta, was faced with the terrible ordeal of a Huna inva¬ 
sion. The Hunas, notorious for their ferocious cruelty, were at that 
time the most dreaded scourge of humanity. They carried fire and 
sword over Asia and Europe, and their leader Attila was ‘able to 
send equal defiance to the courts of Ravenna and Constantinople.'' 
About the time when the two Roman Empires quailed before them 
the Hunas appeared at the frontier of India. But the Gupta Emperor 
inflicted such a crushing defeat upon them that for nearly half a 
century they dared not cross the Sindhu. When later, they appeared 
once again, the Gupta Empire was crumbling, but the heroic tradition 
of old days still inspired the Indians, and no less than three contem¬ 
porary rulers, including the last great Gupta Emperor, claim to have 
defeated the Hunas. Whether the three heroes acted singly or in 
concert we do not know. But it is certain that after a brief spell of 
success the Hunas ceased to be an important political pow 7 er in India, 
far less a threat to its safety and security. Judged in the context of 
the history of the then world, this definite check to the nomadic bar¬ 
barian hordes must ever redound to the credit of the Gupta Empire. 

The Gupta rulers were versed in arts of war as well as of peace. 
They established an efficient system of administration which became 
the model for succeeding ages. They ensured peace and prosperity 
to the people to which even foreign visitors paid eloquent tribute. 
During their rule India witnessed a v/onderful outburst of intellec¬ 
tual activity and a unique efflorescence of culture to which detailed 
reference will be made later. There are good grounds to believe that 
the political system set up by the Gupta rulers and the personality 
of some of them played a large part in bringing about this momentous 
change. The Gupta Age was mostly a product of the Gupta Empire. 

The Gupta Empire perished, but the memory of its greatness 
continued for centuries. This was echoed in the popular legends, 
the most famous of which is that of Vikramaditya. Whether there 
was an historical king Vikramaditya before the Guptas is a matter 
of dispute. But there is no doubt that the legend owes much of its 
vitality and inspiration to the lives and achievements of the Gupta 
Emperors, no less than three of whom actually assumed the title 
Vikramaditya. Like his great contemporary Salivahana, the legendi- 
ary hero Vikramaditya is to be regarded as the personification of a 
group of rulers rather than an individual. The cycle of Vikrama¬ 
ditya legends, which has been a cherished tradition of India for 
many centuries, may thus be looked upon as a fitting tribute to the 
glory of the Gupta Age of which it was a product. 


PREFACE 


The history of the Imperial Guptas cast into shade that of seve¬ 
ral contemporary dynasties which enjoyed great local importance. 
These are dealt with in two separate chapters (VIII, XI). One of 
them, the Vakatakas, received an undue importance on account of 
some fanciful conjectures of the late Mr. K. P. Jayaswal, so much 
so that a recently published volume in a comprehensive history of 
India, planned in 20 volumes, has been styled the Vakataka-Gupta 
Age. As a matter of fact, however, the political influence of the 
Vakatakas hardly ever spread much beyond the Deccan, and for a 
considerable period their state was an appendage to, if not a vassal 
of, the Gupta Empire. The same may be said of most other states 
which enjoyed a nominal independence. Few of them can really be 
said to have been quite beyond the sphere of influence of the Guptas. 

Among the states that succumbed to the Gupta Imperialism spe¬ 
cial reference must be made to those ruled by republican or oligar¬ 
chical clans. These formed a distinctive feature of the Indian poli¬ 
tical system since the days of Buddha, if not much earlier still, and 
some of them like the Lichchhavis, Sakyas and Malavas played an 
important role in the political and cultural history of India. The 
existence of these states with their republican tradition of freedom 
was always a thorn in the side of Imperialism. The Maurya Empire, 
true to the imperial policy enunciated by Kautilya, swept them away. 
But these clans appeared again, and indications are not wanting that 
many of them took a leading part in the struggle against the foreign 
hordes who dominated India. But the Gupta Empire made a clean 
sweep of them all. Some of them submitted to Samudra-gupta and 
continued for some time as vassal states. But with the growth of 
the Gupta Empire they gradually fade out of existence never to 
appear again. We cannot clearly trace the last stages in the dissolu¬ 
tion of the republican system after more than a thousand years of 
recorded activity in Indian politics. But it is certain that Gupta 
Imperialism was the main cause of its final extinction. 

The history of the Gupta Empire carries us to the middle of 
the sixth century A.D., when India is once again divided into a num¬ 
ber of independent states. Then follows a long succession of indi¬ 
vidual military geniuses who seek in vain to re-establish the empire 
that fell from the grasp of the Guptas. Yasodharman, Sasanka and 
Harsha-vardhana, in the seventh century, and Yasovarman and Lalit- 
aditya in the eighth,—all achieved conspicuous success in this direc¬ 
tion and exercised sway over vast areas, but their empires perished 
with them. In the meanwhile the main interest in political history 
shifts to the Deccan and South India where the Chalukyas and the 
Pallavas establish powerful empires of long duration. In the second 


xliii 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


quarter of the seventh century A.D. the three natural divisions of 
India, viz. North India, Deccan and South India, developed into 
three well defined imperial zones respectively under Harsha- 
vardhana, the Chalukya king Puiakesin and the Pallava rulers 
Mahendra-varman I and Narasiihha-varman I. The rivalry and the 
struggle between the first and the second and the second and the 
third form the main theme of the history of this period. The brilli¬ 
ant political and military career of Puiakesin must have excited the 
admiration as well as the envy of his two neighbours. He inflicted a 
defeat upon Harsha-vardhana which forced the latter to give up for 
ever all designs of conquest of the region south of the Vindhyas. The 
success of the Chalukya king against his Pallava rival Mahendra- 
varman I was even more complete, and, for a time, the Pallava king¬ 
dom almost collapsed before his mighty army. But the dazzling pro¬ 
gress of the Chalukya Emperor was cut short by Narasiihha-varman 
1, who fully avenged the defeat and disgrace of his father. The 
tables were completely turned. The Pallava ruler overran the Dec- 
can; the great king Puiakesin was defeated and slain, and for thirteen 
years his kingdom lay prostrate before the hated enemy. The struggle 
continued throughout the next century’ till, exhausted by the strain 
of long-drawn wars, the Chalukya dynasty went down about the 
period with which this volume closes. But it had established an off¬ 
shoot in the eastern coast between the mouths of the Krishna and the 
Godavari which, under the name of Eastern Chalukyas, continued the 
name and fame of the house till the Chalukya power was restored 
by the main line or a collateral branch more than two centuries later. 
The Pallas r as continued to dominate South India beyond the period 
covered by this volume and were not finally ousted till the Cholas 
emerged from obscurity and became a great political power in the 
tenth century. 

To modern students Harsha-vardhana looms large in the post- 
Gupta period of Indian history. Early European writers, in their 
ignorance, set the fashion of describing him as the last empire- 
builder, and this has been blindly followed bj^ many modern writers 
who had far less excuse for this historical blunder. But the limit 
has been reached by V. A. Smith, the I.C.S. historian of India. To 
him the history of India after the death of Harsha-vardhana is merelv 
“bewildering annals of petty states,” and its only value lies in the 
notion it gives “of what India always has been when released from 
the control of a supreme authority, and what she would be again, if 
the hand of the benevolent despotism which now holds her in its 
iron grasp should be withdrawn.” The moral that V. A. Smith 
sought to convey need not be seriously discussed to-day when his 


PREFACE 


theory has been put to the severe test of actual occurrence. We are 
more concerned with the justification of the historical observation 
that Harsha-vardhana’s empire was the last in Hindu India after 
which her organised political life completely broke down. In the 
first place, Lalitaditya, and possibly also Yasovarman, ruled over an 
empire which we have no ground to believe was inferior in any res¬ 
pect to that of Harsha-vardhana. Further, the empires of the Palas 
and the Pratlharas, to be described in the next volume, were un¬ 
doubtedly far greater in extend and far more lasting, and the latter 
was far more closely knit. Still later flourished heroes like Chan- 
della Yasovarman and Kalachuri Gahga and Kama whose empires 
were as ephemeral as that of Harsha, and probably not less extensive. 
As V. A. Smith includes even the Deccan and South India within the 
scope of his observation we might refer to the mighty Rashtrakuta 
empire under Dhruva and Govinda III, the Later Chalukya empire 
under Vikramaditya VI, and the great Chola Empire of Rajendra 
Chela extending from the mouth of the Ganga to Cape Comorin and 
even over territories beyond the Bay of Bengal. With such exam¬ 
ples before us it is a travesty of history to describe Harsha-vardhana 
as the last empire-builder of India,—even of North India,—and to 
credit him with a performance which was beyond the power of those 
who followed him. 

The fact remains that Harsha-vardhana owes his high renown 
as much to the writings of Hiuen Tsang and Banabhatta as to his 
intrinsic greatness. The flattering account of his character and 
achievements by these two over-zealous friends was available to his¬ 
torians when little else was known of the history of ancient India. 
They were therefore in no mood to be critical and accepted, at its 
face value, almost everything that was said about Harsha-vardhana 
by these two writers. The result was a highly overdrawn picture 
of his life and achievements which has passed current as history 
ever since. An attempt has been made in Chapter IX to reconstruct 
his true history by a critical sifting of all available evidences. The 
case of Harsha-vardhana teaches us that while normally the heroes 
make history, sometimes history also makes heroes. 

Curiously enough, while the historians have unhesitatingly ac¬ 
cepted all that has been said of Harsha-vardhana by a court-poet and 
friendly chronicler, they have been unduly sceptic about the con¬ 
quests made by Yasovarman and Lalitaditya as recorded respectively 
by Vakpati, the court-poet of the former, and Kalhana, the great his¬ 
torian of Kashmir. There is no reason to believe that the accounts 
of these two are less reliable than those about Harsha, and it is diffi¬ 
cult to justify the differential treatment accorded to them by some 
eminent historians. Thus V. A . Smith, who gives a detailed and 

xlv 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


highly exaggerated account of Harsha’s conquest and empire, which 
is not always justified even by the biassed sources, does not say a 
word about the conquests of Yasovarman, and only very briefly 
refers in vague and general terms to the military expeditions of 
Lalitaditya, in distant lands. The entire historical outlook of the 
period after Harsha, as envisaged by V. A. Smith and his followers 
must be thoroughly changed before we can hope to understand, in 
their true perspective, the momentous political events of the last 
half-a-millennium of Hindu rule in Northern India. 

So far as this volume is concerned, the chief interest in the 
political history of India, therefore, centres round the rise, decline, 
and fall of the Gupta Empire, and the reorientation of the history 
of the succeeding period. Although the history of India beyond the 
Vindbyas occupies a place of only secondary interest, it has an im¬ 
portance of its own that needs special emphasis. The Chalukyas 
and the Pallavas ably continued the work of the Guptas. They 
achieved that political unity in the Deccan and South India which 
was the most valuable gift of the Guptas to Northern India. Hence¬ 
forth the federation of these three regional units came to be regarded 
as the political ideal which was never entirely lost sight of in suc¬ 
ceeding ages. Moreover, under the Chalukyas and the Pallavas, we 
find the further development of that remarkable renaissance of cul¬ 
ture which was ushered in by the Guptas and characterised the entire 
period which is consequently known as the Gupta Age. 

The Gupta Age, which forms the subject-matter of this volume, 
has been described in rapturous terms, as the ‘Golden Age’, the 
‘Classical period’ of Indian history, etc. And fully does it deserve these 
appellations. It was during this period that Indian intellect reached 
its high watermark in most branches of art, science and literature, 
and Indian culture and civilization reached a unique stage jof deve¬ 
lopment which left its deep impress upon succeedings ages. For the 
detailed justification of this claim the reader is referred to the volume 
itself, particularly Chapters XV and XIX. It will suffice here to 
state only a few broad facts. The period witnessed the highest deve¬ 
lopment of Sanskrit literature, alike in prose, poetry and drama. 
It was the age of Kalidasa who stands unrivalled, even unapproach¬ 
ed, as poet and dramatist. It was also the age of Dandin, Subandhu, 
and Banabhatta, the greatest writers in Sanskrit prose. The six 
systems of Philosophy, which some regard as the greatest intellectual 
contribution of India to the stock of human knowledge, took final 
shape mostly during this period, which also produced great Buddhist 
philosophers like Vasubandhu. It was also the age of Amara, the 
greatest lexicographer in Sanskrit. In the field of science, we have 

xlvi 


PREFACE 


the shining figures of Aryabhata, Varahamihira, and Brahmagupta, 
whose works in Mathematics and Astronomy are still reckoned as 
the greatest contribution of India to science in the ancient world. It 
will be enough to recall the fact that Aryabhata was the first to dis¬ 
cover that the earth rotates on its axis and moves round the sun. 
Reference should also be made to the epoch-making discovery of the 
decimal system of notation which has revolutionized the process of 
arithmetical calculations and is now used all pver the world. As 
regards technical science, the great iron pillar at Meharauli near 
Delhi is a triumph of metallurgy. 

The Gupta Age made equally splendid contribution in the 
domain of art. Some of the figures in stone at Sarnath and in colour 
at Ajanta are justly regarded as masterpieces all* over the world. 
The art is justly styled classical, for the sculptures and paintings of 
this period set the standard which was alike the ideal and despair of 
succeeding ages. They still remain the finest productions of Indian 
art to which modern world has appropriately paid a high tribute 
of praise. 

Finally this was the age made memorable to three hundred 
million Hindus by the fact that it witnessed the evolution of that form 
of Brahmanical religion which they follow today. It saw the final 
development of the two great epics, the Ramayana and the Mahd- 
bh&rata, and the phenomenal growth of the two religious cults, 
Vaishnavism and Saivism, at the cost of heterodox religious creeds 
like Buddhism and Jainism. The vast Puranic literature which 
originated, or at least took definite shape, during this period, com¬ 
pleted the break from the Vedic Age and set on a solid foundation 
what is now commonly known as Hinduism, the culmination of a 
religious movement which had behind it the rich heritage of the 
diverse peoples of India. 

The replacement of Prakrit by Sanskrit as the court-language 
and the high development of Sanskrit literature in all branches gave 
a position of pre-eminence to Sanskrit language which became the 
lingua franca of educated Indians. It served as the medium of a 
cultural unity which has left an indelible mark upon the people of 
India in spite of diversity in race and language and provincial rival¬ 
ries ,and struggles in later times. This cultural unity has survived 
strange political vicissitudes and foreign dominations and constitutes 
today the one sure basis of the political unity and nationality in 
the Indian Republic. 

During the Gupta Age this cultural unity overspread the natural 
physical boundaries of India and embraced within its fold a vast 
region lying beyond the Hindu Kush and the Himalayas, and across 


xlvii 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the Bay of Bengal and the Indian Ocean. The beginnings of India’s 
intercourse with the outside world have been described in the pre¬ 
ceding volume. During the period under review flourishing Hindu 
states arose in different parts of the mainland of Asia and the East 
Indies, such as Burma, Siam, the Malaya Peninsula, Annam, Cam¬ 
bodia, Sumatra, Java, Bali and Borneo. Their rulers regarded them¬ 
selves as descended from Indian colonists, and the Indian culture 
made a thorough conquest of the people. Even in Central and Eastern 
Asia, where we have no definite evidence of political domination by 
the Indian colonists, the cultural influence of India was very great. 
The activities of Indian missionaries in China during the Gupta Age 
may be regarded as almost unique in the annals of cultural rela¬ 
tions between two independent countries. We have clear and detail¬ 
ed evidence of the spread of this cultural influence to Tibet, Korea, 
Japan and even the Philippine islands in the east, and over the vast 
region in the north that lay along the overland route from China to 
India through Central Asia. Thus came into being the “Greater 
India” which sheds lustre on the Gupta Age no less than the cul¬ 
tural renaissance in India. v 

The intellectual greatness which characterised the Gupta Age 
was typified in the University of Nalanda. The name and fame of 
this great seat of learning reached the remotest corners of Asia and 
attracted students from all parts of the vast continent. It was the 
symbol of the great international culture of which India was the 
universally acknowledged centre. This culture was promoted by 
the increased intercourse, during this age, between India and other 
Asiatic countries, particularly China. The detailed account that we 
possess of India’s cordial relations with these countries, as given 
in Chapter XXIII, reveals a cultural internationalism of the Asiatic 
world such as has rarely been witnessed since. 

Ihe facts recounted above will more than justify the appella¬ 
tion Perlclean Age of India’ which is often applied to the Gupta 
period. The all-round greatness of Athens in the fifth century B.C., 
not only in itself but also with reference to its effect on the progress 
of humanity, may not unreasonably be compared with that of India 
under the Guptas. As in the case of Perlclean Athens, the new era 
of culture ushered in by the Guptas long survived their political 
power. The Gupta Dynasty came to an end in the middle or latter 
half ox the sixth century A.D., but the Gupa Age may be said to have 
continued for two centuries more. The spirit and genius of Kalidasa 
were inherited, to some extent, by Rhavabhuti and Bharavi, while 
Ranabhatta surpassed Dan<Jin and Subandhu as a master of prose. 
The rhetorician Bhamaha and philosophers like Kumarila and 

xlviii 


PREFACE 


Prabhakara kept up the highest tradition in these branches of lite¬ 
rature. The form and ideal of the sculptures at Sarnath and the 
paintings of Ajanta caves inspired the artists who kept up the tradi¬ 
tions for one or two centuries. Even the imperial traditions of the 
Guptas were never entirely lost sight of, and repeated attempts were 
made to revive the imperial unity, though success was always short¬ 
lived. Further, as mentioned above, the ideas of political unity 
were more successfully pursued in Deccan and South India by the 
Chalukyas and the Pallavas. Moreover the development of the 
Puranic religion and its predominance over Buddhism and Jainism, 
as well as the great development in art and literature, were equally 
characteristic of the Gupta and the Chalukya-Pallava period. 

Thus although the Guptas did not rule over the whole of India 
or for the entire period dealt with in this volume, the name Gupta 
Age may be fittingly applied to it, for the activities of the Gupta 
rulers and the cultural renaissance. which followed in their wake 
mattered most during the whole period and have mattered most to 
the large majority of Indians ever since. 

Little need be added to what has been said in the preceding 
volumes regarding the policy and principles followed by the Editor 
and the difficulties confronted by him. It is only necessary to draw 
special attention to some changes in the spelling of proper names. 
Since India became independent she has tried to throw off some 
anglicised spellings of geographical names, such as Muttra for 
Mathura, Ganges for Gafiga, Jumna for Yamuna and the Indus for 
Sindhu. Full effect could not be given to this new system as almost 
all the chapters were written before it came into vogue. But a 
beginning has been made by the introduction of the new mode of 
spelling in a few cases. It is inevitable that for some time to come 
both the old and the new spellings would occur side by side and there 
would be a lack of uniformity, as in this volume. Save for this 
minor detail this great political event has not exercised any influence 
on the preparation of this volume. In particular it is to be under¬ 
stood that in this volume, as well as in the preceding two, which 
have already been published, the geographical and political terms, 
particularly with reference to States, apply to the state of things 
prevailing in British India; 

Chapters XVI, XVII, and XXII have been revised by the 
author, and the account of Nepal in Chapter VIII, section 7 and 
Chapter X, section 5, has been considerably modified in the light of 
newly discovered inscriptions. With the exception of these and 
slight modifications here and there, the present Volume is a reprint 
of Vol. Ill published in 1954. 

xlix 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


In conclusion, I take this opportunity of placing on record my 
deep obligations to Dr. Pusalker and the contributors of this volume. 
I also convey, on behalf of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan and on my 
own behalf, our hearty thanks to the Director General of Archaeo- 
logy, Government of India, for having lent us blocks and photographs 
for purposes of illustration. The copyright of these belongs to the 
Department of Archaeology and no one should reproduce any illu¬ 
stration without its permission. 


1 


LIST OF MAPS 


1. India: Gupta Age. 

2. India as described by Hiuen Tsang. 

3. South India (A.D. 320-1000). 

4. South-east Asia. 


li 


V- 



















































. 
































LIST OF PLATES 


Plate 

I 

II 

III 

IV 
V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 
IX 

X 

XI 

XII 

XIII 

XIV 

XV 
XVI 

XVII 

XVIII 

XIX 


XX 

XXI 

XXII 

XXIII 


Fig. Description 

1. Ajanta, Cave XIX: Facade. 

2. Ajanta, Cave XXVI: Interior. 

3. Ellora, Visvakarma cave: Facade. 

4. Ellora, Visvakarma cave: Interior. 

5. Ajanta, Cave XIX: Detail of Interior. 

6. Ajanta, Cave I: Interior. 

7. Ajanta, Cave I: Fagade. 

8. Ajanta, Cave XXIV: Pillar. 

9. Aurangabad, Cave I: Interior. 

10. Bagh, Cave IV: Interior. 

11. Bagh, Cave V: Interior. 

12. Ellora, Cave II: Interior. 

13. Ellora, Tin Thai cave: Fagade. 

14. Ellora, Indra Sabha cave: Fagade. 

15. Badami, Cave III: Verandah. 

16. Ellora, Ramesvara Cave: Pillar of Verandah. 

17. Ellora, Dhumar Lena Cave: Interior. 

18. Elephanta, Cave: Interior. 

19. Rajgir, Maniyar Math: A segment of circular shrine. 

20. Sanchi, Temple No. XVII: Near view. 

21. Tigawa Kahkall Devi temple: Front view. 

22. Naehna Kuthara, Parvatl temple: Front view. 

23. Naehna Kufhara, Parvatl temple: Doorway. 

24. Aihole, Lad Khan temple: View from a side. 

25. Mamallapuram, Rock-cut “rathas”: General view. 

26. Aihole, Meguti temple: View from a corner. 

27. Mamallapuram, Dharmaraja “ratha”: Near view. 

28. Deogarh, Dasavatara temple: Front view. 

29. Mirpur Khas, Stupa: View from south-west. 

30. Bhltargaon, Brick temple: Near view. 

31. Bodh-Gaya, Mahabodhi temple: General view. 

32. Sirpur, Brick temple of Lakshmana: Near view. 

33. Sarnath, Dhamekh Stupa: Near view. 

34. Sarnath, Dhamekh Stupa: Details of ornament. 

35. Bodh-Gaya: Bodhisattva, dated year 64. 

36. Mathura: Buddha. 

37. Sarnath: Buddha in “dharmachakrapravartana-mudra”. 

38. Mathura: 6iva head. 

39. Mathura: &iva head. 

40. Garhwa: Pillars. 

41. Garhwa: Pillars. 

42. Garhwa: Pillars. 

43. Mankuw^ar: Buddha. 

44. Banaras, Bharat Kala Bhavan: Karttikeya. 

45. Gwalior: Apsara. 

46. Sarnath: &iva head. 

47. Mandor: Govardhanadhara Krishna. 

48. Khoh: Mukhalihga. 

49. Besnagar: Gahga. 

50. Deogarh: Anantasayl Vishnu. 

51. Pathari: Nativity of Krishna (?) 

52. Deogarh, Dasavatara tempie: Basement sculptures. * 

53. Kosam: 6iva Parvatl. 

54. Mirpur Khas: Brahma. 


liii 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Plate 

XXIV 

XXV 

XXVI 

XXVII 

XXVIII 

XXIX 

XXX 
XXXI 

XXXII 

XXXIII 

XXXIV 

^XXV 

XXXVI 

XXXVII 

XXXVIII 

XXXIX 

XL 

XLI 

XLII 

XLIII 


' Fig. Description 

55. Udayagiri: Varaha. 

56. Chandimau: Pillar fragment with “Kiratarjunlya” scene. 

57. Biharail: Buddha. 

58. Sultanganj: Buddha. 

59. Rajgir, Maniyar Math: Naginl. 

60. Dah Parvatiya: River goddess. 

61. Mahasthan: ManjusrI. 

62. Dah Parvatiya: River goddess. 

63. Aihole: Ananta-Vishnu relief. 

64. Kanheri: Avalokitesvara relief. 

65. Parel: Sivaite sculpture. 

66. Ajanta: Rock-cut figure of the Buddha. 

67. Sarnath: Buddha seated in “pralambapada”. 

68. Badami: Frieze of sculptures. 

69. Fadami: Frieze of sculptures. 

70. Badami: Narasimha. 

71. Badami: Mahishamardinl. 

72. Paharpur: Radha Krishna (?). 

73. Paharpur: Monkey and Rakshasa fighting. 

74. Bhagalpur: Lady with bird. 

75. Gwalior: Female bust. 

"76. Central India: Lower part of a female figure. 

77. Sanchl: Avalokitesvara. 

78. Fathpur (Kangra): Buddha. 

79. Ellora: Kalyanasundara. 

80. Ellora: Narasimha. 

81. Aurangabad, Cave IX: Dancing scene. 

82. Ellora: Ravananugraha. 

83. Mamallapuram: Gangavatarana. 

84. Mamallapuram: Mahishamardinl. 

85. Elephanta, Maheshamurti. 

86. Bhltargaon: Terracotta plaque showing Vishnu on Ananta, 

87. Mamallapuram: Sculptured panel on “ratha”. 

88. Mirpur Khas: Terracotta plaque showing a male figure. 

89. Ajanta, Cave XVI: Dying Princess. 

90. Ajanta, Cave II: Palace Scene. 

91. Ajanfa, Cave I: The Great Bodhisattva. 

92. Ajanta, Cave XVII: Apsaras. 

93. Bagh: Group of Musicians. 

94. Badami, Cave III: J§iva and Parvatl. 

95. Ajanta, Cave I: A daughter of Mara. 

96. Sittannavasal: Dancing Apsara. 

97. Mahasthan: Terracotta medallion showing amatory couple. 

98. Ahichchhatra: Head of Parvatl (Terracotta). 

99. Raj ghat: Copper seal matrix with the figure of a bull and 

inscription. * 

100. Plaster of Paris cast from above. 

101. Rajghat: Copper seal matrix with the figure of a lion and 

inscription. 

102. Plaster of Paris cast from above. 

103. Basarh: Inscribed clay sealing. 

104. Bhita: Inscribed clay sealing. 

105. Basarh: Inscribed clay sealing. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


ABORI. 

Achar. Su. 
AHD. 

AIG. 

AIHT. 

AIIC. 

AIOC. 

Amara. 

AMV. 

AO. 

AOR. 

Ap. 

AR. 

ASC. 

ASI. 

ASS. 

Asv. Gr. Su. 
ASWI. 

Baudh. 

BB. 

BCAI. 

BDCRI. 

Beal (or Life). 


BEFEO. 

BG. 

Bharata Kaumudl. 


Bh. List. 

BI. 

Bri. 


Br. I.A. 


Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona. 

Achdrdnga Sutra. 

Ancient History of the Deccan, by G. Jouveau 
Dubreuil. Pondicherry, 1920. 

Age of the Imperial Guptas, by R. D. Banerji. 
Benares, 1933. 

Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, by F. E. 
Pargiter. Oxford, 1922. 

Ancient India and Indian Civilization, by P. 
Masson-Oursel and others. London, 1934. 

All-India Oriental Conference. 

Amarakosha. 

Asutosh Memorial Volume. Patna, 1926-28. 

Acta Orientalia, Leiden. 

Annals of Oriental Resea!rch, Madras Univer¬ 
sity. 

Apastamba Dharma-sutra. 

Annual Report. 

Archaeological Survey of India, Reports by 
Sir Alexander Cunningham. 

Archaeological Survey of India, Annual 
Reports. 

Ananddsrama Sanskrit Series, Poona. 

Asvaldyana Grihya-sutra. 

Archaeological Survey of Western India. 

Baudhayana Dharma-sutra. 

Bibliotheca Buddhica, St. Petersburg. 

Bidletin de la commission Archaeologique de 
ITndochine. 

Bulletin of the Deccan College Post-graduate 
and Research Institute, Poona. 

The Life of Hiuen Tsang, by Shaman Hwui 
Li, with an introduction etc. by Samuel 
Beal. London, 1914. 

Bulletin de Vficole Franqaise d y Extreme Orient, 
Hanoi. 

Bombay Gazetteer. 

Studies in Indology in honour of Dr. Radha 
Kumud Mookerji. 2 Parts. Allahabad, 
1945, 1947. 

A List of Inscriptions of Northern India , by D. R. 
Bhandarkar (Appendix to El, X1X-XXII1). 

Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta. 

Brihaspati Smriti (Page refs, to Brihaspati 
Smriti reconstructed. Ed. by K. V. Ranga- 
swami Aiyangar. GOS. Baroda. 1941). 

Indian Architecture, Buddhist and Hindu , by 
Percy Brown. Bombay, 1942. 

Iv 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


BS. 

BSD. 

BSS. 

Bu-stcm. 

BV. 

Cat. M.M. 

COM. 

CGD. 


Chh. Up. 
CII. 

CP. 

cv. 

Dasa. 


DHI. 

DHNI. 

Div. 

DKA. 


EHI. 


EHVS. 


EL 

Stats. 


FAS. 


FTL. 


Gaut. 

G.E. 

GIL. 

Giles. 


GOS. 

GSAI. 

HAL. 


Har (or Harsha). 
HAS, 


Brihat-sarhhitd of Varahamihira. 

Bibliography of the Sanskrit Drama, by M. 

Schuyler. New York, 1906. 

Bombay Sanskrit Series. 

History of Buddhism, by Bu-ston. Eng. trans. 

by E. Obermiller. Heidelberg, 1932. 
Bharatiya Vidyd, Bombay. 

Catalogue of the Archaeological Museum at 
Mathura, by J. Ph. Vogel. Allahabad, 1910. 
Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta. 

Catalogue of the Coins of the Gupta Dynasties 
and of Sasdhka , king of Gauda (in the Bri¬ 
tish Museum), by John Allan. London, 1914. 
Chhdndogya Vpanishad. 

Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. 

Copperplate. 

Chullavagga (tr. SEE, XX). 
Dasakumdra-charita of Dandin (Page refs, to the 
3rd revised ed. by M. R. Kale. Bom,hay, 1926). 
Development of Hindu Iconography, by J. N. 

Banerjea. Calcutta . 1942. 

Dynastic History of Northern India, by H. C. 

Ray. 2 Vols. Calcutta, 1931, 1936. 
Divyavaddna. 

Dynasties of the Kali Age, by F. E. Pargiter. 
Oxford . 1913. 

Early History of India, by V. A. Smith. 4th 
Edition. Oxford, 1924. 

Early History of the Vaishnava Sect, by H. C. 

Raychaudhuri. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1936. 
Epigraphia Indica. 

Les Etats Hindouises D’Indochine et D’Indo¬ 
nesia. Paris, 1948 . 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon , by 
V. A. Smith. Oxford, 1911. 

Record of the Buddhistic Kingdoms, being an 
account of the Chinese inonk Fa-hien’s 
Travels. Tr. by J. H. Legge. Oxford, 1886. 
Gautama Dharma-stistra. 

Gupta Era. 

Geschichte der Indichen Literatur, by M. 

Winternitz. 3 Vols. Leipzig, 1905, 1909,'1920. 
The Travels of Fa-hien (A.D. 399-414), or 
Record of the Buddhistic Kingdoms. Re¬ 
translated by H. A. Giles. Cambridge , 1923. 
Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, Baroda. 

Giornale della Societa Asiatica Italiana. 
History of Alamkdra Literature, by P. V. Kane. 

Bombay, 1923. 

Harsha-chcirita (text). 

Hyderabad Archaeological Series. 

Ivi 


ABBREVIATIONS 


HBR. 

HC. 

HCSL. 

H.E. 

HIEA. 


HIED. 

HIIA. 

HIJ. 

HIL. 


Hist. Ins. 

I-IK. 

HNI. 

HOS. 

HPL. 

HSL. 

HSP. 

HTB. 


HTW (or Watters). 

IA. 

IAL. 

IC. 

ID. 

IHC. 

ITIIJ. 

IHQ. 

Imp. Ins. Bar. St. 

IP. 

IRT. 


IS. 

JA. 

JAHRS. 


History of Bengal. VoL 1. Edited by R. C. 

Majumdar. Dacca, 1943. 

Harsacarita. Eng. trans. by E. B. Cowell and 
F. W. Thomas. London, 1897. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature, by 
M. Krishnamachariar. Madras, 1937. 

Harsha Era. 

History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 
by J. Fergusson. 2nd Ed. Revised by J. 
Burgess and R. P. Spiers. London, 1910. 
History of India as told by its own Historians. 

Ed. by Elliot and Dowson. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art, by A. K. 

Coomaraswamy. London, 1927. 

History of India, A.D. 150-350, by K. P. 

Jayaswal. Lahore, 1933. 

History of Indian Literature, by M. Wmternitz. 
Eng. Trans, by Mrs. S . Ketkar. Calcutta 
University Press. 

Historical Inscriptions of South India, by R. B. 
Sewell. 

History of Kanauj, by R. S. Tripathi. 

History of North-Eastern India, by R. G. Basak. 

Calcutta, 1934. 

Harvard Oriental Series. 

History of Pali Literature, by B. C. Law. 2 
Vols. London, 1933. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. 

History of Sanskrit Poetics. 

Buddhist Records of the Western World. 
Translated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsang, 
by Samuel Beal. London, 1906. 

On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, by T. 

Watters. London, 1908. 

Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

Indian Art and Letters, London. 

Indian Culture, Calcutta. 

Das indische Drama, by Sten Konow. Berlin, 
1920. 

Indian History Congress. 

Imperial History of India, by K. P. Jayaswal. 
Lahore, 1934. 

Indian Historical Quarterly, Calcutta. 
Important Inscriptions of the Baroda State, 
by A. S. Gadre. Baroda, 1943. 

Indian Philosophy, by S. Radhakrishnan. 

A Record of the Buddhist Religion as practised 
in India and the Malay Archipelago, by I-ts- 
ing. Translated by J. Takakusu. Oxford, 1896. 
Indische Studien. Ed. A. Weber. 

Journal Asiatique, Paris. 

Journal of the Andhra Historical Research 
Society, Rajahmundry. 

lvii 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


JARS. 

JASB. 

JBBRAS. . 

JBORS. 

JBRS. 

JDL. 

JGIS. 

JIH. 

JISOA. 

JKHRS. 

J.Mal.Br.R.A.S. 

JMU. 

JNSI. 

JOR. 

JPASB. 

JPTS. 

JRAS. 

JRASB(L). 

JUB. 

JUPHS. 

Kad. 


Kam. 

Kat. 


Kat. Add. 


Kaut. 

KHDS. 

KIS. 

KM. 

KRT. 

KS. 

KSS. 

Kum. 

Kush-Sas. Coins. 


Journal of the Assam Research Society. 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Cal¬ 
cutta. 

Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, Bombay. 

Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research 
Society, Patna. 

Journal of the Bihar Research Society, Patna. 

Journal of the Department of Letters, Cal¬ 
cutta University. 

Journal of the Greater India Society, Calcutta. 

Journal of Indian History, Madras. 

Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art, 
Calcutta. 

Journal of the Kalinga Historical Research 
Society, Balangir. 

Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society. 

Journal of the Madras University. 

Journal of the Numismatic Society of India, 
Bombay. 

Journal of Oriental Research, Madras. 

Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic Society 
of Bengal, Calcutta. 

Journal of the Pali Text Society. 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Great Britain 
and Ireland, London. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal: 
Letters. Calcutta. 

Journal of the University of Bombay, Bombay. 

Journal of the U.P. Historical Society. 

Kddambari of Bdna (Page refs, to the 3rd 
revised edition by M. R. Kale. Bombay , 
1928). 

Kamandaka’s Nitisara. 

Katyayana Smriti (Refs, to Kdtydyana-Smriti - 
Sdroddhdra, edited by P. V. Kane. Bombay, 
1933). 

Additional Verses of Katyayana on Vyavahdra , 
by K. V. Rcingaswami Aiyangar (A Volume 
of Studies in Indology presented to P. V. 
Kane. Poona, 1941)/ 

Arthasdstra of Kautilya. 

History of Dharma-sdstra, by P. V. Kane. 

Indian Sculpture, by Stella Kramrisch. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1933. 

Kdvyamdld. NSP. Bombay. 

RdjataranginI by Kalhana. 

Kdmasutra of Vatsydyana. 

Kamarupa-sdsanavali. 

Kumdrasambhava of Kalidasa. 

Kushano-Sassanian Coins by E. He'rzfeld. 
MASI, No. 38. Calcutta, 1930. 

lviii 


ABBREVIATIONS 


Life (or Beal). 


Malatl. 

Malav. 

Manu. 

MAH. 

Mark. Pur. 

Martin. 


MASI. 

Mat. Pur. 

Mbh. 

Meg. 

Megha. 

Memoire. 


MKHS Papers 
Mlm Su. 
MMK. 

MR. 

Mri. 

Mud. 

MV. 

Nag. 

Nar. 

NHIP. 


NIA. 

NIS. 

NSP. 

Num. Chr. 
Num. Suppl. 
OZ. 

Pan. 

Pancha. 

Par. 

PHAI. 

PIHC. 

PLC. 

POC. 

PR. ASI. WC. 


The Life of Hiuen Tsang, by Shaman Hwui 
Li, with an introduction, etc. by Samuel 
Beal. London, 1914. 

Mdlati-mddhava of Bhavabhuti. 
Mdlavikdgnimitra of Kalidasa. 

Manu-smriti. 

Mysore Archaeological Report. 

MarkaruLeya Purana. 

Coins of the Kiddra Kushdnas (JRASBL, 111 
—Num. Suppl., XLVII, pp. 23-50) by M. F. 
C. Martin. 

Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India. 
Matsya Purana. 

Mahabhdrata. 

Megasthenes. 

Meghaduta of Kalidasa. 

Memoire compose a Vepoque de la grande 
dynastie Tang sur les Religieux Eminents 
qui allerent chercher a loi dans les pays 
d’Occident, par I-tsing, traduit en fran^ais 
par Edouard Chavannes. Paris, 1894. 

Papers of the Mahdkosala Historical Society. 
Mirnamsa-sutras. 

Mahjusrl-mulakalpa. Ed. T. Ganapati Sastri. 
TSS. 

Modern Review, Calcutta. 

Mrichchhakatika of Sudraka. 

Mudmrakshasa of Visakhadatta. 

Mahdvagga (Trans. SBE, XIII, XVII). 
Nagananda of Harsha. 

Narada-smriti (Ed. by J. Jolly). 

New History of the Indian People. Vol. VI. 
Edited by R. C. Majumdar and A. S. Altekar. 
Lahore, 1946 

New Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

New Imperial Series. 

Nirnaya Sagar Press, Bombay. 

Numismatic Chronicle. 

Numismatic Supplement. 

Ostasiatische Zeitschrift. 

Pdnini. 

Pahchatantra. 

Pardsara-smriti. 

Political History of Ancient India, by H. C. 

Raychaudhuri. 4th Ed. Calcutta, 1938. 
Proceedings of the Indian History Congress. 
Pali Literature of Ceylon, by M. H. Bode. 
London, 1909. 

Proceedings of the All-India Oriental Con¬ 
ference. 

Progress Report of the Archaeological Survey 
of India, Western Circle. 

lix 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Pratima. 

Priya. 

PTS. 

Pur. 

Raghu. 

Ram. 

Ratnavali. 

Record 

(or Takakusu) 

pitu. 

Sak, 

Sat. Br. 

SBE. 

SBH. 

Sel. Ins. 


SII. 

Siksha. 

SIS. 

SJS. 

Sm. C. 

SP. 

Sue. Sat. 

Svap (or Svapna). 
Taitt. Ar. 
Takakusu 
(or Record) 

Tar. 

TSS. 

Uttara. 

Vas. 

Vi. 

Vi. Pur. 

Vij. 

VS. 


Warmington. 


Watters (or HTW). 

Yaj. 

ZDMG. 


PraLimd-nataka of Bhdsa . 

Pnyadarsikd of Harsha. 

Pali Text Society, London. 

Pur ana. 

9 

Raghuvarhsa of Kalidasa. 

Rdmdyana. 

Ratnavali of Harsha. 

A record of the Buddhist religion as practised 
in India and the Malay Archipelago by 
I-tsing. Trans, by J. Takakusu. Oxford, 189b. 

Ritusamhdra of Kalidasa. 

Sdkuntala of Kalidasa. 

Satapatha Brdhmana. 

Sacred Books of the East, Oxford. 

Sacred Books of the Hindus, Allahabad. 

Select Inscriptions bearing on Indian History 
and Civilization. Vol. I. By D. C. Sircar. 
Calcutta, 1942. 

South Indian Inscriptions. 

Sikshd-samuchchaya of Sdntideva. Ed. by C. 
Bendall. St. Petersburg, 1897-1902. 

Sino-Indian Studies, Calcutta. 

Singhi Jain Series. 

Smriti-chandrika of Devannabhatta. Ed. by 
L. Srinivasacharya. Mysore, 1914-21. 

Sanskrit Poetics, by S. K. De. 

Successors of the Sdtavdhanas in the Lower 
Deccan, by D. C. Sircar. Calcutta, 1939. 

Svapna-Vdsavadatta of Bhdsa. 

Taittiriya Aranyaka. 

A record of the Buddhist religion as practised 
in India and the Malay Archipelago by 
I-tsing. Trans, by J. Takakusu. Oxford, 1896. 

Taranatha. Geschichte des Buddhismus in 
Indien. German trans. by A. Schiefner. 

Trivandrum Sanskrit Series. 

Uttarardma-charita of Bhavabhuti. 

Vasishtha Dharma-sutra. 

Vishnu-smriti. 

Vishnu Pur ana. 

Vijnanesvara. 

Vaishnavism, Saivism and minor religious 
systems, by R. G. Bhandarkar. Strassburg, 
1913. 

The Commerce between the Roman Empire 
and India , by E. H. Warmington, Cam¬ 
bridge, 1928. 

On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India, by T. 
Watters. London, 1908. 

Ydjnavalkya-smriti. 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft. 


lx 


CHAPTER I 


THE RISE OF THE GUPTAS 

The political disintegration which followed the dissolution of 
the Kushana empire continued right up to the beginning of the 
fourth century A.D. The Kushanas still ruled over the western 
Punjab, but had ceased to exercise any authority further east. The 
Sakas ruled over Gujarat and a part of Malwa, but their power was 
rapidly on the decline. The rest of Northern India was divided into 
a number of small kingdoms and autonomous tribal states. The 
time was ripe for a great Indian military leader to arise and build 
up a mighty empire, and such a leader soon arose in a petty ruling 
family known as the Guptas. 

1. ORIGIN AND EARLY HISTORY 

The origin and early history of this family are shrouded in 
obscurity. The name or surname Gupta is not absolutely unknown 
in ancient Indian history. Names of officials ending in Gupta and 
queens of the Gupta clan or family are mentioned in old records, 
particularly of the Suhga and the Satavahana period. But whether 
all of them were connected with a parent Gupta clan or there were 
different families, without any such connection, who assumed the 
name Gupta, cannot be determined, though the latter view seems 
mor^ probable. In any case, the particular Gupta family, ruling in 
the fourth century A.D., cannot be affiliated to any ancient family 
or clan of that name. 

The first three rulers of this family are referred to in the Gupta 
records as Maharaja Srigupta, his son Maharaja Sri Ghatotkacha- 
gupta and the latter’s son, Maharajddhirdja Sri Chandra-gupta. The 
fact that the third ruler is given the higher title of Mahdrajadhirdja, 
whereas his father and grandfather are called simply Maharaja, 
cannot but be regarded as significant. We must assume that 
Chandra-gupta was a more powerful ruler than his predecessors 
and extended the ancestral kingdom. 

Of the first two kings the Gupta records do not mention any¬ 
thing beyond their names and titles. We have, therefore, no defi¬ 
nite information about their exact status or the locality where they 
ruled. The title Maharaja was often borne by feudatory chiefs, and 
it has been surmised that both Gupta and Ghatotkacha were sub¬ 
ordinate to some paramount ruler. But no such paramount ruler 
of the period is known to us. On the other hand, even independent 

1 

C.A.—1 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


rulers are known to have used the title Maharajah and it is not 
unlikely that the first two Gupta kings were really independent, 
though their kingdom was not very large. 

As regards the locality of this kingdom some light is thrown by 
a passing observation of the Chinese pilgrim I-tsing. I-tsing, who 
travelled in India during the period A.D. 671-695, refers to a king 
Srlgupta as having built a temple for the Chinese pilgrims and en¬ 
dowed it with twenty-four villages. Some scholars have identified 
this king with the founder of the Gupta dynasty and located the 
temple in Magadha. Consequently they place the kingdom of the 
early Guptas in Magadha. But there are certain difficulties in ac¬ 
cepting this view. In the first place, I-tsing places Srlgupta about 
five hundred years before his time, whereas the founder of the 
Gupta dynasty cannot be placed more than four hundred, or at the 
most, four hundred and fifty years before he wrote. The identity 
can, therefore, be maintained only if we regard the five hundred 
years as only a round approximate figure. This is not an unreason¬ 
able view, especially when we remember that the “Chinese pilgrim 
gives the statement on the authority of a tradition handed down from 
ancient times by old men.” 2 The identification of the king mention¬ 
ed by I-tsing with Srlgupta, the founder of the Gupta family, may, 
therefore, be accepted, at least as a provisional hypothesis. 

There is, however, no justification for the view that the temple 
which this king built for the Chinese was situated in Magadha. The 
bearing and the distance given by the Chinese pilgrim place it in 
the western borders of northern or central Bengal and this is corro¬ 
borated by some other details mentioned by him. We may, there¬ 
fore, hold that Srlgupta’s kingdom comprised a portion of Bengal.' 3 

We do not know anything of Gupta’s son and successor Ghatot- 
kacha. But it is interesting to note that in two records of the 
Vakataka queen Prabhavati-gupta, 4 daughter of Chandra-gupta II, 
Ghatotkacha is said to be the first Gupta king. Further, in a record 
recently discove red at Rewa, 5 the Gupta family is traced back only 


]. 

2 . 


4. 

5. 


The examples of the Lichchhavis (Nepal), the Maghas, the Bharasivas and the 
Vakatakas are sufficient to prove that the title Maharaja does not necessarily 
indicate a feudatory rank. 

CGD, xv, xix. 

This point has been fully discussed in HBR. 69-70 and JBRS, XXXVIIT 410-428 
Prof Jagannath’s argument (IHQ, XXII. 28) against the proposed view is based 
on Beal s faulty translation of the Chinese passage in IA, 1881, pp. 110-11 

tZsUioZlf the^of talW’" ** Intr ° duCti ° n XXXvi > of his 
Ch°XI C A P l:V5kfL?ar 211 RUhpUr CP ' inS ’ JPASB ’ NS ’ 58; See in f ra ’ 

U U T% r a[ °f. Pa P e :f re f a t th e Twelld All-India Oriental Conference (Part 
"rha'JZbh?'*'? i° p ? m P h ’ et the contains the expression 

tnrl,Z° t ^ aCh r,~ Sa nui m w e ' ? ut wbat bas been read' a#., 'sadvamse’ is realty 
himself ° r ' Chhabra ’ who 1S editing the record, emended the old reading 





THE RISE OF THE GUPTAS 


to Ghatotkacha. It is difficult to explain why or how Ghatotkacha 
came to be regarded as the founder of the family, at least in some 
quarters in Central India and the Deccan, but these references seem 
to imply that he was a notable ruler in some respects. 

2. CHANDRA-GUPTA I 

There is, however, no doubt that it was really under Chandra- 
gupta I, the son and successor of Ghatotkacha, that the family rose 
to eminence. This is clearly indicated by the higher title Maharaja- 
dhirdja applied to him in the family records. Further evidence is 
supplied by a series of gold coins issued by him. These coins depict 
on one side the names and figures of Chandra-gupta and his queen 
Kumaradevi, and on the other, a goddess seated on a lion with the 
name of the Lichchhavis inscribed by its side. 

Kumaradevi was a Lichchhavi princess, and evidently special 
significance was attached to Chandra-gupta’s marriage with her. 
Apart from the above coins, this is also proved by the fact that 
their son Samudra-gupta is always referred to in the genealogical 
account of the Gupta records as the ‘daughter’s son of the Lichchha¬ 
vis,’ whereas we do not come across any such reference to the 
maternal family of the eight or ten other Gupta rulers, mentioned 
in the same records. It has been suggested by V. A. Smith that by 
means of this matrimonial alliance Chandra-gupta succeeded to the 
power previously held by his wife’s relations and secured a para¬ 
mount position in Magadha and the neighbouring countries. On 
the other hand, Allan thinks that the “pride of the Guptas in their 
Lichchhavi blood was probably due rather to the ancient lineage of 
the Lichchhavis than to any material advantages gained by this 
alliance.” It may be doubted, however, whether the Lichchhavis 
enjoyed at this time a very high status in society. For the Manu- 
Samhitd, which was undoubtedly held in high respect about this 
time, regards the Lichchhavis as a kind of degraded Kshatriyas 
( Vrdtya-Kshatriya ). It appears more probable, therefore, that the 
marriage alliance of Chandra-gupta I was valuable from a political 
rather than a social point of view. 

Although, therefore, we my accept the view that the political 
greatness of the Guptas was due, in a large measure, to their 
alliance with the Lichchhavis, it is difficult to define more precisely, 
as V. A. Smith has done, the extent of their indebtedness. For we 
do not know for certain anything about the power or political status 
of the Lichchhavis, or even the position of their kingdom at this 
time. As noted above, 1 the Lichchhavis ruled over the republican 
state of Vaisall when Gautama Buddha flourished. About the time 


l. Vol. IT, pp. 6 f. 


o 

») 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of which we are speaking we find kings of the Lichchhavi dynasty 
ruling in the valley of Nepal. 1 We do not know whether the 
Lichchhavi relations of KumaradevI belonged to the ruling family 
of Vaisall or Nepal or of some other kingdom. The view that they 
ruled in Magadha rests on very dubious grounds. On the whole, it 
is more reasonable to regard the Lichchhavis as ruling somewhere in 
North Bihar, in the region between Vaisali and Nepal. It is highly 
probable that the Lichchhavis and Guptas ruled over adjoining prin¬ 
cipalities and that the two kingdoms were united under Chandra- 
gupta by his marriage with KumaradevI. This happy union, which 
enhanced the power and prestige of the new kingdom and augured 
so well for the future, was evidently commemorated by the gold 
coins jointly issued by Chandra-gupta and his Lichchhavi 
queen. 2 

So little is definitely known about Chandra-gupta I that we 
have only to rely upon such provisional hypotheses for the recon¬ 
struction of his history. We may reasonably infer that his domi¬ 
nions must have been sufficiently large to justify his assumption of 
the imperial title Mahartijadhimja and to enable his son to launch 
upon that career of conquest which led to the foundation of a mighty 
empire. It is generally held on the basis of a passage 3 in the 
Puranas, that Chandra-gupta ruled over Saketa (Awadh), Prayaga 
(Allahabad) and Magadha (S. Bihar). But apart from the uncer¬ 
tainty in the reading and interpretation of the passage, we cannot 
even be certain that it refers to the period of Chandra-gupta I. 
Although, therefore, no definite conclusions are possible, we may, 
judging from the military campaigns of his son, regard the kingdom 
of Chandra-gupta as comprising nearly the whole of Bihar and por¬ 
tions of Bengal and Awadh. 

It is generally assumed that the well-known Gupta era, which 
commenced on February 26, 320 A.D., 4 5 was founded by Chandra- 
gupta I to commemorate his accession or coronation. 6 * Although this 
is a very probable view, there is no definite evidence in support of 
it, and we cannot altogether exclude the possibility that the era 

1. See infra, Ch. VIII. 7: Nepal. 

2. JRASBL, III. Num. Suppl., pp. 105 ff; JIH, VI. Suppl. pp. 10 ff. The view that 
the coins were issued by Samudra-gupta (CGD. lxiv) is no longer held by any 
scholar. 

3. DKA, 53 fn. 8; IHQ, XXI. 141; NHIP . 134-5. 

4. Or December, 20, 318 A.D. Cf. EHR 280; JRASBL. VIII. 41. 

5. According to V. A. Smith Chandra-gupta I ascended the throne some time 

before A.D. 308 but founded a new era in A.D. 320 to commemorate his formal 
consecration or coronation. The reason for this long interval between accession 
and formal coronation is not clear, particularly when it is held that Chandra- 

gupta had married KumaradevI in or about A.D. 308 (EHI. 8 279-80). According 
to Dr. H. C. Raychaudhuri, Chandra-gupta I ascended the throne in A.D. 320 

careey^CPHA/'MO) 5 P ° siti ° n by marr y in g KumaradevI “at some stage of his 


4 





THE RISE OF THE GUPTAS 


commemorates the coronation of Samudra-gupta, the greatest king 
of the dynasty and the founder of the Gupta empire. The chrono¬ 
logy of the early Gupta kings can be fixed only with reference to 
this date. If we assume that Chandra-gupta I ascended the throne 
in A.D. 320, we may place the reigns of Gupta and Ghatotkacha 
between that year and A.D. 270. On the other hand, if we regard 
A.D. 320 as the date of Samudra-gupta’s coronation, we shall have 
to push back the reign of Gupta to about A.D. 250. This would be 
more in accordance with the statement of I-tsing who places Srigupta 
about 500 years before his time (c. A.D. 700). 

In view of the vagueness and uncertainty of our knowledge 
regarding the early history of the Guptas, it would be wise not to 
indulge in further speculation on the subject. It has been suggested, 
for example, that Chandra-gupta I ‘simply drove out the Scythians 
and gave independence to the province of Magadha after three cen¬ 
turies of subjection and foreign oppression.’ We have, however, 
absolutely no evidence that Chandra-gupta I ever came into conflict 
with the Scythian rulers, or led any ‘war of liberation.’ It is also a 
mere gratuitous assumption that Gupta and Ghatotkacha were 
‘petty landholders’ or ‘feudatory chiefs subordinate to the Kushanas.’ 1 
Still more illusory is the attempt to reconstruct the history of 
Chandra-gupta I on the basis of the drama Kaumudl-Mahotsava. 2 
It describes how the cursed Chandasena, an adopted son of Sundara- 
varman, king of Magadha, and the commander of his army, allied 
himself with the barbarian Lichchhavis and got possession of 
Magadha by defeating and killing the king, his adoptive father 
It is nothing short of ‘fantastic’ to equate Chandasena with Chan¬ 
dra-gupta I and to construct the history of the period from the 
romantic episodes described in a dramatic work of a later age, which 
agree so little with the data of contemporary inscriptions. An 
attempt has also been made to reconstract the history of the early 
Guptas with such graphic details as the murder of Chandra-gupta I 
by his son Samudra-gupta. But the passage in the Bhavishyottara- 
Purdna which contains this and other similar episodes can be easily 
demonstrated to be ‘a palpable modern forgery’. 3 

These vague conjectures and wild theories need not be seriously 
discussed in a sober history. For the present we have to rest con¬ 
tent with the little that we definitely know about the early Guptas, 


1. AIG. pp. 1-5. 

2. Jayaswal’s reconstruction ( ABORI . XII. 50; JBORS. XIX. 113) of the origin 
and early history of the Guptas, on the basis of the drama Kaumudl-mahotsava, 
though supported by some (JBORS, XXI. 77; XXII. 275), has been justly 
rejected by most other scholars (Aiyangar Comm. Vol. 359-362; 1C, IX. 100- 
IHQ, XIV. 582; Thomas Comm. Vol. 115; JAHRS, VI. 139). 

3. NHIP, VI, 133, fn. 2; JBRS, XXX 1 ff, IHQ, XX. 345. 


5 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


or can reasonably infer about them, and we may sum up the position 
somewhat as follows: 

Towards the close of the third century A.D., India was divided 
into a number of independent states both monarchical and non- 
monarchical. Two of these in Eastern India were united by a mar¬ 
riage alliance between Kumaradevi, the Lichchhavi princess, and 
Chandra-gupta I, the grandson of Gupta and the son of Ghatotkacha. 
Chandra-gupta I thus ruled over a fairly extensive kingdom which 
probably included nearly the whole of Bihar and also parts of U.P. 
and Bengal. He signalised his increased power and dominion by 
changing the title Maharaja, adopted by his father and grandfather, 
for the higher imperial title Mahdrajadhirdja, and probably also by 
founding an era to commemorate his coronation in A.D. 320. 


6 


CHAPTER II 

THE FOUNDATION OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 

1. ACCESSION OF SAMUDRA-GUPTA 

Samudra-gupta, the son of Chandra-gupta I and Kumaradcvi, 
succeeded his father. We possess a long eulogy of this king com¬ 
posed by one of his officials named Harishena and engraved on the 
Asoka pillar at Allahabad. 1 This eulogy or prasasti gives a detailed 
account of the career and personality of Samudra-gupta, such as we 
do not possess of any other king of ancient India, except the great 
Maurya emperor Asoka. Thanks to this record we are in a position 
to describe the remarkable military exploits of Samudra-gupta which 
laid the foundation of the Gupta empire. The Allahabad prasasti 
vividly describes at the outset, how in a full session of the royal 
court Chandra-gupta I embraced his son Samudra-gupta, and declar¬ 
ed, in accents surcharged with emotion: “Thou art worthy, rule this 
whole world.” The poet leaves no doubt that the assembly was held 
in a tense atmosphere, and while the royal declaration was received 
with cheers by most of those present in the court, it caused great dis¬ 
content and heart-burning to the rival candidates of the royal family. 
The royal declaration is usually taken to mean that Chandra-gupta I 
publicly announced Samudra-gupta as the heir-apparent to the 
throne. The words put in his mouth, however, taken literally, mean 
that Chandra-gupta I formally abdicated in favour of his son. 2 

In any case, Samudra-gupta was deliberately selected by his 
father as the next king and this evidently caused deep disappoint¬ 
ment to the rival princes who coveted the throne. It possibly led to 
trouble, and it is not even unlikely that when Samudra-gupta 
ascended the throne he had to face a revolt of his brothers. The 
name of a king Kacha is known from a few coins which bear a close 
resemblance to those of Samudra-gupta. It has been suggested that 
Kacha was the eldest brother of Samudra-gupta and headed the 
rebellion against him. 3 But this is by no means certain, and some 
hold that Kacha was only the original name of Samudra-gupta. But 
whatever troubles might have arisen, they were quelled by Samudra- 
gupta who soon made his position stable and secure. 

1. CII, III. 1; Sel. Ins . 254. 

2. Dr. Chhabra has come to the same conclusion after a critical discussion of the 
whole passage. He also offers a new reading and interpretation of the passage. 
The words of Chandra-gupta I, quoted above, are translated by him as “Come, 
Come! Protect thou the whole earth” (fC, XIV. 141). 

3. ABORL IX. 83. 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


2. SAMUDRA-GUPTA’S CONQUESTS 


The reign of Samudra-gupta is chiefly remarkable for the series 
of military campaigns which he led in various parts of India. The 
author of the Allahabad prasasti refers to the skill he displayed in 
a hundred battles which left scars all over his body. Judging from 
the< long list of countries which he conquered and brought under 
various degrees of subjection, the statement need not be regarded as 
a mere poetic effusion or even a highly exaggerated encomium. 

A number of rulers of Northern India, among whom nine are 
specifically named, felt the full brunt of Samudra-gupta’s aggressive 
policy. These kings were defeated and crushed and their kingdoms 
were annexed to the Gupta kingdom. Two of them, Nagasena and 
Ganapati-naga, were rulers of the Naga family who had set up three 
kingdoms at Padmavati (Padam Pawaya, 25 miles north-east of 
Narwar in old Gwalior State), Vidisa (Rhilsa) and Mathura. * 1 Two 
other kings, Achyuta and Chandra-varman, ruled respectively in 
Ahichchhatra (near Bareilly) and Western Bengal (in the Bankura 
District). The dominions of the remaining five kings, viz. Rudra- 
deva, Matila, Nagadatta, Nandin, and Balavarman cannot be located 
at present. 2 But we can form an idea of the territory, thus con¬ 
quered and directly administered by Samudra-gupta, from the men¬ 
tion of the kingdoms and tribal states, situated at the frontiers of 
his kingdom, which paid taxes, obeyed orders and rendered obei¬ 
sance in person to the emperor. Three of these kingdoms, 
Samatata, Kamarupa, and Nepala are well known and correspond 
respectively to South-East Bengal, Upper Assam and Nepal. The^ 
fourth, Davaka, was most probably situated in the Nowgong District 
of Assam. The fifth, Kartripura, has been identified with Kartarpur 
in the Jalandhar District, and according to some it even comprised 
the territory of the Katuria Raj of Kumaon, Garhwal and Rohil- 
khand. But this cannot be regarded as certain. 

These five tributary kingdoms are expressly stated to be 
situated on the frontiers of Samudra-gupta’s dominions. The feuda¬ 
tory tribal states which are mentioned along with them, and were 
also presumably on the frontier, were nine in number, and may be 


1 


For the identifications of kings and states mentioned in the Allahabad Inscrin- 
tion cf. the works of Allan, Smith, Aiyangar and Raychaudhuri, mentioned 
at the end under General References, and also the following:— 

(i) V. A. Smith in JR AS, 1897, pp. 87 ff. 

(ii) Fleet in JR AS, 1898, p. 368. 

(iii) D. R. Bhandarkar in 1HQ, I. 252 ff. 

( lv ) R. Sathianathaier —Studies in the Ancient History of Tondama- 
ndalam (pp. 13-19). 

ur' cp+ D ilC ? r £ as su §'S este d that Rudra-deva might he identified with the 
W Satiap Rudradaman II or his son Rudrasena III, and Nagadatta was pro¬ 
bably a king of N. Bengal and an ancestor of the viceroys of the Imperial Guptas 
whose names end in Datta ( PIHC , VII. 78). p Guptas 


8 






THE FOUNDATION OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 


easily divided into two groups. The first comprises the Malavas, 
the Arjunayanas, the Yaudheyas and the Madrakas. The Malavas 
were at this time settled in Eastern Rajputana, in the regions now 
known as Mewar, Tonk and Kotah. The Yaudheyas inhabited the 
territory still known as Johiyabar along both banks of the Sutlej on 
the borders of the Bahawalpur State; at one time their dominions 
extended up to the Yamuna and included Bharatpur. The Madrakas 
occupied the territory between the Ravi and the Chinab with their 
capital at Sakala, modern Sialkot. The Arjunayanas cannot be loca¬ 
ted with certainty, but if, as is generally believed, the names of the 
tribes have been recorded in a geographical order, their territory 
may be placed near Jaipur. 

Of the second group of five states, only the Sanakanikas may 
be located with some degree of certainty near Bhilsa. The Abhiras 
are known to have had various settlements, but the reference here 
is probably to the one in Central India, called Ahirawara, between 
Bhilsa and Jhansi. The remaining three states, viz. Prarjunas, 
Kakas and Kharaparikas, -cannot be located with certainty, but may 
be placed to the north and east of Bhilsa and not very far from it. 
For Eran in the Saugor District, Madhya Pradesh, about 50 miles to 
the N.N.E. of Bhilsa, is definitely known to have been included in 
the kingdom of Samudra-gupta. 

If we now consider the position of the tributary states on the 
frontiers of Samudra-gupta’s dominions, we may form an idea ol 
the territory directly under the administration of Samudra-gupta. 
In the east it included the whole of Bengal, excepting its south¬ 
eastern extremity. Its northern boundary ran along the foothills of 
the Himalayas. In the west it extended up to the territory of the 
Madras in the Punjab and probably included its eastern districts 
between Lahore and Karnal. From Karnal the boundary followed 
the Yamuna up to its junction with the Chambal, and thence along 
an imaginary line drawn almost due south to Bhilsa. The southern 
boundary ran from Bhilsa to Jubbulpore and thence along the 
Vindhya range of hills. Samudra-gupta is said to have conquered ail 
the Atavi-rajyas (forest kingdoms) which probably denoted the hilly 
tracts, full of dense forest, extending eastwards from Jubbulpore. 

Samudra-gupta’s campaigns of conquest were not confined to 
North India. He made one or more expeditions to the Deccan and 
defeated no less than twelve rulers. The defeated chiefs included 
Mahendra of Kosala (Drug, Raipur, Bilaspur and Sambalpur Dis¬ 
tricts), Vyaghraraja of Mahakantara (probably forest regions in 
Jeypore State, Orissa), Mahendragiri of Pishtapura (Pithapuram in 
the Godavari District), Hastivarman (the Salankayana chief) of 
Veiigi (modern Pedda-Vegi, 7 miles north of Ellore between the 


9 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Krishna and the Godavari), Ugrasena of Palakka (Nellore District), 
and Vishnugopa (the Pallava king) of Kanchi (Conjeevaram in 
Chingleput District). Kings Damana of Erandapalla and Kuvera 
of Devarashtra probably ruled in the Vizagapatam District. 1 Four 
other kings, Mantaraja of Kaurala, Svamidatta of Kottura, 2 Nilaraja 
of Avamukta and Dhananjaya of Kusthalapura cannot be identified 
with certainty. 

Although these four southern kingdoms cannot be located, it is 
clear that Samudra-gupta proceeded through the eastern and 
southern parts of Madhya Pradesh to Orissa and then advanced along 
the eastern coast up to the Pallava kingdom, probably beyond the 
city of Madras. 3 Samudra-gupta defeated and captured the rulers 
of these southern states. But he later set them at liberty and they 
were presumably allowed to rule over their kingdoms as feudatories 
of Samudra-gupta. 4 

Samudra-gupta had probably other military campaigns to his 
credit, though we cannot speak of them with any degree of certainty. 
It is, however, evident that his supremacy was acknowledged by 
powerful rulers in the western and north-western frontiers of India, 
such as the Saka chiefs ruling in Western Malwa or the Kathiawar 
Peninsula, and the Kushana king or kings of the Western Punjab 
and Afghanistan referred to as Daivaputra-shahi-shahanushahi. 5 
The passage describing their relations with Samudra-gupta is some¬ 
what vague and uncertain, but it may be taken for granted that they 

1. The correct identification of Erandapalla and Devarashtra is of great historical 
importance. Fleet identified them respectively with Erandol (in Khandesh) 
and Maharashtra and held that Samudra-gupta passed through the Western 
Deccan after his victorious campaign in the eastern coast. This view was 
generally accepted until Dubreuil proposed to locate Erandapalla in the Gan jam 
and Devarashtra in the Vizagapatam District ( AHD . 58, 160). Dubreuil’s identi¬ 
fication is now generally accepted and the view that Samudra-gupta proceeded 
to the Maharashtra State is discredited. Recently some scholars have supported 
the old view of Fleet ( ABOR1 , XXVI. 138). 

2. Kottura has been identified by Dr. Saletore with Kottura in the Kudligi taluk, 
Bellary District, Madras ( ABORI, XXVI. 120). This tallies with the old view 
of Fleet, mentioned in the preceding footnote, but as there is no positive evidence 
that Samudra-gupta proceeded so far to the west, it is better to identify Kottura 
with Kothoor in Ganjam or Vizagapatam District (PHAI 4 , 453). 

3. Mr. Sathianathaier (op. cit.) proposes to identify, among others, Mahakantara 

with Kanker and Bastar, Kerala with Cheraia (Nugur taluk, E. Godavari 
District), Kottura with Kottura near Tuni (E. Godavari District), Erandapalla 
with Erraguntapalle in the Chentalapudi taluk of the West Godavari District, 
and Devarashtra with the place of that name in the Khanapur Sub-division of 
the Satara District. He thus maintains, against the generally accepted view, 
that Samudra-gupta did not pass through Orissa, Ganjam and Vizagapatam’ 
but first emerged on the east coast at Pishtapura (Pithapuram), and that he* 
also conquered Western Deccan. * 

4. J. Dubreuil is of opinion (op. cit. pp. 60-61) that Samudra-gupta, who advanced 
up to the Krishna, was opposed by a confederacy of the kings of the E. Deccan, 
and being repulsed, abandoned the conquests he had made in the coast of Orissa 
and returned home. This is pure imagination, and directly contradicted by the 
explicit statements in the Allahabad Ins. 

5. For details Cf. Chapter VII. 


10 



THE FOUNDATION OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 

sought to win the favour of the great emperor by personal 
attendance in his court, offering daughters in marriage, and asking 
permission for the use of imperial coins or soliciting imperial 
charters confirming them in the enjoyment of their territories. 
Whether this attitude of subservience was the result of military 
defeat or was merely a diplomatic move to save themselves from 
a worse fate, we cannot say. The discovery of some coins of the 
Kushana type with the names of Samudra and Chandra, and the use 
of Gupta type of coins by some Scythian rulers of the west, indicate 
that the Guptas really exercised a sort of suzerainty over some of 
these frontier kingdoms still under foreign rulers, and the statement 
in the records of Samudra-gupta about his relations with the Saka 
and Kushana chiefs may not be regarded as altogether without 
foundation. 

3. POLITICAL RELATION WITH CEYLON 

Even the distant Siriihala (Ceylon) and all other islands are 
included in the same category of vassal states to which the &akas 
and the Kushanas belonged. If we remember that Ceylon and 
many other islands in the Indian ocean were colonised by the 
Indians and bear a deep impress of Gupta culture, it is not unlikely 
that some of them at any rate sought to maintain close contact with 
the most powerful empire in the mainland, and thought it politic to 
win the good graces of the great emperor by sending rich presents 
or showing respect in some other way. The reference to the homage 
paid by the people of all these islands cannot, therefore, be dismiss¬ 
ed as mere rhetoric, but may be based on actual relationship, the 
exact nature of which cannot be determined. 

So far as Ceylon is concerned, we have fortunately independent 
evidence of its political relations with Samudra-gupta. We learn 
from a Chinese text that king Meghavarna of Ceylon (c. A.D. 352-379) 
sent two monks to Bodh-Gaya to visit the sacred spots, but they 
were put to great inconvenience for want of suitable accommo¬ 
dation. To obviate the difficulty for future pilgrims to the holy 
place, Meghavarna decided to found a monastery there. He accord¬ 
ingly sent a mission to Samudra-gupta with rich presents and asked 
for permission to build a monastery and a rest-house for Ceylonese 
pilgrims. Samudra-gupta readily granted permission and the 
Ceylonese king built a splendid monastery to the north of the Bodhi 
tree. By the time of Hiuen Tsang it had developed into a magni¬ 
ficent establishment, with more than 1000 priests, and the pilgrim 
has described the rich decorations and massive grandeur of the 
buildings. Referring to the old history of its foundation, Hiuen 
Tsang says that the Ceylonese king ‘gave in tribute to the king of 


11 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


India all the jewels of his country.’ It is likely that Samudra-gupta’s 
courtiers regarded the rich presents as tributes, and construed the 
Ceylonese king’s prayer for permission to build a monastery as an 
‘application for charter confirming him in the enjoyment of his 
territories,’ one of the forms of homage paid by the category of 
vassal states in which Sirhhala is included. There may be similar 
basis for the inclusion of the other states in this category, the offer 
of a daughter’s hand being very common among neighbourly kings. 
In view of the great renown of Samudra-gupta, the neighbouring 
Saka and Kushana rulers might have sought to cultivate friendly 
relations with him and strengthen them by personal visits or matri¬ 
monial alliances. It may also be conceded that the rulers of the 
weaker states, situated just outside the limits of the empire, main¬ 
tained diplomatic relations with Samudra-gupta and deliberately 
sought to win his favour and goodwill by various measures which, 
however derogatory to their royal status and position of equality, 
did not theoretically detract from their independent status. But it 
is difficult to believe, without more positive evidence, such as we 
possess in the case of some Scythian states mentioned above, that 
all these rulers in any way openly acknowledged the suzerainty of 
the Gupta emperor, and enjoyed their kingdoms merely as fiefs by 
virtue of charters granted by Samudra-gupta. 

4. SAMUDRA-GBPTA’S EMPIRE 

The above discussion enables us to describe the nature and 
extent of the empire of Samudra-gupta with an accuracy and full¬ 
ness of detail rare in ancient Indian history. It comprised nearly 
the whole of Northern India, with the exclusion of Kashmir, West¬ 
ern Punjab, Western Rajputana, Sindh and Gujarat, and includ¬ 
ed the highlands of Chattisgarh and Orissa with a long stretch of 
territory along the eastern coast extending as far south as Chingleput, 
and probably even further. Of these vast territories, a considerable 
portion of Northern India, whose boundaries have been defined 
above, was directly administered by the emperor through his offi¬ 
cials. This was surrounded on all sides except on the south by an 
almost continuous line of tributary states. Beyond them lay the 
Saka and the Kushana principalities on the west and north-west. 
Some of these probably acknowledged the suzerainty of the Gupta 
empire, but there is no doubt that all of them were within the sphere 
of its influence. The states along the eastern coast of the Deccan 
and the Pallava kingdom in the Tamil country beyond the Krishna 
were also feudatories, while Ceylon and probably some other islands 
in the Indian Ocean or the East Indies maintained a submissive and 
respectful attitude towards the emperor. Thus to use the words of 


12 


THE FOUNDATION OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 

the Allahabad prasasti, was the (whole) world bound by means of 
the amplitude of the vigour of the arm of Samudra-gupta. 

It is permissible to hold that the consolidation of Samudra- 
gupta’s empire was the result of a definite policy deliberately pur¬ 
sued. He may have been inspired by the vision of an all-India 
empire, but he realised the impracticability of any idea to establish, 
immediately, a direct rule over the whole country or even a con¬ 
siderable part of it. He, therefore, created, by ruthless suppression 
of a number of independent states, a central block of territory over 
which he exercised direct sway. He thus established an imperial 
authority strong enough to ensure the internal peace of India by 
checking the disruptive tendencies of minor states. But he did not 
attempt to bring all the outlying kingdoms under his direct sway. 
That would have not only taxed his strength to the utmost, but 
might have even led to serious disaster for, as is shown by the his¬ 
tory of India at all times, it is hard to conquer the frontier states 
and still harder to retain control over them. Instead of permanently 
antagonising them by a policy of subjugation such as he had followed 
in the centre, within a limited sphere, he tried gradually to win 
them over by a policy of conciliation. He allowed them internal 
autonomy without liberty to create discord and disunion within 
the body-politic of India. The frontier-states on the west might 
also have been retained as buffer-states in order to increase the defen¬ 
sive strength of the empire against foreign foes. It was left to the 
successors of Samudra-gupta to build on the solid foundations laid 
by him. With the consolidation of the empire, the directly admini¬ 
stered areas were gradually extended in the east as well as in the 
west, until nearly the whole of Northern India from Chittagong to 
Kathiawar was ruled by the governors of the Gupta emperor. 

5. PERSONALITY OF SAMUDRA-GUPTA 

The vast empire of Samudra-gupta must have been the result 
oi numerous military campaigns extending over many years. We 
have no specific or detailed account of them and it is not necessary 
to suppose that he fought separately with every single state 
mentioned above as included in his kingdom or tributary to him 
Nevertheless when we recall the large number of states acknowledg¬ 
ing his authority it is impossible not to feel profound admiration for 
his military genius. The total extermination of the nine states in 
Northern India demanded uncommon daring and military skill. 
His southern campaign, over long distances, and through compara¬ 
tively unknown and inhospitable regions far from his base, must 
have called forth powers of leadership and organisation of the 
highest order. His march along the coastal regions makes it likely 

13 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


that the land-operations were aided by the navy, the possession of 
which is implied in his dominion over islands in the sea. He is known 
to have performed the Asvamedha sacrifice. No historical Indian 
ruler, either before or after him, had greater justification for per¬ 
forming this time-honoured ceremony and unique method of assert¬ 
ing universal supremacy. V. A. Smith’s description of him as the 
‘‘Indian Napoleon’ 5 is by no means unmerited. 

Brilliant both as general and statesman, Samudra-gupta also 
possessed many qualities of head and heart better suited to a life of 
peaceful pursuits. According to the Allahabad inscription he was 
not only a great patron of learning but was himself a great poet and 
a musician. His poetical compositions, which earned him the title 
of ‘king of poets, 5 have not survived, but we have a striking testi¬ 
mony to his love of music. In one type of his gold coins the great 
emperor is represented as seated cross-legged on a couch, playing 
on a vmd (lute or lyre) which rests on his knees. The royal figure 
on this unique type of coins was undoubtedly drawn from real life 
and testifies to hij inordinate love for, and skill in music. The high 
eulogies of the official record in respect of his personal accomplish¬ 
ments were not merely conventional or courtly praises, but had a 
large substratum of actual fact. 1 We know from Buddhist records 
that a Gupta king was a great patron of letters and appointed the 
famous Buddhist scholar Vasubandhu as his minister. The date of 
Vasubandhu is not known with certainty, but if he died about the 
middle of the fourth century A.D., as is generally held, 2 we must 
regard Samudra-gupta as his patron, and this would indicate his 
patronage of letters to which such a pointed reference is made in 
the Allahabad inscription. The same record emphasises his charity 
and kindness. His munificence, we are told, removed the eternal 
discord between good poetry and plenty and he restored the kings 
fallen from their high estate to wealth and fortune. 

Samudra-gupta was devoted to religious observances and the 
sacred scriptures. He was a follower of the orthodox Brahmanical 
cult, and gave many hundreds of thousands of cows by way of gift 
to Brahmanas. He is said to have revived the Asvamedha sacrifice 
which had been long in abeyance. This statement may not be 
strictly accurate, as Asvamedha was performed by Indian kings not 

1. Dr. R. K. Mookerji has made a detailed analysis of the ‘many-sided genius and 
character of Samudra-gupta’ on the basis of his inscriptions and coin-legends 
(IC, IX. 77). But we should hardly be justified in accepting the expressions 
occurring in them at their face value. 

2. Takakusu held that Vasubandhu lived from about A.D. 420 to 500 (JRAS. 1905, 
pp. 43 ff). Against this M. Peri maintained (BEFEO, XI. 339 ff) that Vasu¬ 
bandhu lived in the fourth century A.D., and died soon after the middle of 
that century. This view is generally accepted. Takakusu opposed it and 
reaffirmed his old view (Indian Studies in honour of C. R. Lanman pp. 79 ff). 
For other views, cf. EHI, S 328 ff. 


14 



THE FOUNDATION OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 

long before his time. But there can be hardly any doubt that his 
reign marked a distinct revival of the old glory and influence of the 
Brahmanical religion which had suffered decline since Asoka made 
Buddhism the dominant religion of India. The neo-Brahmanical 
doctrine that ‘the king is a great deity in human form’ is reflected in 
the Allahabad record which describes Samudra-gupta as ‘a god 
dwelling on earth, being a mortal only in celebrating the rites of the 
observances of mankind.’ 

There can be no doubt that Samudra-gupta was a striking, 
almost unique, personality; and he ushered in a new age in the 
history of India. It is in the fitness of things that he assumed the 
title Vikramanka, 1 evidently in imitation of the king Vikramaditya 
of legendary fame. We have a remarkable memorial of his life and 
reign in the rich variety of gold coins issued by him. 2 They not 
only indicate the power, wealth and grandeur of his empire but also 
give us some idea of his physical appearance and insight into his re¬ 
markable personality. Three types of coins represent him in a mili¬ 
tary garb. In one he stands fully dressed, holding a bow and an 
arrow, and on the margin runs the legend “having conquered the 
earth, the invincible one wins heaven by good deeds.” Another 
depicts him as holding a battle-axe with the appropriate legend 
“wielding the axe of Kritanta (the god of death), the unconquered 
conqueror of unconquered kings is victorious.” In the third the 
king, wearing turban and waist-cloth, is trampling on a tiger which 
falls backwards as he shoots it with the bow in his right hand, the 
left hand pulling the string back behind the ear. The legend refers 
to the king as ‘having the prowess of a tiger.’ These figures of the 
king are apparently drawn from real life, as also that of the fourth 
type referred to above in which the king, wearing waist-cloth, plays 
on a vina. The legend on this type of coins simply gives his name 
without any reference to his martial exploits. The fifth type of 
coins commemorates the Asvamedha, sacrifice. It shows, on the 
obverse, a spirited horse standing before a sacrificial post, and on 
the reverse, the figure of the queen-empress. The legend on this 
type reads: “The king of kings, who performed the Asvamedha 
sacrifice, having protected the earth, wins heaven.” These five 
tvpes of coins thus symbolise both the martial and peaceful pursuits 
of the king. The personal appearance of the king, so far as we can 
judge from his figure on the coins, is in keeping with the impression 
we otherwise form of him. Tall in stature and of good physique, 
he has strong muscular arms and a fully developed chest. 


1. This is inferred from the legend “6rI-Vikramah” recently found on one of his 
coins (JNSJ . V. 1361. Some scholars, however, do not accept Ihe view. 

2. For the coins cf. Allan, op. cit. 


15 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The artistic execution of the gold coins of Samudra-gupta fully 
illustrates the wonderful progress of art which forms such a distinc¬ 
tive feature of the Gupta period and justifies its designation as the 
Classical Age in India. Samudra-gupta, as far as we can judge of him 
from the materials at our disposal, was the visible embodiment of 
the physical and intellectual vigour of the coming age which was 
largely his own creation. His coins and inscriptions hold up before 
our mind’s eye a king of robust and powerful build, whose physical 
strength and prowess, matched by his cultural attainments, herald¬ 
ed a new era in Aryavarta (N. India). After five centuries of politi¬ 
cal disintegration and foreign domination, she again reached the 
high watermark of moral, intellectual and material progress. It was 
the Golden Age which inspired succeeding generations of Indians 
and became alike their ideal and despair. 

Samudra-gupta probably had a fairly long reign. He died in, 
or a little before, A.D. 380; but it is difficult to determine the date 
of his accession. If he founded the Gupta era, as seems not unlikely, 
he must have ascended the throne in A.D. 320. But if, as is general¬ 
ly believed, the era was founded to commemorate the coronation of 
his father, the accession of Samudra-gupta may be placed between 
A.D. 340 or 350. Some scholars put it between A.D. 325 and 335; 
but there is hardly any justification for assuming such a short reign 
of Chandra-gupta I. 1 * * 


1. It is not a little curious that even those who place Chandra-gupta’s accession 

in A.D. 320 and his marriage with KumaradevI after that date, do not hesitate to 

accept A.D. 325 or 335 as the date of Samudra-gupta’s accession (cf. PHAI 4 445, 
447). For Samudra-gupta would then be less than 4 or 14 years of age at the 
time of his accession and it is difficult to believe that his father selected him, 
at that tender age, as his successor out of many other available candidates, on 

the ground of fitness. Cf. PHAP, 530. 


16 




CHAPTER III 

THE EXPANSION AND CONSOLIDATION 

OF THE EMPIRE 

1. RAMA-GUPTA 

Before we proceed with the history of the Guptas we have to 
consider a curious episode, concerning the period immediately fol¬ 
lowing the death of Samudra-gupta, which formed the plot of the 
drama Devl-Chandra-gupta by Visakhadatta. This work is now lost, 
but a few passages from it, quoted in other books, give us a glimpse 
of the events narrated in it. These passages are supplemented by 
scattered references in literary works and inscriptions of a later 
period. All these, pieced together, enable us to reconstruct some¬ 
what as follows the story which formed the central theme of the 
dramatic work: 

‘Samudra-gupta was succeeded by his son Rama-gupta whose 
wife was called Dhruvadevl. In the course of a war with the Saka 
king he was closely besieged, and placed in such a difficult position, 
that in order to save his people he agreed to surrender his queen to 
the Saka king. His younger brother Chandra-gupta protested 
against this act of dishonour, and offered to go to the enemy’s camp 
in the disguise of queen Dhruvadevl in order to kill the hated £aka 
king. The stratagem succeeded and Chandra-gupta saved the empire 
and its honour. The incident must have raised him in the estima¬ 
tion of the people as well as of queen Dhruvadevl, and the character 
and reputation of Rama-gupta suffered a corresponding decline. 
There was an estrangement between the two brothers, and Chandra- 
gupta, presumably afraid of his elder brother’s design on his life, 
pretended madness. Ultimately, by some unknown means Chandra- 
gupta succeeded in killing his elder brother, and not only seized his 
kingdom but also married his widow’. 

It is difficult to decide how far this strange and romantic episode 
can be regarded as historical. The contemporary records of the 
Gupta period contain no reference to Rama-gupta, and imply that 
Chandra-gupta II immediately succeeded his father Samudra-gupta. 
We have numerous coins of the Gupta period, but not even one con¬ 
tains the name of Rama-gupta. 1 These facts naturally cast a doubt 
upon the very existence of a king called Rama-gupta, and the story 

1. It may be mentioned that a few coins f fourth century A.D.) of Rama-gupta have 
recently been found near Bhilsa (JNSL XII. 193 ff) and other places. This 
Rama-gupta may have been a local ruler of Malwa. 

17 

C.A,—2 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


itself contains some elements which make it difficult of acceptance 
without strong positive evidence. The murder of a brother for the 
sake of a kingdom is by no means unusual, but the marriage of his 
brother’s widowed queen by the regicide certainly clashes with our 
cherished notions of morality and social decorum. Besides, it is 
difficult to believe that the inheritor of the mighty empire of 
Samudra-gupta could be so decisively defeated by a Saka king that he 
had no means of saving his army or kingdom, or that he could, under 
any circumstances, consent to an act which would be regarded as the 
most ignominious in any age or country. These considerations make 
it difficult to believe that this drama had a historical basis. On the 
other hand, as there is independent evidence of the existence of such 
a tradition as early as the seventh century A.D. and of its wide-spread 
acceptance all over India, we can hardly dismiss it off-hand as al¬ 
together a figment of imagination. We must, therefore, suspend our 
judgment upon the historical character of Rama-gupta and ignore 
his strange but eventful reign. 1 

2. CHANDRA-GUPTA II 

Samudra-gupta left many sons and grandsons behind him. But 
we know definitely the name of only one son, born of his chief queen 
Dattadevi. He was named Chandra-gupta II after his grandfather 
but had also a second name Deva-gupta, with the variants Deva-raja 
or Deva-sri. Two of his queens, DhruvadevI and Kuvera-naga, are 
known to us. The epithet Parama-bhagavata borne by him shows 
that he was a staunch devotee of the Vaishnava faith. 

It has been held by some that Samudra-gupta chose Chandra- 
gupta II as his successor. But this view rests on the doubtful inter¬ 
pretation of an expression and cannot be regarded as certain. Apart 
from the problematic episode of Rama-gupta discussed above, there is 
nothing to indicate any interval between the death of Samudra-gupta 
and the accession of Chandra-gupta II. 

An inscription, dated A.D. 380, gives also the regnal year of 
Chandra-gupta II, which has been read as prathama (first) by same, 
and panchama (fifth) by others. The date of his accession would 
accordingly be either A.D. 380 or 376. The latter appears to be 
more probable. Chandragupta II died some time between A.D. 
413 and 415, and thus enjoyed a long reign of more than thirty-three 
years. 

1. The question has been discussed by a large number of scholars among whom 
the following deserve special mention: S. Levi ( JA, CCIII, 1923, pp. 201 ff); 
R. Sarasvati (I A, LII, 1923, pp. 181 ff); A. S. Altekar ( JBORS , XIV, 223 ff, XV. 
133 ff); R. D. Banerji (AIG, 26 ff); Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar ( Malaviya Comm. Vol. 
189 ff); K. P. Jayaswal (JBORS, XVIII. 17 ff); Winternitz ( Axyangar Comm. Vol. 
359 ff); Sten Konow (JBORS, XXIII. 444 ff); V. V. Mirashi (1HQ, X. 48 ff; 
JA. LXII, 201 ff); N. Das Gupta (IC, IV. 216 ff). For a full discussion of the 
different views cf. NHIP, Ch. VIII. Sec. 1. 


IS 




EXPANSION AND CONSOLIDATION OF THE EMPIRE 


Chandra-gupta inherited the military genius of his father and 
launched upon a campaign of conquest towards the west. His chief 
opponent was the &aka ruler of Gujarat and the Kathiawar Peninsula. 
The details of the campaign are not known, but there are indications 
that Chandra-gupta, with his feudatory chiefs and ministers, had to 
make a prolonged stay in Malwa. This is proved by three inscrip¬ 
tions: one of Virasena, his minister of ‘peace and war’, at Udayagiri 
hill near Bhilsa, the second, of a Sanakanlka Maharaja, a feudatory 
chief, in the same locality dated 82 (z=A.D. 401-2); and the third of 
a military officer, named Amrakardava, at Sanchl, dated 93 (=A.D. 
412-13). Chandra-gupta’s success was, however, complete. The Saka 
ruler Rudrasiihha III was not only defeated, but his kingdom was 
annexed. The date on his coin falls between 310 and 319 (the unit 
figure is lost) of the Saka Era, or A.D. 388 and 397; the earliest date 
on the coin which Chandra-gupta issued in imitation of the Saka coins 
is 90 -{- x (the unit figure is lost) of the Gupta Era, and thus falls 
after A.D. 409. The western campaign of Chandra-gupta II may 
thus be placed in the first decade of the fifth century A.D. Thus 
after more than three hundred years’ rule the line of the Western 
Satraps came to an end and the last vestige of foreign rule disappear¬ 
ed from Western India. It is not unlikely that the literary refer¬ 
ences to Chandra-gupta’s wars with the Saka chief, mentioned 
above in connection with the episode of Rama-gupta, contain an echo 
of this victory. 

By this brilliant conquest, the Gupta emperor not only put an 
end to the domination of the foreigners who had been in India for 
the longest period, but also added the rich provinces of Kathiawar 
and Gujarat to his empire which now extended from the Bay of 
Bengal to the Arabian Sea. The Gupta empire also controlled to a 
large extent the Indian commerce with the western world; and was 
thus brought into closer contact with western civilisation. Chandra- 
gupta’s exploits naturally recalled those of king Vikramaditya of 
Ujjayinl who is described in Indian legend as having expelled the 
first Saka conquerors of India more than four hundred years before. 1 
It is presumably in imitation of this legendary hero that Chandra- 
gupta assumed the title Vikramaditya, which was also probably 
adopted by his father and had come to be regarded as a title of dis¬ 
tinction by mighty rulers of India famed for their military exploits. 

It is also likely that some of the traditions associated with 
Vikramaditya, especially his liberality and patronage of learning, 
owed their origin to this historic king. For there are ample grounds 
to believe that the famous poet Kalidasa, the chief of the traditional 
nine gems ( nava-ratna) of the court of Vikramaditya, really lived at 


1. See above, Vol. II, pp. 154-7. 


19 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the court of Chandra-gupta II. While these traditions undoubtedly 
prove that Chandra-gupta’s name was held in great esteem by a 
grateful posterity, it would be too much to assume that he was the 
historical figure from whom the Vikramaditya legend was originally 
evolved. In spite of his undoubted popularity, it is difficult to 
maintain this claim, although upheld by several scholars, for reasons 
stated above. 1 

It may be regarded as almost certain that Chandra-gupta had 
other successful military operations to his credit. Saba, a hereditary 
minister of Chandra-gupta, states in his record that the emperor set 
out fio conquer the whole world.’ His general, Amrakardava, is 
said to have obtained great glory by winning many battles. But we 
have no definite information regarding the nature and result of these 
campaigns. The military exploits of a king called Chandra are men¬ 
tioned in an inscription engraved on the Iron Pillar near Qutb Minar 
at Delhi. Although there is no convincing proof that this Chandra 
is the same as Chandra-gupta II, many scholars hold this view. 2 If 
we accept this identity, we must hold that Chandra-gupta II led vic¬ 
torious military expeditions in the eastern as well as in the western 
frontiers of his empire. The record says that he “defeated a confe¬ 
deracy of hostile chiefs in Vahga, and having crossed in warfare the 
seven mouths of the river Sindhu, conquered the Vahlikas.” Vahga 
denotes Eastern Bengal; very nearly the same country as Samatata 
which is included in the tributary frontier states of Samudra-gupta. 
We do not know whether there was a rebellion in East Bengal, or 
whether the war was caused by the aggressive imperial policy of 
Chandra-gupta which sought to incorporate the province into the 
dominions directly administered by him. In any case, it was pro¬ 
bably as a result of this campaign that direct Gupta rule was estab¬ 
lished in this province; for we know definitely that early in the sixth 
century A.D. a Gupta king was ruling in this region. 

Vahlika, the other country conquered by Chandra-gupta II 
after crossing tlm “seven mouths of the river Sindhu,” is almost cer¬ 
tainly to be identified with Balkh (Bactria) beyond the Hindu Kush 
mountains. It is regrettable that we have no more definite or He 
tailed account of the only recorded military expedition of an Indian 
king in this remote region outside India. Here, too, the motive of 
the campaign was probably similar to that against Eastern Bengal. 
As mentioned above, 3 the Kushanas who ruled in this region, or at 
least some of them, had acknowledged the supremacy of Samudra- 
1 7* Vol7lTp7 156 f: ef. also FJ1V. 320 f. 

2. For the different views on the identification of Chandra and the location of 
Vahlika (which some place in the Beas Valley, bordering on Kashmir) cf. 
JRASBL. IX 179 ff. In addition to the references contained therein cf FJ XIV 
f>67: JAHRS. X. 86: JJH. XVI. 13. 

3. Bet' pn. 10-11. 


20 






EXPANSION AND CONSOLIDATION OF THE EMPIRE 


gupta, and either they rebelled, or Chandra-gupta II wanted to 
establish his authority on a firmer basis. Thus, if we accept the 
identity of king Chandra of the Delhi Iron Pillar Inscription with 
Chandra-gupta II, we may well presume that his victorious arms 
penetrated as far as the eastern limits of India, and beyond Hindu 
Kush to the north-west. If we remember that he had also conquered 
the Saka kingdoms in Western Malwa, Gujarat and Kathiawar, we 
may regard Chandra-gupta II as having rounded off the Gupta im¬ 
perial dominions in Northern India in all directions. He thus com¬ 
pleted the task begun by his father. 

Chandra-gupta II is known to have formed marriage alliances 
with some powerful ruling families. He married Kuvera-naga, of 
the Naga family, and had a daughter by her named Prabhavati-gupta. 
This daughter was married to the Vakataka king Rudrasena II. The 
geographical position of the Nagas and the Vakatakas was such that 
they might have been of great help to him in his campaigns against 
the Sakas and the Kushanas, and their hostility could easily prove 
to be a serious embarrassment. It is not, therefore, an unreasonable 
assumption that both these matrimonial alliances were deliberately 
made with a political object. 

We learn from an inscription of the powerful Kadamba ruler 
Kakutsthavarman 1 of Kuntala that his daughters were married to 
the Guptas and other kings. It is not quite certain whether it was 
Chandra-gupta II or his son who married a Kuntala princess. But 
it is another indication of the fact that since the very beginning it 
was the traditional policy of the Guptas to form political alliances 
by marriage with the more powerful and distinguished royal families 
of India. 

While his predecessors issued only gold coins Chandra-gupta II 
introduced those of copper and silver as well. The obverse of his 
silver coins was imitated from that of the Western Satraps as these 
coins were obviously meant for circulation in the territories con¬ 
quered from them. But on the reverse the usual chaitya symbol 
was replaced by the bird Garuda, the vehicle of Vishnu, which figures 
prominently also on the coins of Samudra-gupta, as befitting a devout 
follower of Vishnu. The copper coins, which show no less than nine 
different varieties, have the same general type, viz. the king on the 
obverse and the Garuda on the reverse. 

The gold coins of Chandra-gupta rival those of his father in 
grandeur and brilliance, and like them throw considerable light on 
his personality and imperial pomp and power. Some variations 
made by him in the types of his father’s coins seem to be full of 

1. The correct form is Kakutsthavarman, though Kakusthavarman is the form 
invariably found in the records of the Kadambas. We have uniformly used 
the correct form. 


21 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


significance. Thus he is represented as slaying a lion instead of a 
tiger, and the difference is emphasised by the legend Simha-Vikrama 
(one who has the prowess of a lion). It is generally held that these 
coins indicate his conquest of Gujarat where lions were then fairly 
common. In his couch-type of coins he holds, not a lyre like his 
father, but a flower, and taken with the legend vuptikriti, this new 
type may be taken to represent his intellectual and physical eminence 
or artistic sense. 

Chandra-gupta II also introduced some new types of coins. In 
one of these he stands with his left hand on the hilt of his sword, 
with a dwarf-attendant holding an umbrella over his head,—probably 
a symbol of his claim to universal sovereignty. 1 Another represents 
him as riding on a fully caparisoned horse. These as well as the 
lion-slayer type are fitting tributes to his personal valour and mar¬ 
tial spirit, which was evidently not incompatible with artistic or 
intellectual temperament suggested by the couch-type. A coin, doubt¬ 
fully attributed to Chandra-gupta II, represents the king as standing 
before a deity, probably Vishnu, and extending his right hand to 
receive the divine prasdda in the form of three sweetmeats. 2 

Fa-hien, the Chinese pilgrim who travelled over India for more 
than ten years (c. 400-411) during the reign of Chandra-gupta II, has 
left an interesting record of the country. Unfortunately, he has not 
noted anything about the political condition of India; so much so, 
that he does not even mention the name of the great emperor in 
whose wide dominions he must have lived for more than five years. 
Still even the little that he says about the life of the people is of 
value. Referring to the ‘Middle Kingdom’, which formed the heart 
of Chandra-gupta II’s dominions, he observes: “The people are 
numerous and happy; they have not to register their households, or 
attend to any magistrates and their rules; only those who cultivate 
the royal land have to pay (a portion of) the gain from it. If they 
want to go, they go: if they want to stay on, they stay. The king 
governs without decapitation or (other) corporal punishments.” 
Fa-hien never refers to the lawlessness from which Hiuen Tsang, 
two centuries later, suffered more than once. The mild punishment 
of criminals referred to by him is also in striking contrast to the 
harsh and severe penalties mentioned by the later Chinese pilgrim. 
On the whole the brief account of Fa-hien gives us some idea of 
the peace, prosperity and contentment prevailing in the empire of 
Chandra-gupta II. 

The reign of Chandra-gupta II saw the consolidation of the 
Gupta empire. The brilliant intellectual revival, manifested in arts, 
sciences and literature, which distinguished the Gupta age,, has been 


1. IHQ, XXIII. 113. 


2. JNSI, X. 103. 





EXPANSION AND CONSOLIDATION OF THE EMPIRE 


dealt with elsewhere in this volume. But it is necessary to remem¬ 
ber that this age was largely the creation of Samudra-gupta and 
Chandra-gupta II. Their conquests brought about that imperial 
peace which rendered possible the progress of culture and civilisa¬ 
tion which has rightly earned the epithet ‘Golden Age’ or ‘Classical 
Age’ for the period of Gupta rule in India. 

Samudra-gupta had begun the work of conquest. To his son 
Chandra-gupta II fell the task of completing it and assimilating into 
the organisation of the empire, not only the tribal states and king¬ 
doms on the border but also the territories ruled by foreign hordes 
like the Sakas and the Kushanas. The peaceful and well-knit empire 
which he left as a legacy to his son must have been the fruit of long 
endeavour not only of a great general and able statesman, but also 
of a striking personality. If, as is generally believed, Chandra-gupta 
Vikramaditya lived longer in the memory of a grateful posterity 
which had forgotten his illustrious father, the explanation is not far 
to seek. People are more impressed by the finished superstructure, 
and give greater credit to its architect than the master-builder who 
conceived the plan and laboriously laid the foundation. Samudra- 
gupta, the victor of a hundred fights, is a hero of history. Chandra- 
gupta II, who brought to maturity the new era of political greatness 
and cultural regeneration, won a place in the hearts of his people. 

3. KUMARA-GUPTA I 

On the death of Chandra-gupta II, his son Kumara-gupta, born 
of his chief queen DhruvadevI, ascended the throne. 1 His earliest 
known date is A.D. 415 and he died in A.D. 455. He had thus a long 
reign of forty years or more. 

The Gupta empire had now reached its zenith. No specific 
military campaign of Kumara-gupta is known to us, but there is no 
doubt that he maintained intact the vast empire he had inherited 
from his father. He also performed an Asvamedha sacrifice and 

<u 

assumed the title Mahendraditya. He gave great prominence to the 
God Karttikeya, whose name (Kumara) he bore. He issued a new 
type of gold coins depicting Karttikeya riding on a peacock on one 
side, and the king feeding a peacock on the other. He also substi¬ 
tuted the peacock for Garuda on the silver coins. 

Quite a large number of records of the governors and feudatories 
of Kumara-gupta have come to light. They indicate the develop¬ 
ment of the administrative machinery and the strength and stability 
of the empire. There is reason to believe that Kumara-gupta’s long 

1. It is difficult to accept Bhandarkar’s view (JC, XI. 231) that. Kumara-gupta is 
identical with Govinda-gupta, or the theory of Jagannath (IC, XII. 167) that 
the latter ascended the throne after Chandra-gupta II and ruled before the 
former. 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


reign was on the whole peaceful and prosperous, and the empire 
enjoyed to the full the benefits of the military victories of his father 

and grandfather. 

Towards the very end of his reign the peace of the empire was 
rudely disturbed by the invasion of an enemy whose identity is not 
definitely established. It is generally believed that the hostile forces 
belonged to a tribe whose name was Pushyamitra, but the reading 
of this name is uncertain. 1 Whoever might have been the adversary 
(or adversaries), there is no doubt that he was very powerful, and 
his progress must have constituted a grave menace to the empire. 
A contemporary inscription expressly states that the enemies ‘had 
great resources in men and money/ and in the course of his fight 
with them ‘to restore the fallen fortunes of his family/ the crown- 
prince Skanda-gupta passed a whole night on bare earth. In spite 
of obvious poetic fancies and exaggerations, the statement leaves the 
impression that the Gupta emperor had met with serious reverses 
and was threatened with utter ruin when Skanda-gupta turned the 
scale in his favour by inflicting a crushing defeat upon the enemy. 
The poet, who composed the inscription, tells us that this heroic 
achievement of Skanda-gupta was sung in every region ‘by happy 
men, even down to the children.’ The sense of relief echoed in these 
laudatory songs gives us a proper measure of the apprehended 
calamity. It is significant that in four successive verses the poet 
refers no less than three times to the ‘ruined fortunes of the Gupta 
family/ and their restoration by Skanda-gupta. This emphasises 
the serious nature of the crisis that was averted by Skanda-gupta, 
but its exact nature still remains unknown. 

The reign of Kumara-gupta is generally regarded as devoid of 
interest and importance. But in forming a true estimate of his 
character and achievements we must give full importance to certain 
significant details which are generally overlooked. The numerous 
inscriptions of this age mention only one military campaign towards 
the very end of his reign, while they all clearly indicate a peaceful 
and stable administration from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of Bengal 
under his personal authority. Only a strong and benevolent admi¬ 
nistration could have kept the vast empire so thoroughly in check. 
The repulse of the Hunas and other enemies shortly after his death 
proves the efficiency of the imperial army and that it was preserved 
for nearly 40 years even under peaceful conditions reflects no small 
credit upon Kumara-gupta. On the whole, it is not unlikely that 

L The information is derived from the Bhitari pillar Inscription/” Fleet read the 
crucial expression as “Pushya-mitrams-cha”, but noted that the second syllable 
of the name is damaged (CI7, III. 54, 55 fn. 2). Dr. H. R. Divekar proposes to 
read the compound as “Yudhy-amitrdms-cha” ( ABORI. I. 99 ff) A trib* 
called Pushyamitra is referred to in the Vishnu Purdna which associates it with 
the region near the source of the Narmada river. 


24 









EXPANSION AND CONSOLIDATION OF THE EMPIRE 


more credit is due to Kumara-gupta’s administration and personality 
than is usually given to him by modern historians. His reign is 
generally looked upon as a mere dark background against which 
shine brilliantly those of his two predecessors and immediate suc¬ 
cessor. But for aught we know this may be unfair to him and not 
in consonance with strict historical truth. 

4. SKANDA-GUPTA 

The aged emperor Kumara-gupta died before Skanda-gupta's 
return from his victorious campaign (A.D. 455-6). The official re¬ 
cord, mentioned above, describes how Skanda-gupta reported his 
glorious victory over the enemies to his mother, who received him 
with tears as Devaki did unto Krishna. This allusion to the well- 
known story might have more meaning than is apparent to us. It 
has been suggested that Devaki 1 was the name of the queen-mother. 
But the analogy might have been called forth by the similarity of 
circumstances as much as by a common name. 2 

It is curious that the official records of a later date omit the name 
of Skanda-gupta from the royal genealogical list. It is equally 
strange that while the genealogical portion, even in the inscription of 
Skanda-gupta himself, mentions the chief queens who were mothers 
of his three predecessors, it does not refer to his own mother. 
Further, an official record, composed shortly after the accession of 
Skanda-gupta, states how the “goddess of sovereignty, of her own 
accord, selected him as her husband, having in succession discarded 
all other princes.” This idea is also probably represented in a type 
of coins which depicts the king, armed with bow and arrow, as 
standing in front of the Garuda standard while, beyond it, is a female 
figure facing the king and holding a lotus in her left hand and an 
indistinct object, probably a fillet, in her right hand. All these 
scattered evidences may indicate that Skanda-gupta’s mother was 
probably not the chief queen of Kumara-gupta, and having no indis¬ 
putable legitimate claim to the throne, Skanda-gupta had to fight 
for it with one or more rivals. 3 It is probable, for example, that 

1. Hist. Ins. 349; PHAP, 573, f. n. 3. 

2. B.C. Law Vol. I. 618; EL XVIII. 242. 

3. Arguments in support of this hypothesis are given in JPASB, XVII. 253 ff. 
They have been criticised in detail in PHAI 1 , 482 ff. The criticism seeks to 
establish that the conclusion does not necessarily follow from the data; in other 
words, it cannot be regarded as a settled fact. Now, this was never claimed, 
and the views were expressly stated to be a tentative hypothesis. Besides, the 
criticism misses the real points of many of the arguments. Thus regarding 
the omission of the name of Skanda-gupta's mother in the Bhitari pillar Ins. 
it is merely observed that ‘the names of the mothers of kings are sometimes 
omitted,’ and ‘there was no rule prohibiting the mention of ordinary queens 
in inscriptions.’ These remarks show a lack of appreciation of the argument, 
viz. the omission of the name Mahndevi of Kumara-gupta I, the mother of 
the reigning king, in striking contrast with the mention of the other Mahddevis 
of earlier kings in one and the same record, cannot but he looked upon as 


25 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


taking advantage of Skanda-gupta’s absence in a distant campaign, 
his step-brother Puru-gupta ascended the throne immediately after 
his father’s death, but was soon removed when Skanda-gupta re¬ 
turned from his victorious campaign. It should be remembered, 
however, that while this is undoubtedly a probable view, it cannot 
be regarded as an established fact. 

But whether there was a war of succession or not, Skanda-gupta 
did not long reign in peace, and was engaged in hostilities almost 
immediately after his accession. Contemporary records refer to 
his struggle with hostile kings, including some who are described as 
mlechchas, but no details are given. We know, however, definitely 
that some time during his reign, Skanda-gupta had to encounter the 
invasion of the Hunas who had already proved themselves to be a 
formidable power and a terror to both Europe and Asia. The history 
of the Hunas will be treated in detail elsewhere. For the present it 
will suffice to state that about the middle of the fifth century A.D. one 
branch of the Hunas, known as the Ephthalites or White Huns, 
occupied the Oxus valley and threatened both Persia and India. 
They conquered the kingdom of Gandhara, and set up a king who was 
cruel and vindictive and practised the most barbarous atrocities. It 
is probable that they advanced still further into the heart of India 
and became a grave menace to the Gupta empire. Skanda-gupta had 
once saved the empire while he was yet the crown prince. This new 
danger, perhaps a graver one, again put his military prowess to a 
severe test. But he was equally successful on this occasion as well. 
The verse describing his conflict with the Hunas, though mutilated, 
leaves no doubt that the struggle was severe, but he won a complete 
victory. The utter discomfiture of the Hunas is also borne out by 
the fact that for-nearly half a century the Gupta empire was immune 
from their depredations. * 1 * * 

significant. It is true that almost all the facts, on which the hypothesis is 
based, may be explained away in a different manner. If they were not, then 
the view would not be a mere hypothesis, but a proved fact. But nothing has 
been said to indicate that the proposed view is not a probable and a reasonable 
inference from the facts before us. In particular no other satisfactory explana¬ 
tion is forthcoming regarding the assumption of royal power by Ghatotkacha- 
gupta and Prakasaditya. The analogy of the Banskhera and Madhuban plates 
does not, as has been suggested (PHAI. 4 483), take away the force of the argu¬ 
ment. For here Rajya-vardhana’s mother is mentioned, and as Harsha-vardhana 
is said to be his anuja (younger brother), the separate mention of his mother 
is rendered unnecessary. (Cf. also PHAI , 5 572 ff). 

1. ATlan finds an echo of Skanda-gupta’s victory over the Hunas in a story of 
king Vikramaditya preserved in Somadeva’s Kathasaritsdgara. According to 
it Vikramaditya, son of Mahendraditya, king of Ujjain, having succeeded to the 
throne on his father s abdication, utterly defeated the Mlechchhas who were 
overrunning the earth (CGD. xlix, fn. 1). 

According to a Buddhist text ‘Chandragarblia-paviprichchha’ ‘king Mahen- 

drasena, who was born in the country of Kausambi, had a valiant son. After 

he had passed the age of 12 Mahendra’s kingdom was invaded by three foreign 

powers in concert Yavanas, Palhikas and Sakunas—who took possession of 

26 . 



EXPANSION AND CONSOLIDATION OF THE EMPIRE 

It was a great achievement for which Skanda-gupta may well 
go down in history as the saviour of India. The full significance of 
the great task performed by him can only be understood against the 
background of contemporary events. Shortly before Skanda-gupta 
ascended the throne, the Hunas had established their supremacy in 
Europe, and the mighty Roman empire quailed before these bar¬ 
barians. Their leader Attila, who died in A.D. 453, was able 'to send 
equal defiance to the courts of Ravenna and Constantinople.’ Shortly 
after their defeat by Skanda-gupta, they overwhelmed Persia and 
killed its king. Wherever they went, they carried devastation by 
fire and sword, and the most prosperous towns and villages were 
reduced to utter desolation. If we remember all this, we can well 
realise the value of the great victory of Skanda-gupta over them. 
All over the vast empire the people must have heaved a sigh of re¬ 
lief at the great deliverance and as a contemporary record puts it, 
the fame of Skanda-gupta was sung by everyone both young and old. 
This heroic feat of Skanda-gupta that saved India from the scourge 
of a cruel and barbaric foe fully justifies his assumption of the title 
Vikramaditya in imitation of his grandfather. 

The arduous military campaigns must have heavily taxed the 
resources of the empire, and this is reflected in the coinage of 
Skanda-gupta. His gold coins are comparatively few and belong 
mostly to a single type. This, as well as deterioration in the purity 
of gold, was possibly due to the financial drain caused by the con¬ 
tinual stress of wars during the reign. Happily we have also evi¬ 
dence of great works of public utility executed by his officers even 
in distant parts of the empire. An inscription, incised on the Girnar 
hill near Junagadh in Kathiawar, refers in detail to such an achieve¬ 
ment by his governor Parnadatta. It refers to the great lake or 
water-reservoir on the Girnar hill, which evidently supplied irriga¬ 
tion canals over a large cultivated area, and was constructed by 
Chandragupta Maurya by having an embankment built across a 
small gap in a natural depression over the hills. This embankment 
having burst on account of excessive rains in the very first year of 
Skanda-gupta’s reign, the whole countryside was threatened with 
ruin. But the governor Parnadatta, and his son Chakrapalita, the 
local magistrate, took prompt steps to repair the damage and restore 

Gandhara and countries to the north of the Ganga. The young son of 
Mahendrasena led his father’s army of two hundred thousand men against the 
enemy whose soldiers numbered three hundred thousand. The prince, how¬ 
ever, broke the enemy army and won the battle. On his return his father 
crowned him king, saying “henceforth rule the kingdom,” and himself retired 
to religious life. For twelve years after this, the new king fought these foreign 
enemies, and ultimately captured and executed the three kings.’ It has been 
suggested that this story gives an account of the fight between Skanda-gupta 
and the Hunas (1HIJ. 36). But no great reliance can be placed on the details 
of such stories. 


27 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the embankment. Another record in the same place tells us how 
a similar catastrophe had occurred three hundred years before, 
when the embankment was repaired by the Saka chief Rudradaman. 
Two records on the spot thus give us an interesting history of this 
great irrigation reservoir over a period of more than seven hundred 
and fifty years. 

The inscription of Parnadatta is a beautiful composition and 
holds out before us the picture of a strong united empire under the 
vigorous administration of a benevolent and popular ruler. The 
Gupta empire, which now stretched literally from the Bay of Bengal 
to the Arabian Sea, was the undisputed possession of one master 
whose commands were implicitly obeyed by the governors, appointed 
‘by him, from one end to the other of this vast region. The founda¬ 
tions of the empire were strong enough to survive great internal 
shocks, and even the redoubtable Hunas failed to break through its 
defences. For nearly a century the empire had stood as a symbol 
of the unity, integrity and independence of Aryavarta. The poet 
who referred (in A.D. 460) to the tranquil reign of Skanda-gupta, 
the lord of hundred kings, did not probably exaggerate the condi¬ 
tion of things. We have every reason to believe that peace and 
prosperity prevailed over the vast empire, and the new era of cul¬ 
tural progress continued its course unchecked under the protective 
wing of the unparalleled material power and splendour of the age. 
When Skanda-gupta died about A.D. 467, he had the supreme satis¬ 
faction of leaving intact the mighty empire built up by his great 
predecessors. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE IMPERIAL CRISIS 

It is impossible in the present state of our knowledge to give a 
clear account, or even a definite outline, of the history of the Imperial 
Guptas after the death of Skanda-gupta. We know the names of 
several kings, but their dates or relation to each other cannot always 
be definitely determined. The known facts cannot be co-ordinated 
in a manner that may be regarded as entirely satisfactory or even 
free from serious difficulties. All that can be attempted is a provi¬ 
sional reconstruction that appears to be the most reasonable and 
least open to objection. 1 2 3 

1. PURU-GUPTA 

The official genealogy of the later Gupta emperors traces the 
imperial line from Kumara-gupta through Puru-gupta and altogether 
ignores Skanda-gupta. Puru-gupta was the son of Kumara-gupta I 
and his chief queen AnantadevI, and, as noted above, it is not un¬ 
likely that he contested the throne after the death of his father. But 
whether he ruled, for howsoever short a period, at that time, or 
seized the throne after the death of his brother Skanda-gupta, there 
is hardly any doubt that he did reign, and the imperial line was 
continued by his two sons Budha-gupta and Narasimha-gupta, and 
the latter’s descendants, not those of Skanda-gupta. 

But there are several kings known from coins and inscriptions 
whose position in the Gupta family is not known with certainty. 
One is Kumara-gupta II who reigned in A.D. 474, i.e. less than seven 
years after the death of Skanda-gupta. He might have been a son 
of Skanda-gupta who was dispossessed or succeeded by Budha-gupta, 
but it is also not unlikely that he was an elder brother of Budha- 
gupta. There are some other kings also whose existence is deduced 
from coins and inscriptions and who probably ruled about this time. 
Thus indications are not wanting that there were rival factions con- 
tending for the throne during the period immediately after Skanda- 
gupta’s death; but we have no definite knowledge of the events of 
this period. 


1. For the different views on this subject cf. the works mentioned in General 
References and also the following: 

1. Pannalal, in Hindusthan Review, January, 1918. 

2. R. C. Majumdar in l A, 1918, pp. 161-7: IC. X. 172; JIJPHS , XVIII. 70. 

3. N. N. Das Gupta in B. C. Law, Vol. I. 617. 


29 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


2. BUDHA-GUPTA 

The obscurity lifts with the accession of Budha-gupta, the son 
of Puru-gupta and his chief queen Chandradevl. Budha-gupta, was 
on the throne in A.D. 477 and ruled for twenty years or more. 
Whatever might have been the internal troubles before he came to 
the throne, he succeeded in establishing a firm rule and restoring 
peace and order over the extensive empire. Records of his 
governors in Malwa and Bengal testify to the continued solidarity 
of the empire, at least to a very large extent, though there were 
ominous signs of the decline of its power and authority in the out¬ 
lying provinces. 

In the west, the Maitraka family became hereditary rulers of 
the Kathiawar Peninsula. Bhatarka, the founder of this family and 
a general of the emperor, was appointed governor of this province 
with Valabhl as its capital, and he was succeeded by his son Dhara- 
sena. Both of them called themselves Sendpaiti, but the next 
governor, Dronasimha, a younger son of Bhatarka, assumed the title 
Maharaja , and it is claimed in the official records of the family that 
the paramount ruler in person installed him in royalty by a regular 
ceremony. The paramount ruler, referred to, was most probably the 
emperor Budha-gupta. Thus Dronasimha became a feudal chief 
rather than a governor, and though the family still paid nominal 
homage to the Gupta emperor, the Maitrakas of Valabhi were well 
on the way to setting up an independent kingdom. 

The Parivrajaka Maharajas, so-called because they were des¬ 
cended from a royal ascetic ( parivrajaka ), ruled in Bundelkhand 
(Nagod and Jaso States). Maharaja Hastin (A.D. 475-517) of the 
family issued land-grants without mentioning Budha-gupta, making 
only a general reference to Gupta sovereignty. 

Contiguous to the Parivrajaka kingdom was another principality 
with Uchchakalpa as the capital. King Jayanatha of this family 
issued land grants in the years 174 and 177 which probably refer to 
the Gupta era and therefore correspond to A.D. 493 and 496. 1 It 
appears from the locality and the use of the Gupta era that this 
kingdom was once included in the Gupta empire, but as Jayanatha’s 
grants do not contain any reference to the Gupta sovereignty, it is 
probable that by A.D. 493 he had ceased to owe any allegiance to it. 

To the north and east of these two kingdoms in Bundelkhand, 
a dynasty called the Panduvamsa was rising into importance. King 
Udayana of this family, known from a rock inscription at Kalanjar 
(in Banda District, U.P.), 2 flourished probably towards the end of the 
fifth century A.D., and is to be identified with the king of the same 


1. Cll, III. 117, 121; El, XXIII. 171. 


30 


2. El, IV. 257. 




THE IMPERIAL CRISIS 


name whose great-grandson Tlvaradeva founded a principality in 
South Kosala. 1 Another Panduvarhsa or Pandu family is known 
from a copper-plate grant found in Rewah State, Baghelkhand, 
which mentions the names of four kings. 2 The first two of these 
bear no royal title, but the next two, Nagabala and his son Bharata- 
bala ( alias Indra), are not only styled Maharaja but also bear the 
epithets Parama-mahesvara, Parama-brahmanya, etc. These four 
kings probably ruled in the fifth century A.D. and it is evident that 
the family achieved complete or partial independence in the latter 
half of the period. 

Another ruling chief, Maharaja Lakshmana, is known from two 
copper-plates found in Allahabad District and Rewah State. 3 Both 
are dated in the year 158 which has been referred to the Gupta era. 
Maharaja Lakshmana, who was thus ruling in A.D. 477-8 in the reign 
of Budha-gupta, had his capital at Jayapura, a place not yet 
identified. As he makes no reference to Gupta sovereignty, he was 
probably an independent king, at least de facto. 

Similarly Maharaja Subandhu, who issued a land-grant from 
the ancient town of Mahishmati (Mandhata or Maheshwar) on the 
Narmada in the year 167, makes no reference to any Gupta suzerain. 
If the date is to be referred to the Gupta era, as is generally believed, 
he was a contemporary of Budha-gupta. 4 

It is also significant that whereas the governor of North Bengal 
was called simply Uparika in the time of Kumara-gupta I, the epithet 
Maharaja was added to it in the time of Budha-gupta. Another 
governor of the latter, ruling the land between the Yamuna and the 
Narmada, was also called Maharaja. Even a subordinate to this ruler, 
who governed the territory round Eran, had the title Maharaja. 

These instances show that while outwardly the Gupta empire 
suffered no diminution and its authority was still acknowledged as 
far as the Bay of Bengal in the east, the Arabian Sea in the west, and 
the river Narmada in the south, its power and prestige had consider¬ 
ably declined, and some of its outlying provinces like Kathiawar and 
Bundelkhand were already enjoying a semi-independent status. 
This is fully borne out by a study of the coins of Budha-gupta. His 
gold coins are very rare and only two or three specimens are so far 
known. 6 


1 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 


El, vn. 104. 2. Bharata-Kaumudi, I. 215; EL XXVII 132 

El. II. 364; AS I, 1936-7, p. 88. ' 

El, XIX. 261. Prof. Mirashi refers the date to the so-called Kalachuri era and 
regards Subandhu as an independent chief in A.D. 416-7 (/HQ, XXI. 82-3). 
According to Allan (CGD. cv) the coins of Budha-gupta are kown in silver 
only. But a type of gold coin, attributed by Allan to Puru-gupta (ibid, cii) 
m <>st probably belongs to Budha-gupta (1C. I. 691-2) Besides, two gold coins 
of Budha-gupta have recently been found (JNSI, X. 78- XII 112) 


31 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The reason for this decline is to be sought for both in internal 
and external circumstances. The probability of civil war and 
struggle for the throne, on the deaths of Kumara-gupta I and Skanda- 
gupta, has been referred to above. An inscription found at Manda- 
sor refers to the period between A.D. 436 and 472 as full of troubles 
which saw the reigns of many kings, but the implication is rather 
vague. 

We have also allusions to foreign invasions. The Vakataka 
king Narendra-sena is said to have established his suzerainty over 
the lords of Kosala, Mekala and Malava. This would imply an in¬ 
vasion of Gupta dominions from the south. The date of Narendra- 
sena is not definitely known, but he may be regarded as a contem¬ 
porary of Budha-gupta. His invasion might have been primarily 
responsible for the decline of the Gupta supremacy in Bundelkhand 
and Baghelkhand noted above. The Hunas, though defeated by 
Skanda-gupta, reappeared, probably even during the reign of Budha- 
gupta, but the dates are not definitely known. Thus although our 
information is very meagre, we may easily infer that both internal 
discord and foreign aggression sapped the vitality of the empire. 

Budha-gupta’s last known date is A.D. 495, but he died probably 
about A.D. 500 1 or shortly after. It is difficult to form a proper 
estimate of his ability. His reign was undoubtedly the first stage in 
the decline of the empire, but this was not necessarily due to his 
faults. Perhaps, if the facts were more fully known, he would have 
been entitled to great credit for saving the mighty fabric of the 
empire from the impending ruin which overtook it almost imme¬ 
diately after his death. In any case he seems to have been the last 
Gupta emperor to enjoy sovereignty over the vast dominions be¬ 
queathed by Samudra-gupta and Chandra-gupta II. During his 
reign the empire passed through a critical period and emerged, not 
quite unscathed, but with its form intact, and its glory scarcely 
diminished, at least in outward appearance. At the time of his 
death, the imperial structure was still imposing, though cracks were 
already visible. 


1. 7A. XVIII. 227. But the reading of the symbol for 80 on a coin, from which this 
date is derived, is very uncertain (JA. XIV. 68). 





CHAPTER V 


THE DISINTEGRATION OF THE EMPIRE 

1. DISSENSIONS IN THE IMPERIAL FAMILY 

The death of Budha-gupta was followed by a period of troubles. 
We find evidence of internal dissensions, caused by disputed succes¬ 
sion, leading to the partition of the empire; and to make matters 
worse, there was renewed invasion of the Hunas with far greater 
success than before. It is difficult to follow clearly the sequence of 
events, or to understand their reaction upon one another; we can 
only trace the course of history in broad outline. 

According to the official genealogy Budha-gupta was succeeded 
by his brother Narasimha-gupta and the latter by his son and grand¬ 
son. The reigns of these three kings covered roughly the period 
between A.D. 500 and 570. But we find the records of two other 
Gupta kings who ruled during the earlier part of this period. The 
first of them is Vainya-gupta, of whom a single record, dated A.D. 
507, has been found in Tippera District in Bengal. His gold coins 
and royal seal indicate that he belonged to the imperial family, but 
his exact relationship to the Gupta kings mentioned above is not 
known. 1 It is probable that his dominion was confined to Bengal, 
and that he ruled for a short time. 

The other king Bhanu-gupta is also known from a single inscrip- 
tion at Eran (Saugor District, Madhya Pradesh) dated A.D. 510, but 
neither his coins nor any royal seal have yet come to light. The 
inscription records how a feudatory chief named Goparaja accom¬ 
panied “the mighty king, the glorious Bhanu-gupta, the bravest man 
on the earth,” and fought a famous battle. Goparaja was killed in 
this battle and his wife accompanied him on the funeral pyre. The 
small pillar on which the record is engraved was thus a memorial 
Sail stone. 

The epithet of Bhanu-gupta leaves no doubt that he was a ruler 
of the Gupta family. It is difficult to account for the almost simul¬ 
taneous appearance of the two rulers, Vainya-gupta and Bhanu- 
gupta, in the eastern and western provinces of the Gupta dominion, 
particularly when we remember that neither of them is recognised 
in the official Gupta genealogy, according to which a third king 
Narasimha-gupta was ruling about the same time. The most plau- 

1. For Vainya-gupta’s inscriptions, coins and seals, cf. IHQ, VI. 40; IX. 784, 989; 
XIX. 275. For the suggestion that he was the son of Puru-gupta cf. IHQ, 
XXIV. 67. 


C.A.—3 


33 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


sibie explanation seems to be that there were several rival claimants 
to the throne, who set themselves up in different parts of the empire 
and succeeded for the time being in holding their own. 

The famous battle in which Bhanu-gupta and Goparaja were 
engaged at Eran was most probably fought against the Huna chief 
Toramana. For we know definitely that about this time that great 
Huna leader had conquered this region. But even assuming that 
Bhanu-gupta fought with Toramana, we do not know whether he 
defended the province against the Huna attack or made an attempt 
to recover it from Huna possession. In either case, we do not know 
the extent of his success or failure. Thus, in spite of the high 
encomiums showered on his bravery, Bhanu-gupta remains a 
shadowy figure and we cannot say exactly what part he played in 
this dark period of the Gupta empire. 

Nor are we better informed about the early history of Nara- 
simha-gupta, who followed his brother Budha-gupta on the throne 
and assumed the title of Bdldditya. His position vis a vis either 
Vainya-gupta or Bhanu-gupta is not known, and we cannot exclude 
the possibility that he ascended the throne after both of them had 
died. The only great achievement with which he may be credited 
is the crushing defeat he inflicted upon the Huna chief Mihirakula, 
the son of Toramana. But the forces of disintegration were already 
at work and terrific convulsions shook the empire, heralding its 
downfall. We must take note of these before we can proceed with 
the history of Narasimha-gupta. 


2. THE HUN AS 1 


As early as the second century B.C. we find the nomadic Hunas 
living on the borders of China. Their quarrel with the Yueh-chi, a 
neighbouring nomadic tribe, as mentioned above,^ led to the con¬ 
quest of India by the Sakas and the Kushanas about the first century 
of the Chiistian era. Later, the Hunas, like the Yueh-chi, migrated 
towards the west, and divided into two main streams, of which one 
flowed towards the Volga and the other to the Oxus. The activities 
of the former figure prominently in Roman history and need notT>c 
discussed here. The Hunas in the Oxus valley threw off the yoke 
of the Juan-Juan tribe and became very powerful towards the middle 
of the fifth century A.D. From the name of their rulers’ family they 


1. For a general account of the Hunas cf:— 

1. Chavannes— Documents sur les Toukiue Occidentaux, pp 223 ff 

2 ' flT tT 1 S lf"-T The White Huns Kindred tribes in the history of 
the Indian North-western frontier (IA, 1905, pp. 73 ff). 

3. Ghirshman— Les Chionites Hephthalites. 

For the Huna activities in India cf. I A, XV. 245 34C>- 1HO TTT 1- N1A 

IV. 36. For Huna coins cf. JASB, 1894, Part I. pp. 19! ff. F^th” anti^fy 

P Vol n pp 3S and their actlvlty m Iran cf - Bhandarkar Comm. Vol. 65. 


34 








THE DISINTEGRATION OF THE EMPIRE 


came to be known as Ye-tha, Hephthalites .or Ephthalites, and the 
Greek accounts refer to them as White Huns. 

From the Oxus valley the White Huns advanced towards both 
Persia and India. Crossing the Hindu Kush they occupied Gandhara, 
but their further progress was checked by Skanda-gupta, who inflict¬ 
ed a crushing defeat upon them about A.D. 460. Persia, however, 
was unable to stop their ravages and in A.D. 484 the Huns defeated 
and killed the Persian king. This success enhanced the power and 
prestige of the Huns, and by the end of the fifth century A.D. they 
ruled over a vast empire with their principal capital at Balkh. 

About the close of the fifth or the beginning of the sixth century 
A.D., a chief named Toramana, advancing from the Punjab, conquer¬ 
ed a large part of Western India, and even Eran (Saugor District, 
Madhya Pradesh) was included in his dominions. The conquest of 
Eran must have taken place not long after the reign of Budha-gupta, 
for the chief who administered the district under Toramana was the 
younger brother of one who held the same office under Budha-gupta. 
Toramana is generally taken to be a Huna chief, and although there 
is no conclusive evidence to this effect, this may well be true. 1 His 
coins testify to his foreign origin and indicate his rule over parts of 
U.P., Rajputana, Punjab and Kashmir. It is probable that he was 
connected with the Huna ruling family in Gandhara and advanced 
from that base to effect further conquests in India. But we possess 
little definite information about him. According to a Jain work he 
was converted to that faith and lived at Pavvaiya on the banks of the 
Chandrabhaga (Chenab) in the Punjab. 2 

Toramana was succeeded by his son Mihirakula who probably 
ascended the throne about A.D. 515. According to Hiuen Tsang his 
capital was Sakala or Sialkot and he ruled over India. 

Rajatarangini, the chronicle of Kashmir, 3 refers to Mihirakula 
as a powerful king who ruled over both Kashmir and Gandhara and 
conquered Southern India and Ceylon. He is described as a king 
of violent disposition, and heart-rending tales of his cruelty are told 
at great length. Rajatarangini also refers to Toramana, but he flour¬ 
ished long after Mihirakula, about eighteen kings intervening 
between the two. The career of this Toramana hardly fits in with 
what we know of the Huna chief of that name from other sources, 
though the age assigned to him fits in with that of the latter. On the 
other hand, the stories of Mihirakula’s cruelty, preserved in 
Rajatarangini, agree with those narrated by Hiuen Tsang, but the 


1. For the nationality of Toramana cf. NIA, IV. 36; 1HQ, VII. 532. 

2. This Jain work is Kuvalayamald, composed in 700 6aka (A.D. 778). For an 
abstract of its contents cf. JBORS, XIV. 28. Also cf. 1HQ, XXXIII. 253. 

3. I. 289 ff, III. 102 ff. 


85 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 




period assigned to his reign is too remote. Thus we can hardly 
accept Rdjaltarangim as a reliable source of historical information 

about these rulers. 

We get a fair idea of the power and influence of the Huns about 
this time from the account of Sung-yun, 1 a Chinese ambassador to 
the Hun king of Gandhara in A.D. 520. After mentioning the con¬ 
quest* and occupation of this kingdom by the Huns, two generations 
before his time, he gives the following account of the king whose 

court he visited : „ 

“The disposition of this king (or dynasty) was cruel and vindic¬ 
tive, and he practised the most barbarous atrocities. He did not 
believe the law of Buddha, but loved to worship demons. Entirely 
self-reliant on his own strength, he had entered on a war with the 
country of Ki-pin (Kashmir), disputing the boundaries of their king¬ 
dom, and his troops had been already engaged in ifc for three years. 

The king has 700 war-elephants .The king continually abode 

with his troops on the frontier and never returned to his 
kingdom. . . . ” Somewhat later in date is the account given by 
Cosmas, surnamed Indicopleustes (Indian navigator), an Alexandrine 
Greek, in his Christian Topography, 2 which was probably begun in 
A.D. 535 but not put in its final form till A.D. 547. In one place 
he says: “Higher up in India, that is farther to the north, are the 
White Huns. The one called Gollas when going to a war takes with 
him, it is said, no fewer than two thousand elephants and a great 
force of cavalry. He is the lord of India, and oppressing the people, 
forces them to pay tribute.” After narrating some stories about 
him the same writer remarks: “The river Phison separates all the 
countries of India from the country of the Huns.” Fortunately the 
author clearly says elsewhere that “the Phison is the same as the 
river Indus.” The date to which this account refers cannot be 
exactly determined but may be placed between A.D. 525 and 535. 

It is generally believed that king Gollas in the above account 
refers to Mihirakula whose name is also written as Mihirgul. It is 
not also unlikely that he is the king whom Sung-yun met in Gand¬ 
hara, somewhat earlier. It is interesting to note that both these 
accounts place the Huna kingdom proper to the west of the Sindhu, 
though according to Cosmas the Huna king exercised suzerainty over 
Indian kings and forced them to pay tribute. This appears to have 
been a later development, during the interval between the two 
accounts, which also saw the increase of the elephant forces of the 
king from 700 to 2000. 

1. HTB, I, xv. c. 

2. Translated into English by J. W. Mc’Crindle (London, 1897). 

36 





THE DISINTEGRATION OF THE EMPIRE 


If we proceed on this assumption, we may legitimately conclude 
that Toramana’s power suffered a decline, and after his initial suc¬ 
cesses which carried him as far as Eran, he was forced to fall back, 
and the Huna authority was confined to the territory beyond the 
Sindhu. This might be due to a defeat inflicted upon him by Bhanu- 
gupta, to whom reference has been made above. All this is, how¬ 
ever, vague and uncertain, and we cannot come to any definite con¬ 
clusion. But whatever we might think of the end of Toramana, 
there is no doubt that his son Mihirakula revived the ambitious 
project of his father. It appears from all accounts that Mihirakula 
was a powerful tyrant who overran a large part of Northern India. 
An inscription dated in the fifteenth year of his reign (c. A.D. 530) 
shows that his sovereignty extended at least up to Gwalior, and pro¬ 
bably his authority was acknowledged further beyond that territory 
as well. As mentioned above, according to Hiuen Tsang, he subdued 
the whole of India, and Cosmas also describes the Huna chief at this 
time as the Lord of India. But the Hunas were not destined to enjoy 
success for long, and Mihirakula, too, soon met his doom at the 
hands of two Indian rulers, Yasodharman and Narasimha-gupta. 

Yasodharman, whose career will be discussed later, claims that 
“respect was paid to his feet by even that (famous) king Mihirakula 
whose head had never (previously) been brought to the humility of 
obeisance to any other save (the god) Sthanu (Siva), (and) embraced 
by whose arms the mountain of snow (i.e. the Himalaya) falsely 
prides itself on being styled as inaccessible fortress.” The reference 
to the mountain of snow probably indicates that Mihirakula was 
ruling over Kashmir and the adjoining regions. It may be remember¬ 
ed that Sung-yun also related that the Huna chief was fighting with 
Kashmir. It would appear that while Mihirakula was advancing into 
the interior of India he was opposed by Yasodharman, an ambitious 
chief of Malwa. Mihirakula was evidently defeated, but his kingdom 
or power was not destroyed. With the fall of Yasodharman, which 
probably took place not long after, Mihirakula again came to the 
forefront. 

The Gupta king who then occupied the imperial throne was 
probably Narasimha-gupta Baladitya. He was temporarily over¬ 
whelmed by the victorious raids of Yasodharman, and Mihirakula 
evidently took advantge of this temporary collapse of the imperial 
authority to extend his power. Narasimha-gupta was, according to 
Hiuen Tsang, forced to the humiliating position of paying tribute to 
Mihirakula. After mentioning Mihirakula’s great power and perse¬ 
cution of Buddhism, Hiuen Tsang tells a long story how finally 
Baladitya triumphed over his rival. This may be summed up as 
follows:— 


37 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


“Baladitya-raja, king of Magadha, profoundly honoured the law 
of Buddha. When he heard of the cruel persecution and atrocities 
of Mihirakula he strictly guarded the frontiers of his kingdom and 
refused to pay tribute. When Mthirukula invaded his dominions, 
Baladitya took refuge with his army in an island. Mihirakula left 
the main part of his army in charge of his younger brother, embarked 
on boats and landed with a part of his troops on the island. He was, 
however, ambushed by the troops of Baladitya in a narrow pass and 
was taken prisoner. Baladitya resolved to execute Mihirakula, but 
released him on the intercession of his mother. Mihirakula found 
on his return that his brother had gone back and occupied the throne. 
He, therefore, sought and obtained an asylum in Kashmir. Then he 
stirred up a rebellion there, killed the king and placed himself on the 
throne of Kashmir. He next killed the king of Gandhara, extermi¬ 
nated the royal family, destroyed the stupas and sanghdramas, plun¬ 
dered the wealth of the country and returned. But within a year 
he died.” 

Apart from the fact that the general account of Hiuen Tsang is 
open to suspicion, on the ground of his placing Mihirakula “several 
centuries ago”, it is difficult to believe many of the details in this 

story. 

It has been noted above that Kashmir, probably, and Gandhara, 
certainly, were already parts of the Huna empire in India, and Hiuen 
Tsang is palpably wrong in describing them as new conquests by 
Mihirakula. The long account of the defeat and discomfiture of 
Mihirakula at the hands of Baladitya, and particularly the manner 
in which it was achieved, undoubtedly contains a great deal of 
exaggeration. But in spite of all these we may, in the absence of a 
better or more satisfactory hypothesis, provisionally regard Bala¬ 
ditya as having defeated Mihirakula and saved the Gupta empire 
from the Huna depredations. That would explain why his name and 
fame as a great hero survived even two centuries later. The defeat 
of Mihirakula appears to have finally crushed the Huna political 
supremacy in India. For although the existence of a Huna commu¬ 
nity, and even of small Huna principalities, is known in later times, 
the Hunas no longer appear as a great power or even a disturbing ele¬ 
ment in Indian history. 

Reference may be made in this connection to the defeat inflicted 
upon the Hunas by the Maukharis. In a record of their enemies, 
the Later Guptas, reference is made to the “proudly stepping array 
of mighty elephants, belonging to the Maukharis, which had thrown 
aloft in battle the troops of the Hunas,” It is likely that this famous 
victory was gained by Isana-varman, the Maukhari king, and that 
he fought as a feudatory of the Gupta emperor N&rasimha-gupta in 


38 


THE DISINTEGRATION Of' THE EMPIRE 


his campaign against Mihirakula. It is, however, not unlikely that 
an independent Maukhari king, Isana-varman or his son Sarva- 
varman, again defeated the Hunas. Certain it is that the Maukharis 
issued coins in imitation of the Huna kings and ruled over territories 
formerly in possession of the Hunas. 

The collapse of the Huna political power in India was due not 
only to the defeat of their chiefs Toramana and Mihirakula, but also, 
and perhaps mainly, to the crushing blow given to their central 
authority on the Oxus by the combined forces of the Turks and the 
Persians some time between A.D. 563 and 567. That administered 
the final death-blow to the Huna power in the east. 

3. YASODHARMAN AND OTHER REBELLIOUS FEUDATORIES 

The Huna inroads under Toramana and Mihirakula must have 
• • 

contributed further to the disintegration of the Gupta empire, which 
had begun after the death of Budha-gupta. Feudal chiefs, and even 
high officials, gradually assumed power and authority, and finally set 
themselves up as independent kings. Epigraphic records frequently 
refer to battles in all directions about this time, clearly indicating a 
period of unrest and excitement. In addition to the Hunas, we know 
of at least one other foreign invasion. Hari-shena, the Vakataka 
ruler of the Deccan, invaded Malwa, and established his authority 
over Malwa and Gujarat. 

The province of Malwa had been passing through a troublesome 
period on account of the invasions of the Hunas and the Vakatakas, 
and the hold of the Gupta emperors must have been considerably 
weakened in that region. Taking advantage of this situation 
Yasodharman, a local chief, established independent authority, and 
soon became powerful enough not only to defeat the Huna chief 
Mihirakula but also to hurl defiance at the Gupta emperor. 

Nothing is known of the early history of Yasodharman. He had 
evidently some connection with the family of feudatory chiefs who 
were ruling over Malwa, or a part of it, under the Imperial Guptas 
about the middle of the fifth century A.D. 1 But nothing is known 
of this family for nearly a century when Yasodharman suddenly rose 
to power. All that we know of his military achievements is contain¬ 
ed in a single record engraved in duplicate on two stone pillars al 
Mandasor. 2 This official eulogy claims that Yasodharman’s suze¬ 
rainty was acknowledged over the vast area bounded by the Hima¬ 
layas in the north, the Mahendra mountains (Ganjam District) in 
the south, the Brahmaputra river in the east and the ocean in the 

1. This is proved by the fact that Naravarman of the feudatory family is called 
Aulikara (El, XXVI. 130) and Yasodharman is said to belong to Aulikara family. 

2. CII, III. 142; Sel. Ins. 393. Some information is also given in another inscription 
at Mandasor (CII, III. 150; Sel Ins. 386). 


39 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


West. We are told that he conquered countries which did not submit 
even to the Guptas or to the Hunas. Further, as noted above, it is 
claimed that respect was paid to his feet even by the famous king 

Mihirakula. 

The general and conventional description of universal conquest 
cannot, of course, be accepted at its face value, and we should hardly 
be justified in regarding Yasodharman as the sole undisputed 
monarch of Northern India. At the same time such bold claims 
would not probably have been made in a public record unless there 
was some basis for it, and we need not doubt that Yasodharman was 
a great conqueror. In particular we can well believe that he defeated 
Mihirakula. We may, perhaps, go even further and hold that he 
first rose to distinction and won popular favour by defeating Mihira¬ 
kula and freeing Malwa and the neighbouring region from the Huna 
depredations. The power and prestige he gained thereby perhaps 
enabled him to achieve further conquests, mainly at the cost of the 
Guptas. But the exact limits of his empire cannot be defined. It is 
certain, however, that he could not finally annihilate the Gupta 
empire or the power of Mihirakula. There are good grounds to 
believe that his power was of short duration. He rose and fell like 
a meteor between A.D. 530 and 540, and his empire perished with 
him. 

Shortly after the great coup of Yasodharman, and perhaps as an 
inevitable consequence thereof, we find the rise of several powerful 
feudatory principalities in the very heart of the Gupta empire. 
Among them the Maukharis and the Later Guptas were the most 
powerful and were destined to play an important part in the later 
history of India. Their detailed history will be narrated later. It 
will suffice here to state that the Maukharis, although ruling at first 
as feudal chiefs in Bihar and U.P., gradually rose to power in the 
latter region, and founded an independent kingdom perhaps about 
the middle of the sixth century A.D. The Later Guptas were so 
called to distinguish them from the Imperial Guptas, for the kings 
of this family had names ending in Gupta and they ruled in Malwa 
and Magadha. Like the Maukharis, the Later Gupta chiefs were at 
first feudatories of the Imperial Guptas, and perhaps fought to save 
the empire. But later, probably about the same time as the 
Maukharis, they also set up as independent rulers. 

About the same time or perhaps a little earlier, Vanga, i.e. South 
and East Bengal, also shook off the suzerainty of the Guptas. 
Reference has already been made to Vainya-gupta who ruled in East 
Bengal with the title Maharaja in A.D. 506-7. It is just possible that 
although he later claimed the imperial throne, his actual power was 
confined to Bengal. If this is so we may trace from this time the exis- 


40 


THE DISINTEGRATION OF THE EMPIRE 


tence of an independent kingdom in Bengal. In any event, Vanga 
soon attained importance as an independent kingdom under local 
rulers who assumed the title Mahdrdjddhirdja and issued gold coins 
like the Gupta emperors. 

The people of Gauda (W. Bengal) also achieved prominence, and 
a Maukhari chief claims to have defeated them. The Later Guptas 
also fought against some enemies who lived on the sea-shore. The 
reference in both cases may be to the kings of Bengal mentioned 
above, and the military campaigns of the Maukharis and the Later 
Guptas might have been undertaken, jointly or severally, on behalf 
of the Gupta emperor, their nominal overlord. 

The tangled history of these newly risen powers shows that 
Yasodharman could not maintain his authority on a stable basis or 
for a long period. It is possible that his dazzling military success 
for the time being led others to imitate his example. It thus led 
to a general uprising among the feudatories of the Gupta empire 
and Yasodharman himself was probably the first victim to perish in 
the conflagration that his own action had brought about. 


41 


CHAPTER VI 


THE FALL OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 

1. NARASIMHA-GUPTA 

It will be clear from the events described in the preceding 
chapter that at the time of Narasimha-gupta’s accession to the throne, 
or shortly thereafter, internal dissensions, foreign invasions, and the 
successful revolts of provincial satraps and feudal chiefs had almost 
completed the disintegration of the Gupta empire. The name of 
the emperor was still invoked as the suzerain over extensive terri¬ 
tories, but his actual authority was confined to a comparatively small 
region comprising Magadha and its immediate neighbourhood. It is 
difficult to determine the exact effect of Yasodharman’s conquests, 
but it is certain that the Gupta empire survived this shock. An 
analysis of the epigraphic records, e.g. the 14 Valabhi Grants ranging 
in date between A.D. 526 and 545, does not indicate any important 
political change. For all these grants express, as usual, allegiance 
to the i Paramahhattdraka > or the paramount lord. This undoubtedly 
refers to the Gupta emperor; for such nominal allegiance, without 
any reality behind it, is offered usually only to an old established 
dynasty. A new authority like Yasodharman could only exact real 
submission or nothing. Besides, a land-grant in North Bengal, dated 
A.D. 543, definitely refers to a Gupta ruler (whose name is lost) and 
not to Yasodharman. Further, although Yasodharman claims to 
have established his authority as far as the Gan jam District, an 
inscription, 1 recently discovered at the village of Sumandala in 
Khallikote, Orissa, refers to the Gupta suzerainty in Kalinga in the 
year 250 of the Gupta Era (=3fcD. 569-70). All these facts lead to- 
the inference that Yasodharman’s military success was of a tem¬ 
porary character and made no appreciable change in the political 
map of the Gupta empire. 

There is, however, no doubt that Yasodharman dealt a shatter¬ 
ing blow to the prestige and authority of the Gupta empire. It 
stimulated all the forces of disintegration which were already at 
work. The Hiina chiei Mlhirakuia seized the opportunity to renew 
his depredations. If Hiuen Tsang is to be believed, Mihirakula car¬ 
ried his raids even into the dominions directly ruled by Narasimha- 
gupta and forced him to pay tribute. 

1. This inscription has been edited in El, XXVIII. 79. 


42 







THE FALL OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 


It must have been extremely galling to the Gupta emperor to 
acknowledge the Huna K chief as his overlord. The position, humi¬ 
liating as it was, was rendered worse by the incredible cruelties of 
Mihirakula. At last the proud descendant of Skanda-gupta was 
unable to bear it any longer and made a heroic effort to remove this 
scourge from his kingdom. He was probably helped by the 
Maukharis and other feudatories in this laudable endeavour, the 
last great service that the Gupta emperors were destined to render to 
their country. How Narasimha-gupta achieved complete success has 
already been described on the authority of Hiuen Tsang, assuming, 
of course, that Baladitya, mentioned by him, is identical with 
Narasimha-gupta Baladitya. The Chinese pilgrim also refers to him 
as a great patron of Buddhism and the builder of a great monastery 
( Sanghdrdma ) at Nalanda. An inscription found at Nalanda, and 
belonging to about the eighth century A.D., also refers to ‘Baladitya, 
the great king of irresistible valour,’ who, after having vanquished 
all the foes and enjoyed the entire earth, erected ‘a great and extra¬ 
ordinary temple at Nalanda.’ Two independent traditions have thus 
preserved the memory of a great king called Baladitya noted alike 
for prowess and the construction of a sanctuary at Nalanda. The 
most plausible view appears to be that he is identical with 
Narasimha-gupta, though it cannot be regarded as absolutely 
certain. 1 


2. THE LAST TWO GUPTA EMPERORS 

Narasimha-gupta was the last great Gupta emperor. He was 
succeeded by his son and grandson Kumara-gupta III and Vishnu- 
gupta. 2 They issued gold coins of the same type as those of 
Narasimha-gupta and, like him, assumed respectively the titles 
Krarnaditya and Chandrd{Litya. Their reigns may be placed between 
A.t). 535 and 570. The continued debasement of the coins furnishes, 
a striking testimony to the speedy decline of the Gupta empire under 
these two rulers, but the very fact that they issued gold coins shows 
that the imperial fabric had not yet completely collapsed. This 

1. Narasimha-gupta is known from his coins to have assumed the title Baladitya. 
He is therefore identified by some scholars with Baladitya, king of Magadha, 
who, according to Hiuen Tsang, defeated Mihirakula. The chronology of the 
last three Gupta emperors, as given in this work, is based on this identity which, 
however, is not accepted by some scholars. They place Narasimha-gupta’s reign 
before A.D. 474, and identify his son Kumara-gupta with the king of that name 
who is referred to as the ruler in an inscription dated in that year (See p. 29). 
Dr. Raychaudhuri identifies Hiuen Tsang’s Baladitya with Bhanu-gupta 
(PHAP, 596-7). 

2. The existence of Vishnu-gupta and his position in the Gupta genealogy are 
known from a Nalanda Seal (El, XXVI. 235; 1HQ, XIX. 119). For the coins of 
Kumara-gupta III as distinguished from those of Kumara-gupta II, cf. JBRS, 
XXXIV. Part. III-IV, pp. 20-22. 


43 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


conclusion is also supported by the three other facts, noted above, 
viz. that even in A.D. 543 a Gupta emperor is referred to as suzerain 
in an inscription in N. Bengal, that the rulers of Valabhi paid 
nominal allegiance to their (Gupta) overlord till about A.D. 550, and 
that Gupta suzerainty was acknowledged in Kalinga even as late as 

A.D. 569. 

Hiuen Tsang refers to Baladitya as king of Magadha, and in 
view of what has been said above regarding the Maukharis and the 
Later Guptas, that seems to be a correct description of the Gupta 
emperor. The only territories outside Magadha which probably still 
formed part of the Gupta dominions were Kalinga and Northern 
Bengal. While we hear of independent rulers in Southern, Eastern, 
and Western Bengal, the name of a Gupta ruler is invoked as 
suzerain in a grant of N. Bengal in A.D. 543. Unfortunately, the 
first part of the name is lost, but it might well have been ‘Vishnu 
and refer to the last Gupta ruler. We do not know how and when 
the Guptas lost this last stronghold. A land-grant found in the 
Gaya District in the very heart of Magadha was issued in A.D. 551-2 
by Nandana who is called Kurridrdrrvatya Maharaja. As there is no 
reference to any Gupta ruler in this record, we may conclude that 
by A.D. 550 the Guptas had ceased to exercise effective authority 
over the great part of Magadha. Nandana’s title Kumdrdmatya, 
however, shows that like the Viziers of Oudh in the eighteenth 
century he still dared not throw off nominal allegiance to the Guptas. 
That some Gupta emperors continued to rule for another quarter of 
a century seems to be proved by the continuance of the Gupta 
suzerainty in Kalinga till at least A. D. 569. 

Indeed, from various points of view the end of the Gupta 
empire offers a striking analogy to that of the Mughal empire. 
The decline and downfall of both were brought about mainly by 
internal dissensions in the royal family and the rebellion of feudal 
chiefs and provincial satraps, though foreign invasion was an 
important contributory factor. There is a general belief among 
historians that the Huna invasion was the principal cause of the 
downfall of the Gupta empire. But it is difficult to subscribe to this 
view. The gates of India were successfully barred against the 
Hunas throughout the fifth century A.D. In spite of temporary suc¬ 
cesses, first of Toramana and then of Mihirakula, the Hunas never 
counted as a permanent factor in Indian politics, save in Kashmir 
and Afghanistan which lay far beyond the frontiers of the Gupta 
empire. So far as the evidence goes, the death-blow to the Gupta 
empire was dealt not by the Hunas but by ambitious chiefs like 
Yasodharman. The Hunas caused depredations on a large scale, but 
ere long the force of their sweeping success spent itself. The rift 


44 


THE FALL OF THE GUPTA EMPIRE 


caused by Yasodharman, however, gradually widened till the mighty 
imperial structure was engulfed in the chasm. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

J. F. Fleet— Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, Vol. Ill (Inscriptions of the Early 
Gupta kings and their Successors). Calcutta, 1888. 

D. C. Sircar —Select Inscriptions bearing on Indian History and Civilization, 
Vol. I. Calcutta, 1942. 

J. Allan —Catalogue of the coins of the Gupta Dynasties and of Sasahka, king 
of Gauda. London, 1914. 

V. A. Smith— Early History of India. Chs. XI, XII. 

R. D. Banerji— The Age of the Imperial Guptas. Benares, 1933. 

R. G. Basak— The History of North-Eastern India. Calcutta, 1934. 

S. K. Aiyangar—Studies in Gupta History, JIH. VI. Supplement. 

Vdkdtaka-Gupta Age —Edited by R. C. Majumdar and A. S. Altekar. ( New 

History of the Indian People Vol. VI). A list of Gupta inscriptions is given on 
pp. 480-2 of this book. 

IT. C. Raychaudhuri— Political History of Ancient India (Fifth Edition). Calcutta, 
1950. 

R. N. Dandekar— A History of the Guptas. Poona, 1941. 

N.B.—A list of important inscriptions is given in the Bibliography at the end of 
this volume. 


45 


CHAPTER VII 


MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA DURING 

THE GUPTA EMPIRE 

In tracing the history of the Gupta empire, reference has been 
made to the Saka and Kushana principalities. The great emperor 
Samudra-gupta established some sort of suzerainty over both, and 
the former was finally conquered by his son. The early history of 
both the dynasties has been already narrated, 1 and we may con¬ 
veniently bring together in this chapter the little information that 
we possess regarding their history during the Gupta period. 

1. THE SARAS OR WESTERN SATRAPS 

The principality of the Western Satraps, consisting of Malwa, 
Gujarat and the Kathiawar Peninsula, was being ruled by the family 
of Chashtana for nearly two hundred years. But a break in the 
regular course of succession occurred at the beginning of the fourth 
century A.D. when Rudrasimha II ousted the legitimate heir and 
occupied the throne in A.D. 304 or 305. His father, SvamI Jivadaman, 
bears no royal title, and although it is possible that he might have 
belonged to a younger branch of the old royal family, his relation¬ 
ship to it is not definitely known. 2 

Along with this change in succession we have to note two other 
important facts bearing upon the history of the kingdom. In the 
first place, neither Rudrasimha II, who usurped the throne, nor his 
son and successor Yasodaman II assumed the title Mahdkshatrapa, 
and both were content with the lower title of Kshatrapa only. This is 
specially remarkable in view of the fact that since almost the*very 
beginning the chief political power in the kingdom was regularly 
exercised by a Mahdkshatrapa who associated with him the heir- 
apparent bearing the title Kshatrapa. Secondly, after the reign of 
Rudrasimha II and his son, extending from A.D. 305 to 332, no coins 
of Western Satraps are known for a period of sixteen years. 

These facts indicate troublesome times though we are unable 
to throw much light on the cause or nature of the troubles through 

1: voi. nTchsTvii-ix" 

2. The historical account is based principally on the coins of the Western Satraps. 
These coins have been dealt with by Rapson in his Catalogue of the Coins of 
the Andhra Dynasty, the Western Kshatrapas etc. In addition to the descrip¬ 
tion of the coins (pp. 63-194) Rapson has brought together the historical infor¬ 
mation derived from them in the Introduction (pp. xcvii-clvii). Unless other¬ 
wise stated the statements regarding the coins in this chapter are based on this 
work. 


46 






MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA 

which the principality must have passed. An inscription 1 found in 
the village of Kanakhera near Sanchi, however, throws some light 
on this matter. This record refers to some pious work done by 
Maha-danda-ndyaka 2 Saka Srldharavarma, son of Saka Nanda, in the 
13th year of his reign. Another inscription at Eran, dated in his 
27th regnal year, calls him both Raj an and Mahdkshatrapa. 3 The 
first inscription also contains a date, presumably in Saka era, which 
has been read as 241. This reading is not free from doubt, but if 
we accept it, we can easily conclude that Mahdkshatrapa Sri» 
dharavarma refused to acknowledge Rudrasimha II as legitimate 
sovereign and set up an independent kingdom in A.D. 306 or 307, 
i.e. within a year or two of Rudrasimha’s accession. It may be 
concluded, therefore, that Rudrasimha II came to the throne by 
violent means, and it led to a civil war or internal dissension as 
a result of which Malwa was lost to the Western Satraps. For we 
know from the Allahabad inscription of Samudra-gupta that a 
number of tribal states flourished in Malwa about the middle of 
the fourth century A.D., and there is no evidence that the Saka 
Satraps exercised any authority in this province at the time. 

There might have been similar revolts in other parts of the 
kingdom, and this internal dissension might have been the cause, or 
at least one of the causes, of the decline in power and authority of 
the Satraps Rudrasimha II and his son Yasodaman II who never 
assumed the title Mahdkshatrapa. 

The absence of coins of the dynasty between A.D. 332 and 348 
shows that the political troubles, far from being over, were accen¬ 
tuated during this period. As a result, the family of Rudrasimha 
was swept away and Mahdkshatrapa SvamI Rudrasena III occupied 
the throne in or shortly after A.D. 348. He is described in his coin¬ 
legends as the son of Mahdkshatrapa SvamI Rudradaman (II), but 
no coins of the latter have so far been discovered. Whether Rudra- 

1. This inscription was first edited by Mr. R. D. Banerji (El. XVI. 230) who took 
it as a record of JIvadaman. It was re-edited by Mr. N. G. Majumdar (JPASB. 
XIX. 337) who rightly pointed out that there was no reference to JIvadaman in 
the inscription which is a record of J§rldharavarma, and is dated in the 13th year 
of his reign. Mr. Banerji read the date as 201, but Mr. Majumdar was of the 
opinion that the symbol interpreted by Mr. Banerji as 200 is really a sign of 
interpunction. But he noted that at some distance from the sign there are three 
numerical symbols. The first symbol is not very clear but he tentatively read 
it as 200, the remaining two symbols being clearly 41. 

2. Mahd-danda-nayaka might mean a judge or a general. The latter sense is 
preferable here. 

3. This inscription is incised on the same pillar which bears the posthumous 
inscription of Goparaja (above, p. 33). The inscription is not yet published 
but MM. V. V. Mirashi gave an account of it in the 14th Session of Indian 
History Congress held at Jaipur (cf. Summary of Papers, p. 16). He denies 
that there is a date in the »§aka Era in the Kanakhera record of 5§ridharavarman 
and concludes, mainly on this ground, that he did not probably belong to the 
Kshatrapa family of Saurashtra. 


47 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


daman was a mere pretender to the title or actually exercised royal 
power cannot, therefore, be determined. The relationship, if any, 
of this new family to the older members is yet unknown. It pro¬ 
bably established its authority on a firm basis and restored to some 
extent the old prestige, as indicated by the revival of the title 
Mahakshatrapa. But if so, the success was very short-lived. For 
while we have silver coins of Rudrasena III representing each year 
from 270 to 273 inclusive (i.c. A.D. 348 to 351) they cease altogether 
after that year and do not reappear till A.D. 360. 1 Rere, again, the 
absence of coins may be taken to indicate some political troubles, 
though it may not be quite safe to rely upon such negative evidence 
alone. 

It may be suggested that the constant troubles of the Western 
Satraps during the first half of the fourth century A.D. were due 
also to foreign invasions which were perhaps provoked by the in¬ 
ternal dissensions referred to above. During the first half of the 
period the only two powers we can think of in this connection are 
the Vakafkas and the Sassanians of Persia. The contemporary 
Vakataka ruler Pravarasena I was undoubtedly a powerful king and 
was the only ruler of the family to assume the imperial title Samrdt. 
It is not unlikely that he helped or joined one of the contending 
parties in order to extend his political influence in this region, but 
there is no reference to any such attempt in the Vakataka records. 
As regards the Sassanians, there is no evidence that they played any 
part in Indian politics about this time, and what we know of their 
history makes it very unlikely. The only other power that we can 
think of in this connection, at least for the second quarter of the 
fourth century A.D., is the Imperial Gupta. The Allahabad inscrip- 
tion of Samudra-gupt^ clearly refers to some sort of political con¬ 
trol exercised by that emperor over the Sakas. It is quite possible 
that the &aka Satraps did not accept this position without a fight 
and there was a long-drawn struggle. It led to no decisive result 
for the time being, but the &aka ruler must have been sufficiently 
humbled, and his discomfiture probably led to the weakening of his 
authority and internal troubles reflected in the absence of coins 
between A.D. 332 and 348 and again between A.D. 351 and 360. It 
may be recalled that according to one interpretation, the Saka 
Satrapy belonged to the category of subject-states which had to use 
the Gupta coins. 2 This might well account for the cessation of the 

1. Kapson (op. cit. cxliv) says that there were no silver coins of Rudrasena III, 
later than 273 and earlier than 286. But coins of Rudrasena dated 282 and 
284 have since come to light (NB. XLVII. pp. 96, 97). Rapson himself describes 
lead coins dated 280-285 (p. 187) but these do not bear the name of any ruler. 

2. This point has been discussed before in connection with Samudra-gupta. 

48 






MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA 


coins of Western Satraps, but such a conclusion can only be regarded 
as provisional. 1 

The regular issue of coins from about A.D. 360 to 390 2 by Rudra- 
sena III shows that he had re-established his power and authority 
to some extent. But indications are not wanting that troubles broke 
out again towards the close of his reign. The coins show that in 
A.D. 382 (and probably also in 384) his sister’s son SvamI Simhasena 
had assumed the title of Mahakshatrapa. Either, therefore, Rudra- 
sena III was temporarily dispossessed of his authority by his nephew, 
or there was a civil war, involving a partition of the kingdom, at 
least for some years. Only a single coin attests to the rule of SvamI 
Rudrasena IV, son of SvamI Simhasena, but as it contains no date 
we cannot say whether he ruled alone or as a rival of his grand¬ 
uncle Rudrasena III. In any case we soon find a new king SvamI 
Rudrasimha III occupying the position of Mahakshatrapa in the 
year 31X (the unit figure of the date on the coins is lost), which 
may refer to any year between A.D. 388 and 398. Rudrasimha III 
is called in his coins the son of Mahakshatrapa SvamI Satyasimha. 
No coins of the latter have been found and we do not know, there¬ 
fore, whether he actually ruled or merely claimed the position of a 
Mahakshatrapa as against a rival. Nothing is also known of his rela¬ 
tionship with the preceding rulers. 

Thus after a brief respite of twenty years from A.D. 360 to 380 
the kingdom of the Western Satraps was again convulsed by internal 
dissensions. The accession of Chandra-gupta II in or shortly before 
A.D. 380 might have had something to do with the renewal of politi¬ 
cal troubles in the kingdom over which the new emperor had been 
casting covetous eyes. Whether we believe in the episode of Rama- 
gupta or not, the aggressive and imperialist policy of expansion 
sufficiently accounts for the determination of Chandra-gupta to put 
an end to this last vestige of foreign rule on the soil of India and 
thereby expand his growing empire to the furthest natural limits on 
the west. 3 

Unfortunately we know little of the campaign which put an end 
to the rule of SvamI Rudrasimha III, the last of a long line of Saka 
chiefs who had been ruling over the region for nearly three hundred 
years. The statement in the Harsha-charita that Chandra-gupta, in 


1. Dr. D. C. Sircar has worked out this hypothesis in some detail. He even pro¬ 
poses to identify Rudradeva, one of the nine kings of Aryavarta exterminated 
by Samudra-gupta (above, p. 8), with the J§aka Satrap Rudradaman II or 
his son Rudrasena III ( PIHC, VII. 78). 

2. Rapson does not notice any coin of Rudrasena III later than 300. But the 
Sonpur hoard contains two coins of Rudrasena III. one of which is dated (3)12 
and the other 310-fx, the unit figure being lost ( N.S . XLVII. 96). 

3. The epigraphic evidence for Chandra-gupta’s campaign against the Western 
Satraps has been discussed in connection with the history of that emperor. 


49 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the disguise of a woman, slew the 2§aka chief, was usually taken to 
refer to his final struggle with Rudrasimha III. But this simple fact 
has now developed into the big episode centring round Rama-gupta 
and Dhruvadevi which has already been narrated above. 1 If any 
value is to be attached to the history of the Western Satraps as 
narrated above, it is hardly within the range of probability that they 
were in a position to challenge the authority of the Gupta emperor 
and force him to accept the most ignoble terms which a king is ever 
known to have proposed to another. 

The date of the final conquest of Saurashtra (Kathiawar Penin¬ 
sula) by Chandra-gupta II has been discussed in connection with the 
his toy of that emperor. There is hardly any doubt that the down¬ 
fall of the Western Satraps was hastened, if not brought about, by 
the internal dissensions and other troubles which marked their 
history almost throughout the fourth century A.D. and particularly 
during the last two decades. Although they disappeared from history, 
they left a legacy in their peculiar coins which were continued 
with some modifications by the Guptas and their successors for 
well-nigh two centuries after their fall. 


2. THE KUSH ANAS 

The chronology of the great Kushana kings is far from settled 
yet and although opinions generally waver between A.D. 78 and 128 
as the date of the accession of Kanishka, there is no solid argument 
in favour of either. 2 It is difficult, therefore, to say at what period 
of time fhe dynasty of the great emperor Kanishka came to an end, 
on the death of Vasudeva, after ruling for a century. Following the 
general v r iew we may provisionally accept it as happening some time 
between A.D. 180 and 230 and we propose to deal in this chapter 
with the subsequent history of the Kushanas. 

Our principal sources of information are the brief references in 
me Chinese history and the large number of coins found in India, 
principally in the Punjab and N.W.F. Province. 3 

According to the Chinese writer Ma-twan-lin, the Kushanas, after 
their conquest of Northern India under Wema Kadphises, became 
rich and powerful, and remained in that condition until the time of 
the second Han Dynasty (A.D. 221-263).* Another Chinese writer 
Yu Huan specifically states that about A.D. 239 Ki-pin (Kashmir?) 5 


1. 

2 . 


4. 

5. 


See pp. 17-18. ' 

tf hi R ha rtm diSCU T J b ? fore - , See Vo1 ' n - PP- 143 '6- The latest view is that 
c:CXXXIV 59) wh ° places the accession of Kanishka in A.D, 144 (JA 

Mr M. F. C. Martin has brought together most of the evidences both Chinese 
nn M S‘ Sm rik- bea ™ S “"‘he Period in JRASBh. in, Num. Suppl XLVII 
MartL p 25 referred t0 ” su Wtent notes as ^Martin!’ 

For the identification of Ki-pin, see below Ch. XXIII. 


50 


t 







MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA 


Ta-hia (Bactria), Kao-fu (Kabul) and Tien-chu (India) were sub¬ 
ordinate to the Kushanas. 1 There is other evidence to show that 
about this time the Kushanas were still ruling over territories be¬ 
yond the Hindu Kush. 2 But they were soon engaged in hostilities 
with the newly founded Sassanian power. The sudden rise of this 
dynasty to greatness under Ardashir need not be described in detail. 3 
It will suffice to say that after having defeated the great king Arta- 
banus V of Parthia in A.D. 224, he conquered the western provinces 
of the Parthian empire and crowned himself with the title ‘King of 
kings’ ( Shahanshah ) of Iran. He then led a series of victorious 
campaigns in the east and conquered, among others, Seistan, modern 
Khorasan, Merv and Balkh. 4 5 It is also claimed that the Kushana 
ruler of the Punjab and Kabul valley and the kings of Turan (Quzdar, 
south of Quetta) and Makran recognised him as suzerain, 6 though 
this is somewhat doubtful. 

The Sassanian supremacy over the Kushana principalities in 
Balkh and the neighbouring region is attested by the coins of the 
Sassanian governors. 6 During the reign of Shapur I (241-72) his 
younger brother Peroz was the governor with the title Kushan-shah 
(king of the Kushanas). In 252 the title was changed to Kushan- 
Shahanshah (king of the Kushana kings), indicating an increase in 
the authority of the prince-governor. For the next 30 years the 
heir-apparent generally held this viceroyalty. It is to be noted that 
the coins issued by the Sassanian governors closely resembled the 
coins of the great Kushana king Vasudeva and were evidently copied 
from them. 

Vahram II, who had been the Kushan-shah during his father’s 
reign, ascended the throne in A.D. 276 while his brother Hormazd 


1. This and other Chinese evidences, referring the glorious period of the Great 
Kushanas to the third century A.D., have been discussed in my article on the 
Kushan Chronology ( JDL , 1920, pp. 71 ff). 

2. The Sassanian coins, discussed later, clearly prove this. 

3. Cf. Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. XII. pp. 109-114. Herzfeld also gives a brief 
outline of the Sassanid history in his Kushano-Sassanian Coins (MASI. No. 38) 
pp. 32 ff. The account in the text is based on these two authorities. The names 
of kings have been spelt according to the former. 

4. Herzfeld, Kush-Sas. Coins, p. 32. 

5. This is stated in Camb. Anc. Hist., XII, p. 110 on the authority of Herzfeld’s Paikuli 
pp. 36 ff. But Herzfeld does not state this in his later work, Kush-Sas. Coins, 
p. 32, where he describes the conquest of Ardashir. The claim rests on the 
statement of Tabari that while Ardashir, after his conquest mentioned above, 
halted at Gor, he was visited by messengers from the kings of Kushan, Turan 
and Makran who expressed their allegiance. V. A. Smith finds a corroboration 
of it in a coin of Shllada ruler Pasana (to be referred later in the text above), 
which was restruck on the reverse with the symbol found on the coins of 
Ardashir, and the story preserved by Firishta that Ardashir marched against 
India and reached as far as the neighbourhood of Sirhind but returned on 
receiving homage and tribute from the Indian king (of Kanauj) (JRAS, 1920, 
pp. 221 ff). 

6. Herzfeld, Kush-Sas . Coins. 


51 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


became the Kushan-shah. In A.D. 283 Hormazd rebelled against 
his brother and was supported by both the &akas and the Kushanas. 
Vahram crushed the revolt, conquered the whole of Sakastan 
(Seistan) and appointed his son Vahram (III) Sakan-shah or gover¬ 
nor of the provinces. It was the prerogative of the heir-apparent to 
the Sassanian throne to be governor of the most important province. 
The Kushana province was thus reduced in importance. This was 
further emphasised by the fact that the governor of the Kushana 
principality was deprived of the privilege of issuing gold coins which 
were henceforth issued in the name of Shahanshah, the Great king 
of kings. 

Prof. Herzfeld asserts that Vahram II made extensive conquests 
in the east and that under him the Sassanid empire not only included 
Khorasan (including Balkh), Sakastan, Turan and Makran, but also 
the countries of the Middle and Lower Sindhu region and Kachchha, 
Kathiawar and Malwa. 1 This view rests upon the Paikuli Inscrip¬ 
tion which gives a list of independent kings and vassal chiefs who 
came to congratulate Narsih, son of Shapur I, after he had success¬ 
fully rebelled against king Vahram II and occupied the throne in 
A.D. 293. The inscription is fragmentary and very much damaged, 
but Herzfeld, who edited it, has been able to read several names and 
has drawn interesting conclusions from it. Among independent 
kings we find the name of Kushan-shah and among the vassals the 
chiefs of Paradan (Paradas), Makuran (Makran) and the Abhlras 
Reference is then made to Satraps of all kinds such as Bagdat, lord 
of Zuradian and Mitr-(AL)asen, lord of Boraspicin. Herzfeld takes 
the last two as Bhagadat^a, lord of Surashtra, and Mitrasena, lord 
of Bharukachchha. There is also reference to an ally of the un¬ 
fortunate king Vahram II, viz . Avandikan xvat(a)vya whom Herzfeld 
regards as the Kshatrapa of Avanti. 

Now the proposed identification of Zuradian and Boraspicin 
cannot be regarded as certain or even satisfactory, and there is 
nothing to show that the Kshatrapa of Avanti, assuming the reading 
and interpretation to be correct, was in any case a dependent of the 
Sassanians. The supremacy of the Sassanians over Western India 
is, therefore, very problematic. If the reading Abhlra be regarded 
as correct the Sassanian supremacy probably extended beyond 
Makran to the lower Sindhu valley and the adjoining region. But 
as the Abhlras were something like a nomadic tribe having different 
settlements, it is difficult to locate them precisely. On the whole, 
therefore, while we may accept that Vahram II (276-93) had esta¬ 
blished his supremacy in the lower Sindhu valley and had political 
intercourse of a friendly character with Indian principalities in the 

1. Herzfeld, Paikuli, pp. 35-51. 

52 






MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA 


interior, there is no valid ground to assume that Kathiawar, Gujarat 
and Malwa were his vassal states. 

It is interesting to note that the Kushan-shah is referred to as 
an independent king in the Paikuli Inscription. Evidently the 
Kushana ruler of the Kabul valley and the Punjab is meant. The 
continuation of the Kushana principality in these regions after the 
death of the Great Kushana emperor Vasudeva is proved by a large 
number of coins. These coins are debased imitations of those of 
the Great Kushana kings Kanishka, Huvishka and Vasudeva. Hence 
the rulers who issued them are called Later Great Kushanas. Some 
of them have old names like Kanishka (written as Kaneshko) and 
Vasu or Vasudeva. These coins are found in Afghanistan, as well 
as in Bactria and Seistan. This, as well as the fact that at least two 
rulers, viz. Kanishka and Vasudeva, who issued them, assumed the 
imperial title Shaonanoshao, shows that they represented the Great 
or Imperial Kushana family and possessed a fair degree of authority. 
Attempts have been made to arrange these three kings in chronolo¬ 
gical order, viz. Kanishka II, Vasudeva II and Vasu (or Vasudeva 
III) and to reconstruct their history, 1 but without much success. 

In addition to this series, gold coins of Kushana type, of a later 
date, are also found in large numbers in the Punjab and neighbour¬ 
ing region. These belong to the fourth century A.D. and contain 
the names of a large number of rulers such as Sya (or Sasya), 
Sayatha, Sita, Sena (or Sena), Bhadra, Bacharna and Pasana. Neither 
the nationality of these rulers, nor the meaning of words like Shaka 
or Shllada, each of which is fpund on coins of several rulers, is clear 
to us. Most likely these rulers were Kushana of the Shaka and 
Shilada clan, the first four chiefs named above belonging to the 
former, and the last three to the latter clan. The findspots of these 
coins have not been properly recorded, but a hoard of Shaka coins 
was found near Peshawar. This shows that they probably held 
sway over Gandhara. 2 

1. Mr. R. D. Banerji’s reconstruction of the history of these kings, apart from 
being based on highly speculative theories about the coins, is vitiated by the 
assumed date of Gondophares (about 100 years later than Kanishka) which 
is now generally discarded. The significance of the various syllables or groups 
of syllables occurring on these coins still remains a mystery. Mr. Banerji up¬ 
held the view that they werg the initial letter or letters of the names of sub¬ 
ordinate chiefs issuing them and of the mint-towns or provinces from which 
they were issued. This view seems reasonable, but cannot be regarded as 
certain. The restoration of the names like Mahi(dhara), Viru(dhaka), 
Ga(ndhara), Khu(draka), Pu(shkalavatl), Na(garahara) etc. by supplying the 
portions within the brackets is, of course, highly questionable, (cf. Cunningham, 
Later Indo-Scythians, Num. Chr. 1893, p. 119). 

2. For the coins of the Later Kushanas (and the Hunas) the standard authority is 
Cunningham, Later Indo-Scythians originally published as a series of essays 
in Numismatic Chronicle for 1893 and 1894. A summary of these essays, and 
other references on this subject are given by V. A. Smith in JASB. LXIII (1894), 
pp. 177 ff. cf. also CCIM, 85 ff. and Martin (op. cit.). R. D. Banerji corrected some 


53 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Another clan or tribe named Ga^ahara or Gadakhara is known 
from coins issued by two chiefs named Peraya and Kirada. It has 
been suggested that these coins should be classed with those of the 
Little Kushanas (to be noted later), and not with those of Shaka and 
Shilada. But there are good grounds to believe that this tribe also 

ruled in the Punjab in the fourth century A.D. 

On the basis of the foregoing, we may reconstruct the history 

of the Later Kushanas somewhat as follows:— 

The great Kushana empire broke up some time after A.D. 230 
or 240 which probably represents the end of the reign of Vasudeva 
or one of the later kings named Kanishka or Vasudeva. Apart from 
other causes the growing power of the Sassanians was the most im¬ 
portant factor that contributed to it. The first Sassanian king Arda- 
shir (224-241) conquered the Kushana principalities to the north of 
the Hindu Kush, and although Kushana chiefs continued to rule there 
they had to acknowledge the supremacy of the Sassanid king. His 
Governor, generally the heir-apparent, assumed the proud title of 
‘Kushan-king’ or ‘king of Kushana kings’ and issued gold coins like 
those of Vasudeva. 

We learn from a Chinese account that Po-tiao, the king of the 
Great Kushanas, sent an embassy to the Chinese Court in A.D. 230. * 1 
This name may well represent Vasudeva, and it was probably the 
growing power of the Sassanids that induced him to seek help from 
the Chinese emperor. But evidently no help came, and in any case 
he was unable to check the aggression of the Sassanian king. But 
although Balkh was lost, the Kushana overlord, whose seat of autho¬ 
rity was probably at Peshawar, still ruled over the other parts of 
the Kushana kingdom. His power and prestige were, however, 
considerably weakened. Taking advantage of this, Indian states 
one after another asserted their independence and even the Kushana 
governors of the Punjab and neighbouring regions followed suit. 
There were probably two or more dynasties belonging to Shilada, 
Shaka and Gadahara clans who formed independent principalities 
in the Punjab. The Sassanian kings in the west grew more and more 
powerful. When Hormazd rebelled against his brother Vahram II 
(A.D. 283), the Kushanas and Sakas joined him probably in a 
desperate effort at getting rid of the Sassanian supremacy. But the 
rebellion was crushed and Vahram II conquered the whole of Seistan, 
Makran and the lower Sindhu valley. He also tightened his hold 
on the Kushana principalities in Balkh. 

But though shorn of his possessions in Bactria, Seistan and the 
Sindhu valley, the Kushana king still maintained his hold in the 

readings of names in JPASB. IV. 81 ff. and these corrections have been accepted 
in the text above. 

1. CII, II. Ixxvii. 


54 



MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA 


Kabul valley, and the Paikuli inscription, as noted above, refers to 
him as an independent king (A.D. 293). His importance is indicated 
by the fact that the Sassanian king Hormizd (302-9) married a 
daughter of the Kush an a king of the Kabul valley. 1 But later, about 
the middle of the fourth century A.D., the Kabul valley formed a 
part of the Sassanid empire. An inscription found at Persepolis, 
dated A.D. 310-11, refers to Shapur Sakanshah, an elder brother 
of Shapur II (A.D. 309-379), who has the titles “king of Sakastan, 
minister of ministers of Sind, Sakastan and Tukharistan,” and who 
is accompanied by the “minister of Public Instruction of Sakastan,” 
by the Satrap of Seistan (in the modern meaning of the name) and 
other dignitaries. Another inscription from Persepolis is probably 
dated in the year 47 of Shapur II, i.e. A.D. 356, though the figure is 
doubtful. It is written by Slok, i.e. “Seleucus, high judge of Kabul” 
who, according to this record, is paying his homage to Shapur 
Sakanshah as his superior, showing that even Kabul belonged to the 
lands governed by the Sakanshah at that time. If the date has been 
correctly read, Kabul must have been conquered some time before 
A.D. 356. 2 

Thus for more than a century after the death of Vasudeva, the 
last Great Kushana emperor, the Later Kushanas ruled over the 
Kabul valley. Whether they were finally overthrown during the 
reign of Shapur II or they maintained a precarious existence in the 
lower Kabul valley and a part of the Punjab, we cannot definitely 
say. But the latter view seems probable and perhaps new tribal 
movements led to fresh Kushana migrations to this region and 
strengthened the kingdom. 

This new movement is referred to in the Chinese annals. The 
‘W T ei-shu 5 or Annals of the Wei Dynasty (A.D. 386-556) refers to it 
as follows 3 :—• 

“The kingdom of the Ta-Yueh-chi (i.e. the Great Kushanas) has 
for its capital the town of Lou-Kien-Chi (Balkh). They found them¬ 
selves threatened on the north by the Juan-Juan, and were exposed 
on several occasions to their raids. They therefore migrated to the 
west*.and established themselves in the town of Po-lo (Balkan, on 
the north of the old bed of the Oxus, where it flowed into the Caspian 
Sea east of Krasnovodsk). Their king Ki-to-lo, a brave and warlike 
prince, raised an army, crossed to the south of the Great Mountains 


1. EHP. 274. 

2. For an account of these two inscriptions, cf. Herzfeld, Kush-Sas. Coins, pp. 35-36. 
In the statement on p. 36 that the second inscription is dated “in the year 
47(?) of Shapur I—the numbers are much obliterated,” Shapur I is evidently 
a printing mistake for Shapur II. 

3. Martin, pp. 24-26. 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(Hindu Kush) and invaded Northern India where the five kingdoms 
to the north of Kan-tho-lo (Gandhara) submitted to him.. .. . 

“Ki-to-lo, having been pursued by the Hmng-nu and havi g 
retired to the west, ordered his son to establish himself in this town 
of Fu-leu-cha (Peshawar). These people are consequen y ca e 

Little Yueh-chi (Little Kushanas).” 

Ma-twan-lin’s encyclopaedic work also contains a brief accouru 

of the same event as follows:—“The capital of the Little Yueh-chi 
is the town of Fu-leu-cha. Their king was a son of Ki-to-lo; he was 
placed in charge of this town by his father when this prince was 
forced, by the attacks of the Juan-Juan, to march westwards.” 

A large number of coins have been found in North-Western India, 
with the Brahmi legend ‘Kidara Kushana Sha,’ 1 and this ruler has 
been identified by most scholars with the chief Ki-to-lo of the Chinese 
annals. 2 The silver coins of Kidara are of distinctively Sassanian 
type and a comparison with the Sassanian coins yields important 
results. Mr. Martin, who has made a special study of these coins, 
arrives at the following conclusions, though they must be regarded 
as provisional until more positive evidence is forthcoming.— 

(1) That Kidara was followed by Piro and Varahran as their 
coins are closely connected. 

(2) That Kidara was at first feudatory to the Sassanian empire, 
that he later became independent, and that during the reign 
of Piro the Sassanians re-asserted their suzerainty. 

(3) That Kidara and his two successors, Piro and Varahran, 

should be referred to the latter half of the fourth century 
A.E). | 

On the basis of these hypotheses it is possible to reconstruct 
the history of the Little Kushanas in some detail. 

We learn from Ammianus, an officer in the Roman army who 
fought against Shapur II in Mesopotamia, that this Sassanid king 
was engaged from A.D. 350 to 358 in fighting against certain tribes 
on his eastern frontier. The most important among these tribes 
were the Chionites, who had invaded Ractria, and the Euseni, which 
has been recognised as a textual corruption for Cuseni or Kushanas. 
In A.D. 358 Shapur made peace with these tribes and began his ‘war 
of revenge upon Rome.’ The army with which he besieged the 
Roman fortress of Amida in Mesopotamia included contingents from 
his new allies, the Chionites and the Kushanas. 3 

1. Martin, p. 39. Cf. also the authorities referred to in fn. 2, p. 53. 

2. V. A. Smith was opposed to this identification and believed that the well- 
executed Kidara-Kushana coins were as early as A.D. 300 or 350 and approxi¬ 
mately contemporaneous with the Shaka, Shilada and Gadahara coins referred 
to above ( JASB, LXIII. 182-3). 

3. Martin, p. 30; Herzfeld, Kush-Sas. Coins, p. 36. 


56 





MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA 


It is very likely that the Chionites, referred to by the Roman 
writer, and the Juan-Juan, mentioned by the Chinese, refer to the 
same tribe. It would then follow that about the middle of the 
fourth century A.D., Kidara, the Kushana ruler, was forced by the 
invasion of this tribe to leave Balkh and occupy the Kabul valley. 
These tribal movements forced Shapur II in A.D. 350 to move to¬ 
wards his eastern frontier. He fought with the Kushanas as well 
as the Chionites and ultimately concluded a treaty with them in 
A.D. 358. Both probably acknowledged the supremacy of the 
Sassanian king, as attested by their coins, and sent contingents to 
help their overlord in his wars against Rome. But, later, Kidara 
asserted his independence, as attested by his coins. The numismatic 
evidence is corroborated by the writings of the Armenian historian, 
Faustos of Byzantium. It appears from his account that the 
Kushanas inflicted two crushing defeats on the Sassanians in 
A.D, 367-8, and on one occasion even forced Shapur II to fly from 
the battlefield. 1 

Thus Kidara established once more an independent Kushana 
dynasty in the Kabul valley. According to the Chinese Annals, he 
invaded North India where the five kingdoms to the north of 
Gandhara submitted to him. It is difficult to understand the full 
import of this, but it is possible that Kidara’s dominions included 
Afghanistan and a part of the upper Sindhu valley. Some of his 
(or his son’s) provincial governors are also known from fheir coins, 
viz. Varo Shahi, Piroch, Bhasa and Buddhabala. 2 As Kidara 
flourished in the third quarter of the fourth century A.D. he was 
probably the contemporary Kushana king who is referred to as 
Daivaputra-Shahi-Shahanushahi in the Allahabad Pillar Inscription. 
Samudra-gupta had probably already imposed his suzerainty on some 
petty Kushana States in the Punjab, for his name occurs on the coin 
of a Gadahara chief. 3 Hence Kidara found it politic to be on good 
terms with the Gupta emperor, for his own position was far from 
being secure on the west. Apart from the Sassanian kings who 
naturally wanted to re-establish their suzerainty, he had also to 
reckon with the hostility of the ruling tribes in Bactria. According 
to the Chinese accounts, their attacks ultimately forced him to march 


1. Martin, p. 32. 

2. Martin, pp. 33 ff. 41 ff. 

3. Two of the three types of Gadahara coinage enumerated by Cunningham have 
been noted above, viz. those bearing the names of Peraya and Kirada. Regarding 
the third bearing the name of Samudra Mr. R. D. Banerji observes:— 
“The resemblance between this coin and the coin of Samudra-gupta is so great 
that it is possible to say that the Gadahara tribe at least acknowledged the 
suzerainty of the great conqueror and placed his name on their coins.” (op. cit, 
93). A similar coin with the name Chandra-gupta (?) is described by Smith 
(JRAS, 1893, p. 145). 


57 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


westwards, and as he evidently expected this to be a prolonged 
campaign he left his son in charge of the capital; in other words, 
probably appointed him to be regent during his absence. 

The name of the tribe against which Kidara was forced to march 
is given as Juan-Juan by Ma-twan-lin and Hiung-nu in Wei-shu. 
But as the latter did not seem to have established their power till 
the middle of the fifth century A.D. * 1 possibly the former is the 
correct name. We do not know the result of Kidara's military 
campaign or anything else about him. 

The son whom he left behind and who succeeded him was Piro. 
Placed between the Gupta empire on the east and the two powerful 
enemies, the Sassanians and the Juan-Juan on the west and the 
north-west, his position was precarious. The Sassanians evidently 
took advantage of Kidara’s preoccupations in the north-west and 
Ardashir II (A.D. 379-383) reconquered at least one district over 
which he set up Tarika as Satrap. Shapur III (383-388) reconquered 
several more districts and at last forced Piro to acknowledge his 
sovereignty. Piro’s successor Varahran also continued as a vassal 
of the Sassanians, whose renewed influence in the Indian border¬ 
land in the last quarter of the fourth century A.D. is attested by 
coins. 2 

It appears from the coins that the Sassanians ceased to exercise 
any authority on the Indian frontier after Vahram IV (A.D. 388- 
399). 3 It has been suggested that this was due to the inroads of the 
Hunas about this time which also extinguished the rule of the Little 
Kushanas in the Kabul valley and forced them to retreat to the 
mountain regions around the upper Sindhu valley and Kashmir. 
The view that the Hunas established their political authority in 
Gandhara at the beginning of the fifth century A.D. rests, however, 
on very insufficient grounds. 4 5 

The continuation of the ruling dynasty founded by Kidara is 

attested by coins found in North-Western India. 6 These coins not 

————— . — 1 — " 

1. Chavannes ( Documents sur les toukiue Occidental, p. 223) definitely says that 
the White Huns were subject to the Juan-Juan tribe and did not come into 
prolninence till the middle pf the fifth century A.D. Martin’s view (pp. 35 ff.) 
that they had raided Peshawar prior to A.D. 400 rests on very doubtful evidence. 
The statement of Fa-hien, quoted by him, is misleading, as Fa-hien refers not 
to an Ephthalite king, as Martin says on the authority of Giles, but to a king 
of Yueh-^he, whom Legge takes to be Kanishka ( Travels of Fa-hien p 34) 

S U Lu h w teV r e r r we may think of this there is no authority^ taking Yueh-she as 
Ephthalite Huns. As regards the imitation by the Huns of the Sassanian coins 
of the fourth century A.D., this is not a very convincing argument, as the 
barbarian invaders often copied even old coins. 

2. Martin, pp. 34-35, 37-8. 

3. Ibid. 

4. See f. n. 1 above. 

5. For references, see f. n. 2, p. 53. 


58 





MINOR STATES IN NORTH INDIA 


only bear the name of the ruler who issued them, but have also the 
name Kidara, or its abbreviated form Kida, written vertically under 
the arms of the royal figure dressed like a Kushana king. The gold 
coins of these Little Kushana rulers have been found over extensive 
areas, from the Punjab as far as Kanauj and Kosam in the east; and 
even as late as 1925 a dozen of them was found in Hardoi District, 
U.P. 1 Among names of individual rulers may be noted Kritavlrya, 
Sarvayasa, Bhasvan, Prakasa, Kusala and Salonavlra. 2 These 
coins seem to have been current for several centuries after which 
they merged into the series struck in Kashmir by the Karkotaka or 
Naga dynasty in the seventh century A.D. 3 The long currency of 
the coinage as well as its findspots indicates that it was probably 
used by several dynasties. But it is impossible, with the meagre 
information available now, to arrange the kings in different dynasties 
and to locate them either chronologically or geographically. The 
Kushana principalities both in the Kabul valley and the Punjab were 
overrun by the White Huns about the middle of the fifth century 
A.D. and they set up an independent kingdom in Gandhara about 
A.D. 460. Whether there was a revival of the Kushana power or 
not depends upon the question whether later rulers like Toramana 
and Mihirakula were Huna or Kushana. It is probable also that 
the two tribes were ethnically allied and were merged into a new 
nation, generally known in India under the name of Huna. 


1. JPASB, XXX, Num. Suppl. XLV. 77. 

2. Ibid. This is evidently the name which was wrongly read before as Siladitya. 

3. Martin, p. 23. 


59 




CHAPTER VIII 

NORTHERN INDIA AFTER THE BREAK-UP OF 
THE GUPTA EMPIRE (SIXTH CENTURY A.D.) 

For nearly half a century after the break-up of the Gupta 
empire, Northern India presented the usual picture of political dis¬ 
integration—a number of independent states struggling for power, 
and, if possible, for establishing suzerainty over others. Most of these 
states were off-shoots of the Gupta empire, chief among them being 
the principalities ruled over by the Maitrakas, the Kalachuris, 1 the 
Gurjaras, the Maukharis, and the Later Guptas, and the kingdoms 
of Nepal, Bengal, Assam, and Orissa. Outside the limits of the empire, 
the kingdoms of Kashmir and Thaneswar on the north-west and 
Southern Kalinga in the south-east came into prominence. It was not 
till the beginning of the seventh century A.D. that a powerful ruler 
of Thaneswar once more succeeded in establishing a big empire and 
bringing back, to a limited extent and for a short time, that political 
unity and solidarity which Northern India enjoyed under the 
Imperial Guptas. It is necessary, therefore, to review separately 
the history of these various states during the sixth century A.D., 
before we can again take up the main thread of the imperial history 
of Northern India. 


1. VALABHI 

Of all the states that arose out of the ruins of the Gupta empire 
the kingdom of Valabhi proved to be the most durable. It has been 
noted above how the descendants of Bhatarka, a Gupta general of 
the Maitraka clan 2 and the governor of Saurashtra or Kathiawai 
Peninsula, gradually made themselves powerful towards the close 

1. For the history of the Kalachuris cf. Chap. XI. B. III. 

2. Due to a faulty translation of the opening passage of the inscriptions of the 
Valabhi kings, it was erroneously held for a long time that ‘Bhatarka success¬ 
fully fought against the Maitrakas.’ * Hultzsch was the first to point out (El. 
III. 320) that according to the proper construction of the passage it really means 
that Bhatarka himself belonged to the family or tribe of the Maitrakas, and 
not that he fought against it. This view is now unanimously accepted. Fleet 
and other scholars identified the Maitrakas with Mihiras and regarded them 
as sun-worshipping people of foreign origin. Fleet even went so far as to 
suggest that the Maitrakas were the ‘particular family or clan among the Hunas, 
to which Toramana and Mihirakula belonged’ (CII. Ill, Introd. 12) and this 
view has been accepted by others ( 1HQ . 1928, p. 457; JPASB. 1909, p. 183). 
But this theory, originally prompted by the wrong translation, noted above, has 
really no basis. (Cf. JC. V. 408-9). 


60 



NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


of the fifth century A.D. The first two chiefs, Bhatarka and hi 5 son 
Dharasena, called themselves Sendpati , but their successors styled 
themselves Maharaja or Mahdsdmanta Maharaja. The third king 
Dronasimha, the younger brother of Dharasena, is said to have been 
invested with the rank and title of Maharaja by his (Gupta) overlord, 
probably Budha-gupta. 1 Both Dronasimha and his younger brother 
and successor Maharaja Dhruvasena issued land-grants in the man¬ 
ner of independent kings, but the expression of allegiance to the 
paramount sovereign shows that they had not yet finally thrown off 
the yoke of the Guptas. 

The date of the foundation of this kingdom cannot be precisely 
determined. The earliest land-grant of the family, so far discover¬ 
ed, is the one issued by Mahdrdja Dronasimha in A.D. 502. As his 
brother Dharasena and his father Bhatarka preceded him, the date 
of the latter cannot be placed much later than A.D. 475, and may 
be even somewhat earlier. As we have seen above, Parnadatta was 
appointed governor of Surashtra in A.D. 455-56. Bhatarka’s date 
may, therefore, be provisionally fixed between A.D. 465 and 475. 2 

All the royal grants are issued from Valabhl which must have 
been the capital city. When or under what circumstances the capi¬ 
tal was removed from Girinagara, modern Junagadh, where Parna¬ 
datta evidently had his headquarters, it is difficult to say. It has 
been suggested that the capital was removed as the bursting of the 
Sudarsana lake was a standing menace to its safety. 3 It is true that 
we have records showing that such a calamity occurred at least 
twice, once in A.D. 150 and again in A.D. 455, but that is hardly 
sufficient to account for the removal of the capital, especially to such 
a great distance. 

The extent of the kingdom of Valabhl is also uncertain. The 
site of the capital city is now represented by Wala or Vala (21°52' N, 
71°57' E) in old Bhavnagar State in Eastern Kathiawar Peninsula. 
The villages, donated in the grants of the early rulers, are all situated 
in the neighbouring region. But as Bhatarka was the governor of 


1. Cf. p. 30. There seems to be no reasonable ground to suppose that the overlord of 
Dronasimha could be either Toramana or Yasodharman, or indeed any one 
other than the Gupta emperor (for a discussion of this point cf. 1C. V. 409). 

2. There is a tradition current in Surashtra according to which, during the weak 
rule of Skanda-gupta, his sendpati Bhattaraka of the Gehloti race, whose fore¬ 
fathers were rulers of Ayodhya and displaced by the Guptas, came into 
Surashtra and stabilised his rule there. Two years after this Skanda-gupta 
died. The sendpati now assumed the title of king of Surashtra and founded 
the city of Valabhl-nagara (for the full story, cf. I A, II. 312). The clear epigra- 
phic evidence that Sendpati Bhatarka never assumed the title of king shows 
what little reliance can be placed on these stories. The view that Bhatarka 
issued coins in his own name rests upon a very doubtful interpretation of the 
coin-legends ( JRASBL, III. Num. Suppl. p. 99). 

3. 1C. V. 413-4. 


61 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Surashtra, it may be presumed that the kingdom carved out by his 
successors roughly corresponded to that province. 

An unsually large number of records of this family have come 
to light which enable us to reconstruct the genealogy and chronology 
of the kings with a fair degree of certainty. But these records con¬ 
tain little else of historical value. Of Dhruvasena I, for example, 
we have no less than 16 grants, but they do not refer to a single 
event of historical importance. 1 We only know that he also paid 
at least nominal allegiance to a suzerain, presumably the Gupta 
overlord, and was on the throne from at least G.E. 206 to 226 
(A.D. 525-545). Dhruvasena was succeeded by his younger brother 
Maharaja Dharapatta of whom no record has yet been found. 
Dharapatta was succeeded by his son Maharaja Guhasena whose 
known dates range between 240 (or 237) and 248 (A.D. 556 or 559 
to 567). It is significant that Guhasena’s grants discard the epithet 
‘paramahhaltaraka-pddanudhyata/ which was used by Dhruvasena I. 
This shows that the Maitraka kings no longer paid even nominal 
allegiance to any overlord, and indirectly confirms the supposition 
th$t this overlord was the Gupta emperor, for it is difficult to think 
of any other who held this position from about A.D. 475 to 550 and 
then ceased to do so. The final overthrow of the Imperial Gupta 
dynasty between A.D. 550 and 570, as noted above, fully explains 
the absence of all references to its suzerainty in Valabhl records 
since the time of Guhasena. It is probably for this reason that in later 
records of the family, since the time of &Iladitya I (A.D. 606), the 
conventional genealogy of the royal family, as given in the land- 
grants, begins with Guhasena, descended from Bhatarka, the names 
of all the intervening rulers being omitted altogether. 

Guhasena was followed by his son and grandson, Dharasena II 
and Siladitya I Bharmaditya. The known dates of the former range 
between A.D. 571 and 590, and those of the latter between A.D. 606 
and 612. A single copper-plate 2 reveals the existence of a family 
(called Garulaka) of feudatory chiefs consisting of Sendpati Varaha¬ 
dasa I, his two sons Bhattisura and Varahadasa II, and the latter’s 
son Simhaditya, the last three having the title Sdmanta-Mahardja. 
The change in titles is analogous to that of the Maitraka chiefs them¬ 
selves. The grant was issued by Simhaditya in A.D. 574 and he 
was, therefore, a feudatory of Dharasena II. The grant mentions 
that Varahadasa II defeated a ruler of Dvaraka, which is on the west 
coast of Kathiawar Peninsula. It is probable that Varhahadasa II 

1. These inscriptions give him various titles such as Mahasamanta, Maharaja , 

Mahdpratihjira, Mahddandandyaka, Mahakartakritika. 

2. EL XI. 17. 

62 



NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


fought on behalf of his overlord (Guhasena or Dharasena II). Whether 
this fight denotes an extension of Maitraka power to the western 
extremity of Surashtra, which was till now independent, or whether 
it refers to a rebellion of a feudatory, it is difficult to say. The 
former appears more probable, for Dharasena II, in one record, 
assumes the paramount title Mahddhirdja^ and this claim, perhaps, 
rests upon an extension of territory. 

The extension of the Valabhi kingdom about this time is also 
perhaps indicated by a statement of Hiuen Tsang. 1 2 While describ¬ 
ing Mo-la-po, he refers to its king Slladitya, who ruled over the 
country sixty years before his time. This would place the reign of 
Slladitya about A.D. 580. In spite of slight discrepancy in dates, the 
identity of king Slladitya of Mo-la-po with Slladitya I Dharmaditya 
of Valabhi may be regarded as almost certain. For the Chinese pil¬ 
grim calls his contemporary ruler of Valabhi a nephew of Slladitya, 
king of Mo-la-po, and we know that Dhruvasena II, the king of 
Valabhi in A.D. 640, was the nephew of Slladitya I. 

If we assume this identity, we must hold that king Slladitya 
ruled over an extensive kingdom. In spite of the difference of views 
about the location of Mo-la-po, there cannot be any doubt that it 
represents the name Malava, and comprised a considerable portion 
of Western Malwa. 3 We may therefore hold that towards the close 
of the sixth century A.D. Valabhi had become the most powerful 
kingdom in Western India. 

Hiuen Tsang pays high compliments to king Slladitya. He is 
said to be a “monarch of great administrative ability and of rare 
kindness and compassion.” He built a Buddhist temple, “extremely 
artistic in structure and ornament,” and held every year a “great 
religious assembly” to which Buddhists were summoned from all 
quarters. From epigraphic records we know that the king had the 
surname Dharmaditya, and this fits in well with the description of 
his character by the Chinese pilgrim. 

2. THE GURJARAS OF RAJPUTANA 

The Gurjaras came into prominence about the second half of 
the sixth century A.D. They, no doubt, took advantage of the 
downfall of the Gupta empire to establish their political authority. 
Their most important kingdom was that founded in the heart of 
Rajputana near Jodhpur, and this region came to be called after 

1. Wala PI. of year 269 (IA. VI. 11). In the text of the grant itself the king Is 
given the ordinary titles Mahasamanta Maharaja, but in the royal signature he 
is described as Mahddhirdja. 

2. HTW. II. 242. 3. EHV 323-26. 


68 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


them Gujaratra, a variant of Gujarat. The state, now known 
as Gujarat, was not called by that name till a much later period. • In 
addition to these two important regions called after the Gurjaras, 
there are other localities associated with the name of this people. 
We have, for example, place-names like Gujranwala, Gujarat and 
Gujar-khan in the Punjab. The district of Saharanpur was also 
called Gujarat in the eighteenth century, and one of the northern 
districts of Gwalior is still called Gujargarh. 

These place-names indicate that the Gurjaras had quite a large 
number of settlements in different parts of the country. This infe¬ 
rence is corroborated by the present distribution of the Gujars, who 
may be regarded as the modern representatives of the old Gurjaras. 
They are fairly numerous in the Western Himalayas, the Punjab, 
the Uttar Pradesh and western Rajputana and are also found in 
the hilly country beyond the Sindhu. They constitute a large part 
of the population of Gujarat, but are not found to the south of the 
Satpura mountains. 1 

The origin of the Gurjaras is a subject of keen controversy. 
Many scholars hold the view that the Gurjaras were a foreign people 
who came to India along with the Hunas, and their gradual advance 
from the Punjab, through Rajputana into Gujarat, is marked by the 
various localities that still bear their name. This view is, however, 
contested by others who take Gurjara to be primarily the name of a 
country whose inhabitants were naturally known as Gurjaras. It 
has been suggested that the various geographical units now called 
Gujarat (or allied names) were originally parts of a large homoge¬ 
neous country named Gurjaradesa under the political authority of 
its own kings, and while isolated fragments of it have retained the 
old name others have lost it. 2 This view has not, however, met with 
general acceptance. For while there is no evidence that the mighty 
empire of the Pratiharas had a common geographical name and a 
homogeneous character as distinguished from the rest of India, 
several parts of it have retained distinct names throughout the dura¬ 
tion of that empire and even later. The various localities clearly 
associated in old times with the name Gurjara, and the present geo¬ 
graphical distribution of the people called Gujars, undoubtedly 
favour the view that the term primarily denoted a people, and the 
countries derived their names from them. The Malavas* offer an 


1 . 

2 . 


reference? in e jm Wi X tW ° *f raS haVe been fully bussed with 

, e TT ces in fpL. X. 1 ff. For the settlement of the Gujars in Unoer Swit 

/nf S Y n, i°f? Alexander’s Track to the Indus, pp. 150-51. 

IHn y qq 7 vt The Glory that was Gurjaradesa, Part III pp 1 ff 

IHQ, X. 337, 613; XI. 167; XIII. 137; 1C. I. 510; IV. 113; JBROS. XXIV 221.' 


64 







NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


exact analogy to the Gurjaras in this respect. But though we can 
be more or less sure that the Gurjaras were originally the name of 
a people, there is no definite evidence that they were foreigners, and 
came to India in historical times in the wake of the Hunas, the 
Kushanas or other foreign hordes. Their sudden rise into pro¬ 
minence in the sixth century A.D., and the attempt of some of their 
royal dynasties to fabricate a mythical origin, no doubt, lend colour 
to this view. But these cannot be relied upon as definite evidence, 
and we may cite analogous instances of the Kalachuris and the 
Chandellas. On the whole, this question must be left open till more 
definite evidence is available. 1 

The earliest Gurjara kingdom, known so far, is that founded by 
Harichandra 2 in the modern Jodhpur State in Rajputana, about the 
middle of the sixth century A.D. Harichandra was a Brahmana, 
versed in the Vedas and other sdstras. He had two wives. The sons 
born of his Brahmana wife became Pratihara Brahmanas, while those 
born of his Kshatriya wife became the founders of the royal line of 
the Pratiharas. It is significant that the Kshatriya wife Bhadra is 
called queen while no such royal epithet is given to his Brahmana 
wife. It seems that Harichandra followed peaceful Brahmanical 
pursuits in his early life, but when, after the fall of the Gupta 
empire and of the empires of Mihirakula and Yasodharman, Northern 
India presented a favourable field for military enterprise, he gave 
up the sdstras (scriptures) for the sastra (arms), as many others have 
done both before and after him. He proved successful and founded 
a kingdom. He had four sons by queen Bhadra, viz. Bhogabhata, 
Kakka, Rajjila and Dadda. They conquered and fortified Mandavya- 
pura (Mandor, five miles to the north of Jodhpur) which presumably 
became their capital. The four sons of Harichandra are described as 
fit to hold the earth, and this probably implies that each of them 
ruled over a separate principality. But we do not know anything 
about the first two. The third Rajjila ruled in Mandavyapura. He 
was succeeded by his son Narabhata and the latter bv his son 
Nagabhata, who fixed his permanent capital at Medantaka (probably 
Merta, 70 miles north-east of Jodhpur). Harichandra and his three 
successors, mentioned above, probably ruled between c. A.D; 550 
and 640. Eight more generations of this family, comprising ten 
kings, ruled during the next two hundred years and their history 
will be dealt with in a subsequent chapter. 

1. The whole question has recently been discussed by the present writer in K. M. 
Munshi Diamond Jubilee Volume, Part II, pp. 1-18. 

2. The account that follows is based mainly on the Jodhpur Inscription of Prati¬ 
hara Bauka (EL XVIII. 87 ff). Cf. also JDL. X. 1 ff. 

65 

C, A.—5. 




the classical age 


3. THE GURJARAS OF NANDIPURI 1 

In addition to the kingdom in Rajputana, there was another 
principality in the region round Broach ruled over by Gurjara chiefs. 
The four earliest records of the family, dated between A.D. 629 and 
641, .were issued by a king named Dadda II Prasantaraga, son of 
Vitaraga Jayabhata I, and grandson of Dadda I. It appears from 
these records that his principality extended from the river Mahi in 
the north to the Kim in the south, and from the sea-coast in the west 
to the borders of Malwa and Khandesh on the east. As all the grants 
were issued from Nandlpurl, that was probably the capital of the 
family. It has been identified by Blihler with Broach and by 
Bhagwanlal Xndraji with Nandod, situated on the Karjan river in 
the Rajpipla State. 2 

As Dadda I is expressly said to have been born in the family of 
the Gurjara kings, and must have flourished in the last quarter of 
the sixth century A.D., he may reasonably be identified with Dadda, 
the youngest son of Harichandra, the founder of the main Gurjara 
family mentioned above. As noted above, all the four sons of 
Harichandra are described as fit to bear the burdens of the earth, 
and it is very likely that while the third son Rajjila ruled near 
Jodhpur, the three other sons also established separate principalities. 
In addition to the kingdom of Broach we hear of another Gurjara 
kingdom in Malwa, with its capital at Avanti, at a somewhat later 
date, and as the rulers called themselves Pratiharas they might 
have been descended from one of the sons of Harichandra. It is, 
however, difficult to say whether Dadda I himself advanced as far 
as Broach, for we do not know whether the vast intervening region 
was conquered by the Gurjaras. Besides, as we shall see later, the 
territory over which this dynasty ruled was included in the domi¬ 
nions of the Kalachuri kings ^ahkaragana and Buddharaja. If, 
therefore, we hold that Dadda I founded this principality in the last 
quarter of the sixth century A.D. we must suppose that he or his 
son lost it or became feudatories of the Kalachuris. The probability, 
therefore, is that Dadda I founded a principality somewhere in 
southern Rajputana and it was only after the collapse of the Kala¬ 
churi power that he or his son occupied Broach and the district 
around it. It is not improbable that the Gurjaras sought the aid of 
Pulakesin and voluntarily submitted to him in order to overpower 
the Kalachuris. It is probably by this means that the Gurjaras 
occupied their territories in Gujarat not long after A.D. 610, and 


1. BG..L Part II, p. 313; Bh. List, Nos. 1209-13. 

2. BG. I. Part II, p. 314, f.n. 6. Indraji’s view is now generally accepted, j 

66 




NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


eventually Malwa, or at least a large portion of it, also passed into 
their hands. 

Dadda I is said to have overthrown some hostile Nagas, and it 
is therefore likely that he carved out a principality by ejecting some 
branch of the Naga tribe. Dadda and his successors are called 
Sdmantas or feudatories, and no royal titles are given them in their 
records. On the other hand, these Grants do not refer to any para¬ 
mount sovereign. It may be presumed, therefore, that they owed 
allegiance to the main Gurjara ruling family in Rajputana or to the 
Chalukyas. 

4. THE MAUKHARIS 

Maukhari is the name of a very ancient family or clan. The 
name was probably known to Panini. A clay-seal of the clan be¬ 
longing to the Maurya period has been found at Gaya. A Maukhari 
general is referred to in an inscription dated A.D. 239 found in Kotah 
State in Rajputana. Four inscriptions 1 engraved on stone yupas 
(sacrificial pillars) show that there were several Maukhari families 
in this locality during the third century A.D. When later they came 
to be a great power, the Maukharis claimed to be descended from 
Asvapati, referred to in the Mahdbharata as king of Madra in the 
Central Punjab. It would thus appear that the Maukharis were 
widely spread over Northern India at a very early period. 

In the sixth century A.D. a Maukhari family ruled in the neigh¬ 
bourhood of Gaya. Three kings of this family are known from three 
inscriptions found in the Barabar and Nagarjuni Hills in the Gaya 
District. These are Yajna-varman, his son Sardula-varman and the 
latter’s son Ananta-varman. They were all feudatories to the 
Guptas. Ananta-varman, in whose reign all the three inscriptions 
were engraved, flourished at the time of the decline of the Gupta 
empire. For his records do not refer to the paramount sovereign, 
although they describe his grandfather as a feudatory chief. 
Nothing further is known of this family and their rule may be placed 
in the first half of the sixth century A.D. or perhaps a little earlier. 

Another branch of the Maukharis, who ultimately became more 
powerful, is known from several seals and inscriptions. The royal 
seals give us the following genealogy:— 

1. Maharaja Hari-varman = JayasvaminI 

2. Maharaja Aditya-varman = Harshagupta 

3. Maharaja Isvara-varman — Upagupta 

4. Mahdrdjddhirdja, Tsana-varman — Lakshmlvati 


1. El, XXIII, 42; XXIV, 251. 


67 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


5. Mahdrdjddhiraja Sarva-varman = Indrabhattarika 

6. Mahdrdjddhiraja Avanti-varman = 

7. Mahdrdjddhiraja Su — 

The distinction between the titles given to the first three kings and 
the rest leaves no doubt that the reign of Isana-varman marked the 
rise of the family to power and prestige. As all the inscriptions of 
the family, other than the small seals, and their coins have been 
found within the limits of the modern province of U.P., we may 
regard it roughly as the seat of their power. Fortunately, we possess 
a date of Isana-varman which is generally taken to be equivalent to 
A.D. 554. There can thus be hardly any doubt that the three pre¬ 
decessors of Isana-varman were feudatories of the Gupta empire and 
flourished during the first half of the sixth century A.D., and pro¬ 
bably somewhat earlier. It would thus follow that the Maukhari 
families ruled as feudatory chiefs in S. Bihar and U.P. since the time 
of Budha-gupta, and the decline of the power of the Imperial Guptas, 
early in the sixth century A.D., gave them an opportunity to assert 
their independence. Although we have vague references to the 
military campaigns carried on far and wide by these Maukhari kings, 
we do not know anything definite of their history until we come to 
the reign of Isana-varman. He claims to have defeated the Andhras, 
Sulikas and the Gaudas. These probably refer respectively to the 
Vishnu-kundins, 1 the Sulkis of Orissa 2 and some ruling powers of 
Bengal. 3 These conquests indicate extensive military campaigns 
and great power. Isana-varman was thus fully justified in assuming 
the title Mahdrdjddhiraja. He was the first in his family to assume 
this imperial title and to issue coins. It is, therefore, very likely 
that he was the first Maukhari king to set up an independent king¬ 
dom and establish the power of the family. As one of his known 
dates is A.D. 554 his rise to power almost coincides with the downfall 
of the Gupta empire and may be the cause or effect of this event, or 
perhaps both, to a certain extent. 

The Later Guptas, who came into prominence about the same 
time, and due to the same circumstances, challenged the power of 
the Maukharis. There was a protracted struggle between the two 
for the remnants of the Gupta empire and, as will be narrated later, 
the Maukhari king Isana-varman was defeated by Kumara-gupta and 
probably also by Damodara-gupta. 

Very little is known of the history of the Maukharis after Isana- 
varman. Reference will be made later to their struggle with the 


1. See Ch. XI, C. 1(2). 

2. Cf. Vol. IV, Ch. IV, HI. 3. 


3. Probably the kings mentioned on p. 77. 


68 








NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


Later Guptas. Although they do not always seem to have met with 
great success, there is some evidence of the occupation of Magadha 
or a part of it by the next two kings Sarva-varman and Avanti- 
varman. The Maukhari rulers must have been fairly powerful 
throughout the latter half of the sixth century A.D. This follows not 
only from the imperial titles assumed by both the kings, but also 
from the eulogistic expressions used by Banabhatta in the Harsha- 
charita. He remarks that the ‘Maukharis stand at the head of all 
royal houses, and Avanti-varman is the pride of that race.’ 1 Even 
allowing for poetic exaggerations, particularly when the occasion was 
a matrimonial alliance of his patron’s family with the Maukharis, 
Banabhatta’s eulogy undoubtedly conveys the idea that the Maukhari 
rulers enjoyed great power and distinction up to the beginning of 
the seventh century A.D. It may also be noted in this connection 
that Ban a, in his other work Kudambarl , mentions with pride that 
the feet of his guru were worshipped by the Maukhari kings. 2 

As mentioned above, either Isana-varman or his son Sarva- 
varman fought with the H€mas and defeated them. There is no 
doubt that both Sarva-varman and his son Avanti-varman were 
powerful kings and ruled over considerable territory. But it is 
difficult to form even an approximate idea of its limits. To judge 
from the findspots of coins and inscriptions, the kingdom seems to 
have corresponded roughly to the present Uttar Pradesh. It also 
included portions of Magadha. The view that Asirgadh in the 
Nimar District (Madhya Pradesh) was a ‘Maukhari outpost in the 
Deccan’ has nothing to commend itself. 3 The theory that the Mau¬ 
khari dominion extended up to the Sutlej in the west also rests on 
very insufficient grounds. 4 Kanauj seems to have been the capital 

1. Cowell and Thomas, HC. 122. 2. Introductory Verse 4. 

3. T. G. Aravamuthan argues “that the fortress of Asirgadh fell into the hands 
of the Maukharis” as “no other suggestion explains, at any rate, how Sarva- 
varman’s seal could have migrated to Asirgadh” ( Kaveri, Maukharis and San - 
gam Age, pp. 96-97). It is well known, however, that even copper-plates, not 
to speak of small portable objects like a seal, can be easily carried to distant 
places. There is also a great deal of doubt whether the seal was actually found 
at Asirgadh. Fleet says that an impression of the seal was found at Asirgadh 
in a box containing property of the Maharaja Sindhia. As regards the seal he 
remarks: “It is not quite clear from the published accounts whether the ori¬ 
ginal was ever found, or only impressions of it.” Thus what was found at 
Asirgadh was not the seal, but a box of Maharaja Sindhia containing an im¬ 

pression of the seal. As Asirgadh at the time belonged to Sindhia, we can 
easily believe that the box was taken there from other parts of his dominions 
in Northern India. There is thus hardly any ground, even to presume that 
Asirgadh formed part of the dominions of the Maukharis. 

4. This view rests upon a copper-plate grant found at Nirmand, a village on the 
right bank of the upper course of the Sutlej, in the Kangra District (31° 25' N, 
77° 38' E) ( CII . III. 288). It refers to lands formerly granted by Maharaja 
Sarva-varman to a temple in this neighbourhood. If this Sarva-varman is 
identical with the Maukhari king of that name, the latter must have extended 


G9 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of the Maukhari kingdom, at least in the time of Avanti-varman and 
his son, but of this too we have no positive evidence. * 1 

Many dated coins of isana-varman, Sarva-varman and Avanti- 
varman have come to light. Unfortunately the numerical figures 
are very uncertain, and widely divergent readings have been pro¬ 
posed by different scholars. 2 So it is impossible to form any de¬ 
finite conclusions from them. Some scholars have read the dates 
257, 234, and 250 on coins respectively of Isana-varman, Sarva-var¬ 
man and Avanti-varman, while another scholar has read the same 
figures as 257, 258, and 260. Assuming these to be correct, and 
referring them to the Gupta era, we get A.D. 576-7 for Isana-varman, 
A.D. 577-8 for Sarva-varman and A.D. 579-80 for Avanti-varman. 
The last two dates may be tentatively accepted and cannot be very 
far from truth. For it may be reasonably inferred from the Harsh ®- 
charita that Avanti-varman had died and his eldest son Graha-var- 
man was on the throne some time before A.D. 606. If we accept 
the date A.D. 576 for Isana-varman, he must have ruled from c. A.D. 
550 to 576, and Sarva-vaman had a very short rule between A.D. 
576 and 580. We may thus provisionally accept the following chro¬ 
nological table:— 


c. A.D. 550-576 3 
c. A.D. 576-580 
c. A.D. 580-600 


Isana-varman 

Sarva-varman 

Avanti-varman 


There is some uncertainty regarding the successor of Avanti- 
varman. In Bana’s Harsha-charita, king Prabhakara-vardhana tells 
his queen that ‘Graha-varman, the eldest son of Avanti-varman, 
seeks our daughter.’ 4 Later, we are told that an envoy extraordi¬ 
nary had arrived with instructions from Graha-varman to sue for the 
hand of princess RajyasrlJ 5 These references make it clear that 


his authority to this region. There is, however, nothing to support this identi¬ 
fication, except the similarity of the name. It is not impossible, however, that 
the Maukhari king might have advanced so far in course of his campaign 
against the Hunas. In that case we must suppose that the ruler of the inter¬ 
vening principality of Thaneswar was either subordinate to the Maukharis or 
formed an alliance with them against their common foe, the Hunas. But we 
cannot arrive at such important conclusions from a doubtful identification 
based merely on a common name. Cf. POC, XV. 298. 

1. The story of RajyasrI, as narrated by Bana, makes it highly probable that 
Kanauj was the capital of her kingdom. The same conclusion follows from 
Hiuen Tsang’s story of Harsha-vardhana. The whole question has been 
thoroughly discussed by Dr. Tripathi ( Kanauj, pp. 32-35). 

2. These have been summarised and discussed by Dr. Tripathi (Kanauj, pp. 55 ff). 

3. We learn from the Haraha Ins. that Isana-varman had a son called Surya- 
varman, but there is no evidence that he ever came to the throne. The identi¬ 
fication of this prince with the king of that name mentioned in the Sirur Ins. 
lests on very insufficient grounds (cf. El. XXIV. 284, where full references are 
given for different views). 

4. Cowell and Thomas, HC, pp. 122-3. 5. Ibid, p. 123. 


70 




NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


Graha-varman, the eldest son of Avanti-varman, had succeeded his 
father before he married Rajyasri in or shortly before A.D. 006. 1 

But according to a Nalanda. seal 2 the son and successor of 
Avanti-varman is certainly not Graha-varman. Though, on account 
of the damaged state of the seal, the name cannot be read in full, its 
first letter is undoubtedly Su and the second probably va or cha. 
In any case it cannot be the first part of Graha-varman. This raises 
a difficult problem. The omission of Graha-varman’s name in the 
seal does not, of course, conclusively prove that he did not reign, or 
even that he did not succeed his father, and in view of Bana’s posi¬ 
tive statement we may reject these views. It would then follow 
that king Suva (?). . who issued the seal was a younger brother of 
Graha-varman and succeeded him. 3 Even this is opposed to the 
view generally held about the history of Kanauj after the tragic death 
of Graha-varman. But this problem will be discussed in connection 
with Harsh-vardhana. We may close the history of the Maukharis 
with the happy event of the marriage of Graha-varman and Rajyasri 
of which Bana has given such a picturesque account. 

This marriage was rightly regarded as ‘uniting the two brilliant 
lines of Pushpabhuti and Mukhara.’ 4 But little could one foresee 
at the time all the consequences of this fateful alliance. For seldom 
did a royal marriage bring in its train so much tragedy as well as so 
much glory and power. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
INSCRIPTIONS AND SEALS 

(i) Fleet—C7J. III. Nos. 47-51. 

(ii) Haraha Ins.— EL XIV. 110. 

(iii) Nalanda Seal EL XXIV. 284. 

MODERN TEXTS 

1. R. S. Tripathi, History of Kanauj, Ch. II. 

2. R. G. Basak, History of North-Eastern India, Ch. V. 

3. E. Pires, The Maukharis. 

For certain views about the Maukharis which rest on very insufficient data 
and have not therefore been discussed above, cf. N1A, II. 354; POC, VII. 569; 
Woolner Comm. Volume, p. 116. 


1. It has been doubted whether Graha-varman ever came to the throne (El. XXIV. 
284 fn. 8). But the passages quoted above from Harsha-charita, as well as 
subsequent references, seem to be decisive on this point. 

2. EI. XXIV. 284-5. 

3. Mahjusrx-Mula-Kalpa indicates that Graha(varman) was succeeded by Suvra(?), 
which may be the name mentioned in the Nalanda seal (Suva?). According 
to M_MK the dynasty declined and lost regal status after Suvra ( MMK, p. 626): 

Isana-sarva pahktischa graha-surva-t.athaparah, 

Tataste luptarajanah bhrashtamaryada sarvadd. 

Jayaswal emends the first line as follows:— 

isana-sarvdvantischa graha-suvrata(a)th=dparah , thus taking ‘Suvrata’ 
as the name of the successor of Graha(varman).— IHIJ, pp. 27, 45. This, how¬ 
ever, violates the metre. Dr. N. P. Chakravarti suggests the restoration’of the 
last part of the seal as &ri-Sucha(ndravarmmd Maukharih) (EI, XXIV. 284. f.n. 
6 ). 

4. Cowell and Thomas, HC, p. 128. 


71 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


5. THE LATER GUPTAS 

The history of the Later Guptas is similar in many respects to 
that of the Maukharis. They too were at first feudatory to the 
Imperial Guptas, and came into prominence and asserted their inde¬ 
pendence about the same time as the Maukharis. An inscription 
found at Aphsad, near Gaya, 1 gives the following genealogy of the 

early kings of this dynasty: 

1. Krishna-gupta 

2. Harsha-gupta 

3. JIvita-gupta 

4. Kumara-gupta 

5. Damodara-gupta 

6. Mahasena-gupta 

7. Madhava-gupta 

8. Aditya-sena 

Although no royal title is given to any of these, Krishna-gupta is 
called a nripa (king) and similar epithets are applied to his succes¬ 
sors. 

We do not know for certain which member of this family was 
the first to set up as an independent king. The Aphsad inscription 
describes in very general and conventional terms the military 
achievements of the first three kings. The third king is said to have 
carried his arms to the Himalaya mountains as well as to the sea. 
But there is nothing to show whether these campaigns were under¬ 
taken by the Later Gupta rulers as feudatories on behalf of their 
suzerains, or as independent chiefs. The former, however, appears 
more probable. 

More details are available about the next king Kumara-gupta. 
He defeated the Maukhari king Isana-varman, who is described as ‘a 
very moon of kings.’ Kumara-gupta’s success must have paved 
the way for the rise in the fortunes of his family. When we 
remember that there is no reference in any record to a Gupta 
emperor after A.D. 543, we may well believe that from the time of 
Kumara-gupta, if not before, the Later Guptas had, to all intents and 
purposes, assumed an independent position. That the success at¬ 
tained by Kumara-gupta was both great and permanent is proved 
by the fact, recorded in the Aphsad inscription, that he had advanced 
up to Prayaga where he died, and that his son Damodara-gupta again 
defeated the Mauhkaris, though he was probably killed or was 
seriously wounded in the battle. 2 

1. rn in. 200. 

2. Fleet’s translation of the passage, conveying the Plea that the kins died in the 
fight, is generally accepted. Mr. K. C. Chattopadhyaya, however, argues that 


72 





NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


There is no reason to discredit these claims, particularly as the 
Maukhari records do not claim any victory over their opponents. 
Whether the Maukhari king defeated by Damodara-gupta was 
Isana-varman or his son is difficult to say. But there seems to be 
little doubt that the Later Guptas had by then strongly established 
themselves both in Malwa as well as in the eastern parts of the Gupta 
empire. For Mahasena-gupta, the son of Damodara-gupta, carried 
his victorious arms as far as the Lauhita or Brahmaputra, and de¬ 
feated Susthita-varman, the king of Kamarupa or Assam. 

In spite of uncertainties regarding the original home of the 
Later Gupta kings, to which reference will be made later, we are on 
comparatively safe ground regarding the extent of Mahasena-gupta’s 
dominions. He is described as the king of Malava in the Harsha-cha - 
rita^ and his victory on the banks of the Brahmaputra is vouched 
for by the Aphsad Inscription. We must, therefore, hold'that he 
succeeded in bringing under his sway, at least for some time, the 
extensive dominions from Malava to Bengal. Reference may be 
made in this connection to two foreign invasions of Magadha and 
adjoining regions about this time. According to the Mahakuta 
Pillar Inscription, the Chalukya king Kirtivarman, who ruled from 
A.D. 567 to 597, defeated, among others, the kings of Anga, Vanga 
and Magadha. * 1 2 We also know from the chronicles of Tibet that its 
powerful king Sroh-btsan, who ruled between A.D. 581 and 600, 
led a victorious campaign to Central India, a term which usually 
denotes Bihar and sometimes also U.P. 3 The exact date and details 
of these campaigns, and whether they were merely vain boasts or 
based upon historical fact, it is difficult to determine. 4 It is not 
unlikely that the brunt of the alleged victorious campaigns of tile 
Tibetan and Chalukya kings had really been borne by the Mau- 
kharis, and that this paved the way for the triumphant march of 
Mahasena-gupta up to the Brahmaputra. On the other hand, if we 
suppose that Mahasena-gupta was really master of Magadha and 


the passage does not refer to Damodara-gupta’s death, but only speaks of his 
swoon and of his subsequent awakening, i.e. regaining of consciousness (D. R. 
Bhandarkar Volume, pp. 191 ff.). He has also pointed out that the inscription 
refers to the victory, and not defeat, of Damodara-gupta, as supposed by 
Dr. Basak ( HNI , 123). 

1. Kumara-gupta and Madhava-gupta, who were appointed to wait upon Rajya- 
vardhana and Harsha-vardhana, are referred to as sons of the king of Malava 
(Cowell and Thomas, HC. 119). As Madhava-gupta has been identified with the 
Later Gupta, king of that name it would follow that his father Mahasena-gupta 
was king of Malava. 

2. I A. XIX. 7. 

3. Levi, Nepal, II. 147 ff. 

4. Fleet regards KIrtivarman’s claim, in respect of the distant kingdoms of Bengal 
and Bihar, as a mere.boast (Bomb. Gaz. Vol. I, Part II, p. 346). 


73 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Northern Bengal, he might have been worsted in these campaigns 
if at all they took place. 

But whatever view we might take, there is no doubt that 
Mahasena-gupta, who seemed to have revived to some extent the 
glory of the Guptas, soon fell on evil days. As we have seen above, 1 
the Maitraka king Slladitya I of Valabhi conquered a considerable 
portion of Western Malwa; the Kalachuri king Sankaragana was also 
m possession of UjjayinI in the year A.D. 595. 2 Thus pressed by 
two powerful enemies, Mahasena-gupta lost his hold over Malava. 
At the same time, evidently taking advantage of his distress, Sasanka, 
who was probably a feudatory of Mahasena-gupta, asserted his 
independence in Gauda (N. and W. Bengal) . 

The fate of Mahasena-gupta, whose brilliant career ended so 
tragically, is not definitely known. His two sons Kumara-gupta and 
Madhava-gupta found shelter at the court of king Prabhakara- 
vardnana of Thaneswar, whose mother Mahasena-gupta, as the 
name shows, was probably a sister of king Mahasena-gupta. The 
two young princes became attendants of Rajya-vardhana and Harsha- 
vardhana, the two sons of Prabhakara-vardhana. 

There are good grounds to believe that one Deva-gupta soon 
became king of Malava, or at least a part of it. 3 A king of this name 
is mentioned in the records of Harsha-vardhana as being prominent 
among the hostile kings whose evil career was checked by R.ajya- 
vardhana. Rajya-vardhana is also known from the HcirsKa-charita to 
have defeated the Malava-lord who invaded his sister’s dominions 
and threatened his own. As the two young princes with their names 
ending in Gupta, who waited upon Rajya-vardhana and Harsha- 
vardhana, are explicitly referred to as sons of the king of Malava, 
and as the Guptas are thus definitely associated with this kingdom, 
there is a strong presumption in favour of identifying Deva-gupta 
of Harsha’s inscriptions with the wicked lord of Malava, mentioned 
in the Harsha-charita, who was defeated by Rajya-vardhana accord¬ 
ing to both these authorities. 4 

Deva-gupta’s relationship with Mahasena-gupta is not known. 
Evidently, when following the defeat and death of the latter, his two 
young sons (the elder of whom was less than 18 at the time) had 


1. See p. 63. 2. See below Ch. XI. 

3. It has been suggested by Dr. Tripathi that Malava at this tipie denoted only 
Eastern Malwa corresponding to the Bhilsa District (Kanauj , p. 46), but 

Dr. D. C. Ganguly argues that there is no authority for taking Malava in this 
restricted sense about this period ( JBORS . XIX. 399-400). 

4. This view is opposed by Dr. D. C. Ganguly (op. cit. 407 fn.) but supported by 
Dr. H. C. Raychaudhuri (PHAL 5 607). 


74 






NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


sought refuge with Prabhakara-vardhana, Deva-gupta, probably a 
member of a collateral branch, 1 re-established the Gupta power in 
Malava. The recovery of the kingdom was perhaps facilitated by 
the defeat inflicted upon the Kalachuri king Buddharaja by the 
Chalukya king Mahgalesa, some time before A.D. 602. 2 The northern 
advance of the Chalukya king up to the river Kim, or perhaps 
even to the Mahi, must have had repercussions in the political 
atmosphere of Malava and the neighbouring regions, and Deva-gupta 
perhaps seized the opportunity to recover Malava. It appears that 
he virtually recognized the independence of Sasahka and formed an 
alliance with him. It is also not unlikely that Deva-gupta himself 
played some part in the downfall of Mahasena-gupta, though there is 
no evidence to support this view. 

The later history of this dynasty will be related in a separate 
chapter. But it will be convenient to discuss here the vexed ques¬ 
tion of the locality over which it originally ruled. As will be 
shown later, Adityasena, the grandson of Mahasena-gupta, ruled in 
Magadha, and so did all his successors. The Aphsad inscription of 
Adityasena gives a continuous account of the whole dynasty from 
the very beginning up to his reign, without indicating in any way 
that it had migrated from a different place. It may, therefore, be 
presumed that Magadha was the kingdom over which the dynasty 
ruled from the beginning. It has been suggested on the other hand, 
that all the kings down to Mahasena-gupta ruled in Malava, and it 
was only at a later period that his successors ruled in Magadha. 3 
The principal argument in favour of this view is the fact that 
Kumara-gupta and Madhava-gupta, the attendants of Rajya-var- 
dhana and Harsha-vardhana, are referred to in the Harsha-charita as 
sons of the king of Malava. This Madhava-gupta is generally identified 
with the king of that name in the Later Gupta dynasty, who was the 
son of Mahasena-gupta, and is referred to in the Aphsad Inscription 
in such a way as to indicate his close association with Harsha. If 
we accept this identity, we must presume that Mahasena-gupta was 
a ruler of Malava. But this cannot be taken to disprove that he was 
the ruler of Magadha. For as he carried on his victorious expedition 
to the bank of the Brahmaputra, he must have been in possession 
of Magadha and Gauda. What seems most likely, therefore, is that 
he had to take shelter in Malava when he had lost his eastern terri¬ 
tories, as described above. Although this cannot be definitely proved, 
the alternative assumption, that he was the ruler of Malava and con- 


1. It has been suggested that Deva-gupta was the eldest son of Mahasena-gupta, 
but this is very doubtful (JRAS 1903, p. 562; PHAI 5 p. 608, fn. 1). 

2. See below Ch. XL 3. JBORS, XIX. 402. 


75 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


quered all the eastern territories up to the Brahmaputra, is open to 
more serious objection. It is to be noted that an inscription of 
Kamarupa refers to a victory of the forces of Gauda which must 
have taken place almost immediately after the victorious campaign 
of Mahasena-gupta. It may be presumed, therefore, that Mahasena- 
gupta was regarded as king of Gauda rather than that of Malava. 
As Sasanka, who ruled over Gauda and Magadha immediately after 
Mahasena-gupta, is also known as lord of Gau^a, it is very likely 
that the latter ruled over Magadha and Gauda which were conquered 
by Sasanka. Thus although it is impossible to come to any definite 
conclusion, it seems very reasonable to regard the Later Guptas as 
rulers of Gauda and Magadha with suzerainty over Malava. In other 
words, they came into possession of those parts of the Gupta domi¬ 
nions which had not been formed into independent kingdoms and 
were, so to say, the residuary legatees of the Gupta empire. 

This does not, however, necessarily imply that the Later Guptas 
were descended from the Imperial Guptas. The similarity of the 
name endings, the common names like Kumara-gupta and Deva- 
gupta, and the fact that the Later Guptas came into immediate 
possession of a large part of the dominions of the Imperial Guptas, no 
doubt favour such a supposition, and it has even been suggested 
that Krishna-gupta, the founder of the dynasty, was identical with 
Govinda-gupta, a son of Chandra-gupta II, whom we know from a 
Basarh seal and an inscription. But there is not enough evidence to 
support this identification. On the other hand, we should remember 
that not even the slightest hint of any such relationship is given in 
the records of the Later Guptas. It is difficult to believe that the 
court-poets of the Later Guptas wmuld have missed such a splendid 
opportunity of glorifying their patrons if they had the least claim to 
such an illustrious lineage. 

6. BENGAL 

Two independent kingdoms arose in Bengal on the ruins of the 
Gupta empire. 1 The first, which comprised the Southern and East¬ 
ern, as also a part of Western^ Bengal, was founded in the first half 
of the sixth century A.D. Six copper-plate grants have preserved 
the names of three kings of this dynasty, viz. Gopachandra, Dharma- 
ditya and Samacharadeva; but very little is known about any of 
them. They all assumed the title Mahdrdjddhirdja, and at least one 
of them, Samacharadeva, issued gold coins, one type of which re¬ 
sembled that of the last Gupta emperors. 


1. For full discussions with references, cf. HBR. 51 ff. 


76 







NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


One Maharaja Yijayasena is referred to as an influential feuda¬ 
tory chief and a high official in the grants of both Vainya-gupta and 
Gopachandra. It is quite likely that the same person is meant, 
though this cannot be definitely proved. If we assume this identity, 
we may hold that the Gupta rule in Lower Bengal ended immediate¬ 
ly after Vaniya-gupta, and an independent kingdom was founded 
there by Gopachandra not long after A.D. 507. 

As noted above, the Imperial Guptas maintained their hold over 
Northern Bengal till as late as A.D. 543. Whether they made any 
effort to reconquer Lower Bengal is not definitely known, but the 
fight of Jivita-gupta against the people on the sea-coast and the 
boast of Isana-varman that he forced the Gaudas ‘to take shelter in 
the sea’, probably refer to their attempts, on behalf of the empire, 
to bring back this province under the imperial authority, at least in 
name; for the real authority would probably have passed into the 
hands of the Maukharis or the Later Guptas. 

But the newly-founded kingdom maintained its independence. 
Gopachandra ruled for at least 18 years, and was probably followed 
by Dharmaditya and Samacharadeva, but nothing is definitely known 
about their relationship, dates, or order of succession. Samachara¬ 
deva, who ruled for at least 14 years, assumed the title Narendra- 
ditya on his coins, evidently following the well-known Gupta tradi¬ 
tion. These three kings may be referred to the period A.D. 525-575. 
A large number of gold coins—crude and debased imitations of the 
Gupta type—found in different parts of Eastern Bengal prove the 
existence of other kings in this locality who evidently ruled later. Of 
the kings who issued these coins, the names of only two can be read 
with some degree of certainty, viz. Prithuvira and Sudhanyaditya. 
All of them may be referred to the sixth and seventh centuries A.D., 
but it is not known whether they belonged to the older line of kings. 
Nor can we say how far the kingdom was affected by the alleged 
victorious campaigns of the Chalukya king Klrtivarman and the 
Tibetan king Sron-btsan referred to above. 

The new kingdom may be called Vanga. For, from this period, 
Gauda and Vanga came to denote the two prominent political divi¬ 
sions of Bengal. Roughly speaking, the former comprised the 
Northern and Western, and the latter, the Southern and Eastern 
Bengal, though the terms were sometimes loosely used and the 
boundaries of each varied at different times. The old name Sama- 
tata, denoting Eastern Bengal, did not, however, go out of use. 
According to Hiuen Tsang, Sllabhadra, the head of the Nalanda 
University in his time, was a scion of the Brahmanical royal family 

77 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of Samatata. Whether this ruling family was connected with the 
kings mentioned above, we cannot say. 

Nothing is known of the political condition of Gauda imme¬ 
diately after the fall of the Gupta empire. As has been suggested 
above, it was probably under the Later Guptas till the reign of 
Mahasena-gupta, who flourished towards the close of the sixth cen¬ 
tury A.D. His reign, as noted above, ended in a sea of troubles, and 
an independent kingdom was set up in Gauda by Sasahka. 

Of the early life of Sasahka 1 and the circumstances under which 
he occupied the throne of Gauda, we possess no definite information. 
A seal-matrix cut in the rock of the hill-fort of Rohtasgarh records 
the name of “SrI-Mahasamanta Sasanka”, i.e. the illustrious great 
feudatory chief Sasahka. It is generally held that this Sasahka is 
identical with Sasahka, king of Gauda. If this identity is to be pre¬ 
sumed, we must hold that Sasahka began his career as a feudal chief, 
presumably under Mahasena-gupta. 2 The view that he was also 
known as Narendra-gupta is based on very insufficient data, and 
there is hardly any justification for the belief that he was connected 
with the Guptas, far less that he was the son or nephew of Mahasena- 
gupta. 3 Sasahka is referred to as king of Gauda both by Bana- 
bhatta and Hiuen Tsang. His capital-city, Karnasuvarna, cannot be 
identified with absolute certainty, but it is most probably represent¬ 
ed today by the ruins at Rangamati, six miles south-west of Berham- 
pore in the Murshidabad District. 4 

Some time before the rise of Sasahka, the Mana dynasty had 
established a kingdom in the hilly region between Midnapore and 
Gaya Districts. In course of time, this dynasty extended its 
dominion up to Orissa. 5 Sambhuyasas, a king or a feudatory chief 
of this family, was ruling over Orissa in A.D. 580, and probably also 
in A.D. 603. Sasahka presumably defeated this king or his successor 
and made himself master of Dandabhukti, Utkala and Kongoda, cor¬ 
responding roughly to Midnapore and Northern and Southern Orissa. 
For we possess records of his officers and feudatory chiefs who gov¬ 
erned these provinces. The Sailodbhava dynasty, which ruled over 
Kongoda or Southern Orissa, acknowledged the suzerainty of 
Sasahka at least up to A.D. 619, but later set up an independent 
kingdom which had a long history. 


1. 

2 . 


3 . 

5. 


Ibid, 59 I., 71 ff. 

The view that he was a feudatory of the Maukharis ( IHQ . XII. 457) is based 
on the assumption that the Maukharis exercised supremacy over Magadha right 
nrr a? * r£ J 1 ? 1 ® ^ Sasanka’s accession. This, as shown above, is highly doubtful 
FHAJ 514 fa. 3. 4 . JASB. LXIII (1894), Part I. 172. 

See later in this chapter, under Orissa. 


78 






NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


Thus Sasahka not only freed Gauda from the yoke of the Later 
Guptas, but also extended his suzerainty almost as far south as the 
Mahendragiri mountain in Gan jam District. No positive evidence 
is available regarding the extent of his authority in Bengal, but it 
stands to reason that he had brought the whole of Bengal under his 
sway before embarking upon his southern expedition and the still 
more ambitious military enterprise to the west which forms the most 
remarkable episode in his career. In the course of this expedition, he 
first conquered the whole of Magadha and probably even Banaras, 
and then proceeded against the Maukharis which involved him 
presently in a fight with the Pushpabhutis of Thaneswar. 

The account of Sasanka’s military campaign against the Mauk- 
hari and Pushpabhuti dynasties has been preserved by Banabhatta 
in his “Life of Harsha” to which detailed reference will be made later. 
Here we only note some general conclusions which may be reasonably 
deduced from this account. 

It appears that Sasahka formed an alliance with Deva-gupta, 
king of Malava, against Graha-varman, the Maukhari ruler of 
Kanauj. The Maukharis were enemies of Gauda since the time of 
isana-varman and had been carrying on a bitter struggle with the 
Later Guptas for generations. Sasahka, king of Gauda, probably 
therefore, made common cause with the Later Gupta king of Malava 
against the Maukharis, their common enemy. The marriage of 
Rajyasri with the Maukhari king naturally led to an alliance betwee.n 
the kingdoms of Thaneswar and Kanauj and thereby strengthened 
the latter, and Sasahka’s alliance with Deva-gupta may be regarded 
as a counterpoise to this new union. Although details are lacking, 
there is no doubt that the enterprise of Sasahka and Deva-gupta was 
completely successful. They advanced against Kanauj, killed king 
Graha-varman, captured the city, and imprisoned queen Rajyasri. 
All these momentous events happened in quick succession, and pro¬ 
bably within an incredibly short period. One of the causes of this 
brilliant and sweeping success seems to be that king Prabhakara- 
vardhana died at this critical moment after a brief illness. It is not 
unlikely that Sasahka and Deva-gupta had deliberately planned the 
invasion of the Maukhari kingdom at this time, knowing full well 
that there was little possibility of any immediate military support 
coming from Thaneswar. Perhaps with the same object in view 
they made a sudden dash against Kahauj. The Maukharis were 
evidently taken by surprise, for no inkling of this invasion had 

t 

reached Thaneswar before the Maukhari king was actually killed, 
and his kingdom lay prostrate before the enemy. 


79 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Immediately after the defeat and death of Graha-varman, Deva- 
gupta probably marched against Thaneswar, leaving Sasanka to 
follow him after having settled affairs in Kanauj. On his way he 
met his doom at the hands of the new king Rajya-vardhana who was 
proceeding in hot haste from Thaneswar to the rescue of his sister. 
But Rajya-vardhana’s success was short-lived. He soon had to con¬ 
front Sasahka and lost his life at the hands of the latter. His army, 
unable to retrieve the disaster, retreated to Thaneswar, and Sasanka 
remained master of the situation. In the meantime Rajyasri, who 
was imprisoned in Kanyakubja during the Gauda trouble, was re¬ 
leased through the action of a nobleman named Gupta, but hearing 
the news of Rajya-vardhana’s death, she refused to take food and 
wandered miserably in the Vindhya forest. When this news reached 
Harsha-vardhana he swore eternal vengeance against the king of 
Gauda and ordered an army to proceed against him. He himself, 
however, went in search of his sister and met her while she was 
about to mount the funeral pile in utter despair. Having thus res¬ 
cued his sister, Harsha rejoined his army on the bank of the Gahga. 
Bana’s account abruptly ends here. 

Thus, so far as Bana’s narrative is concerned, Sasahka is left at 
the zenith of his glory. Harsha-vardhana, we are told, led an ex¬ 
pedition against him, but about its further progress, after Harsha 
joined it on his return from Vindhya forest, we know nothing. A 
mediaeval Buddhist Chronicle, Manjusrl-Mula-Kalpa, mentions an 
expedition of Harsha against Sasahka in course of which he advanc¬ 
ed as far as Northern Bengal, but had to return without doing much 
injury to his enemy. The authenticity of this chronicle is, however, 
very doubtful. 

Whether Sasahka ever met Harsha-vardhana on the battlefield 
cannot be definitely known. But it does not appear that his power 
was curbed by Harsha to any considerable extent. As noted above, 
even as late as A.D. 619 he was referred to as the suzerain authority 
by the Sailodbhava king of Southern Orissa. According to Hiuen 
Tsang’s own testimony, Sasahka was in possession of Magadha at 
the time of his death which probably took place not long before A.D. 
637-8. For, while travelling in Magadha in that year, Hiuen Tsang 
noted that only a little while previously Sasanka had cut down the- 
Bodhi tree at Gaya and ordered the removal of an image of Buddha 
from a neighbouring temple. These and other stories of persecution 
of Buddhism by Sasahka cannot be accepted as true, without inde¬ 
pendent testimony. Besides, the flourishing condition of Buddhism 
in the capital-city of Sasahka, as described by Hiuen Tsang, is hardly 


80 


NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


compatible with the view that he was a religious bigot and a cruel 
persecutor of Buddhism. 

Although we do not know enough facts to form an accurate 
estimate of the character and achievements of &a£anka, he must be 
regarded as the first great king of Bengal. He had not only made 
Gauda an independent state, but extended its authority over the 
whole of southern Bihar and Orissa. He even made a bold bid for 
the empire of Northern India. He thus laid the foundations of that 
policy on which the Palas later built up their vast empire. If he 
had had a friendly biographer like Bana or Hiuen Tsang, he would 
probably have appeared to posterity almost as brilliant as Harsha- 
vardhana. But as it is, his fair name and fame have vanished and 
posterity knows him only as the cowardly murderer of Rajya-var- 
dhana and a cruel persecutor of Buddhism. 

7. NEPAL 

Nepal is the only region in India, besides Kashmir, which 
possesses local chronicles, narrating its history from time immemo¬ 
rial. These chronicles, known as Vamsdvalis, are obtained from 
both Brahmanical and Buddhist sources, and have been dealt with 
by several eminent scholars. 1 They profess to give a continuous 
aocount of the dynasties, with names of kings and their regnal years, 
that ruled the country from the time when god ManjusrI converted 
a lake into the fertile valley of Nepal, through the Tretd, Dvapara 
and the Kali Yugas. 

Leaving aside the mythical legends which have no historical 
value, we come to the successive dynasties of Gopalas (cowherds), 
Abhlras and the Kiratas. These are probably reminiscent of the 
period when the country was ruled by groups of pastoral and moun¬ 
tain tribes. The Kiratas were followed by a dynasty founded by 
Nimikha, who belonged to the solar dynasty of Rama or the lunar 
dynasty of Kuru according to different chronicles. The last king 
of this dynasty is said to have flourished in the year 1234 (or 1239) 
of the Kaliyuga. Then followed a long line of rulers belonging to 
the Lichchhavi dynasty. 

The Lichchhavis are a well-known ancient dynasty, and the 
history of the republican or oligarchic principality set up by them 
with Vaisall as capital has already been narrated above. But we 
cannot say whether the Lichchhavi rulers of Nepal were related to 
or connected in any way with the Lichchhavis of Vaisall. Absolute¬ 
ly nothing is known of the whereabouts and activities of the latter 


1. See General References, below. 


81 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


duriiv> the five or six centuries that elapsed since the conquest of 
Vaisali by Ajatasatru. It may be noted that both the Lichchhavis 
and Mallas who figure so prominently as republican clans in North 
Bihar in early Buddhist and Jain literature, and who are mentioned 
together in Manu-Samhitd as Vratya Kshatriyas, and by Kautilya as 
forming a special kind of Sangha, are found in Nepal side by side in 
the early centuries of the Christian era. It is not unlikely that these 
clans, and perhaps many others, sought the safety of the hills of 
Nepal during the periods of political troubles in India caused by 
foreign inroads or internal wars. According to the Pasupati Temple 
inscription of the eighth century A.D. 1 , Supushpa a remote des¬ 
cendant of Lichchhavi, the eponymous hero of the clan, was born at 
Pushpapura, which probably refers to Pataliputra. This Supushpa, 
we are told, was followed by 23 kings, and then was born the famous 
king Jayadeva. After eleven more kings had ruled, flourished 

Vri shade 1 va. 

With Vrishadeva we stand on firm historical ground, for this 
king and his five successors, as named in this record as well as in 
all the Vcuhsavalis , are also mentioned in contemporary inscriptions. 
Vrishadeva was a devout Buddhist and built several viharas. He 
was succeeded by his son Sankaradeva. An inscription refers to 
him as a great and prosperous king: according to the Vamsavalis he 
made endowments to the Pasupati temple and founded a monastery 
at Patan in favour of a Brahmana. Sahkaradeva’s son and successor 
Dharmadeva also ruled over a large kingdom. He is said to have 
dedicated a large statue of Siva’s Bull to the Pasupati temple and 
also founded Svayambhunatha. 

More historical information is available about Manadeva, the 
son and successor of Dharmadeva. An inscription of this king on a 
pillar in the temple of Changunarayana 2 (about 5 miles to the north¬ 
east of Katmandu) gives a graphic account of the events following 
the death of Dharmadeva. Rajyavati. the widowed queen, made a 
pious resolve to follow her husband on the funeral pyre. But her 
son Manadeva said that he would give up his own life before she did 
so. This dissuaded the queen from her grim resolve and she per¬ 
formed the last rites of her husband along with her son. 

Then the king addressed his mother as follows: 

“My father adorned the earth with pillars (of victory) resem¬ 
bling sacrificial pillars. Being initiated in the rites of the Kshatriyas, 
I shall depart on an expedition to the east to crush my foes (there). 
I shall install those princes who will remain obedient to me.” 

1 Tmlraii. No. XV. Gnoli (No. LXXXI). 

2. Indrnji No. I. Full text is given by Levi. (No. I) nnrl Gnoli (No. I). 


82 








NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


Having obtained the consent of his mother, Manadeva marched 
to the east and reduced the turbulent feudal chiefs to obedience. He 
then proceeded to the west and having heard of the misdeeds of a 
vassal there, addressed his maternal uncle as follows:—“If he does 
not voluntarily submit, he must be forced to do so. This very day 
you cross the Gand^ki river and I shall follow your force with 
hundreds of horses and elephants.” He kept his word and defeated 
the Malla chief. 

This interesting record throws a flood of light on the history 
of Nepal. In the first place it shows that even before the time of 
Manadeva the Lichchhavi power was not confined to the Nepal valley 
proper, i.e. the region around Katmandu in the Bagmati valley, but 
had spread to the valley of the Sapta-Kusi rivers on the east and 
Sapta-Gandaki rivers on the west. The Mailas on the west, and the 
hilly tribes, probably the Kiratas, on the east, were evidently, as in 
later days, turbulent people who chafed at the yoke imposed by the 
central authority, and it required constant vigilance and frequent 
military expeditions to keep them under control. Still it is obvious 
that the idea of establishing one central political authority in the 
region corresponding to the modern kingdom of Nepal was already 
cherished by the Lichchhavis, and at times successfully carried into 
effect, at least to a considerable extent. 

The inscription of Manadeva is dated in Samvat 386. Opinions 
vary widely regarding the era to which this date is to be referred. 
In addition to well-known eras like the Vikrama, Saka, and Gupta, 
even a special Lichchhavi era commencing in A.D. 110 has been 
suggested by different scholars. 1 The Gupta era must be ruled out 
altogether, and the Vikrama era is also very unlikely. The choice 
seems to lie between the other two, and for the present, the most 
plausible view seems to be to refer the date to the Saka era. The 
inscription of Manadeva, referred to above, would then be dated in 
A.D. 464. As another record of Manadeva is dated in Samvat 427 
(—A.D. 505), the period of Manadeva’s reign may be assumed to lie 
between A.D. 460 and 505. 

The date of Manadeva must be used as the sheet-anchor of 
Nepalese chronology for the present, as we know of no other dated 
event before his reign. As Manadeva was the 20th Lichchhavi king 
according to the Vamsavalis , we may place the foundation of the 
Lichchhavi kingdom in Nepal in the first or second century A.D. 

1. Fleet advocated the Gupta era (CII, III. Introduction p. 177 ff.), while Indraji 
(IA, XIII. 411 ff) refers the dates to the Vikrama Samvat, Dr. R. G. Basak 
refers the earlv dates to Vikrama Samvat and those of §ivadeva to Gupta era 
(HNI 274). Levi propounds the snecial Lichchhavi era, and advocates £aka era 
as art alternative (Nepal, III. 49 ff. 73 ff). The whole problem was discussed 
by the present writer first in B. C. Law Volume Part I, pp. 626 ff. and more 
recently in the Journal of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta. 


83 




the classical age 


The existence of the Lichchhavis as a political power, before the time 
of Manadeva, is known from the marriage of Chandra-gupta I and 
a Lichchhavi princess, referred to above. 1 Whether this Lichchhavi 
princess belonged to, or was connected in any way with, the ruling 
house of Nepal we cannot say. But it is certain that the Lichchhavis 
of Nepal had to acknowledge the suzerainty of Samudra-gupta. The 
nature and duration of the Gupta suzerainty in Nepal cannot be 
exactly determined. But the fact that the Lichchhavis of Nepal 
came into prominence only after the decline of the Gupta empire is 
not perhaps merely a coincidence. We may assume that they were 
subordinate to, or at least were kept in check by, the Gupta emperors, 
and the decline of the empire gave them the opportunity to rise to 
prominence and make themselves masters of nearly the whole of 
Nepal. The task was probably begun by Dharmadeva, and success¬ 
fully continued by his son Manadeva. It may be noted here that the 
dominance of Brahmanical religion and Sanskrit literature, which 
forms the key-note of the Gupta period, is fully proved in the case 
of Nepal by the inscriptions of Manadeva and his successors. 

Manadeva founded a vihara, called after him Mana-vihara, 2 and 
the royal palace Mana-griha, from which his successors issued royal 
charters, was also probably built by him. It has been suggested that 
the coins called Mananka and the cult of the goddess Manesvarl in 
Nepal are associated with the same king. His name survives today 
in Nepal in the name of a clan of the Thakuris called Mana. 3 

The Lichchhavi kingdom under Manadeva extended beyond the 
Nepal Valley proper both in the east as well as in the west, and 
probably included territories to the west of the Gandaki. Manadeva 
was succeeded by Mahldeva, and the latter by Vasantadeva. As the 
last-known date of Manadeva is 427 and Vasantadeva was already 
on the throne in 428, Mahldeva must have had a very short reign, 
not exceeding a few months. Vasantadeva ruled for at least 26 years, 
up to the year 454 (A.D. 532). At least two other kings are known 
to have reigned between him and §ivadeva. These are Ramadeva 
(year 469 or A.D. 547) and Ganadeva (years 482 and 489 or A.D. 
560, 567). The Pasupati Temple Inscription which gives a complete 
genealogy of the kings of Nepal during this period is unfortunately 
of little help as a number of letters have peeled off in the line follow¬ 
ing the account of Vasantadeva. The only safe inference from what 

1. See pp. 3-4. 

2. The Manadeva-vihara is mentioned in Yag Bahai Ins. (Levi No. XX). The 
Mana-vihara mentioned in the stele of Harigaon of the time of Amsu-varman 
(Levi, No. XIV) evidently refers to the same monastery. This is further evi¬ 
dence that Manadeva flourished before 6ivadeva and Amsu-varman and not 
after them. The same conclusion also follows from the name of the palace 
Mana-griha whence charters were issued by Sivadeva. 

3. Nepal, II. 105-111. 


84 



NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPtA EMPIRE 


remains of the line is that some time after Vasantadeva there was 
a king named Narendradeva who was succeeded by Sivadeva. 

According to one of the Vamsdvalls , the successor of Vasanta¬ 
deva was defeated by the Abhlras, and after three of their chiefs 
had ruled in Nepal, the Lichchhavi king Sivadeva expelled them 
and regained his paternal kingdom. There may be some truth in 
this tradition. 

We know, however, definitely from a number of inscriptions 
that early in the seventh century A.D. or towards the end of the 
sixth, there was a dyarchy in Nepal like the system of government 
that prevailed there till recent times. The Lichchhavi king Sivadeva 
remained only a nominal ruler, and gradually all political authority 
passed into the hands of the great Baron ( Mahasdmanta) Amsu-var- 
man. It appears that towards the close of the sixth century A.D, 
the Lichchhavi kingdom was invaded by the Abhiras, who ruled 
over it for some time. Ultimately, during the reign of Sivadeva, the 
Abhlras were driven out. It is probable that the great baron 
Amsu-varman took the leading part in this war of liberation and 
distinguished himself as a great general. For, all the grants of 
Sivadeva refer to the discomfiture of the enemy by the valour and 
prowess of Arinsu-varman. The popularity and military renown, 
which the latter gained by driving away the foreign invaders, secur¬ 
ed him a very high position in the state and gradually enabled him 
to become its de facto ruler. 1 It is also not unlikely that he further 
strengthened his position by marrying the daughter of the 
Lichchhavi king. He chose Kailasakuta as the royal residence for 
himself, while the old Mana-griha continued to be the abode of the 
titular Lichchhavi kings. Hiuen Tsang refers to Amsu-varman as a 
distinguished and learned ruler of Nepal. He is said to have com¬ 
posed a grammar and his reputation spread everywhere. 2 

According to the Vamsdvalis, the great king Vikramaditya con¬ 
quered Nepal and introduced his era there immediately before the 
reign of Amsu-varman. This has been taken to be a veiled allusion 
to the conquest of the country by Harsha-vardhana, and the dates of 
Amsu-varman’s charters, 32 to 45, 3 have all been referred to the 
Harsha era. Accordingly, Amsu-varman should have ruled from 
A.D. 638 to 651 (or at least 647). Although this view is now gene¬ 
rally accepted, it is not free from difficulties. In the first place, 
there is no positive evidence to show that Harsha-vardhana ever 
conquered Nepal. Secondly, Hiuen Tsang’s reference to Amsu- 

1. Levi has made several suggestions about the relation between Amsu-varman 
and Sivadeva (Nepal, III, 77) but no definite conclusion is possible until the 
dates of their charters are finally settled. 

2. HTB, II. 81. 

3. The unit figure is doubtful, but the date must in any case exceed 40. 


85 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


varman as the late king shows that he must have died before 
A,D. 642-3 when Hieun Tsang possibly gathered his last information 
about the country. This is corroborated by the fact that when a 
Chinese embassy visited Nepal in A.D. 643 they found king Naren- 
dradeva on the throne, and there were at least two kings who reigned 
between Arhsu-varman and Narendradeva. The dates in Aihsu- 
varman’s charters, therefore, cannot be dated in the Harsha era. 
Recently, the writer of the present chapter has shown, with the 
help of new inscriptions unknown to the scholars named above, 
that there is a very strong presumption, bordering almost on cer¬ 
tainty, that the dates in the inscriptions of Manadeva and his suc¬ 
cessors refer to the Saka Era, and that after the year 500 of this Era, 
it was continued with the omission of the hundredth figure. The 
dates of Arhsu-varman’s charters should therefore be taken as 532 
to 545 Saka Era (A.D. 610 to 623). 

Levi has suggested that the dates in Ariisu-varman’s charter 
should be referred to an era of Tibetan origin commencing in A.D, 
595. * 1 Whatever we might think of this, there is little doubt that 
about this time Nepal came under the political influence of Tibet. 2 
Some time between A.D, 580 and 600 the disunited clans of that 
hilly region had been brought together under a powerful ruler, 
Gnam-ri-sroh-btsan, who extended his power up to India. His son 
and successor Sroh-btsan-sgam-po, who introduced Indian civiliza¬ 
tion into Tibet, is said to have conquered Assam and Nepal, and 
dominated over half of Jambudvipa (India). He demanded the 
hand of a daughter of Ariisu-varman and the latter dared not refuse. 
Two years later, and certainly before 641, the Tibetan king invaded 
China and pillaged the country as far as Szechuan. He asked for a 
Chinese princess, as one of the terms of peace, and the Chinese 
emperor was reluctantly forced to give his daughter in marriage to 
this barbarian king. Thus Tibet came under the cultural influence 
of both China and India and gained profoundly by these two 
marriages. But Ariisu-varman became for all practical purposes a 
dependent of the Tibetan king. This makes it all the more difficult 
to believe that Harsha-vardhana could have exercised any political 


1. Nepal, II. 152-153. JA, 1894, Part II, pp. 55 ff. Levi first held the view that 
the dates in Amsu-varman’s charters should be referred to an era commemo¬ 
rating his accession. But he discarded it on two grounds:— 

(i) That no record of the king is dated before the year 30; 

(ii) that the inscription dated the year 30 seems to refer to the coronation oi 
Arhsu-varman. 

These objections, however, are not vital (cf. B. C. Law Volume, Part 1, p. 640). 
?. The political suzerainty of Tibet over Nepal is described by Levi with full re¬ 
ferences to authorities (Nepal, II, 146-154). Dr. Basak does not believe that 
Nepal owed allegiance to Tibet (HNL 295), but is altogether silent about the 
eyidence collected by Levi. Dr. Basak also ignores Levi’s theory about the 
Tibetan origin of the era of Arhsu-varman. 

86 





NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


authority over Amsu-varman or that his era was ever in use in Nepal. 
On the other hand, the political subjection of Nepal to Tibet makes 
it probable that the new era introduced in Nepal was of Tibetan 
origin. According to Levi, it probably commenced in A.D. 595 which 
commemorated either the birth of Sron-btsan-sgam-po or the acces¬ 
sion of his father. But as no such era is known to have ever been 
used in Tibet, Levi’s theory must remain questionable. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

The history of Nepal is chiefly based on the Vaihsavalis and the 
inscriptions. 

1. On the Vaihsavalis of Nepal and its general history: 

(i) Kirkpatrick —An account of the kingdom of Nepal 
being the substance of observations made during a 
mission to that country in the year 1793. London, 1811. 

(ii) D. Wright —History of Nepal translated from the 
Parbatiya. Cambridge, 1877. 

(iii) C. Bendall —Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit 
Manuscripts at Cambridge. Cambridge, 1883. 

(iv) Bhagawanlal Indraji—Some considerations on the 

History of Nepal [IA. XIII (1884) pp. 411-428]. 

(v) Le Nepal, by S. Levi. Vols. I, 11—1905; III—1908 
(Referred to in the footnotes as Nepal). 

(vi) Bendall—The history of Nepal and surrounding king¬ 
dom (A.D. 1000-1600). JASB. LXXII (1903). 

The Vaihsavalis are recent compositions. The Buddhist recen¬ 
sion is the work of a monk who resided in the Mahabuddha 
monastery at Patan at the beginning of the nineteenth century. It 
has been translated into English by the Indian munshi of the Bri¬ 
tish embassy under the direction of Mr. Wright. The Brahmanical 
version, which alone is regarded as authentic by the present Gurkha 
government, was also composed in the nineteenth century, and the 
text consulted by Levi was compiled by Brahman Siddhi Narayan, an 
inhabitant of Deo Patan, in A.D. 1834. Both the versions are written 
in Parbatiya (or Khas) language introduced into the valley after 
the Gurkha conquest. 

Both the Vaihsavalis had a common source. The Brahmanical 
version adds little to the Buddhist, but omits stories and legends 
glorifying the Buddhist church. The existence of Vaihsavalis in early 
periods is attested by the Pasupati Temple Inscription of Jayadeva 
and the inscription of Pratapamalla (dated 778 Nepala Samvat). 
But no ancient text has yet come to light. The Vamsdvali communi¬ 
cated to Kirkpatrick at the end of the eighteenth century is far more 
accurate than those of the nineteenth century now available and 


87 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


referred to above. Bendall discovered three manuscripts, probably 
belonging to the end of the thirteenth century A.D., which give lists 
of some kings with the duration of their reigns. Two of them are 
written in Newari language and one in very incorrect Sanskrit. 

2. The Inscriptions of Nepal are edited in the following works: 

(i) Pandit Bhagwanlal Indraji and Dr. G. Biihler— 
Inscriptions from Nepal—-IA, IX (1880), pp. 163 ff. 
(23 Inscriptions are edited which have been referred to 
as ‘Indraji’ No. ). 

(ii) Nepal, Vol. Ill (23 Inscriptions, referred to as ‘Levi, 
No. ). 

(iii) Bendall— Journey in Nepal, pp. 72 ff. (Four inscrip¬ 
tions referred to as Bendall, No. ). No. I was also 
published in 1A, XIV. 98. 

Dr. R. G. Basak ( HNL 242 ff) has given a combined list of these 
inscriptions with short summaries. But the list is neither complete, 
nor always accurate. He has, for example, omitted Levi, Nos. IV, 
V, and failed to note that Indraji No. I was re-edited by Levi (No. I) 
with the addition of important lines, which were hidden under the 
ground when Indraji wrote and were consequently omitted by him. 

3. Modern works:— 

(i) Fleet— Corpus Inscriptionum Indicdrum Vol. Ill, 
pp. 177-191. 

(ii) R. G. Basak— History of North-Eastern India. 

(iii) R. C. Majumdar—The Chronology of the Early Kings 
of Nepal (B. C. Law Volume , Part I, pp. 626 ff). 

8. KAMARUPA 

For nearly three centuries, from about A.D. 350 to 650, the 
kingdom of Kamarupa, in the Brahmaputra valley in Assam, was 
ruled by a single dynasty. This dynasty claimed descent from the 
demon Naraka, mentioned in the Epics and the Puranas as the son 
of Vishnu (in his Boar incarnation) and the Earth. According to 
traditions current in the seventh century A.D. Naraka, his son Bhaga- 
datta, and other kings of this family ruled for three thousand years 
before Pushya-varman came to the throne. With Pushya-varman 
begins what may be regarded as the historical period of Kamarupa. 
The alleged descent from demon Naraka probably indicates the non- 
Aryan origin of the ruling family, though converted to the orthodox 
Brahmanical religion. It is interesting to note that a line of Shahi 
kings ruling in the hilly region of Gilgit, about the sixth century 
A D > is describ ed as belonging to the family of Bhagadatta. 1 Per- 
1. JRAS. 1944, pp. 5 ff. 


88 









NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 

haps this Bhagadatta is identical with the son of the mythical 
Naraka mentioned above. But we cannot say whether there was any 
connection between these Shahi kings and the ruling dynasty of 
Kamarupa. 

The epigraphic and literary records of the period have pre¬ 
served the names of Pushya-varman and his twelve successors as 
indicated in the following genealogical table. 1 

1. Pushya-varman 

2. Samudra-varmali = DattadevI (or Dattavati) 

3. Bala-varman = Batnavati 

4. Kalyaiia-varman = Gandharvavati 

5. Ganapati-varman = Yajnavatl 

I 

6. Mahendra-varman = Suvrata 

I 

7. Narayana-varman = Devavati 

I 

8. Bhuti-varman = Vijnanavati 
(or Mahabhuta-varman) 

I 

9. Chandramukha-varman = Bhogavatl 

I 

10. Sthita-varman = NayanadevI (or 

(or Sthiti-varman) Nayanasobha) 

I 

11. Susthita-varman = SyamadevI (or 

(or Susthira-varman) Dhruvalakshmi) 


12. Supratishthita-varman 13 f Bhaskara-varman. 

Bhaskara-varman, with whom the series end, was a contempo¬ 
rary of Harsha-vardhana, and his rule covered almost the first half of 
the seventh century A.D. The accession of Pushya-varman may thus 
approximately be placed about A.D. 350, or a little earlier. 

1. The genealogical account is given in the Nidhanpur C.P. of Bhaskara-varman 
(El, XII. 73; XIX. 115 ff; 245 ff) and the royal seals discovered at Nalandi 
(MASl No. 66, np. 69-70; JBORS, V. 302 ff., VI. 151 ff). It is also partially 
given in the Harsha-charita (Nirnayasagar Ed. p. 220; Tr. by Cowell and Thomas, 
p. 217). Names of some of the kings and queens are given in slightly different 
forms in the different sources. The most important of these are indicated in the 
genealogical table within brackets. 


89 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


It has been already mentioned that Kamarupa was one of the 
feudatory states of Samudra-gupta. 1 In view of the fact that local 
tradition places the beginning of the historical ruling dynasty about 
the same time, we may reasonably conclude that the dynasty owed 
its rise or importance to the patronage of the great emperor. It 
is possible, for example, that one of the many petty local chiefs, 
who divided the territory among themselves, was placed as the ruler 
of the whole kingdom by the great Gupta emperor, following the 
well-known policy for ensuring the loyalty and allegiance of a fron¬ 
tier-state. This would at any rate furnish an explanation of the 
name of the second king and his queen. Samudra-varman and 
DattadevI were undoubtedly deliberate imitations of the names of 
the Gupta emperor Samudra-gupta and his queen Dattadevi, for 
such a similarity in the names of both the king and the queen can 
hardly be regarded as a mere coincidence. Unless we suppose that 
the actual name of the suzerain Gupta emperor was put in the royal 
genealogy of Kamarupa through ignorance and confusion, we must 
hold that Pushya-varman, out of loyalty and devotion to his overlord 
and patron, named his son and daughter-in-law after the great 
emperor and empress. The latter alternative is preferable and we 
have an analogous instance in the history of the Ganga kings. 2 

A royal seal of the dynasty found at Nalanda calls Pushya-var¬ 
man the lord of Pragjyotisha, and gives the title Mahdrdjddhirdja 
to the first three rulers. As these kings were almost certainly con¬ 
temporaries of the early Gupta emperors, we can hardly attach 
much significance to their high-sounding titles or regard them as very 
powerful kings. The effective hold of the Guptas on this kingdom 
is indicated by the currency of the Gupta era in this kingdom for 
nearly five hundred years. Further, the kingdom of Kamarupa or 
Pragjyotisha did not at this time comprise even the whole of the 
Assam valley. For the Allahabad Inscription mentions, along with 
Kamarupa, the kingdom of Davaka, which has been reasonably 
located in the valley of the Kapili river in modern Nowgong Dis¬ 
trict. 3 The existence of this kingdom in A.D. 428 has been inferred 
from the Chinese account of an embassy sent in that year by the 
king of Ka-pi-li. For this name is probably derived from the river 
Kapili, and denotes the kingdom of Davaka situated in the valley of 
that river. 4 We may thus hold that Kamrupa was comparatively 
a small feudatory kingdom of the Guptas in the fourth and fifth 
centuries A.D. We do not know anything beyond the names of the 
first six rulers of this kingdom. But according to the royal seal, the 

1. Sec p. 8. 

2. The Ganpa kin£ Ayyn-varmnn, who was installed on the throne by the Pallavn 
kine, Sirhha-varman, named his son Madhava-Simha-varman. 

3. See above, p. 8. 4. JRAS. 1920, pp. 227 ff. 


90 





NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


seventh king Narayana-varman or his predecessor 1 performed two 
Asvamedha sacrifices. This evidently indicates some increase in the 
power of the family under him. Perhaps he threw off the yoke of 
the Guptas in the first half of the sixth century A.D. 2 

There is, however, no doubt that under the next king Bhuti- 
varman, Kamarupa became powerful. Not only the old kingdom 
of Davaka, but also the Surma valley (Sylhet District) was now in¬ 
cluded in this kingdom. In a short record inscribed on a rock in 
the Kapili valley, Mahdrajddhirdja Bhuti-varman is said to have per-, 
formed an Asvamedha sacrifice. He probably flourished about the 
middle of the sixth century A.D, 3 

In the Harsha-charita, a brief account of the royal family of 
Bhaskara-varman is put into the mouth of his envoy to Harsha- 
vardhana. After referring to the mythical kings Naraka, Bhaga- 
datta and others, the envoy mentions Bhuti-varman and his success¬ 
ors up to Bhaskara-varman. This might be taken to indicate that 
Bhuti-varman was really the founder of the greatness of the family. 
This presumption is strengthened by what has been said above of 
Bhuti-varman. He evidently took advantage of the decline of the 
Gupta empire to establish the independence of his kingdom—if it 
had not already been done by his father—and to enlarge his territory 
by incorporating Davaka and the Surma valley, which formed parts 
of the Gupta empire. It is possible that the kingdom of Kamarupa 
at this time extended to the west as far as the Karatoya river in 
North Bengal which continued to be its traditional boundary. Thus 
an independent and powerful kingdom of Kamarupa arose out of 
the ruins of the Gupta empire. 

Nothing is known of the son of Bhuti-varman, but his grandson 
Sthita-varman is said to have performed two Asvamedha sacrifices. 
The next king Susthita-varman, also called Mriganka, is highly 

1. It is not clear whether the epithet ‘performer of two Asvamedha sacrifices’ is 
meant for the king whose name precedes or follows it. 

2. This is also rendered probable by the political condition of the Gupta empire 
described above (Ch. VI). But the view put forward by Dr. N. K. Bhattasali 
that the downfall of the Guptas was caused by the ‘onslaught of the Varman 
kings of Kamarupa’ (IHQ, XXI. 24) has nothing to commend it. 

3. We know from the Nidhanpur CP. of Bhaskara-varman that lands were origi¬ 
nally granted by Bhuti-varman to more than 200 Brahmanas, but as the charter 
was lost they were re-granted by Bhaskara-varman. These lands were located 
by some in N. Bengal, but they were undoubtedly situated in the Sylhet region. 
(For the different views on the subject, cf. the authorities mentioned under 
Bhandarkar’s List of inscriptions No. 1666, and also JRASBL, I. 419 ff; IC, II. 
153 ff; IHQ, VII. 743 ff). 

A short record of Bhuti-varman has been found in the Kapili valley (JARS, 
VIII. 33; X. 63; El, XXVII. 18). It was supposed to contain a date (year 234 
or 244) to be referred to the Gupta Era. But there is probably no date (El 
XXX. 64). 


91 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


eulogised in the Harsha-charita, and the epithet Maharajddhirdja is 
applied to him, while even Bhuti-varman is called simply Maharaja * 
Nothing, however, is known of Susthita-varman, save that he came 
into conflict with the Later Gupta king Mahasena-gupta 1 and was 
defeated by him. The causes of the hostility are not known, but it 
may be merely due to the natural desire of the Later Guptas to re¬ 
conquer the old dominions of the Imperial Guptas. The hostility 
between the Later Guptas and the kings of Kamarupa probably 
dated frpm an earlier period, and, as we shall see, descended to the 
next generation. Mahasena-gupta seems to have advanced up to 
the Brahmaputra and won a great victory in a battle on the banks 
of the river. But it led to no permanent result. 

Susthita-varman was succeeded by his elder son Supratishfhita- 
varman. He and his younger brother Bhaskara-varman were defeat¬ 
ed by the king of Gauda who took them captives, but released them 
after some time, 2 probably after they offered allegiance. As has been 
suggested above, probably the victorious Gauda king was none other 
than Mahasena-gupta. 3 Supratishthita-varman was succeeded by 
his younger brother Bhaskara-varman who played an important role 
in contemporary politics as will be described in a later chapter. 

9. ORISSA 

Hardly anything is known of the history of Orissa during the 
Gupta period. It would be interesting to speculate why Samudra- 
gupta advanced to the eastern coast of the Deccan through the hilly 
region of Kosala (Chattisgarh), and avoided the more direct and 
easier route through West Bengal and Orissa. This would be all 
the more inexplicable if Orissa formed a part of his empire; and it is 
difficult to believe that he would have proceeded so far south with¬ 
out first subjugating Orissa. In any case no royal dynasty ruling 
over Orissa during the fourth and fifth centuries A.D. is known to 
us, and we may well believe that it was included in the territory 
directly administered by the Gupta emperors. 

About the middle of the sixth century A.D., a feudatory chief 
was ruling in the southern part of Orissa. We learn from an inscrip¬ 
tion discovered in a village called Sumandala near Khallikote in 
Orissa 4 that king Prithivl-vigraha was ruling over Kalinga, in the 
dominion of the Guptas, in the year 250 (=A.D. 569-70), and that 
his subordinate chief, Maharaja Dharmaraja, had his headquarters 

1. See p. 73. 

2. This is known from the recently discovered Doobi copper-plate of Bhaskara- 
varman (El, XXX. 287). It proves definitely that Supratishthita-varman ascend¬ 
ed the throne, although his name is omitted in the Harsha-charita. 

3. See p. 76. It is not unlikely, however, that the Gau^a king may be Sasanka 

4. See p. 42. 




NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


at Padmakholi near Khallikote. It proves that even in the last 
days of the Gupta empire, 1 Orissa continued to acknowledge the 
suzerainty of the Guptas. This, taken along with the fact that the 
Gupta era was used in this record as well as in the Gan jam Grant 
of 300 (—A.D. 619), to be referred to later, is a strong argument in 
favour of the view, maintained above, that Orissa formed an integral 
part of the Gupta empire for some time. 

Unfortunately, we know nothing further about Prithivi-vigraha 
or his family. His claim to rule over Kalihga cannot be easily re¬ 
conciled with similar claims made by other kings mentioned in 
Chapter XI (C. II), and it is very likely that his authority did not 
extend beyond the northern fringe of Kalinga. 

The Gupta suzerainty, and therewith the rule of Prithivi-vigraha 
and his family, must have come to an end shortly after A.D. 570. 
For, in the last quarter of the sixth century A.D. we find the Mana 
and Sailodbhava families ruling respectively in the northern and 
southern parts of the province. There is hardly any doubt that both 
of them rose to power on the ruins of the Gupta empire. 

The rise of the Mana family is recorded in an inscription 2 found 
in the Hazaribagh District. It is said that three brothers, Udaya- 
mana, Sridhauta-mana and Ajita-mana were all merchants and went 
on business from Ayodhya to Tamralipti. Having made a large 
fortune they, on their way home, stayed for some time at a village, 
probably situated in the locality where the inscription was found. 
Through the favour of king Adisimha of Magadha, to whom this re¬ 
gion belonged, Udaya-mana became the ruler of the village, and 
appointed his two brothers as rulers subordinate to him over two 
other neighbouring villages. Thus grew a small principality in the 
hilly region between Gaya and Midnapore Districts. The date of its 
foundation is unknown, but many generations had ruled after 
Udaya-mana when this traditional account was drawn up in the 
seventh or eighth century A.D. 

In the last quarter of the sixth century A.D. a Mana dynasty, 
probably identical with the above, was ruling over the greater part 
of Orissa. We learn from two records of a ruler named Sambhu- 
yasas 3 dated 260 and 283, that he was ruling over Northern and 
Southern Tosali which comprised nearly the whole of Orissa from 
Balasore to Puri District. The two dates, referred to the Gupta 
era, 4 would place the reign of Sambhuyasas between A.D. 580 and 
603. Whether Sambhuyasas was himself a member of the Mana 
family, or a ruler merely subordinate to it, cannot be determined. 


1. See p. 44. 

2. El, II. 343. The family name is written both as Mana and Mana, 

3. El, IX. 285; XXm. 198. 4. JRASBL, XI. 4 ff. 

93 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


But there is no doubt that the Mana family exercised suzerainty 
over Orissa, and its rulers assumed imperial titles. 1 

About the same time when the Manas were ruling over the 
greater part of Orissa, the Sailodbhavas 2 were ruling in Kongoda, a 
kingdom which extended from the Chilka lake, or perhaps even 
further north, to Mahendragiri mountains in Ganjam District, reach¬ 
ing in the west to the hills which now form the western boundary of 
the Kalahandi State. The history of the Sailodbhavas is known 
from several records. Ranabhlta (or Aranabhlta), the founder of 
the dynasty, flourished in the latter part of the sixth century A.D., 
and probably took advantage of the anarchy and confusion, follow¬ 
ing the dissolution of the Gupta empire, to found an independent 
kingdom. He was followed by three kings, his son Sainyabhita I 
Madhavaraja, grandson Ayasobhlta, and great-grandson Sainyabhita 
II Madhavaraja II. The last-named king ascended the throne some 
time before A.D. 619. The relation of these kings to the Mana 
dynasty cannot be exactly determined. It is not unlikely that they, 
for some time at least, acknowledged the suzerainty of the Manas, 
for South Tosall included the territory where Kongoda was situated. 
But we do not know for certain whether £ambhuyasas ruled over the 
whole of South Tosall or only the northern part of it. 

Be that as it may, there is no doubt that the kingdoms of both 
the Manas and the Sailodbhavas soon came into the possession of 
Sasanka, king of Gauda. We know nothing of the military cam¬ 
paigns by which Sasanka made himself master of these kingdoms. 
But a record, dated A.D. 619, of the Sailodbhava king Sainyabhita II 
Madhavaraja II, shows that he had by that time become a feuda¬ 
tory of Sasanka. The Manas ceased to exercise any authority in 
Orissa which was governed by an officer of Sasanka, named Soma- 
datta. Later, this Somadatta was raised to the dignity of Sdmanta - 
Maharaja and ruled both Utkala (Orissa) and Dandabhukti (Midna- 
pore District) as a governor or feudatory of Sasanka. After Soma¬ 
datta, Bhanudatta held the same position at least in Utkala, but his 
records do not expressly refer to Sasanka as the suzerain. 

As has been noted above, Sasanka’s empire collapsed after his 
death and Orissa gained independence. Hiuen Tsang, who travelled 
in this region about this time, has made the following remarks about 
the kingdom of Kongoda: 

“Within the limits of this country there are several tens of small 
towns which border on the mountains and are built contiguous to 

1. The Manas probably gave their name to the well-known district of Manbhum. 
Reference to Mana kings occurs in later records. The Kara king ^antikara II 
married the daughter of Simhamana and two Mana kings are mentioned in a 
record of the twelfth century A.D. (El, II. 333). 

2. For a full account of the Sailodbhavas, cf. JAHRS. X. 1 ff. 


94 







NORTHERN INDIA AFTER GUPTA EMPIRE 


the sea. * The cities themselves are strong and high; the soldiers are 
brave and daring; they rule by force the neighbouring provinces, so 
that no one can resist them.” 

It would appear from the above that the Sailodbhavas had not 
only become independent but had also extended their authority over 
the neighbouring regions. This is confirmed by the records of the 
Sailodbhava king Sainyabhlta II Madhavaraja II. One of his grants, 
dated A.D. 619, invokes the name of Sasanka as his suzerain. But 
another undated grant makes no reference to Sasanka as overlord. 
The king issues this grant from the Jayaskandhavdra of Kongoda and 
claims to have exercised sovereignty over the whole of Kalinga. 
This may be a somewhat exaggerated claim, but possibly a large part 
of Orissa had passed into his hands, for Hiuen Tsang does not refer 
to U-Cha or Udra, which corresponds tc Orissa, as a strong or im¬ 
portant kingdom, and is altogether silent about its political status. 
But, be that as it may, neither Utkala nor Kongoda was destined to 
enjoy independence for long. Soon after Sasanka’s death, Harsha- 
vardhana began his eastern campaign and by A.D. 643 conquered 
both the kingdoms. 


CHAPTER IX 


HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 

I. KINGDOM OF THANESWAR 


The origin of the kingdom of Sthanvisvara, modern Thaneswar, 
is shrouded in obscurity. According to Bana, 1 it was the name of 
a city as well as a district, situated in the country called Srikantha, 
and the kingdom was founded by Pushpabhuti. Bana gives a long- 
drawn and somewhat miraculous account of this king, 2 but he is not 
known from any other source. Bana says nothing of the immediate 
successors of the king, but begins his historical account with king 
Prabhakara-vardhana, born in his family. 3 

The royal seals and inscriptions have, however, preserved the 
names of a few more kings, as represented in the following genealo¬ 
gical table:— 


Maharaja Nara-vardhana=Vajrini-devI 

Maharaja Rajya-vardhana—Apsaro-devi 

Maharaja Aditya-vardhana=Mahasena-gupta-devI 

Paramabhattdraka Maharajadhiraja 
Prabhakara-vardhana=Yasomatf-devi 


Paramabhattdraka 
Mhdh. Rajya-vardhana 


Paramabhattdraka 
Mhdh . Harsha-vardhana 


From Banabhatta’s Harsha^charita , we learn that Prabhakara- 
vardhana was also known as Pratapasila and that he had another 
son named Krishna and a daughter named Rajyasri. 4 



have been, therefore, bom of another queen. 


96 











HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


It will be seen from the above genealogy that the first three 
kings are called simply Maharaja, and it is Prabhakara-vardhana who 
is first styled Mahtirajadhirdja . As Prabhakara-vardhana, according 
to Bana, died shortly before Harsha’s accession to the throne in 
A.D. 606, we may fix the commencement of his rule about A.D. 580* 
If we regard his mother Mahasena-gupta as sister of the Later Gupta 
king Mahasena-gupta, as appears probable from the similarity of 
names, we arrive at the same conclusion regarding his date. 

It would thus follow that the kingdom of Thaneswar did not 
attain much power or importance till the last quarter of the sixth 
century A.D. Nothing is known about its history or status before 
that date. The first three kings, who flourished probably between 
A.D. 500 and 580, might have been feudatory chiefs, acknowledging 
the supremacy either of the Hunas, or of the Guptas, or of both, at 
different times. It is also very likely that the Maukharis exercised 
supremacy over them, for they did not claim the rank of 
Mahdrdjadhirdja immediately after the fall of the Guptas and the 
Hunas, as we find in the case of the Maukharis, but did so some time 
after the death of Isana-varman, when the Maukhari power had de¬ 
clined. This view is also supported by the statement, put in the 
mouth of king Prabhakara-vardhana by Banabhatta, that “at the 
head of all royal houses stand the Mukharas, worshipped, like Siva’s 
foot-print, by all the world”. 1 It may be surmised that the 
dynasty really came into prominence after the death of Isana-var¬ 
man, and Aditya-vardhana’s marriage with a princess of the Later 
Gupta family probably marks a definite step in their rise to power 
and importance. However, all this is mere speculation, and no de¬ 
finite opinion is possible till more positive evidence is available. 

With the accession of Prabhakara-vardhana, the history of 
Thaneswar assumes a definite shape, thanks to the biography of 
Harsha ( Harsha-charita) written by the contemporary scholar, 
Banabhatta. 

Although Bana devotes more than one chapter to Prabhakara- 
vardhana, all that is historically important is confined to the six 
qualifying epithets to the king, viz. “a lion to the Huna deer, a burn¬ 
ing fever to the king of Sindhu, a troubler of the sleep of Gurjara 
king, a bilious fever to that scent-elephant, the lord of Gandhara, 
destroyer of the skill of the Latas, an axe to the creeper which is 
the goddess of fortune (or sovereignty) of Malava.” 2 This poetical 
description leaves us in doubt whether he actually defeated these 

1. See p. 65. 

2. The translation is somewhat different from Cowell’s on p. 101. Gurjara, as 
noted below, is not the same as Gujarat, and ' pdtava* has been taken in the 
sense of ‘skill’ rather than lawlessness. 


C.A.—7. 


97 



the classical age 


powers or was a mere threat to them. About the Hunas we are told 
later that shortly before his death, Prabhakara-vardhana sent a mili¬ 
tary expedition against them under his elder son Rajya-vardhana to 
Uttara-patha. But the result of the expedition is not known; probably 
no conflict took place as Rajya-vardhana was suddenly called back 
to the capital on account of the illness of his father which proved 
fatal. Whether in the pithy phrases quoted above, Bana alludes to 
this expedition or a previous one against the Hunas, we cannot say. 
It appears from some details that the Huna kingdom lay not far from 
the foothills of the Himalayas and we may locate it in northern 

Punjab. 

Of the other kingdoms mentioned, Sindhu, Gandhara, Lata and 
Malava are well known. Whether Malava was ruled by the Maitra- 
kas, Katachuris, or Deva-gupta about this time, is not known with 
certainty. The Gurjaras must be taken to refer to the kingdom in 
Rajputana, then known as Gurjaratra, founded by Harichandra. 1 
A branch of this family was probably ruling in Lata or Southern 
Gujarat. 2 

The hostile powers mentioned by Bana may thus be divided into 
two groups of almost contiguous states, viz. Huna, Gandhara and 
Sindhu in the north and west, and Lata, Malava and Gurjara in the 
south. But it is difficult to believe that Prabhakara-vardhana could 
directly invade all these states, particularly Sindhu (the lower 
Sindhu valley) and Lata, which lay too far to the south and south¬ 
west. The probability is that he fought with two groups of confe¬ 
derate states or rather was on hostile terms with them. If we as¬ 
sume that Prabhakara-vardhana’s kingdom was contiguous to both 
these groups we may regard it as bounded by the Yamuna (or the 
Ganga) and the Beas on the east and the west, and the Himalayas 
and Rajputana on the north and the south. 

As noted above, when Rajya-vardhana had proceeded several 
stages in his expedition against the Hunas, the news of his father’s 
illness reached him and he returned in hot haste to the capital. His 
father had already expired and his mother, queen Yasomati, burnt 
herself on the bank of the Sarasvati river to avoid widowhood. 
Distracted with grief, Rajya-vardhana decided to renounce the throne 
in favour of his younger brother Harsha and to take to an ascetic 
life. Harsha was, however, unwilling to accept the burdens of 
sovereignty and decided to follow in the footsteps of his brother and 
practise austerities as a hermit. 

1. See p. 65. 

2. This has been fully dealt with by me in JDL. X. 1 ff. See also, above, 

pp. 63 ff. 


98 




HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


But all this was changed by the arrival of a messenger from 
Kanauj with grave news. He reported that immediately after the 
death of Prabhakara-vardhana—in fact, on the very day on which 
this news was rumoured in the Maukhari court—the king of Malava 
killed Graha-varman. He even imprisoned the queen RajyasrI at 
Kanauj and was believed to have planned an invasion of Thaneswar 
itself. Immediately on receipt of this news Rajya-vardhana marched 
against the king of Malava with a hastily collected army of ten 
thousand cavalry, leaving his younger brother Harsha-vardhaxia in 
charge of the kingdom. Rajya-vardhana routed the Malava army 
with ridiculous ease, but being “allured to confidence by false civili¬ 
ties on the part of the king of Gauda,” was murdered by the latter. 1 

II. HARSHA AND KANAUJ 

As soon as the news of this calamity reached Harsha, he took a 
vow of vengeance against gasanka, the king of Gau<Ja. “I swear”, 
said, he, “that unless in a limited number of days I clear this earth 
of Gaudas.... then will I hurl my sinful self, like a moth, into an 
oil-fed flame.” 2 According to Bana, he decided upon world-wide 
conquest, and even asked his minister to issue a proclamation 
throughout India asking all the kings either to accept his suzerainty 
or to fight with him. 3 Then a few days later, at an auspicious 
moment, Harsha commenced his march “for the subjugation of all 
the four quarters”. 4 * 

After he had proceeded some distance Harsha was visited in his 
camp by Hamsavega, a messenger from the king of Pragjyotisha 
(Assam) who was known both as Kumara and Bhaskara-varman. 6 
The envoy reported that his master was firmly resolved never to do 
homage to any one except £iva, and therefore sought a perpetual 
alliance with Harsha. The latter gladly accepted the proposal and 
expressed a desire to meet king Bhaskara-varman. Hamsavega re¬ 
plied that his master would arrive in a few days. 6 Although 
nothing further is said about this alliance by Bana, it is a 
reasonable presumption that this alliance was concluded as a measure 
of safety against &asanka, king of Gauda, the powerful neighbour of 

1. HC, p. 178. See Appendix. 

2. HC, p. 187. According to Hiuen Tsang, Harsha said: “The enemies of my 
brother are unpunished as yet, the neighbouring countries not brought to sub¬ 
mission; while this is so my right hand shall never lift food to my mouth.” 

(Beal I. 213). 

3. HC, p. 187. 4. HC, p. 197. 

5. HC, p. 211; HTW, I. 348. The name Kumara also occurs in the original 

text (p. 214), but the English translators have missed it. 

6. HC, pp. 223, 280. 


99 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Bhaskara-varman, and now a common enemy of both himself and 
Harsha. The results of this diplomatic move will be seen later. 

llarsha continued his march for a few days more when 
he came across Bhandi who was returning with the remnants of 
Rajya-vardhana’s army and the captured troops, booty and equip¬ 
ments of the Malava king. After having learnt from him the 
details of his brother’s death, Harsha inquired about Rajyasri. 
Bhandi replied that he had heard a rumour that Rajyasri, after being 
released from confinement, entered the Vindhya forest with her 
train, but numerous search parties sent after her had not yet return¬ 
ed. 1 Harsha thereupon left Bhandi in charge of the army with 
instructions to advance against Gauda, and himself set out in search 
of his sister. He reached the Vindhya forest in a few days, and 
after a great deal of wandering met Rajyasri while she was about 
to mount the funeral pyre. Then he went back, accompanied by 
his sister, to his camp stationed along the bank of the Ganga. 

Bana’s narrative, from which the above details are taken, 
abruptly ends here, and it is not possible to follow the subsequent 
career of Harsha either in a chronological sequence or with any full¬ 
ness of detail. Our main source of information for the rest of his 
life is the account of the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang, who travelled 
all over India from A.D. 630 to 644, and was treated with marked 
distinction and kindness by Harsha-vardhana. 

The most singular point in Hiuen Tsang’s account is that he 
regards Harsha-vardhana and his two predecesssors as rulers of 
Kanauj, and does not refer to them in any way in his account of the 
kingdom of Thaneswar. He describes at length how, after the death 
of Rajya-vardhana, the ministers, at the instance of the great minis¬ 
ter Po-ni, 2 invited Harsha to ascend the throne; the latter, we are 
told, approached a statue of Avalokitesvara Bodhisatva, on the bank 
of the Ganga, and asked his advice. The Bodhisatva pointed out that 
the king of Karnasuvarna had overturned the law of Buddha, and 
advised him to ascend the throne in order to revive the glory of 
Buddhism. The Bodhisatva, however, asked him not to occupy the 
actual throne and not to use the title Maharaja. Thereupon Harsha 
became king of Kanauj with the title Rdjaputra and the style 
Siladitya. 3 

It would appear from what has been said above that the account 
of the Chinese pilgrim is confused and absurd. For. Harsha-var- 

1. HC, p. 224. 

2. Po-ni is usually identified with Bhandi referred to above. But as pointed out 

by Tripathi (HK, p. 75, fn. 1), if the question discussed was the throne of 

Kanauj, as seems to be the case, this identification is hardly likely. 

3. HTW I. 343. 


100 



HAUSHA-VAKDHANA AND HIS TIME 


dhana had nothing to do with the kingdom of Kanauj at the time oi 
his brother’s death. Nor can it be held that the statement of Hiuen 
Tsang really applies to the accession of Harsha-vardhana on the 
throne of Thaneswar. For it is contradicted by the very clear and 
express statement of Bana that as soon as Harsha heard the news of 
his brother’s death, he assumed sovereignty without any hesitation 
and vowed vengeance against his murderer. 1 The implication 
in the concluding portion of Bodhisatva’s advice also can hardly be 
accepted as a fact, for Harsha-vardhana did ascend the throne and 
used royal titles. 

But perhaps we may find in Hiuen Tsang’s statement a distant 
echo of the manner in which Harsha came to occupy the throne of 
Kanauj. It is clear from Hiuen Tsang’s narrative that about A.D. 
636, when he visited Kanauj, Harsha had not only been the ruler of 
this kingdom but had also fixed his capital in that ~city for such a 
long time that his early association with Thaneswar had become 
merely a memory of a distant past. We do not know how or when 
Harsha came to rule over Kanauj, but it has been generally assumed 
that Graha-varman having left no heir, and his widowed queen being 
unwilling to assume the responsibilities of rulership, the ministers 
of Kanauj, at the suggestion of their chief Po-ni, as stated by Hiuen 
Tsang, offered the throne to Harsha. Harsha, after some hesitation, 
accepted the offer on the advice of the Bodhisatva. At first, he did 
not assume the title of king of Kanauj, but merely acted as a guar¬ 
dian or regent, but with lapse of time, when he had made his posi¬ 
tion secure, he declared himself sovereign ruler of Kanauj and 
formally transferred the capital of the joint kingdom to this city. 2 

This imaginary reconstruction of the course of events is princi¬ 
pally based on the assumption that Graha-varman died without 
leaving any heir to the throne. But. a seal discovered at Nalanda, 
as already noted above, proves that a son of Avanti-varman, other 
than Graha-varman, ruled after him. As Bana expressly mentions 
Graha-varman as the eldest son of Avanti-varman, we may safely 
conclude from this seal that a younger brother of Graha-varman 
succeeded him. This cuts at the root of the theory that the throne 
of Kanauj, being vacant, was offered to Harsha. 

Now, the inscriptions of Nepal have preserved the memory of a 
Maukhari chief Bhoga-varman, who was probably the nephew 
(sister’s son) of king Ariisu-varman and father-in-law of king 
Sivadeva II. His father’s name was Surasena and he was a dutaka 
in a royal charter dated A.D. 637-8. It has been surmised by Dr. 


1. Cf. Tripathi, HK, p. 68. 


2. Cf. Tripathi, HK, pp. 74 ff. 
101 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Basak 1 that Surasena was a Maukhari prince who might have ruled 
at Kanauj after Harsha's death. But in view of the Nalanda seal 
he might be regarded as a successor of Graha-varman, particularly 
as his name on the seal also begins with ‘SIT. In any case it is 
almost certain that there was a Maukhari ruler of Kanauj after 
Graha-varman’s death, and we can no longer rest content with the 
very simple explanation of its vacant throne being offered to Harsha. 

The fact that the distinguished Maukhari chiefs lived in Nepal 
even during the rule of Harsha-vardhana is not compatible with the 
view of his peaceful occupation of Kanauj. A mystery surrounds 
it, and Hiuen Tsang’s story, which is the result of either ignorance 
or clumsy effort to conceal true facts, is hardly acceptable. The 
Chinese work entitled Fang-chih represents Harsha as carrying on 
the government, along with his widowed sister. This evidently re¬ 
fers to Kanauj, and probably shows that Harsha first administered 
the government of Kanauj in the name of his sister whose cause he 
espoused against other rivals. Later, he openly assumed the crown 
and full right of sovereignty. As will be shown later, this probably 
took place c. A.D. 612. 

But in whatever manner Harsha might have come to rule over 
the Maukhari kingdom, it seems to have been his first acquisition of 
territory, and its vast resources mast have helped him greatly in his 
subsequent career of conquest. 


III. HARSHA’S MILITARY CAMPAIGNS 


Unfortunately very little is known of the early part of Harsha’s 
career. As noted above, his army was marching against Sasanka, 
when he went to find out his sister, and after the recovery of his 
sister, he joined the camp on the bank of the Ganga. The progress 
and result of this campaign are not, however, known from any 
source. Dr. Tripathi’s attempt 2 to fill up, by imagination, the void 
left by the abrupt ending of Bana’s narrative, has hardly anything 
to commend it. He draws a graphic picture of how ‘on the approach 
oi llaisna s army, Sasanka thought discretion was the better part of 
velour ana beat a masterly retreat;’ but unfortunately this is a mere 
gratuitous assumption. For aught we know, Sasanka might have 
left the younger brother of Graha-varman on the throne of Kanauj 
as his own protege, and it was by ousting him that Harsha occupied 
Kanauj after Sasanka had retired to his kingdom. 


HNI. 290. Cf. also 1HQ. XI, 320. 


2. HK, pp. 73-4. 


102 






HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


But although we are totally in the dark regarding the progress 
and result of Harsha’s campaign against Sasanka, undertaken im- , 
mediately after his accession, there is no doubt that Harsha carried 
on a series of military expeditions which made him the most power¬ 
ful ruler in North India. Unfortunately we know very little of his 
military campaigns, for Hiuen Tsang, who should have been our 
most valuable guide in this respect, scarcely alludes to them except 
in a vague and general manner. It is not possible, therefore, to 
give any details of Harsha’s conquests or even to follow them broad¬ 
ly in a chronological order. All that we can do is to name the 
powers with which he fought and indicate the result, as far as it is 
possible to do so with the very meagre materials in our possession. 

We can broadly distinguish at least four main phases of Harsha’s 
military career which brought him into conflict with (1) the rulers 
of Yalabhl and Gurjara, (2) the Chalukya king Pulakesin II, (3) 
Sindhu, and (4) eastern countries like Magadha, Gauda, Odra and 
Kohgoda. 

1. ValabhV 

The rise of Valabhl as an important kingdom and its great power 
under &iladitya I Dharmaditya have been narrated above. 1 2 Siladitya 
who ruled at least till A.D. 612, was succeeded by his younger brother 
Kharagraha, and the latter by his son Dharasena III. Nothing is 
known of these two kings save that they were ruling respectively in 
A.D. 616 and 623, and that during the reign of the latter the Valabhl 
kingdom included Northern Gujarat. 

Dharasena III was succeeded by his younger brother Dhruva- 
sena II Baladitya some time before A.D. 629. It was during his 
reign that Hiuen Tsang visited India, and we learn from him that 
this king, whose name is written in a form that seems to correspond 
to Dhruvapatu or Dhruvabhatta, was the son-in-law of Harsha-var- 
dhana. He was, we are told, of hasty temper and of a shallow mind, 
but he was a sincere believer in Buddhism. He attended the reli¬ 
gious assembly convoked by Harsha at Prayaga- and probably also 
at Kanauj, early in A.D. 643.. 

Dhruvasena II certainly ruled till at least A.D. 640-641 and was 
succeeded by his son Dharasena IV. This king, for the first time in 
the history of the dynasty, assumed imperial titles, and his known 
dates are A.D. 646 and 650. 

1. For the inscriptions of the Valabhl and Gurjara kings referred to below, cf. Bh. 

List Nos. 1330 ff. under the dates mentioned. For Hiuen Tsang’s account cf. 

HTW , II. 246. 

2. See p. 63. 


103 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


All the five kings mentioned above, from Siladitya I to Dhara- 
sena IV, were contemporaries of Harsha. As noted above, Siladitya 
I ruled over Malava. Hiuen Tsang describes Mo-la-po as an inde¬ 
pendent kingdom with several neighbouring kingdoms subject to it, 
but a grant of Dhruvasena II, dated A.D. 640-641, shows that he 
was still in possession of at least a part of Malava. As Hiuen Tsang 
passed through the country about the same time, it is difficult to 
account for this discrepancy, except on the supposition that there 
were constant struggles between the two with alternate success and 
failure. But on the whole we may assume that during at least the 
greater part of the reign of Harsha-vardhana, Valabhl was a power¬ 
ful and independent kingdom and exercised supremacy over Nor¬ 
thern Gujarat and a part of Malwa. 

The inscriptions of the Gurjaras of Broach exultingly mention 
the fact that Dadda II obtained great glory by protecting (or rescu¬ 
ing) the lord of Valabhl who had been overpowered by the great 
lord, the illustrious Harshadeva. 1 This proves that a conflict took 
place between Harsha and the king of Valabhl, but excepting this 
casual reference, we have no other information regarding it. The 
circumstances which led to this struggle and its incidents are com¬ 
pletely unknown. All that we can reasonably conclude is that 
Harsha at first gained some successes against the king of Valabhl, 
but the latter retrieved the situation with the help of Dadda II, and 
perhaps other allies. There is no basis at all for the view that 
Valabhl was conquered by Harsha and that its ruler became his 
subordinate vassal. 2 


It might be wondered how the ruler of the small Gurjara state 
was in a position to protect the king of Valabhl against Harsha. It 
has been shown above that the Gurjara ruling family of Broach was 
an offshoot of the main family ruling over a principality further 
north, in Rajputana. It may be held, therefore, that they acted in 
unison, and either Dadda II merely aided the Gurjara king, or was 
helped by the latter in his efforts on behalf of the Valabhl king. 
But probably the Gurjaras were not the only power to help Valabhl. 


It has been noted above that Lata, Malava and Gurjara were 
hostile to Prabhakara-vardhana, and the enmity with Malava con¬ 
tinued in the next reign. It may be presumed, therefore, that these 
three principalities were hostile to Harsha also. On the other hand, 
according to the Aihole Inscription, the same three principalities 
were feudatories of Harsha’s contemporary Pulakesin II, and volun- 
tarily accepted this position, evidently for protection against some 


l. I A. xni. 77-79. 

2 ' HK> P ' , 109 \ Dr * D ‘ C * Sircar maintains the view that the king 

Valabhl was a subordinate ally of Harsha (POC. XII. 525). g 


104 





HAKSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


other power. 1 Whether this power was the Katachchuris 2 or 
Harsha, we cannot definitely say. But in any event they formed a 
group of buffer states between Harsha and Pulakesin II, and could 
rely upon the protection of the latter against the aggressive designs 
of the former. 

Whether Dadda II of Broach incurred the hostility of Harsha by 
taking up the cause of Malava and the defeated king of Valabhi, or 
from the very beginning all these states had made common cause 
against a common enemy, we cannot definitely say. But we can 
well imagine that hostility between Harsha and Dadda II directly 
or indirectly precipitated the conflict between Harsha-vardhana and 
Pulakesin II. 

2. War with Pulakesin 

The war between Harsha and Pulakesin has been regarded as a 
memorable event both by the successors of Pulakesin and by modern 
historians. But such a degree of importance is not reflected in con¬ 
temporary records. Pulakesin’s own record 3 merely says that 
Harsha’s elephants fell in the battle and he was seized with fear. 
Hiuen Tsang tells us that although Harsha had conquered many 
countries, he could not defeat Pulakesin. Harsha, he says, “has 
gathered troops from the five Indies, and summoned the best leaders 
from all countries, and himself gone at the head of his army to 
punish and subdue these people, but he has not yet conquered their 
troops.” 4 This shows that Harsha took the aggressive, and implies 
rather that he failed in his object to conquer the enemy than that 
he suffered any decisive defeat. The successors of Pulakesin 
undoubtedly regarded his achievement against Harsha in a different 
light. Not only was the defeat of Harsha referred to as a matter 
of special pride, but it was also claimed that Pulakesin acquir¬ 
ed the title Paramesvara “by defeating Harsha-vardhana, the 
war-like lord of all the region of the north.” There is no doubt that 
the result of the battle was magnified in favour of Pulakesin by his 
successors, and also by those modern historians who hold that the 
Chalukya king inflicted a crushing defeat on Harsha. 

We do not know where the battle was fought. There is nothing 
to support V. A. Smith’s view, now generally adopted, 5 that Pula¬ 
kesin ‘guarded the passes on the Narmada so effectually that Harsha 
was constrained to retire discomfited, and to accept that river as 
his frontier.’ The Latas, Malavas and Gurjaras are referred to as 


1. EI. VI. p. 10, fn. 5. 2. See below, Ch. XI, B, III. 

3. EI. VI. p. 10. 4. HTB. II. 257. 

’ 5. BG. I. Part II, p. 350; EHI. 8 350; R. Mookerji, Harsha, p. 43. 


105 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


feudatories of Pulakesin in the Aihole Inscription, and there is no 
evidence that they ever submitted to Harsha. Hiuen Tsang also 
refers to independent kingdoms in Malava and Bundelkhand. We 
can, therefore, hardly regard the empire of Harsha as extending up 
to the Narmada on the south, and it is not unlikely that the actual 
battle was fought much further to the north. 1 

3. Sindh 

The great southern campaign, or campaigns, in the course of 
which Harsha fought with Dhruvasena II of Valabhi, Dadda II of 
Broach, and the Chalukya king Pulakesin ended in failure. Nor 
was Harsha more successful in his campaign against Sindh. In a 
rhetorical phrase Banabhatta refers to Harsha as having ‘pounded 
the king of Sindhu and appropriated his fortune’. 2 Sindh was 
hostile to Prabhakara-varman as well, and it is just possible that 
Harsha might have led a campaign against it. But the detailed 
description of Hiuen Tsang leaves no doubt that Sindh was a strong 
and independent kingdom when he visited it, and Harsha’s military 
campaign, if there was any, evidently bore no fruit. 

4. Eastern Campaign 

We may now turn to the military campaign of Harsha in the 
east which was attended with brilUant success. We learn from the 
Life of Hiuen Tsang 3 that about the beginning of A.D. 643, 
when the Chinese pilgrim had gone to Kamarupa at the invitation 
of its king Bhaskara-varman, Harsha had completed the subjugation 
of Kongoda and Orissa, and was halting at Kajangala near Raj- 
mahal on the bank of the Ganga. This shows that Harsha must have 
launched one or more victorious campaigns to the east before this 
date in the course of which he had subjugated the intervening 
territories. Some light is thrown on the progress of this eastern 
campaign by the statement of the Chinese encyclopaedist Ma-twan- 


1. Some writers hold that Harsha even penetrated far into the Deccan and 
fought with the Pallava king Mahendra-varman I. This view is based on the 
Gaddemane inscription assignable to the seventh century, which mentions the 
death of one Pettani Satyanka in a fight against the Be^a chiefs when Siliditya 
invaded the south and Mahendra took to flight. But as already pointed out by 
the author of this chapter ( IHQ, V. 235), giladitya and Mahendra of this inscrip¬ 
tion should be identified respectively with Yuvaraja Sryasraya Slladitya (a son 
of Pulakesin II) and Pallava Mahendravarman II, both of whom flourished in 
the second half of the seventh century. Again, a verse of Mayura, a court-poet 
of Harsha, is quoted to prove his patron’s success against Anga, Kuntala Chola 
Madhyadesa and Kanchl. But the author conceives the earth as his patron’s 
wife and uses the words anga, etc., also in the additional sense respectively of 
her body, hair, cloth, chest and girdle. There is no doubt that here is a poetic 
imagination showing the author’s knowledge of the Kamasdstra, but having 
nothing to do with geography or history. 

2. HC, Text, p. 91. 3 . Trans, by Beal, pp. 172, 159. 

106 



HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


lin that Siladitya assumed the title of king of Magadha in A.D. 641. 1 
That Harsha did not conquer Magadha long before this date is prov¬ 
ed by the statement of Hiuen Tsang. While travelling through 
Magadha in A.D. 637-38 he noted that Sasanka had lately cut down 
the Bodhi tree at Gaya and died shortly after. Then the king of 
Magadha, called Purnavarma, the last of the race of Asokaraja, 
revived the tree by having its roots bathed with the milk of a 
thousand cows. 

The date of Sasanka’s death is not known. His last known date 
is A.D. 619 and he must have died before, probably not long before, 
A.D. 637, when Hiuen Tsang refers to it as a recent event. 2 It 
would thus follow that in spite of all loud boast which Banabhatta 
puts into the mouth of Harsha and his solemn oath to take speedy 
revenge for the death of his brother, Harsha could not achieve any 
success against Sasanka. It was probably after his death that he 
conquered Magadha and carried on his victorious raids up to Kon- 
goda, with a view to subjugate the territories which hitherto formed 
the dominions of Sasanka. Presumably he conquered West Bengal 
which intervened between Magadha and Orissa. But all this 
happened more than 30 years after Harsha had ascended the throne. 

It is not definitely known whether Harsha ever came into actual 
conflict with Sasanka. The only evidence in support of it is a passage 
in ManjvJri-Mulakalpa according to Which Harsha marched against 
Pundra, the capital of Sasanka, defeated him and forbade him to 
move out of his country, and then returned, having (or not having) 
been honoured in that kingdom. 3 How far this vague and obscure 
statement in the mediaeval Buddhist Chronicle can be regarded as 
historical, it is difficult to say. But even assuming it to be a fact, 
this first campaign of Harsha evidently led to no permanent results. 
Harsha returned and, as Hiuen Tsang testifies, Sasahka regained 
possession of Magadha. The very fact that at least up to A.D. 619, 
and probably for many years after that, Sasanka ruled over Bengal, 
South Bihar and Orissa, with all the imperial titles, proves definitely 
that the earlier efforts of Harsha against Sasanka, referred to in the 
Harsha-charita and Mafcjiisri-Mulakalpa, did not meet with any con¬ 
spicuous success. 

It is a moot point whether Harsha ever got possession of that 
part of Bengal which lay to the east of the Bhaglrathl or north of 
the Padma river. While there is nothing in support of this, there 
is positive evidence that Bhaskara-varman, the king of Kamarupa, 

1. Ettinghausen, Harsha Vardhana, p. 54. The passage is quoted below in Section VI. 

2. “In recent time 6asanka cut down the Bodhi tree” (HTW II. 115) and he died 
soon after (Beal II. 122). 

3. Verses 719-20, 726. The whole passage has been fully discussed in HBR, 64. 

107 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


and the ally of Harsha, was for some time master of this territory, 
or at least a considerable portion of itj It is probable that he 
rendered substantial help to Harsha in his eastern campaign, and 
obtained, as his share of the spoils of war, a part of the province of 
Bengal. But we cannot altogether exclude the possibility that Harsha 
was suzerain of Bengal for a short time and it was not till after 
his death that Bhaskara-varman gained the same position. 

5. The Chronology oj Marsha’s Campaigns 

Harsha-vardhana had to embark upon his military campaigns 
almost immediately after his accession. Although the immediate 
objective was to avenge the death of his brother by punishing 
Sasanka, Banabhatta’s description also implies that he was preparing 
for a digvijaya or ‘world-wide conquest.’ Hiuen Tsang also makes 
a statement which confirms this, and gives fuller details. His nar¬ 
rative may be thus summarised: ‘As soon as Siladitya became ruler, 
he got together a great army (a body of 5,000 elephants, 2,000 cavalry, 
and 50,000 foot soldiers) and set out to avenge his brother’s murder 
and to reduce the neighbouring countries to subjection. Proceed¬ 
ing eastwards he invaded the states which had refused allegiance 
and waged incessant warfare, until in six years he had fought the 
five Indias. 1 2 Then having enlarged his territory he increased his 
army, bringing the elephant corps up to 60,000 and the cavalry 
to 100,000, and reigned in peace for thirty years without raising a 
weapon.’ 3 

According to this statement, Harsha fought his battles between 
A.D. 606 and 611-612 and reigned in peace between A.D. 611-612 
and 641-42. the eastern campaigns against Orissa and Kongoda, 
referred to by Hiuen Tsang, and the campaign against Magadha, as 
noted above, would then fall in the second period of his military 
activity after A.D. 641. There is thus no inherent absurdity in the 
statements of Hiuen Tsang, as has been supposed by some. 4 On 
the other hand, it stands corroborated if we accept Dr. Fleet’s view 
that Harsha’s fight with Pulakesin took place in A.D. 608-9. 5 

But considering the unsettled political conditions of the time 
it would be unreasonable to expect that Harsha could reign in peace 
for 30 years without any struggle, though he had to fight hard both 
before and after that period. Besides, Ma-twan-lin categorically 
states that Harsha was engaged in severe battles in the years 618 

1. Cf. Ch. X Section 6. 

2. According to another reading: “Harsha had brought the five Indias under 
allegiance” (HTW I. 343; HTB I. 213). 

3. Beal translates it differently (I. 213), implying that he fought for 30 years. 

4. Tripathi, UK, p. 127. 5. BG. Vol. I, Pt. II, p. 351. 


108 



HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


and 627. 1 It is thus difficult to place implicit faith in the statement 
of Hiuen Tsang, quoted above, and reconstruct the chronology of 
Harsha’s campaigns accordingly. Hiuen Tsang did not meet Harsha 
before A.D. 643 and was ill-informed about his early career, as is 
evidenced by his confused statement about Harsha’s accession dis¬ 
cussed above. As regards Fleet’s view, it is based on the fact that 
Pulakesin is called Paramesvara in a record dated A.D. 612, but the 
hypothesis that Pulakesin assumed this title on defeating Harsha 
cannot be regarded as satisfactory. For according to Pulakesin’s own 
records, he acquired it by defeating many hostile kings, and it is 
only in the records of his successor that the title is said to have 
been assumed by him on account of his victory over Harsha. The 
contest between Harsha and Pulakesin must have taken place 
before A.D. 634-5 as it is mentioned in the Aihole inscription re¬ 
corded in that year; but how long before that it is difficult to say. 
Different scholars have suggested dates varying between A.D. 620 
and 630. 1 2 

The battle with the king of Valabhi has to be placed before this 
date if we believe it to be one of the causes of Harsha’s hostility to 
Pulakesin. The identity of the king of Valabhi with whom Harsha 
fought depends upon the date of this battle. It is generally assumed 
that this king was Dhruvasena, who is described by Hiuen Tsang 
as the son-in-law of Harsha. It has been held that Dhruvasena II, 
being completely defeated, was compelled to sue for peace and to 
accept the hand of the victor’s daughter. It has been pqinted out, 
on-the other hand, that ‘the offer of a daughter’s hand in marriage 
which involves humility cannot be expected in a victor.’ 3 But, 
as has been shown above, the theory of complete defeat has no 
ground to stand upon, and instances are not wanting where the 
hostilities between two contending sovereigns are closed by a matri¬ 
monial alliance. It is, therefore, not unlikely that Dhruvasena II 
was the king of Valabhi who was at first defeated by Harsha, but 
was saved by the support of the Gurjara king Dadda II. It is, how¬ 
ever, interesting to note that the records of Dadda II, dated A.D. 629 
and 641, make no reference to the support given by him to the 
Valabhi king, and his achievement is extolled only in subsequent 
records issued by his successors. The successful opposition to Harsha 
on the part of a petty chief is so important an event that the silence 
of Dadda’s records in this respect requires an explanation. Some 
hold that Dadda fought with Harsha in the company, and merely 

1. JRAS . N. S. IV. p. 86; JASB. VI. 68. 

2. The date of the campaign has been fully discussed in Ch. XII. Cf. also Tripathi, 
( HK , p. 125); ABORL XIII. 300; PIHC. III. 596. 

3. PIHC. Ill 596-7. 


109 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


as a feudatory, of Pulakesin who bore the brunt of the struggle, and 
hence Dadda did not dare take any credit for his success during 
the lifetime of his suzerain. 1 Others, however, hold that Harsha’s 
battle with the king of Valabhi took place after A.D. 641, and that 
his opponent was Dharasena IV. It is pointed out that Dharasena’s 
assumption of imperial titles was a direct challenge to the authority 
of Harsha, and he was thus forced to declare war on the king of 
Valabhi. 2 It may be argued that this means a war between the 
maternal grandfather and the grandson. But such a thing is not 
unknown in history, and besides, Dharasena might have been born 
of a queen other than Harsha’s daughter. The main drawback to 
this theory is that it places the battle after A.D. 644 when Pulakesin 
was probably worsted in his fight with the Pallavas and was rot in 
a position to render any help to the king of Valabhi or Gurjara 
Dadda II. On the whole, both the date of the battle and the identity 
of the Valabhi king must be left undecided. 

It would appear from Hiuen Tsang’s statement as well as Bana’s 
narrative that Harsha’s eastern campaign preceded his other cam¬ 
paigns. But then this campaign must be different from the later 
one in the course of which he conquered Magadha, Orissa, and 
Kongoda in A.D. 641 and 642. The nature of the earlier campaign 
and the extent of its success are alike unknown. 

IV. THE EXTENT OF HARSHA’S EMPIRE 

Having thus discussed briefly the military campaigns of Harsha 
so far as they are known to us, we may now proceed to form an 
idea of the extent of his empire. The treatment of this subject 
is rendered difficult by the extravagant estimates formed by old 
scholars on weak and insufficient basis. At a time when the study 
of Indian history was in its infancy, and people were not critical of 
the few contemporary data of ancient Indian history, then known, 
the scholars readily accepted the vague statements of Hiuen Tsang 
and Banabhatta and pictured Harsha as a great monarch and the 
last great empire-builder of Hindu India. This erroneous conception 
persisted down to comparatively recent times. The present writer 
was perhaps the first to challenge its accuracy, and it is gratifying 
to note a gradual change of view in the right direction. 3 Never¬ 
theless prejudices die hard, and it is necessary to notice the subject 
in greater detail than might otherwise be necessary. 


1. El, XXIV. 179. 2. PIHC, III, 598. 

3. Cf. JBORS, 1923, pp. 311 ff. This view, expressed therein, is generally endorsed 
by Tripathi (HK, pp. 78 ff). 


110 










HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


In order to form an idea of the limits of Harsha’s empire, it is 
necessary to review briefly the political condition of Northern India 
as described by Hiuen Tsang. The Chinese pilgrim has given a 
short account of all the kingdoms through which he passed. He 
was primarily a Buddhist devotee, and he has mainly described sites 
and events of religious importance, but in a good many cases he 
has also briefly noticed the political status of the kingdom. This 
invests his account with a degree of historical importance which is 
lacking, for example, in similar accounts of Fa-hien. In spite of 
uncertainties of exact identification of sites and some other minor 
details, we may, following Hiuen Tsang, take a bird’s-eye view of 
political India as seen by the great Chinese pilgrim between A.D. 
630, when he reached Kapisa (in Afghanistan), and A.D. 644, when 
he recrossed the Sindhu on his way home. 

Kapisa, immediately to the south of the Hindu Kush mountains, 
was a powerful state under a Kshatriya king who directly ruled 
over the old kingdoms of Lan-po (Laghman), Nagarahara (Jelalabad) 
and even Gandhara, and held Fa-la-na (Bannu) in subjection. The 
only other important kingdom to the west of the Sindhu was Udyana 
which occupied the upper Swat valley. 

To the east of the Sindhu, Kashmir was the first important state. 
The old kingdoms of Takshasila, Simhapura, Urasa, Pan-nu-tso and 
Rajapura, comprising nearly the whole of western and north-western 
Punjab, were now incorporated into it, and the kingdom thus com¬ 
prised not only the whole of Kashmir but also a considerable part 
of the Punjab. The most important kingdom in the Punjab is called 
Cheh-ka, which probably stands for Takka. Its capital was near 
Sialkot and it extended from the Beas in the east to the Sindhu on 
the west. Multan, and another country called Po-fa-to (Parvata) to 
the north-east of it, were both dependencies of Takka. 

Hiuen Tsang notices four more kingdoms in the East Punjab and 
the hilly regions to the north-east, viz. Chi-na-puh-ti, Jalandhara, 
Kuluta, and Satadru, but does not say anything about their political 
condition. It is probable that they were included in the empire of 
Harsha, but we cannot be quite sure of it. A king of Jalandhara 
is mentioned in the Life of Hiuen Tsang as having supplied a military 
escort to the Chinese pilgrim on his return journey, and although 
Harsha afterwards added a great elephant to this escort and provided 
some money for defraying the expenses of the Chinese pilgrim, it 
does not prove, as has been suggested, that Harsha exercised some 
measure of influence over this kingdom. 

To the east of the Yamuna, the only states whose rulers are 
mentioned are Mo-ti-pu-lo, Su-fa-la-na-ku-ta-lo (Suvarnagotra), 


Ill 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 

Nepal and Kamarupa. The first was situated in Western Rohilkhand 
and was ruled by a &udra king. The next was in the Himalayas. It 
was ruled by women and was known as the kingdom of the women. 
The other two are well-known states and will be treated in detail 
later. A large number of other states in U.P., Bihar and Bengal are 
noted, but nothing is said about their political status. We can 
reasonably assume that all or most of them were comprised in 
Harsha’s empire. 

In Central India there were three states in Bundelkhand, 
Gwalior, and Ujjain (E. Malava) ruled over by Brahmana kings. In 
Western India the most powerful kingdom was Mo-la-po or W. 
Malava which exercised suzerainty over three other states, viz. 
Kutch or Kheda, Anandapura and Surashtra. Further to the west 
were the kingdoms of Valabhi, Broach, Gurjara and Sindhu. The 
two kingdoms Pi-to-shih-lo and A-fan-tu were subject to Sindhu 
which thus comprised the whole of the lower Sindhu valley. 

This detailed account of the important kingdoms of Northern 
India, based on the express statements of Hiuen Tsang, leaves no 
doubt that Harsha’s empire could not possibly comprise any sub¬ 
stantial territory outside U.P., Bihar, Bengal and Orissa. But M. 
Ettinghausen and Panikkar, the two modern biographers of Harsha, 
regard him as sovereign of the whole of Northern India; the latter 
specifically describes Harsha’s empire as having extended from Ka¬ 
marupa to Kashmir and the Himalayas to the Vindhyas. The more 
moderate estimate of V. A. Smith excludes from this area Kashmir, 
Punjab, Sindh, Rajputana and Kamarupa for the very simple reason 
that Hiuen Tsang clearly refers to them as independent kingdoms, 
and even mentions the states that were subordinate to some of them. 

But even V. A. Smith’s estimate can hardly be regarded as sober. 
His belief that the king of Valabhi was a feudatory or vassal of 
Harsha has no real grounds to stand upon. But he exceeds the bounds 
of probability when he includes Malava, Gujarat, Kutch and Kathia¬ 
war Peninsula within the limits of Harsha’s empire. For Hiuen 
Tsang describes Mo-la-po to the east of the Mahi river, as a powerful 
kingdom and expressly states that the kingdoms of Anandapura 
(Ahmedabad District), K-i-ta (Kutch or Kaira District) and Su-la- 
cha (Kathiawar Peninsula) were subject to it. There can be no 
doubt that Mo-la-po denotes the western part of Malwa with 
its dependent states and Valabhi covers the whole western region 
south of Rajputana. Again, Hiuen Tsang describes the three states 
to the east of Malwa corresponding roughly to E. Malwa (with 
capital at Ujjayinl), Bundelkhand and Gwalior as being ruled by 

112 


HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


Brahmans kings. It is thus clear that Harsha’s suzerainty did not 
extend much to the south of the Yamuna. 

To the west of the Yamuna the empire of Harsha could not possi¬ 
bly extend beyond Jalandhara. To the north Kashmir was certainly 
an independent kingdom, and although Nepal is supposed by some 
to be subject to Harsha, the evidence in support of it is very weak. It 
is likely, however, that he conquered some territories at the foot of 
the Himalayas. 1 In the east, as noted above, there is nothing to 
show that Harsha exercised any suzerainty over North, South or 
Eastern Bengal, or that Kamarupa was a vassal state of Harsha. 2 

This detailed examination forces us to the conclusion that at 
first Harsha’s kingdom comprised merely the territories of the old 
states of Thaneswar and Kanauj, though he probably added some 
small principalities to the north and west. It may be said to have 
comprised the Eastern Punjab and Uttar Pradesh. Towards the 
close of his reign, he had annexed Magadha and even pushed his 
conquests as far as Orissa and Kohgoda. It is not definitely known, 
however, whether the last two with the intervening territory were 
ever incorporated in his dominions. 

This limit of Harsha’s empire is much narrower than what is 
generally believed. But excluding the doubtful case of Bengal it 
seems impossible, in the present state of our knowledge, to regard 
Harsha as exercising his authority over a larger area. It is signi¬ 
ficant that the find-spots of his coins and inscriptions, and the locality 
where the new era started by him was undoubtedly in vogue, are 
all situated within this limit. 

V. ESTIMATE OF HARSHA 

It would be quite wrong to assume, as many have done, that 
Harsha was the last great empire-builder in the Hindu period and 
his death marked the end of all successful attempts to restore the 
political unity of Northern India. Several empires, which did not 
compare unfavourably with his, rose and fell in Northern India 
during the next five centuries, and some of them, like the Pratihara 
empire, were not only bigger but more enduring. While, therefore, 
it would be idle to pretend that Harsha-vardhana’s reign constitutes 
a distinctive age or marks an epoch in Indian history in any way, 
we cannot withhold our tribute of praise and admiration which is 

1. Banabhatta says (HC, p. 76) that Harsha exacted tribute from an inaccessible 
land of snowy mountains. Biihler (1A. XIX. 40), and following him, others 
take the country to be Nepal, while Levi (le Nepal . II, 145-6) and Ettinghausen 
(Harsha Vardhana, p. 47) think that it refers to the Tukhara country. 

2. See on this point, Tripathi ( HK, p. 104), and PIHC, VI 48. 


N 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


due to him as a great ruler, a brave military leader, a patron of arts 
and letters, and a man of noble impulses and distinguished persona¬ 
lity. 

Harsha-vardhana came to occupy the throne of Thaneswar at 
a most critical moment in its history. The friendly and neighbour¬ 
ing state of Kanauj was overrun by a powerful enemy who had 
designs upon Thaneswar itself, and its king met with a tragic end 
in an attempt to retrieve the disaster. The death of two successive 
rulers within a short space of time rendered the position of the 
young king still more difficult in the face of the heavy task that lay 
before him, particularly if we remember that his relations with the 
surrounding states were far from friendly, and hostile operations 
were actually in progress against one of them. That Harsha not only 
surmounted these difficulties, but raised the small principality of 
Thaneswar into the most powerful kingdom in Northern India, re¬ 
flects the greatest credit upon his military skill and general ability. 
The disintegrating forces, let loose by the dissolution of the Gupta 
empire, made the task of an empire-builder particularly difficult, 
and he had to engage in a series of military engagements with the 
numerous states that arose all over Northern India. He had also 
to measure his sword with the great emperor who successfully 
emulated his own exploits in the Deccan and South India. Harsha’s 
military expeditions did not prove uniformly successful, but in spite 
of occasional failures, he built a strong and powerful empire, and 
established his reputation as a great conqueror. His supremacy in 
Northern India was undisputed, and even rulers who did not acknow¬ 
ledge his suzerainty stood in awe of him, and were eager to win 
his favour and friendship. This is well illustrated by the host of 
crowned monarchs that attended the religious ceremonies organised 
by him, and in particular by the story that Hiuen Tsang tells of his 
first meeting with the great emperor. Harsha was then staying in 
his camp at Kajangala (near Rajmahal) after his return from his 
Orissa campaign. On hearing that Hiuen Tsang was then staying in 
Kamarupa, he sent a messenger asking king Bhaskara-varman to 
send the Chinese priest to him at once. Bhaskara-varman replied: 
“He (Harsha) can take my head, but he cannot take the Master 
of the Law (Hiuen Tsang) yet.” On receiving this reply Harsha 
sent a brief message: ‘Send the head per bearer.’ Bhaskara-varman, 
deeply alarmed at his own folly, now made amends by a personal 
visit to Harsha along with Hiuen Tsang . 1 This story need not be 
taken as literally true; nevertheless it reflects the high regard and 
consideration that Harsha commanded even from independent rulers. 

1. Life, p. 172. 







HARSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


But while Harsha must be regarded as a great and powerful 
monarch, it is difficult to form a proper estimate of his military 
genius and statesmanship. To all appearances his accession to the 
throne of Kanauj paved the way for his future success and consi¬ 
derably facilitated his task. We do not know the means by which 
he acquired that kingdom, and we cannot say what part luck, d!p» 
lomacy, or military ability played in this initial achievement. As 
regards his campaigns, we know r of only two enemies who may be 
regarded as first class powers, viz. Pulakesin and Sasanka, He was 
defeated by one of them, and certainly achieved no conspicuous suc¬ 
cess against the other. About his other adversaries like the kings 
of Sindh and Valabhi, we possess too little knowledge to form any 
idea of their comparative sirength. The view that Harsha carried 
his military expeditions as far as South India has no basis to rest 
upon. 1 

There are two extraneous evidences of the eminent position that 
Harsha occupied in contemporary politics. The Chalukya records 
state that Pulakesin acquired the title ‘Paramosvara 5 by defeating 
the glorious Harsha-vardhana, the warlike lord of all the region of 
the North. Although the title ‘Sakalottarapatha-natha’ should not 
be literally taken to mean the lord of whole of Northern India, the 
references in South Indian records certainly indicate that Harsha 
occupied a pre-eminent position in his time. 

Secondly, an era, counting from the date of Marshals accession, 
was probably in use even long after his death. Inscriptions bearing 
date as late as 298, and one of the year 563 (or 562) have been refer¬ 
red to this era. 2 Although in not a single instance has the era been 
expressly associated with the name of Harsha, its existence has been 
inferred from certain remarks of AlberunL Alberuni notes 3 that 
there was an era of &ri-Harsha prevalent in Mathura and Kanauj, 
which commenced 400 years before the Yikrama era, i.e. about 458 
B.C. But he adds that he read in the Kashmirian calendar that 
&rl-Harsha was 664 years later than Vikramaditya. This would 
place the accession of Harsha in A.D. 606, a date now’ generally ac¬ 
cepted. It is further held on the same authority that there were 
two Harsha eras, the later of which, founded by Harsha-vardhana, 
commenced from this date. The accession of Harsha-vardhana in 
A.D. 606 cannot, however, be easily reconciled with a statement in 
the Life of Hiuen Tsang, 4 which implies that Harsha reigned for 
30 years or a little more when he performed his sixth quinquennial 

1. Cl Tripathi, HK, p. 121. See above, p. 106, fn. 1. 

2. Cf. Bh. List 189 ff, Tripathi, HK, p. 123. 

3. Sachau’s Tr. Vol. II. p. 5. 4. Trans, by Beal, p. 183. 


115 











THE CLASSICAL AGE 


celebrations at Prayaga in A.D. 643, unless we count this period 
from his accession to the throne of Kanauj which would then fall 
in c. A.D. 612. 1 In any event, it must be pointed out that there is 
no reliable evidence in support of the generally accepted views that 
Harsha-vardhana ascended the throne of Thaneswar in A.D. 606, 
and that an era was counted from his accession. * 2 

Hiuen Tsang draws a vivid picture of Harsha as an energetic 
ruler who was constantly on the move, being either engaged in 
military campaigns, or visiting different parts of his wide empire, 
meting out justice to all, showing honour to the worthy, and correc¬ 
ting irregularities in the conduct or behaviour of all. He maintained 
a large standing army, and Hiuen Tsang’s estimate of its strength 
is interesting. At first it is said to have comprised 5000 elephants, 
2000 cavalry, and 50,000 infantry. But, later, the number of ele¬ 
phants and cavalry were raised respectively to 60,000 and 100,000. 3 
The number would appear almost incredible, and if the infantry 
were increased in anything like the same proportion, it must have 
well nigh reached almost a million. Even the army of Chandragupta 
Maury a, who ruled over a much bigger empire, included only 30,000 
cavalry and 9,000 elephants, besides 600,000 infantry. The state¬ 
ment of Hiuen Tsang is certainly open to grave doubts. That great 
attention was paid to cavalry is also hinted at by Bana, for we are 
told that the horses for the army were brought from Persia, Afgha¬ 
nistan, and N.-W. Frontier Province which are still famous for their 
good breed. 4 

Harsha distinguished himself almost equally in arts of peace 
and war. He could wield the pen as well as the sword, and three 
of his dramatic plays, Ratnavati, Priyadarsikd and Nagnnanda, 
survive to testify to the literary skill of the royal author, which 
won him high reputation as a poet both from contemporaries and 
posterity. 15 He was, besides, a great patron of learning, and his 
court was graced by Banabhafta, Mayura, and other literary men of 

1. According to V. A. Smith ‘Harsha did not boldly stand forth as avowed king* 
of Thaneswar until A.D. 612 and he suggests that up to that time Harsha 
^considered himself to be Regent on behalf of his sister, or possibly, an infant 
crnld of his late brother.” (EHP 338). It is absurd to suggest that his sister 
had any claim to the throne of Thaneswar, and as already noted above, BSna's 
account leaves no doubt that Harsha became king of Thaneswar immediately 
after his brother’s death. 

2 ‘ ^estion has been fully discussed by the present writer (JHQ, XXVII, 

3 HTB l F< 213 fUrther discussion cf * Ibid > 321 > and IH Q- XXVIII. 

4. Bana saw Harsha s stable filled with the king’s favourite horses from Vanayu, 
Aratfa, Kamboja, Bharadvaja, Sindh, and Persia (HC, p. 50). 

**• Pp . 5 s kp ve De en entertained whether Harsha himself composed these plays. 
Tims has been fully discussed by Tripathi (HK, p. 185) who also cites references 
to Harsha s literary activities (p. 182), cf. infra Cr. XV. 


116 




HAKSHA-VARDHANA AND HIS TIME 


less renown. Hiuen Tsang observes, in his general account of India, 
that royal revenues are divided into four parts; one for the expenses 
of government and state worship, one for the endowment of great 
public servants, one to reward high intellectual eminence, and one 
for acquiring religious merit by gifts to the various sects. 1 If this 
picture applies to Harsha J s government, as we have every reason to 
believe, we may find in it indirect reference to the royal patronage 
of learning, which finds support from other sources of information. 
A story is told in the Life of Hiuen Tsang 2 that Harsha was 
deeply impressed by the remarkable learning and scholarship of a 
Kshatriya householder named Jayasena, a native of Surashfra, liv¬ 
ing in Magadha, and offered him the revenue of eighty large towns 
of Orissa. The offer was declined, but it proves the generosity of 
Harsha towards learned men and his unstinted liberality to them. 
Harsha was also a patron of the great University of Nalanda, which 
was then the most renowned centre of learning in the whole of the 
Buddhist world. We learn from Hiuen Tsang. that he built there 
a magnificent vihdra and a bronze temple. 3 I-tsing tells us that 
“£iiaditya was exceedingly fond of literature” and that he not only 
“versified the story of the Bodhisatva JImu ta vahana” (i.e. Ndgdnanda) 
“but had it performed by a band accompanied by dancing and 
acting.” 4 

Even making due allowances for the pompous rhetoric of 
Ranabhatta and enthusiastic exaggeration of Hiuen Tsang, their 
narratives leave no doubt that Harsha was a ruler of versatile ability 
and wonderful personality. Naturally Hiuen Tsang has given more 
details of the religious beliefs and activities of Harsha. Any one 
who goes through the pilgrim’s bulky volumes is struck by his 
enthusiasm, bordering almost on fanaticism, in matters concerning 
Bi|ddhist religion. He was so much blinded by faith and devotion 
that he even describes supernatural phenomena as happening before 
his very eyes. He saw everything in India through the spectacles 
of Buddhism, and regarded its inherent superiority to all other 
religions as beyond question. The account of such a person about 
the religious proclivities of Harsha must be accepted with more than 
usual reserve. To judge, as we do in other cases, from the epigraphie 
records of Harsha, ha must be regarded as a pious and devoted Saiva. 
His royal seals, which refer to his three ancestors as worshippers 
of the Sun and his elder brother as Buddhist, describe him as a 
devoted &aiva, and this is corroborated by the two records that we 

1. HTW. I, 176. 2. Trans, bv Beal, p. 154. 

3. Li/e, p. 159, HTW. II. 171. 4. 1RT. 163-64. 

117 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


possess of him. Yet the accounts of Hiuen Tsang would leave the 
impression that Harsha was not only a devoted follower of Buddhist 
religion, but even deliberately treated with scant respect the other 
religious sects, including halvas, as being distinctly inferior. Hiuen 
Tsang describes, for example, the great ceremony which Harsha per¬ 
formed every five years at Prayaga, at the confluence of the rivers 
Ganga and Yamuna, when, ajter the example of his ancestors , he 
‘distributed in one day the accumulated wealth of five years.’ But we 
are told that an image of Buddha was first offered the most costly 
jewels, and the Buddhist priests, from far and near, were entertained 
with gifts, before his charity was extended to ‘retired scholars and 
recluses of other religions and the kinless poor.’ 1 This lavish distri¬ 
bution exhausted all the public and private wealth of the country, 
but in ten days the empty treasury was again filled by the gifts of 
the rulers of different countries. This account is of a piece with 
the general tenor of Hiuen Tsang’s statements, and undoubtedly 
contains a great deal of exaggeration, and perhaps even perversion 
of truth. 


Still more striking is his account of Harsha’s religious assembly 
at Kanauj, 2 which was attended by Bhaskara-varman, with his 
immense host, and twenty (or eighteen) other kings. 3 A special 
tower, 100 ft. high and with a golden statue of Buddha of the size 
of the king inside it, was constructed at Kanauj, and every day in 
the midst of a huge procession, escorted by the kings, a smaller 
golden image of Buddha was carried on a gorgeously caparisoned 
elephant. On its left went king Harsha, dressed as gakra (Indra) 
holding a canopy, and on the right was Bhaskara-varman. dressed as 
Brahma holding a white Chdmara. After having reached an altar, 
specially constructed for the purpose, the king first washed the 
Buddha image in scented water, and then himself bore it on his 
shoulder to the tower where he offered to it tens, hundreds, and 
thousands of silken garments, decorated with precious gems. This 
worship was followed by a grand feast. After the feast the kings 
and followers of different religious sects gathered in an assembly 
and discussed the most abstruse subjects till evening when the king 
ietirea in state to his own residence. This programme was followed 
for 21 days in succession. 


is nee dless to add that in the assembly for discussion Hiuen 
Tsang is represented as towering head and shoulders above the rest 
The members of the assembly were selected by Harsha himself, and 
included, in addition to the kings and their two hundred ministers 
1, 000 r enown ed Buddhist priest s and five hundred Brahmanas and 


1. HTW . I. 364. 


3. The number of kings is given as IS in the Life’ 


Life, 177. 


118 









HAKSHA-VAKDHANA AND HIS TIME 


followers of other religious sects. Hiuen Tsang was nominated as 
‘Lord of the discussion,’ and having selected a subject, he offered his 
head to any one who could find fault with his arguments. None dared 
challenge him for five days, and then the followers of the Hlnayana 
form of Buddhism plotted to kill him. Thereupon Harsha issued 
a proclamation threatening with instant death any one who ‘should 
hurt or touch’ the Chinese pilgrim. Further, he announced that 
‘w T hoever speaks against him, his tongue shall be cut out.’ No 
wonder, that after this ‘the followers of error withdrew’ and no one 
joined the discussion. 

But murder seems to have been in the air of the religious as¬ 
sembly at Kanauj. The heretics, we are told, felt great resentment 
against Harsha and planned to kill him, because while he ‘exhausted 
his treasury in offerings to the Buddhists, he scarcely even spoke to 
them. 5 On the last day of the assembly the great tower suddenly 
caught fire, and in the confusion that ensued, a heretic, knife in 
hand, rushed on the king. The man was seized and confessed that 
he was hired by the heretics, who had deliberately set the tower on 
lire to get an opportunity to assassinate the king. Five hundred 
Brahmanas, all of singular talent, questioned by the king, confessed 
to their share in the plot, adding that they were “jealous of the 
Sramanas, whom the king had reverenced and exceedingly honour¬ 
ed.” The king punished the ring-leaders and banished the 500 
Brahmanas to the frontiers of India. 

Thus ended the strange assembly of Kanauj. The whole scene 
is dominated by the towering personality of Hiuen Tsang, and 
Harsha cuts a sorry, almost a pitiable figure. An extreme partisan 
of Buddhism, and a blind admirer of his illustrious guest, he even 
forgot his royal duties and the allegiance he owed to the faith offi¬ 
cially accepted by him and his numerous subjects. The sight of 
the Buddha image carried by the king, dressed as a Brahmanical god, 
was sure to wound the feelings of millions who thronged the capital. 
It was again queer indeed to convoke an assembly for religious dis¬ 
cussion with Hiuen Tsang as the chief spokesman, and then to de¬ 
clare publicly that whoever speaks against him shall hdve-his tongue 
cut out. The result was, of course, a foregone conclusion,—Hiuen 
Tsang occupying the Presidential chair in splendid isolation, with 
no one entering the Hall to join the discussion. Such is the picture 
which Hiuen Tsang presents to us of his patron and hero, but we 
may well doubt whether Harsha was really capable of such folly. 

Hiuen Tsang’s account leaves no doubt that Harsha was greatly 
attached to Buddhism, and showered great honours upon the Chinese 


119 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


pilgrim for his learning, piety and devotion. But we should, per¬ 
haps give too much credence to it if we believe that he formally 
gave up his old faith, and his zeal for Buddhism and respect and 
reverence for Hiuen Tsang led him to show scant courtesy, if not 
positive disrespect, to the other religious sects and their revered 

leaders. 


VI. MARSHA’S RELATION WITH CHINA 

Harsha’s intimacy with Hiuen Tsang led to one important result. 
He must have been impressed with the pilgrim’s description of the 
power and prestige of the Chinese emperor, and accordingly sent 
an envoy 1 to him in A.D. 641. Ma-twan-lin has preserved the fol- 
lowing account of it: 

“(In 641) Slladitya assumed the title of king of Magadha and 
sent an ambassador with a letter to the emperor. The emperor, 
in his turn, sent Liang-hoai-King as an envoy with a royal patent to 
Slladitya with an invitation to him to submit (to the authority of 
the Chinese emperor). &iladitya was full of astonishment and asked 
his officers whether any Chinese envoy ever came to this country 
since time immemorial. ‘Never’, they replied in one voice. There¬ 
upon the king went out, received the imperial decree with bended 
knees, and placed it on his head.” 

Ettinghausen has inferred from this submissive attitude of 
Harsba that he must have been in great trouble and badly needed 
the help of China. Such a conclusion is absolutely unwarranted. 
It has been invariably the practice of Chinese chroniclers to repre¬ 
sent customary presents given by an envoy as the tribute paid by 
a vassal state, and no wonder that ordinary marks of courtesy and 
politeness, which Harsha showed to the ambassador, were repre¬ 
sented as an act of submission. It is impossible to believe that 
Harsha could really expect any material aid from such a distant 
country as China, of which he knew very little before he met Hiuen 
Tsang. 


Towards the close of the year A.D. 643 a second Chinese embassy 
came to Magadha under Li-y-piao and Wang-hiuen-tse. They 
brought with them a Brahmana envoy sent to the Chinese emperor 
by Siladitya, probably soon after he made the acquaintance of Hiuen 


1. For an account of the embassies, cf. Ettinghausen, Harsha Vardhana, pp. 54-7. 
Dr. P. C. Bagchi in enumerating the embassies from China does not refer to 
the Chinese embassy under Liang-hoai-King and takes the embassy under 
Li-y -piao as the first sent by the Chinese emperor in return to that sent by 
Harsha (India and China , p. 82). He writes Li Yi-pao and Wang Hiuan-ts’o 
as the names of the two Chinese ambassadors, and gives the date of the second 
embassy ©f the latter as A D. 647 (Sino-Indian Studies, L 69). 


120 






HABSHA-VABDHANA AND HIS TIME 


Tsang. This embassy brought the reply of the Chinese emperor to 
the king of Magadha (as Harsha was called in the Chinese account) 
and was received with similar honours as the previous one. 

Scarcely had Wang-hiuen-tse returned to China when he was 
again sent back to the court of Harsha. This third embassy was 
probably the result of detailed communications about the Indian 
king which the emperor received from Hiuen Tsang on the latter’s 
return to China in A.D. 645. 

Wang-hiuen-tse left for India in 646 with Tsiang-Cheu-jenn as 
the second in command. But when they arrived in India the great 
king was no more. We may thus infer that Harsha-vardhana pro¬ 
bably died in the beginning of A.D. 647 or towards the close of the 
previous year. The exact time and circumstances of his death, as 
well as the events following it, are unknown, and no light is thrown 
on them by any Indian record. 

No successor of Harsha-vardhana is known, and with him ended 
the famous Pushpabhuti family and the mighty empire founded by 
his prowess and ability. 


APPENDIX 

The Death of R&jya-vardhema 

Banabhatta’s account 1 of Rajya-vardhana, summarised above, 
is distressingly vague and incomplete, and suffers from all the defects 
of partisan authorship. He does not, for example, mention even the 
name of either the king of Malava or the king of Gau$a, who inflicted 
such calamity on the house of Thaneswar. That the latter is Sasanka 
admits of no doubt, as Hiuen Tsang refers to the murder of Rajya- 
vardhana by Sasanka. The inscriptions of Harsha-vardhana refer 
to Deva-gupta and other kings being defeated by Rajya-vardhana. 
As the king of Malava was the only important king defeated by 
Rajya-vardhana in his brief career, it is a reasonable presumption 
that Deva-gupta of the inscriptions and the king of "Malava denote 
one and the same person. 2 

The first part of Bana’s narrative seems to imply that Deva- 
gupta alone defeated and killed Graha-varman and put Rajyasri in 
prison. But the chance mentioned of ‘Gau$a trouble’ in connection 
with the imprisonment of Rajyasrl, and the fight between Sasahka 
and Rajya-vardhana almost immediately after Deva-gupta’s death, 
can hardly be explained except on the theory of an alliance between 
Malava and Gau$a against the Maukharis. 

1. HC, pp. 173, 177-8, 224, 250. 

2. For oth&r views on the subject, cf. 1HQ, XXXII, 431; XXXIII, 235. 


121 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


There is much that is vague in the account of the allied conquest 
of Kanauj. Not only are details lacking about the initial stages of 
the campaign which ended so disastrously for Graha-varman, but no 
clue is given regarding the identity of the nobleman named Gupta 
who set Rajyasri at liberty; nor are we told how or why Rajyasri 
chose to betake herself to the distant Vindhya hills when she could 
far more easily fly to her native kingdom of Thaneswar. 

The subsequent events are also not easy to follow. Why Rajya- 
vardhana marched with such a small army against powerful foes; 
why Deva-gupta met him without his ally Sasahka; whether Rajya- 
vardhana was at all aware that ^asahka’s army was near at hand, 
and if so why he advanced, with his depleted army, against this new 
enemy without re-inforcement;—these are questions to which it 
is difficult to give any satisfactory answer. 

Similar uncertainty hangs round the story of Raj ya-vardhana’s 
death. Bana says he was allured by Sasahka to his house and killed 
when he was alone and without any weapon. Banabhatta does not 
mention the nature of the allurements which induced Rajya-var™ 
dhana to visit the house of his enemy without any guard. Sankara, 
a later commentator of Bana, explains the allurements by saying 
that Sasahka enticed Eajya -vardhana through a spy by the offer of 
his daughter’s hand, and while the unlucky king with his retinue 
was participating in a dinner in his enemy’s camp, he was killed by 
the Gauda king in disguise. Apart from its inherent absurdity, the 
story is hardly consistent with the express statement of Bana that 
Rajya-vardhana died while he was alone and weaponless in his 
enemy’s house. 

Hiuen Tsang gives us a different story altogether. Sasahka, it 
is said, frequently told his ministers, with reference to Rajya-var¬ 
dhana, that ‘if a frontier country has a virtuous ruler, this is the un¬ 
happiness of the mother-kingdom/ Thereupon the ministers of 
Sasahka asked Rajya-vardhana to a conference and murdered him. 
Elsewhere Hiuen Tsang quotes the following speech of Harsha’s 
ministers: “Owing to the fault of his (Rajya-vardhana’s) ministers, he 
was led to subject his person to the hand of his enemy, and the king¬ 
dom has suffered a great affliction, but it is the fault of your 
ministers.” 

Lastly we have the express statement in the inscriptions of 
Harsha-vardhana that Rajya-vardhana gave up his life at the house 
of his enemy owing to his adherence to a promise. 

il would appear from these varying accounts that while there 
is no doubt that Rajya-vardhana was killed by Sasahka, it is not just 


122 


HARSHA-VABDHANA AND HIS TIME 


or reasonable to accept the view that this was accomplished by 
treachery. That both Banabhatta and Hiuen Tsang were bitter 
against Sasahka is evidenced by their writings, and their accusations 
must be treated with a great deal of reserve. It is not a little curious 
that all the three contemporary accounts, which refer to Rajya- 
vardhana’s murder, maintain a conspiracy of silence regarding its 
cause or details. It is no use stressing the fact that &a4anka*s 
treachery is mentioned by contemporary writers, for the varying 
accounts of Shivaji and Afzal Khan in Muslim and Maratha chro¬ 
nicles illustrate the danger of relying upon contemporary evidence 
if it comes from interested or prejudiced sources. On the whole, it 
is better to reserve judgment until further evidence is available, 1 


GENERAL REFERENCES 


1. Contemporary Literary Works. 

(a) Bajmbhatta— Harsha-charita (References are to the English Translation by 
Cowell and Thomas and the Nirnayasagara Edition of the Text). 

(b) Hiuen Tsang’s account. Translated by Beal {Buddhist Records of the 
Western World) and Watters (On Yuan Chwang’s Travels in India), 

(c) Life of Hiuen Tsang . Translated by Beal. 

2. Royal Seals. 

(a) Banskhera Copper Seal (CII, III 231), 

(b) Naianda Seals (EL XXX, 74; MASI, 66, p. 68). 

3. Inscriptions. 

(a) Banskhera Copper-plate, dated year 22 (El, W. 208). 

(b) Madiiufean Copper-plate, dated year 25 (El, I. 67). 

4. Modern Works, 

(a) R. o Mookerji— Marsha. 

(b) M. L. Et tmghausen—H arsha Vardhana. 

(e) K. M. Panikkar—&n Harsha of Kanauf. 

<d) R. S, Tripathi —History of Kanauj. (Chs. I1I-VIH). 


1. For a full discussion of this question, cf. HBR, pp. 71 If; IHQ, XXIII. 51. 


128 






CHAPTER X 

NORTHERN INDIA DURING A. D. 650-750 

1. THE CHINESE RAID 

It is generally held that the death of Harsha was followed by 
a period of anarchy and confusion throughout Northern India. This 
view must be considerably modified in view of what has been stated, 
above regarding the limits of Harsha’s empire. For there is no 
ground to suppose that the large number of kingdoms in Northern 
India outside that empire were directly affected by his death to 
any appreciable extent. The break-up of the empire, no doubt, 
led to the rise of a number of independent states on its ruins, and 
the period of transition might have witnessed troubles and disorders, 
possibly even internecine wars between rival claimants for power. 
No light is thrown on this by any Indian record. But the Chinese 
account of the embassy of Wang-hiuen-tse which, as noted above, 1 
reached India immediately after the death of Harsha, has preserved 
some curious details of the history of this period. Accustomed as 
we are to the exaggeration and self-adulation of the Chinese writers, 
this account beats all records and reads more like a romance or a 
string of fables than sober history. It may be summed up as fol¬ 
lows 2 :— 

“Before the embassy arrived in India, Harsha-varGhana was 
dead and his minister, named A-la-na-shuen (Arjuna or Arunasva?), 
the king of Tlrabhukti(?), had usurped the throne. The usurper 
attacked the ambassador who had only 30 horsemen as his escort. 
Wang-hiuen-tse was defeated and the articles which the Indian 
kingdoms paid him as tribute were plundered. He fled alone, under 
cover of darkness at night, and went to Tibet to ask for help. The 
Tibetan king Sroh-btsan-sgam-po supplied 1,200 picked troops and 
Amsuvarman, king of Nepal, gave him 7,000 horsemen as escort. 
With these recruits, Wang-hiuen-tse, determined to take revenge, 

1. See p. 121. 

2. The different versions are given in S. Levi's account in JA. 1900, pp. 297 ff. 
Brief summary is also given by Dr. P. C. Bagchi ( Sino-Indian Studies, I. 89) 
and E. Chavannes (Documents sur les Toukiue occidentaux, p. 16 of the Addi¬ 
tional Notes). The usurper is called the ruler of Ti-na-fu-ti, which has been 
regarded as equivalent to Tirabhukti. This shows that he was a local ruler 
rather than the imperial successor of Harsha. Levi’s identification of Cha-puo- 
ho-lo with Davaka (Nowgong district, cf. p. 8 above) also points in the same 
direction. The river K’ien-t’o-wei has been equated with Gantfavatl, a pos¬ 
sible variant form of Gandakl. The differences of details in the different ver¬ 
sions have not been noted in the above summary. The whole question has been 
critically discussed in JASL, XIX. 37 ff. 


124 




NORTHERN INDIA DURING AD. 650-750 


advanced as far as Cha-puo-ho-lo, the capital of Mid-India, and 
captured it after a siege of three days. The carnage was terrible. 
Three thousand of the besieged were beheaded and ten thousand 
were drowned. The usurper Arjuna fled, rallied his scattered troops 
and again offered battle. He was defeated and captured, and one 
thousand of his troops were beheaded. The guards of the royal 
harem opposed the enemy’s passage of the river K’ien-t’o-wei. They 
were defeated. The wives and children of the usurper fell into the 
hands of the enemy who also took 12,000 prisoners and more than 
30,000 domesticated animals of all kinds. Then whole India trembled 
and 580 walled towns offered their submission. Kumara (Bhaskara- 
varman), the king of Eastern India, sent the victor large quantities 
of provisions and equipment. After this great triumph Wang-hiuen- 
tse returned to China in A.D. 648, taking with him Arjuna as a pri¬ 
soner. The latter remained in China till his death and was given 
posthumous honours. His statue was placed on the avenue leading 
to the tomb of the Chinese emperor T’ai-tsong.” 

It was indeed a great marvel! With only eight thousand 
soldiers, borrowed from two neighbouring states, Wang-hiuen-tse, 
far from his home, defied the great king who sat on Harsha’s throne, 
fought a series of battles, and won an easy and complete victory in 
each, killing 13,000 and imprisoning 12,000 over and above a large 
unspecified number. He captured the enemy’s capital city only after 
three days’ siege, and 580 walled towns submitted to him, evidently 
out of fear, though his force consisted mainly of cavalry. And all 
these, including a return journey to China, were accomplished in 
the course of a year or a little more. Such marvels do not often or 
easily happen, and one might justly feel sceptical about the whole 
affair. In any case, it is impossible to draw any reliable conclusion 
from this picture of an invincible hero painted by himself. What 
appears to be probable is that Wang-hiuen-tse’s party was attacked 
and pillaged by some petty chief near the Himalayas, and Wang, 
with the help of some Nepalese and Tibetan soldiers, retaliated. It 
is also quite likely that Harsha’s death was followed by political 
disintegration and rise of ambitious chiefs who scrambled for the 
inheritance of the vast empire left without any strong or legitimate 
heir. Wang himself might have espoused the cause of one such 
rival and thus created enemies for himself. Apart from such a pro¬ 
vocation, it is difficult to imagine why his camp was suddenly attacked 
by the minister of Harsha who had usurped the throne. No motive 
is alleged, and it is interesting to note that the scene of action is laid 
in Nepal border of North Bihar, and not anywhere near Kanauj, the 
capital of Harsha. It is equally difficult to account for the posthu¬ 
mous honours shown to the rebellious Indian ruler, guilty of wanton 


125 


THE CLASSICAL AGF 


violence against the Chinese ambassador. On the whole, the story 
of Wang-hiuen-tse has little historical value, except as a general 
indication of the anarchy and confusion prevailing in North Biliar 
and the neighbouring region after the death of Harsha. What hap¬ 
pened to the kingdoms of Thaneswar or Kanauj we cannot say, but 
there is no ground to suppose that Harsha’s death was followed by 
a political upheaval in the whole of North India. 

Although the process of the disintegration of Harsha’s empire 
cannot be traced in detail, it is clearly marked by the rise ot two 
or three powerful states in its component parts. We may first 
briefly sketch their history and then take up the other states which 
lay outside the empire. 


2. THE LATER GUPTAS OF MAGADHA 


The most important succession-state of the empire was the 
kingdom of Magadha, Shortly after the death of Harsha we find 
the Later Guptas ruling over it. Madhava-gupta, the son of Maha- 
sena-gupta and the friend of Harsha, occupied the throne, and the 
records of the family leave no doubt that henceforth they ruled over 
a powerful principality in Magadha for nearly a century. The 
Aphsad stone inscription, 1 engraved in the reign of Adityasena, the 
son of Madhava-gupta, is the earliest record of the family, and traces 
its history from the very beginning. It does not refer to any break 
in the rule of the dynasty after Mahasena-gupta, though it is almost 
certain that the family exercised no sovereign authority for a fairly 
long time during which Deva-gupta was ruling in Malwa, and at 
first &asahka, then Purnavarman, and lastly Harsha-vardhana were 
ruling over Magadha. All the while Madhava-gupta and his elder 
brother Kumara-gupta were living in Thaneswar court as companions 
of Rajya-vardhana and Harsha-vardhana, There is a casual reference 
in the Harsha-dharita to the anointment of Kumara (as king) by 
Harsha-vardhana. 2 This Kumara has been identified with Bhaskara- 
varman of Kamarupa. But as the latter was an independent ruler, 
and had ascended the throne before Harsha, this view is hardly 
acceptable. 3 The probability is that Kumara-gupta was anointed 
sovereign by Harsha-vardhana. If this supposition be correct, we 
must hold that Madhava-gupta succeeded his brother, though there 
is no mention of it in the Aphsad Inscription. On the other hand, it 
is equally likely that when the death of Harsha was followed by a 
scramble for power, either Madhava-gupta or his brother seized the 
opportunity to make himself master of Magadha. As noted above, 4 


i. cn. III. 202. 

3. Mookerji, Harsha , p. 44; THE, 104. 

A 


2. Harsha-Charita (Nirnayasagar) p. 91. 

4, See p. 75. 


126 









NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 

his ancestors were probably rulers of Magadha, and Madhava-gupta’s 
action in that case merely amounted to a recovery of the paternal 
kingdom. 

M&dhava-gupta must have been fairly advanced in age when he 
ascended the throne, and his.^reign was probably a short one. He 
was succeeded by his son Adityasena, the only ruler of the family 
about whom we know some details. His daughter was married to 
the Maukhari Bhoga-varman, son of the sister of king Aihsu-varman 
of Nepal; and Bhoga-varman’s daughter VatsadevI, the grand¬ 
daughter of Adityasena, became the queen of ^ivadeva, king of Nepal. 
The express reference to these marriage alliances in the official re¬ 
cords of Nepal seems to indicate that the Later Gupta kings enjoyed 
high political and social status in Eastern India. This is further 
borne out by the fact that Adityasena assumed the imperial title 
of Mahdmjddhirdja . An inscription, 1 engraved in a temple at Deo- 
ghar (Santa! Parganas), refers to his conquest of the Chola country 
and performance of several sacrifices, including three Asvamedhas. 
The characters of this inscription are, however, of much later date, 
and it seems to be the copy of a record originally set up at Mannar 
hill, near Bhagalpur. It is difficult to place much reliance on it, and 
we shall not be justified in assuming, on the basis of this record alone, 
that Adityasena really carried his victorious arms to the Chola 
country. Unfortunately, no other specific event is recorded of his 
reign except some pious foundations by his queen Konadevi. 

The date in a short record of Adityasena has been read as 66 2 
and has been referred to the H&rsha era. It is accordingly held that 
Adityasena was ruling in A.D. 672. The reading of the date is, 
however, uncertain, and no definite conclusion can be drawn from 
it. But there is hardly any doubt that he ascended the throne in 
the third quarter of the seventh century A.D. 

We know the names of three successors of Adityasena, viz. Deva- 
gupta, Vishnu-gupta and Jlvita-gupta. 3 They all continued the 
imperial titles and were evidently rulers of some power, but we do 
not know much about them. Vishnu-gupta ruled for at least 17 
years, 4 and Jlvita-gupta probably extended his authority to some 
territory on the banks of the Gomati which once formed part of the 
Maukhari kingdom. 

No successor of Jlvita-gupta is known, and the end of the Later 
Guptas is obscure. When Yasovarman of Kanauj set out on his 
victorious campaign in the east, some time in the second quarter of 
the eighth century A.D., he found one king in possession of Gauda 

2. Ibid . 210. 

4. El, XXVI. 241, 

127 

•/fl. 'v*V 


1. CII, III p. 213 fn. 
3. Ibid . 215. 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


and Magadha. 1 It has been suggested that this ruler, whose defeat 
and death at the hands of Yasovarman is described in the poem 
Ga'tida-vaho (killing of the king of Gauda), is no other than Jlvita- 
gupta. But as the ruler is expressly called Lord of Gauda, and the 
poem is named Gauda-vaho, we should infer that the opponent of 
Yasovarman was a king of Gauda who also ruled over Magadha, 
rather than a king of Magadha, as Jlvita-gupta undoubtedly was, 
whose sway extended over Gauda. In any case, we must hold that 
the power of the Later Guptas came to an end in or shortly before 
the second quarter of the eight century A.D., the last ruler Jlvita- 
gupta being defeated either by a king of Gauda or king Yasovarman 
of Kanauj. 


3. YASOVARMAN OF KANAUJ 

The city of Kanauj was raised to the position of an imperial 
capital by Harsha-vardhana, But an impenetrable gloom surrounds 
its history for more than half a century after his death. When the 
obscurity lifts we find a powerful monarch Yasovarman occupying 
its throne. Nothing is known of the early history and antecedents 
of this king, but one of his court-poets, .the famous Vakpati, wrote a 
poetical work in Prakrit to celebrate the victorious campaign of his 
patron, and this forms the chief source of our knowledge of his life 
and reign. The name of Vakpati’s poem, ( Gauda-vaho’, 2 implies 
that the defeat and death of the king of Gauda formed the main 
theme of the work, but as a matter of fact this event is merely allud¬ 
ed to at the very end, and the rest of the work deals with the other 
conquests of Yasovarman. The facts narrated in the poem may be 
summed up as follows:— 

‘At the end of a rainy season, Yasovarman proceeded with his 
army on an expedition of conquest (vijaya-ydtm ). Passing through 
the valley of the Son, he reached the Vindhya mountain, and propi¬ 
tiated the famous goddess Vindhyavasini (a form of Kali) residing 
in one of its caves. Proceeding further he met the king of Magadha, 
who fled in terror. But the vassal kings who accompanied the latter 
felt ashamed of their conduct and immediately returned to fight 
Yasovarman. A great battle ensued, and the blood of Yasovarman’s 
enemies reddened the field. The lord of Magadha was pursued and 
slain by Yasovarman who then proceeded to the seacoast and con¬ 
quered the king of the Vangas. The Vangas were powerful and in 

1. This is very doubtful cf. HBR. pp. 94-5. 

2 ‘ 7**™* has be en edited by S. P. Pandit, with a learned Introduction discuss- 
mg the history of Yasovarman. Mr. N. B. Utgikar has brought out a second 
edition, with another learned Introduction discussing recent views. 


128 





NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


possession of a large number of warlike elephants, but they sub¬ 
mitted to Yasovarman and acknowledged him as their suzerain. 

‘The conquering hero then proceeded across the Malaya moun¬ 
tain after receiving the submission of the king of the Deccan (king 
of south). Then he reached that shore of the sea where Valin, taking 
the mighty Havana under his arm, roamed about at ease. Yaso¬ 
varman then marched upon the Parasikas and conquered them after 
a protracted and hard-fought battle. He levied tributes from the 
regions rendered inaccessible by the Western Ghats. He then came 
to the bank of the Narmada and, passing by the sea-coast, marched 
to Maru-desa (Desert of Rajputana). Thence he advanced towards 
Srikantha, *the district round Thaneswar. Passing through Kuru- 
kshetra, and visiting the scenes of the war described in the Mahd - 
bharata } Yasovarman proceeded to Ayodhya. He then received the 
submission of the people living on the Mandara mountains and pro¬ 
ceeded towards + he Himalayan region. 

‘Having thus conquered the world, Yasovarman returned to his 
capital Kanauj and the vanquished kings, who were compelled to 
accompany him, were sent back to their kingdoms.’ 

It is curious that no mention is made of the king of Gauda in 
the course of this narrative of the world conquest, though the poem 
is entitled Gauda-vaho or slaying of the king of Gauda. The event 
is only incidentally alluded to in a single verse towards the end of 
the poem. An old commentator, Haripala, took the lord of Magadha, 
defeated and killed by Yasovarman, to be the king of Gauda. This 
is at best an assumption, 1 but even this would hardly justify the 
title, as the number of verses devoted to the particular episode is 
very few, indeed fewer than those relating to other kings. 

As the summary shows, the description of Yasovarman’s con¬ 
quest is highly conventional, and it is difficult to accept as an histo¬ 
rical fact that he conquered all the regions in the north and south 
as described in the poem. But we possess some independent evi¬ 
dence which corroborates in a general way his conquests in the east. 
An inscription, 2 found at Nalanda, refers to Yasovarman as the 
paramount suzerain, and it may be taken to indicate that his author¬ 
ity extended over Magadha. We may therefore believe that he 
carried his arms as far as Bengal and defeated the lord of Gautja. 

The story of the southern conquests of Yasovarman appears, 
on the face of it, highly improbable. But there may be some basis 
for it. The inscriptions of the Chalukya king Vijayaditya, great- 

1. Cf. HBR. pp. 94-5. 

2. El. XX. 37. For various views and inferences, cf. references in Bhandarkar’s 
List No. 2105. 

129 

C.A.—9 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


grandson of the famous Pulakesin II, refer to a fight with a king who 
is not named but is described as the 'Lord of the North, or whole of 
Uttarapatha (sakalottampatha-natha) The battle took place dur¬ 
ing the reign of Vinayaditya and most probably towards its eio^e, 
about A.D. 695. The Chalukya king defeated the enemy and ob¬ 
tained from him 'the symbols of the rivers Gangs. and Yamuna, the 
Palidhvaja banner,’ and other insignia of imperial power. Now the 
reference to the Gahga and the Yamuna shows that the battle pro¬ 
bably took place in the Gahga-Yamuna doab. Considering the date 
and the locality of the battle, and the designation of the defeated 
king as the 'Lord of the whole of Uttarapatha’, it is not unreasonable 
to identify him with Yasovarman. The account of the yictory, as 
reported in the Chalukya inscriptions, need not be taken as literally 
true. For there are good grounds to believe that it was in the 
northern campaign that Vijayadxtya, the Chalukya crown-prince, 
was taken captive by the enemy. Thus both sides might claim vic¬ 
tory, and if the identification of the northern king with Yasovarman 
be accepted, we can easily account for the panegyrics of his court- 
poet. 1 

As regards his conquest in the west, there is only slight indirect 
corroboration. It is now generally recognised that Yasovarman is 
possibly identical with Yi-sha-tfu-mo, king of Central India, who 
sent his minister, the Buddhist monk Pu-ta-sin (Buddhasena), to the 
court of China in A.D. 731. 2 Lalitaditya, king of Kashmir, sent an 
embassy to China in A.D. 736, and probably referred to Yasovar¬ 
man as an ally. 3 It may be held that both these kings asked for 
Chinese help against the Arabs and Tibetans who were making in¬ 
roads upon India. 4 If this view be correct, we must hold that 
Yasovarman had extended his power in the west. As will be shown 
later, the Arabs, after conquering Sindh, sent an expedition against 
Kanauj which did not meet with any success. The defeat of the 
Parasikas by Yasovarman possibly refers to his victories against the 
Arabs of Sindh. 

But although Yasovarman took up the noble cause of defending 
India against foreign invaders in alliance with Lalitaditya, the two 
soon fell out. The imperial ambition of both was probably the real 
cause of the enmity, though it might have been accelerated by other 
circumstances. We learn from the RajatarangirfiP that there was' 

1. IRQ. Xx7l83; 356-77 1A. IX, pp. i^Tff; 130~S * 

2. Chavannes ( Tou-kiue, Additional Notes, p. 53 f.n. 2) and Dr. P. C. Bagchi 
(Sino-Indian Studies , I. 71) give this name of the envoy, hut other authorities 
name him Seng-po-ta (Sahghabhadra). 

3. Stein—Transl. of Rajatarangini, IV. 134 note. 

4. Dr. Bagchi (op. cit.) thinks that Yasovarman had appealed to the Chinese 
emperor for intervention in his dispute with Kashmir. 

5. IV. 132 If. 


180 





NORTHERN INDIA DURING AD. 650-750 


a prolonged struggle between Lalitaditya and Yasovarman, The 
war was at first cut short by a truce, but when the formal treaty 
was drawn up, the minister of Lalitaditya took objection to the docu¬ 
ment as it was entitled “a treaty of peace concluded between Yaso- 
varman and Lalitaditya.” thus giving precedence to Yasovarman 
and not to his own master. Neither party was willing to yield, and 
though Lalitaditya’s generals ‘were uneasy at the prolonged dura¬ 
tion of the war/ he renewed the struggle. The result is described 
in the three following verses of the Rajatarangim . 1 

“Yasovarman, who had been served by the poet Vakpati and 
the illustrious Bhavabhuti, upon being defeated, was reduced to the 
position of a minstrel to eulogize his (Lalitaditya’s) virtues. 

“What more need be said? The territory of Kanyakubja, from 
the bank of the Yamuna to the bank of the Kalika, was, like the 
courtyard of his residence, under his subjection. 

“Passing over Yasovarman .... his army reached in comfort 
the eastern ocean.” 

It appears from the first two verses that Yaso varman was 
thoroughly defeated and lost his kingdom. The third verse may be 
taken to indicate that Yasovarman’s empire extended up to the 
eastern ocean, and the whole of this territory passed into the hands 
of Lalitaditya in consequence of the defeat of Yaso varman. But 
though Yaso varman lost the battle, it is doubtful whether he was 
also slain. Kalhana incidentally remarks that Lalitaditya “tore up 
Yasovarman from the root.” 2 But it need not be taken literally 
to mean that he was killed. Whether he was killed or not, his 
power was utterly broken by Lalitaditya, and he fades out of history. 

The date of Yasovarman is not definitely known, but his reign 
may be placed between A.D. 700 and 740. 3 If, as proposed above, 
Yasovarman can be identified with the Lord of the North defeated 
by the Chalukya king Vinayaditya, his accession has to be placed 
about A.D. 690. 

4. KASHMIR 

Of all the kingdoms in ancient India, Kashmir alone has the 
unique advantage of possessing a written history from the earliest 
times. This work, called R&jatarangirii, was written by Kalhana in 
the twelfth century A.D. Although the author was well-versed in 
historical methods, and was surprisingly modern in his outlook, he 


1. IV. 144-46. 2. IV. 140. 

3. Other views on this subject are discussed in the Introduction to Gauda-vano 
(2nd Edition). 


131 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


had not got sufficient reliable materials for the early period of his 
history. The result is that this part of his work is full of legends, 
and although we meet with familiar names like Kanishka, Tora- 
mana, and Mihirakula, the whole story is too confused and fanciful 
for sober history. According to the scheme of chronology adopted 
by Kalhana, nearly the whole of the Gupta age is covered by the 
reign of a single king of the Gonanda dynasty who is said to have 
ruled for 300 years. Such an extraordinary regnal period of a king 
indubitably indicates the loss of true history of the period. The 
next two reigns of two brothers covering a period of 80 years is also 
of dubious authenticity. 

But the detailed narrative of subsequent history beginning with 
a new dynasty may be taken as fairly reliable. The chronology 
adopted by Kalhana for this dynasty has proved to be wrong only 
by about 30 years. When we remember that it was more than 
five hundred years before the author’s time, this error appears to be 
surprisingly small and invests his narrative with a fair degree of 
authenticity. 

The new dynasty, known as the Karkota or Naga dynasty, was 
founded by Durlabha-vardhana. He had married the daughter of 
the last king of the Gonanda dynasty named Baladitya, and as the 
latter had no son, succeeded to the throne (c. A.D. 627). During 
his reign Kashmir was visited by Hiuen Tsang. The Chinese pil¬ 
grim has given a very long account of Kashmir, but it contains little 
of historical interest. We, however, learn from him that five other 
states, viz. Takshasila (Rawalpindi district), Simhapura (Salt Range 
region), Urasa (Hazara or Abbottabad district), Pan-nu-tso (Punch), 
and Raj a pur a (Rajaori) were subject to Kashmir. We may thus 
hold that Durlabha-vardhana ruled over not only Kashmir proper, 
but a part of the western and north-western Punjab as well. 

Nothing of historical importance is known of Durlabha-vardhana 
and his son and successor Durlabhaka, who reigned respectively for 
36 and 50 years. 

Durlabhaka was succeeded by his eldest son Chandrapida. In 
A.D. 713 this king sent an envoy to the Chinese emperor asking for 
aid against the Arabs. 'As will be noted below (§12), Muhammad- 
ibn- Qasim probably reached the frontier of Kashmir about this time. 
Although Chandrapida did not receive any aid from China, he was 
able to defend his kingdom against Arab aggression. The recall and 
death of the Arab leader, which shortly followed, gave a brief respite 
to Kashmir. According to the Chinese chronicles the Chinese 
emperor granted the title of king to Chandrapida in A.D. 720. This 


132 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING AX). 650-750 


probably means no more than that Chandraphja was recognised as 
king by the Chinese emperor. 

King Chandrap^la was renowned for his piety and justice. It 
is recorded by Kalhana that when the king proposed to build a 
temple, a tanner refused to give up his hut which was on the pro¬ 
posed site. When the matter was reported to the king, he consider¬ 
ed his own officers to be at fault, not the tanner. “Stop the build¬ 
ing,” he cried out, “or have it erected elsewhere.” The tanner him¬ 
self came to the king and represented: “Since my birth this hut 
has been to me like a mother, witness of good and evil days. I can¬ 
not bear to see it pulled down today.” Still he agreed to give up 
his hut “if His Majesty would come to his dwelling and ask for it 
in accordance with propriety,” As soon as the king heard this, he 
went to the tanner’s hut and bought it. The reign of this king was 
full of just and humane acts like this, and he may almost be said to 
have been a martyr to his sense of justice. Once he punished a 
Brahmana who had secretly murdered another Brahmana by witch¬ 
craft. The former nursed deep wrath over his punishment, and was 
instigated by the king’s younger brother Tarapkja to use his witch¬ 
craft against the king. Thus died the noble king Chandrapwja after 
a reign of eight years and a half. The fratricide Tarapida then 
ascended the throne. His inglorious rule of four years was full of 
cruel and bloody deeds. He was followed by his younger brother 
Lalitaditya Muktapl^a, the greatest king of the dynasty. 

Lalitaditya ascended the throne about A.D. 724. He was ‘eager 
for conquests and passed his life chiefly on expeditions,’ As already 
related, he entered into an alliance with Yasovarman, and defeated 
the Tibetans. Like Yasovarman, and probably for similar reasons, 
he sent a diplomatic mission in A.D. 733 to the Chinese emperor in 
order to induce him to make common cause against the Tibetans. 1 
The mission was received with honour by the emperor who recognis¬ 
ed the king of Kashmir as his royal ally, 2 but no military assistance 
w r as sent from China. But even unaided, Lalitaditya succeeded in 
defeating not only the Tibetans but also the mountain tribes on the 
north and north-western frontier of his kingdom, such as the Dards, 
Kambojas and Turks. 

But the most important of the expeditions of Lalitaditya was 
that against Yasovarman to which reference has already been made. 
By that victory, Lalitaditya not only made himself master of Kanauj, 

1. Cf. Chavannes , Tou-kiue, pp. 166-8, 209. According to Dr. P. C. Bagchi 
official correspondence was exchanged between China and Kashmir in A.D. 724 
(Sino-Indian Studies, I. 71). This possibly refers to the reign of lalitaditya. 

2. The Chinese official history says that “the Emperor awarded the title of 
the ‘king of Kashmir* to Muktapl$a“ (Ibid). 


133 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


but also acquired the theoretical right of suzerainty over the vast 
conquests of his late enemy. In order effectively to assert these 
rights Lalitaditya, according to Kalhana, undertook a digvijaya or 
world-wide campaign which is described in detail by Kalhana. After 
defeating Yasovarman, he proceeded to the eastern ocean and reach¬ 
ed Kalinga. The king of Gau$a probably acknowledged his suze¬ 
rainty without a fight, for he sent elephants to join the army of 
Lalitaditya. Passing through Karnata, ruled over by queen Rafta 
who paid him homage, Lalitaditya reached the bank of the Kaveri 
and even conquered some of the islands. Turning west he overran 
the seven Kohkanas and advanced as far as Dvaraka (in the western 
extremity of the Kathiawar Peninsula). Then he conquered Avanti 
and many other states till he reached the hilly regions in the north¬ 
west. Here he conquered the Kambojas, Tukharas (Turks), 
Bhauttas (Tibetans), Daradas and also a king called Mammuni. 
Mention is also made of Pragjyotisha, Strlrajya (Realm of the Ama¬ 
zons) and the Uttara-Kurus which are more conventional and my¬ 
thical than real names. 

It is difficult to say how far this conventional account may be 
regarded as historically true. That Lalitaditya proceeded in his 
conquering expedition as far as Bengal in the east is corroborated 
by a story told later by Kalhana and by the casual mention of an 
image of Buddha brought from Magadha. But it is difficult to be¬ 
lieve without corroborative evidence that he conquered the Deccan 
or South India. It is likely that Mammuni, whom he is said to have 
defeated thrice, refers to the Arab ruler. As will be noted below, the 
Arabs are said to have reached the frontier of Kashmir and conquered 
Kangra. It is very likely, therefore, that Lalitaditya met them in 
this legion. The fact that the Arabs could not gain any lasting 
success in this direction supports the view that Lalitaditya thoroughly 
dexeated them and freed the Punjab from their depredation. There 
may also be a great deal of truth in the reputed victories of Lalita- 
ditya against the Kambojas, Turks, Dards and Tibetans who sur¬ 
rounded the kingdom of Kashmir. But nothing can be asserted with 
certainty. 

Although corroborative evidence is lacking, and final judgment 
dbout the nature and extent of Lalitaditya s victorious campaign has 
to be suspended, there is no valid reason to regard the whole thing 
as mere fiction. It should be remembered that we have here to deal 
with, not a conventional poetic description in a Kavya, but a state¬ 
ment of facts made by a historian whose sobriety of judgment and 
regard for historical truth are vouched for by his work. Making 
due allowance for the partiality and exaggeration of a court historian 


134 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.B. 650-750 


and the imperfect knowledge of events which had taken place more 
than four centuries before Kalhana's time, we cannot but regard 
Lalitaditya as a great conqueror. His extensive conquests made 
the kingdom of Kashmir, for the time being, the most powerful 
empire that India had seen since the days of the Guptas. No won¬ 
der that for centuries the Kashmirians celebrated the victories of 
the great emperor whom, with pardonable exaggeration, they chose 
to call the universal monarch. 

Lalitaditya lavished the great resources of this mighty empire 
in adorning his kingdom with beautiful towns, and decorating the 
towns with fine buildings, monasteries, temples and images of gods. 
The most famous of his works is the Martanda temple, ruins of 
which still form “the most striking remains which have survived 
of the ancient architecture of Kashmir.” 

Kalhana the author of Rdjatarangini, has drawn a magnificent 
picture of this celebrated king. But two incidents have left an 
indelible stain on the character of this great emperor. Once in a 
fit of drunkenness he ordered the town of Pravarapura to be burnt 
down; though afterwards in his sober moments he repented of it, 
and was glad to find that the ministers had disobeyed his orders. 
The second incident is more revolting. He summoned the king of 
Bengal (Ganda) to Kashmir and promised him safe-conduct, mak-* 
f ing the image of Vishnu Parihasakesava the surety for his promise. 
All the same he had the king assassinated by hirelings. It is as 
difficult to find any motive for this foul treachery as to condone it 
in any way. The sequel of this story is interesting in the extreme. 
A few devoted followers of the murdered king undertook the long 
journey from Bengal to Kashmir, and invested the temple of the 
god who had been made the surety. The priests closed the gates, 
but they were forced open. The Bengali heroes reached the statue 
of Vishnu Ramasvamm, and mistaking it for that of Parihasakesava, 
they overturned it and broke it into pieces. While doing this, they 
were all cut to pieces by the Kashmirian soldiers who had just 
arrived from the capital. Kalhana pays a just tribute to the heroism 
of the small but devoted band of Bengalis. “What of the long 
journey which had to be accomplished, and what of the devotion 
for the dead lord? Even the creator cannot achieve what the 
Gaudas did on that occasion. Even to this day the .temple of 
Ramasvamin is seen empty, whereas the world is filled with the 
fame of the Gauda heroes.” 

Lalitaditya died about A.D. 760 1 after a reign of thirty-six 

1. According to the data furnished by Rdjatarangini , Lalitaditya reigned from 
A.D. 695 to 732. But Cunningham suggested, in the light of Chinese evidence, 
that the dates of kings of this period, as given by Kalhana, should be brought 


135 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


years. He was followed by a succession of weak kings who were 
unable to maintain the power and prestige of the family. One 
among them, his grandson Javaplda, seems to have made a serious 
attempt to regain the lost ascendancy, but no conspicuous success 
attended his efforts. The dynasty, however, continued to rule over 
Kashmir till about the middle of the ninth century A.D. 

5. NEPAL 

The death of Amsu-varman, about A.D. 623, was followed by a 
period of confusion in Nepal. Jishnu-gupta, who succeeded to his 
position, is known from four inscriptions to have ruled over the 
entire valley between the years 48 and 59 (A.D. 626 and 637). It 
appears from the name-ending that he was probably not related to 
Amsu-varman although both used the same era and lived in the same 
palace, Kailasakuta-Bhavana. Levi has identified Jishnu-gupta with 
Kishnoo-gupta, one of the three Abhlra chiefs mentioned in the 
Vavis avails.' * 1 Be that as it may, there seems to be no doubt that 
Jishnu-gupta was a usurper. In one of Amsu-varman’s inscriptions, 
dated year 39, reference is made to Yuvamja Udayadeva. This 
heir-presumptive to the throne probably belonged to the Lichchhavi 
family. But either he died before Amsu-varman or was removed by 
Jishnu-gupta. The latter issued coins in his own name, but con¬ 
tinued the fiction of the Lichchhavi sovereignty by placing on the 
throne of the Lichchhavis at Mana-griha, first Dhruvadeva and then 
Bhlmarj unadeva. 

Jishnu-gupta was succeeded by his son Vishnu-gupta, though 
the fiction of the nominal suzerainty of the Lichchhavi Bhimarjuna 
was still continued. The known dates of Vishnu-gupta are 64 and 
65 (A.D. 642-3), and he must have been ousted from the throne after 
a brief rule. For already in A.D. 643, or a little later, we find 
Narendradeva of the Lichchhavi family on the throne of Nepal. He 
occupies a prominent place in the Nepalese chronicles, being very 
intimately connected with the cult of Matsyendranatha, the patron- 
saint oi the valley of Nepal. Chinese sources give us some interest¬ 
ing information about him. They tell us that the father of Narendra¬ 
deva was removed from the throne by his younger brother. 
Narendradeva fled to Tibet, and with the help of the Tibetan king 


down by about 25 to 31 years. This view is now generally accepted. The whole 
question has been thoroughly discussed by S. P. Pandit who maintains the cor¬ 
rectness of Kalhana’s date (Cf. Introduction to his Edition of Gauda-vaho). 

1. Nepal II. 157 if. 


136 






NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


recovered his paternal throne. He consequently became a vassal 
of the Tibetan king. 1 

It was during the reign of Narendradeva that a Chinese mission 
visited Nepal, for the first time, in A.D. 643 or a little later. 2 The 
king received, with all honours, the envoy Li-y-piao and his party 
who then proceeded to the court of Harsha-vardhana. The memor¬ 
able mission of Wang-hiuen-tse to India in A.D. 647-648 passed 
through Nepal, and the envoy returned shortly after to ask for 
aid against the Indian king who had usurped the throne of Harsha 
and ill-treated the Chinese embassy. This episode has already been 
narrated above 3 in detail. Narendradeva helped the envoy with 
7,000 horsemen, and throughout his reign maintained friendly rela¬ 
tions with China. A large number of Chinese pilgrims visited Nepal 
during his reign and he sent a mission to the Imperial court in 
A.D. 651. The Chinese account represents Nepal, under him, as a 
peaceful, civilised and flourishing country. 4 

For the period after Aihsu-varman the account given in the 
Varhsdvalis differs widely from what is given in the epigraphic re¬ 
cords, and it is impossible to reconcile the two. The Pasupati Temple 
inscription informs us that Narendradeva was succeeded by his 
son Sivadeva and the latter by his son Jayadeva. We learn from the 
same record that £ivadeva’s queen VatsadevI was the daughter of 
the Maukhari Bhoga-varman, and grand-daughter (daughter’s 
daughter) of Adityasena, king of Magadha. Now, Bhoga-varman 
was the sister’s son of Aihsu-varman, and as Narendradeva reigned 
within 25 years of Aihsu-varman’s death, the marriage between 
Sivadeva and Vatsadevi not only fits in with the chronological 
scheme, but may be looked upon as a political alliance between rival 
claimants to the throne. Narendradeva had a long reign of more 
than thirty years, his known dates extending from 69 to 103 (A.D. 
647 to 681). He must have died before 109 (A.D. 687), the earliest 
known date of his son and successor Sivadeva who ruled till at 
least 125 (A.D. 703). The only known date of Jayadeva, the son and 
successor of Sivadeva, is 159 (A.D. 737). 

Thus the two Lichchhavi kings, Sivadeva and his son Jayadeva, 
ruled in Nepal during the first half of the eighth century A.D. The 

1. Cf. the account of Nepal given in the History of the 'Tang dynasty. The author 
of Che-kia-fa7i-che, compiled in A.D. 650, also says that the kingdom of Nepal 
is really a vassal state of Tibet (JA, 1894, Part II, pp. 64-5 ff). 

2. Nepal, II. 164. Elsewhere {ibid, I. 156) Levi says that the embassy was receiv¬ 
ed by Narendradeva either on its way to or back from Magadha which it visit¬ 
ed in A.D. 643. Levi’s statement that Narendradeva was already king in A.D. 
643 is contradicted by his observation that about A.D. 645 Jishnu-gupta’s suc¬ 
cessor was expelled and king Narendradeva of the legitimate dynasty had 
recovered the throne (Nepal, II. 162). 

3. See p. 124 ff. 4. For the account of the Chinese embassies cf. Nepal, 1. 155 ff. 


187 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Tibetan kings were very powerful during this period and undoubted¬ 
ly exercised suzerainty over Nepal, but probably they did not inter¬ 
fere in the internal administration of the kingdom. Nepal revolted 
in A.D. 702, but was soon reconquered. In a grant of &ivadeva, 
dated in the year 619 (A.D. 697) reference is made to Bhotta-Vishti 
or ‘Corvee’ payable to Tibet. 1 

Jayadeva married Rajyamati, daughter of Sri Harshadeva, king 
of Gauda, Odra, Kalinga, Kosala and other countries, who was des¬ 
cended from the race of Bhagadatta. The identity of this king 
Harsha is not yet satisfactorily established. The reference to the 
dynasty of Bhagadatta seems to associate him with Assam, but this 
is by no means certain. 2 


Jayadeva assumed the epithet para-chakm-kama (desirous of 
the domains of enemies), and a verse of the Pasupati Temple 
Inscription is so worded as to yield a double meaning, one describ¬ 
ing the personal beauty of the king, and the other implying that 
he had conquered or exercised supremacy over Ahga, Kamarupa, 
Kane hi and Saurashtra. Although some scholars have accepted 
this latter meaning as historical fact, 3 it would perhaps be wiser 
to regard it as mere poetic effusion. 


The reign of Jayadeva practically closes the period under 
review. But a brief reference may be made to the culture and 
civilisation of Nepal. *Hiuen Tsang 4 remarks about the people that 
their manners are false and perfidious, and their temperament is 
hard and fierce with little regard to truth or honour. We are 
further told that they are unlearned but skilful in the arts, and 
their appearance is ungainly and revolting. This description, 
though hardly flattering, is more applicable to the primitive hill- 
tribes who formed the mass of the people. But there is no doubt 
that there was also a cultured and civilised element in the popu¬ 
lation. This is evident from the large number of inscriptions dated 
between fourth or fifth and eighth century A.D. They show that 
in language, literature, art, religion and social ideas, Nepal formed 
an integral part of India and was completely saturated with its 
culture. It had close political and social association with India, and 
had not yet developed that isolation which characterised it in later 
ages. It was a strong centre of both Brahmanical and Buddhist 


1 . 

2. 

3. 


Nepal, II. 173 ff. 

™ R Ba 8 Jik Tnwwr 3 wi att ? - fam l ly ruling L" ? ilgit cf - EI ’ xxx - 221 ■ 

effu Joif (JVeodfn m h ° we Y er ’ j h i nks that the verse is merely a poetic 

to the verse/ ’ ' ' ' ajl 8 S ° g, y political significance 


138 




NORTHERN INDIA DURING AD. 650-750 


religions, and in spite of strange vicissitudes of fortune, it has still 
retained vestiges of its old Indian culture. 

6. KAMABUPA 

We have already traced the history of Kimarupa up to the 
accession of Bhaskara-varman. 1 He is the best known king of the 
dynasty which had been ruling in Kamarupa since the fourth cen¬ 
tury A.D. We have seen how he formed a diplomatic alliance with 
Harsha-vardhana. This was probably due to the growing power 
of Sasahka who was a common enemy of both. The speech which 
Banabhatta puts into the mouth of his ambassador Haxhsavega 
supports this view. The latter said with reference to his master, 
that it was his “firm resolution never to do homage to any being' 
except 6iva, and one of the means of realising this ambition was 
friendship with Harsha. Harsha, too, in accepting the “imperish¬ 
able alliance” offered by Bhaskara-varman, remarked: “With me 
for his friend, to whom save &iva need he pay homage?” 2 These 
statements indicate that Bhaskara-varman was apprehensive of 
some ruler imposing suzerainty upon him, 0 and he sought to avert 
this evil by forming an alliance with Harsha, There can be hardly 
any doubt that this dreaded ruler was Sasahka. 

Nothing is known about the practical results of this alliance. 
Whether Bhaskara-varman offered any help to Harsha in his mili¬ 
tary campaigns, particularly those against Sasahka, we cannot say. 
But his main object was evidently fulfilled, as his kingdom does not 
seem to have suffered in any way from Sasahka or any one else. 
Probably the alliance bore more fruits after the death of Sasahka, 
for Bhaskara-varman w T as in occupation of a large part of Bengal, 
at least for some time. This is clear from the accounts of Hiuen 
Tsang. 

When Hiuen Tsang was staying at Nalanda, Bhaskara-varman 
sent a messenger to ^ilabhadra, head of that monastery, with a 
request to send the ‘great priest from China' to him. Sllabhadra 
did not comply with it, and even refused a second request. Then 
Bhaskara-varman grew angry and threatened ^ilabhadra that if the 
Chinese priest were not sent, ‘he will equip his army and elephants, 
and trample to the very dust the monastery of Nalanda/ The 
threat had the desired effect. Hiuen Tsang visited Kamarupa and 
stayed there for a month. It was now the turn of Harsha-vardhana 
to get angry, for he, too, had asked the Chinese priest to see him, 

1. See pp. 88-92. 2. Harsha-charita , Tr. by Cowell and Thomas, p. 217. 


189 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


but his request was disregarded. He now sent a messenger to 
Bhaskara-varman ‘bidding him to send the priest of China to him 
at once.’ Bhaskara-varman replied: ‘"He can take my head, but he 
cannot take the Chinese priest.” Harsha was “greatly enraged,” 
and replied by the laconic message: “Send the head so that I may 
have it immediately by my messenger who is to bring it here.” 
Bhaskara-varman, deeply alarmed, immediately ordered his army 
of 20,000 elephants and his ships, 30,000 in number, to be equipped. 
Then embarking with Hiuen Tsang he passed along the Gahga to 
Kajangaia where Harsha was staying. This submissive attitude 
pleased Harsha, and the two were reconciled, Bhaskara-varman 
accompanied Harsha to Kanauj to attend the great festival, referred 
to before. He also attended the quinquennial assembly at Prayaga. 1 

If the curious wrangle between Harsha-vardhana and Bhaskara- 
varman, as reported by Hiuen Tsang, be true in any degree, we 
must hold that the relation between the two kings had suffered a 
great change. It was no longer an alliance on equal terms, but such 
as normally subsists between a haughty powerful monarch and 
his weaker neighbour. But neither this story, nor the fact that 
Bhaskara-varman attended the religious ceremonies of Harsha can 
legitimately lead to the conclusion that Bhaskara-varman was a 
feudatory of Harsha, or was politically subordinate to him in any 
way. Considering the difference in power and prestige between 
himself and his old ally, Bhaskara no doubt thought it politic to be 
in the good graces of Harsha T>y avoiding unpleasant acts, but there 
is nothing to show that he lost his political independence in any 
degree or that Harsha had any pretensions to suzerainty over him. 2 

On the other hand, Hiuen Tsang’s story implies that Bhaskara- 
varman had some political hold over Bengal. It is otherwise diffi¬ 
cult to explain his threat to send an army to reduce Nalanda to dust, 
and his voyage along the Gahga with his fleet and army. This view 
is supported by the fact that he issued a land-grant from his victo¬ 
rious camp at Kama-suvama, the old capital of Sasahka. 3 This 
grant is not dated, and it may be argued that Bhaskara-varman 
came into possession of Bengal after Harsha’s death. But as the 
other two facts relate to the lifetime of Harsha, it is more likely 
that Bhaskara occupied Bengal even before the death of the former. 
Possibly gasahka’s empire was partitioned between the two, Harsha 
taking West Bengal, Orissa, and Kongoda, and Bhaskara-varman 


i. Life, 171-2. 2. PIHC, VI. 48. 3. El, XII. 65. 


140 




NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


taking the rest of Bengal. But no definite opinion can be hazarded 
with the meagre information available. 

We hear of Bhaskara-varman again in connection with the 
strange expedition of Wang-hiuen-tse. 1 After the latter had 
thoroughly crushed the power of the minister who had usurped the 
throne of Harsha, he received large quantities of provisions and 
equipments from Bhaskara-varman. Whether the king of Kama¬ 
rupa was connected in any way with the strange political events 
that took place after the death of Harsha, cannot be determined. 
But the sequel was positively unfavourable to him and his kingdom. 
The Tibetan king Sron-btsan-sgam-po, who was drawn into Indian 
politics by the expedition of Wang-hiuen-tse, is said to have con¬ 
quered Assam. 2 There may be some truth in this, for so far as we 
can judge from available records, the dynasty of Pushy a-var man 
came to an end with Bhaskara-varman after a rule of more than 
three hundred years, and the kingdom of Kamarupa was occupied 
by a Mlechchha ruler named Saiastambha. 3 It is not unlikely that* 
the downfall of the old dynasty was caused by the Tibetan inva¬ 
sion, though nothing definite can be said on this point. We know 
the names of a few successors of Saiastambha, but nothing of their 
history. A king of this dynasty, called both Harsha and Harsha- 
varman, has been identified with king Harshadeva of the Bhaga- 
datta dynasty, who is referred to in a Nepal Inscription as the father 
of Rajyamatl (queen of Jayadeva) and the king of Gauda, U<Jra, 
Kalinga,“ Kosala and other countries. 4 5 This identification must re¬ 
main doubtful until independent evidence of these great achieve¬ 
ments of Harisha or Harsha is forthcoming. There were other 
dynasties in India who traced descent from Bhagadatta, 6 and it is 
doubtful whether Harsha had really any claim to this title. 6 On 
the whole, the century following the death of Bhaskara-varman may 
be regarded as a dark period in the history of Kamarupa. 


1. See p. 125. 2. L4vi, Nepal, D. 148. 

3. V. 9 of the Bargaon CP. of Ratnapala ( JASB, 1898, p. 99) leaves no doubt that 
Saiastambha belonged to a different dynasty. It has been argued on the basis 
of the copper-plates of Vanamala (JASB. IX. 766) and Balavarman (JASB. 
1897, p. 285) that Saiastambha belonged to the dynasty of Naraka and Bhaga¬ 
datta (KSS. 19; IHQ, 1927, p. 844). But v. 7 of the former and v. 9 of the latter 
refer respectively to Pralambha and the predecessors of Saiastambha, and not 
to Saiastambha himself, as descended from Naraka. The former implies that 

kings beginning from Saiastambha and ending in Harisha belonged to a dynasty 
different from that to which Pralambha belonged (cf. DHN1. I. 241-2). 

4. 1A, IX. 179; JRAS, 1898, pp. 384-5; DHNI, I. 241. See above, p. 138. 

5. E.g. the Kara dynasty of Orissa. There was also another ruling in Chitral (IHQ, 
XIV. 841; BV. VI. 111). 

6. See footnote 3 above. 


141 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


7. BENGAL 

d 

The history of Bengal during the century following the death 
of Sasahka is obscure in the extreme. It is certain, however, that 
Bengal lost 'the political solidarity brought about by that great 
king and was divided into a number of independent principalities. 
Hiuen Tsang, travelling in Bengal about A.D. 638, shortly after the 
death of ^asahka, mentions the names of five such kingdoms, viz. 
Kajangala, Pundravardhana, Karnasuvarna, Tamralipti and Sama- 
tata. 1 The first roughly comprises the region round Rajmahal, the 
second, Northern Bengal, the third and fourth, West Bengal, and the 
fifth. East Bengal. 

This political disintegration of the kingdom of Sasanka imme¬ 
diately after his death is hinted in Mailpdri-Mulakaipa . It des¬ 
cribes the Gauda-tantra or the political system of Gau$a as reduced 
to mutual mistrust, leading to civil war in course of which one king 
ruled for a week, another for a month, and then a republic was 
f established. Thereafter SaSahka’s son gained the throne, but he 
ruled only for about eight months. 2 This anarchy and confusion 
were probably the causes or results of the invasion of Harsha and 
Bbaskara-varman, each of whom, as noted above, ruled over parts 
of Bengal for some time. 

Soon a powerful kingdom was established in Gau$a or West 
Bengal by Jayanaga. He issued a land-grant 3 from Karnasuvarna, 
which was the capital of Sasahka and subsequently passed into the 
hands of Bbaskara-varman. The date of Jayanaga is not definitely 
known, but he flourished probably a little while after Bhaskara- 
varman, 4 and freed Karnasuvarna and the surrounding region from 
the yoke of that king. The title Makardjtidhirdja assumed by 
Jayanaga and the coins issued by him show that he was a powerful 
ruler of considerable authority, but the extent of his kingdom is 
difficult to determine. 

We do not know the name of Jayanaga’s successor or anything 
about the kingdom of Gau$a after his death. It has been held by 
some that it passed into the hands of the Later Guptas, 6 but of this 
we have no evidence. 

Of Vahga or East Bengal we possess a little more information. 
According to Hiuen Tsang, Brahmana kings ruled over this territory 
in the first half of the seventh century A.D., and &51abhadra, the 
head of the University of Nalanda, was a scion of this family. 6 This 

1. HTB, II. 193; HTW, II. 182. 2. IHIJ. 51. 3. El, XVIII. 60. 

4. According to Dr. R. G. Basak Jayanaga was a predecessor of Sasanka (HNI y 140). 

For full discussion cf. HBR. 80. 

5. HNI. 128. 6. HTW , II. 109. 


142 





NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


dynasty was overthrown by a Buddhist family, four of whose 
king are known to us, viz. Kha^godyama, Jatakhadga, Devakhadga, 
and Rajarajabhata, each being the son of his predecessor. The king’ 
of Samatata, named Rajabhafa, referred to by I-tsing, can certainly 
be identified with Rajarajabhata of the Khadga dynasty. It is also 
very likely that king Devavarma of Eastern India, mentioned by the 
same Chinese pilgrim, is the same as Devakhadga. This and other 
evidences indicate that the Khadga dynasty was ruling in the latter 
half of the seventh century A.D. in East Bengal, and probably also 
over a considerable part of Southern and Central Bengal. 1 

In the first half of the eighth century A.D. Bengal was subjected 
to a series ©f foreign invasions. A king of the Saila dynasty con¬ 
quered North Bengal. This dynasty, which originally ruled in the 
Himalayan region, later spread to the east and south, and founded' 
branches in Ka§I, Yindhya region and North Bengal. Nothing is, 
however, known of their rule in any of these kingdoms. 

Later, some time between A.D. 725 and 735, Yasovarman con¬ 
quered both West and East Bengal. If, as noted above, 2 it is assum¬ 
ed that in those days both Magadha and Gau<Ja were under one rdler, 
then we must hold that Magadha was conquered by Gauda, rather 
than that Gauda was conquered by Magadha. For otherwise, there 
is no rational explanation of the name Gauda-vdho (killing of Gauda) 
applied to the great poetical work which describes Yaso-var man’s 
conquests. 3 

Yasovarman’s conquest was short-lived, but Gauda had to 
acknowledge the suzerainty of Lalitaditya, king of Kashmir. 4 5 
Later, Gauda regained its independence, but the whole of Northern 
and Western Bengal was split up into a number of independent 
states. According to Rajaiamngmft when Jayaplda, the grandson 
of Lalitaditya, lost the throne of Kashmir, he came to the city of 
Pundravardhana (near Bogra) in North Bengal, whose ruler Jayanta 
was subordinate to the king of Gauda. Jayaplda married Jayanta’s 
daughter, defeated the five Gauda chiefs, and made his father-in-law 
the overlord of them all. 6 

1. HBR. 86. ^ 2. See p. 127 f. 3. HBR. 94. 4. See pp. 134, §. 

5. KRT. IV. 402-468. The whole episode reads more like a romance than history 
and can hardly be regarded as historical. As Jayaplda ascended the throne 
about 19 years after the death of Lalitaditya, this event must have taken place 
after A.D. 780 according to the chronology adopted above (p. 135). Some 
scholars, however, as noted'above (p. 135, f.n. 1), place Lalitaditya’s death in 
A.D. 732 and so JayapRla’s accession would fall about A.D. 751. The political 
condition of Qauda described by Kalhana would be more suitable to this earlier 
date. But in any case life passage preserves a memory of the political disinte¬ 

gration of Gauda. 


143 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


In an inscription of Nepal, Harsha, the father-in-law of king 
Jayadeva, 1 is described as the lord of Gauda and other countries. 
As Harsha is said to have belonged to the Bhagadatta dynasty it is 
generally assumed that he was a ruler of Kamarupa. But this is by 
no means certain, as kings claiming descent from Bagadatta are 
known to have ruled, not only in Kamarupa, but also in Orissa and 
other regions. We have no independent evidence that any king of 
Kamarupa or Orissa ruled over Bengal during this period, and we 
cannot say how far the assumption of the title ‘Lord of Gauda’ by 
Harsha was justified by his actual conquests. 2 

Epigraphic evidences supply the names of two kings of Samatata 
of the Rata dynasty, viz. Jivadharana, and grldharana, and also of a 
few kings in East Bengal such as Lokanatha, Jayatuhgavarsha, ruling 
about this time, but we do not possess any definite information about 
their mutual relations and of their status or the extent of their king¬ 
dom. 3 The Tibetan priest Taranatha refers to a Chandra dynasty 
in East Bengal, the last two kings of which, Govichandra and Lalita- 
chandra, probably ruled early in the eighth century A.D. 4 

Although it is not possible to reconstruct, even in outline, the 
political history of Bengal after the death of Sasahka, the facts men¬ 
tioned above leave no doubt that anarchy and confusion caused by 
political disintegration marked its course throughout the period 
A.D. 650-750. This was mainly due to a series of foreign invasions 
and rapid changes of ruling dynasties. The result was, as Tara¬ 
natha so characteristically puts it, that there was no powerful ruler 
in either Gauda or Vanga, but every Kshatriya, Grandee, Brahmana, 
or merchant was a king in his own house. 6 A contemporary record 
describes the political condition of Bengal by the well-known term 
‘M&tsyanyaya’ (like fish), which denotes a state of anarchy in which 
might alone is right, as in a pond where the stronger fish devours 
the weaker ones. 6 Such was the miserable state of Bengal for more 
than 100 years after the death of Sasahka. 

8. ORISSA 

The §ailodbhavas continued to rule in Kongoda even after 
Harsha’s conquest. Several records give us an account of the 
family beginning with Ayasobhita born in the family of Sainya- 

1. See pp. 138, 141. 

2. HBR. 85. For an account of the royal families in different parts of India claim¬ 
ing descent from Bhagadatta, cf. BV, VI, 111. 

3. 1HQ , XXIII. 221. 4. HBR, 88-89. 

5. Ibid. 183. 6. Ibid. 97. 


144 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING AJD. 650-750 


bhlta. This Ayasobhlta had a son named Sainyabhita. As we have 
seen above, 1 a group of three kings in this family named Sainya¬ 
bhita I (Madhavaraja I), Ayasobhlta and Sainyabhita II (Madhava¬ 
ra j a II) ruled in the latter half of the sixth and the beginning of the 
seventh century A.D. Some scholars 2 think that the two groups of 
kings are identical. But there are two objections to this view. In 
the latter group Ayasobhlta is said to be a son of Sainyabhita, but 
in the former he is said to be born in the family of that king. It is 
very doubtful whether a son of a king would be referred to, in an 
official record, as born in his family. Secondly the alphabets of 
the records of the former group of kings are distinctly later. But 
recently one record of this family (No. 2) 3 has come to light which 
is written in characters not very dissimilar to those used by the 
other group of kings. This has no doubt strengthened the case for 
the identification of the two groups of kings, but this point must still 
be regarded as uncertain, and some scholars 4 regard the former 
group as different from and reigning later than the latter. 

The two theories would thus give us two alternative schemes 
of chronology as follows:— 

I 

1. Ranabhita (c. A.D. 550) 

■EL - ! 

2. Sainyabhita I Madhavaraja I (c. A.D. 575) 

| 

3. Ayasobhlta I (c. A.D. 600) 

i 

4. Sainyabhita II Madhavaraja II (c. A.D. 615) 

II 

In continuation of the above:— 

5. Ayasobhlta II (born in the family of No. 4) 

.6. Sainyabhita III Madhavavarman (also called Srinivasa). 
Those who hold that kings numbered 5 and 6 above were differ¬ 
ent from 3 and 4, place them in the seventh, eighth or even in the 
ninth century A.D. Those who identify them naturally fix the date 
on the basis of the Gan jam copper-plate according to which Sainya¬ 
bhita II (4 and 6) was a feudatory of Sasanka in A.D. 619. Another 
copper-plate (No. 2) issued by the king is dated in the year 50, and 
this, referred to Harsha Era, would be equivalent to A.D. 656, The 
king would thus have a long reign of more than forty years. 

1. For the earlier liistory of the dynasty see above pp. 92ff. 

2. N. G. Majumdar (E7, XXIV, 151), N, P. Chakravarti (El, XXI, 36), R. D. 
Banerji, Orissa I. 130. 

3. See Bibliography, List of Inscriptions. 

4. R. G. Basak (HNI. 170; E/, XXIII. 126-7), Kielhorn (El, VH. 102). For further 
references, cf. JAHRS, X. 5. 

145 

C.A—10 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


According to the last-mentioned record and several others, he was 
a very powerful ruler and performed great sacrifices like Asvamedha. 
He was succeeded by his son Ayasobhita II (or III) Madhyamaraja, 
who ruled for at least 26 years and performed Vdjapeya , Asva¬ 
medha and other sacrifices. The king granted lands in Kataka- 
bhukti, and if this be the same as the region round modern Cuttack, 
the kingdom of the &ailodbhavas apparently extended up to the 
Mahanadi in the north beyond the traditional boundary of Kohgoda. 
It would thus appear that the ^ailodbhavas recovered their inde¬ 
pendence and extended their authority, either immediately after 
the death of Harsha-vardhana or some time later. 

Ayasobhita II (or III) was succeeded by ManabhTta Dharmaraja. 
During his reign there was a disastrous civil war. Madhava, a junior 
member of the royal family, rebelled and seized the throne, buc 
was defeated by Dharmaraja at Phasika. Madhava then made an 
alliance with king Trivara, but they were defeated at the foot of 
the Vindhyas. This king Trivara has been identified by some 
scholars with the SomavamsI king Mahasivagupta Tivaradeva, 1 but 
as the chronology of both the Sailodfehava and the Somavariisf kings 
is extremely uncertain, this identification is highly problematical. 
Be that as it may, it reflects great credit upon king Dharmaraja that 
he quelled the rebellion and could pursue his enemies up to the 
Vindhyas. 

A single record, the Tekkali grant, gives the names of three 
kings who succeeded Dharmaraja, but no particulars about them are 
known. These are (1) his son Madhyamaraja II Ranakshobha; 
(2) Allavaraja, paternal cousin of No. 1; and (3) Madhyamaraja III, 
son of No. 2. 2 It is difficult to say how long these kings ruled. That 
depends upon the chronology of the earlier kings. If we accept the 
identity of the two groups of kings mentioned above, 3 the dynasty 
must have continued to reign up to the middle of the eighth century 
A.D,, and we may presume that they were ousted by the Karas who 
also ruled over Kohgoda in the latter part of the eighth and the 
beginning of the ninth century A.D. If the identification be not 
upheld, it may be presumed that the later kings ruled between 
A.D. 825 and 1000. 

In conclusion reference may be made to some hypotheses usu¬ 
ally assumed about the Sailodbhava dynasty. A copper-plate grant 
found at Ragholi in Balaghat District, Madhya Pradesh, gives a 

1. JAHRS , X. 4. This identification depends upon the date of Tivaradeva which 
has been discussed in Ch. XI, C. Ill, under the Panduvamsls of Mekala. 

2. This genealogy is somewhat different from that given by MM. H. P. Sastri 
who edited the Tekkali Grant (JBORS, TV. 165), as I have accepted the inter¬ 
pretation given in the Ann. Rep. of South Indian Epigraphy 1935-36 pp. 64-5. 

3. See p. 145. 


146 




NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


short account of a royal family called &ailavamsa founded by &n- 
vardhana I. His son Prithu-vardhana overran the country of the 
Gurjaras. In his family was born Samvardhana, one of whose sons 
conquered Pa undr a (N. Bengal) and another took KasL The son 
of the latter, Jaya-vardhana I, conquered the Vindhya region, and 
there ruled his son ^n-vardhana II and grandson Jaya-vardhana II 
who had the titles Mah&rdj&dhimja and Paramesvara and whose 
kingdom included the Baiaghat District. Rai Bahadur Hiralal, who 
edited the grant* 1 thinks that this ^ailavamsa is most probably 
identical with the ^ailodbhavas. He has also suggested that the 
Sailavaihsa was a branch of the Gangavarhsa. Both these conjectures 
are plausible, but cannot be definitely proved. 

o 

It has also been suggested that the ^ailendra dynasty, which 
established a powerful empire in the Malay Peninsula and Malay 
Archipelago in the eighth century A.D., and probably migrated from 
Kalinga, was connected with the Kailas or Sailodbhavas. 2 But this, 
too, must be regarded as a mere hypothesis lacking definite evidence, 

9. VALABHI 

We have already seen 3 that Dharasena IV, who ascended the 
throne of Valabhi about A.D. 644, assumed imperial titles and called 
himself a Chakravarfi. Whether this led to hostility between him 
and Harsha-vardhana, which forced him to take refuge with king 
Dadda II of Nandlpurl, 4 5 we do not definitely know. But two of his 
land-grants, dated A.D. 648, were issued from Bharukachchha 
(Broach), within the dominion, of the Gurjaras. As the donated lands 
lay in Khetsika-vishaya (Kaira District) outside the territory of the 
Gurjaras, these grants do not conclusively prove that Dharasena 
had conquered the Gurjara kingdom. It is usually held that Dhara¬ 
sena w r as enjoying the hospitality of the friendly Gurjara king in 
the latter's territory when these grants were issued. It is, however, 
more probable that he had reached Broach in the course of a victo¬ 
rious military campaign, particularly as the word ‘victorious' is 
prefixed to the name of the camp. 6 Gratitude in politics is seldom 
of long duration, and it is not surprising that the king of Valabhi 
should have so soon forgotten the,help rendered by the Gurjara 
king. The occupation of Broach was only temporary, for the Gur¬ 
jaras continued to rule over that city for many years after this. 

It is worthy of note that even in the later Valabhi records 
Dharasena IV alone, of all the kings preceding 6Uaditya III, is given 

1. El, IX. 41. 2. R. C. Majumdar, Suvarnadvipa, I. 226 

3. See p. 103. 4. See p. 104, 

5. THQ , XX. 358. 


147 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


imperial titles, and the title Chakravarfi; is given to no other king. 
Dharasena’s reign thus marks an important epoch in the history of 
Valabhi, and he must have increased the power and prestige of the 
kingdom. The great poet Bhatti lived at his court. Dharasena’s 
reign was, however, of short duration and he died some time before 
A.D. 653. His death seems to have been followed by a period of 
troubles, for we find a quick succession of kings in an irregular 
order. The position would be cleared by the following genealogical 
table, indicating the chronological sequence of the successors of 
Dharasena IV by Arabic numerals within brackets. The names of 
those who did not rule are put in italics and the known dates of 
kings are put in brackets. 

Dharasena II * 1 


Siladitya I Dharmaditya Kharagraha I 


j Dharasena III Dhruvasena II 

Derabhata | 

i Dharasena IV 


Siladitya II (2) Kharagraha II (1) Dhruvasena III 

Dharmaditya (A.D. 651-3) 

. (A.D. 656) 

(3) Siladitya III 
(A.D. 662-684) 

The reversion of the crown, after Dharasena IV, to the family 
of Slladitya I, and the reversal of the natural order of succession in 
that line, both indicate some internal trouble, the nature of which 
is unknown. The stability of the kingdom was, however, restored 
with the accession of Siladitya III. 

Slladitya III was undoubtedly a very powerful ruler. Like 
Dharasena IV, he assumed imperial titles and conquered the Gur- 
jara kingdom. For, in the year A.D. 676 he granted some lands in 
the Bharukachchha-uishcu/a (district). This time also the occupa¬ 
tion of Gurjara territory was of short duration and the Gurjaras 

recovered it. In doing so, they were probably helped by the Western 
Chalukyas. 

A passage occurring in several Rashtrakuta records mentions 
arsha and Vajrata among the enemies defeated by the Chalukyas. 

1. See pp. 62 ff. 


148 



















NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


It is evident from this that, like Harsha-vardhana, Vajrata was a very 
powerful king, and the Chalukyas won great renown by defeating 
him. Unfortunately nothing is known of this Vajrata. According 
to a Chalukya record dated A.D. 685, Dharasraya-Jayasimha, a son 
of Pulakesin II, defeated and exterminated the whole army of 
Vajjada in the country between the Mahi and the Narmada. There 
can be hardly any doubt that this Vajjada is identical with king 
Vajrata of the Rashtrakuta records. As he was defeated in the 
territory between the Mahi and the Narmada, he was probably the 
Valabhl king Siladitya III who had occupied the Gurjara territory, 
for it is difficult to conceive of any other powerful king ruling in this 
region in or shortly before A.D. 685. The name Vajrata is not found 
in the Valabhl records, but as all the kings of Valabhl after 
Siladitya III bear the same name, it is likely that each of them had 
an additional personal name. 1 

If we assume the identity, it would appear that when Siladitya 
III conquered the Gurjaras, the latter appealed to their Chalukya 
overlord for help. The latter could hardly remain indifferent to \he 
extension of the Valabhl power to his own frontier; and so he sent 
an army to drive the Valabhl king out of the Gurjara province. 
Dharasraya-Jayasimha, who was put at the head of this army, evi¬ 
dently performed this task successfully. 

An echo of the fight between the Valabhl ruler and the 
Chalukyas is supposed by some to have been preserved in a viragal 
found at the village of Gaddemane, in Sagar Taluk , Mysore. It 
commemorates the death of one Pettani Satyanka, a commander in 
the army of Siladitya, in a battle with king Mahendra. This king 
has been identified with Mahendra-varman II Pallava who ascended 
the throne some time after A.D. 650. It has been suggested that the 
Valabhl king Siladitya inflicted a crushing defeat upon Mahendra- 
varman II and conquered a part of the Chalukya dominions which 
had been but a short while ago conquered by the Pallavas. 2 But, 
as noted above, 3 king Siladitya of the viragal should be identified 
with the Chalukya Yuvaraja Sryasraya Siladitya, rather than with 
a Valabhl king or Harsha-vardhana, none of whom is known to have 
carried any victorious expedition to Karnataka. 

The fact that Siladitya III alias Vajrata was mentioned along 
with Harsha-vardhana shows the power and prestige of the Valabhl 
kings. This is quite in keeping with the imperial titles assumed by 
all the four kings, named Siladitya (IV-VII), who succeeded 6Ua- 
ditya III alias Vajrata. They were all related as father to son and 

1. IHQ, XX. 131, 353, 2. Moraes, The Kadamba Kula. pp. 64-66. 

3. See p. 106, f.n. 1. 

149 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the last of them, also known as Dhrubhata ( i.e. Dhruvabhata), was 
ruling in A.D. 766-7. Although the imperial titles denote eminence 
and distinction, we hardly know anything of these kings whose 
reigns cover the period from c. A.D. 690 to 770. 

It was probably during the reign of Siliaditya V that Valabhi was 
invaded by the Arabs. The details of the Arab invasion will be 
given in a separate section. It will suffice here to state that the 
Arabs, starting from their base in Sindh, overran a great part of Raj- 
putana, Gujarat and Kathiawar Peninsula, and advanced as far as 
Uj jay ini. Although they obtained considerable success at first, their 
incursions led to no permanent results, and they were ultimately 
repulsed by the Chalukya king of Lata and the Prailhara king of 
Maiava. These raids took place probably during A.D. 725 to 735. 

The Arab invasion is not referred to in the Valabhi records. 
We learn, however, from a record of the Gurjara king Jayabhata IV 
of Broach, that in the city of the Lord of Valabhi he inflicted a 
defeat on the Tajjikas (Arabs) who had caused immense suffering to 
numerous peoples 1 It is probable that at this crisis, too, as in the 
past, the Gurjaras came to the rescue of the Valabhi king. 

Though the Arabs retired from the Kathiawar Peninsula, the 
Valabhi king was not destined to rule in peace. A record, dated 
A.D. 738, refers to one Jaikadeva as the lord of Surashtra-man^ala, 
with imperial titles, ruling at Bhumilika (modern Bhumli in For- 
bandar). The genuineness of this record has been doubted, 2 but we 
know from other sources that the south-western part of Kathiawar 
had passed out of Valabhi about this time and formed a separate 
kingdom under the Saindhavas whose history will be dealt with in 
the next volume. 


Even apart from this, there were other troubles. The gradual 
advance, first of the Chalukyas and later of the Pratiharas of AvantI 
and Rashtrakutas. 3 must have constituted a grave menace to the 
state, though its exact relations with those powers in the eighth 
’entury are not known. 

Siladitya VII is the last known king of Valabhi. He was on the 
throne in A.D. 766-7, and the rule of the family came to an end 
probably not long after that. The city of Valabhi seems to have 
been destroyed about the same time or a little earlier. 

“The destruction of Valabhi”, wrote Buhler in 1872, “is an 
event around which there hangs more than a mystery.” 4 The 
mystery still persists and baffles definite solution. 


*• 151. in. 7: 154 f.n. 1. 2. I A. XII. 155; BG, Vol. I, Part I. 87~ 137. 

6 ah is will be dealt with in connection with the history of these dynasties 
4. 1A, I. 130. 


150 






NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


We know from a famous passage in Jaina Harivaihsa that in 
A.D. 783 Saurashtra was being ruled by one Varaha or Ja^a 
varaha. 1 It is certain, therefore, that the Maitraka power came to 
an end some time between A.D. 766 and 783. 

As there is an interval of only seventeen years between 
the last known date of the Valabhi king and the only known date of 
Varaha, it is likely that the Valabhi kingdom was overthrown by 
Varaha, or his predecessor. We do not know anythihg more of this 
Varaha, and although the passage in the Harivamsa seems to indi¬ 
cate that he was an independent king, it is not unlikely that he 
was a feudatory of a more powerful ruler. It has been suggested, 
for example, that Varaha was possibly a Chapa king and an ancestor 
of Dhara^I varaha who ruJed in Kathiawar Peninsula as a feudatory 
of the Imperial Pratiharas in A.D. 914. 2 Shortly before this date, 
we find two members of a Chalukva family ruling in Saurashtra as 
feudatories of the Imperial Pratiharas* Kalla, the founder of this 
family, was the great-great-grandfather of Balavarman who issued 
a Grant in A.D. 893, and must therefore have lived in the second 
half of the eighth century A.D. 3 It is not improbable that tbi* 
feudatory family was set up in Saurashtra about this time. 

As will be noted later, the neighbouring Gurjara kingdom of 
Broach was ruled in the middle of the eighth century A.D. by a 
Chahamana family owning allegiance to king Nagabhata I, who 
founded the Imperial Pratihara family. It would not, therefore, 
be unreasonable to conclude that the Pratihara king destroyed the 
kingdom of Valabhi and set up one or more feudatory families, like 
the Chapas and the Chalukyas referred to above, to rule over the 
kingdom. This seems to be the most reasonable explanation of the 
downfall of the Maitraka kings. 

The general belief, however, is that the Valabhi kingdom was 
destroyed by the Arabs. This is primarily based on a story record¬ 
ed by Alberuni. It is said that a rich citizen of Valabhi had a 
quarrel with the king and, ‘being afraid of his resentment, fled to 
the Arab ruler of Sindh. He offered the latter presents of money, 
and asked him to send a naval force against Valabhi. The Arab 
ruler accordingly made a night attack, killed the king and his people, 
and destroyed the town/ 4 

The story belongs to the domain of folk-lore and is hardly 
credible in all details. But it may be a faint echo of some historical 
incidents. That the Arabs actually raided Valabhi during A.D. 725- 
735 and reduced the kingdom to sore straits, has been already noted. 

1. El, VI. 195-107. 2. I A, XII. 193. 

3. El, IX. Iff. 4. Alberuni s India, Tr. by Sachau, I. 192. 


151 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The Arab historians of Sindh record that in A.D. 758 Caliph Mansur 
sent Amru-bin-Jamal with a fleet to the coast of Barada- a name 
applied to the Porbandar range of hills. About A.D. 776 a second 
expedition succeeded in taking the town, but as sickness broke out 
among the troops, they returned without securing any permanent 
result. Some scholars find in this account a corroboration of 
Alberuni’s story by taking Barada as a mistaken form for Balaba 
or ValabhI. 1 But this is extremely doubtful, particularly as the 
more authentic account says nothing about the destruction of the 
town or of its royal power. On the whole, although one or more 
Arab expeditions might have been instrumental in causing the 
downfall of ValabhI, it is difficult to come to any definite conclusion 
about it. 

What we know of the naval power of the Arabs makes it 
extremely unlikely that they could have overthrown the kingdom 
of ValabhI by a naval expedition without the strong support of an 
Indian power. If any credit is to be given to the story of Alberuni, 
we may hold that the destruction of ValabhI was caused by internal 
revolution or by invasion of an Indian power, aided by the Arabs. 
But as no such victory is definitely claimed by the Arabs, their 
share, if any, in causing the downfall of ValabhI was not probably 
of any substantial nature. 

It has been suggested that the rival kingdom of Bhumilika, 
referred to above, in south-western Kathiawar, fought with the 
Maitrakas and even assisted the Arabs against them. It is pointed 
out in support of this theory that the Jethva clan, to which the 
rulers of the kingdom are supposed to have belonged, survived till 
tne tenth century A.D., whereas the Maitrakas disappeared after 
the eighth. 2 But these speculations are of little avail so long as it 
u. not definitely established that the Maitraka power was destroyed 
by an Arab invasion. 


Albeiunis story, for all we know, may be merely an echo of 
the Arab invasion of A.D. 725-785, and even assuming that king 
Jaika of south-western Kathiawar treacherously helped the Arab 
expedition against the Maitrakas, we cannot attribute to it the final 
collapse of the Maitraka power. It is, however, interesting to note 
.nat tne plates of Siiaditya V and his successors are issuedpnot from 
/alabhi, but from Khetaka and other places. The destruction of 
he city of V alabhi, might, therefore, have been caused by the Arabs 
as noted by Alberuni, in course of their raid during A.D. 725-35^ 

U i Jt v S 1x Certam that the Maitr &kas ruled over the kingdom for 
nearly half a century after that event. 

1: SankaUa, Archaeolog^of Gujlrafp'lf * ** ^ aindRava3 in ~ the “ext voW 


152 








NORTHERN INDIA DURING AX). 650-750 


10. RAJPUTANA AND GUJARAT 

The territory which today we call Raj putana was not 
known by this name in ancient times. In the tenth century A.D. the 
whole or at least, a large part of it was called Gurjaratra, an older 
and Sanskritised form of Gujarat. As we have seen above, 1 the 
Gurjaras set up one or more principalities in Raj pu tana as early as 
the sixth century A.D., and Hiuen Tsang visited a kingdom in this 
area which he calls Ku-che-lo or Gurjara. It is probable, therefore, 
that the name Gurjaratra was applied to Rajputana as early as the 
sixth or seventh century A.D. 

But although we cannot trace the name of the locality as 
Rajputana at this early period, we find there already settled a 
number of clans or tribes who became famous as Rajputs in later 
days. These were the Pratiharas, the Guhilots, the Chapotkafas and 
the Chahamanas. 

(i) Gurjara-Pratiharas 

The dynasty founded by Harichandra, whose early history has 
been traced above, 2 is known as Pratihara. There was another 
Pratihara family which rose to power in the eighth century. These 
two probably belonged to the same Gurjara clan and were called 
Gurjara-Pratihara, a name actually met with in connection with a 
feudatory chief of the Imperial Pratiharas. 

The part played by the Gurjaras in the troubled politics of the 
first half of the seventh century A.D. has been noticed in connection 
with IJarsha-vardhana and Pulakesin. It is probable that the 
Gurjaras in the records of this age denoted the Gurjara principality 
in Rajputana with its feudatory state in South Gujarat, the early 
history of which has been related above. 3 

There can be hardly any doubt that the Gurjara kingdom 
described by Hiuen Tsang refers to that ruled over by the des¬ 
cendants of Harichandra. The Chinese pilgrim describes the young 
Gurjara king as a devout believer in the law of Buddha, and dis¬ 
tinguished for wisdom and courage. He may be identified with 
king Tata, son of Nagabhata, about whom it is said in a record of 
the family that, considering life to be evanescent as lightning, he 
abdicated in favour of his younger brother, Bhoja, and himself 
retired to a hermitage practising there the rites of true religion. 

Hiuen Tsang refers to the capital of the Gurjara kingdom as 
Pi-lo-mo-lo. This has been identified with Bhillamala, modern 
Bhinmal. But since he notes its distance as 300 miles north of 

1. See pp. 63 ff. 2. See p. 65. 3. See pp. 66 ff. 

153 










THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Valabhl, we should look for the capital further north, and Balmer 
would be a more probable site. Bhillamala is associated with the 
name of the famous astronomer Brahmagupta who is called Bhilla- 
mdlakdckdrya. Since Brahmagupta wrote his great work Brahma « 
sphuta-siddhdnta under the patronage of king \ r yaghramukha of the 
Chapa dynasty, it has been held by some that this dynasty had its 
capital at Bhillamala. This is not, however, a legitimate conclusion, 
as a great scholar might write a work under the patronage of a 
foreign king. So even if we identify Bhillamala with Pi-lo-mo-lo 
mentioned by Hiuen Tsang, as the capital of the Gurjara kingdom, 
we cannot identify the Chapas as the Gurjaras, as some scholars 
have done. 1 

King Tata and his three successors ruled probably between 
A.D. 640 and 720. Nothing is known about them beyond what has 
been said about Tata. The next king ^iluka, great-grandson of Tata, 
was however an important king. He is said to have fixed the 
boundary between Valla and Stravanx and gained supremacy by 
defeating Devaraja, the Bhafti king, ^iluka evidently achieved 
some success against neighbouring powers and increased the power 
of his family by enlarging the extent of bis kingdom. If Stravani 
be regarded as identical with Taban of the Arab writers, which 
probably consisted of a part of the Punjab just to the north-West of 
Rajputana, SlJukats kingdom must have roughly corresponded to 
modern Jodhpur and Bikaner. The Bhaffi king Devaraja was 
probably the ruler of the Bhatfi clan who occupied Jaisalmer, and 
by defeating him Siiuka established his supremacy in Rajputana. 

Slluka has been called V&lla-mand&la-pdlaka, This presumably 
refers to a confederacy of states of which he was the recognised 
head. It has been noted above 2 that there were probably several 
Gurjara states, founded by the several sons of Harichandra. One of 
these was in Lata or southern Gujarat with its capital at Nandlpuri. 
There was probably another such state in Avanti with its capital 
at Uj jay ini, for, early in the eighth century A.D. a Pratihara chief 
Nagabhata was ruling in this region. There can be hardly any 
doubt that his family was closely related to the Pratihara family of 
Jodhpur. Probably the same wave of conquest which brought one 
branch of the Gurjaras to South Gujarat also established another 
dynasty in Malwa, and the Kaiachuris had to give way to them in both 
these regions. The title Y alla-mandala-pdlaka perhaps denotes that 
Siluka was the head of this Gurjara confederacy which ruled over an 
extensive region including parts of Rajputana, Malwa and Gujarat. 

1. Cf. 1HQ, XV. 595. 2, Isee jx 85. 


154 







NORTHERN INDIA DURING AJD. 650-750 


Either ^Iluka or his successor was on the throne when the Arabs 
swept over the whole of Rajputana and Gujarat, and advanced as 
far as Ujjayinl. The Gurjara kingdom of Jodhpur was overrun, but 
the Pratlhara king Nagabhafa of AvantI withstood this terrible shock 
and hurled back the invaders. ' The credit of saving Western India 
from the hands of the Arab invaders belongs to him, and he shares 
the glory with the Ch&Iukya king Avanijanasraya-Pulakesiraja who 
stopped their advance into Southern India. 1 

The Arab invasion must have brought about great changes in 
the political condition in Western India by destroying or weakening 
numerous small states. The triumphant success of the Pratlbaras 
of Avanti offered a sad contrast to the serious reverses sustained by 
other states, and in particular by the Jodhpur family which had 
hitherto exercised the suzerain power. The prestige of Nagabha$a 
must have risen very high, and it was inevitable that he should make 
a bold bid for the position of supremacy. It is also natural that the 
minor Gurjara states, and probably also others, should favourably 
entertain this claim of one who had proved himself their true 
saviour. 

An indication of the sad and distracted condition of Gurjara 
dominions is furnished by the claim of king Prithuvardhana, of the 
&aila dynasty, that he overran the Gurjara dominions. 2 

The supremacy over the Gurjara confederacy passed out of the 
hands of SUuka’s family about the middle of the eighth century A. D. 
The changed, condition is faithfully reflected in the family record. 
After describing the military exploits of Siluka it states that his son 
and grandson, who ruled after him, were both of a pacific nature 
and spent their last days on the banks of the Gahga. 

King Nagabhata now occupied the supreme position and his suc¬ 
cessors were destined to raise the Pratlbaras to the highest power 
and glory. Their history will be dealt with in the next volume. 

(ii) The Gurjdrai kingdom of Ndndipun 

The small kingdom of South Gujarat continued throughout this 
period under the Gurjara royal family of Dadda I. The records 
.supply the names of the following successors of Dadda II to whom 

reference has already been made. 3 


1. Cf. Bh. List, No. 1220. 2, El, IX. p. 41. See above, p. 147. 

3. El, XXIV 178. See p. 66. 

155 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Dadda II—Prasantaraga 


Jayabhata II 


Dadda III—Bahusahaya 
Jayabhata III 


Ahirola 


Jayabhata IV 


Dadda II, whose known dates are A.D. 629 and 641, gave protection 
to the lord of Valabhl against Harsha, but this did not save his king¬ 
dom from the greed of his powerful neighbour. As noted above, 1 
the kings of Valabhl conquered this kingdom, on at least two occa¬ 
sions, about A.D. 648 and 685. On the last occasion, the Valabhl 
king was driven out by the Chalukyas. Dadda III was probably 
ruling at this time. He assumed the title Bahusahaya meaning that 
his own arms were his support. He is said to have waged war with 
the great kings of the east and of the west. The western king was 
undoubtedly the king of Valabhl. The king of the east with whom 
he fought, probably as a feudatory of the Western Chalukyas, might 
have been Yasovarman 2 or the Pratihara king of Avanti. 

The Gurjaras were hemmed in by great powers on all sides. The 
Chalukyas had gradually established an independent kingdom 
in South Gujarat with Navasarika (Navsari) as capital. It appears 
that the northern boundary of this kingdom extended up to the Nar¬ 
mada. The Gurjaras probably acknowledged them as their over- 
lord and, as noted above, drove away the king of Valabhl with their 
help. 

When the Arab invasion burst upon his kingdom, Jayabhata IV 
probably saved himself with the help of the Chalukya king Avani- 
janasraya-Pulakesiraja who inflicted a crushing defeat upon them. 
As noted above, 3 Jayabhata takes the credit for having defeated 
the Arabs at Valabhl, and probably here, too, he fought as a feuda¬ 
tory of the Chalukya overlord. 

The Rashtrakuta chief Indra I, a feudatory of the Western Cha¬ 
lukyas, is said to have married the daughter of a Chalukya king at 
Khetaka by the Rakshasa form of marriage. In other words, he 
carried off the princess by force and married her. As Khetaka has 
been identified with Kaira in Gujarat, the statement indicates the 
occupation of this part, at least temporarily, by the Chalukyas some 

1. See pp. 147, 149. 2. See p. 130. 3. See p. 150. 

156 








NORTHERN INDIA DURING AD. 650-750 


time about A.D. 725. The Gurjaras, though saved from the Arabs, 
thus fell a prey to the Chalukyas. The Rashtrakutas shortly after¬ 
wards supplanted the Chalukyas in this region and Dantidurga, son of 
Indra I, is said to have conquered Lata and Sindhu. But the 
Rashtrakuta domination, too, was of short duration, and by the 
middle of the eighth century A.D. the Pratiharas of AvantI esta¬ 
blished their supremacy over this region. For in A.D. 756 a 
Chahamana was ruling in Broach as a feudatpry of Nagavaloka who 
has been identified with Nagabhata I, the Pratlhara king of AvantI. 1 
Whether the Gurjaras of Nandlpuri refused to recognise the suze¬ 
rainty of this new family, or for other reasons incurred their dis¬ 
pleasure, we cannot say; and for the present, no definite reasons 
can be assigned as to why the Pratiharas of AvantI drove out the 
royal family, which belonged to their own clan, in favour of an out¬ 
sider. Jayabhata IV is the last known king of the Gurjara family 
of Nandlpuri and his only known date is A.D. 735. 

(iii) The Guhilots 

The Guhila-putras or Guhilots of Mewar are rightly regarded 
as the crest-jewel of the Rajput clans, and many mediaeval Rajput 
legends have clustered round this name. These romantic tales and 
bardic traditions are of so varied a character that it is well-nigh 
impossible to reconstruct from them the true history of this family. 
There is also a wide divergence of opinion among modern writers 
on this subject. The scope of this work will not permit a detailed 
discussion of this topic, and only a brief sketch of the origin and early 
history of the family will be attempted here on the authority of 
reliable epigraphic records. 

A full genealogy of the family is given for the first time in the 
Atpur Inscription, dated A.D. 977. It gives the names of 20 kings 
from Guhadatta to Saktikumara. If we allot an average of 20 years 
to each reign, Guhadatta may be regarded as having flourished in 
the second half of the sixth century A.D. This date is corroborated 
by two records of SUa (Slladitya) and Aparajita, the fifth and sixth 
kings in the list, dated respectively in V.S. 703 (646-7) and V.S. 718 
(A.D. 661-2). This demolishes the traditional account, recorded in 
the bardic chronicles, that Guha, the founder of the family, was the 
son of &Iladitya, the last king of Valabhl; for as we have seen above, 
the latter was on the throne till A.D. 766. 

The most famous name among the Guhilot rulers is that of 
Bappa Rawal. His name does not occur in the Atpur Inscription, 

l. El, XII. 201. 


157 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


but it heads the genealogical list given in subsequent records dating 
from the thirteenth century A.D. According to the early records of 
this series, Bappa came from Anandapura, worshipped at the feet of a 
sage named Harita-rasi, and through his grace obtained royal fortune 
and became the king of Chitrakuta (Chitor). Later records state 
that Bappa, who obtained the favour of Harita-rasi, conquered Chi¬ 
tor from the Mori king Mnuraja and adopted the title of Rawal. 

Now, the different chronicles agree in placing Bappa in the first 
half of the eighth century A.D. According to Tod, he occupied 
Chitor in A.D. 728 and abdicated the throne in A.D. 784, Pandit 
Ojha gives 734 and 753 as the dates of these two events. Other 
authorities give varying dates within these limits. 

It is obvious from the date of Bappa that he could not be the 
founder of the family, and must have flourished about two centuries 
after the first ruler Guhadatta, mentioned in the Atpur list. He 
has accordingly been identified with the eighth king Kalabhoja by 
Pandit Ojha, and the ninth king Khommana or Khummana I by 
Dr. Bhandarkar. The latter theory seems preferable in view of the 
celebrity of the name Khummana in the history and traditions of 
Mewar. 1 Bappa Rawal was evidently a designation, and not a 
proper name. Several meanings have been suggested for each of 
these two terms, and it is probable that this designation was applied 
to more than one king. 2 

Although Bappa is represented to have come from Anandapura 
and conquered Chitor, there is no doubt that Guhilots w 7 ere ruling 
in Mewar long before him. The earliest seat of their power was 
Nagahrada (Nagda), and its place was taken by Aghata (Ahar) in 
the tenth century. There is no epigraphic evidence to show that 
Chitor was the capital of the family till a much later period, and in 
a record of the fifteenth century A.D. even Bappa is said to have 
flourished at Nagahrada in Medapata (Mewar). Nevertheless the 
tradition that Bappa founded a new kingdom by conquering Chitor 
may not be absolutely without any foundation. It is likely that the 
Mauryas or Moris were ruling at Chitor when the Arabs overran 
this part of the country between A.D. 725 and 738. 3 The Mauryas 
probably succumbed to these raids and Bappa, a neighbouring chief 
who was more successful in his resistance to the Arab raiders, seized 
the fortress of Chitor. Tod states, on the authority of bardic Chro¬ 
nicles, that Bappa captured Chitor after expelling the mlechchhas 
i.e. non-Hindu foreign hordes who had attacked the Mori kingdom, 
and this may be an echo of his successful fight with the Arabs. It 
is not unlikely that the small Guhila state was also temporarily over- 


1. Banerjee, Rajput Studies, p. 25 


2. PIHC, III. 817 f.n. 
158 


2. See p. 150. 









NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650* 750 


whelmed by the Arab invasion and Bappa restored its independence. 
That would surely entitle him to be regarded as the founder of the 

kingdom. 

We may therefore sum up the history of the Guhilots as 

follows:— 

After the fall of the Gupta empire in the middle of the sixth 
century A.D., a chief named Guhadatta established a small princi¬ 
pality in the western part of the old State of Udaipur. A long 
line of kings, called after him Guhilas or Guhila-putras, succeeded 
on the throne, though nothing of importance is known about them. 
When the Arabs overran this part of the country between A.D. 725 
and 738, Kbummana I, the ninth king, called also Bappa Rawal, 
obtained great renown by his successful resistance to the Muslim 
invaders. His success was probably due as much to his valour as 
to the natural strategic advantages of the territory over which he 
ruled. In any case he took full advantage of the chaos and confu¬ 
sion that followed the Arab raids, and made himself master of the 
strong fortress of Chitor, and probably also of a part of the neigh¬ 
bouring region. He raised the power and prestige of the family to 
such an extent that posterity regarded him not only as the greatest 
ruler, but even as the real founder of the family. It is also likely 
that when in a later age Chitor became the capital of the family, 
popular memory clung round the name of the hero who first con¬ 
quered this impregnable fortress. Bappa Rawal came to be the 
most revered name in the history of the Guhilots and, as usually 
happens, romantic episodes gathered round his name to such an 
extent that he became almost a legendary hero rather than an his¬ 
torical king. It is needless to repeat the numerous legends about 
Bapp§, for no historical conclusions can be drawn from them. 

The Guhilots, at a later age, regarded themselves as Kshatriyas 
of the solar race, and claimed descent from the epic hero Rama. 
Of this there is no trace in the early records. On the other hand, 
some early epigraphic records clearly refer to the Guhila princes as 
Brahmanas. Guhadatta, the founder of the family, as well as Bappa 
are called vipra or Bx&hmana in two records dated respectively in 
A.D. 977 and 1274, Another record, dated A.D. 1285, tells us that 
Bappa exchanged brahma (priestly) for kshatra (military) splen¬ 
dour. In spite of the arguments of Pandit Ojha and Mr. C. Y. Vaidya 
to the contrary, the conclusion is irresistible that the early Guhilots 
professed to be Brahmanas, and never claimed to belong to the Ksha¬ 
triyas of solar race till at a much later age. 1 

1. Dr. Bhandarkar holds the view that the Guhilots were Nagara Brahmanas 
hailing from Anandapura, who were of foreign origin (JPASB, 1909, p. 170). 
This view is challenged by Ojha and Vaidya. The controversy is summed up 
by Banerjee (op. cit pp. 8 ff). Cf. also IRQ, XXVI. 263; XXVIII. a3. 


159 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


In addition to the dynasty ruling at Udaipur there were pro¬ 
bably other branches of the Guhilots ruling in the neighbourhood. 
One such branch is known from a record found at Chatsu, a town in 
Jaipur State, about 26 miles south of the capital city. This Guhila 
branch was founded about the beginning of the seventh or the latter 
part of the sixth century A.D. by one Bhartripatta who, according 
to this inscription, “was like Parasurama endowed with both priest¬ 
ly and martial qualities.” This obviously means that just as Para¬ 
surama was a Brahmana by caste, but performed the feats of a 
Kshatriya, Bhartripatta also was Brahmana by birth, but followed 
the pursuits of a Kshatriya. This fully supports the view that the 
Guhilots were originally Brahmapas. 

The earliest record 1 of the family is an inscription of Dhanika, 
son of Guhila, third in descent from Bhartripatta. It was found 
near the city of Nagara, which was a stronghold of the Malava tribe 
in the early centuries of the Christian era. The locality is about 50 
miles south of Chatsu, and the inscription is dated A.D. 684. This 
Dhanika is probably identical with Guhilaputra Dhanika mentioned 
in a record dated A.D. 725. 2 In that case, this branch of the Guhi¬ 
lots ruled over an extensive region in Jaipur and Udaipur. 

In this record, dated A.D. 725, Dhanika is said to have ruled in 
Dhavagarta as a feudatory of the Paramabhattaraka Mahdrdjddhu 
raja Paramesvara Sri Dhavalappadeva who is probably the same as 
the Maurya ruler named Dhavala. 3 Dhavagarta has been identified 
with the present town of Dhor in the Jahazpur District of the Udai- 
pur State. This record has been taken as an evidence of this branch 
of the Guhilots being feudatory to the Mauryas ruling in Udaipur. 
It is, therefore, thought to be not unlikely that the main branch was 
also a feudatory of the sam§ family, and Bappa founded an indepen¬ 
dent State on the ruins of the Maurya kingdom destroyed by the 
Arab invasion. But the record of Dhanika, found at Nagar, makes 
this theory somewhat doubtful, as it contains no reference to any 
overlord. 

The subsequent history of the family does not concern us here. 
"We do not know when it was established as a ruling power in the 
Jaipur State, and what was its relation with the main 4 branch" up to 
A.D. 750. In the following period both the branches had to acknow¬ 
ledge the suzerainty of the Imperial Pratiharas. 

1. Bharata-Kaumudi, I. p. 267. 

2. El, XX. 122. Dr. Bhandarkar read the date as 407 G.E. (=A.D. 725) but Mr R. 
R. Haider reads it as 207 and refers it to Harsha Era. Dr. Bhandarkar’s 
reading seems preferable. Guhila Dhanika could not have flourished in 207 
H.E. (—A.D. 813) as Harsharaja, fourth in descent from him, was contemporary 
of Pratlhara Bhoja I. 

3. See later under Mauryas. 


160 







NORTHERN INDIA DURING AD. 650-750 

(iv) The Chapas 

The Chapas are probably the same as the Chapotkafas or Chavo- 
takas, commonly known as Chava^as (also as Chanda, Chaura or 
Chavara). According to the Gujarat chronicles 1 they ruled in 
Pancha^ara in Vadhiar, between Gujarat and Kutch, in the period 
c. A.D. 720-966. 

According to these chronicles, the Chapotkafa king Vanaraja, 
son of Jayasekhara of Panchasara, founded the famous city of 
Anahilapataka (modern Patan) in A.D. 746. Leaving aside the 
further statement in these chronicles that Mularaja, the founder of 
the Chaulukya dynasty of Gujar&t in the tenth century A.D., was a 
son of a Chapa princess who destroyed his maternal uncle and seized 
Anahilapataka, the existence of the Chapas in the first half of the 
eighth century A.D. is proved by epigraphic records. An inscrip¬ 
tion, dated A.D. 738, mentions Kachchhelia, Saurashtra, Chavotska, 
Maurya, and Gurjara kings as being defeated by the Arabs. The 
Kachchhellas probably denoted the people of Kutch, and Saurashtra 
undoubtedly refers to Kathiawar Peninsula. The exact locality of 
the Chavofakas at this period cannot be determined. But as the 
Arabs did not proceed beyond Malwa in the east and Navsari in the 
south, the Chavotaka principality may be located in Rajputana or 
its immediate neighbourhood. The Chapa king Dharanlvaraha 
was ruling in eastern Kathiawar in the year A.D. 914. 2 As he is 
described as fourth in descent from Vikramarka, the first king, :+ is 
likely that the family had been ruling there for a century or more. 
It has been suggested that king Vyaghramukha of the Chapa dynasty, 
who was a patron of the astronomer Brahmagupta and was ruling 
in A.D. 628, had his capital at Bhiilamala. As noted above, 3 neither 
this view nor the identification of Bhiilamala with the Gurjara capi¬ 
tal, noted by Hiuen Tsang, can be definitely accepted. Consequently, 
there is no justification for regarding the Chapas as Gurjaras. 4 As 
a matter of fact the Chapas are distinguished from the Gurjaras in 
the list of countries overrun by the Arabs, quoted above. 

Thus on the whole the Chapas may be located in southern Raj¬ 
putana or in northern Gujarat and Kathiawar, and they might have 
had more than one settlement including Panchasara or Anahila¬ 
pataka referred to in the Gujarat chronicles. 

(v) The Maury as 

The Mauryas are evidently the same as the Mori Rajputs who, 
according to the bardic chronicles, ruled in Chitor. There is still 

1. DHNI, II. 935; Sankalia, Archaeology of Gujarat, 35-36. 

2. Ha&lala plates (IA, XII. 193). 

3. See above pp. 153-54, 

4. Hiis is the view of Jackson and Indraji (BG, I. Part I, p. 155). 

161 

C.A.—11 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


a sub-clan of the Paramaras known as Morya or Maurya. 1 The 
existence of several ruling families of this name, both in Northern 
and Southern India, in the seventh century A.D. and later, is proved 
by epigraphic records. 2 The name no doubt recalls the famous im¬ 
perial dynasty of ancient India, but although Hiuen Tsang refers to 
Purna-varman of Magadha as a descendant of Asoka, it is difficult 
to regard him or any ruling Maurya clan as connected with that 
illustrious family. 

The Mauryas are referred to in a record at Jhalrapatan dated 
A.D. 690. 3 Another record 4 in Kotah State, dated A.D. 738-39, 
refers to the local prince as a friend of king Dhavala of Maurya 
lineage. This Dhavala is probably the same as Dhavalappadeva who 
is given imperial titles and is described as the suzerain of the 
feudatory Guhila-putra Dhanika who ruled in Udaipur. 6 We may* 
therefore, give some credit to the tradition, mentioned above, that 
the Guhilot ruler Bappa conquered Chitor from the Mori king 
Manuraja. Tod gives the name as Mana, and this ruler has been 
identified with the author of an inscription, dated A.D. 713, found 
at Chitor, which will be referred to later. 

It is to be noted that if Mana, ruling in A.D. 713, was the last 
Maurya king in Udaipur, we can hardly regard Dhavalappa also as 
a Maurya king ruling in Udaipur in A.D. 738. Further, as this Dha¬ 
valappadeva was the suzerain of Guhila Dhanika, we can hardly 
regard Bappa as occupying Chitor before A.D. 738. In the present 
state of meagre information, therefore, the identity of Manuraja and 
Mana must be regarded as doubtful. 

As already noted above, the Mauryas fell a victim to the Arab 
aggression, and it was probably after this catastrophe that Bappa 
defeated them and took possession of Chitor. 

(vi) The Chahamanas 

An inscription, dated A.D. 756, gives the names of six genera¬ 
tions of Chahamana princes, ending with Bhartrivaddha II, a feuda¬ 
tory of Nagavaloka, who is generally identified with the Imperial 
Pratlhara ruler Nagabhata I. 6 Bhartrivaddha ruled in the Broach 
District, and if his five ancestors did the same, we must presume that 
the Chahamanas ruled in this region from about A.D. 600. But this 
is in conflict with what we know of the Gurjaras ruling in the same 
region during the same period. It is presumed, therefore, that 
either the ancestors of Bhartrivaddha II were not ruling chiefs, or 

1. See above, p. 158; DHNI f II. 1154. 2. BG, I. Part II, p. 284. 

3. It mentions Raja Durgagana of the Maurya family. The inscription has not 
been edited and there is only a short reference to it in I A, LVI. 213. 

4. JA y XIX. 57. 5. See p. 160. 6. El, XII. 201. 


162 







NORTHERN INDIA DURING AD. 650-750 


that this ruling family migrated from some other locality to Broach 
after the reign of Gurjara Jayabhata IV, whose last known date is 
A.D. 735. The more reliable traditions locate the early home of 
the Chahamanas in the region round lake Sakambharl, though 
according to the bardic chronicles the first Chahamana or Chauhan 
king ruled at Mahishmati on the Narmada. 1 It is not unlikely that 
the Chahamanas were petty ruling chiefs in one of these regions, 
when Bhartrivaddha II was appointed by Nagabhata I to rule in 
Broach as his feudatory. 

It is interesting to note in this connection that an inscription 2 
dated A.D. 713, found at Chitorgadh, records a dynasty of four kings, 
viz. Mahesvara of the race of Tvashtri, Bhima, his son Bhoja and 
his son Mana. Curiously enough, the first two ancestors of the 
Chahamana ruler Bhartpvaddha II are also Mahesvaradama and his 
son Bhlmadama. Leaving out the common name-ending darna, the 
two sets of names and their dates agree, and it is not unlikely that 
they refer to identical persons. In that case we should presume 
that the Chahamanas originally lived in or near Chitor during the 
seventh century A.D. It is noteworthy in this connection that the 
family was originally called the race of Tvashtri, anti it was only 
somewhat later, with the growth of power, that the members 
used the name-ending dama, first met with in the names of Western 
Satraps, and called themselves Chahamanas. 

The Chitorgadh inscription, as interpreted by Tod, would seem 
to imply that in A.D. 713 the territory was under the suzerainty of 
the lord of Malwa. But this may be doubted. The expression ‘Lord 
of Malava f was evidently used with reference to the date, indicating 
that it was a year of the well-known Malava era. Mana and his 
three ancestors were probably local rulers or high officials. As noted 
above, some scholars regard Mana as the Maurya or Mori ruler 
defeated by Bappa. Even if this view be accepted, it does not neces¬ 
sarily disprove the identity proposed above. For it is not impossible 
that the Chahamana clan might be a branch or offshoot of the 
Moriyas. But it is unnecessary to proceed further with these specu¬ 
lations. No historical event connected with Bhartrivaddha II or any 
of his five ancestors is known. 

(vii) Minor States 

Contemporary epigraphic records reveal the existence of several 
other states in Rajputana between A.D. 600 and 750. 

A suzerain king Varmalata and his feudatory Rajjila are named 
in a record 3 found at Vasantgadh, in Sirohi State, and dated in the 

1. DHNl, II. 1052 ff. 2. Bh. List, No. 16. 3, El. IX. 191. 

163 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


year A.D. 625. Rajjila’s father Vajrabhata Satyasraya was also a feu¬ 
datory of the same king. Rajjila protected Mount Arbuda (Mt. Abu) 
and had his capital at Va*a which is undoubtedly represented by 
Vasantgadh. The king Varmalata is almost - certainly identical 
with the king of the same name whose prime minister was the 
grandfather of the famous poet Magha. Unfortunately, we know 
nothing of this ruler, but it is not unlikely that Hiuen Tsang, who 
passed through this region, referred to his kingdom as O-cha-li. 

An inscription, 1 found at Shergadh in Kotah State, refers to 
Samanta Devadatta ruling in A.D. 790. As the names of his three 
ancestors end in Naga, we may hold that a Naga family was ruling 
in the region in the eighth century A.D., if not earlier. 

11. SINDH AND OTHER STATES ON THE WESTERN FRONTIER 
The most important kingdom in Western India, besides 
Surashtra and the Gurjara states, was Sindhu. As mentioned 
above, 2 this kingdom was hostile to the Pushpabhuti dynasty, and 
is said to have been destroyed by Harsha-vardhaha. But there is 
no doubt that from the beginning of the seventh century A.D. it 
was an extensive and powerful kingdom, and though Harsha might 
have gained some success against it, he could not establish any 
permanent influence. Hiuen Tsang not only describes it as an in¬ 
dependent kingdom, but also mentions three other states as its 
dependencies. It is difficult to locate these states definitely, but 
Sindh and its subordinate states certainly comprised the whole of 
the lower Sindhu valley to the south of Multan. 

There is a local chronicle of Sindh called Chach-nama 3 which 
gives some interesting details of its history. According to this work 
Sahiras, the king of Sindh, ruled over an extensive territory border¬ 
ing in the north upon Kashmir and in the west upon Makran. 

To the north-west of Sindh were two other important states on 
the western borderland of India. In the north was the kingdom of 
Kapisa or Kabul or Kabulistan, comprising the valley of the Kabul 
river and the hilly tracts surrounding it up to the Hindu Kush 
mountains. To the south of Kabul was Zabul or Zabulistan which 
included the upper valley of the Helmand river and a large extent 
of territory both to the east as well as to the west of it. 

According to Hiuen Tsang, the kingdom of Kapisa was an 
extensive one and exercised suzerainty over ten dependent states 
including Lampaka (Laghman), Nagara (Jalalabad) and Gandhara. 
Of Zabulistan we have no detailed knowledge, but it was also a 

1. Bh. List , No. 21. 2. SecTp.li8. 

3. For an account of this work and other authorities, cf. JIH, X. Supplement, 
pp. lift 


164 







NORTHERN INDIA DURING AD. 650-750 


very powerful kingdom. In the seventh century A.D. these two 
kingdoms formed parts of India both politically and culturally, 
being Indian in language, literature and religion, and ruled over 
by kings who bore Indian names. The king of Zabul bore the 
designation Shahi, and the rulers of Kapisa called themselves 
Kshatriyas. The boundaries of these kingdoms varied from time 
to time, and some of their rulers became very powerful. We know 
from the coins of one Vasudeva, bearing legends in Sassanian Pahlavi 
and Indian scripts, that he was the ruler of Bahman (Brahmana- 
bad?), Multan, Tukan, Zabulistan and Sapardalakshan (Sapada- 
laksha?). AnotherVruler of the same region, and belonging almost 
to the same period, was Shahi Tigin, who is called'the master of 
Takan and Khurasan in the Pahlavi legend, and the supreme lord 
of India and Iran in the Indian script. These were probably rulers 
of the borderlands of Kabul and Zabul, but nothing definite is known 
about them. 1 

It is not possible to give any connected history either of Kabul 
or Zabul. Of Sindh alone, we possess some detailed account from 
the local chronicle Chach-nama and some Arabic works. The details 
recorded in them are not always very reliable, but it is possible, 
with their help, to construct a general narrative which may be 
regarded as fairly trustworthy. 

According to these chronicles king Sahiras, son of Sahasi Rai, 
ruled over an extensive kingdom bordering on Kashmir and Kanauj 
in the north and east, and extending as far as Makran in the west. 
The fact that Harsha-vardhana fought with the king of Sindh lends 
some colour of probability to this account. The central part of these 
territories was under the immediate charge of the king, who had 
his capital at Alor, while the rest was divided into four provinces, 
each under a governor who is also described as a tributary ruler. 
This account agrees fairly yyell with that of Hiuen Tsang. 

King Sahiras lost his life in a fight with the king of Nimruz, a 
province of Persia, who had invaded his territory and entered 
Kirman. This took place probably at the beginning of the seventh 
century A.D. 

Sahiras was succeeded by his son Rai Sahasi II. During his 
reign a Brahmana named Chach gradually rose to power and high 
office, and ascended the throne after his master’s death. 

The provincial governors at first refused to acknowledge the 
suzerainty of the usurper. But Chach marched in person against 

1. Rapson, Indian Coins § 169 (pp. 30-31). A somewhat different view is taken 
by V. A. Smith (CCIAf, 234); cf. other texts referred to by these writers for 
other coins of this class. 


165 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


them and subdued them all. He also proceeded to the hills of 
Kashmir and definitely fixed the frontier between the two kingdoms. 
Taking advantage of the confusion in Persia, due apparently to the 
Arab invasion, Chach conquered a portion of Makran and forced 
the people of Kandabil (east of Kalat) to pay tribute. 

Chach was thus a very powerful king according to Chach-mima , 
but it is difficult to accept as fact everything mentioned in this 
work. The date it gives for Chach’s accession, viz. A.D. 602, is 
palpably wrong. If we believe Hiuen Tsang’s statement that the 
ruling king of Sindhu was a Sudra, the accession of the Brahmin 
Chach must be placed later than A.D, 640. Although an Arabic 
chronicle puts the accession of Chach in A.D. 622, and this date fits 
in well with the chronological details of the next reigns given in 
Chach-nama, a date after A.D. 640 accords better with the fact that 
his son occupied the throne in A.D. 708. 

Chach married the widowed queen of his predecessor, and had 
two sons by her, viz. Daharsiah and Dahar. Chach was, however, 
succeeded by his brother Chandar. After the death of Chandar, his 
son Duraj and Dahar were rival claimants for the throne. But 
Daharsiah ousted Duraj and the kingdom was divided between the 
two sons of Chach. Then after Daharsiah’s death, Dahar alone ruled 
over the united kingdom. 

This event may be dated about A.D. 700. Eight years later, 
Dahar’s kingdom was attacked by the neighbouring king of Ramal, 
but Dahar easily repulsed him. 

The most important event in Dakar’s reign was the Arab inva¬ 
sion which overwhelmed him and his kingdom. This was not an 
isolated fact nor an unexpected event, as is generally believed, but 
the culmination of a continuous effort on the part of the Arabs to 
effect the conquest of India. In view of its great importance in the 
history of India this episode of the Arab invasion requires separate 
and fuller treatment. 

12. THE ARAB INVASION 

The sudden rise of the Arabs in the seventh century A.D. as the 
greatest military power is one of the most remarkable events in the 
history of the world. It is unnecessary to describe in detail the 
rapid military successes which made them a world-power soon after 
the rise of Islam. But a brief reference to it should be made in 

order to understand properly the nature and results of their military 

enterprise against India. 

At the time of the death of the Prophet Muhammad in A.D. 632 
his temporal authority did not extend beyond the Arabian Peninsula! 


166 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING AX). 650-750 


Within eight years thereafter his successors subjugated Syria and 
Egypt. Northern Africa was conquered between A.D. 640 and 709, 
and Spain by A.D. 713. Within a century of the death of the Prophet, 
the Muhammadans had advanced as far as the heart of France, 
when their further progress westwards was checked by the victory 
of Charles Martel between Tours and Poitiers in A.D. 732. 

The Muhammadans attained equally rapid and brilliant suc¬ 
cesses in the east. The mighty Persian empire received its death¬ 
blow at the battle of Cadesia in A.D. 637, and within five years the 
whole of Persia as far east as Herat was annexed to the growing 
empire of the Arabs. By A.D. 650, its northern frontier was advanc¬ 
ed to the Oxus, and all the countries between that river and the 
Hindu Kush mountains were included in it. 

It was inevitable that the Arabs should cast their covetous eyes 
on India. As a matter of fact, no less than three naval expeditions 
were sent against India as early as the Caliphate of ‘Umar (A.D. 
634-44). The first, in A.D. 637, was directed against Tanah, i.e. 
Thana near Bombay, and the other two were aimed at Barwas 
(Broach) and Debal, a port at the mouth of the Sindhu. These were 
in the nature of raids, and probably ended in failure; at least no con¬ 
spicuous success attended any of them. 

Then the Arabs advanced by land, and the first shock of their 
invasion was felt equally by the three border kingdoms of Kabul, 
-Zabul, and Sindh. It will be convenient to deal separately with the 
first two and the third. 

(I) Kabul and Zabul 

About A.D. 650 the governor of Basra sent a force to Sijistan 
(Seistan). The Arabs gained some successes at first in this region 
and advanced along the Helmand river as far as Bust. But soon 
they had to return, and lost everything they had gained. 

During the Caliphate of Muawiyah (A.D. 661-80) a determined 
effort was made to conquer this region. An Arab force under Abd- 
ar-Rahman, the governor of Sijistan, proceeded up to Kabul and 
stormed it after a few months’ siege. From Kabul the Arabs pro¬ 
ceeded to Zabulistan and defeated the people who opposed them. 
Soon after Abd-ar-Rahman was recalled, the chiefs of Kabul and 
Zabul threw off the Muslim yoke, and the Muslims were driven out 
from these two countries. The new Arab governor renewed the 
campaign, but concluded a treaty with these two chiefs on payment 
of a sum of money by them. 

In A.D. 683 Kabul revolted. The governor of Sijistan proceed¬ 
ed against it and a great battle was fought at Junzah. The Muslim 


167 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


army was completely routed. The governor himself and some dis¬ 
tinguished members of the aristocracy lay dead on the field and the 

rest fled. 

The king of Zabul also declared war against the Arabs, but in 
spite of initial successes he was killed and his army ^routed (A.D. 
635). His son and successor, however, continued the struggle. He 
did not oppose the advance of the Arabs till they had penetrated 
deep into his country. Then he blocked the mountain paths and 
passes and forced the Arab general to conclude a treaty, by which 
the latter promised, on payment of a sum of money, not to raid this 
kingdom in future. The Caliph, however, disapproved of the treaty 
and dismissed the general. 

Shortly after Al-Hajjaj became governor of Iraq (A.D. 695), his 
general ‘Ubaidullah made an attempt to subdue Kabul. The kings 
of Zabul and Kabul combined and inflicted a severe defeat upon the 
Muslim army. The retreat of the Arabs was blocked, and although 
they fought their way out, many perished from thirst and hunger, 
and ‘Ubaiduliah died of grief at the plight of his army. 

It was a veritable disaster for the Muslim forces who were, 
according to some writers, allowed to retire only on payment of a 
humiliating ransom. To avenge this affront, a huge army was raised 
and equipped at the cost of a heavy war-cess on Basra and Kufa. Its 
commander Abd-ar-Rahman marched against Zabul (A.D. 699), de¬ 
feated its king, and ravaged the land. Bearing in mind the recent 
reverses, he wanted to proceed cautiously. Al-Hajjaj, however, 
urged him to be more active and, when he expostulated, 
threatened to supersede him. Taking offence at this, he declared 
war against Al-Hajjaj and the Caliph, marched on Iraq, and captur¬ 
ed Basra. Being defeated and pursued he took refuge with the king 
of Zabul who, however, a year or two later sent his head to Al- 
Hajjaj. Al-Hajjaj concluded a treaty with Zabul, and agreed not to 
make war against it for seven or nine years on condition of an annual 
subsidy in kind. This truce continued till the death of Hajjaj in 
714. Then the king of Zabul refused to pay the tribute, and for over 
forty years thereafter the Arabs could not exact anything from him. 

Thus the Arabs had been making persistent efforts for more than 
half a century to subdue Kabul and Zabul, in the course of which 
they gained notable successes, but also suffered serious reverses. 
They could achieve no permanent gain, and were ultimately con¬ 
vinced that the conquest of these territories was beyond their power. 
Henceforth the Arabs were content to leave them alone and merely 
sought to impose some sort of suzerainty over them. But even this 
was achieved with difficulty for a very brief period (A.D. 700-714). 


168 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


(For the next century and a half, Kabul and Zabul maintained their 
authority practically unimpaired. 

(ii) Sindh 

The first Arab invasion of Sindh was in the form of a naval raid 
against the port of Debal at the mouth of the Sindhu in or about A.D. 
643. The Arab historians record a Muslim victory, but according 
to Chach-ndma the Muslims were defeated and their leader was 
killed by the governor of Chach at the battle of Debal. 

The defeat at Debal must have been a disagreeable surprise to 
Caliph ‘Umar who was accustomed only to reports of success from 
his armies all over the world. He now planned to send an expedi¬ 
tion by land, and commanded the governor of Iraq to send him de¬ 
tailed information about‘ Sindh. The governor reported that this 
kingdom was very powerful and by no means willing to submit 
to Muslim domination. Thereupon the Caliph gave up the idea of 
sending any expedition against it. The next Caliph ‘Uthman also 
gave up the projected invasion of Sindh by land on getting similar 
reports from his agent. 

During the Caliphate of ‘Ali, a great expedition was sent against 
India (c. A.D. 660). The Muslim army, which included a large num¬ 
ber of nobles and chiefs, advanced up to Kikan or Kikanan without 
any serious opposition. Kikan was a state in the hilly region round 
Bolan pass, and is referred to by Hiuen Tsang as a kingdom whose 
people led pastoral lives amid the great mountains and valleys in 
separate clans, without any ruling chief. It was, however, according 
to Chach-nama, included m the central division of Sindh, under the 
direct administration of the king. In any case, the people of Kikan 
made a brave stand and repulsed the Muslim army with severe losses. 
The leader of the Muslim host was killed together with all but a 
few of his followers (A.D. 663). 

Henceforth, Kikan became the chief objective of the Muslim 
expeditions. During the next twenty years, no less than six expe¬ 
ditions against this frontier post of Sindh are recorded, but they 
failed to make any permanent impression. The only solid gain of 
the Arabs during this period was the conquest of Makran. 

For more than twenty years thereafter, the kingdom of Sindh 
enjoyed a respite from Arab aggression on its frontier. But hos¬ 
tilities broke out again, about A.D. 708, with Hajjaj, the governor 
of Iraq. A ship from Ceylon, carrying some Muslim women pro¬ 
ceeding to Hajjaj, was captured by pirates near the port of Debal. 
Hajjaj wrote to Dahar, king of Sindh, to set the women free; but 


169 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Dahar pleaded inability, pointing out that he had no control over 
the pirates who captured them. 

This gave Hajjaj a pretext for sending an expedition to Sindh. 
The general belief that this incident was the origin of the hostility 
between the Arabs and Sindh is, however, not well founded. That 
hostility, as we have seen, was of long standing. The incident at 
Debal merely provoked Hajjaj to make renewed efforts on a large 
scale for conquering a country which had so long defied the might 
of Islam. The Caliph was at first unwilling to sanction the risky 
expedition, but ultimately gave his consent at the importunities of 
Hajjaj. Hajjaj thereupon sent ‘Ubaidullah to raid fiebal, but he was 
defeated and killed. A second expedition was sent under Budail 
by way of sea from Oman. Budail got reinforcements and marched 
towards Debal. He was met by Jaisimha, son of Dahar. A pitched 
battle ensued, which lasted a whole day. At the end, the Muslim 
army was routed and Budail was killed. 

Hajjaj then made elaborate preparations for the invasion of 
Sindh. He appointed his nephew and son-in-law Muhammad-ibn- 
Qasim as commander of the expedition, and provided him with 
soldiers, arms, and ammunitions on a lavish scale. He also obtained 
from the Caliph the services of 6,000 Syrian soldiers fully equipped. 

Muhammad reached Debal and, with the help of heavy siege- 
materials sent by sea, stormed the fortress. No quarter was given, 
and for three days the inhabitants were ruthlessly slaughtered by 
the victorious foe. Muhammad settled 4,000 Muslim colonists in 
the city and built a mosque for them. The sea-port of Debal can¬ 
not be definitely identified. According to some it occupied the site 
of Thathah, while others locate it at Bhambor on the north bank of 
the Gharo creeks, and 3J miles to the west of the village of Gharo 
in the tdluq of Mirpur Sakro. 

From Debal, Muhammad proceeded to Nerun which is repre¬ 
sented by modern Haidarabad. The Buddhist priests there were 
already carrying on treasonable correspondence with Hajjaj, and 
now openly helped Muhammad with provisions. Muhammad then 
conquered many cities without any opposition and advanced to 
Siwistan (Sehwan). Here, too, the Buddhist fifth-columnists wel¬ 
comed the Arabs and entered into a pact with them against their own 
governor, who was defeated and fled. The Buddhist sections of 
other towns are also said to have befriended the Arabs. This may 
be explained partly by their aversion to slaughter and bloodshed, 
and partly by their ideal of universal religious fraternity which 
transcended that of nation or country. Perhaps the superstitious 
beliefs in the alleged prophetic sayings about the conquest of India 


170 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


by Islamic force, also, partly account for this attitude. It should be 
noted, however, that all the Buddhists did not support the Muslims 
and some actually fought against them. On the other hand, many 
non-Buddhists also betrayed their king and country. 

Some leading chiefs now tendered homage to Muhammad, who 
proceeded along the western bank of the Sindhu and pitched his 
camp opposite the army of Dahar. Here he entered into alliance 
with an important chief called Mokah, who basely deserted Dahar 
and promised to supply Muhammad with boats for crossing the 
Sindhu on receiving as reward a large stretch of the conquered 
territory. 

Muhammad was re-inforced by 2000 select horse sent by Haj- 
jaj and 4000 warlike Jats from Siwistan, which had revolted but 
was again subdued. Nevertheless Muhammad halted on the bank 
of the Sindhu for nearly two months, whereupon Hajjaj repriman¬ 
ded him and urged him to cross the river and fight with Dahar. 

Muhammad then crossed to the eastern bank of the Sindhu and 
was joined by the brother of Mokah who had already betrayed 
Dahar. By the help and advice of these two chiefs he crossed the 
lake between him and Dahar’s army, and a pitched battle was fought 
near Raor. According to Chach-nama, which has described the battle 
in detail, Dahar fought with valour, and on the second day the Mus¬ 
lim army was nearly routed. “The infidels”, so runs the account, 
“made a rush on the Arabs from all sides and fought so steadily and 
bravely that the army of Islam became irresolute and their lines were 
broken up in great confusion.” As was customary with Indian kings 
Dahar, seated on an elephant, led the vanguard of his army. He was 
an easy target and an arrow struck him in the heart. The death of 
the king was followed by a complete rout of his army. Jaisimha, the 
son of Dahar, retreated to Brahma nabad, leaving the widowed queen 
to defend the fort of Raor which Muhammad immediately attacked. 
The queen put up a brave resistance, and being reduced to the last 
extremity, burnt herself along with other ladies to escape the infamy 
of falling into the hands of the Arabs. 

After capturing Raor, Muhammad proceeded towards Brahmana- 
bad. Jaisimha made elaborate preparations for defending it as well 
as the capital city Alor, and marched with an army to harass the 
enemy and cut off his supply. Although his vizier or chief minister 
joined Muhammad, the people of Brahma nabad fought bravely for 
six months when some leading citizens entered into a secret pact 
with the enemy and betrayed the fort. 

After having subdued several other places, Muhammad proceed¬ 
ed to the capital city Alor which surrendered after some fighting. 

171 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


After conquering a few more strongholds, he besieged Multan, which 
offered stubborn resistance for two months, but was ultimately oblig¬ 
ed to surrender owing to treachery. 

Muhammad-ibn-Qasim was undoubtedly a great general, and his 
remarkable victories gave the Muslims the first foothold on Indian 
soil. Unfortunately, far from his achievements being appreciated 
and properly rewarded at home, he met with a cruel end even while 
he was engaged in making further conquests. The death of Hajjaj 
in A.D. 714, and that of Caliph Walid in the year following, brought 
evil days for him. The new Caliph was an enemy of Hajjaj and 
wreaked his vengeance on the members of his family. Muhammad 
was recalled to Iraq where, with certain other adherents of Hajjaj, 
he was put to death by torture. There seems to be no basis for the 
romantic story, told in Chach-n&mci, about machinations of two 
daughters of Dahar, who were sent captives to the Caliph and who 
secured the death of Muhammad by means of false representations 
to the effect that their modesty was outraged by the latter before he 
sent them to his master. 

The recall and death of Muhammad induced the chiefs of Sindh 
to throw off the Muslim yoke. Dakar’s son Jaisimha re-occupied 
Brahmanabad. The Caliph sent Habib to subdue Sindh. He con¬ 
quered Alor and made some minor conquests. 

The next Caliph ‘Umar II (A.D. 717-720) offered virtual indepen¬ 
dence to the chiefs of Sindh, under his suzerainty, on condition of 
their accepting Islam. Many chiefs including Jaisimha accepted the 
offer. But during the Caliphate of Hisham (A.D. 724-743), he aposta¬ 
tized and declared war against Junaid, the governor of Sindh. Junaid 
defeated him and took him prisoner. With Jaisimha ended the Hindu 
royal dynasty of Sindh. 

(iii) Western India 

Junaid now planned to complete the work of Muhammad-ibn- 
Qasim by extending Muslim domination over the interior of India. 
He himself conquered ‘Bailaman and Jurz and his lieutenants pro¬ 
ceeded as far as Uzain, overrunning Marmad, Mandai, Dahnaz, 
Barwas and Malibah.’ Most of these places can be easily identified. 
Marmad evidently stands for Maru-Mara, corresponding to Jaisal- 
mer and part of Jodhpur. Barwas is undoubtedly Broach, and Bai¬ 
laman probably refers to Vallaman^ala, 1 Malibah and Uzain no 
doubt stand for Malava and its capital city Ujjayinl. It would thus 
appear that the Arabs advanced through Raj putana and proceeded 
as far as Malwa in the east and Broach in the south. From a con- 

1. See p. 154. 


172 




NORTHERN INDIA DURING AD. 650-750 


temporary Indian record we learn that the Arabs defeated the kings 
of the Saindhavas, the Kachchhellas, Saurashtra, the Chavotakas, the 
Mauryas and the Gurjaras, and advanced as far south as Navsari. 1 
In view of the probable location of these states, mentioned above, 
the two accounts agree remarkably, except that Saurashtra, denoting 
the Valabhl kingdom, is not included by the Arab chronicler. These 
Arab expeditions took place between A.D. 724 and 738. 

But the success of the Arabs was short-lived, and they were 
defeated by the Prafihara king Nagabhata 2 and the Chalukya ruler of 
Lata (S. Gujarat) named Avanijanasray a Pulakesiraja. The latter’s 
heroic stand earned him the titles ‘solid pillar of Dakshinapatha’ and 
‘the repeller of the unrepellable.’ 3 The Gurjara king Jayabhata IV of 
Nandlpuii also claims to have defeated the Arabs. 4 Apart from these 
claims, authenticated by contemporary records, we have traditions 
about several Indian rulers as having defeated the Mlechchhas, and 
some of them at any rate refer probably to the Arab invaders of 
this period. 6 It is also admitted in the Arab chronicles that under 
Junaid’s successor Tamm, the Muslims lost the newly conquered 
territories and fell back upon Sindh. Even here their position became 
insecure. According to the Arab chronicles, ‘a place of refuge to 
which the Muslims might flee was not to be found,’ and so the gover¬ 
nor of Sindh built a city on the further side of the lake, on which 
later the city of Mansurah stood, as a place of refuge for them. It is 
thus clear that the period of confusion in the Caliphate during the 
last years of the Umayyads also witnessed the decline of Islamic 
power in India. 

(iv) North-Western India 

No details are known regarding the Arab expeditions to the 
north of Sindh. According to Chach-nama, Muhammad-ibn-Qasim 
had proceeded from Multan to the frontiers of Kashmir and at the 
same time sent an expedition against Kanauj; but before he could 
achieve any material success he was put to death by the orders of 
the Caliph. The Arab chronicles do not refer to Muhammad’s ex¬ 
pedition against Kashmir and Kanauj, but mention his conquest of 
Kiraj. As Kiraj or Kira country corresponds to Kangra, Muhammad 
must have reached very nearly the frontiers of Kashmir and Kanauj. 
But the Arabs lost their conquests in this region during the tur¬ 
moils that followed the death of Muhammad. Junaid again conquered 
Kiraj, but his success, too, was short-lived. Both Yasovarman, king 
of Kanauj, and Laiitaditya, king of Kashmir, seem to have stemmed 

1. ABORI, X. 31. 27 See pl55. 

3. ABORI, X. 31. 4. See p. 150. 

5. Cf. the history of Yasovarman, Laiitaditya and Bappa in the preceding sections 
(pp. 128 ff., 133 ff., 157 ff.). 


178 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the advance of the Arabs in this direction. They sent embassies to 
China for making a common cause against the Arabs, but although 
no help was forthcoming from that quarter, they were able to defeat 
the Arabs by their own unaided efforts. 1 

Thus by the middle of the eighth century A.D. when the great 
revolution in the Islamic world transferred the chief power from 
the Umayyads to the Abbasids, the power and prestige of Islam in 
India was reduced to its lowest ebb, and the Arabs could only main¬ 
tain a precarious hold over a part of Sindh. 

(v) Retrospect 

We may now critically review the main incidents narrated above 
in connection with the early Muslim raids on the western borderlands 
of India. It is well known that only four routes are open to a hostile 
army operating against India from the west. One way Is by the 
sea, and the other three lie roughly speaking through Khyber Pass, 
Bolan Pass and the Makran coast. From the very commencement, 
we find the Arabs endeavouring to penetrate into India through 
every one of these routes. The early naval raids against Thana, 
Broach and Debal, and subsequent raids in the same direction, mark 
their vain efforts to reach India by sea. Of the land-routes, the 
Khyber Pass was guarded by Kabul and Zabui while the Bolan 
Pass was protected by the brave Jats of Kikan or Kikanan. The 
long-drawn struggles of the Arabs with these powers, narrated 
above, mark their steady but fruitless endeavours to enter India 
through the two great passes. The hardy mountaineers of these 
regions, backed by the natural advantage of their hilly country, 
offered stubborn resistance to the conquerors of the world, and 
though often defeated, ever refused to yield. If there had been a 
history of India written without prejudices and predilections, the 
heroic deeds of these brave people, who stemmed the tide of Islam 
for two centuries, would certainly have received the recognition they 
so richly deserve. 

When the other three routes failed, the Arabs attempted the 
fourth one through Makran coast. It is not difficult to explain why 
the Arabs succeeded in this route while they failed in the others. 
While the equipment of the Arab army was made on a lavish scale, 
and forces were requisitioned even from distant Syria, Sindh was 
at the moment exhausted by civil wars, internal discords, and 
foreign aggression that had been going on for more than half a cen¬ 
tury. King Dahar’s statesmanship and military skill were also much 
inferior to those of his rival. It is difficult to explain why he did 
not oppose the Arab fleet carrying military equipment, especially 

1. See above, pp. 130, 134. 

174 


■j' 








NORTHERN INDIA DURING A.D. 650-750 


heavy siege-materials. Evidently he did not possess sufficient naval 
strength for the purpose. But in view of the persistent endeavours 
of the Arabs to reach the Indian soil, and the feasibility of the 
Makran coast for that purpose, the ruler of Sindh showed a lamen¬ 
table lack of foresight in neglecting the navy. Possibly this is 
mainly due to the fact that for nearly thirty years, from c. A.D. 670 
to 700, Dahar had no control over the southern part of Sindh, and it 
came into his possession only a few years before the Arab invasion. 
The same reason also explains partly why both Nehrun and Siwistan, 
the two main strongholds of Southern Sindh, opened their gates to 
the Arabs without any resistance. The unpatriotic character of the 
Buddhists, the general superstitions of a section of the people, and 
the want of loyalty towards the royal family which had usurped the 
throne only a generation ago, account for the desertion and treachery 
of the chiefs and people which ruined the cause of Dahar. 

All these causes, and perhaps others which are not known, 
brought about the fall of Sindh. The conquest of Sindh should not, 
therefore, be regarded as indicating in a general way the military 
superiority of Muslims over Indians. This is further borne out by 
the fact that the conquest of Sindh was the first and the last great 
achievement of the Arabs in India. Junaid, no doubt, was trium¬ 
phant for a time over the petty states in the neighbourhood of Sindh, 
but as soon as he clashed with powerful states like Kashmir and 
Kanauj in the north and those of the Pratiharas and the Chalukyas 
in the south, the spell of victory was broken. Even the greater part 
of Sindh was lost in a short time. Ultimately, after three centuries 
of unremitting efforts, we find the Arab dominion in India confined 
to the two petty states of Mansurah and Multan. 

When we remember their wonderful military success in other 
parts of the w T orld, the comparatively insignificant results the Arabs 
achieved in India certainly stand out in marked contrast. The cause 
of this, however, does not lie in the religious and social peculiarities 
of India as old historians like Elphinstone vainly attempted to 
establish. The cause lies undoubtedly in the superior military 
strength and state-organisation of the Indians as compared with most 
other nations of the time. However incredible this might appear in 
the light of subsequent events, this is the plain verdict of history. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 
4. Kashmir 

Rajatarangini [Translated into English by (i) MA. 
Stein, and (ii) R. S. Pandit]. 

6. Kamarupa 

Dynastic History of Northern India, Vol. I, Ch. V. 

175 


Kalhana 

Ray, H. C. 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Majumdar, R. C. (Ed.) 


Basak, R. G. 
Majumdar, R. C. 


Bombay Gazetteer, 
Sankalia, H. D. 


Ray, N. R. 


7. Bengal 

History of Bengal, Ch. V. 

8. Orissa 

History of North-Eastern India, Ch. VIII. 

“The Sailodbhava Dynasty”. JAHRS, X, 1-15. It con¬ 
tains a detailed discussion of the various points of view 
with full references to authorities. 

9. Valabhl 

I. Modern Works 
Vol. I, Part 1. 

The Archaeology of Gujarat, pp. 28-32. 

II. Articles 

“Maitrakas of Valabhl”. IHQ, IV, pp. 453-474. 


10. Rajputana and Gujarat 

(A) Gurjara-Prafiharas and the Gurjara kingdom of Nandipuri 


Bombay Gazetteer, 
Munshi, K. M. 


Bhandarkar, D. R. 
Hoernle, A. F. R. 
Majumdar, R. C. 

Smith, V. A. 


7. Modern Works 

Vol. I, Part 1, App. Ill; Part 2, pp. 312 ff. 

The Glory that was Gurjaradesa, Part 3, Ch. I. 

II. Articles 

JBBRAS, XXI. 405 ff; 413 ff. 

JRAS, 1904, pp. 639 ff; 1905, pp. 1 ff. 

JDL, X. 1 ff.* (This gives full references to statements 
made in this section). 

JRAS, 1909, pp. 53 ff; 247 ff. 

On the origin of the Gurjaras and Pratlharas, cf. IHQ, X. 
337, 582-3, 762; JC, I. 510; IHQ, X. 613; XI. 167; 1C, IV. 
113; JBORS, XXIV. 221; ABORI, XVIII. 396; P1HC, III. 
513. 


Tod, Col. J. 

Vaidya, C. V. 

Ojha, Pandit G. H. 
Banerjee, A. C. 
Ray, H. C. 


Bhandarkar, D. R. 
Ray Chaudhuri, G. C. 

Ganguly, D. C. 

Dutt, S. 

Haider, R. R. 


(B) The Guhilots 

7. Modern Works 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, Vol. I: Annals of 
Mewar. 

History of Medieval India. 

History of Rajaputana. 

Rajput Studies, Ch. I. 

Dynastic History of Northern India, Vol. II, Ch. XVIII. 
II. Articles 

“Guhilots”. JPASB, 1909, pp. 167 ff. 

D. R. Bhandarkar Volume , p. 311; PIHC, III. 812; IC, HI. 
219. 

IHQ, X. 613. 

IHQ, IV. 797. 

“The Guhila kings of Mewar”. IA, 1927. 169. 

12. The Arab Invasion 


Dhar, S. N. 
Ghani, M. A. 
Majumdar, R. C. 


Articles 

“The Arab Conquest of Sind”. IHQ, XVI. 596. 

“The Advent of the Arabs in Hindusthan”. POC, X. 403. 
“The Arab Invasion of India”. JIH, X, Supplement. 

176 


CHAPTER XI 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 

Numerous ruling families flourished in different parts of the 
Deccan in the centuries preceding the rise of the mighty Chalukya 
house of Badami shortly before A.D. 542. They may be classified 
roughly into three groups with reference to their main spheres of 
influence in the Central, Western and Eastern parts of the Deccan. 

A. CENTRAL DECCAN 
I. THE VAKATAKAS 

The rise of the Vakatakas as a great power in the Deccan and 
a part of Central India under Vindhyasakti and his valiant son 
Pravarasena I has been narrated in the preceding Volume. 1 We 
have seen that when the latter died, about the end of the first 
quarter of the fourth century, he left probably a vast empire ex¬ 
tending from Bundelkhand in the north to the former Hyderabad 
State in the south. 

According to the Puranic account, four sons of Pravarasena I 
became kings. Whether this indicates a division of Pravarasena’s 
empire amongst his four sons cannot be determined. There seems, 
however, to be some evidence in favour of the suggestion. Inscrip¬ 
tions testify to the division of Pravarasena’s empire at least into 
two parts, one under the descendants of his son Gautamiputra with 
their headquarters in the Nagpur District, and another under his 
son Sarvasena and his successors with their capital at Vatsagulma 
in the Akola District. It may be suggested that during the lifetime 
of Pravarasena I his sons were viceroys in the provinces, and that 
they or their descendants began to rule independently after his 
death. Nothing, however, is known about the other sons of Pravara¬ 
sena referred to in the Puranic account, although it is not improbable 
that their territories were later absorbed in the dominions of the 
descendants of Gautamlputra, who represented the main branch of 
the family. The fact that the family is not called samrd d-Va kata k a 
with reference to any ruler after Pravarasena I may be due to the 
waning of their power as a result of the division of the empire. 

1. Vol. II, pp. 217-221. 

177 


C.A.—12. 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


1. The Main Branch of the Vakataka Family 

The eldest son of Pravarasena I appears to have been Gautaml- 
putra who possibly predeceased his father; for the Vakataka records 
do not attribute any royal title to him. His son by the daughter of 
Bhavanaga was Maharaja Rudrasena I, who succeeded his grand¬ 
father and is described in the records of his successors as a devout 
worshipper of the lord Mahabhairava (the terrific aspect of Siva). 
It is not improbable that Rudrasena I became a Saiva through the 
influence of his maternal relatives, the Bharasiva Nagas, who were 
noted for their* 5 devotion to Ssiva. The prominent mention of Rudra¬ 
sena’s relation To the Bharasiva king Bhavanaga in the Vakataka 
records possibly indicates that he received considerable help from 
his relatives in making his position secure over large parts of his 
grandfather’s empire. As no inscription' of Rudrasena’s time has 
been discovered, 1 little is known about the events of his reign and 
the extent of his dominions. 

Some scholars are inclined to identify Rudrasena I with the 
king of Aryavarta named Rudradeva overthrown by Samudra- 
gupta. 2 But considerable parts of Bundelkhand acknowledged 
Vakataka suzerainty as late as the time of Rudrasena’s son and suc¬ 
cessor Prithivlshena I. Moreover, if Rudrasena had, like his suc¬ 
cessors, his headquarters in the Nagpur District in Dakshinapatha, 
he has to be distinguished from the Aryavarta ruler Rudradeva, 
contemporary of Samudra-gupta. It is probable that the Vakataka 
king Rudrasena I flourished before the victorious advance of 
Samudra-gupta in Central India. 


Rudrasena I was succeeded by his son Prithivlshena I who, like 
his father, was a worshipper of Mahesvara (Siva). He is described 
as an exceptionally pious man in the records of his descendants, 
and is not only called a Dharma-vijayin (one who becomes victo¬ 
rious through virtue), but also a “person acting like Yudhishthira.” 
Another remarkable epithet applied to this king describes him as 
“one having sons and grandsons and enjoying the continuity of 
treasure, army, and means of fulfilling desires that had been accu¬ 
mulating for a hundred years.” It may be surmised that Prithivl¬ 
shena I lived for more than a century. But the fact that his son 
and successor is supposed to have died at a comparatively early age 
would render this interpretation unlikely. The more plausible sug¬ 
gestion would be that during the rule of Prithivlshena I (about the 
thiid quarter of the fourth century), a century had already elapsed 
since the foundation of the Vakataka empire by Vindhyasakti. 


1. 

2 . 


Mirashi assigns an inscription at Deotek to Rudrasena 
See above, p. 8. 


I (POC, 1935, pp. 613-22). 


178 





DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


No record of Prithivishena I himself has been discovered as yet; 
but we have two inscriptions of one Vyaghradeva who claims to 
have been a vassal of Maharaja Prithivishena of the Vakataka 
dynasty. He should be identified with Prithivishena I, though some 
writers take him to be the second king of that name. 1 One of the 
records has been found at Nachna or Nachne-ki-talai in the old Jaso 
State and the other at Ganj in the old Ajaigarh State, both in the old 
Bundelkhand division of Central India, which was evidently includ¬ 
ed in the dominions of the Vakatakas. The Gupta emperor Samudra- 
gupta however seems to have extended his power over these tracts 
some time before A.D. 376. 

Prithivishena I was succeeded by his son Maharaja Rudrasena II 
who married Prabhavatl-gupta, 2 daughter of Chandra-gupta II alias 
Deva-gupta and his queen Kuberanaga of the Naga lineage. 
Whether the marriage took place during Prithivlshena’s rule cannot 
be determined; but it is not improbable that the Vakataka king was 
ousted from his Central Indian possessions by the Guptas and that 


1. Apparently the letters of these epigraphs have not been carefully compared 
with those of the other Vakataka records. The palaeographical peculiarities 
of the Nachna and Ganj inscriptions are undoubtedly earlier than those exhi¬ 
bited even by the Basim grant of Vindhyasakti II, a grandson of Pravarasena I; 
cf. the triangular form of v and the old forms of t and j. Although copper¬ 
plates often exhibit more developed alphabets than contemporary records on 
stone, it is strange that the palaeography of the Nachna and Ganj records is 
sometimes considered to be so late as to suggest the identification of Vyaghra- 
deva’s overlord with Prithivishena II who was the great-great-grandson of 
Prithivishena I and flourished about a century later. That Prithivishena of the 
Nachna and Ganj inscriptions was the first Vakataka king of that name is also 
suggested by another piece of evidence. As pointed out by Raychaudhuri, 
from the time of the great-grandfather of Vakataka Prithivishena II—if not 
still earlier—down to A.D. 528, the princes of the Bundelkhand region in Central 
India acknowledged the suzerainty not of the Vakatakas but of the Gupta 
emperors. The rule of Vyaghradeva and his overlord Prithivishena in Bundel¬ 
khand, therefore, could not have been later than the Gupta occupation of Central 
India as evidenced by the Eran inscription of Samudra-gupta and the Udayagiri 
and Sanchl inscriptions of Chandra-gupta II (A.D. 376-414). Prithivishena II 
can hardly be placed after A.D. 528 as he was ninth in descent from Vindhya¬ 
sakti I who cannot be assigned to the second quarter of the fourth century. 
It is not reasonable to ascribe more than two hundred years for the eight 
generations of the Vakatakas before Prithivishena II. But some scholars hold 
different views (cf. JRASBL. XII, 1 ff). Vyaghradeva is sometimes identified 
with the Uchchakalpa ruler of that name who, however, seems to have flourish¬ 
ed about the middle of the fifth century. The identification of Vyaghradeva 
of Bundelkhand in Aryavarta with the Deccan ruler Vyaghraraja of the 
Allahabad pillar inscription is also untenable. 

2. There is a tradition in the Sthala-mdhdtmya of the ^risaila hill in Kumool 
District of Madras State according to which princess Chandravati, daughter of 
Chandra-gupta, conceived a passion for the god on the 6rlsaila and daily offer¬ 
ed him a garland of maVika flowers. It is often believed that Chandravati 
is the same as Prabhavati-gupta. Whatever be the historical value of the 
tradition, which is apparently doubtful, the identification is untenable in view 
of the fact that Prabhkvati claims to have been a staunch Vaishnava while the 
god in question is 6iva-Mallikarjuna. There is no evidence to show that the 
Kurnool District formed a part of the dominions of the Vakatakas of Gautami- 
putra’s house. 


179 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


he contracted the matrimonial alliance in order to stem the tide of 
Gupta advance towards the Deccan. The alliance was a turning 
point in the history of the Vakatakas. Rudrasena II became a 
devotee of Chakrapani (Vishnu) through the influence of his Gupta 
wife and her father, who were devout Vaishnavas. There is reason 
to believe that henceforth the Vakatakas of Gautamlputra s house 
became subordinate allies of the Gupta emperors. Although the 
title Maharaja , applied to the early Vakataka kings, did not imply 
subordinate rank, it is very significant that in many cases the 
Vakataka and Gupta rulers are mentioned side by side in 
the same records, the former with the humbler title Maharaja 
but the latter with the dignified title M a hdrdjddhi raj a . 1 The Guptas 
probably received considerable help from their southern allies in 
their struggle with the powers of Central and Western India, espe¬ 
cially with the Sakas of Malwa and Kathiawar. 

Rudrasena II died probably before or shortly after A.D. 400. 
He seems to have left three minor sons, viz. Divakarasena, Damo- 
darasena and Pravarasena, 2 by his chief queen Prabhavati-gupta. 
Divakarasena remained a Yuva'rdja (crown-prince) and his mother 
ruled the country in his name at least for 13 years. In the present 
state of inadequate information, it cannot be ascertained whether 
Rudrasena II had other queens older than the agramahishi Prabha¬ 
vati-gupta, and other sons older than Yuvardja Divakarasena, and 
whether the throne passed to Prabhavatl and her sons by virtue of 
their relation to the Gupta emperors. It is also unknown if Prabha- 
vati-gupta’s elder sons predeceased their father 3 or if her elder 
children, if any, were all daughters. It is, however, generally 
believed that Rudrasena II died in his youth after a short reign. 
The long period of Prabhavati-gupta’s rule as guardian of her son 
shows that Divakarasena was not made a Maharaja even when he 
had passed his sixteenth year. 4 This may have been due to some 
special difficulties or to Prabhavatl’s love of power. 6 

1. It is impossible to think that the officials and subjects of the Vakatakas were 
not conscious of the difference in meaning between the two titles. 

2. It is sometimes believed that Damodarasena was only another name of Pravara¬ 
sena II. The theory is rendered untenable by the fact that Pravarasena II is 
known to have ascended the throne at an advanced age when his mother was 
more than 80 years old. Prabhavatl must have ceased to rule long before that 
age. 

3. The use of the epithet jivat-putra-pautra when she was more than hundred 
years old may go against the conjecture. It is unknown whether epigraphic 
reference to the son’s sons of Prithivishena I points to the sons of Prabhavati- 
gupta, mentioned in inscriptions. 

4. This becomes striking when we find a boy, only 8 years old, on the Vakataka 
throne of Vatsagulma. Some unknown reasons may have prevented Divakara¬ 
sena from occupying the throne as in the case of the Pallava Yuvamaharaja 
Vishnugopa-varman. Cf. JRASBL, XII. 71 ff., XIII. 75 ff. 

5. For different views on this subject, and a general discussion of the whole 
chronology of the Vakatakas, cf. JRASBL „ XII. 1 ff. 


180 








DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


The date of the Poona 1 grant is the 13th year of Prabhavati 
gupta’s own rule as is indicated by the legend on the seal of the 
charter. The Grant was issued by the queen, who calls herself 
“Mother of the Yuvardja Divakarasena,” from Nandivardhana or 
Nandivardhana which appears to have been the capital of this 
branch of the family at least from the time of Rudrasena II, if not 
earlier. The place has been identified by some writers with modern 
Nagardhan or Nandardhan near Ramtek, about 13 miles north of 
Nagpur, and by others with Nandpur about 21 miles north of Nagar¬ 
dhan. 2 There is as yet no evidence to show that Divakarasena ever 
ascended his paternal throne as a Maharaja. In a later inscription 
of Prabhavatl-gupta, dated in the 19th regnal year of her son 
Pravarasena II, she is called “mother of the illustrious Maharajas 
Damodarasena and Pravarasena.” As Prabhavati was more than 
100 years old when the charter was issued, Maharaja Damodarasena 
must have enjoyed a fairly long reign in the intervening period 
between her own rule in the earlier part of her life and the acces¬ 
sion of Pravarasena II during its later part. 3 Prabhavati was still 
living in the 23rd year of PraVarasena’s reign as we know from the 
latter’s Tirodi Grant. 

The second charter of Prabhavatl-gupta was issued from the 
feet of the god Ramagirisvamin, identified with the deity at Ramtek 
near Nagpur, probably on the occasion of her pilgrimage to the holy 
temple. In both her records she is described as a devotee of the 
Bhagavat (Vishnu) and is credited with the gotra (the Dharana gotra) 
and family designation (Gupta) of her father. 4 

As Prabhavatl-gupta’s death does not appear to have occurred 
long before the end of the rule of her aged brother Kumara-gupta 
(A.D. 414-55), the reign of Pravarasena II may be assigned to about 
the middle of the fifth century. We have a number of records of 
the reign of Pravarasena II with dates ranging between the regnal 
years 2 and 27. These charters have been found in the Wardha, 
Chhindwara, Siwani, Nagpur, Balaghat, Amraoti and Betul Districts, 
and record the grant of lands usually in the neighbourhood of the 
find-spots of the inscriptions. Thus Pravarasena II must have ruled 

1. The suggestion that the Grants of Prabhavati were “drafted by a Gupta officer 
imported from Pataliputra” is unlikely because of the numerous mistakes of a 
serious nature found in their sections dealing with Gupta genealogy; cf. Sue. 
Sat., p. 88, note 1. 

2. It is certain that Nandivardhana was not far from Nagpur; cf. Nagapura- 
Nandivardhana, the name of the district round Nagpur, in the Deoli grant of 
Rashtrakuta Krishna III. 

3. This fact precludes the possibility of Damodarasena and Pravarasena having 
ruled at the same time in different parts of their father’s dominions. 

4. There is evidence to show that gotrdntara was not essential in the popular 
form of marriage in ancient India, possibly due to the want of sampradana 
(P1HC, 1945, pp. 48 ff.). 


181 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


for at least 27 years, and over practically the whole of Berar, with 
the exclusion of its southern portion, but together with the western 
districts of Madhya Pradesh. He seems to have inherited these terri¬ 
tories from his predecessors. The early charters of Pravarasena II 
were issued from the city of Nandivardhana, but the later grants from 
a new city called Pravarapura, apparently founded by and named 
after him. The new capital was built probably not far from the 
site of the old one, although it is sometimes identified with Paonar 
in the Ward ha District. The Tirodi grant of Pravarasena II was 
issued from the Narattangavari-sthana, probably a holy place which 
the king visited on a pilgrimage. The administration of Pravara¬ 
sena II was characterised by the appointment of officials styled 
Senapati either as viceroys or as High Commissioners in regard to 
subordinate states. Some of the Sendpaltis such as Chitravarman, 
Namidasa, Katyayana and Bappadeva are known from inscriptions. 
The subordinate chiefs Satrughnaraja and his son Kon<Jaraja pro¬ 
bably ruled the Bhojakata-mj^/a in the Amraoti District under the 
supervision of Senapati Chitravarman. The Arammi -rajya in the 
Chindwara District was in charge of Senapati Namidasa, probably 
the same as the rdjyddhikrita (chief minister) Navamidasa of the 
Tirodi grant. One of the records speaks of a rajuka which may be 
the same as rajjuka of the inscriptions of Asoka. 

Pravarasena II of the Vakataka dynasty is usually identified with 
Pravarasena, author of the Setubandha Kdvya written in Maha- 
rashtrH Prakrit, although another view attributes its authorship to 
a Kashmirian king of that name. Some scholars believe that certain 
literary traditions about the author of the Setubandha throw light 
on the history of Vakataka Pravarasena II especially in regard to 
his relation with his maternal grandfather. There is a verse quoted 
in Rajasekhara’s Kavyarnfimaiiisa, Bhoja's Spingara-praikasa and 
Sarasvatikanthdbharana, and Kshemendra’s Auchityavichdracharchd 
which says that the king of Kuntala left the administration 
in the hands of some one (believed to have been Vikrama- 
ditya) and spent his days in the pursuit of pleasure. According to 
Bhoja, the verse embodies the report made by Kalidasa to his patron 
Vikramaditya who had sent him as an ambassador to the king of 
Kuntala. Kshemendra attributes the verse to Kalidasa’s Kuntes- 
varadautya, supposed to be a mistake for Kuntalesvdradautya. Bana’s 
Harsha-charita says that Setu or Setubandha was Pravarasena’s work; 
but a later work called Bharatacharita attributes the authorship to a 
Kuntalesa (king of Kuntala). According to Rarnadasa, who wrote 
the Rdmasetupradipa commentary on the Setubandha in the latter 
part of the sixteenth century, the poem was written by the newly 

182 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


installed king Pravarasena who was the same as Bhojadeva, and the 
work was revised by Kalidasa at the instance of Vikramaditya. 
Some weighty conclusions are often made on the basis of these 
literary traditions. It is believed that the Vakataka king Pravara¬ 
sena II was the author of the Setubandha; that his territory was 
known as Kuntala; that he was called Bhojadeva, because the Vaka- 
^akas were a branch of the Bhoja people; and that in the early years 
of his reign, he left the charge of administration in the hands of his 
maternal grandfather Chandra-gupta II Vikramaditya. Now, the 
existence of some relation between Kalidasa, who is traditionally 
associated with the court of Vikramaditya, most probably Chandra- 
gupta II, and the Vidarbha or Berar region is within the bounds of 
possibility. 1 But most of the conclusions are unjustifiable as they 
are against the known facts of Vakataka history. That the Vakataka 
king was the lord of Kuntala is rendered untenable by the fact that 
Pravarasena II gave his son in marriage to a daughter of the king 
of Kuntala which was undoubtedly the district round Banavasi in 
the Kanarese area. 2 The prominent mention of the Kuntala 
princess in the record of her son points to the importance the Vaka- 
fakas attached to the Kuntala alliance. Whatever be the value of 
the tradition regarding Kalidasa’s embassy at the Kuntala court, a 
Kuntala king of the fifth century cannot possibly be regarded as any 
other than a ruler of the Kadamba family. It may be recalled in 
this connection that the Kadamba king Kakutsthavarman (c. A.D. 
405-35) is known to have given one of his daughters in marriage to 
a Gupta prince. Again, at the time of Pravarasena’s accession to 
the throne his mother was more than 80 years old, and so he was 
no longer young and his maternal grandfather had in all probability 
been dead long ago. That Pravarasena II was not so much under 
the influence of Chandra-gupta II, as is usually supposed, is probably 
suggested by the fact that, while the grandfather’s influence caused 
the wide diffusion of Bhagavatism (Vaishnavism) in his age, the 
grandson was throughout his long reign a parama-mdhesvara (devout 
worshipper of Mahesvara or Siva) claiming to be “as virtuous as a 
person belonging to the Golden Age through the possession of the 
grace of Sambhu (Siva).” Pravarasena’s authorship of the Setu¬ 
bandha may not be altogether impossible, but it is rendered doubt- 

1. The style of composition adopted by Kalidasa came to be known as the 
Vaidarbhi rlti (Berar style) as early as the seventh century A.D. It is also 
interesting to note that the poet has immortalised Ramagiri (modern Ramtek 
near Nagpur) in his Meqhaduta. 

2. Cf. Sue. Sat., pp. 215-16. The theory that Kuntala indicated the territory of 
the Rashtrakutas of Manapura is based on the interpretation of the expression 
Kuntaldndih prasasitd as “ruler of the Kuntalas.” The real meaning of the 
passage, however, is apparently “chastiser of the Kuntalas” i.e., the Kadambas. 
(IHQ, XXII, 309; XXIII. 65, 320). 


183 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


ful by the fact that while the theme of the Kdvya is Vaishnava, the 
king was a devotee of &iva. 

Pravarasena II was succeeded by his son Mahdrdja Narendra- 
sena who married Ajjhita-bhattarika, daughter of the king of Kun- 
tala. The father of the Kuntala princess may have been the 
Kadamba king Kakutsthavarman who claims to have married his 
daughters to scions of several royal houses including that of the 
Guptas. Narendrasena’s command is said to have been honoured 
by the kings of Kosala, Mekaia and Malava, although the actual 
extent of his political influence in these territories cannot be deter¬ 
mined. Kosala and Mekaia appear to have been the capital cities 
of the South-Kosala (Raipur-Bilaspur-Sambalpur region) and Mekaia 
(the land about the Amarkantak hills) countries, and Malava, as 
suggested by a commentary on the Kdmasutra, was probably East 
Malwa. As these regions had been under the influence of the Guptas, 
whose position in regard to the outlying provinces and subordinate 
states deteriorated in the second half of the fifth century, the claim 
of the Vakataka king no doubt points to the period when he flourish¬ 
ed. Nothing definite is known about the kings of Kosala, Mekaia 
and Malava who probably became subordinate allies of Narendra- 
sena; but the ruler of South Kosala seems to have been a king of 
Sarabhapura, and the Mekaia king, one of the Panduvarhsls. While 
these countries lay within the sphere of Gupta influence, Malwa 
formed an integral part of the Gupta empire before it was threaten¬ 
ed by the Hunas. An epithet applied to Narendrasena in his son’s 
record suggests that he recovered his family’s fortune probably from 
an enemy’s hold. This may refer to Narendrasena’s success against 
the vassals of the Guptas whose subordinate allies he and his imme¬ 
diate predecessors had been. 

Narendrasena was succeeded by Maharaja Prithivlshena II, his 
son by the Kuntala princess. The Balaghat record describes 
Prithivlshena II as a parama-bhdgavata (devout worshipper of the 
Bhagavat or Vishnu). Whether this indicates a revival of Gupta 
influence on the Vakatakas cannot be determined. It is, however, 
to be noted that Prithivlshena claims to have twice retrieved the 
fallen fortunes of his family. Although nothing definite is known as 
to the nature of the catastrophes referred to in the claim, it probably 
refers to Prithivlshena’s struggles with Harishena of Vatsagulma and 
Bliavadattavarman of the Nala dynasty. One of Prithivlshena’s 
charters was issued from Bembara (identified with Bembal in the 
Chanda District) and another probably from Padmapura (modem 
Padampur in the Bhandara District). Nothing is known of the 
history of this family after Prithivlshena II. 


184 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


2. The Vakatakas of Vatsagulma 

The city of Vatsagulma or Vatsyagulma is mentioned for the 
first time in such works as the Mahabhdrata and Vatsyayana’s Kdma- 
sutra which, in their present forms, are assignable to the age of the 
Vakatakas. The site of the city has been located at modern Basim 
in the Akola District of Berar. The earliest epigraphic record of 
the Vakatakas of Vatsagulma is the Basim Grant of DharmctrMahd - 
raja Vindhyasakti II, son of Dharma-Mahdruja Sarvasena, 
grandson of Pravarasena I and great-grandson of Vindhya¬ 
sakti I, founder of the Vakataka dynasty. The Puranic reference 
to the sons of Pravarasena I, who became kings, may sug¬ 
gest that Sarvasena was the founder of a new kingdom in the land 
round Basim. The distinction between Vidarbha and Vatsagulma 
made in such works as the Kamasutra seems to point to the Vidar¬ 
bha kingdom having been under the main branch of the Vakatakas 
and to the Vatsagulma territory as under a collateral branch of the 
family. The charter of Vindhyasakti II, issued from Vatsagulma 
and dated in the 37th year of his reign, records the grant of a village 
in the region of Nandikata which has been identified with Nander in 
the Hyderabad State. Thus it appears that Vidhyasakti II had a 
fairly long reign and that his dominions comprised the southern 
fringe of Berar and the northern districts of Hyderabad, probably 
with some of the adjoining regions. 

A fragmentary inscription in one of the caves at Ajanta in 
the Aurangabad District of the old Hyderabad State was formerly be¬ 
lieved to contain the names of the Vakataka kings Pravarasena I, 
his son (supposed to be a mistake for grandson) Rudrasena I, 
and the latter’s son Prithivlshena I. Of late it has been pointed out 
that the record actually belongs to the Basim branch of the Vakataka 
family and that instead of the names of Rudrasena I and Prithivl¬ 
shena I we have to read respectively those of Sarvasena and Vin- 
dhyasena, the latter being supposed to be identical with Vindhya¬ 
sakti II. There is no doubt as regards the correction of the name 
Rudrasena to Sarvasena; but the unsatisfactory preservation of the 
Ajanta inscription as well as the difference in the forms Vindhydsena 
and Vindhyasakti renders the second correction somewhat doubtful. 
If the new reading of this name is preferred, Vindhyasena has no 
doubt to be identified with Vindhyasakti II; but if the old reading is 
accepted Prithivlshena may be regarded as a brother of that king. In 
the Ajanta inscription, this ruler is represented as having defeated 
the king of Kuntala, apparently a Kadamba king of Banavasi ruling 
about the middle of the fourth century A.D. It may be remember- 


185 


the classical age 


/ 


ed in this connection that, according to the Chandravalli inscription, 1 
Kadamba Mayurasarman came into conflict with the Abhiras and 
Traikutakas who were neighbours of the Vakatakas. 

The conqueror of the Kuntala king was succeeded, according 
to the Ajanta record, by his son Pravarasena who may be called 
Pravarasena II of Vatsagulma as distinguished from Pravarasena II 
of Nandivardhana and Pravarapura. Pravarasena II of Vatsagulma 
probably died early as his son and successor was only eight years old 
at the time of his accession. The name of this ruler cannot oe traced 
in the preserved portion of the Ajanta inscription which, however, 
speaks of his son and successor Devasena in glowing terms. Men¬ 
tion is also made of Hastibhoja who, according to a Ghatotkacha 
cave inscription, was a minister of Devasena. Maharaja Devasena 
is further known from a charter which he issued from Vatsagulma. 

The next ruler was Devasena’s son Harishena who seems to 
have been a contemporary of the kings Narendrasena and Prithivi- 
shena II of the main branch of the Vakataka family and flourished 
in the second half of the fifth century. Nothing definite, however, 
is known about the relations that existed between the independent 
Maharajas of Vatsagulma and their kinsmen who ruled from the 
Nagpur District. The Ajanta inscription was caused to be incised 
by Varahadeva, 2 a devout Buddhist, who was a sachiva of king 
Harishena and probably a son of Hastibhoja. 

Harishena appears to have been one of the most powerful rulers 
of his time. He is probably described in the Ajanta record as hav¬ 
ing spread his influence in Kuntala (territories of the Kadambas), 
Avanti (West Malwa), Kalinga (territories of the Kalingadhipatis of 
the Srikakulam-Vizagapatam region), Kosala (Raipur-Bilaspur-Sam- 
balpur region), Trikuta (Traikutaka territories about the northern 
Konkari), Lata (Navsari-Broach region), Andhra (districts about the 
mouths of the Krishna) and other countries whose names cannot be 
deciphered. The exact relations of Harishena with the above-men¬ 
tioned countries cannot be ascertained; but it is difficult to believe 
that he succeeded in completely subjugating any of them. It is, 
however, interesting to note that while the Kuntala king was a re¬ 
lative and probably an ally of the Vakatakas of the main line, his 
relation with this branch was unfriendly. South Kosala and the 
Malwa region are claimed to have been within the sphere of influ- 

1. It is difficult to agree with Prof. Sastri’s view (NHIP, VI. 238) that the genuine¬ 
ness of this record is to "be doubted. For Mayura-sarman, cf. Ch. XIII, IV. 

2. It is not known whether Hastibhoja and Varahadeva were governors of the 
Aurangabad District under Devasena and Harishena. Another Ajanta inscrip¬ 
tion, probably belonging to the reign of Harishena, seems to speak of a family 
of feudatory rulers. Some of the Ajanta caves may have been excavated by 
these officials and feudatories. 


186 



DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


ence of both houses. It is not improbable that Harishena’s suc¬ 
cess temporarily eclipsed the power of his kinsmen and that the 
struggle between the two houses led to their decline almost simul¬ 
taneously towards the beginning of the sixth century. 

The actual events leading to the fall of the Vakatakas are un¬ 
known. They are not mentioned amongst the powers that stood 
in the way of the Chalukya occupation of the Deccan in the latter 
half of the sixth century. The early Chalukya monarehs had to 
subdue the Nalas of the southern Madhya Pradesh and adjoining 
regions, the Mauryas of the Konkan and the Kalachuris of northern 
Maharashtra and the adjacent countries. It is not improbable 
that the major part of the dominions of both the Vakataka houses 
had passed to the Nalas before the middle of the sixth century as 
will be shown in the next section. A Rashtrakuta king named 
Manahka, who appears to have flourished in the Satara-Kolhapur 
region about the middle of the fifth century, claims to have subdued 
Asmaka (northern Hyderabad), Vidarbha (Berar region ahd parts 
of the western Madhya Pradesh) and Kuntala. It is probable that 
here is a reference to his contest with the Kadambas and with the 
Vakatakas of both the houses . 1 

The Vakatakas appear to have been lovers of learning and pat¬ 
rons of art and literature. Some verses quoted in Srldharadasa’s 
Saduktikarnamrita have been attributed to Yuvardja Divakara who 
may be identified with the Vakataka Yuvardja Divakarasena. We 
have seen that Pravarasena II of Nandivardhana and Pravarapura is 
usually regarded as the author of the Setubandha, although the 
matter is not free from doubt. To Sarvasena of the Vatsagulma 
branch has been attributed the authorship of a poem called Haravi- 
faya. 'Whatever be the value of these suggestions, there is little 
doubt that the name of the celebrated Vaidarbht riti or Berar 
style of Sanskrit composition is due to its having flourished at the 
court of the Vakatakas of Vidarbha. This is supported by the fact 
that, while the style was named after Vidarbha before the composi¬ 
tion of Dandin’s Kdvyddarsa in the seventh century, it was the Vaka¬ 
takas who held sway over that country for several centuries down 
to the beginning of the sixth century A.D. There is again no doubt 

1. The Asmaka country had its ancient capital at Paudanya, modern Bodhan in 
the Hyderabad State. It usually included Mulaka, i.e. the district round 
Pratishthana (modern Paithan on the Godavari in the Aurangabad District) 
and occasionally abutted on Kalinga, Vidarbha and Avanti-Dakshinapatha. 
The fact that the Vakatakas of Vatsagulma ruled over northern Hyderabad at 
least as far south as Nandlkafa, i.e. the Nander District not far from Bodhan 
shows that their territories may have been styled Asmaka. See IHQ, XXII, 
233, 309; XXIII, 65, 320. 


187 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


that some of the magnificent caves at Ajanta with their brilliant 
fresco paintings were excavated during the rule of the Vakatakas, 
probably under the patronage of themselves and their subordinates. 


II. THE NALAS 


The Rithapur copper-plate inscription , * 1 which may be assigned, 
on grounds of palaeography, to the first half of the sixth century, 
records the grant of a village called Kadambagiri by Maharaja 
Bhavatta-varman while he (probably with his queen) had gone on a 
pilgrimage 2 to Prayaga (Allahabad), “the place blest by the favour 
of lord Frajapati at the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna.” 
The charter, however, was actually issued from Nandivardhana by 
a successor of that king. We know that this city was the capital of 
the Vakatakas of the main line before the foundation of Pravarapura 
by Pravarasena II. The village of Kadambagiri has been identified 
with Kalamba in the Yeotmal District of Berar. It is thus apparent 
that a new line of kings was in possession of territories formerly 
occupied by the Vakatakas. 

The name Bhavatta-varman is probably a mistake or Prakritis- 
ed form of Bhavadatta-varman . This suggestion is supported by 
the evidence of coins and of another record of the family. The king 
is called nalair-rmpa-va^a-prasuta and apparently claimed descent 
from Nala, the ancient king of Nishadha. He is said to have obtain¬ 
ed royal fortune through the grace of Mahesvara (giva) and Mafia- 
sena (Skanda-Karttikeya ). 3 The king’s banner bore the tri-pataka 
which has been explained as (the representation of the ) “hand with 
three fingers stretched out” or “three pennons.” The charter is 
dated in the king’s eleventh regnal year, but the grant is said to 
have been actually made for the spiritual benefit of his own parents by 
Maharaja Arthapati-bhattaraka, who was favoured by his dryaka, 
i.e. grandfather. Arthapati is sometimes taken to be an epithet of 
Bhavadatta-varman, but is now usually regarded as the name of 
the latter’s son and successor. It is, however, not unlikely that 

. • — 1 ■ — 1 ■' . . 

1. El, XIX, p. 100 ff. 

2. The grant may also have been made on the occasion of the Nala king’s marriage 

with a prmcess of the Allahabad region. B 



i 



188 














DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


Bhavadatta-varman was actually the aryaka, i.e., “grandfather,” of 
Arthapati. 1 

Another Nala inscription 2 in verse has been discovered at 
PogLagadh in the old Jeypore State (Koraput District) not far from 
the borders of the old Bastar State (M.P.). It is dated in the twelfth 
regnal year of a king whose name seems to be Skanda-varman 
although the reading of its first part is not beyond doubt. This king 
is described as the son of king Bhavadatta of the Nala family, very 
probably the same as Bhavatta-varman of the Rithapur grant. 
Skanda-varman is said to have recovered the lost ( bhrashtd ) royal 
fortune of his family and to have re-peopled the deserted ( sunyd) 
city of Pushkarl. The city, which appears to have been situated 
in the Podagadh region, was probably the capital of the Nala kings. 
The inscription refers to the construction of a shrine ( pddamula ) of 
Vishnu by Skanda-varman, apparently at Podagadh. 

There has been some speculation as regards the identity of the 
enemy who defeated the Nalas and sacked Pushkarl but was after¬ 
wards defeated by Skanda-varman. As there was apparently a 
struggle between the Nalas and the Vakatakas of the main branch, 
the enemy has been identified with Prithivlshena II who claims to 
have twice restored the fallen fortunes of his family. Skanda- 
varman’s adversary may also have been the PanduvamsI king Nanna 
of South Kosala, whose occupation of practically the whole of the 
Western Madhya Pradesh is indicated by an inscription at Bhandak 
in the Chanda District. 3 Most probably, however, the enemy was 
the Chalukya king Kirtivarman I (A.D. 567-97) who claims to have 
subdued the Nalas, sometimes represented as the traditional enemy 
of the Chalukyas, and to have destroyed their residence ( nilaya ). 

A third Nala inscription has been discovered in the village of 
Kesariveda 4 in the Umarkot thana, old Jeypore State, Orissa. It re¬ 
cords a grant made by Maharaja Arthapati Bhattaraka in the year 7. 
As this grant was issued from Pushkarl, Arthapati seems to have 
flourished after Skanda-varman who is said to have re-peopled this 
deserted city. It is, therefore, not unlikely, that he was the son 
and successor of Skanda-varman. 

A hoard of gold coins was discovered at Edenga, a village in 
the Kondegaon tahsil of the Bastar-State. 6 The issuers of the coins 
of this hoard were Bhavadatta and Arthapati, and another king 
named Varaha who may have belonged to the same family. From 

1. See infra. 2. El, XXL p. 155 f. 

3. Mirashi believes that the record is wrongly associated with Bhandak, and must 
have come from some place in Chhattisgarh ( BDCRI, VIII. 4; El, XVI, 227, 

n 2) 

4. El, XXVIII. 12. 5. JNSI, I. p. 29ff. 


189 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


epigraphic and numismatic materials, it appears that the territories 
of the Nalas lay in the Bastar-Jeypore region. In the first half of 
the sixth century they extended their power towards the north at 
the expense of the Vakatakas; but their northern possessions appear 
to have soon passed to the PaiiduvarhsI kings of Kosala. There is, 
however, some indication that the Nala empire had extended over 
a wider area. 

Inscriptions of the time of Chalukya Vikramaditya I and his 
son mention the Nalavadi -vishaya which was apparently named 
after the Nalas. As the villages situated in that vishaya have been 
identified with localities in the present Bellary and Kurnool Dis¬ 
tricts, it seems that Nalavadi under the Chalukyas comprised parts 
of .the said Districts. This may have been a Nala settlement or the 
southernmost province of the Nala empire originally under a 
viceroy of the royal blood. Whether the Nalas were responsible for 
the fall of the Vakatakas of Vatsagulma and the Rashtrakutas of 
Manapura cannot be determined in the present state of insufficient 
knowledge. But the suggestion is not altogether improbable. 

A stone inscription 1 at Rajim in the Raipur District of the 
eastern Madhya Pradesh, which may be assigned on palaeographic 
grounds to the middle of the seventh century, records the construc¬ 
tion of a temple of Vishnu, probably by Vilasatuhga, apparently a 
successor (son?) of king Virupaksha who was the son of king Prithvl- 
raja. These rulers claimed^ 1 descent from Nala, king of Nishadha, and 
were most probably later members of the family of Bhavadatta-var- 
man. It seems that the Nalas, who were cornered in the Bastar region 
by the Panduvaihsis and the Chalukyas, retrieved their position and 
conquered South Kosala some time after the rule of Sivagupta- 
Balarjuna, in the seventh century. It is not known whether they 
continued to rule in that country till the rise of the Somavamsis 
about the middle of the tenth century. If, however, they did, they 
were in all probability matrimonially connected with the Bana king 
Vikramaditya I (c. A.D. 870-95) who constructed a temple at Pali 
about 12 miles from Ratnapur in the Bilaspur District, 2 on the occa¬ 
sion of a visit that he might have paid to his relatives’ kingdom. 

B. WESTERN DECCAN 
I. THE BHOJAS 

According to the Puranas, the Bhojas were a section of the 
Haihaya branch of the Yadu or Yadava clan, probably of the 
Mathura region. But the Haihayas are known to have settled in the 

1. El, XXVI. p. 49 ff. 2. Ibid, p. 53. 


190 






DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 

Narmada valley at a very early date, while the Bhojas appear to 
have colonised the Berar region. An inscription of the Vakajakas 
locates a Bhojakata-rajya, apparently named after the Bhojas, about 
the Amraoti District of Berar. Kalidasa’s Raghuvavisa also 
associates the Bhojas with Vida^bha or Berar. Probably the 
Bhojakas, mentioned in the inscriptions of Asoka and Kharavela, 
were no other than the Bhojas settled in Berar. A section of these 
Bhojas appears to have migrated to the Goa region in the Konkan. 
The Mahabhojas, who are known to have been associated with the 
Chutu-Satakarnis of Kuntala, were very probably the same as the 
Bhojas of the Goa region. 1 

The Siroda copper-plate charter 2 was issued from Chandra- 
pura in the twelfth regnal year of a king named Devaraja who is 
credited with no special royal title. The king is said to have belong¬ 
ed to the family of the Bhojas. Chandrapura, which was probably 
the capital of the Bhoja king, has been identified with modern Chan- 
dor in Goa which may have been originally under the political 
influence of the kings of Kuntala. Considering the palaeography of 
the Siroda inscription, king Devaraja may be assigned to the end of 
the fourth century. The seal of Devaraja is supposed to bear the 
figure of a swan, although it may actually be an elephant. 

A later king of the same region was Maharaja Chandra-varman 
who issued the Goa copper-plate grant 3 in the second year of his 
reign. The charter has been assigned on palaeographic grounds to 
the fifth century. King Chandra-varman granted a piece of land to a 
Mahavihara (Buddhist monastery) at Sivapura located in Goa. Since 
the words at the beginning of the charter, which is supposed to bear 
the figure of a boar, have not been deciphered, it is uncertain 
whether Chandra-varman belonged to the dynasty of the Bhojas. 

A number of Bhoja copper-plate grants have been recently dis¬ 
covered in and near the Goa territory. They, have all been assigned 
on palaeographical grounds to the seventh century A.D. These 
records reveal the names of the Bhoja kings Prithivlmalla-varman, 
Kapali-varman and Asahkita. Asankita’s seal attached to the charter 
bears the figure of an elephant which seems to have been the emblem 
of the Bhoja royal family of the west coast. The relationship of 
Prithivlmalla-varman, Kapali-varman and Asahkita with one 


1. Pargiter, AIHT, pp. 102, 269, etc.; Rapson, Catalogue, pp. xxxii, xliii; Sue. Sat., 
pp. 94, 220. Bhojaka was also often used in the sense of a Jagirdar. Cf. above 
Vol. II, p. 79. 

2. El, XXIV, p. 143 ff.; XXjVI, 337 ff. The name of the family was at first wrongly 
read as Gomin. 

3. ABORI, XXIII, 510 ff. 


191 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


another and with the earlier kings Devaraja and Chandra-varman 
is not known. 1 


II. THE TRAIKUTAKAS 

The Traikutakas derived their family name from the Trikuta 
hill in Aparanta (northern Konkan). 2 One of the Traikutaka kings 
is actually described in his record as ruling over Aparanta and other 
countries. Inscriptions of the Traikutaka kings show that their 
kingdom comprised the coast country, at least from the Kanheri 
area in the south as far as the district round Surat in the north. But 
their coins have been found not only in southern Gujarat and the 
Konkan, but also in the Maratha country on the other side of the 
Ghats. As the Traikutaka coin-types are closely imitated from the 
Kshatrapa coins, they must have been intended for circulation in 
districts where the Western Satraps had previously ruled and their 
coins had become familiar to the people. The Traikutakas appear to 
have ruled over substantially the same territories as had originally 
been under the Abhiras. Members of both the dynasties again had 
similar formation of names. The Traikutaka kings used the era of 
A.D. 248-9 which, as pointed out before, was probably an Abhira insti¬ 
tution. Some sort of relation, therefore, might have existed between 
the two peoples. It is not impossible that the Traikutaka kings repre¬ 
sented a family of Abhira origin and ruled over parts of Aparanta 
originally as subordinates of the Abhira kings. 

The Chandravalli inscription 3 mentions separately - the Abhiras 
and Traikutakas as having come into conflict with the Kadamba 
king Mayurasarman who ruled about the middle of the fourth cen¬ 
tury. This probably shows that the Traikutakas, originally a vice¬ 
regal family of Abhira extraction, had carved out a kingdom in Apa¬ 
ranta at the expense of the Abhira kings. There is a veiled reference 
to the Traikutaka kingdom of Aparanta in Kalidasa’s Raghuvamsa 
written in the fourth or fifth century. In the second half of the fifth 
century, the Traikutakas were probably in occupation of the Abhira 

1. EI t XXVI. 338 f; Summary of Papers submitted to the 15th Session of the 
AlOC, p. 99. R. S. Panchamukhi reads the dates of the two grants of Prithivi- 
malla-varman as his 13th and 15th regnal years; but N. L. Rao suggests the 
readings 1st and 25th regnal years. P. B. Desai’s article on Asankita’s grant is 
being published in El. Panchamukhi speaks of another charter of a Bhoja king 
named Anirjita-varman; but N. L. Rao has shown that this king belonged to 
the Maurya dynasty of the Konkan. The charter in question was issued by 
the Maurya Maharaja Anirjita-varman from Kumaradvlpa in the 29th year of 
his reign. It seems that the Bhojas were subdued by the Mauryas who were 
themselves ousted by the Chalukyas of Badami. It has to be noticed that it 
was not the Bhojas but the Mauryas who stood in the way of Chalukya expan¬ 
sion in the seventh century. 

2. The Anjaneri grant (El, XXV. 225) of PrithvI-chandra-Bhogasakti, dated 
A.D. 709, mentions the Purva-Trikuta vishaya as a part of the Puri-Konkana 
vishaya. 

3 . MAR, 1929, No. I, pp. 50 ff. 


192 








DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


possessions in northern Maharashtra and had possibly extended 
their power over considerable parts of Gujarat in the north. 

Epigraphic and numismatic evidence reveals the existence of 
three Traikutaka Maharajas who ruled in the fifth century A.D. 
They are Indradatta, his son Dahrasena, and the latter’s son Vyaghra- 
sena. 1 Little is known about Maharaja Indradatta who seems to 
have flourished about the second quarter of the fifth century and 
founded the greatness of the family. He was succeeded by his son 
Maharaja Dahrasena whose copper-plate grant, issued from the camp 
of victory at Amraka and dated in the year 207 (A.D. 455), has been 
discovered at Pardi, about 50 miles to the south of Surat. Dahra¬ 
sena is described as a devout Vaishnava. He is also credited with 
having performed an Asvamedha sacrifice which may point to the 
success of the Traikutakas against their neighbours including the 
Abhlras. 

Dahrasena was succeeded by his son Maharcija Vyaghrasena 
whose Surat Grant was issued from Aniruddhapura in the year 241 
(A.D. 489). Vyaghrasena, who is described as the lord of Aparanta 
and other countries, was a Vaishnava like his father. Nothing is 
known about the successors of this king. The Kanheri copper-plate 
inscription, recording the construction of a Chaitya at the Maha* 
vihdra (Buddhist monastery) of Krishnagiri ( i.e . Kanheri), is dated 
“in the year 245 (A.D. 493) of the increasing rule of the Traikutakas.” 
It is uncertain whether the date belongs to the reign of Maharaja 
Vyaghrasena himself or to that of his immediate successor. 
Gradually the Traikutakas lost their territories, due to the aggres¬ 
sion of the Gurjaras 2 and Kalachuris and the rise of erstwhile sub¬ 
ordinates such as the Mauryas and the Suras. 

A copper-plate charter, 3 discovered at Banaras, is known to 
have been issued from Santanapura (Santanupura?) by king Hari- 
raja of the Sura Dynasty, who was the son of Nishthuraraja and 
grandson of Kobhagraharaja (Kshobhagraharaja?). It records the 
grant of land at Amraka-nagara by the Gana of the Mahdmdtras 
under orders from king Hariraja and his queen who was the owner 
of the land. The letters of the record, which resemble the script 

1. On their coins the names of the kings are sometimes read as Dahragana and 
Vyaghragana. 

2. One of the earliest Gurjara records is probably the Sunaokala grant of the 
year 292 (A.D. 540), issued from Bharukachchha (Broach) by the Mahasamanta - 
Maharaja Samgamasimha who might have been a feudatory of the Aulikaras 
of Mandasor. 

3. Bhdratavarsha (Bengali), 1351 B.S., p. 46. The record seems to have been 
brought, to Banaras by a descendant of the donee who probably came to the 
holy place on pilgrimage. The Kamauli grant of Vaidyadeva of Kamarupa 
tells a similar story about migration of conoer-plate charters. For a different 
view on this record see JUPHS, XVIII, p. 167. 

19J3 

C.A.—13. 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of the inscriptions of the Traikutakas, may be assigned to the first 
half of the sixth century. It is, therefore, not improbable that 
Amraka-nagara mentioned in the Banaras grant is the same as 
Amraka known from the Pardi grant of Dahrasena. If this sugges¬ 
tion be accepted, the Sura kings may be regarded as ruling in the 
Surat region after the fall of the Traikutakas. It is probable that 
the Suras were originally vishaya-patis under the Traikutakas. They 
were probably subdued by the Kalachuris in the second half of 
the sixth century. 1 

III. THE KALACHURIS 

The earlier form of the dynastic name Kalachuri was Kata - 
chchuri, though in some cases we have other variants like Kalatsuri , 
Kalachuti, Ktilachchuri, Kalachulrya and Kalichuri. It was appa¬ 
rently a word of non-Sanskritic origin and has with some amount 
of plausibility, been equated with the Turkish word Kuluchur indi¬ 
cating an office of high rank. 2 This may suggest that the Kala¬ 
churis were foreigners who probably entered India in the train of 
the Hunas and Gurjaras. 3 Their later claim to have been des¬ 
cended from the Haihaya king Arjuna, son of Kritavirya and ruler of 
Mahishmati, suggests that they had settled in the Anupa country on 
the Narmada. The Kalachuris became powerful in the second half 
of the sixth century, when they are found in occupation of northern 
Maharashtra, Gujarat and parts of Malwa. The Mauryas of the 
Konkan probably acknowledged their supremacy. They used the 
era of A.D. 248-49 which therefore came to be known as the Kala¬ 
churi era; but they adopted the use of the era probably after their 
conquest of the Nasik and Broach regions. This is suggested by the 
use of the Gupta era in the Barawani grant (A.D. 486) of Maharaja 
Subandhu, king of Mahishmati, and in the records of other kings 
of the Anupa region, viz. Svamidasa (A.D. 386), Bhulunda (A.D. 426) 
and Rudradasa (A.D. 436) 4 whose family or families the foreigners 
appear to have overthrown. About the close of the sixth century, 
the Chalukyas of Badami attacked the kingdom of the Kalachuris 
from the south, while the Gurjaras gained strength in the Broach 
region. During the troubled period, the Kalachuris appear to have 
settled in Malwa; but owing to the pressure of the Maitrakas, they 

1. A person of the same Sura family is perhaps referred to in an inscription at 
Sanchl of about the fifth century A.D. (Monuments of Sanchi, by Marshall and 
Foucher, Vol. I, p. 387). 

2. Proc. IHC., 1943, p. 44. The word Thakkura (modern Thdkur) is likewise 
supposed to have originated from the Turkish title Teghin. 

3. See above, p. 65. 

4. It is difficult to agree with Prof. Mirashi who refers all these dates to the era of 
A.D. 248-49. For different views on the subject, cf. ABORI, XXV. 159 ff; IHQ, 
XXI. 80, XXII. 64, XXIII. 156, XXIV. 75. 

191 




DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


moved towards the east and ultimately settled in the Jubbulpore 
region where, after a long period of comparative obscurity, they 
emerged powerful about the end of the ninth century. 

1. Krishnaraja and Sankaragana 

Epigraphic records reveal the existence of a group of three 
Kalachuri kings, viz. Krishnaraja, his son Sankaragana and the 
latter’s son Buddharaja, who were all devout worshippers of the god 
Pasupati or Mahesvara, i.e. Siva. The greatness of the family was 
established by Krishnaraja whose silver coins bearing the legend 
paramamdhesvara-Krishnardja and the figure of a bull have been 
discovered not only in the Nasik District but also in the islands of 
Bombay and Salsette. These coins are apparently mentioned as 
Krishnard ja-rupaka in the Anjaneri grant of Prithivlchandra Bhoga- 
sakti dated A.D. 709, and were current in the northern part of the 
Chalukya empire for a long time after the end of Kalachuri rule 
in that region. 1 King Krishnaraja’s son Sankaragana was a very 
powerful monarch. A charter of Sankaragana, found at Ahbona in 
the Nasik District and dated in the year 347 (A.D. 595), was issued 
from the king’s vasaka or residence at the victorious camp of UjjayanI 
in order to grant land in the Bhogavardhana vishaya which may 
have been another name of the ancient Govardhana (Nasik) district. 
There is reference in this record to a locality called Kallavana which 
is the same as modern Kalavan, a taluk in the Nasik District. Ujja¬ 
yanI, whence the charter was issued, is often identified with Ujjani 
near Sinnar in the same District; but in view of the fact that Sanka- 
ragana’s successor is known to have issued a charter from Vaidisa, 
i.e. ancient Vidisa in East Malwa, it is possible to identify UjjayanI 
of the Abhona grant with the celebrated city of that name in West 
Malwa. Thus Sankaragana’s territories appear to have comprised 
at least the Nasik District in the south and parts of Malwa in the 
north. The Aulikaras of Mandasor were probably subdued by this 
king. It is very interesting that long passages in eulogy of Sankara¬ 
gana are copied verbatim from the description of Samudra-gupta as 
found in the Gupta records. This shows that the Kalachuri king 
conquered territories (probably in the Malvra-Gujarat region) that 
had originally been under the Gupta emperors. 

Kalachuri Sankaragana is said to have acquired royal fortune 
by the prowess of his arms and is credited w r ith reinstating many 
kings who had lost their thrones. He further claims to have been 
the lord of the entire land bounded by the Eastern and Western Seas, 

1. Gurjara Dadda I (above, p. 66) is described in inscriptions as Krishnn-hriday- 
ahit-aspada, probably in allusion to his being a subordinate of Kalachuri 
Krishnaraja (IHQ, XXV. 290). 


195 



the classical age 


i.e. the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea. Although these claims 
are of a conventional character and can hardly be accepted in their 
literal sense, .there is no doubt that Sahkaragana was one of the 
most powerful rulers of his time. It is probable that he succeeded in 
extending Kalachuri power over parts of Gujarat and Kathiawar. 

The Sankheda (Baroda District) copper-plate Grant, issued about 
the last quarter of the sixth century, refers to a prince named Nin- 
hullaka who was a feudatory of king Sankaragana (wrongly written 
Sankarana), son of Krishnaraja. The Kalachuri occupation of Guja¬ 
rat suggested by this record is further indicated by a record of Sanka- 
ragana’s son. Nirihullaka may have been a Gurjara and a descen¬ 
dant of Samgamasimha, ruler of Bharukachchha (Broach) mentioned 
in the Sunaokala Grant of the year 292 (A.D. 540). The expansion 
of Chalukya influence over this region about the first quarter of the 
seventh century A.D. is indicated by the claim of Pulakesin II to 
have subdued the Latas, Malavas and Gurjaras. 

2. Buddharaja 

Shortly after A.D. 595 Sankaragana was succeeded by his son 
Buddharaja. The Vadner grant of Buddharaja, dated in the year 360 
(A.D. 608), was issued from Vaidisa (i.e. Vidisa, modern Besnagar 
in old Gwalior State) in order to grant land in the Vatanagara bhoga 
which is the same as modern Vadner in the Chandor taluk of the 
Nasik District. It is possible that East Malwa, of which Vidisa was 
the old capital, was conquered by Buddharaja shortly before A.D. 608 
from king Deva-gupta of the so-called Later Gupta dynasty, who is 
known to have fought conjointly with the Gaudas against the Mau- 
kharis and Pushyabhutis about A.D. 605-06. 

The Chalukya king Maiigalesa (c. A.D. 597-98 to 610-11) claims 
to have put to flight Buddharaja, son of Sankaragana, and to have 
appropriated the royal fortunes of the Katachchuris. The earliest 
reference to Mangalesa’s success against Katachchuri Buddharaja 
is found in the Mahakuta pillar inscription of A.D. 602. But the 
Vadner grant indicating Kalachuri occupation of the Nasik District 
in A.D. 608 shows that the Chalukya conquest of the southern pro¬ 
vinces of the Kalachuri kingdom in the central and northern parts 
of Maharashtra was by no means complete before the date of the 
Mahakuta pillar inscription. Mangalesa’s successor is known to 
have granted a village in the Nasik District in A.D. 630. Another 
copper-plate charter of Buddharaja was discovered at Sarsavni near 
Padra in the Baroda District. It was issued in the year 361 (A.D. 609) 
in order to grant land in the Bharukachchha vishaya, i.e. the district 
round modern Broach. 


19G 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


3. Nanna and Taralasvamin 

The second plate of a charter containing no valuable information 
excepting a date in the year 346 (A.D. 594) was long ago discovered 
at Sankheda in the Baroda District. The charter would appear to 
have been one of the time of Kalachuri Sankaragana, although it was 
usually believed to be the concluding part of a Gurjara record. Re¬ 
cently the first plate of a grant has been found at Mankani not far 
from Sankheda and it has been suggested that the Mankani and 
Sankheda fragments constitute the whole of a complete charter. 1 

The Mankani inscription reveals some valuable information 
about the history of the Kalachuris. It records the grant of the 
village of Mahkanika (modern Mankani) by a prince named Tarala¬ 
svamin who is credited with no royal title. He is described as the 
son of Maharaja Nanna (written Nanna ) by Dadda, apparently 
Nanna’s queen who may have been related to Sdmanta Dadda I of 
Gurjara lineage. Taralasvamin is probably called sri-Surya-bh&vuka 
and it has been suggested that he was the sister’s husband of a 
prince named Surya who cannot be identified. In spite of the fact 
that Taralasvamin is described as a worshipper of Siva, the expression 
may possibly be interpreted as pointing to his leanings towards the 
worship of the Sun-god. The most important information supplied 
by the record is, however, that Maharaja Nanna is called Katach- 
churi-kula-vesma-pradtpa, i.e. the light of the house that was the 
family of the Katachchuris. The normal indication' of the passage 
is that Nanna was a scion of the Kalachuri family, although it may 
also suggest that Nanna’s mother was a Kalachuri princess. It is 
difficult to reconcile the rule of Nanna or his son Taralasvamin in the 
Sankheda region, in case it is assigned to A.D. 594, with Kalachuri 
Sankaragana’s rule at the same time and over the same area. Whe¬ 
ther Nanna was a rival of Sankaragana and held sway over the 
Gujarat region for some time with Gurjara help cannot be deter¬ 
mined with the meagre information available. 

The Chalukya king Vinayaditya (A.D. 681-96) claims to have 
defeated the Haihayas. His grandson Vikramaditya II (A.D. 733-34 
to 746) married two Haihaya princesses. These Haihayas appear 
to be no other than the Kalachuris who were then probably ruling 
in the eastern districts of Malwa and the adjoining areas. 


1. Imp. Ins. Bar. St., I, p. 4 ff. The plate does not appear to be spurious as sug¬ 
gested by Mirashi. 


197 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


IV. THE EARLY RASHTRAKUTAS 

1. Origin 

Several theories have been put forward to explain the dynastic 
designation of the Rashtrakutas; but the most acceptable view seems 
to be that it arose like the dynastic names PraUhara, Peshwd and 
many others, 1 from an official designation. Officials styled Rdshtra - 
kuta, apparently indicating “head of a rdshtra (districts), 2 are 
mentioned in many records belonging to kings of the Chalukya (cf. 
Lohner Grant of A.D. 630) and Rashtrakuta (cf. Ellora Grant of 
A.D. 742) families of Kanarese origin, although the viceregal style 
in question appears to have been prevalent in the Deccan even be¬ 
fore the rise of the Chalukyas of Badami. As the Chalukyas in later 
times associated themselve often directly with the lunar race and 
sometimes indirectly with the solar kings of Ayodhya, the family of 
the Imperial Rashtrakutas is known to have introduced, in the ninth 
century, a claim of descent from another ancient family of epic 
fame. As late as A.D. 808, the date of Wani-Dindori Grant, the 
court-poets of the Rashtrakuta emperors were content with compar¬ 
ing the Rashtrakuta family with the ancient race of Yadu by point¬ 
ing out that the former became as invincible with the birth of 
Govinda III as the latter had been with the birth of Murari (i.e. 
Krishna). The comparison was no doubt suggested by the king’s 
name Govinda , which was also a name of Vasudeva-Krishna of 
Yadava lineage, and by the fact that Vaishnava kings often claimed 
to have been incarnations of Krishna identified with Vishnu (cf. the 
style Sri-prithivt-vallahha adopted by the Rashtrakutas from their 
former suzerains the Chalukyas). The author of the Sanjan Grant 
of A.D. 871, however, advanced one step further by declaring lord 
Vira-Narayana (i.e. Krishna) to be the progenitor of the Rashtra¬ 
kuta family which he identified with the Yadavanvaya. Still 
further development of the claim of Yadava affinity by the imperial 

Rashtrakutas is noticed in later records such as the Karhad and 
• • 

Deoli Grants of Krishna III, wherein the Rashtrakutas are made the 
descendants of the eponymous Ratta, born in the family of kings 
who were styled Tunga (i.e. high or the high-born; cf. tunga-ganga- 
kula etc.) and belonged to the Satyaki branch of the Yadu-vamsa. 

1. The history of the Pratlharas and the Peshwas will be dealt with in Vols. IV 
and VHI respectively. In this connection, cf. other old styles like Rashtrika, 
(Maharashtrika), Bhojaka (Mahabhojaka), etc., and present day family names 
like Deshmukh, Patel, Majumdar, Niyogi, etc. The crystallisation of an offi¬ 
cial title into a family name was mainly due to the fact that, in ancient India 
the employment of officers was often on hereditary principle and that some¬ 
times the viceregal families did not discard their earlier style even after the 
assumption of independent or imperial status. 

2. Cf. the word gramakuta, ‘the headman of a village.’ 


198 







DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


Epigraphic evidence points to the existence of individuals with 
the title Rashtrakuta as well as of Rashtrakuta families ruling in 
different parts of the Deccan before the collapse of the Chalukya 
house of Badami about the middle of the eighth century. A Rashtra¬ 
kuta named Govindaraja, son of Sivaraja, appears to have ruled the 
Satara-Ratnagiri region under the Chalukya king Vikramaditya II 
about A.D. 743. It is not known whether he had any relation with 
the earlier Rashtrakutas of the same area, who ruled in the fifth and 
sixth centuries A.D. Another family of the Rashtrakutas is known 
to have ruled in the Betul and Ellichpur Districts of Madhya Pradesh 
in the seventh and eighth centuries. The most important of the 
Rashtrakuta families was the one which originally flourished some¬ 
where in the upper Deccan, probably under the Chalukya viceroys of 
the Gujarat region, and later became so powerful as to deprive the 
Chalukyas of Badami of their sovereignty of the Deccan. It is some¬ 
times believed that the families of the Rashtrakutas noticed above 
were different branches of the same dynasty. But the suggestion 
appears to be unlikely in view of the fact that officials styled Rashtra¬ 
kuta are not only mentioned in earlier records, but also known to 
have been in me service of later kings including the imperial Cha¬ 
lukyas and Rashtrakutas. In this section, we propose to deal with 
the early and less important families of the Rashtrakutas leaving 
the history of the imperial Rashtrakutas to be treated in the next 
volume. 

2. The Rashtrakutas of Manapura 

A ruler named Abhimanyu, who resided at Manapura and was 
the son of Bhavishya, grandson of Devaraja and great-grandson of 
Rashtrakuta Mananka, is known from his Undikavatika Grant. 
Although the find-spot of the record is unknown, scholars tried to 
locate the territories of this family of rulers on the basis of the iden¬ 
tification of Manapura, apparently their capital founded by, and 
named after, Mananka. The city was supposed by some waiters to 
be the same as modern Manpur near Bandhogarh in the Rewah State 
in Central India. It was further suggested that king Mananka and 
his son Devaraja are identical respectively with king Manamatra 
and Sudevaraja who were, however, rulers of South Kosala with 
Sarabhapura as their capital. The identification of the kings of 
Manapura and Sarabhapura is absolutely unwarranted in view of 
the facts, (1) that none of the Sarabhapuriyas ever claimed to be a 
Rashtrakfita, (2) that the two families apparently ruled over diffe¬ 
rent territories from different capital cities, (3) that the seal of the 
Sarabhapuriyas bears the representation of the Gaja-Lakshmi, while 
that of the Manapura kings the figure of a lion, and (4) that the char- 


199 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


ters of the kings of Manapura are not written in the box-headed 
script like those of the &?rabhapura kings. The recent discovery 
of another Grant of the Manapura family, issued by Avidheya, son 

of Devaraja and grandson of Mananka, in the neighbourhood of 

* 

Kolhapur, points unmistakably to the fact that the royal house of 
Manapura ruled in the southern part of the Maratha country. 
Mirashi’s identification of Manapura with Man in the Satara District 
is generally accepted. 1 


King Mananka, founder of the dynasty, is described in the 
Undikavatika Grant as the ornament of the Rashtrakutas and may 
have originally been the Rdshtrakuta or provincial governor of some 
other king. He seems to have flourished in the! middle of the fifth 
century. Whether he once owed allegiance to the Vakatakas of 
Vatsagulma cannot be determined. The Pandurangapalll Grant of 
his grandson Avidheya, however, seems to describe Mananka as the 
conqueror of Vidarbha and Asmaka. 2 It is probable that the names 
Vidarbha and Asmaka have actually been used to indicate respec¬ 
tively the kingdom of the Vakatakas of Berar and that of the 
Vakatakas of Vatsagulma who are known to have ruled at least as far 
south as Nandikata, i.e. the Nander District of Hyderabad in ancient 
Asmaka. In the same record, Mananka is also called the chastiser 
( prasdsitd ) of the Kuntalas who are undoubtedly the Kadambas of 
the Kanarese country. 3 


Mananka was succeeded by his son Devaraja 4 who is said to 
have had three sons. The Pandurangapalll Grant was issued by 
Avidheya, son of Devaraja. Another son of Devaraja was Bhavishya, 
father of Abhimanyu, who issued the Undikavatika Grant. It is un¬ 
certain whether Avidheya ruled immediately after his father Deva¬ 
raja or after his brother Bhavishya or nephew Abhimanyu. 


While residing at Manapura, king Abhimanyu granted the vil¬ 
lage of Undikavatika, in honour of God Dakshina-&iva, to the &aiva 
ascetic Jatabhara in the presence of Jayasimha, the commander of the 
fort of Harivatsa. As the record may be assigned to the sixth cen¬ 
tury, it is no doubt tempting to identify Jayasimha of the Undika- 


1. ABORI, XXV. 42. The suggestion that these Rashtrakutas were in possession 
of wide regions including South Kosala, Central India and large parts of the 

vvnfiln d ° n mere unwarra nted guesses (cf. PIHC. VII, p. 70; ABORI 
-A.A.1 V. 149-55). 1 

2. See above, p. 187. 

3 ‘ Th l r ^- 1S n ° satisfactor y evidence in support of Mirashi’s view that Mananka 
and h.s successors were themselves rulers of the Kuntala country and that they 

v|£-* - l0rdS + ° f K / U A n H a T,r referred to in the K vntalesvaradautva and the 

WQ XXIIh S 65?320 On ( ’ XXV - 36) ‘ F ° r KUntala ’ See SttC ‘ 215 ' 16 ; 

4 ‘ to a ^cept Mirashi’s suggestion identifying Devaraja of Manapura 

with Devaraja of the Bhoja dynasty of Goa (op. cit. 43). P 


200 








DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


vatika grant with Jayasimha-vallabha, founder of the Chalukya house v 

of Badami. But even in that case his relation to the Rashtrakutas of 

• • 

Manapura cannot be determined with any amount of certainty, espe¬ 
cially in view of the great influence of the Kadamba style on the 
documents of the Early Chalukyas. It is not known whether the 
rulers of Manapura were finally subdued by the Early Chalukyas or 
by some other power such as the Mauryas of the Konkan. Although 
certain records of the Later Chalukyas assert that Jayasimha-valla¬ 
bha obtained sovereignty of the Deccan by overthrowing the Rashtra¬ 
kuta king Indra, son of Krishna, the statement is regarded by scho¬ 
lars as a fabrication influenced by a reflection of events of the tenth 
century when Rashtrakuta suzerainty passed from the successors of 
Krishna III to the founder of the Later Chalukya dynasty. This is 
obviously supported by the fact that Jayasimha-vallabha is repre¬ 
sented as a petty chief without any achievement to his credit in the 
records of the early Chalukyas of Badami, especially in the detailed 
description of the family’s rise as found in the Aihole inscription. 
It seems significant that the Rashtrakutas do not figure in the list of 
powers overwhelmed by the early members of the Badami house, not 
even in the exaggerated account in the Mahakuta pillar inscription 
of the exploits of Kirtivarman I, the real founder of the family’s 
greatness. It seems more probable, therefore, that the rulers of 
Manapura were subdued by the Mauryas or the Nalas, who were 
in their turn overwhelmed by the Early Chalukyas. Rashtrakuta 
Govindaraja, son of Sivaraja, who appears to have ruled in the 
Satara-Ratnagiri region during the reign of Vikramaditya II, may 
have been a scion of the old house of the Rashtrakutas of Manapura. 

3. The Rashtrakutas of Ber&r 

Four rulers of a family are known from two copper-plate char¬ 
ters discovered at Tiwarkhed and Multai in the Betul District of 
Madhya Pradesh. Both the Grants were issued by Nannaraja, sur- 
named Yuddhasura, who was the son of Svamikaraja, grandson of 
Govindaraja, and great-grandson of Durgaraja. They are said to 
have belonged to the Rashtrakuta lineage. The Tiwarkhed grant 
was issued from Achalapura (modern Ellichpur in the Amraoti Dis¬ 
trict) which was probably the capital of this family of rulers. The 
recently discovered Sangalooda Plates of Nannaraja Yuddhasura 
were issued from Padmanagara which may have been a secondary 
capital of these Rashtrakutas. They appear to have held sway over 
the Betul-Amraoti region of the Upper Deccan. 

The date of the Multai grant of Nannaraja, expressed in words, 
is Saka 631 corresponding to A.D. 709. The language of the passage 


201 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


recording the date of the Tiwarkhed grant is defective and yields no 
satisfactory meaning, although it has been so amended as to indicate 
the Saka year 553 (A.D. 631). But a comparison of this date with 
the satisfactorily worded date of the other record shows that the Saka 
year intended is probably 653 corresponding to A.D. 731 or 732. 
The date of the Sangalooda plates is Saka 615 (A.D. 693). 
Rashtrakuta Nanna of Achalapura therefore may be roughly assign¬ 
ed to the period A.D. 690-735. His great-grandfather Durgaraja 
appears to have flourished about the middle of the seventh century. 
Durgaraja may have been appointed a Rashtrakuta (provincial gover¬ 
nor) by Pulakesin II, but ruled almost independently for some time 
after Pulakesin’s death when the Chalukya house of Badami was 
in peril. It is interesting to note that Dantivarman I, founder of 
the imperial line of the Rashfrakutas, seems also to have flourished 
about the middle of the seventh century and may have been appoint¬ 
ed governor of a district somewhere in the northern part of the Dec- 
can by the same Chalukya monarch. Both these Rashtrakuta houses 
appear to have been growing powerful during the weak rule of the 
later members of the imperial house of Badami in the first half of 
the eighth century. It seems that the Rashtrakuta house of Achala¬ 
pura was subdued by Dantidurga (Dantivarman II), who belonged 
to another family of the Rashtrakutas and established Rashtrakuta 
sovereignty in the Deccan in the middle of the eighth century. 

C. EASTERN DECCAN 
I. ANDHRA 
1. The Anandas 

We have seen how the Pallavas of Kanchl conquered the heart 
of the Andhra country about the close of the third century. The 
credit of freeing the region around the Guntur District from Pallava 
yoke would seem to go to a new family of rulers who claimed to have 
belonged to the Ananda gotra or to have been descendants of a great 
sage namea Ananda. Only three kings of the Ananda dynasty are 
known from inscriptions. They are Kandara, Attivarman and 
Damodaravarman, who appear to have flourished about the second 
half of the fourth and first half of the fifth century. There is con¬ 
siderable difference of opinion amongst scholars as regards the dynas¬ 
tic name and chronology of the Ananda kings. The dynasty to 
which the three kings belonged is sometimes called the Kandara 
family or the Ananda-gotra family. It cannot, however, be ignored 
that only the descendants of king Kandara may be described as be¬ 
longing to the Kandara family and that the word gotra means 


202 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 

‘family’ in the Sanskrit language. As regards the chronology of the 
Ananda kings, different writers have placed them variously in the 
sixth and seventh centuries, in the period A.D. 375-500, and in A.D. 
290-630. The most important fact to be considered in this connec¬ 
tion is that the Mattepad Grant of Damodaravarman is written part¬ 
ly in Sanskrit and partly in Prakrit and can hardly be very much 
later than the second half of the fourth century when Prakrit was 
ousted by Sanskrit from the field of South Indian epigraphy. There 
is again no reason to believe that Kandara and Attivarman were re¬ 
moved from Damodaravarman by long periods of time. 

The name Kandara is a Prakritic corruption of Sanskrit Krishna 
under Dravidian influence. King Kandara seems to have been the 
founder of the city of Kandarapura which became the capital of the 
Ananda kings. It was probably situated in the vicinity of modern 
Chezarla in the Guntur District. An inscription at this place re¬ 
presents king Kandara as lord of the river Krishnavenna (Krishna), 
of the hill called Trikuta, the city of Kandarapura, and of two jana- 
padas or provinces. The Trikuta-parvata of the Chezarla inscrip¬ 
tion has been tentatively identified with the Trikuta-malaya mention¬ 
ed in a Vishnukundin record and with modern Kotappakonda near 
Kavur. One of the janapadas of Kandara’s kingdom may have been 
the district round Kandarapura. Kandara’s banner is said to have 
borne the figure of the goldhgula which is a species of monkey. It is 
uncertain whether the defaced seals of the copper-plate charters of 
the Ananda kings also bear the representation of the same animal. 

The Chezarla inscription actually belongs to Satsabhamalla, who 
was the daughter’s son of Kandara and probably belonged to a vicere¬ 
gal line. The record seems to credit king Kandara with the title 
Prithivi-yuvamt and possibly also with victory in some battles at 
Dhanyakataka (Amaravati region) which is known to have been the 
Pallava headquarters in Andhrapatha. It is not improbable that 
Kandara and his feudatories drove out the Pallavas from Dhanya¬ 
kataka about the middle of the fourth century. 1 

King Attivarman, whose name is a Prakritic curruption of 
Sanskrit Hastivarman under Dravidian influence, issued the 
Gorantla charter. In this record the Ananda king is described as a 
worshipper of Sambhu (Siva) and a performer of Hiranyagarbha 
mahaddna. The temple of Siva, who seems to have been the family 
deity of the early kings of the family, was located at a place called 
Vakesvara, which was probably in the vicinity of the capital city of 
Kandarapura and may have been the same as modern Chezarla. 

1. Considering the palaeography of the Chezarla Ins. it may be suggested that 
Kandara of this record flourished later than Attivarman and Damodara-varman 
and was different from the founder of the family bearing the same name. 


203 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The Ananda king Damodaravarman, who issued the Mattepad 
Grant, was a devotee of lord Saniyak-Sambuddha (Buddha). In 
connection with Damodaravarman’s patronage of the Buddhist faith, 
it may be pointed out that the Kapotesvara temple at Chezarla is re¬ 
garded by scholars as a structural Chaitya hall which was originally 
Buddhist but was later converted to Brahmanical usage. The tem¬ 
ple is usually assigned to the fourth century which date seems to 
connect it with the kings of the Ananda dynasty. 

King Damodaravarman is usually regarded as a predecessor of 
Attivarman on the throne of Kandarapura. His description as the 
son of a king who had celebrated the Hiranyagarbha mahaddna may, 
however, suggest that he was the son of Attivarman, a performer of 
the Hiranyagarbha. 

The decline of the Anandas was probably brought about by their 
constant struggles with the Pallavas. 

2. The Salahkayanas 

In the Geography of Ptolemy, composed about A.D. 140, men¬ 
tion is made of a people called Salakenoi who inhabited the land to 
the north of Maisolia or the modern Masulipatam area. Ptolemy’s 
Salakenoi appear to be none other than the Salahkayanas who are 
known to have lived in the land between the mouths of the Krishna 
and the Godavari with their capital at the city of Vengi, modern 
Pedda-Vegi near Ellore in the Godavari District. According to 
Ptolemy an important city of the Salakenoi was Benagouron which 
may be a Greek corruption of Vengapura or Vehglpura. The Salahka¬ 
yanas must have acknowledged the suzerainty of the later Satava- 
hanas; but whether they had also to submit to the Ikshvakus and to 
the Pallava conquerors of Andhrapatha cannot be definitely settled. 

The Salahkayana charters were all issued from the city of Vengi. 
The Kollair Grant was issued by Maharaja Nandivarman, eldest son 
of Maharaja Chandavarman. This king is apparently identical with 
Maharaja Nandivarman II of the Pedda-Vegi Grant, who is said to 
have been the eldest son of Maharaja Chandavarman, grandson of 
Maharaja Nandivarman I and great-grandson of Maharaja Hasti- 
varman. There is little doubt that the Salankayana king Hastivar- 
man is the same as the king of Vengi of that name who, according 
to the Allahabad pillar inscription, was defeated by the Gupta 
emperor Samudra-gupta about the middle of the fourth century. 
The recently discovered Kanukollu Plates (first set) 1 record in Pra¬ 
krit a grant made in his 14th regnal year by Nandivarman who was 
presumably the son of Hastivarman. The grandson of this Nandi- 

1. Ancient India, No. 5, pp. 46-7. 


204 






DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 

varman I was Nandivarman II, who may be roughly assigned to the 
second quarter of the fifth century. The Kanteru grant (No. 1) was 
issued by a Salankayana Mahdmja named Nandi varman whose an¬ 
cestors are not, however, mentioned in the charter. He may be 
identified with Nandivarman II on the strength of the common 
epithet parama-bhagavata . 

A Mahdmja, named Skandavarman, is known from two grants, 
the Kanteru plates (No. 2) and Kanukollu plates (No. 2) issued by 
him. According to the latter he was a grandson of Nandivarman (I) 
and son of Hastivarman II. His relative chronological position 
with respect to Chandavarman and Nandivarman II is not yet known. 
We may thus draw the following genealogy of the &alankayanas: 

Hastivarman I 

i 

Nandivarman I 


Hastivarman II Skandavarman 

i i 

Chandavarman Nandivarman II 

• • 

Another Salankayana Maharaja, Devavarman, who was a devotee 
of Mahesvara (Siva), is known from his Ellore grant issued in the 
thirteenth year of his reign. As the Ellore grant is written in Pra¬ 
krit while the records of Nandivarman II and Skandavarman are in 
Sanskrit, Devavarman must be regarded as earlier than both. 
Some writers believe that he was a son of Hastivarman I; but 
there is no evidence in support of this suggestion. He might 
have been the predecessor of Hastivarman on the throne of Vengi 
and flourished about the second quarter of the fourth century. The 
grant describes Maharaja Devavarman as having performed the 
Asvamedha sacrifice. This may indicate that he flourished before 
Samudra-gupta’s invasion and established the greatness of the 
Salankayana family after successful campaigns with enemies who 
might have been the Pallava conquerors of Andhrapatha. 

Although either Saivism or Vaishnavism was preferred by in¬ 
dividual Salankayana monarchs, all of them claimed to have been 
devoted to the god Chitraratha-svamin who apparently was the 
family deity of the Salankayana Maharajas. As the word Chitraratha 
means “the sun”, the deity may have been the Sun-god. The seals 
attached to the copper-plate charters of the Salankayana kings bear 
the representation of a bull which seems to have been the crest of 


L'05 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the family. As the word ‘salankayana’ indicates Nandin, the bull 
of Siva, it is probable that the crest of the galankayana rulers was 
not entirely unconnected with the name of their family. 

The Salankayanas held sway over West Godavari and Krishna 
Districts, probably with some of the adjoining regions. Their de¬ 
cline is wrapped in obscurity. The Mangalur Grant of Simhavar- 
man (c. A.D. 500), the Pallava king of the Nellore-Guntur region, 
records a gift of land in the Vengo {sic. Vehgl) rushtra. This fact 
probably points to the success of the Pallavas against the Salarika- 
yanas of Vengl about the end of the fifth century. The Vishnu¬ 
kundins appear to have finally subdued them about the beginning 
of the next century. 

3. The Vishnukundins 

The Vishnukundins appear to have derived their name from 
their original home, modern Vinukonda, about 60 miles east of the 
Srlsaila hill in the Kurnool District and 50 miles south of the Krishna. 
The kings of the Vishnukundin dynasty had the representation of 
the lion on their seals and were worshippers of the god Sriparvata- 
svamin, i.e. a deity in a temple on the Srlparvata (modern Nalla- 
malur range including the Srlsaila peak), who was the family deity 
of the Vishnukundins. Whether Sriparvata-svamin has to be identified 
with Siva-Mallikarjuna on the Srlsaila cannot be determined. 

There is difference of opinion among scholars regarding the 
genealogy of the Vishnukundin kings. The main cause of this differ¬ 
ence is the relation of king Madhava-varman mentioned in Chik- 
kulla and Ramatirtham plates with the homonymous king mentioned 
in the Ipur (first set) and Polamuru plates. In all these plates the 
king is referred to as having performed eleven Asvamedha and a 
thousand other sacrifices. But the latter two add that he ‘celebrat¬ 
ed the Hiranyagarbha mahdddruT and ‘caused the delight of the dam¬ 
sels residing at Trivaranagara.’ The celebration of eleven Asva¬ 
medha and a thousand other sacrifices is so unique in the opinion 
of some scholars that they believe that all the four plates refer 
to one and the same king. But other scholars regard the 
king mentioned in the first two plates as different from, and much 
earlier than, the king mentioned in the last two. 1 The history and 

1. As pointed out by me (7HQ, IX. 653ff), it is difficult to believe that there were 
more than one Vishnukundin king named Madhava-varman who performed 
exactly equal number of sacrifices, i.e. eleven Asvamedhas and one thousand 
Agnishtomas ( kratus ). In a note recently published in IC, XV, p. 13 ff., Prof. 
K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, however, duplicates the above Madhava-varman, per¬ 
former of eleven horse-sacrifices, etc. He doubts the genuineness of the claim 
but seems to suggest that the first Madhava-varman may have performed the 
sacrifices while the later king of the same name appropriated his ancestor’s 


20G 







DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 

chronology of the dynasty, as well as its relations with the neigh¬ 
bouring powers, would differ considerably if we accept the one or 
the other theory. The following sketch is based on the view that 
the same king is mentioned in all the four plates, 1 and this gives us 
the following genealogy. 

Vikramahendra (Vikramendra-varman I) c. A.D. 500 
Maharaja Govindavarman Vikramasraya 

i 

Maharaja Madhavavarman I Janasraya. c. A. D. 535-85 


Devavarman (Raja) Vikramendra- Manchyanna- 

varman II. bhattaraka 

Madhavavarman II ( Maharaja) Raja Indra- 

[bhattaraka]-varman c. A.D. 590-620 

Maharaja Vikramendravarman (III) c. A.D. 620-631 

The earliest known king of the Vishnukundin family was Vikra¬ 
mahendra (c. A.D. 500), who is known from his grandson’s records. 
The correct form of king Vikramahendra’s name may be either 
Vikramamahendra or Vikramendra. As, however, there are two 
rulers named Vikramendra-varman among his descendants, while 
Vikramamahendra is otherwise unknown in the family, this king 
should probably be designated Vikramendra (Vikramendra- 
varman) I of the Vishnukundin family. He was succeeded by his son 

claim conventionally. Although conventional appropriation of an ancestor’s 
claim by his successors is not entirely unknown in Indian history, Prof. Sastri’s 
suggestion is entirely unconvincing in view of thfe facts that none of the known 
descendants of the noted performer of sacrifices (viz. his grandson Madhava¬ 
varman II of the second set of the Ipur plates, his other grandson Indravarman 
of the Ramatirtham plates, and his great-grandson Vikramendravarman II of 
the Chikkulla plates) applies the claim to himself, but passes it to his ancestor, 
and that Madhavavarman of the Polamuru plates, who claims the performance 
of the above sacrifices, exactly in the same numbers (conventionally, according 
to Prof Sastri), while speaking of his ancestors, does not mention any one 
bearing his name. The unique numbers of the sacrifices and the peculiarity 
of the claim suggest that it is based on facts whatever may be their real nature. 
Sastri makes much of the difference between Madhava-varman’s description 
in his own records and in those of his descendants, but ignores similar diffe¬ 
rences between his description in his Ipur (No. 1) and his Polamuru Grants, 
as well as in the records of his grandsons and in that of his great-grandson. 
He does not also notice that his scheme of Vishnukundin genealogy was pre¬ 
viously offered by V. S. Ramachandramurty in JAHRS, X, 193, and was com¬ 
mented on by me (ibid, XI, 129 ff). Sastri’s (i.e. Ramachandramurty’s) scheme 
has been characterised as “not completely convincing” in a review in JRAS, 
1952, p. 83. 

1. For the other view, cf. Appendix to this chapter. 


207 











THE CLASSICAL AGE 


j 

(Sovinda-varman Vikramasraya whose records have not yet been dis¬ 
covered. 

The real founder of the greatness of the Vishnukundin family 
was Madhava-varman I Janairaya, who was the son and successor of 
Govinda-varman Vikramasraya and probably flourished in the period 
A.D. 535-85. That he began to rule about the middle of the sixth 
century is indicated by the fact that more than a generation elapsed 
between his advanced years and the early years of the reign of the 
Eastern Chalukya king Jayasirhha I (c. A.D. 633-63). The village 
of Polamuru in the Ramachandrapur taluk of the Godavari District 
is known to have been granted by Madhava-varman I in the year 40 
(or probably 48) of his reign to the Brahmana Sivasarman, resident 
of Kunlura in the Karma-rashtra, while the same village was once 
again granted by Jayasirhha I in his fifth regnal year to Sivasarman’s 
son Rudrasarman who is described as residing at the Asanapura 
sthana (near Drdksharam in the Godavari District) and as the former 
owner of the agrahdra of Polamuru. Considering the facts that 
Brahmanas usually received agraharas from kings at the time of 
entering the grihastfoaSrama, that Rudrasarman enjoyed the village 
for some time after his father’s death and before the fifth year of 
Jayasimha’s reign, and that Rudrasarman had probably fled to Asa¬ 
napura due to the troubled state of the country caused by Eastern 
Chalukya conquest of the Vishnukundin territories, it would seem 
that the difference between the dates of the two grants was about 
half a century. The 40th (or 48th) year of the reign of Madhava- 
varman I may thus be assigned to the last quarter of the sixth cen¬ 
tury. 

In all the records of the Vishnukundin family, Maharaja Mad¬ 
hava-varman I is credited with having performed eleven Asvamedha 
sacrifices and one thousand agnishtomas (or other sacrifices). In 
his own charters, he is further credited with the celebration of the 
Hiranyagarbha mahdddna. These were no doubt regarded as re¬ 
markable achievements. 

In both the Ipur and Polamuru Grants of Madhava-varman I, 
the king is described as causing delight to the damsels residing at 
Trivara-nagara, no doubt a city that the Vishnukundin king claimed 
to have subdued. Trivara-nagara seems to indicate the capital 
city of a king named Trivara, who may be identified with the 
PanduvamsI ruler Tivara of South Kosala who ruled about the last 
quarter of the sixth century. According to the Polamuru inscrip¬ 
tion, Madhava-varman I crossed the river Godavari about the 40th 
(or 48th) year of his reign with a view to conquering the eastern 
region. It is usually believed that here is an indirect reference to 


208 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


his struggle with the Maukhari king isanavarman who claims, how¬ 
ever, to have defeated an Andhra king some time before A.D. 553. 
Madhava-varman I married a princess of the Vakataka family and 
had by her a son named Vikramendra-varman (II). 

A Vishnukundin prince named Madhava-varman (II), son of 
Deva-varman and grandson of Madhava-varman I, is known from 
his charter which has been discovered at Ipur and is possibly dated 
in the 47th regnal year of his grandfather. Madhava-varman II is 
described in the record as the lord of Trikuta-Malaya which might 
have been the name of a province of his grandfather’s kingdom and 
which he was possibly governing as the viceroy. Trikuta-Malaya 
has been tentatively identified with modern Kotappakonda near 
Kavur in the Narasaraopet taluk of the Guntur District, although 
the charter was issued from Amarapura which seems to be the same 
as Amaravatl. 

The Vishnukundin king Madhava-varman I Janasraya was not 
only a conqueror and one who performed religious sacrifices; he was 
also a great patron of learning. A work on prosody entitled the 
Janasrayl Chhandovichiti was most probably written under his pat¬ 
ronage and named after him. Several traditions may possibly be 
referred to this Vishnukundin king. He seems to be the South In¬ 
dian monarch named Madhava mentioned in the Aryamanjusnmula - 
kalpa. A Bezwada inscription of the thirteenth century refers to a 
king of Bezwada named Madhava-varman, who sentenced his own 
son to death for killing a poor woman’s son. In a record of the six¬ 
teenth century, a general of king Krishnadevaraya of Vijayanagara is 
stated to have descended from king Madhava-varman of Bezwada. 
A poem entitled Srikrishnavijaya, written about the middle of that 
century, speaks of a migration into Telingana of four Rajput tribes 
under the leadership of Madhava-varman who is claimed to have 
been the progenitor of the royal family of Vizianagaram in the Viza- 
gapatam District. The Razus or Rachavars of the Telugu country 
also claim to be descendants of Madhava-varman. Telugu litera¬ 
ture records a legend about Madhava-varman that he was the post¬ 
humous son of Somadeva, king of Kandara, and was named after a 
Brahmana of Anumakonda (modern Hanmakonda near Warangal), 
the capital of the Kakatiyas in later times. The legend also refers 
to the struggle between the kings of Kandara and the king of Kataka. 
Whatever be the historical value of these traditions, they no doubt 
point to the deep impression the achievements of Madhava-varman I 
made on the minds of the people. 

Madhava-varman I Janasraya was succeeded by his son Vikra¬ 
mendra-varman II, born of his queen of the Vakata or Vakataka 

209 

C.A.—14 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


family. This king, possibly after a short reign, was succeeded by his 
son Indra-varman or Indrabhattaraka-varman who was a paramo- 
mahesvara and seems to have flourished in the period c. A.D. 590- 
620. 1 There is little doubt that he was a great conqueror; but, dur¬ 
ing the latter part of his rule, the Vishnukundin kingdom appears to 
have been threatened by enemies. His brilliant success against his 
enemies on the east is amply demonstrated by the discovery of his 
Ramatirtham copper-plate charter, dated in his 27th regnal year, 
which was issued from a locality near the sangama (confluence) of 
the river Purani and records a grant of land in the Plaki-rashtra in 
the modern Yizagapatam District lying far away from the Vishnu- 
kundin kingdom proper, between the lower courses of the Krishna 
and the Godavari. According to the Godavari Grant of Raja Pri- 
thivlmula, son of MoJndrdja Prabhakara, which is assignable on palaeo- 
graphic grounds to the beginning of the seventh century, an Adhirdja 
named Indra or a chief named Indradhiraja, at whose request the 
Grant was made apparently within the dominions of the Vishnu- 
kundins, fought along with other chiefs who united to overthrow a 
certain Xndrabhattaraka. The reference is apparently to a coalition of 
certain eastern powers against the Vishnukundin king Indra-varman 
or Indrabhattaraka-varman. The fact that Indradhiraja is said to 
have mounted the elephant Supratlka (associated with the north¬ 
eastern quarter) and to have overthrown the elephant Kumuda 
(associated with the southern or south-eastern quarter), as well as 
the grant of land within the Vishnukundin territory, points to the 
discomfiture of the Vishnukundin king. Indra-varman’s claim in 
the Ramatirtham grant to have defeated many Chaturdantas (ele¬ 
phants) in numerous battles may refer to a phase of the same struggle, 
indradhiraja is usually identified with the Gahga king Indra-varman 
whose earliest known date is A.D. 624, but the identification is unten- 
•uOxe because the iormer is said to have been the son of Mitavarman 
or Mitravarman, a Brahmana ( dvijdti ) of Manalkudi. A reference 
to ddyddas in the Ramatirtham Grant seems to suggest that some re¬ 
lations of the Vishnukundin king also fought with him for the throne. 


Indra-varman Vishnukundin was succeeded by his son Maharaja 
Vikramendra-varman III (c. A.D. 620-31) who issued the Chikkulla 
Grant in his tenth regnal year. The king was a devout worshipper 
oi Mahesvara. The charter was issued from the king’s vdsaka at 
Lendulura (modern Dendaluru near Ellore), and records the grant 
of a village lying to the south of the river Krishna-venna in honour 


1 ' ^ ews , expressed in Sue Sat. in regard to the time of Indra-varmai 

OQ V br-°u iave k een slightly modified in these pages (cf. loc. cit. no. 133-34 

, 9 M , ad lava " v . ar man of the Khanapur Plates (El, XXVII. 312 ff.) can hard! 

be regarded as belonging to the Vishnukiznqlin family. 


210 






DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


of God Somagirisvaranatha probably a Siva-lihga. The Vishnu- 
kurujin kingdom, which survived the disastrous foreign policy of 
Indra-varman, seems to have encountered another great calamity 
during the reign of Vikramendra-varman III. It was an attack by 
Pulakesin II, the powerful Chalukya king of Badami, about A.D. 631. 
The enemy defeated by the Chalukya king, according to his Aihole 
inscription of A.B. 634, in order to occupy an island fortress in the 
waters of Kunala (the Rolleru lake near Ellore), seems to have been 
no other than the Vishnukundin king Vikramendra-varman III. The 
kingdom of Pishtapura was conquered and the whole coastland from 
Vizagapatam to northern Nellore seems to have been subjugated 
and placed under Pulakesin’s younger brother Kubja-Vishnu- 
vardhana, founder of the Easterr^Chalukya dynasty. The Koppa- 
ram charter of A.D. 631, which records a grant of land in the Karma- 
mshtra (northern part of the Nellore and southern part of the Gun¬ 
tur District) made by Prithivlyuvaraja (i.e. Vishnuvardhana) in the 
presence and apparently with the permission of Pulakesin II, seems 
to point to the success of the Chalukyas against the Vishnukundins 
and the Pallavas. It is usually believed that Pulakesin II conquered 
the country round Ven^i from the Pallavas and that Kubja-Vishnu- 
vardhana began to rule with his headquarters in that city. Epi- 
graphic evidence, however, proves that in the first part of the seventh 
century the Vehgl region was in the possession, not of the Pallavas, 
but of the Vishnukundins, and that the early rulers of the Eastern 
Chalukya dynasty ruled from Pishtapura and not from Vehgl. 

II. KALINGA 1 

The ancient Kaiihga country (roughly speaking the coastal land 
between the rivers Mahanadi and Godavari) was split up into a 
number of small states after the disintegration of the Chedi empire 
founded by Kharavela. 2 The Allahabad pillar inscription of 
Samudra-gupta, while describing the Gupta emperor’s victory over 
the kings of Dakshinapatha, speaks of several kings who have 
been located in different parts of Kaiihga. They are Svamidatta of 
Kottura, Mahendragiri of Pishtapura, Damana of Erandapalla and 
Kuvera of Devarashtra. 3 Nothing is known about the history of 
these states. But the continued existence of Pishtapura and Deva¬ 
rashtra, identified respectively with Pithapuram in East Godavari 
District and the Yellamanchilli taluk of the Vizagapatam District, 
is proved by later inscriptions. Kings who held sway over these 
kingdoms about the fifth and sixth centuries are known from their 

1. Cf. “Outline of the History of Kaiihga” by R. C. Majumdar ( Dacca University 
i Studies Vol. II, No. pp. 1 ff) which gives full reference to the inscriptions. 

2. Vol. II. pp. 213 ff. 3. See above, pp. 9-10. 


211 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


charters. A royal city named Simhapuram, modern Singupuram 
near Chicacole, is mentioned in some of these records, although it 
finds no mention in the Allahabad inscription and may have flourish¬ 
ed after the middle of the fourth century. 

1. The Pitribhaktas 

A Maharaja named Uma-varman, who assumed the title Kalin - 
gadhipati, issued charters from the cities of Simhapura, Sunagara and 
Vardhamanapura (modern Vadama in the Palakonda taluk of Viza- 
gapatam District). The Brihatproshtha Grant, issued in the king’s 
thirtieth regnal year, shows that Maharaja Uma-varman had a long 
reign. The seal attached to his Tekkali grant is said to bear the 
word Pitribhakta. Maharaja ChSnda-varman, lord of Kalinga, who 
issued the Tiritthana and Komarti Grants respectively in his fourth 
and sixth regnal years, was probably the son and successor of Uma- 
varman. These charters were issued from the city of Simhapura 
and they bear seals with the word Pitribhakta engraved on them. It 
appears that the chief city of the kings Uma-varman and Chanda- 
varman was Simhapura and that they used the word Pitribhakta as 
a sort of dynastic designation. The proximity of the reigns of these 
two rulers is definitely indicated by the fact that while Uma-varman 
was served by an official named Matrivara, son of Haridatta, Matri- 
vara’s son Rudradatta was in the service of king Chanda-varman. 

Another king of the same family seems to have been Maharaja 
Nanda-Prabhanjana-varman whose Chicacole Grant bears the word 
Pitribhakta on its seal. This king is described as “the lord of the 
entire Kalinga country.” His charter was issued from his vasaka 
at the victorious Sarapallika. Although Nanda-Prabhanjana-var- 
man is associated with the Pitribhaktas of Simhapura, it is tempting 
to suggest that his name indicates Prabhanjana-varman of the Nanda 
family to which he may have been related on the mother’s side. We 
know that a ruler of the Nanda dynasty of Pataliputra is associated 
with Kalinga in the Hathigumpha inscription of Kharavela. A 
Nanda or Nandodbhava family ruled in the Angul-Dhenkanal region 
of Orissa from the ninth century, and another branch of the family 
flourished probably in the Jeypore-Nandapur area of the Koraput 
District at a later date. 

2. The Matharas 

When the Pitribhaktas were ruling from Simhapura in 
Central Kalinga, the royal family of the Matharas had their 
capital at Pishtapura in the south. The Ragolu Grant of the 
Mathara Maharaja Sakti-varman, which records a gift of land 


212 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


near Chicacole, was issued in the king’s 13th regnal year 
from the city of Pishtapura. The king bears the title “lord ot 
Kalinga.” This shows that the Matharas of Pishtapura conquered 
the heart of the Pitribhakta kingdom in Central Kalinga. This is 
also supported by the fact that the Sakunaka Grant issued in the 
28th regnal year of another Mathara king named Ananta-Sakti-var- 
man, who enjoyed the title “lord of Kalinga,” was issued from Sim- 
hapura, the former capital of the Pitribhaktas. Maharaja Ananta- 
Sakti-varman was one of the immediate successors of Sakti-varman 
of the Ragolu grant. This is suggested by the fact that an official, 
mentioned as Amatya Arjunadatta in the Ragolu grant of Sakti- 
varman, has been credited with a higher official designation and 
called Desdkshapatalddhikrita-Talavara Arjunadatta in Ananta-Sakti- 
varman’s record. The Amatya was probably raised to higher offices 
during the latter part of his life. According to some writers, the 
name Ananta-Sakti-varman actually indicates ‘Ananta-varman’s son 
Sakti-varman.’ It has also been suggested that Ananta-Sakti-varman 
was a successor of Sakti-varman, a third king named Ananta-varman 
probably intervening between the reigns of the two. 

All these suggestions are negatived by the Ningondi copper¬ 
plate inscription, 1 issued by the Mathara king Prabhahjana-varman, 
who was the son of Saktivarman and the grandson of Sankara- 
varman, from the city of Sirhhapura. This Saktivarman may 
be identified with the king of the same name who issued the Ragolu 
plates; but the relation of Prabhahjanavarman with Anantasakti- 
varman of the same family is not yet definitely known. The recently 
discovered Andhavaram Plates, however, represent Sakti-varman 
as the Aryaka or grandfather of Ananta-Sakti-varman, who may 
have thus been the son and successor of Prabhahjana-varman. 
The Ningondi Grant represents Sakti-varman as the ruler of the 
people inhabiting the land between the Krishnavenna and the 
Mahanadf, but the claim must be regarded as exaggerated. 

3. The Vdsishthas 

• 

Parama-mahesvara Ananta-varman, who issued the Srunga- 
varapukota and Siripuram Grants, and flourished probably about 
the end of the fifth and the beginning of the sixth century, was an¬ 
other ‘lord of Kalinga’ having his adhishthdna or capital at Pishta¬ 
pura. King Ananta-varman was the son of Maharaja Prabhahjana- 
varman who was the moon in the Vasishtha family, and the grandson 
of the Vasishtha Maharaja Guna-varman who was the lord of Deva- 
rashtra. The Siripuram Grant was issued from Devapura, probably 

l. El XXX. 112. 


213 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the capital of Bevarashtra in the Vizagapatam District, These facts 
might suggest that the Vasishthas originally ruled in Central Kalrnga 
and that they later subdued the Matharas of Pishtapura whither they 
transferred their capital. The relations of the Vasishthas with the 
Pitribhaktas, however, still remain a matter of speculation, although 
it is tempting to identify Prabhanjana-varman with Nanda-Prabhan- 
jana-varman. If this identification be accepted it would appear that 
the Pitribhaktas belonged to the Vasishtha gotra . But the fact that 
the seal of Ananta-varman, attached to his record, does not bear the 
word Pitribhakta, renders the identification doubtful. The Vasish¬ 
thas and Matharas of Kalinga were probably matrimonially related 
to many royal families represented by kings bearing the metrony- 
mics Vasishthlputra and Mathanputra. 

A king named Visakha-varman, who does not claim to have 
been a “lord of Kalinga 5 ’, is known from his Koroshanda Grant issued 
in his seventh regnal year from Tripura, identified with modern Siri- 
puram in the Vizagapatam District. Maharaja Visakha-varman 
appears to have flourished in the fifth century; but his relation with 
the other Kalinga rulers of the age cannot be determined. An un¬ 
named ‘lord of Chikura’ is known from an inscription found at Sara- 
bhavaram about 20 miles from Kajahmundry. He seems to have 
been* a feudatory of the kings of Pishtapura. 

'jffT • r 

4. The Rise of New Powers 

f'i r --y. • tr 

The history of Kalinga in the fifth century was marked by the 
rivalry between the kings of Pishtapura and those of Central Kalinga-, 
especially the rulers of Simhapura, for supremacy. The use of the 
title Kalingadhipati by most of the rulers seems to point to the poli¬ 
tical ideal of the period which might or might not have been realised 
in practice. The epithet “lord of the entire Kalinga country” applied 
to king Nanda-Prabhanjana-varman possibly suggests that most of 
the Kalingddhipatis actually ruled over only parts of the country. 
When the rulers of central and southern Kalinga were struggling 
for supremacy, a new royal house was established in Srikakulam 
District. This was the dynasty known as the Eastern Gaiigas. The 
Gangas subjugated the kings of Central Kalinga in the sixth century, 
while the Chalukyas supplanted the rulers of Pishtapura at the be¬ 
ginning of the seventh century. Little is known about the relations 
of the early rulers of Pishtapura with Maharaja Ranadurjaya, his son 
\fikramendra, and the latter’s son PrithivI -Mahdrdja who issued his 
Tandivada grant from Pishtapura in the 46th year of his reign. It 
is tempting to suggest that king Prithivimula, son of Maharaja 
Prabhakara of the Godavari Grant issued from Kandall, was a grand¬ 
son of Prithvl-Mahdrdja of the Tandivada grant. During the reign 


214 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


of Raja Prithivimula or soon after, Pishtapura was conquered by the 
Chalukyas. 

5. The Eastern Gangas 

The early Gangas, who probably represented a branch of the 
Gahga dynasty of Mysore, had their capital at Kalihga-nagara, modern 
Mukhalingam in Gan jam District, and probably a secondary capital 
at the old city of Dantapura, identified by some with Dantavaktra 
near Chicacole in the same District. The Gahga kings were worship¬ 
pers of Gokarnesvara whose temple stood on a peak of the Mahendra, 
no doubt modern Mahendragiri (Ganjam District) in the Eastern 
Ghats. Siva in the form of Gokarnesvara was apparently the family 
deity of the early Gangas. 

The founder of the dynasty was Maharaja Indra-varman I who 
claims to have been the ‘lord of Trikalihga.’ The exact identifica¬ 
tion of Trikalihga is unknown. Some scholars think that it indicates 
three divisions of the Kalinga country, while others take it to mean 
Kalinga together with two of the neighouring countries. In the 
Eastern Chalukya records of the tenth and eleventh centuries, the 
kingdom of the Eastern Chalukyas is described as “Vehgldesa to¬ 
gether with Trikalihga” (Vehgidesam Trikalihcfa-sahitam) , besides 
which we have also the description “Vehgldesa together with the 
Trikalinga-forest” (Vehgldesam Trikalihg-utavi-yuktam) . This seems 
to suggest that Trikalihga was a country of forests between the do¬ 
mains of the later Eastern Chalukyas of Vengl and those of the 
Gangas of Kalihga-nagara, probably lying to the south of Dakshina 
Kosala and not very far from Mahendragiri. The fact that some 
powerful rulers of Kalihga-nagara and of South Kosala preferred to 
call themselves Trikalihgddhipati suggests that the expression often 
indicated lordship over wide regions of ancient Kalinga or several 
countries in the Kalinga region. 

Maharaja Indra-varman dated his records according to his regnal 
years. This reckoning was continued by his successors and thus 
gave rise to the Gahga era. The inaugural year of this era, corres¬ 
ponding to the first regnal year of Indra-varman, seems to have been 
A.D. 496 (or probably some time in the period A.D. 496-98). 1 
King Indra-varman, whose latest known date is the year 39, thus 
seems to have ruled from A.D. 496 to A.D. 535 at least. Whether 
Mahasamanta-varman, known from the Saumyavana Grant 2 dated 
year 64 (A.D. 560), was his immediate successor cannot be definitely 
determined. The next Gahga king known from inscriptions is Mahd- 

1. For different views on the epoch of the Gahga Era, cf. El, XXVI, 326; XXVII. 

192 (and the references contained in the former!. 

2. JAHRS, XIII. 94-95. 


215 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


raja Hasti-varman, also called Rajasimha and Ranabhita, who issued 
his charters in the year 79 (A.D. 575) and 80 (A.D. 576). Hasti-varman 
might have been the son of Indra-varman I and was probably suc¬ 
ceeded by Maharaja Indra-varman II Rajasimha who may have been 
a grandson of Indra-varman I and a son of Hasti-varman. The 
known dates of Indra-varman II range between the years 87 (A.D. 
583) and 91 (A.D. 587). He is described as a parama-mdhesvdra 
and as the lord of all Kalinga. Indra-varman II Rajasimha was pro¬ 
bably succeeded by Maharaja Indra-varman III whose earliest known 
record is dated in the year 128 (A.D. 624). This king is usually 
identified with Mitra-varman’s son Indradhiraja who defeated Indra- 
bhattaraka or Indravarman of the Vishnukundin dynasty and request¬ 
ed Rdjd Prithivimula, son of Maharaja Prabhakara, to grant the 
Godavari charter. However, as the father of Indradhiraja was a 
Brahmana of Manalkudi and probably of non-monarchical rank, the 
identification is extremely improbable. The next king seems to 
have been Maharaja Indra-varman IV who is described as the son 
of Danarnava and a devout worshipper of Mahesvara. Although it 
is not altogether impossible that Indra-varman II Rajasimha was 
succeeded by Danarnava whose son Indra-varman ruled from the 
year 128 to the year 154, it is better to suggest that Indra-varman II 
had two sons, one of them being Danarnava (who probably did not 
ascend the throne), and that both of them named their sons after 
their father. The circumstances leading to the occupation of the 
throne by Indra-varman IV, who marked himself off from his pre¬ 
decessor and namesake by calling himself “son of Danarnava”, are 
unknown. According to Hultzsch, the latest charter of Indi;a- 
varman III is dated in the year 138 (A.D. 634), while the earliest 
grant of Indra-varman IV, son of Danarnava, bears a date in the year 
137 (A.D. 633). If these readings of the dates are to be accepted, it 
may be suggested that the son of Danarnava struggled for the throne 
with Indra-varman III and ultimately succeeded in ousting the 

latter. The latest known date of Indra-varman IV is the vear 154 
(A.D. 650). y 

The next known king, Parama-mdhesvara Maharaja Devendra- 
varman, describes himself as the son of Gunarnava and claims to have 
achieved the overlordship of all Kalinga by his own prowess. His 
relationship with the preceding members of the family cannot be 
determined. His known dates range between the years 183 (A.D. 679) 
and 195 (A.D. 691). Whether Gunarnava actually ruled as king for 
some time before his son’s accession is uncertain, though the interval 
of 29 years between Indra-varman IV and Devendra-varman renders 
11 Devendra-varman was succeeded by his son 

Maharaja Ananta-varman who issued the Parlakimedi grant in the 

21 n 


DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


year 204 (A.D. 700). King Ananta-varman appears to have been suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Maharaja Nanda-varman (also read as Indra- 
varman) who is known from his Santa Bommali grant of the year 221 
(A.D. 717). Another son of Maharaja Ananta-varman was Devendra- 
varman II, who issued his charters in the years 51 i.e. 251 (A.D. 
747) and 254 (A.D. 750). The later history of the Gangas of Kalinga- 
nagara will be narrated in the next volume. 

While the main branch of the Early Ganga dynasty was ruling 
from Kalinga-nagara with probably a secondary capital at Danta- 
pura, a minor branch of the family ruled at a city called Svetaka, 
Sveta or Svetka. 1 The name of the city is sometimes read Schetaka 
which is identified with modern Chikati in the Sompeta taluk of 
Ganjam District. The earliest known Ganga king of Svetaka seems 
to have been Maharaja Jaya-varman who was originally a Ranaka, 
i.e. a feudatory, probably of the kings of Kalinga-nagara. One of 
his two Parlakimedi grants appears to be the late copy of a genuine 
record of the Ganga year 100 (A.D. 596), while the Ganjam Grant, 
originally issued by this king, seems to be dated in the Ganga year 
120 (A.D. 616). This record shows that Jaya-varman granted a 
village in the Vartani vishaya of the Kohgoda mandala but that the 
region w^as later conquered by Ranaka Vishavarnava, on behalf of the 
Bhauma-Kara king Unmattakesarin, who reissued the charter. 2 Like 
the Gangas of Kalinga-nagara, Jaya-varman and other rulers of 
Svetaka were worshippers of Siva-Gokarnesvara. They also claim 
to have made the entire Kalinga empire feel the might of their arms. 
Another early king of Svetaka was Maharaja Samanta-varman whose 
Chidivalasa grant is dated in the Ganga year 185 (A.D. 681). He 
claims to have been the lord of the entire Kalinga country. Maha¬ 
raja Indra-varman of Svetaka, known from his Vishamagiri copper¬ 
plate grant, is assigned to the eighth or ninth century A.D. Little 
is known of the relations of these rulers with the Ganga kings of 
Kalinga-nagara as well as with the later kings of Svetaka whose 
history will be dealt with in the next volume. The early rulers of 
Svetaka were possibly semi-independent feudatories of the kings 
of Kalinga-nagara. 

III. DAKSHINA KOSALA AND MEKALA 

Kosqla (also spelt Kosala) or Dakshina-Kosala (literally ‘South 
Kosala’), comprising the present Raipur-Bilaspur-Sambalpur region 
of Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, was an early settlement of the Aryans 
in the Deccan. The fact that the epic king Dasaratha, lord of Kosala, 
married Kausalya. i.e. the daughter of the king of apparently an- 

1. For a list of the inscriptions of this dynasty and its history, cf. El. XXVII. 109. 

2. 1HQ. XII. 492. For the Kara kings, cf. Vol. IV, Ch. IV. 


217 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


other Kosala, probably points to the antiquity of South Kosala. The 
name of the country might suggest that it was colonised by the 
princes of the Ikshvaku dynasty of Ayodhya, capital of the Kosala, 
Uttara-Kosala or Mabakosala javlapada, near modern Fyzabad in 
Uttar Pradesh. The capital of South Kosala has sometimes been 
called Kosala. 

Little is known about the early history of Dakshina-Kosala, 
although there is reference to some kings of Kosala in certain 
Puranic passages. According to the traditions recorded by the 
Chinese travellers, notably Hiuen Tsang, the celebrated Mahayana 
teacher Nagarjuna, who flourished probably in the second century, 
lived for some time at a Buddhist monastery in the vicinity of the 
capital of South Kosala, which was at that time ruled by a Satava- 
hana king. The Satavahana contemporary of Nagarjuna is usually 
identified with Gautamiputra Satakarni, although Kosala finds no 
mention in the epigraphic list of territories over which Gautamiputra 
Satakarni is said to have held sway. It is better to suggest his identi¬ 
fication with a successor of Gautamiputra such as Gautamiputra 
Yajna-Satakarni, who flourished about the last quarter of the second 
century. To the same century probably belongs king Kumaravlra- 
dattasrl known from the Gunji inscription. 1 A king named Mahendra 
was reigning in South Kosala about the middle of the fourth century 
when Samudra-gupta led an expedition against the kings of Dak- 
shinapatha. The influence of the coin-types of the Imperial Guptas 
and the use of their era noticed in South Kosala suggest that the 
kings of this country became subordinate allies of the Gupta 
emperors. A copper-plate grant of Maharaja Bhlmasena II, dis¬ 
covered at Arang in Raipur District of Madhya Pradesh, was issued 
from Suvarna-nadI (probably the river Sone) in the Gupta year 282 
(A.D. 601). 2 The record of Bhlmasena II, whose seal bears the 
figure of a lion, mentions his father Dayitavarman II, his father 
Bhlmasena I, his father Vibhlshana, his father Dayita I and his father 
Sura, all of whom are credited with the title Maharaja. King Sura 
seems to have founded the line of kings in the northern part of 
Dakshina-Kosala in the second half of the fifth century when the 
Imperial Gupta dynasty had begun to decline. 

1. El, XXVII, 48, where the name of the king is read as Kumaravaradatta. Cf. 
JKHRS , I, 217-8. 

2. Although the first of the three symbols in the date is clearly one for 200, it has 
been recently suggested that the symbol in question is 100 and that the date is 
consequently^ 182. Great stress has in this connection been laid on the passage 
Samvatsara-sate preceding the symbols, and it has been pointed out that the 
proper expression before the date 282 would be samvatsarasatadvaye. The argu¬ 
ment is, however, unconvincing in view of such dates as Samvatsara-sate 872 
(Buchkala inscription of Nagabhata II), Samvatsaro.-sate 500 (Ponduru grant of 
Vajrahasta II), etc. Cf. El, IX, 342, XXVI, 228; 1HQ, XXII, 63; BDCRI, 
VIII, 5. 


218 




DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


1. The Sarabhapuriyas 

A family of kings, who had their capital at the city of Sarabha- 
pura and called themselves pa'ramabhagavata, was ruling contem¬ 
poraneously with the family of Sura. The city, which has not yet 
been identified satisfactorily, has been located by different writers 
at Sambalpur, Sarangarh, Sarpagarh and other places. However, 
since the charters issued from Sarabhapura have been discovered in 
the region of Raipur District, Madhya Pradesh, the royal city was 
probably in the same district in the vicinity or suburbs of Sirpur, 
ancient Sripura, which became the later capital of the Sarabhapura 
rulers. 

Sarabhapura seems to have been founded by a king named Sara- 
bha who was probably the founder of the family of the Sarabha- 
puriyas. A king named Sarabha is actually known to have been the 
father of Maharaja Narendra of Sarabhapura who issued the Pipar- 
dula and Kurud grants. 1 This Sarabha may be identified with Sara- 
bharaja, maternal grandfather of Goparaja, who was a vassal of the 
Gupta ruler Bhanugupta and died at Eran in A.D. 510. 2 If this 
identification be accepted, Sarabha and his son Narendra may be 
roughly assigned to the closing decades of the fifth century when the 
hold of the Imperial Guptas on their subordinate allies had begun to 
decline. The emblem of the Sarabhapuriyas was the Gaja-Lakshml 
which is found on the seals attached to their charters. 

In the early years of the sixth century, the throne of Sarabha¬ 
pura passed to a king named Prasanna or Prasannamatra whose 
silver coins, bearing the figure of Garuda together with the discus 
and conch symbols, have been discovered. Prasannamatra, who was 
probably the successor of Narendra, seems to have been succeeded 
by his son Jayaraja (sometimes called Maha-Jayaraja) who is known 
from Arang Grant. The successor of Jayaraja was probably 
his younger brother Manamatra whose second name was Durgaraja 
(or Maha-Durgaraja as given in a record). The identification of 
king Manamatra of Sarabhapura with the Rashtrakuta ruler Mananka 
of Manapura 3 rests on a very weak basis and cannot be accepted. 

King Manamatra-Durgaraja was probably succeeded by his 
son Sudevaraja (sometimes called Maha-Sudevaraja) whose 
latest known date is the regnal year 10. Like the charters of 
his predecessors, all the Grants of Sudevaraja, with the exception 
of two, 4 were issued from the city of Sarabhapura. These Grants, 
dated in the king’s seventh regnal year, were issued from Sripura 

1. Kurud Grant belongs to the 24th year of his reign (El, XXXI. 263). 

2. See p. 33. 3. See pp. 199-200. 

4. EJ, XXXI. 103, 314. 


219 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


which seems to have been founded by Sudevaraja and to have been 
his secondary capital or residence. In these two inscriptions the king 
is represented as the son of the great Durgaraja, although the legend 
on the seal attached to his Khariar Grant describes him as the son of 
Manamatra and the grandson of Prasanna. 

The last known member of the Sarabhapurlya dynasty is king 
Pravararaja (sometimes called Maha-Pravararaja) who was the son 
of Manamatra and probably the younger brother of Sudevaraja. 
The Thakurdiya Grant of his third regnal year was issued from 
the city of Srlpura. Pravararaja seems to have flourished about the 
middle or third quarter of the sixth century, during the later part 
of which the Panduvamsis became lords of South Kosala. The 
PanduvamsI king Tivara, who issued his Grants from Srlpura, or his 
father Nanna probably ousted Pravararaja himself or one of his 
immediate successors. 

2. The Panduvamsis of South Kosala 

Scholars are not unanimous in their opinion as regards the date 
( Tivara (often styled Tivaradeva and Mahasiva-Tivararaja), the 
Panduvamsi (also called SomavamsI, i.e. belonging to the family of 
tne Moon) king of South Kosala. 1 According to some writers, his 
records belong to the eighth century. There are, however, reasons 
to believe that Tivara was a contemporary of the Vishnukundin king 
Madhava-varman I (c. A.D. 535-85) and the Maukhari prince Surya- 
varman (A.D. 553), son of Isana-varman, and flourished in the second 
half of the sixth century, probably about its last quarter. He issued 
his Kajim and Baloda grants from Srlpura in the regnal years 7 and 
9 respectively. In these records, he is described as having obtained 
mastery of the entire Kosala (South Kosala) country, while, in the 
legend of his seal, he is called Kosalddhipati. The suggestion that 
Tivara has been called samadhigata-pahcha-mtahasabda (i.e. a 
feudatory) is wrong, as his records apparently use the epithet in 
regard to his own feudatories. 

Tivara, who was a parama-vaishnava, was the son of king Nanna 
(called Nannadeva, Nannesvara and Kanna-rdjddhirdja), grandson of 
king Indrabala, and great-grandson of king Udayana who may 
be assigned to the last quarter of the fifth century. King Udayana 
of the Pandava family is mentioned in a rock inscription at Kalanjar 
in the Banda District of U.P. as an ancient king of that region. He 
is usually identified with a Sabara king of the same name who was 
defeated by a general of the Pallava king Nandi-varman (eighth 

1. The Panduvamsis had the Vaishnavite emblem of Garuda on their seal; they 
might have emulated the Imperial Guptas in this respect. 


220 




DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


century). This theory, based on the supposed later date of the Pan- 
duvamsls, ignores the fact that Sahara Udayana, who was defeated at 
Nelveli (Tinnevelly), was probably the ruler of a territory in the 
Far South. 

The Sirpur inscription of Balarjuna mentions Indrabala as the 
son of Udayana. An inscription from Bhandak 1 in the Chanda Dis¬ 
trict, Madhya Pradesh, speaks of the four sons of Indrabala. One of 
them, king Nanna, who was probably a worshipper of Siva, is said 
to have “conquered the earth.” Bhavadeva (also called Ranakesarin 
and Chintadurga), who was the youngest brother of Nanna and pos¬ 
sibly one of his military governors in the Chanda region, restored a 
derelict Buddhist temple built by an ancient king of that area named 
Suryaghosha. An inscription of Isanadeva, another brother of 
Nanna, from Kharod in the Bilaspur District, seems to be the earliest 
PanduvamsI record in South Kosala. It would appear, therefore, that 
the Pamjuvamsls were in occupation of wide regions of Central India, 
and that they invaded South Kosala during the reign of Nanna and 
completed its conquest during that of Tivara. But Tlvara’s title 
‘lord of Kosala’ seems to suggest that he considered himself primari¬ 
ly the king of the South Kosala country, and there is no reason to 
believe that the Banda region formed a part of his kingdom. In this 
connection it is interesting to note that a Mahasarnanta named 
Indrabalaraja is known from the Sarangarh Grant to have been the 
sarvddhikdradhikrita (chief minister) of king Sudevaraja of Sarabha- 
pura. If this official can be identified with the grandfather of Tivara, 
it is not improbable that this son of Udayana did not inherit his 
father’s kingdom, but went to the Sarabhapura court and accepted 
service under the Sarabhapurlyas, whom he or more probably his 
immediate successors ultimately overthrew. 

Tivara was succeeded by his brother Chandragupta, 2 whose 
identification with the king of that name mentioned in the Sanjan 
grant of Amoghavarsha as having been defeated by Rashtrakuta 
Govinda III (c. A.D. 794-814) is doubtful in view of Tlvara’s date 
suggested above. The son and successor of Chandragupta was 
Harshagupta who married Vasata, daughter of a ruler named 
Surya-varman, who was probably the viceroy of his father Maukhari 
Isana-varman in parts of eastern U.P. Queen Vasata was a devout 


1. Mirashi suggests that the Bhandak inscription did not originally belong to that 
place but came from Arang (EI. XXVI, 227). If this suggestion is accepted 
there is no evidence of the expansion of PanduvamsI power over the western 
part of the M.P. The identification of Suryaghosha with £ura of the Arang 
grant of Bhlmasena II, however, is not convincing. 

2 The Adhabhara Plates seem to indicate that Tivara was succeeded by his son 
Nanna (II). EI, XXXI. 219. 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


worshipper of Vishnu and built a temple at Sripura. Iiarshagupta’s 
son and successor Balarjuna assumed the title Sivagupta (sometimes 
called Maha-Sivagupta). He had a long reign as one of his inscriptions 
is dated in his 57th regnal year. 1 As he appears to have flourished 
about the early part of the seventh century, he was possibly defeated 
by the Chalukya king Pulakesin II some time before A.D. 634, the 
date of the latter’s Aihole inscription. A Sirpur inscription mentions 
Sivanandin, son and viceroy of Nityananda who is usually identified 
with king Balarjuna. Nothing definite is known about the end of 
the dynasty and its exact relation with the later Somavaiiisls of 
Kosala who flourished in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries. 
Epigraphic evidence seems, however, to suggest that the Nalas 
subdued the Panduvariisls of South Kosala not long after Balarj una’s 
reign. The country might have been under Nala rule till the rise 
of the later Somavaihsis. 2 

3. The Pdnduvamsis of Mekala 

The old country of Mekala lay about the present Amarkantak 

hills and its name can be traced in that of Maikal range. Little 

is known about the early history of this country, although the 

Puranas refer to kings of Mekala which may have indicated the 

capital city of the Mekala country. Epigraphic evidence points to 

the rule of a branch of the Panduvamsa in Mekala about the fifth 

• • 

century. These Panduvariisls were no doubt related to the Pandu- 
varhsis of Central India and South Kosala. 

A copper-plate grant, 3 discovered at Bamhani in the Sohagpur 
tahsil of the Rewah State in Baghelkhand, mentions four members 
of the Panduvamsa of Mekala. They are Jayabala, his son Vatsa- 
raja, Vatsaraja’s son.by queen Dronabhattarika— Maharaja Naga- 
bala, and Nagabala’s 'son by queen Indrabhattarika— Maharaja 
Bharat, or Bharatabala, also called Indra (probably Indrabala). 
While the chiefs Jayabala and Vatsaraja are not credited with the 
title Mahdrdja, kings Nagabala and Bharatabala have besides the 
royal title, the epithets parama-mdhesvara, parama-brahmanya and 
parama-guru-devatadhidaivata-visesha. King Bharatabala had only 
one queen who was a princess of Kosala and bore the name Loka- 
prakasa. The theory that Lokaprakasa was born in the family of 
the Panduvariisls of South Kosala is untenable in view of the later 
date of the PanduvamsI occupation of that country. It is more pro- 

1. Lodhia PI. El, XXVII, 319; cf. JKHRS, I, 265. The seal of Balarjuna’s char¬ 
ters, unlike those of, TIvara, has the couchant bull as its emblem. Balarjuna 
was a Parania-mahesvara unlike TIvara. 

^ ^ j • p GCGn ^ discovery °f the Sarangarh grant of Sudeva would require slight 
modifications in the section dealing with the PanduvamsI occupation of South 
Kosala in A New History of the Indian People, VI, 89 ff. 

3. Bharata-Kaumudi, I. p. 215; El, XXVII, 132. 






DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


bable that she belonged to the Sarabhapurlya family. As the Bam- 
hani record seems to be palaeographically assignable to the close of 
the fifth century or probably to the beginning of the sixth, it seems 
likely that Jayabala and Vatsaraja were feudatories of the Imperial 
Guptas, and that Nagabala and Bharatabala practically threw off 
the Gupta yoke in the second half of the fifth century when the 
imperial power began to decline. Nagabala seems to have been 
more or less a contemporary of king Udayana of Central India 1 
who belonged to another branch of the same family. 

About the third quarter of the fifth century, the Vakataka king 
Narendrasena claims to have his command honoured by the rulers 
of Kosala, Mekala and Malava. It seems that the Sarabhapurlyas 
of South Kosala and the Panduvarhsis of Mekala, for a time, became 
the subordinate allies of the Vakataka king. The suggestion that 
the Bahamani inscription vaguely refers to Narendrasena Vakataka 
as the overlord of Bharatabala is hardly acceptable. 

APPENDIX 

The Genealogy and Chronology of the Vishnukundins 

The genealogy of the Vishnukundins has been reconstructed 
differently by different scholars, and it is desirable to set forth 
here an alternative view of the probable order of succession in the 
line together with approximate dates for each ruler: 2 

Madhavavarman I (A.D. 440-460) 

_ I 

i 

Vikramcndravarman I 

(460-480) 

I 

Indravarman (bhattaraka) 

(480-515) 

i 

Vikramcndravarman II 

(515-35) 

i 

Govindavarman (535-56) 

i 

Madhavavarman III 

(556-616) 

i 

Manchy annabhattaraka. 

1. See p. 220. 

2. The arrangement proposed above (pp 206 ff) by D. C. Sircar overlooks, or rather 
seeks to explain away, two important objections to it. Madhavavarman of the 


Devavarman 


Madhavavarman II 
(48 years) 


‘223 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Generally speaking, the Vishnukundins may be taken to have 
ruled the Andhra country in the interval between the Salankayanas 
and the Eastern Chalukyas. In its greatest extent their kingdom 
included the Vizagapatam, Godavari, Krishna and Guntur districts. 
They rose to power in the middle of the fifth century A.D. and Mad- 
havavarman I is the first ruler of whom we have a record. He is cre¬ 
dited with having performed eleven asvamedhas and a thousand 
other sacrifices. Though we may hesitate to accept such statements 
as literally true, there seems to be no reason to doubt that Madhava- 
varman I was a powerful ruler. He had a Vakataka princess for his 
queen, as his son Vikramendra I is called an ornament to the two 
families of Vakatakas and Vishnukundins. Presumably she came 
from the Basim branch and might have been a daughter of Devasena, 
if not his sister. Devavarman ‘of great valour’ doubtless predeceas¬ 
ed his father leaving a son too young to take the throne, and so his 
young brother Vikramendra I became king. The records are sin¬ 
gularly silent about him, but his son Indravarman or Indrabhatta- 
raka, as he is also called, is described as a powerful ruler who found¬ 
ed many colleges of learning and gave away much wealth. He is 
said to have scattered his kinsmen by the mere contraction of his 
eye-brows. This is perhaps best explained as implying an attempt 
on the part of Madhavavarman II, after he grew up, to cross swords 
with his cousin and seek to get the kingdom into his own hands. The 
quarrel obviously ended in a compromise and Madhavavarman II, 
who is described as lord of Trikuta-Malaya and issued a grant from 
Amarapura in the forty-seventh year of his reign, was allowed to 
rule over a part of the western mountainous region in the kingdom 
owing a nominal allegiance to Indravarman. The Ramatirtham 
plates of his 27th year show that till very late in his reign Indra- 
bhattaraka continued to be master of the bulk of Vizagapatam dis¬ 
trict, as Plaki-rashtra, where he made a grant, corresponds to the 


Chikkulla and Ramatirtham plates is not the same as the homonymous ruler 
of Ipur plates I and Polamuru plates; though the eleven asvamedhas and 1000 
other sacrifices are common to both, the latter gets in addition the epithets 

Hn anyagarbha-jji asuta and Trivara-nagara-bhavana-gata-yuvati-hridaiia- 

nandana Again the Polamuru grant should be placed much nearer the date^of 

§?4 ms- ! 

"v? is h r dly 

for each ruler are of course approximate. Tho datcs 8iven 




DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 


northern part of this district. But, as noted above, 1 he had to face 
a hostile combination towards the end of his reign. His adversary 
was doubtless the E. Gahga ruler of Kalinga, Indravarman I, the 
earliest ruler of the line. He might have obtained help from the 
Vakataka Harishena II among whose conquests Andhra also is in¬ 
cluded in the Ajanta inscription. It is probable that as a result of 

this conflict the Vishnukundin ruler lost his northern marches to his 

• • • 

rising namesake of Kalinga. Of the next two rulers Vikramendra II 
and Govindavarman Vikramasraya, no striking achievements are re¬ 
corded. But Madhavavarman III, who seems to have been the last 
great ruler of the line, is said to have been a hir any agar bha-prasiita, 
i.e. one who performed the sacred rite of hiranyagarbha which con¬ 
sists in the performer passing through an egg of gold which was 
afterwards distributed among the officiating priests. He made the 
grant of Polamuru when he had just crossed the Godavari with the 
desire of making conquests in the east. Obviously this campaign 
was undertaken to recover the country lost to the rulers of Kalinga 
by Indrabhattaraka as we have noticed above. The result of the 
expedition is not known. In both the grants of his reign dated in 
the 37th and 48th regnal years, the king is described as having caused 
delight to the young damsels of Trivara-nagara. This has been taken 
to mean the city of Trivara, i.e. the capital of Tivaradeva, king of 
Mahakosala, and Madhavavarman has been credited with a victory 
over that king. 2 Tivaradeva has been assigned to A.D. 530-550. 
But as the dates of both TIvara and Madhavavarman III rest on 
approximate calculations, the slight chronological discrepancy need 
not be a serious objection to the acceptance of this suggestion. Or 
the success might have been won against Tlvara’s son and successor 
Chandragupta as Mr. B. V. Krishna Rao has suggested. 3 But Tivara¬ 
deva was a powerful ruler of Kosala, and there is no evidence what¬ 
ever in support of the suggestion of a war on the Somavamsis besides 
the rhetorical attribute given to Madhavavarman in his plates. 
Again, Trivara is not the same as TIvara; the expression Trivara- 
nagara may mean three good cities, and it is not altogether impossible 
that the ornamental epithet means no more than that there were three 
flourishing cities in the Vishnukundin kingdom where the king resid¬ 
ed by turns. Madhavavarman had also the title Janasraya, and on 
the strength of this title a book on prosody Janasrayi Chhandovichiti 
is attributed to the king himself or at least to his reign. A damaged 
stone record of Madhavavarman 4 in archaic characters in Sanskrit 
language found at Velpuru in Guntur district might be of this king. 
There is evidence that parts of the Vishnukundin kingdom were 

3. Early Di/nasties of Andhradeta. p. 321. 

4. 581 cf 1925. 


1. See above p. 210. 

2. El. XXII, pp. 19 ff. 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


breaking loose from it even before the invasion of Pulakesin II; for 
at the time of that invasion we find a certain Prithivl-maharaja ruling 
Pishtapura as an independent ruler, though his father’s name 
Vikramendra is clear evidence of the feudatory relation in which 
the family had stood to the Vishnukundins not long before. 1 Either 
Madhavavarman himself or his son Manchyanna must have been the 
Vehgl ruler who was defeated by Pulakesin in the battle of Kunala 
(Colair lake). Whether the Vishnukundins continued in a sub¬ 
ordinate capacity for some time after the battle, is not known. Their 
overthrow by the Chalukya invader very near their capital is the 
last that is heard of them in history. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

In addition to the works already cited: B. Misra, Orissa under the Bhauma 
kings; D. C. Sircar, Chap. IV of NHIP; A. S. Altekar, Chap. V of NHIP. 


\ 

{ 


1. hi. XXIU, No. 15, Tandivada grant. 







CHAPTER XII 


THE CHALUKYAS 

I. THE CHALUKYAS OF BADAMI 
1. Origin and Early History 

. i 

The Imperial Chalukyas of Badami (Bijapur District), usually 
known as the Early Western Chalukyas, held sway over extensive 
regions of the Deccan for about two centuries, from the middle of 
the sixth to about the middle of the eighth century, when sovereignty 
passed to the Rashtrakutas. They are the earliesti of the several 
branches of the Chalukya family known to have ruled in different 
parts of the country, the other important offshoots being the Eastern 
Chalukyas established at Pishtapura in the first half of the seventh 
century, the Chalukyas of Vemulavada who were the feudatories of 
the Rashtrakutas, and the Later Western Chalukyas of KalyanI who 
overthrew the Rashtrakutas in the second half of the tenth century. 

The Chalukyas of Badami appear to have represented an indi¬ 
genous Kanarese family that claimed the status of Kshatriyas. 1 The 
theory identifying them with the Gurjaras seems to be untenable. 
The name is sometimes associated with the Chulika people of Uttara- 
patha who are supposed to have been identical with the Sogdians 
and to have given their name to the Prakrit dialect called Chulika 
Paisachl, There is, however, no evidence in support of the conjec¬ 
ture. The Sulikas, mentioned in the Haraha inscription of A.D. 553 
and identified with the Sulkis of Orissa, probably had nothing to do 
with the Chalukyas. 

In the inscriptions of the Chalukyas of Badami, the name of the 
family is written as Chalky a, Chalikya , and Chalukya. (rarely 
Chalukya) , sometimes with l for l. The Lohner grant of Pulakesin II 
seems to read the name as Chulukikin, but the intended reading 
may have been Chalukika. In later records of the branch lines, 
we have Chalukya and sometimes the forms Chalukki and Sdlukki, 
which closely resemble the form Solanki, Sanskritised as Chaulukya 
by the royal house of Anhilvada. It appears that the name was 
derived from that of an ancestor, probably called Chaika, Chalika 
or Chaluka. That such a personal name was not quite uncommon 
in the Deccan is suggested by the fact that Chaliki is actually found 
to form a part of the name Skandachalikirerhmanaka (with the 

1. Hiuen Tsang refers to Pulakesin II as a ‘Kshatriya by birth’ ( HTW . II. 239). 

227 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


masculine name-suffix anaka) in one of the Nagarjunikonda inscrip¬ 
tions. In later times when the origin of the family was forgotten, 
a fanciful interpretation of the family name was suggested. Accord¬ 
ing to the Handarike inscription of the time of Vikramaditya VI, the 
Chalukyas Were born in the interior of the chulka (chaluka or 
chuluka of the lexicons, indicating ‘water-pot’ or ‘hand hollowed 
to hold water’) of the sage Hariti-Panchasikha when he was pouring 
out a libation to the gods. The Vikramdhkadeva-chairita by Bilhana, 
the Vidydpati (chief poet) at the court of the same king, however, 
says that the ancestor of the Chalukyas sprang from the chuluka of 
the creator Brahman when the god, at Indra’s request, desired to 
create a hero who would be a terror to evil-doers on the earth. The 
Chaulukyas or Solankis of Anhilvada also believed that the god 
Brahman, for fear of the trouble caused by the demons, created out 
of his chuluka a king called Chaulukya. 

The Chalukyas of Badami claimed to have been Harltlputras, 
to have belonged to the Manavya gotra, to have been nourished by 
the Seven Mothers who are the mothers of mankind, to have acquired 
prosperity through the favour and protection of the god Karttikeya 
(Skanda-Mahasena), and to have had all princes made submission to 
them at the sight of their varahaldnchhana or boar crest (cf. the 
representation of the Vardha on their seal) which was acquired 
through the favour of the god Narayana or Vishnu. The Manavya 
gotra, the metronymic Harltlputra (made Hdritiputra after its real 
significance had been forgotten) as well as the adoration to the god 
Karttikeya and the Seven Mothers appear to have been borrowed 
from the Kadambas and to point to an early success of the Chalu¬ 
kyas against that power. Whether the earlier members of the family 
acknowledged the supremacy of the Kadambas cannot be definitely 
ascertained in the present state of our knowledge. In some early 
records, the Chalukyas are described as meditating on, or favoured by, 
the feet of the holy Svamin or of Svami-Mahasena (Karttikeya). But 
their boar crest as w r ell as the invocation of the Varaha avatdra at 
the beginning of most of their records shows that the family-god of 
the Early Chalukyas was Vishnu (cf. also the use of the epithet 
Parama-Bhagavata in the family), although they are known to have 
patronised the Jains and Saivas, and some of the later kings appear 
to have actually adopted their faiths. The title sri-prithivi-vallabha 
(‘the enjoyer of wealth and land’ or ‘the husband of the goddesses 
Lakshmi and Earth’), assumed by the kings of this family, suggests 
that they claimed to have been incarnations of Vishnu. 

The earliest authentic names in the Chalukya family are those 
of Jayasimha and his son Ranaraga who flourished in the Badami 


\ 


228 


THE CHALUKYAS 


region of the Bijapur District in the first half of the sixth century. 
They are mentioned in a few early records of the family which, 
however, do not attribute any outstanding achievement to either of 
them. Jayasimha (often called Jayasimha-vallabha) is given the 
title Vallabha or Vallabhendra (the same as Vallabhdrdja), which 
like sri-vallabha and prithivi-vallabha seems to be a contraction of 
sri~prithivi-vallabha. The Aihole inscription (v. 4) suggests that 
prithivi-vallabha was a special title of all the Chalukya kings. 
Jayasimha is said to have become king after many rulers of the 
Chalukya lineage had passed away. Little is known about the events 
of the reigns of Jayasimha and Ranaraga, although, in later times, 
when the real facts v/ere forgotten, legends were invented to illus¬ 
trate the rise and early history of the family. The Kauthem grant 
of A.D. 1009 belonging to the reign of the Later Chalukya king 
V’ikramaditya V says that Jayasimha re-established Chalukya sove¬ 
reignty after having overthrown king Indra, son of Krishna, of the 
Rashtrakuta dynasty that had obscured Chalukya power for a period 
of time. 1 In the absence of any reference to such an achievement 
in the records of the Badami house, especially in the celebrated 
Aihole prasasti which gives an elaborate account of the first century 
of Chalukya rule, scholars believe that the statement in the Kauthem 
grant is merely a reflection of the events which occurred in the second 
half of the tenth century when Rashtrakuta sovereignty passed into 
the hands of Vikramaditya’s immediate ancestors. There can be no 
doubt about the soundness of this view; but it is not unlikely that 
the earlier members of the Chalukya family had relations with their 
neighbours, the Rashtrakutas of Manapura, who appear to have held 
sway over the Satara-Kolhapur region of the South Maratha country 
in the fifth and sixth centuries. It is very tempting to identify 
Chalukya Jayasimha-Vallabha with Jayasimha, commander of the 
fort ( Kottanigraha , the same as Kottapdla ) of the locality called 
Harivatsa, in whose presence the village of Undikavatika was granted 
by the Rashtrakuta king Abhimanyu residing at Manapura. 2 If 
the identification is accepted, Harivatsa may be located in the Bijapur 
region which may or may not have formed part of the Rashtrakuta 
kingdom of Manapura, As pointed out above, 3 the Rashtrakutas of 
Manapura were probably subdued by the Mauryas or the Nalas 
and not by the Early Chalukyas. 

The legendary history contained in the records of the Later 
Chalukyas of KalyanI ascribes the origin of the Chalukya dynasty 

1. Cf. also other records such as the Yevoor and Nilgunda grants of Vikrama- 
ditya VI, Sonavade and Miraj grants of Jayasimha, etc. 

2. See p. 200. 3. See p. 201. 


229 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


to Manu or the Moon and associates it with Ayodhya, capital of 
Uttara-Kosala. According to the Kauthem grant, fifty-nine kings of 
the Chalukya lineage ruled at Ayodhya; then sixteen more reigned 
in Dakshinapatha; after a temporary eclipse of their power which 
followed, the glory of the family was restored by Jayasimha. The 
Kalyan inscription of A.D. 1025-26 gives the following genealogy: 
the god Brahman, his mind-born son Svayambhuva-Manu, his son 
Manavya who is the progenitor of all those who claim the Manavya 
gotra, his son Harita, his son Panchasikhi Hariti, and his son 
Chalukya from whom sprang the race of the Chalukyas. Here is no 
doubt a mythological elaboration of the epithets Mdnavyasagotra and 
Hdritiputrci (sic. Harltlputra). Some records of the time of Vikra- 
maditya VI say that the Chalukyas were born in the lineage of 
Soma (the Moon), who was created from the eye of Atri, the son of 
the god Brahman. The Handarike inscription of the same reign 
furnishes the following genealogy: Hiranyagarbha-Brahman born 
in the lotus emanated from Vishnu’s navel, his son Manu, his son 
Mandavya (cf. Manavya of other records), his son Harita (who is 
made the father of Mandavya in some records), and his son Hariti 
Panchasikha in whose chuluka the Chalukyas were born; next it 
introduces an imaginary Chalukya king named Vishnuvardhana- 
Vijayaditya who appropriated his enemies’ territories and was suc¬ 
ceeded by fifty-nine kings beginning with Satyasraya, lord of 
Ayodhya; then came Jayasimha and his sixteen successors (who 
ruled in the Deccan), after whom the Rattas or Rashtrakutas ruled 
the earth. Details of the same legend, which do not exactly tally with 
one another, are offered by the later inscriptions of the Eastern 
Chalukyas in which the genealogy is traced to the god Brahman 
through his successive descendants, viz. Atri, Soma (the Moon) 
Budha, Pururavas, Ayu, Nahusha, Yayati, Puru, Janamejaya.... 
(here follow 14 names), Dushyanta, Bharata,. . . . (here follow 9 
names), Samtanu, Vichitravlrya, Pandu, Arjuna, Abhimanyu, Pari- 
kshit, Janamejaya, Kshemuka, Naravahana, Satanika and Udayana. 
Fifty-nine kings are said to have ruled at Ayodhya after Udayana in 
unbroken lineal succession. Then a member of the family named 
Vijayaditya came to Dakshinapatha with a view to conquest and 
attacked the Pallava king Trilochana (an imaginary person; cf. the 
legend of Trilochana Kadamba), but lost his life in the encounter. 
His wife, who was pregnant, escaped to the abode of the saint Vishnu- 
bhatta Somayajin at the agrahdra of Mudivemu where she gave 
birth to a posthumous son named Vishnuvardhana. This prince 
married a daughter of the Pallava king, worshipped the goddess 
Nanda-Gaurl on the Chalukya-giri (probably an imaginary hill) and 
also Kumara (Karttikeya), Narayana and the Mothers, and in due 

2.30 


THE CHALUKYAS 


course assumed all the royal insignia of the family such as the white 
parasol, the single conch, the five mahci-sabdas , the pdlidhvaja, the 
drum called pratidhakka, the boar emblem, the peacock’s tail, the 
spear, the makara arch, the golden sceptre and the signs of Ganga 
and Yamuna. He conquered the Kadamba, Ganga and other kings 
and established himself as lord of the Dakshinapatha-seven-and-a- 
half-ZaZcZi country (cf. the Rashtrakuta kingdom referred to as the 
Rattappadi-seven-and-a-half-ZaZch country) lying between the Setu 
(Rama’s bridge) and the Narmada. The historical verisimilitude is 
introduced by making Vijayaditya, son of this Vishnuvardhana, the 
father of Pulakesin I who was really the son of Ranaraga and grand¬ 
son of Jayasirhha-vallabha. Scholars have rightly rejected the above 
accounts of the rise and early history of the Chalukyas as a mere 
farrago of vague legends and Puranic myths of no authority or 
value. 


2. Pulakesin I and Kirtivarman I 

The first independent ruler of the dynasty appears to have been 
Ranaraga’s “dear” son Pulakesin I (c. A.D. 535-66), whose name also 
appears in the forms Polekesin, Polikesin and Pulikesin, and may 
be a hybrid Kanarese-Sanskrit word meaning “tiger-haired.” He 
was the first Maharaja in his family and may be considered as its 
real founder. Pulakesin I enjoyed the titles Satydsraya and Rana- 
vikrama and was also known as Sri-prithivi-vallabha, Sri-vallabha 
or Vallabha, the last being sometimes used in lieu of the king’s 
proper name. The Badami inscription of the Chalikya Vallabhe- 
svara, i.e. Pulakesin I, is dated in Saka 465 (A.D. 543) and represents 
the monarch as Hiranyagarbha-prasiita (performer of the Hiranya- 
garbha mahaddna ) and as having performed the Asvamedha and other 
Srauta sacrifices. The records of the time of his son Mangalesa des¬ 
cribe him as not only a performer of the Hiranyagarbha and the 
Asvamedha but also of the Agnishtoma, Agnichayana, Vajapeya, 

Bahusuvarna and Paundarlka sacrifices. He is sometimes described 
• • • 

as an equal of the mythical heroes Yayati, Dilipa and others, and is 
said to have been conversant with the laws of Manu, the Purdnas, 
the Ramdyana, the Bhdrata (Mahabhdrata ) and other Itihasas. Pula¬ 
kesin I married Durlabhadevi of the Batpura family. His Badami 
inscription of A.D. 543 shows that the king laid the foundations (cf. 
the Aihole inscription, v. 7) of the fort of VatapI (associated in tradi¬ 
tions with a demon of that name), modern Badami in the Bijapur 
District. This suggests that he ruled the region roughly comprising 
the present Bijapur District with his capital at Badami. Although the 
performance of the Asvamedha points to Pulakesin’s success against 
his neighbours, including the power to which the family originally 


‘231 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


owed its allegiance, he is not credited with any specific conquest. 
This may indicate that his successes were mainly due to his son and 
successor Klrtivarman who probably acted as his father’s com¬ 
mander-in-chief. The Chiplun inscription attributes even the 
foundation of Vatapi to Klrtivarman. The Mahakuta pillar inscrip¬ 
tion associates both Pulakesin I and Klrtivarman with an endowment 
made in favour of the deity Makutesvara of modern Mahakuta in 
the Bijapur District. 

Maharaja Klrtivarman I (A.D. 566-7 to 597-98), who is some¬ 
times called Klrtiraja, had the titles Satyasraya and Puru-rana- 
parakrama, and was also known as Vallabha or Prithivi-vallabha. 
He married a sister of Raja SrI-vallabha Senananda of the Sendraka 
family. His title “the first maker of Vatapi” suggests that Kirti- 
varman I began to beautify the town with temples and other build¬ 
ings. An inscription, dated in the twelfth regnal year of this king 
(A.D. 578) and incised on a pilaster in the verandah of the Vaishnava 
cave at Badami, records that his younger brother Mangalesa finish¬ 
ed the construction of the cave-temple and endowed it with the 
village of Lanjisvara (modern Nandikesvara near Badami) on the 
^occasion of the installation of the image of Vishnu. Klrtivarman 1 
is also known to have celebrated the Bahusuvarra and Agnishtoma 
sacrifices. 

According to the Mahakuta pillar inscription of Mangalesa, 
Klrtivarman I defeated the rulers of Vahga, Anga, Kalinga, Vatfura, 
Magadha, Madraka, Kerala, Ganga, Mushaka, Pandya, Dramila, 
Choliya, Aluka and Vaijayanti. There is little doubt that the claim 
is a boastful exaggeration of a conventional dig-vijaya or the con¬ 
quest of the chakravarti-kshetra. In the Aihole inscription of Kirti- 
varman’s son, who can hardly be expected to have suppressed the 
glorious achievements of his father, Klrtivarman I is described as 
the night of destruction” to the Nalas, Mauryas and Kadambas, 
and also as having broken up a confederacy of the Kadamba kings. 
This is undoubtedly the more reliable of the two accounts. The 
history of the Nalas, who were about this time in possession of wide 
regions of the Deccan, with probably a settlement in the Bellary- 
Kurnool area, has already been narrated. The inscriptions of the 
Later Chalukyas represent Klrtivarman I as having destroyed the 
habitations of the Nalas. The Mauryas, apparently descendants of 
a Maurya governor of a district in the Deccan, ruled in the 
Konkan, while the Kadambas held sway over the North Kanara 
District of the Bombay State, the northern part of the Mysore state 
and the adjoining regions of Belgaum and Dharwar. About the 
middle of the sixth century, several branches of the Kadamba family 

232 


THE CHALUKYAS 


were ruling simultaneously in different parts of the Kadamba terri¬ 
tory, the capital of the main branch having been Vanavasi or Vaija- 
yanti, modern Banavasi in the North Kanara District. The subjuga¬ 
tion of the Kadamba capital is specifically recorded in the charters of 
the Chalukyas of Badami according to which Klrtivarman I establish¬ 
ed the banner of his pure fame in the lands of the hostile kings of 
Vanavasi and other cities. His victory over the Nalas, Mauryas and 
Kadambas is also echoed in the records of the Later Chalukyas. As 
a result of the successes of Klrtivarman I, some of which may have 
been achieved during the reign of his father, the political influence 
of the Chalukyas extended over wide regions in the southern part 
of the Bombay State and in the adjoining area of Mysore and the 
Madras State. It would seem that Klrtivarman annexed parts of 
the Maurya territories in the Konkan*. 

3. Mangalesa 

Klrtivarman I died in A.D. 597-98, probably leaving several 
minor children, and the throne, therefore, passed to his younger 
brother or step-brother Mangalesa (A.D. 597-98 to 610-11), also 
known as Mangalesa (sic.), Mangalaraja, Mangalisa and Mangallsvara. 
The new king enjoyed the virudas Rana-vikranta and Uru-rana- 
vikranta, besides Prithivl-vallabha or SrI-prithivI-vallabha. Manga¬ 
lesa has been described as a Paramabhagavata, i.e. devout worship¬ 
per of the Bhagavat (Vishnu). The victory over the Katachchuris 
(Kalachuris) and the conquest of Revatldvlpa, referred to in the 
Aihole inscription and echoed in the Kauthem grant, were his 
greatest achievements. According to the Nerur Grant and Maha- 
kuta pillar inscription, the Kalachuri king Buddha, son of Sankara- 
gana, was defeated before the 12th of April, A.D. 602, and his 
entire possessions were appropriated, when the Chalukya king was 
desirous of conquering the northern region. While discussing the 
history of the Kalachuris, however, we have seen 1 that Buddha- 
raja was in possession of the Nasik District as late as A.D. 608. The 
struggle between the Chalukyas and Kalachuris, therefore, appears 
to have continued for some years, after which the former came into 
complete possession of the central and northern Maratha country. 
The Nerur grant of Mangalesa also refers to the killing of the 
Chalukya chief Svamiraja who was apparently ruling in the Konkan 
and is said to have been famous for his victories in eighteen battles. 
Most probably this Svamiraja was placed in the Konkan by Klrti¬ 
varman I as his viceroy; and he sided with Pulakesin II in his struggle 
against Mangalesa. It is also not unlikely that Svamiraja had his 
headquarters at Revatldvlpa in the waters of the Western or Arabian 


1. See p. 196. 


233 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Sea (i.e. the fortified promontory of Redi to the south of Yengurla 
in the Ratnagiri District), which is said to have been conquered by 
Mahgalesa, and that the conqueror appointed Indravarman of the 
Bappura (i.e. Batpura) lineage, apparently related to his own mother, 
as the new governor of the region. According to a Goa Grant, 
Satyasraya-Dhruvaraja-Indravarman was ruling four vishayas or 
mandalas with his headquarters at Re valid vipa in January 610 or 
611 A.D., which was the twentieth year of his government, and 
granted a village in the Khetahara desa (Khed taluk in the Ratnagiri 
District) with the permission of the Chalukya emperor of Badami. 
It is usually believed that Indravarman was placed as a viceroy in 
the Konkan by Klrtivarman I about A.D. 590, the first year of the 
former’s rule according to the Goa Grant. But possibly he was 
ruling as a subordinate ruler elsewhere and was stationed at Revatl¬ 
dvipa only after the conquest of that place by Mahgalesa some time 
after A.D. 597-98. It was as a result of the difficult days through 
which the Chalukya emperor was passing about this time that he 
appears to have become bold enough to issue the charter, dated in 
his own regnal year. 

About the end of Mahgalesa’s reign there was a civil war 
between him and his nephew Pulakesin II, son of Klrtivarman. The 
cause of the quarrel, according to the Aihole inscription of Pula¬ 
kesin II, was Mahgalesa’s attempt to secure the succession for his 
own son. As a result of this war Mahgalesa lost his life and the 
throne of Badami passed to Pulakesin II. The son of Mahgalesa, not 
mentioned by name in the Aihole epigraph, is usually identified 
with Satyasraya-Dhruvaraja-Indravarman of the Goa Grant. But 
even though his title “an ornament of the original great Bappura 
(Batpura) lineage” may be explained by the suggestion that his 
mother was a Bappura princess, the fact that Indravarman acknow¬ 
ledged in January A.D. 610 or 611 the supremacy of Maharaja Srl- 
prithivl-vallabha, identified with Pulakesin II, renders the theory 
unlikely; because Pulakesin II could have hardly allowed his vital 
enemy and rival to the throne to be kept in the important position 
of the viceroy of the Konkan districts. As however Pulakesin’s first 
regnal year corresponds to &aka 532 (expired) while the date of the 
Goa Grant is Saka 532 (current or expired) the identification of 
Maharaja SrI-prithivi-vallabha, overlord of Satyasraya-Dhruvaraja- 
Indravarman, with Mahgalesa is not beyond the bounds of possibility. 

4. Pulakesin II 

Maharaja Pulakesin II (A.D. 610-11 to 642), whose name is also 
found in the forms Polekesin and Pulikesin, is best known by his 
viruda Satyasraya. He is also known to have enjoyed the titles 


234 


THE CHALUKYAS 


Vallabha (Vallabha-raja, Vallabhendra) or Prithivl-vallabha or 
Srl-prithivi-vallabha and to have assumed the imperial title Parame- 
svara as a second name. In later times when the Chalukyas of 
Radami adopted the imperial titles Makardjddhirdja, Paramesvara 
and Bhattaraka (usually not Paramabhattaraka), which had been 
popularised in northern India by the Gupta emperors, all these 
virudas were applied to Pulakesin II also. The Lohner (Nasik Dis¬ 
trict) Grant of A.D. 630 calls him a Parama-bhagavata, i.e. a devout 
worshipper of Vishnu. 

The civil war between Mangalesa and Pulakesin II led to a 
general renunciation of allegiance by almost all the peoples sub¬ 
jugated by the valour of Kirtivarman I and Mangalesa. When Pula¬ 
kesin II ascended the throne after his uncle’s death, there was 
anarchy and confusion throughout the empire and, in the picturesque 
language of the Aihole inscription, ‘‘the whole world was enveloped 
in the darkness that was the enemies.” Even the home province of 
the Chalukyas in the Bijapur area was threatened by an attack led by 
two kings named Appayika arid Govinda who had advanced as far 
as the northern bank of the BhaimarathI (Bhlma). Thus Pulakesin II 
was in a precarious position, faced with the double task of saving his 
home province from the aggression of enemies and of subjugating 
the disaffected subordinates. But the young king proved equal to 
the situation. He pursued a policy of bheda, won over Govinda who 
became his ally, and defeated and expelled Appayika. The identi¬ 
fication of this Govinda with the great-grandfather of Rashtrakuta 
Dantidurga (c. A.D. 742-57) is unwarranted, as the latter cannot be 
assigned to the beginning of the seventh century. 

After having made his position secure at home, Pulakesin II 
launched on a career of conquest for the subjugation of his neigh¬ 
bours. A graphic account of his victories is given in the Aihole 
prasasti, composed by the Jain poet Raviklrti, who claimed equality 
of fame with Bharavi and Kalidasa, at the completion of a shrine of 
Jinendra in A.D. 634-35, In the south Pulakesin II besieged and 
reduced VanavasI, the capital of the Kadambas who had been 
formerly subdued by his father. Then the Gahgas of South Mysore 
and the Alupas, who are supposed to have ruled at Humcha in 
Shimoga District of Mysore, were compelled to submit, probably 
because they were allies of the Kadambas. After the struggle, the 
Ganga king Durvinita Konganivriddha, son of Avimtakongani, 
appears to have given one of his daughters in marriage to the 
Chalukya conqueror. 1 The Mauryas of the Konkan, previously sub¬ 
dued by his father, were overv/helmed and the city of Purl (either 


1. But cf. pp. 242, 269. 


235 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Gharapuri, i.e. the island of Elephanta near Bombay, or Rajpuri 
near Janjira), which was located in the Arabian Sea and was pro¬ 
bably the Maurya capital, was invaded by Pulakesin’s battleships 
and was captured. Further north the Latas, Malavas 1 and Gurjaras 
were subdued. Pulakesin’s success in the Gujarat region is indicated 
by the establishment of a Chalukya viceroy. The Kaira grant issued 
from Vijayapura in A.D. 643 by the Chalukya Raja Vijayaraja or 
Vijayavarmaraja, son of Raja Buddhavarmaraja surnamed Vallabha- 
ranavikranta, and grandson of Jayasimha, records the grant of the 
village of Pariyaya (Pariya in Surat District) to the priests and reli¬ 
gious students of Jambusaras (Jambusar in the Broach District). The 
Bagumra (old Baroda State) grant of the Sendraka chief Prithivi- 
vallabha Nikumbhallasakti (son of Adityasakti and grandson of 
Bhanusakti), dated A.D. 655 and recording a gift of land in the 
Treyannahara vishaya (district round Ten near Bardoli), shows that 
the Chalukyas were succeeded in the viceroyalty of the Gujarat 
region by the Sendrakas related to Pulakesin’s mother. The non¬ 
mention of the overlord in both the records is probably due to the 
temporary eclipse of the Badami house after Pulakesin’s death in 
A.D. 642. 

The Aihole inscription next speaks of a victory of Pulakesin II 
over Harsha, the mighty king of Kanauj, 2 and of the Chalukya 
king’s presence in the region of the Vindhyas and the Reva (Nar¬ 
mada). That the people of Maharashtra under Pulakesin repulsed 
an attack of Siladitya Harsha-vardhana is also known from the 
accounts of Hiuen Tsang. The struggle between the kings of 
Madhyadesa and Dakshinapatha apparently ensued from the 
attempts of both to extend their power over the present Gujarat 
region of the Aparanta division of India. But the suggestion that 
the Latas, Malavas and Gurjaras as well as the Maitrakas of Valabhl, 
having been threatened by Harsha, submitted to Pulakesin II in 
order to get his help against the Kanauj king, and that the formidable 
coalition thus formed led to Harsha’s discomfiture, cannot be definite¬ 
ly established on the meagre facts available. According to a passage 
In the Navsari grant of Jayabhata III, the Gurjara chief Dadda II 
Prasantaraga (with known dates in A.D. 629-41) acquired fame by 
giving shelter (trfina) to the lord of Valabhl (apparently Dhruva- 
sena II) who had been overpowered by the Paramesvara Harsha. It 
is suggested that the Gurjara chief could have helped Harsha’s 
enemy only with Pulakesin’s assistance. 3 If, however, Dadda II 
had any share in a victory over the emperor of northern India, the 
author of the Navsari grant would have naturally been eloquent on 

1. See above, pp. 104 ff. 2. See above, pp. 105 ff. 

3. JBORS, IX. 319. Also cf. above, pp. 104, 109 ff. 


236 








THE CHALUKYAS 


that achievement and would not have stopped with giving the 
Gurjara king merely the credit for offering shelter to the fugitive 
ruler of Valabhi. Moreover if the king of Valabhl applied for help 
to the Chalukya emperor, the author of the Aihole prasasti would 
probably have mentioned the Maitrakas along with the La^as, 
Malavas and Gurjaras in the list of Pulakesin’s feudatories. Appa¬ 
rently the Maitrakas, who ruled from Valabhl in Kathiawad, could 
not have been represented as Malavas even if Malava had been 
conquered by them. 

Some scholars believe that Pulakesin II defeated Harsha before 
the new moon day of Bhadra in Saka 534 (expired) corresponding to 
August 2, 612 A.D. (July 23, 613 A.D. according to some) which is 
the date of the Hyderabad grant of the Chalukya king. 1 According 
to this record, Pulakesin II acquired the secondary name Paramesvara 
“by defeating hostile kings who had applied themselves (or, a hostile 
king who had applied himself) to the contest of a hundred battles,” 
while the records of his successors say that he acquired it “by 
defeating the glorious Harsha-vardhana, the warlike lord of all the 
region of the north.” But Pulakesin II ascended the throne in 
A.D. 610-11 and Harsha in A.D. 606 and both of them had to cope 
with several powerful enemies close to their capitals. The Chalukya 
king could hardly have advanced to measure his strength with the 
emperor of Kanauj before freeing his home province from the 
menace of Appayika and Govinda and before subduing the Kadambas 
and the Mauryas. It is, therefore, not improbable that Pulakesin Tl 
assumed the imperial title of Paramesvara as a second name after 
saving his homeland from enemies and restoring Chalukya sove¬ 
reignty in the territories of the disaffected neighbours, but that an 
additional significance was later attached to it after his victory over 
Paramesvara Harsha-vardhana. The date of Harsha’s advance 
towards Gujarat and ultimate defeat is no doubt earlier than 
A.D. 634-35 when the Aihole prasasti was composed; but it seems 
to be later than the beginning of the reigns of Maitraka Dhruva- 
sena II and Gurjara Dadda II, the earliest known date of both the 
rulers being A.D. 629. 2 It is interesting to note that the victory is 
not alluded to in the Lohner grant of Pulakesin II, dated A.D. 630. 

The above-mentioned conquests secured for Pulakesin II the 
sovereignty of the three Maharashtrakas (great kingdoms) com- 

1. See above, p. 107. 

2. At the beginning of his reign, Harsha was seriously engaged at home with 
powerful enemies such as £asarika. the king of Gauda. That the attack of 
Harsha, who ascended the throne early in his youth, on the kingdom of Valabhi 
occurred long after, i.e. when he was the father of a daughter of marriageable 
age, is indicated by the termination of hostilities with the Valabhi king marry¬ 
ing Harsha’s daughter. As noted above (pp. 108-9), it is difficult to accept Hiuen 
Tsang’s statement that Harsha reigned in peace for 30 years after A.D. 612. 


237 







I 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


prising 99,000 grumas (a phrase of doubtful significance). We know 
that the Chalukya kingdom was known as Maharashtra to Hiuen 
Tsang; the three countries comprising Pulakesin’s empire, extending 
from Gujarat to southern Mysore, probably refer to Maharashtra, 
Kohkana and Karnata. The Aihole inscription next describes how 
the Chalukya king directed his arms towards the eastern Deccan 
where the Kosalas (probably the Panduvamsis of Dakshina-Kosala) 
and the Kalingas (probably the Gangas of Kalihga-nagara in the 
Ganjam District) were easily humbled. The Chalukya army then 
followed the coast route towards the south. The fortress of Pishta- 
pura (Pithapuram in the Godavari District) and another fort on 
an island in the Kunala (the Kolleru lake near Ellore) were re¬ 
duced. The ruling house of Pishtapura was overthrown, and 
Pulakesin’s ‘dear younger brother’ Yuvaraja Kubja Vishnuvardhana 
was placed in charge of the newly acquired kingdom. He became 
the founder of the celebrated Eastern Chalukya dynasty which lasted 
until A.D. 1070 when it was absorbed into the Chola royal family. 
The Ellore region seems to have been defended by the Vishnukundin 
king Vikramendra-varman III, but he was defeated and the heart 
of the Andhra country passed to the Eastern Chalukyas. Further 
south, Pulakesin II defeated the Pallava king Mahendra-varman I 
(c. A.D. 600-30) whom he compelled to take shelter behind the 
ramparts of his capital, the city of Kanchl (modern Conjeeveram). 
That the Chalukya king penetrated far into the heart of the Pallava 
kingdom even if he did not actually besiege Kahchi, is corroborated 
by Pallava records (cf. the Kasakudi grant for example) which 
represent Mahendra-varman I as having annihilated his “chief 
enemies,” i.e. the Chalukyas of Badami, 1 at the battle of Pallalura, 
a place not far from Kahchi. Next Pulakesin II is said to have crossed 
the river Kaverl and made friends with the Cholas, Keralas and 
Pandyas, apparently with a view to raise them against their power¬ 
ful neighbour, the Pallavas. Although the Pallava power was 
temporarily paralysed, the Chalukya king probably did not dare to 
cross the Kaveri without leaving a large army in the rear to ensure 
his safe return. The Pallavas appear to have barred his way, but 
are said to have been once again dispersed. After completing the 
dig-vijaya, Pulakesin II returned to Vatapi. It is sometimes believed 
that the Chalukya king occupied Vatapi after all his conquests 
described above, and since he was stationed at the city in his third 
regnal year when the Hyderabad grant was issued in A.D. 613, all 
the achievements are placed earlier than that date. The suggestion 

1. Some writers think that the enemies referred to -were the Gangas and not the 
Chalukyas. According to them. Pulakesin’s Pallava adversary was not 
Mahendra-varman, but the latter's son Narasimha-varman (1HQ, XXVIII. 60). 

•J38 



THE CHALUKYAS 


is, however, entirely-unjustifiable. The date of Pulakesin’s presence 
in the east coast countries in A.D. 631 is indicated by the Kopparam 
Grant. 1 The conquests of the Chalukya king, extending over wide 
regions between the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal, are hinted 
at in his title “lord of the eastern and western waters”, found in 
the Lohner grant of A.D. 630. 

About the year A.D. 641, Maharashtra, ruled by Pulakesin, was 
visited by the Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang who has left a vivid 
account of the country. The king was a Kshatriya and was obeyed 
by his subjects with perfect submission. His plans and undertakings 
were widespread and his beneficent activities were felt over a great 
distance. The country was about 5,000 ii (about 836 miles) in circuit 
and the capital, 2 about 30 li (about 5 miles) round, bordered on 
the west by a great river. The soil was regularly cultivated and 
was very productive. The climate was hot, and the people, who 
were tall of stature and had a stern and vindictive character, 
were honest and simple. They were fond of learning; were 
grateful to their benefactors and relentless to their enemies. 
If asked to help one in distress, they would forget themselves in 
their haste to render assistance. If insulted, they would risk their 
lives to avenge themselves; but while seeking revenge, they would 
first give their enemy warning and then, both being armed, they 
would attack each other with spears. They would pursue the enemy 
when he turned to flee, but would not kill a person who submitted. 
In the language of Hiuen Tsang, “if a general loses a battle, they 
do not inflict punishment, but present him with woman’s clothes 
and so he is driven to seek death for himself. The country provides 
for a band of champions to the number of several hundreds. Each 
time they are about to engage in conflict they intoxicate themselves 
with wine, and then one man with lance in hand will meet ten 
thousand and challenge them to fight. If one of these champions 
meets a man and kills him, the laws of the country do not punish 
him. Every time they go forth, they beat drums before them. More¬ 
over, they inebriate many hundred heads of elephants, and taking 

1. El, XVIII. 257 ff. 

2. This city is said to have been 1000 li, i.e. above 167 miles from Bharukachchha 
or Broach, while the actual distance between Broach and Badami is about 
435 miles. It has accordingly been suggested that the pilgrim refers to Nasik 
on the Godavari (about 128 miles from Broach) which may have been the 
temporary residence of the Chalukya king when he was conducting military 
operations against Harsha-vardhana. The suggestion, however, is not entirely 
convincing as the operations against Harsha are mentioned in a record of A.D. 
634-35, while Hiuen Tsang visited Maharashtra about six years later. Does 
the pilgrim refer to Ellora which seems to have been the capital of the earlier 
imperial Rashtrakutas and may have been a secondary capital of the Chalukyas 
of Badami? It may be pointed out that Ellora has a river to its west, but 
Nasik has none. 


230 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


them out to fight, they themselves first drink their wine, and then 
rushing forward in mass, they trample everything down, so that no 
enemy can stand before them. The king in consequence of his 
possessing these men and elephants treats his neighbours with 
contempt.” 

Pulakesin II was undoubtedly the greatest king of the Chalukya 
house of Badami and one of the greatest monarchs of ancient India. 
His reputation and influence spread beyond the limits of India, and, 
according to the Muslim historian Tabari, Khusru II (Khusru 
Parviz), king of Persia, received an embassy from the Chalukya 
king in the thirty-sixth year of his reign, i.e. in A.D. 625-26. Tabari 
gives the name of the king of India as Prmesha, i.e. Paramesa or 
Pdramesvara (not Pulakesin as is usually supposed), which is known 
from epigraphic evidence to have been a second name of Pulakesin II 
(cf. paramesvar-apara-namadheya). The suggestion that Paramesa 
(Paramesvara), which is in this case a name, might be taken as the 
ordinary imperial title and that the king of India might have been 
any contemporary Indian monarch like Harsha (whose name was 
not Paramesvara) is unconvincing. The same may be said of the 
theory of some writers that a painting in one of the Ajanta 
caves depicts the Persian embassy presenting Khusru’s reply to 
Pulakesin II. 

Chalukya Pulakesin’s attack on the kingdom of Pallava Mahen- 
dra-varman I was only a phase of the struggle between the dominant 
powers on the two sides of the Tungabhadra, which appears to have 
characterised the history of the country in all ages prior to the 
British occupation of India. Information of such a struggle before 
the days of the Chalukyas is meagre; but from the time of Pula¬ 
kesin II and Mahendra-varman I, it continued, with intervals, for 
many centuries, even long after it had led to the overthrow of both 
the dynasties. 

Pulakesin’s success against the Pallavas was short-lived. About 
A.D. 642, he was defeated and probably killed by the Pallava king 
Narasimha-varman I (son of Mahendra-varman I) who, in retalia¬ 
tion to Pulakesin’s attack on the Pallava capital, led an expedition 
against Badami and captured it. According to the evidence of 
several Pallava grants, Narasimha-varman I repeatedly defeated 
king Vallabha, i.e. Pulakesin II (or, according to one record, wrote 
the word “victory,” as on a plate, on Pulakesin’s back which was 
visible as the Chalukya king took to flight), at the battles of Pariyala, 
Manimangala, Suramara and other places and destroyed the city of 
Badami. In the Ceylonese chronicle Mahavamsa, prince Manavarman 

1. For further discussion, cf. Ch. XXIII, Section 7. 


240 














THE CHALUKYAS 


is represented as having taken shelter at the court of the Pallava 
king whom he assisted in crushing his enemy, king Vallabha. That 
the destruction of VatapI was not an empty boast on the part of 
the Pallava king is proved by his title Vatapikonda and by a frag¬ 
mentary rock inscription at Bad ami itself, which seems to say that 
the city was conquered by Simhavishnu or Narajsiihha vishnu (i.e. 
Narasimha-varman I), surnamed Mahamalla. 

5. Vikramdditya I 

« 

The inscriptions of the later members of the Chalukya house 
of Badami represent Pulakesin II as having been succeeded by one 
of his younger sons, Vikramaditya I (A.D. 655-81), who claims to 
have been the “favourite” son of his father, but who ascended the 
throne several years after his father’s death. It appears that after 
Pulakesin’s death, Badami and some of the southern districts of his 
empire were in the hands of the Pallavas for many years, while 
several of Pulakesin’s sons were making futile efforts to drive out 
the enemy, and the viceroys of some of the provinces were ruling 
without any reference to the overlord (but without actually 
assuming independence) probably because several sons of Pula¬ 
kesin II were rival claimants for the throne. The Kaira and 
Bagumra Grants referred to above 1 show that the troubled state 
resulting from Pulakesin’s death ensued in or shortly before A.D. 643, 
and that the Chalukya sovereignty was not completely restored in 
distant provinces even as late as A.D. 655. As no king is placed 
between Pulakesin II and Vikramaditya I in the genealogy found in 
the formal charters of Vikramaditya I and his successors, it is usually 
believed that the Chalukya throne remained vacant during the period 
A.D. 642-55. When, however, the Pallavas were apparently not in 
occupation of the entire kingdom of the Chalukyas, it is inexplicable 
why Pulakesin’s eldest son did not declare himself king in the 
unconquered regions of the kingdom or at the court of a faithful 
viceroy or ally, especially when some of the viceroys are found not 
to have assumed independence. It is likely, therefore, that during 
this period there were several claimants for the throne, although 
none of them succeeded in driving out the Pallavas from Badami 
or in asserting his authority over all the viceroys. Eventually 
Vikramaditya I, who was probably at first fighting on behalf of one 
of his elder brothers 2 and enjoying the assistance rendered by the 
Gahga king Durvinita, possibly his mother’s father, succeeded in 
freeing Badami from the enemies and in securing his father’s throne 

1. See p. 236. 

2. It does not appear that Vikramaditya I was a rival claimant from the very 
beginning, for in that case he would have probably dated the commencement 
of his reign in A.D. 642 and not 655. 

241 

C.A.—16 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


ior himself. There is a Gahga inscription which speaks of Durvinita 
as having acquired fame in the land of Jayasirhha-Votllabha (founder 
of the Chalukya house of Badami) by seizing the Kaduvetti (meaning 
Pallava, i.e. the Pallava king of Kahchl) and setting up his own 
daughter’s son, probably Vikramaditya I. 1 It appears that the sons 
of Pulakesin II received little help from their relatives, the Eastern 
Chalukyas, who had severed their relations with Badami as early 
as the closing years of Kubja Vishnuvardhana’s reign. One of the 
rival claimants for the Chalukya throne after the death of Pula¬ 
kesin II appears to have been his “dear” son Aditya-varman who is 
described in the Karnul grant of his first regnal year as Mahdrajddhi- 
rdja-Paramesvara and Prithivi-vallcibhci and as the supreme ruler 
of the whole earth overcome by his own prowess. The omission of 
the names of Aditya-varman and other claimants for the throne 
from the genealogy in the records of Vikramaditya I and his 
successors seems to be due to the fact that they were simultaneously 
ruling in the provinces away from Badami, and that their title to the 
throne was challenged or ignored by Vikramaditya I, who ousted 
them. The Kauthem grant of the Later Chalukyas, however, repre¬ 
sents Pulakesin II as succeeded regularly by his son Nedamari, his 
grandson Aditya-varman and his great-grandson Vikramaditya I, 
and this tradition, mistaken as it is, may be a reminiscence of the 
actual fact that two elder brothers of Vikramaditya I had claimed 
to have been kings. 

The existence of Chandraditya, another elder brother of Vikra¬ 
maditya, is known from two grants 2 of Vijayabhat^arika, the wife 
of the former. In both these grants, Vikramaditya is described as 
the dear son of Pulakesin and conqueror of hostile kings and restorer 
of the fortune and sovereignty of his ancestors. As, besides, his 
name is placed before Chandraditya, there is no doubt that the latter 
enjoyed a feudatory status though there were cordial relations 
between the two brothers. It is difficult to decide whether Chandra¬ 
ditya was alive when his wife issued the Grant. 

According to the Talamanchi and Nerur grants, Vikramaditya I 
ascended the throne after September 654 and before July 655 A.D. 
Like his brother Aditya-varman, he also claimed to have been the 
“dear” son of Pulakesin II. Vikramaditya I had the virudas Satya- 
sraya, Ranarasika, Anivarita and Rajamalla, and enjoyed not only 

1. Some scholars place Durvinita’s reign much too early *for this (Cf. Ch. 
XIII. p. 269). For the date of Durvinita cf. Successors of the Satavahanas , 
pp. 299-302. Vikramaditya’s queen Ganga-MahadevI, mentioned in the Gadval 
Grant, may have been a grand-daughter of Durvinita. 

2. BG. p. 366. The expression Svarajya in one of the grants should be taken to 
mean ‘the sovereignty of ourselves (i.e. the Chalukyas).’ Vijayabhattarika may 
have been the celebrated poetess Vijja mentioned in the literary traditions. 

242 



THE CHALUKYAS 


the epithet Sri-prithivi-vallabha ( Sri-vallabha or Vallabha) but also 
the imperial titles Mahdrajddhirdja Paramesvara and sometimes 
Bhattdraka. In a few viceregal records he is described as a Parama- 
mdhesvara ( i.e . devout worshipper of Siva) and as meditating on 
the feet of Nagavardhana, who is supposed to have been the king’s 
religious teacher. But the Talamanchi grant referring to Sri 
Meghacharya as the king’s svakiya-guru is no doubt more reliable 
than the above records. Vikramaditya I, who recovered the southern 
part of the empire from the Pallavas, is said to have conquered his 
enemies in numerous battles with the help of his sword and his 
charger named Chitrakantha. It is further stated that he acquired 
for himself his father's royal fortune that had been interrupted by 
three kings, and thus brought the whole kingdom under his sway. 
By mere word of mouth Vikramaditya I is said to have restored the 
grants to gods and Brahmanas that had been confiscated by the 
three hostile kings. Thus the Chalukya monarch acquired the 
fortune and sovereignty of his ancestors after having defeated 
several enemies, including not improbably some of his own brothers. 
The Hyderabad grant shows that Vikramaditya fought with the 
Paliava monarchs Narasimha-varman I, his son Mahendra-varman II 
and grandson Paramesvara-varman I. Vikramaditya I is described 
in it as having obliterated the fame of Narasimha, destroyed the 
power of Mahendra, and surpassed Isvara (i.e. Paramesvara- 
varman I) in statesmanship and thus crushed the Pallavas. He is 
further said to have captured Kahchi after conquering Isvarapotaraja 
(i.e. Paramesvara-varman I). The Gadval grant describes him as 
the destroyer of the family of Mahamalla (i.e. Narasimha-varman I) 
and of the Paliava lineage. From these accounts it is clear that, for 
the complete recovery of the lost districts of his father’s kingdom, 
Vikramadiya had to fight with no less than three Paliava kings in 
succession. The struggle must have covered a long period of time 
commencing some years before and ending many years after his 
actual accession to the throne. Later records represent him as 
receiving the surrender of Kahchi after defeating the Paliava king, 
as humbling the kings of the Cholas, Pandyas, and Keralas, and as 
getting obeisance done to him by the rulers of Kahchi who were the 
cause of his family’s humiliation. Thus Vikramaditya I is said to 
have become the lord of the whole earth bounded by the three 
oceans, indicating South India, bordered by the Bay of Bengal, 
Arabian Sea, and Indian Ocean, and sometimes conceived as a 
secondary chakravcirii-kshe'tra. In some records the Kalabhras are 
added to the list of peoples subdued by Vikramaditya I. Epigraphic 
records also speak of the great assistance that was rendered 1<> the 
Chalukya king by his son Vinayaditva and grandson Vijnyadilya. 


243 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Vinayaditya claims to have arrested at his father’s command the 
power or forces of the trairajya-Pailava-pati or trairdjya-Kdnchi-pati 
and pleased his father by ensuring peace in all the provinces, while 
Vijayaditya is said to have entirely uprooted the assemblage of the 
foes when his grandfather was engaged with the enemies in the 
south. Vinayaditya’s exploit has been explained as a success against 
the Pallava king of Kanchi as well as the latter’s neighbours, the 
kings of the three kingdoms of the Cholas, Pandyas and Keralas. 1 

According to the Pallava records, king Paramesvara-varman I 
defeated the army of Vallabha (i.e. Vikramaditya I) at the battle of 
Peruvalanallur and, unaided, compelled the Chalukya king, whose 
army consisted of several lakhs, to take to flight, covered only by a 
mg. The Pallava king is further said to have destroyed the city of 
Ranarasika (Vikramaditya I), i.e. the Chalukya capital at Badami. 2 
According to the Honnur Grant 3 Vikramaditya was encamped at 
Malliyur-grama to the west of Kanchi in A.D. 671. The Gadwal 
grant of Vikramaditya shows that he emulated the exploits of his 
father and advanced in the south as far as the Chola capital, at 
Uragapura on the southern bank of the Kaverl (modern Uraiyur 
near Trichinopoly), where he was stationed on the 25th April, 
A.D. 674. This suggests that the Pallava power was temporarily 
paralysed once again. But the Pallava king had, according to some 
writers, allied himself with some of the southern monarchs including 
the Pandya king Kcchchadaiyan, and ultimately succeeded in driv¬ 
ing the Chalukyas out of the southern region. But the Pandyas in 
this period were enemies of the Pallavas. The credit for the defeat 
of the Chalukyas at the battle of Peruvalanallur near Trichinopoly 
has to be ascribed to the military genius of the Pallava king alone. 

During Vikramaditya’s rule, his younger brother Dharasraya 
Jayasimha-varman v/as established in the viceroyalty of the Gujarat 
region with the provincial capital probably at Navasarika (Navsari). 
According to a Nasik grant, 4 referred to A.D. 666 or 685, Jayasimha- 
varman annihilated the entire army of a ruler named Vajjada in the 
land between the rivers Mahl and Narmada. Vajjada is naturally 

1. It is difficult to agree with scholars who believe that Vinayaditya defeated the 
Pallava lord of Kanchi, who had under him three kingdoms or a kingdom 
having three divisions. 

2. According to some scholars, the Pcriyapuranam (Siruttondar, v. 6) suggests 
that, when the Chalukya king v/as leading the expedition against the Pallava 
country,^ Paramesvara-varman I sent his general {§iruttonda to capture Vatapl. 
The Chalukya king’s grandson Vijayaditya possibly succeeded in repulsing the 
Pallava- army under 6iruttonda. The claim of Gahga Bhuvikrama, successor of 
Durvinlta, to have defeated the Pallava king (possibly Paramesvara-varman) 
at Vilinda in the Tumkur region of Mysore seems to refer to a phase of this 
Chalukya-Pallava struggle ( IHQ , XXVIII. 63-4). 

3. Arch. Surv. Mysore, 1939, p. 134. 4. IHQ, XX. 353 ff. 


244 







THE CHALUKYAS 


regarded as the Prakrit corruption of the semi-Sanskrit name Vajrata 
(probably standing for Vajrabhata ) a king of which name, according 
to the Rashtrakuta records, was defeated by the army of the 
Chalukya emperors of Badami. This king has been tentatively 
identified with Siladitya III (A.D. 662-84) of the Maitraka dynasty 
of Valabhl. 1 Yuvamja &ryasraya Siladitya (A.D. 670-92) and his 
father Dharasraya Jayasimha-varman probably helped Vikrama- 
ditya I in the latter’s struggle with Pallava king Mahendra-var- 
man II. The Gaddemane inscription refers to a victory of Slladitya 
over a king named Mahendra and to a general named Pettani 
Satyahka who fell fighting with the Beda chiefs. 2 

6. Vinayaditya and Vijayaditya 

Vikramaditya I was succeeded by his “dear” son Vinayaditya 
(A.D. 681-96) who had probably taken up the reins of government 
a few years before his father’s death in A.D. 681. Vinayaditya was 
known by the virudas Srl-prithivl-vallabha, Satyasraya and pro¬ 
bably also Rajasraya and Yuddhamalla, and enjoyed the imperial 
titles of his father. Mention has already been made of his contest 
with the kings of Ranch! and the three neighbouring kingdoms dur¬ 
ing his father’s reign. Several of his own records as well as those 
of his successors credit him with a number of other exploits, some 
of which appear to be exaggerated. He claims to have reduced the 
Pallavas, Kalabhras, Keralas, Haihayas (Kalachuris), Vilas, Malavas 
(Malavaraiyans of Malanadu), Cholas, Pandyas and other peoples 
to the same state of servitude as that of the Aluvas (Alupas), 
Gangas and others who were the hereditary servants of his family. 
Later inscriptions credit him with having levied tribute from the 
kings of such Dvipas as Kamera or Kavera (probably the Raven 
valley), Paraslka (Persia) and Simhala (Ceylon). Although the 
claims appear to be extravagant, it is not improbable, in view of 
the troubled condition in both Simhala and Persia about this period, 
that, a Ceylonese prince and a Persian chief had taken refuge at the 
Chalukya court. 3 It is said that king Vinayaditya acquired the 
banner called pdlidhvaja and other insignia of sovereignty by defeat¬ 
ing, like his grandfather, the lord of the entire Uttarapatha, whose 
name however, is not specified. The identification of the North 

1. See above, p. 149. 2. See above, p. 106, f.n. 1. 

3. In Ceylon Mana-varman, who had been a fugitive at the Pallava court, fought 
against Pulakesin II, and had gained the throne after killing king Hasta- 
damshtra II with Pallava help, ruled from A.D. 668 to 703. It is not unlikely that 
one of his rivals turned to the Chalukya king for help. Persia was conquered 
by the Arabs during the Caliphate of Umar (A.D. 634-44), but the total eradi¬ 
cation of the semi-independent Satraps of the Persian empire required some 
time. The first colony of Parsee emigrants from Khurasan is said to have 
settled at Sanjan (Thana Dist.) in A.D. 735 ( EHI* p. 444). 


245 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Indian adversary of the Chalukya king is uncertain. The non¬ 
mention of the personal name of the adversary may indicate that 
the epigraphic passage in question actually signifies the Chalukya 
king’s nominal success against several North Indian rulers. 1 

Vinayaditya’s rule seems to have ended disastrously. It is said 
that, while the Chalukya monarch desired to conquer Uttarapatha, 
his son Yuvardja Vijayaditya defeated the hostile forces in front (or, 
in the presence) of his father and acquired the Ganga and Yamuna 
symbols, the 'pdlidhvaja standard, double drums, Mahmabda badges, 
jewels, elephants and other articles, which he presented to his father. 
But, in this connection, it is also said that prince Vijayaditya was 
captured by the retreating enemies. After the prince had somehow 
managed to escape, he succeeded in putting down the anarchical dis¬ 
turbances in his land. The above account may suggest that king 
Vinayaditya died during the period of his son’s captivity in the hands 
of the enemies. 

In the viceroyalty of the Lata region, Dharasraya Jayasimha- 
varman was associated in the administration, for a long time, with 
his son, Yuvardja Sryasraya £lladitya. Another viceroy of Vinaya¬ 
ditya was Maharaja Pogilli of the Sendraka family, who was in pos¬ 
session of territories in the Kanarese area previously held by the 
Kadambas. 

Vijayaditya (A.D. 696-733), the “dear” son of Vinayaditya, next 
ascended the throne. He was known by the virudas Satyasraya, 
Samastabhuvanasraya and Sri-prithivi-vallabha and enjoyed the 
usual imperial titles of his father and grandfather; he was also some¬ 
times styled Parama-bhattaraka in place of Bhattaraka ( Bhatdra in 
Kannada). Vijayaditya’s reign has been hitherto regarded to be a 
peaceful one. But it appears that he was involved in a struggle with 
the Pallavas. Probably he took the aggressive. For we learn from 
the recently discovered Ulchala stone inscription 2 dated in the 35th 
year of his reign (A.D. 730-1) that Yuvardja Vikramaditya conquered 
Kanchl and levied tribute from the Pallava king Paramesvara- 
varman (II). This was evidently the first of the three expeditions 
against Kanchl which Vikramaditya II is said to have undertaken. 3 

Vijayaditya built the magnificent temple of Siva under the name 
Vijayesvara (now called Sangamesvara) at Pattadakal in Bijapur 
District. He was tolerant of Jainism and donated villages to Jain 
teachers. 4 He had probably a younger sister named Kunkuma-maha- 

1. See above, p. 130, where it is suggested that Vinayaditya's adversary was Yaso- 
varman. 

2. Cf. Ancient India. No. 5, p. 54. 3. IA, X. 164-5. 

4. Two spurious Grants (Kielhorn’s List Nos. 26, 37) represent a Jain teacher as 
the priest of the king’s father, suggesting that Vinayaditya was a follower of 
Jainism. 

2 M'S 




THE CHALUKYAS 


devl who built the Jain temple called Anesejjeya-basadi at Laksli- 
meswar. An inscription at the temple at Mahakuta (ancient Makuta) 
in Bijapur District records the gifts of the courtesan Vinapoti who 
is described as “the soul’s darling” of Vijayaditya. 

The viceroy of the Lata region during Vijayaditya’s reign, about 
A.D. 731-32, was Jayasraya Mangalaraja, surnamed Vinayaditya and 
Yuddhamalla, who was a younger brother of Yu vara ja Sryasraya 
Siladitya. A viceregal family of the Rashtrakutas, to whom refer¬ 
ence will be made later, seems to have ruled in the northern part of 
the Chalukya empire. 

7. Vikramaditya II and Kirtivarman II 

Vijayaditya was succeeded by his “dear” son Vikramaditya II 
(A.D. 733-34 to 744-45) who had the virudas Satyasraya and Sri- 
prithivl-vallabha and usual imperial titles. He is said to have had a 
younger brother named Bhima from whom the later Chalukyas 
claimed their descent. Vikramaditya’s chief queen was MahadevI 
Loka-mahadevi of the Haihaya (Kalachuri) family, who built the 
great temple of Siva under the name Lokesvara (now called Viru- 
paksha) at Pattadakal. The king conferred the fillet or badge of 
honour called the Mume-perjerepu patta and the name Tribhuvana- 
charya upon the architect Gunda, surnamed Anivaritacharya, who 
built the temple. Another of his queens was Rdjm Trailokyamaha- 
devl (a co-uterine younger sister of Loka-mahadevi) who constructed 
another great temple of Siva under the name Trailokyesvara in the 
vicinity of the Lokesvara shrine. 

Hostilities with the Pallavas were continued during the reign 
of Vikramaditya II who is said to have made a sudden attack on 
the Tundaka country (i.c. the Pallava kingdom) with a desire to 
uproot completely his “natural enemy”, the Pallava. The Chalukya 
monarch is also said to have taken possession of the musical instru¬ 
ments styled Kafumukha and Samudraghosha, the dhvaja or banner 
called Khatvdnga (club with a skull at the top), elephants, and 
rubies after putting to flight the Pallava king Nandipota-varman, 
i.e. Nandi-varman II Pallavamalla, who was the successor of Para- 
mesvara-varman II, grandson of Paramesvara-varman I. He then 
entered Kanchl, which he did not destroy, and donated heaps of 
gold to the Rajasirhhesvara temple and other shrines which had 
been built by Narasimha-varman II, father of Paramesvara-var¬ 
man II. The Chalukya king then destroyed the power of the Pandya, 
Chola, Kerala, Kalabhra and other kings, and set up a pillar of vic¬ 
tory on the shores of the Southern Ocean. The conquest of Kahchi by 
Vikramaditya II is not only mentioned in the Chalukya inscriptions, 
but is also proved by the existence of a fragmentary record of the 


247 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Chalukya monarch at the Rajasirhhesvara temple at Conjeeveram. 
Yuvardja Kirtivarman II, Vikramaditya’s son by Loka-mahadevI, is 
also said to have joined the expedition against the “family-foe”, the 
Paliava king of Kanchi, who proved himself unable to fight in the 
open country and was driven back into his fortress. After breaking 
the power of the enemy, the Chalukya prince is said to have cap¬ 
tured numerous elephants and rubies and heaps of gold, which he 
presented to his father. 

The Naravana charter of Vikramaditya II, dated January 
743 A.D., records the grant of a village in the Ratnagiri District by 
the Chalukya king at the request of his subordinate, Rashtrakuta 
Govindaraja, who was the son of Sivaraja. The charter was issued 
when the king was camping at Adityavatika (Aitavada in Satara 
District). The chief was probably governing the Satara-Ratnagiri 
region. In the northern part of the Deccan, two houses of the 
Rashtrakutas appear to have been growing powerful during the 
weak rule of the emperors of Badami in the first half of the eighth 
century. 

During the reign of Vikramaditya II, a formidable invasion of 
the Tajikas or Arabs was repulsed by the northern viceroy Avani- 
janasraya Pulakesin, younger brother and successor of Javasraya 
Mahgalaraja, as noted above. 1 For this achievement, the king con¬ 
ferred on Avanijanasraya Pulakesin such titles as Dakshinapatha - 
svadharana and Anivartaka-nivartayitri. A few years later Lata was 
conquered by Rashtrakuta Dantidurga who seems to have extirpated 
the viceregal house of the Chalukyas. 

Vikramaditya II was succeeded by his “dear” son Kirtivarman II 
(A.D. 744-45 to 757) 2 who enjoyed the virudas Satyasrava and 
Nripasimha, as well as the usual Vallabha names and imperial titles. 
He made a grant in honour of god Faramesvara (Siva) at the Rames- 
vara tirtha on the Tungabhadra. 

8. The End of the Chalukya Kingdom of Badami 

The royal fortunes of the Chalukyas of Badami which, according 
to the records of the Later Chalukyas, disintegrated during Kirti- 
varmaiTs reign, passed about the middle of the eighth century to 
Rashtrakuta Dantidurga also known as Dantivacman II. In the 
Fllora grant of Dantidurga, dated A.D. 742, the Rashtrakuta ruler, 
who probably made Ellora his headquarters, was still satisfied with 
the feudatory title Mahdsamantddhipati and the epithet samadhigata- 
pancha-mahasabda ; but the absence of any reference to the Chalukya 
overlord Vikramaditya II shows that he was already aspiring to 

1. See p. 155. 

2. For the date of accession of Kirtivarman II, cf. El. IX. 202. 

248 





THE CHALUKYAS 


independence. The Samangad grant of A.D. 754, however, shows 
that by that date the northern provinces of the Chalukya empire 
had been completely occupied by the Rashtrakutas. The Samangad 
and other records not only attribute to Dantidurga the imperial 
titles Mahamj&dhir&ja, Paramesvara and Paramabhatparaka, but say 
that he acquired supreme sovereignty by conquering Vallabha, i.e. 
the Chalukya monarch Kirtivarman II. Dantidurga is also described 
as the conqueror of the Karnataka army (i.e. the forces of the 
Chalukyas) which had previously subdued the lord of Kanchl, the 
king of Kerala, the Cholas, the Pandyas, the illustrious Harsha, and 
Vajrata. Dantidurga’s claim to have subjugated the Pallava king 
of Kahchi, no doubt Nandi-varman II, seems to be supported by the 
fact that the Pallava king named his son Danti-varman (a name 
unusual in the Pallava genealogy) apparently after the Rashtrakuta 
monarch. His success in the far south may suggest that Rashtrakuta 
supremacy extended also over the southern part of the Chalukya 
empire, and that Kirtivarman II, now confined to his home province, 
was compelled to acknowledge Dantidurga’s suzerainty. The 
Vakkaleri grant of Kirtivarman II, dated the 2nd September, A.D. 
757, records his gift of a village in the modern Hangal region of 
the Dharwar District when the Chalukya king was stationed on the 
northern bank of the Bhlmarathi (Bhlma) in the present Sholapur 
District. This may suggest that Kirtivarman II made an attempt 
to retrieve the fallen fortunes of his family shortly after Dantidurga’s 
death. But soon the Chalukya king was overthrown by Rashtrakuta 
Krishna I who is said to have “forcibly carried away the fortune 
of the Chalukya family bearing the garland of waving Pali-dhvajas”, 
and to have “transformed the great boar (the Chalukya crest), 
which had been seized with an itching for battle and attacked him, 
into a deer.” Some records describe him as achieving supreme 
sovereignty, resplendent with numerous Pali-dhvajas, by conquering 
Rahapa (Rahappa or Rahapya). The reference to supreme sovereignty 
and the palidhvaja in relation to both the Chalukyas and Rahapa 
suggests that Rahapa was another name of the Chalukya king 
Kirtivarman II. 

The dominions of the Chalukyas under Vikramaditya I and his 
successors extended from Gujarat in the north to the Nellore District 
in the south. But the struggle with the Pallavas, demanding their 
constant attention on the south, not only exhausted their strength 
and resources, but also loosened their hold on the northern provinces 
of the empire, where the viceroys gradually began to rule semi- 
independentiy. These were the main factors that led to the over¬ 
throw of the Chalukya emperor by one of his northern viceroys. 1 


1. Cf. 1C XV, 184-89. 


249 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


II. THE EASTERN CHALUKYAS 

We have seen that Pulakesin II, the Chalukya king of Badami, 
had a younger brother named Vishnuvardhana or Kubja-Vishnu- 
vardhana, also known as Prithivi-duvaraja (i.e. Prithivl-yuvaraja or 
Prithivi-vallabha-Yuvaraja), who accompanied him in his expedition 
against the countries of the east coast about A.D. 631. In the 
Satara grant dated A.D. 617-18, Vishnuvardhana calls himself 
Yuvardja and claims to have been the “dear” younger brother of 
the king of Badami. According to this record, the Yuvardja, while 
he was at Kurumarathl, granted to some Brahmanas the village of 
Alanda-tirtha (probably Alundah about 35 miles north of Satara) 
on the south bank of the BhimarathT. It is clear that Vishnuvardhana 
was made Yuvardja early in the reign of his elder brother, and that 
about the year A.D. 617-18 he was ruling as viceroy of the South 
Maratha country. A tradition recorded in the Avantisundan- 
kathasdra seems to speak of the contemporaneity of the Pallava 
king Simhavishnu (i.e. Narasimha-varman I) of Kahchl, narendra 
Vishnuvardhana of the Nasik region, and king Durvinita {i.e. the 
Gahga king of that name). This might suggest that Yuvardja 
Vishnuvardhana was for some time ruling also as viceroy of the 
North Maratha country or that the province under him included the 
whole land from Satara to Nasik. 

As noted above, 1 shortly before the end of A.D. 631, Pulakesin II 
subdued the king of Pishtapura and the Vishnukundin king 
Vikramendra-varman III, and appointed Vishnuvardhana viceroy of 
the newly conquered territories, extending along the coast from 
Vizagapatam District to the northern part of Nellore District. Soon 
after the return of Pulakesin II to Badami, however, Vishnuvardhana 
seems to have assumed the title Maharaja and begun to rule as an 
independent monarch without reference to the king of Badami. Thus 
he became the founder of the so-called Eastern Chalukya dynasty 
of the Andhra country. Vishnuvardhana, known as Vishnuvardhana I, 
was called Makaradhvaja and Vishamasiddhi, and also Bittarasa 
which is a Kanarese corruption of Sanskrit Vishnuraja. The extent 
of his dominions is indicated by the Kopparam grant as well as 
the charters of his independent rule and those of his successors. The 
Timmapuram and Chipurupalle Grants of Vishnuvardhana I, which 
were issued from his capital at Pishtapura, record gifts of land in 
the Plaki and Dimila vishayas in the present Vizagapatam District. 
The Plaki -vishaya corresponded to the region round the ancient 
town of Cherupura, modern Chipurupalle, which is the chief town 
of a taluk of that name, while the name Dimila is preserved in that 

1. See p. 238. 


250 




THE CHALUKYAS 


\ 


of Dimile, a village in Sarvasiddhi taluk. One of Vishnuvardhana's 
lieutenants named Buddhavarman, who belonged to the Chaturth - 
dbhijana or the Sudra class and was the founder of the Durjaya 
family, was appointed by his master governor of a tract of land 
called Giri-paschima or “West of the Hill”. This locality is said to 
have comprised seventy-three villages which have been located about 
Sattenapalle taluk of Guntur District. Vishnuvardhana’s queen 
Ayyana-mahadevI executed a grant in favour of a Jain temple at 
Bijavada, i.e. Vijayavaqla (modern Bezwada). 

Vishnuvardhana I is said to have had a general named Kala- 
kampa, who belonged to the PattavardhinI family, and killed in the 
battlefield a certain Daddara. The identity of Daddara is uncertain. 
There is a tradition that the founder of the Eastern Chalukya 
dynasty was a patron of learning and that the celebrated poet 
Bharavi, author of the Kiratdrjuniya, enjoyed his patronage. 

According to the records of the later members of the Eastern 
Chalukya family, Vishnuvardhana I ruled over the Vengl country 
for eighteen years. The statement probably points to a period when 
the Eastern Chalukya capital was transferred from Pishtapura to 
the ancient city of Vengl prior to its transfer to Rajamahendri or 
Rajamahendrapura founded by Amma II (A.D. 945-70), surnamed 
Rajamahendra. The Chipurupalle grant, issued on the occasion of a 
lunar eclipse when Vishnu vardhana was himself an independent 
Maharaja owing no allegiance to the king of Badami, is dated on the 
fifteenth tithi of the fourth month of the 18th year of his own rule. It 
is usually believed that the date corresponds to the 7th July, A.D. 632; 
but it has been recently suggested that it may fall in A.D. 641 or 
A.D. 650. Consequently Vishnuvardhana’s rule of 18 years has 
been assigned by different writers to A.D. 615-33, to A.D. 624-41 
and to A.D. 633-50. In spite, however, of the statement in the later 
records that Vishnuvardhana ruled the Vengl country for 18 years, 
it seems that his 18th regnal year, as referred to in the Chipurupalle 
grant, was counted from his Yauvar&jy-dbhisheka which, as we have 
seen, took place some time before A.D. 617-18. That the viceroys 
or subordinate rulers sometimes dated their charters in the years 
of their own administration even when they were transferred from 
one place to another is probably indicated by the Goa grant of 
Satya^raya-Dhruvaraja-Indravarman of Revatidvipa, dated in Saka 
532 (A.D. 610 or 611) and in the 20th year of his own government, 
although he could hardly have been stationed at Revatidvipa before 
the conquest of that region by Mangalesa (A.D. 597-98 to 610-11). 1 
The viceregal or subordinate rulers, who are known to have later 


1. See above, p. 234. 


251 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


assumed independence, usually counted from the actual beginning 
of their rule and not from the commencement of their independent 
reign, there being usually in such cases a period—short or long— 
of virtual independence and nominal dependence and no definite date 
of the assumption of independent status. Even if Vishnuvardhana 
counted his 18th year from his establishment at Pishtapura, it 
could hardly have been from A.D. 624 or A.D. 633, as according 
to the Kopparam grant, that region seems to have been conquered 
about A.D. 630-31. In the present state of our knowledge, therefore, 
it is possibly better to assign Vishnuvardhana’s rule to the period 
A.D. 615-33, although it would mean that he ruled in the Andhra 
country only for about four years prior to his death. Nothing definite 
can be said on this point until further evidence is forthcoming; 
but the fact that about half a century intervened between the 
advanced years of the Vishnukundin king Madhavavarman I 
(c. A.D. 535-85) and the early years of Vishnuvardhana’s successor 1 
does not appear to support the dates A.D. 624-41 or A.D. 633-50 for 
the founder of the Eastern Chalukya dynasty. 2 

Vishnu vardhana I was succeeded by his son Mahdrdja Jaya- 
siihha I (c. A.D. 633-63) who was also known as Prithivl-vallabha, 
Sarvasiddhi and PrithivI-Jayasimha (i.e. Prithivl-vallabha Jaya- 
siriiha). In later records, he is usually assigned a reign of 33 years; 
but sometimes only a reign of 30 years. This confusion possibly 
arises from the fact that in the closing years of his reign, the 
administration was actually in charge of his brother Indravarman. 
As noted above, the Pallavas defeated Pulakesin II, and occupied the 
southern part of his empire, including the capital city of Badami, 
about A.D. 642. During the long and protracted struggle that fol¬ 
lowed, Jayasimha does not appear to have rendered any assistance 
to his relatives in distress. 

Jayasimha I was succeeded by his brother Mahdrdja Indra¬ 
varman (c. A.D. 663) who was also called Indraraja, Induraja (sic.) 
and Indrabhattaraka, and had the virudas Siihhavikrama and Tyaga- 
dhenu. According to later records of the family, king Indravarman 

1. Cf. above, p. 208. 

2. A recently discovered charter has been taken to support A.D. 624 as the 
beginning of Kubja-Vishnuvardhana’s rule in Andhra (see Anc. Ind., January 
1949, p. 49). Dr. N. Venkataramanayya accepts the above date of the founda¬ 
tion of the Eastern Chalukya dynasty in his recent work, The Eastern Chd- 
lukyas of Vehgi, Madras, 1950; but he rightly points out: ‘It must not, however, 
be supposed that the problem of Eastern Chalukya chronology has finally been 
solved. Though the evidence of the early records is generally in agreement 
with the date suggested here for the establishment of the Eastern Chalukya 
kingdom, certain facts militate against it and create a suspicion in the mind 
that a satisfactory solution has not yet been attained’ (op. cit., p. 56). The date, 
AD. 624, for the foundation of the Eastern Chalukya dynasty was first sug¬ 
gested by B. V. Krishna Rao ( JAHRS , IX, Pt. 4, pp. 1-32). 


252 




THE CHALUKYAS 


reigned only for a week; but he seems to have enjoyed considerable 
power in the administration during the later years of the rule of his 
brother Jayasimha I, One of his feudatories was Kondivarman of 
the Aryahu family who was probably a friend of the king’s son also 
named Indravarman. 

Indravarman’s successor was his son Vishnuvardhana II (c. 
A.D. 663-72) who enjoyed the virudas Vishamasiddhi, Makaradhvaja 
and Pralayaditya, and ruled for nine years. Most of his own records 
as well as those of his successors represent him as a son of Indra¬ 
varman. In one of his inscriptions, however, he calls himself the 
son of Jayasimha I. Whether this is due to mistake or whether 
Vishnuvardhana II was treated by his uncle as an adopted son, it is 
difficult to say. He was succeeded by his son Mahgi-yuvaraja (c. 
A.D. 672-96) who was known as Vijayasiddhi and Sarvalokasraya 
and ruled for 25 years. 

) 

King Sarvalokasraya Vijayasiddhi or Mahgi-y u varSj a had 
several sons of whom Jayasimha II {c. A.D. 696-709), surnamed 
Sarvalokasraya and Sarvasiddhi, succeeded him after his death and 
ruled for 13 years. But the new king’s brother Vijayadityavarman, 
who £eems to have been originally the viceroy of Madhyama-Kalinga 
with Elamahchi (modern Yellamanchili in Sarvasiddhi taluk of 
Vizagapatam District) as his provincial headquarters, assumed the 
title Maharaja and threw off the yoke of Jayasimha II. After 
Vijayaditya’s death, Madhyama-Kalinga passed to his son, Maharaja 
Kokuli or Kokilivarman, also called Anivarita and Sarvalokasraya. 

When Jayasimha II died, the throne was seized by his younger 
step-brother Kokkili or Kokuli Vikramaditya, surnamed Vijaya¬ 
siddhi, who reigned only for six months. During his short reign, he 
seems to have succeeded in conquering Madhyama-Kalinga from his 
nephew who bore his own name. But soon king Kokuli Vikramaditya 
was overthrown by his elder brother Vishnuvardhana III (c. A.D. 
709-46). It seems that Madhyama-Kalinga remained for some years 
in the possession of Kokuli Vikramaditya’s son named Mangi-yuva- 
raja after his grandfather. 

Vishnuvardhana III assumed the names Samastabhuvanasraya, 
Tribhuvanankusa and Vishamasiddhi, and ruled for 37 years. He 
succeeded in annexing Madhyama-Kalinga. The Musinikonda 
charter of £aka 684 (A.D. 762) records the gift of a village to a Jain 
temple at Bijavada (modern Bezwada) built by Ayyana-mahadevi, 
queen of Kubj a-Vishnuvardhana. The Grant was issued by king 
Vishnuvardhana III; but it was executed by the queen. It has been 
suggested that this charter was a renewal of an old one issued during 
the reign of Vishnuvardhana I and that, although Vishnuvardhana III 


253 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


abdicated his throne about A.D. 746, he probably lived up to 
A.D. 762. It is also not improbable that the charter said to have 
been renewed by Vishnuvardhana III was actually issued by his 
successor. Another charter issued in the 23rd regnal year of Vishnu- 1 
vardhana III records a grant made by Prithivipothi, daughter of 
Maghin-duvaraja, who seems to have been none other than king 
Mangi-yuvaraja, father of the reigning monarch. The identification 
of Maghin-duvaraja with the Pallava prince Mahendra-varman III 
(brother of Paramesvara-varman II) is unconvincing. The word 
duvardja is a Dravidian corruption of Sanskrit yuvardja. 

During the reign of Vishnuvardhana III, a Nishada king named 
Prithivivyaghra, who had let loose a horse for performing the Asva- 
medha sacrifice, 1 seems to have occupied the southern part of the 
Eastern Chalukya dominions about the northern fringe of the Nellore 
District. In the Udayendiram Grant of the Pallava king Nandi- 
varman II of Kanchi, his general Udayachandra claims to have 
defeated the Nishada king and, having driven him out of the vishaya 
or territory of Vishnuraja (i.e. Vishnuvardhana III), annexed it to 
his master’s dominions. , 

Vishnuvardhana III was succeeded by Vijayaditya I (c. 
A.D. 746-64), 2 his son by the chief queen Viiaya-mahadevl. Vijaya¬ 
ditya I assumed the titles Tribhu vanankusa, Vijayasiddhi, 
Saktivarman and Vikramarama, and ruled for about 18 or 19 years. 
His reign witnessed a great political change in the Deccan. In the 
middle of the eighth century, the imperial Chalukya house of Badami 
was overthrown by the Rashtrakutas who next fell upon the domi¬ 
nions of the eastern branch of the Chalukya family. The story of 
the long-drawn hostilities between the Eastern Chalukyas and the 
Rashtrakutas, which characterise the following epoch of Eastern 
Chalukya history, will be narrated in the next volume. 

1. IA, VIII. 273. Venkataramanayya suggests (op. cit., 75-6) that the horse was let 
loose by Nandivarman II and it was sought to be captured by an E. Chalukya 
feudatory, perhaps with the support of his suzerain. The Udayendiram grant 
actually reads as follows: uttarasydm-api disi pra (pri) thivivyaghr&bkidha (dha)- 
nishada-patim prabaldyamdnam-asvamedha-turangamanusarttnamapatam-anu- 
sritya, etc. There is no definite indication as to who it was that performed this 
Asvamedha, but I think it was Prithivivyaghra or his overlord and not the 
Pallava king. Had Nandivarman Pallavamalla been the performer, the fact 
would have been given more prominence in this record and would have cer¬ 
tainly been referred to in some of the numerous records of the later Pallavas. 
The epithet nishada-pati, attributed to Prithivivyaghra, might be either 
Nishadha-pati or nishada-pati. Considering the Dravidian inclination to non- 
aspiration, the former is not improbable. In that case, we have possibly to 
connect the king with the royal family claiming descent from Nala, lord of 
Nishada or the Nishadhas. There is a Nala king named Prithviraja, mentioned 
in the Rajim inscription; but he seems to be earlier than the contemporary of 
Pallavamalla. 

2. This date is in accordance with Fleet’s chronology. B. V. K. Rao, followed now 
by others, suggests the date A.D. 755-72 (op. cit., table between pp. 30-31). 


254 




CHAPTER XIII 

DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 

I. THE PALLAVAS 
1 . The Origin 

The origin of the Pallavas has been discussed by scholars for 
more than half a century; still the latest writer on the subject is 
constrained to say: “The origin of the Pallavas remained till now 
a mystery,” 1 The premises of the problem may be stated in order 
to consider the validity of any theory. The Pallava monuments and 
inscriptions associate them intimately with Tondamandalam, be¬ 
tween the North Penner and the North Vellar dominated by Kahchi, 
but their kingdom is not one with its limits known to Tamil tradi¬ 
tion, like the Chola, Parity a, and Kerala kingdoms. The inscriptions 
of Asoka contain no reference to the Pallava kingdom as such. 
The Pallavas issued their earliest known documents in Prakrit, and 
somewhat later, in Sanskrit, and assumed titles like Dkarmamaharaja 
and Asvamedhaydjin. Their early administrative system was on the 
lines of the Satavahana system, linking up ultimately with that laid 
down in the Arthasdtftra of Kautilya. They were in the beginning 
quite uhlike the Tamil rulers of the &angam Age who patronised 
Tamil literature. Therefore it is thought that the Pallava kings of 
Tonda-mandalam must have originally belonged to a different re¬ 
gion. Consequently we have a multiplicity of theories attempting 
to indicate their original home and their immigration into Tonda¬ 
mandalam. 

A few scholars like B. L. Rice and V. Venkayya identify the 
Pallavas with the Pahlavas or Parthians who, after their settlement 
in the Sindhu valley and Western India along with the Sakas, are 
supposed to have occupied Tonda-mandalam in the period of the 
decline of the Satavahanas. But their immigration into the Kahchi 
region cannot be explained objectively. Further, Rajasekhara, the 
great poet and playwright at the Gurjara-Pratihara court of Kanauj, 
who was born in the Deccan, and some of whose works are valuable 
for the light they throw on ancient Indian geography, assigns the 
Pallavas to South India and the Pahlavas to the trans-Sindhu region. 
Moreover, the Pallava records do not mention the Pahlavas. Foreign 
rulers like the Sakas did not perform the Asvamedha sacrifice, and 
it is difficult to believe that the Pahlavas under the name of Pallavas 

1. Rao, B. V. K., A History of the Early Dynasties of Andhradesa, p. 135. 


255 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


became fond of it. The theory of the Parthian origin of the Pallavas 
has been recently supported on the ground that one of the sculptures 
in the Vaikuntha-perumal temple at Kahchl depicts a crown shaped 
like an elephant’s scalp, similar to that worn by Demetrius, the Indo- 
Bactrian king, on his coins. But similar reasoning would make the 
ikshvakus of Nagarjunikonda Scythians, because a ‘Scythian Warrior’ 
is found among the monuments of that place. Jouveau-Dubreuil 
makes Suvisakha, a Pahlava minister of Rudradaman I, the ancestor 
of the Pallavas of Kahchl. This view is broadly supported by the 
latest writer on the subject: “The Pallavas were immigrants from 
the North or properly speaking from Konkan and Anarta in 
Dakshinapatha. They came into South India through Kuntala or 
Vanavasa.” 1 K P. Jayaswal regards the Pallavas as an offshoot of 
the Vakatakas for the reason that they were both Brahmanas of the 
Bharadvaja gotra and stresses the point that a Naga princess was 
married by VIrakurcha, a feudatory of the Bharasiva Nagas. 2 This 
marriage alliance is underlined by Jouveau-Dubreuil as well. But, 
was VIrakurcha the founder of the Pallava dynasty of Kahchl? The 
theory of a Chola prince, whose mother was a nagi, founding the 
Pallava kingdom, violates the premises of the problem stated above. 
S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar regards the Pallavas as the feudatories of 
the Satavahanas—officers and governors of the south-eastern part 
of their empire—, equates the term Pallava with the terms Tondaiyar 
and Tondaman (people and rulers of Tonda-mandalam), and says 
that, after the fall of the Satavahana Empire, those feudatories 
“founded the new dynasty of the Pallavas, as distinct from the older 
chieftains, the Tondamans of the region”. 3 

Scholars have wandered from Persia to Ceylon in search of the 
original home of the Pallavas of Kahchl, on the supposition that 
they were foreign to Tonda-mandalam, where they rose to eminence. 
But, in the opinion of the present writer, they originated in Tonda- 
mandalam itself. It was a province in the empire of Asoka enjoying 
the benefits of the Mauryan administration for nearly fifty years, 
and the Pulindas, included in the list of his subject-peoples, were 
perhaps identical with the Kurumbas of Tonda-mandalam. Their 
name is reflected in Pulinadu and Puliyurkottam, two ancient terri¬ 
torial divisions of this region. The Vayalur Pillar Inscription of 
Rajasirhha mentions the name Pallava after the first seven mythical 
ancestors from Brahma to Asvatthama and before Asoka’s name. It 
may, therefore, be argued that there was a Pallava ruler before 
Asoka. Further, Pallava may be taken to be a variant of Palada (a 
form of the name Pulinda in some versions of Asoka’s edicts) and 

1. Ibid , p. 173. 2. HIJ, pp. 179-83. 3. JIH, II, p. 25. 

256 




DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


may be regarded as the southernmost people of the Maurya Empire. 1 
They must have continued its traditions during the period of their 
independence after Asoka’s death. The importance of Ton$a- 
mandalam from the second century B.C. to the first century A.D. is 
vouched for by Patanjali and Pan Kou and by the author of the 
Manimekhalai. Tondaiyar is a Tamil rendering of Pallavas. The 
conquest of a part of Tonda-mandalam south of the Palar by Karikala 
Chola in the second century A.D. could not have destroyed the 
Mauryan system established at Kanchi. The Satavahana acquisition 
of Tonda-mandalam in that century must have reinforced that sys¬ 
tem. The Pallavas became feudatory to the Satavahanas and, after 
the collapse of the latter power about A.D. 225, converted their 
gubernatorial status into a royal one. Their expansion from Kanchi 
to the Krishna is proved by the Mayidavolu and Hirahadagaili 
Prakrit copper-plate grants of Sivaskanda-varman Pallava and, 
considering his affinity to the Satavahanas, it is not surprising that he 
issued charters in Prakrit and assumed the title of Dharmamahdrdja. 
The theory of the Tonda-mandalam origin of the Pallavas of Kanchi 
best explains the historical facts relating to the problem of their 
origin, viz. that their earliest documents are in the Prakrit and Sans¬ 
krit, not in Tamil, and that their traditions and their administrative 
system are, at least in the early stages, Yiot South Indian or Tamil 
in character. 

2. Early History 

The Pallava inscriptions are of three kinds. Prakrit copper¬ 
plates assignable on palaeographic grounds to the period A.D. 250- 
350; Sanskrit copper-plates to 350-600; and lithic and copper-plate 
records from the seventh century. The change from Prakrit to 
Sanskrit and the use of stone besides copper-plates were not due to 
dynastic considerations. 

Early Pallava genealogy and chronology have given rise to 
acute differences of opinion among scholars and the question is 
dealt with in the Appendix to this chapter. It will suffice here to 
state that the Prakrit charters 2 mention several kings including 
Sivaskanda-varman who ruled probably about the beginning of the~ 
fourth century A.D. He seems to have been the greatest of the 
early Pallavas and his dominions extended from the Krishna to the 
South Fenner and to the Bellary District. He performed a number 
of Brahmanical sacrifices like the Asvamedha, and the Mauryan 
character of his administrative system is clear from his Hirahadagaili 
grant. 

1. But cf. PHAI. 258-59 for other views. 2. His. Ins. pp. 374-75. 

257 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Vishnugopa comes between the kings of the Prakrit charters 
and those of Sanskrit charters. He was one of the twelve kings 
of Dakshinapatha defeated by Samudra-gupta. A fruitless attempt 1 
has been recently made to revive the theory of Jouveau-Dubreuil 
that Samudra-gupta was defeated by Vishnugopa in league with 
other princes. There are sufficient reasons for thinking that the 
Gupta expedition was a punitive one and that it was a great success. 
Visnnugopa may be assigned to the period A.D. 350-375. 

The Sanskrit charters mention more than sixteen kings assign¬ 
able to the period A.D. 350-575. Some of them were Yuvamahd- 
rdjas who never became kings. We know from relatively later 
epigraphic records that Vlrakurcha married a Naga princess and 
became king, and this fact is interpreted by some scholars as the 
foundation of the Pallava line by Vlrakurcha. But it might only 
mean that he strengthened his position, which must have become 
difficult after Samudra-gupta's Dakshinapatha expedition, by a 
marriage alliance. The next ruler Skandasishya is said to have 
seized the gkatika of the Brahmanas of Kanchl from king Satyasena, 
who is identified with the Western Kshatrapa Satyasimha ruling 
about A.D. 388, but might have been a descendant of Ugrasena of 
Palakka, one of the opponents of Samudra-gupta. Simha-varman I 
ascended the throne in 436. He crowned Hari-varman 2 (Western 
Ganga) about 450, in order to subdue the Banas. The charters of 
Siriiha-varman were issued not from Kanchl but from various 
camps. This, coupled with the epigraphical datum that his brother 
Kumaravishnu recaptured Kanchl, is responsible for the theory of 
a Chola interregnum, which we shall consider later. The period of 
the successors of Siriiha-varman I down to the close of the reign 
of Siriiha-varman II (c. 575) is one of which practically no knowledge 
is available. All the political confusion of the period is attributable 
to the Kalabhra invasion and their occupation of the Tamil country. 
Yet we know that Kanchl, the spiritual and intellectual metropolis 
of South Indian Buddhism, produced Aravana Affigal, Aryadeva, 
Dihnaga and Dharmapala. Early Pallavas like Buddha-varman and 
Asok a-varman must have founded the Raja-vihara (royal monastery) 
mentioned in the Mattavildsa-prahasana, of Mahendra-varman I. 

3. Siihhavishnu and Mahendra-varman I 

Simhavishnu Avanisimha (Lion of the Earth), son of Siriiha- 
varman II, may be assigned to the last quarter of the sixth century. 
With him begins the age of the great Pallavas, and to him belongs 
the honour of starting the Pallavas on their grand career of political 


1. Rao, op. cif., pp. 370-74. 


2. Also called Ayya (or Arya)-varman. 





DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 

and cultural achievement. He is credited with the conquest of 
Choia-mandalam, an achievement not claimed by his son and suc¬ 
cessor, Mahendra-varman. Siirihavishnu vanquished a number of 
enemies including the Kalabhras. Two inscriptions testify to his 
sovereignty from Madras to Kumbhakonam. He is eulogised in his 
son’s Mattavildsa-prahasana. He was a patron of the great Sanskrit 
poet, Bharavi, author of Kirdtdrjuriiya. The reliefs of himself 
and of his two queens are found at Mahabalipuram, and it is 
likely that he took the first step in making that place a great centre 
of art. 

Mahendra-varman I Vichitrachitta (c. 600-630). son of Sirhha- 
vishnu, was one of the greatest sovereigns of the Pallava dynasty. 
During his reign commenced the long-drawn Pallava-Chalukya 
conflict in which either power became the natural enemy of the 
other. 1 The continuous hostility cannot be regarded as due purely 
to aggressive motives. Apparently Pulakesin II Chalukya (610-42) 
was the aggressor,/but the causes of his attack on the Pallavas may 
be easily surmised. It is stated in his Aihole inscription of 634 that 
the Pallavas had opposed the rise of his power. The close relations 
between the Pallavas and the Kadambas and the overthrow of the 
latter by their quondam feudatories, the predecessors of Pulakesin II, 
explain sufficiently the perennial Pallava-Chalukya hostility. 
The Chalukya conquest of Vehgl was followed by the defeat of 
Mahendra-varman. The Aihole record says that Pulakesin II 
“caused the splendour of the lord of the Pallavas ... to be obscured 
by the dust of his army and to vanish behind the walls of Kahchl- 
pura.” 2 This account is perfectly consistent with a victory claimed 
by Mahendra-varman at Pullalur (Pallur, near Conjeeveram). Still 
only the northernmost portions of the Pallava dominions were lost. 
Mahendra-varman’s Trichinopoly cave inscriptions indicate that his 
kingdom extended in the south up to the Kaveri which is described 
as “the beloved of the Pallava”. 

Like some other members of his family, Mahendra-varman had 
a passion for titles. A few of his many surnames may be men¬ 
tioned; Chetthakari (temple builder), Mattavildsa (addicted to 
enjoyment), Chitrakdrappuli (tiger among painters), and Vichitra- 
chitia (myriad-minded). Mahendra-varman gave up Jainism and 
embraced Saivism under the influence of Saint Appar; he con¬ 
structed many rock-cut temples. His Mandagapattu (South Arcot. 
District) inscription runs as follov/s: “This brickless, timberless., 
metalless and mortarless temple, which is a mansion for Brahma, 
Isvara and Vishnu, was caused to be created by the king Vichitra- 

1. See above, p. 238. 2. El, VI, 11. 

259 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


chitta.” 1 His Trichinopoly record refers to his adherence to the 
linga cult and to his rock-cut temples. Such temples of his are 
extant in Trichinopoly, Vallam (near Chingleput), Mahendravadi 
(near Arkonam), and Dalavanur (South Arcot District). He exca¬ 
vated a famous tank at Mahendravadi. Though he encouraged the 
worship of Siva and Vishnu, he destroyed the Jain monastery at 
Pataliputra (Cuddalore, South Arcot District); as a Jain, he had 
formerly persecuted the followers of other fait as. 

The MattaviUsa-prahasana of Mahendra-varman is a farce 
written with the object of holding up to ridicule the foibles and 
follies of Saiva and Buddhist ascetics. The Jain paintings 2 in the 
rock-cut cave at Si tt anna vasal (Pudukkottai State) afford illustra¬ 
tions of dancing, and it is generally held that Mahendra-varman was 
not only a patron of that art but also the author of a work on music. 
His patronage of painting is reflected in his surname Chitrakdrappuli. 
The Sanskrit inscription at Kudimiyamalai (Pudukkottai State) 
relating to music is ascribed to his initiative, and he is regarded as 
an expert musician. Above all, his title of Vichitrachitta is symbolic 
of his versatility and greatness. His statue erected at Trichinopoly 
is not extant, but there is a sculptured portrait of the king with his 
two queens at Mahabalipuram. 

4. Narasimha-varman I and Par am e s vara-varman I 

Narasimha-varman Mahamaila, son of Mahendra-varman .1, 
ruled from c. 630 to c. 668. His surname means the great wrestler 
or warrior. He was the greatest of the Pallavas, and his political 
achievements made him supreme in South India. He defeated 
Pulakesin II, the most distinguished ruler of the Chalukya dynasty 
of Vatapi or Badami, in three battles including that at Manimah- 
galam, near Kanchl. Subsequently he assumed the offensive and 
sent his general Siruttonda Nayanar (assigned by some scholars to a 
later date) to invade the Chalukya territory. Vatapi, the Chalukya 
capital, was captured in 642. Pulakesin II died, and his death was 
followed by political confusion for thirteen years during which 
the Pallavas seem to have been in possession of the southern part 
of the Chalukya dominions. 3 After recording his achievement on 
a rock behind the Mallikarjuna temple in the heart of Badami, the 
Pallava general returned from Vatapi with rich booty. Narasimha- 
varman thus triumphed conspicuously over the conqueror of his own 
father as well as of Harsha-vardhana of Thaneswar and Kanauj. He 

1. Ibid. XVII, 17. 

2. K. R. Srinivasan ascribes the painting to a somewhat later time (PIHC, VII. 

168-73). 

3. See p. 241. 


260 






DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 

fully deserved the title of Vdtapikonda or captor of VatapI, which 
he assumed. 

Another striking achievement of Narasimha-varman was a 
successful naval expedition sent by him to Ceylon in order to rein¬ 
state the Sinhalese prince Manavarma. The Mahdvamsa describes the 
vicissitudes of this prince’s life—his flight to Kahchi about A.D. 640, 
his participation in the campaigns against the Chalukyas, and his 
other activities at Kahchi, the failure of the first Pallava expedition to 
Ceylon, and the success of the second grand expedition which sailed 
from Mahabalipuram. Narasimha-varman erected some monolithic 
shrines called Rathas at Mallai or Mahabalipuram (Seven Pagodas, 
near Madras), and made the place famous, though he cannot be 
regarded as the founder of that city. 

During the reign of Narasimha-varman I Kahchi was visited 
by Hiuen Tsang, the Chinese pilgrim, about A.D. 640, and his ac- 
, count of Tonda-mandalam is very valuable. Kahchi was about six 
miles in circumference. There were more than one hundred Buddhist 
monasteries housing over 10,000 Theravadin monks. The majority 
of the eighty non-Buddhist temples belonged to Digambara Jains. 
Though Buddhism was declining in South India, its position in 
Tonda-mandalam was conspicuous. The people (of Ta-to-p‘i-t‘u or 
Tonda-mandalam) esteemed great learning .... Not far from the 
south of the capital was a large monastery which was a rendezvous 
for the most eminent men of the country.” This is obviously iden¬ 
tical with the Raja-vihara mentioned in the Mattavildsa-prahasana. 
According to the Chinese pilgrim, Dharmapala of the University of 
Nalanda belonged to Kahchi, and we have already mentioned the 
other famous persons of Kahchi. 

After Narasimha-varman, his son, Mahendra-varman II, perhaps 
reigned for the brief period of two years from c. 668 to c. 670; then 
came the latter’s son Paramesvara-varman I (c. 670 to c. 695). His 
great adversary was Vikramaditya I Chalukya who rehabilitated 
the fortunes of his dynasty after the catastrophe which had over¬ 
whelmed his father, and invaded the Pallava kingdom. We learn 
from his Gadval plates of 674 that he captured Kahchi and destroyed 
the family of Mahamalla; and further that, at the time of the Grant, 
the Chalukya camp was at Uragapura or Uraiyur on the southern 
bank of the Kaverl. The Pallava records, however, emphasise 
Paramesvara-varman’s triumph over his enemies, particularly over 
Vikramaditya. Although the latter’s army consisted of several lakhs, 
he was obliged to flee ‘covered only by a rag’, in a battle that took 
place at Peruvalanallur near Lalgudi (Trichinopoly District). Though 


261 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the statements in the Chalukya inscriptions 1 cannot be taken at 
their face value, the fact that Vikramaditya was in the neighbour¬ 
hood of Trichinopoly proves his capture of Kahchl and the general 
success of his campaign, which had been undertaken to efface the 
disgrace of his predecessor’s defeat. Paramesvara-varman was 
devoted to Siva, and built a structural temple at Kuram, near Kahchl, 
dedicated to that god. He also added to the edifices at Mahabali- 

purarn. 

5. Narasimha-varman II and Paramesvara-varman II 

Paramesvara-varman I was succeeded by his son Narasimha- 
varman II Rajasimha (c. 695-c. 722) who enjoyed a peaceful reign. 
He built the Kailasanatha temple at Kahchl and the Shore temple 
at Mahabalipuram, and assumed titles galore—about 2.50. His chief 
bivudas or titles are Rajasimha (lion among kings), Sahkarabhakta 
(devotee of Siva) and Agamapriya (lover of the scriptures). He 
was a man of varied tastes. He sent an embassy to China, which 
fixes his date, as will be discussed in the Appendix. Some scholars 
place Dandin, the great prose-writer and rhetorician in Sanskrit, at 
the court of Rajavarma or Rajasimha, and regard the extant plays 
attributed to Bhasa as mere stage adaptations made at Kahchl, be¬ 
cause Rajasimha is mentioned in their colophons. Narasixhha-var- 
man’s son and successor, Paramesvara-varrnan IT, ruled probably 
from A.D. 722 to 730. Towards the close of his reign he had to 
encounter a Chalukya invasion led by Yuvardja Vikramaditya II 
(see Appendix). 

6. Nandi-varman II Pallavamalla (A.D. 730-c. 800) 

The next king Nandi-varman II Pallavamalla, son of Kiranya- 
varman, was descended from Bhima-varman, brother of Simhavishnu. 
Though the succession to the throne passed on to the younger branch 
of the Pallava family, there was no break in continuity, and it is 
not correct to speak of Nandi-varman II as the founder of a new 
dynasty. Paramesvara-varman is believed to have had a son named 
Chitramaya, a pretender to the Pallava throne, and hence Nandi- 
varman is regarded by some scholars as a usurper. The circum¬ 
stances in which Nandi-varman came to the throne are indicated in 
the Appendix. The sculptures in Vaikuntha-perumial temple at 
Kahchl and the inscriptions explaining them, coupled with some 
other epigraphic records, prove that Nandi-varman, a youth of 
twelve, was chosen king by the people. Though the constitutional 
position of his father, Hiranya-varman, is far from clear, it might 
be accepted that Nandi-varman was no usurper. One of his inscrip- 


202 


1. See pp. 243 f. 









DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


lions at Mahabalipuram belongs to his 65th regnal year. Therefore 
he must have reigned from A.D. 730 to at least 795. 

A large number of inscriptions—Pallava, Chalukya and Pandya 
—throw a flood of light on the manifold activities of Nandi-varman. 
About 740, Vikramaditya II Chalukya invaded the Pallava kingdom, 
defeated his “natural foe”, and captured Kahchi. Far from sacking 
the city, he restored to its temples all the valuables that had been 
taken away from them. Nandi-varman, however, soon recovered 
Kahchi. The Chalukya victory must have been achieved in the 
period of the P a 1 la v a - P a n d y a war. Shortly after his accession 
Nandi-varman had to face a hostile combination organised by the 
Pandvas, who supported the cause of Chitramaya. Rajasixiiha I 
Pandya claims to have won a number of victories against him in the 
region around Tanjofe. Nandi-varman was besieged at Nandipura 
(near Kumbhakonam)Abut released by his general, Udayachandra, 
who killed Chitramaya and won several victories in Tanjore District. 
He is also credited with the conquest of a part of the Eastern 
Chalukya territory. Dantidurga, the founder of the Rashtrakuta 
power, captured Kahchi, but returned home after concluding an 
alliance with Nandi-varman and giving his daughter Reva in mar¬ 
riage to him. She became the mother of Danti-varman Pallava. 
The Western Gariga inscriptions record Srlpurusha’s glorious victory 
over the Pallavas—his greatest military achievement--, but a 
Pallava record mentions Nandi-varman’s forcible acquisition of a 
necklace with a great gem from a Ganga king. 

Nandi-varman built the Muktesvara temple, and probably the 
Vaikuntha-perumal temple, at Kahchi, and some temples elsewhere. 
He was a pious Vaishnava, The records of his reign, epigraphical 
and literary, show its importance in literary and religious history. 
Tirumahgai Alvar, saint and scholar, flourished during his reign. 
Nandi-varman was himself a scholar, though his accomplishments 
are grossly exaggerated in his inscriptions. The Udayendiram plates 
of Nandi-varman Pallavarnalla contain a reference to the Asvamedha : 
it is said that Udayachandra defeated in the northern region a chief 
who, ‘desiring to become very powerful, was running after the horse 
of the asvamedha.' > This is no adequate reason for regarding Nandi- 
varman as an asvamedhaydjin. His numerous records contain no 
specific reference to such an achievement. He was succeeded by his 
son Danti-varman in or shortly after A.D. 795. 

II. THE CHOLAS OF URAIYUR AND RENANDU 

The history of the Cholas of Uraiyur (near Trichinopoiy ) is 
exceedingly obscure from the fourth to the ninth century, chiefly 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


owing to the occupation of their country by the Kalabhras. Buddha- 
datta, the great writer in Pali, belonged to Uraiyur. He mentions 
his contemporary, king Achchutavikranta of the Kalabhrakula, as 
ruling over the Chola country from Kaveripatnam. He was a 
Buddhist, and Tamil literary tradition refers to an Achchuta who 
kept the Chera, Chola and Pandya kings in captivity. On the basis 
of the contemporaneity of Buddhadatta with Buddhaghosha, 
Achchuta may be assigned to the fifth century. Thus, after the 
Sahgam Age, the descendants of Karikala Chola were forced into 
obscurity by the Kalabhras, who disturbed the placid political con¬ 
dition of the Tamil country. 

Some of the Sanskrit charters of the Early Pallavas were issued, 
not from Kanchl but from places in the Telugu country south of the 
Krishna. Therefore it is argued that the Pallavas lost that city to 
Karikala Chola and withdrew northwards. . This theory of the Chola 
interregnum in the period of the Sanskrit charters is not convincing. 
The evidence for believing that the Pallavas lost Kahchl is weak 
and their inscriptions do not directly support such a thesis. The 
statement regarding the recapture of Kahchl by Kumaravishnu in 
the Velurpalaiyam plates of Nandi-varman III might well refer to 
an incident in dynastic succession, or in the course of the Pallava 
conflict with the Kalabhras. Further, the age of Karikala is gene¬ 
rally placed much earlier than the period of the Sanskrit charters. 

Though the Pallavas and the Pandyas finally overthrew the 
Kalabhras and established their independence, the Cholas remained 
in obscurity for some centuries more. The Pallava, Pandya, and 
Chalukya inscriptions mention the Cholas, their army, their country 
etc., and Tamil literature, their princes and princesses. The Cholas 
of Uraiyur hovered around their ancestral home and maintained a 
subordinate position in the midst of towering political powers like 
the Pandvas and the Pallavas. They gradually increased their influ¬ 
ence by marriage alliances, and steadily supported Saivism and 
Vaishnavism as against the heterodox creeds, Jainism and Bud¬ 
dhism. It is significant that Vijayalaya, the founder of the Chola 
dynasty of Tanjore, started as a chieftain in the neighbourhood of 
Uraiyur; an inscription at Tirunedungalam (Tricbinopoly District) 
records a gift of land according to the orders of Parakesari Vijayalaya 
Choladeva. 

During the period of their decline, the Cholas were not confined 
to the Kaverl region. Some Chola princes seem to have migrated 
to other regions, and consequently we find minor Chola dynasties 
in the Telugu and Kannada countries. The most important of them 
were the Cholas of the Renandu country in the Cuddapah, Anantapur 


264 


DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


and Kurnool Districts. Their lithic records, as well as the Malepadu 
(Cuddapah District) plates of Punyakumara, may be referred to the 
seventh century A.D. These plates mention four generations of 
kings, viz. Nandi-varman; his sons, Simhavishnu, Sundarananda and 
Dhanahjaya-varman; son of the last, Mahendravikrama-varman; and 
his sons, Gunamudita and Punyakumara surnamed Pormukharama. 
They styled themselves Chola-Maharajas and claimed descent from 
Karikala Chola. Their names and titles remind us of the Pallavas 
and the Chalukyas, and their seal with a maned lion resembles 
that of the Pallavas and the Vishnukundins. The dynasty of Punya¬ 
kumara may be regarded as having been in power for one hundred 
years. Their position in Cuddapah District must have made them 
play a prominent part in the Pallava-Chalukya struggle, and their 
independence must have been to some extent nominal. After Punya¬ 
kumara, his dynasty probably lost its hold over Cuddapah and was 
scattered in various parts of South India. 

The Renandu country ruled over by the Chola-Maharajas may be 
regarded as Hiuen Tsang’s Chu-li-ya, 1000 li (200 miles) south-west 
of Dhanyakataka: ‘‘The country was about 2400 li in circuit, and its 
capital was about 10 li in circuit. It was a wild jungle region with 
very few settled inhabitants, and bands of highwaymen went about 
openly; it had a moigt hot climate; the people were of a fierce and 
profligate character and were believers in the Tirthikas; the Buddhist 
monasteries were in ruins, and only some of them had Brethren; 
there were several tens of Deva-temples, and the Digambaras were 
numerous.” 1 


III. THE KALABHRAS 

We have already made a few references to the Kalabhras, and 
to their king Achchutavikranta. The Velvikudi plates of the third 
regnal year of Nedunjadaiyan Pandya (c. 765-c. 815) say that Pal- 
yagamudukudumi-Peruvaludi Pandyadhiraja gave the village of 
Velvikudi as brahmadeya (gift to a Brahmana). It was enjoyed 
for long. Then a Kali king named Kalabhran, took possession of 
the extensive earth, driving away numberless great kings (adhirdja), 
and resumed the (village mentioned) above. After that . . .the 
Pandyadhiraja Kadungon 2 recovered the territory under the Kala- 
bhra occupation. It would appear from the brief account that the 
Pandya country was seized by the Kalabhras long after Mudukudumi. 
They overthrew many adhirdjas and resumed even brahmadeya 
lands. Thus they were terrible and ruthless conquerors. Their 

2. EL XVII, 300. 

2C>~) 


1. HTW, II. 224. 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


sway was put an end to by Kadungon, who may be assigned conjec- 
turally to c. 590-620. There are other references to the Kalabhras 
in Pallava and Chalukya inscriptions; they are said to have been 
conquered by Sirhha vishnu and Narasimha-varman I and by 
Vikramaditva I and II. 

nJ 

The identification of the Kalabhras is a very difficult problem 
of South Indian History. They have been identified with the line of 
Muttaraiyar of Kodumbalur (eighth to eleventh century). 1 Others 
regard them as Karnatas on the strength of a reference in Tamil 
literature to the rule of a Karnata king over Madura. A third view 
is that the Kalabhras were Kalappalar, belonging to the Vellala 
community and referred to in Tamil literature and inscriptions.^ 
But the most satisfactory theory identifies the Kalabhras with the 
Kalavar, 3 and the chieftains of this tribe mentioned in the 6ahgam 
Literature are Tiraiyan of Pavattiri and Pulli of Vehgadam or 
Tirupati. The latter is described as the cattle-lifting robber chief 
of the frontier. The Kalavar must have been dislodged from their 
habitat near Tirupati by the political events of the third century 
A.D., viz. the fall of the Satavahanas and the rise of the Pallavas, as 
well as by the invasion of Dakshinapalha by Samudra-gupta in the 
following century, resulting in political confusion in Tonda- 
mandalarn. The Kalabhra invasion must have overwhelmed the 
Pallavas, the Choias and the Pandyas. 

Despite the various explanations given above, the Kalabhras 
cannot but be regarded as a mysterious people who convulsed the 
affairs of the Tamil country for a few centuries. Achchutavikranta 
caused the dispersal of the Chojas. In the Pandya country even 
brahmadeya gifts were not treated as sacrosanct by the predatory 
Kalabhras. Ultimately their power was broken by Kadungon 
Pandya and Sirhhavishnu Pallava, and we have referred to the 
Pallava and Chalukya campaigns against them in the seventh and 
eighth centuries. 

The Muttaraiyar and Kodumbalur chiefs of Kalabhra origin, 
according to one view, were feudatory to the Pallavas and the 
Pandyas respectively, and in the contest between these two powers, 
they fought on opposite sides. The Muttaraiyar ruled over Tanjore 
and Pudukkottai as the feudatories of the Pallavas from the eighth 
century to the eleventh. There is a reference to Perumbidugu- 
Muttaraiyan II who attended the coronation of Nandi-varman 
Pallavamalla. One of the titles of the Muttaraiyar was Lord of 
Tanjore. Vijayalaya Chola, who conquered Tanjore from a Mutta- 

1- J1H, VIII, 74-80; El, XV, 49. 2. JIH, VIII, 75. 

266 


3. Vol. II, p. 233. 







DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


raiyan in the ninth century, was a Paliava feudatory. A vindication 
of the law of nemesis is discernible in the victory of a Chola chief 
over a descendant of the Kalahhras who had overthrown the earlier 
Chola kingdom. 


IV. THE PANDYAS 

The genealogy and chronology of the Pfmdyas of the post- 
Sangam Age, from the seventh to the tenth century, are by no means 
settled. Our knowledge of them is mainly derived from a few 
copper-plate and stone inscriptions—the Velvikucii grant of Nedunja¬ 
daiyan, the larger and smaller Sinnamanur plates of Rajasimha, the 
Madras Museum plates of Jatila-varman, two Anaimalai stone inscrip¬ 
tions of Marahjadaiyan and Parantaka, the latter inscription dated 
770. and an inscription of Varaguna II dated A.D. 870. Some identi¬ 
fications will have to be made for evolving a regular genealogy, 
principally of Nedunjadaiyan with Marahjadaiyan, Parantaka, Jatila- 
varman, and Varaguna I. The Anaimalai inscription of 770 may be 
assigned to the early years of Nedunjadaiyan, whose regnal period 
may well be 765-815, and his six predecessors may be given 25 years 
each or 150 years. Therefore the beginning of the dynasty may be 
roughly placed at about A.D. 600. We may provisionally fix the 
chronology as follows: Kaduhgon, 590-620; Maravarman Avani- 
sulamani, 620-645; Sendan, 645-670; Arikesari Maravarman, 670-710; 
Kochehadaiyan Ranadhira, 710-740; and Maravarman Raiasirhha, 
740-765. 1 

The emancipation of the Pandya country from the Kalabhra 
interregnum by Kadungon must have been effected towards the close 
of the sixth century A.D.; and his successor must have com¬ 
pleted the task. Hiuen Tsang describes the Malakuta or Pandya 
country as follows: It was a depot for sea-pearls; its people were 
‘black . . . harsh and impetuous, of mixed religions, indifferent to 
culture and only good at trade.’ There were many Buddhist monas¬ 
teries in ruins but only a few monks. The destruction of the ancient 
cultural tradition of Madura may be attributed to the Kalabhra 
occupation of the country. The third king, Sendan, is credited with 
warlike qualities and fair-mindedness, and his title of Vanavan sug¬ 
gests his victory over the Cheras. 

Arikesari Parankusa Maravarman won a great victory at Nelveli, 
which is identified with Tinnevelly by some scholars. His other 
victories are on record, particularlv over the Cheras. He is said to 
have “extirpated” the Paravas of the coast and the inhabitants 
of Kurunadu. In spite of the difficulties of identifying the places 

T. Sastri, K. A. Nilakanta, The Pandyan Kingdom , p. 41. 

267 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


mentioned in the inscriptions, it is clear that under Arikesari began 
the imperial career of the Pandyas as well as their clash with the 
Pallavas. He is‘identified with the traditional Kun Pandya who was 
converted from Jainism to Saivism by Saint Sambandar and who 
cruelly persecuted the Jains. According to the story, 8000 of them 
were impaled on stakes—no doubt a palpable exaggeration. It was 
the Chola queen of that Pandya who had invited Saint Sambandar to 
Madura. The next king Kochchadaiyan Ranadhira also pursued an 
aggressive career, and defeated an Ay chief at Marudur (near 
Ambasamudram, Tinnevelly District). His title of Kohgarkoman 
suggests his conquest of Kohgudesa, and he is said to have over¬ 
thrown the Maharathas at Mangalapuram or Mangalore. 

Maravarman Rajasirhha I was also a very powerful ruler. 
Reference has been made above 1 to his conflict with Nandi-varman 
Pallavamalla, and some of its chief incidents, viz. the Pandya con¬ 
quest of the Kaveri region, the siege of Nandipura, and the rescue 
of that Pallava by his great general Udayachandra. Hence Raja¬ 
sirhha took the title of Pallavabhanjana. His conquests in the 
Kohgudesa included Kodumudi. He married a Western Gahga 
princess and defeated the Chalukyas—probably Klrtivarman II. The 
Velvikudi grant mentions Rajasimha’s renovation of the palaces 
and fortifications of Kudal (Madura), Yahji (the Chera capital) and 
Koli (Uraiyur). That mighty Pandya is said to have made many 
mohaddnas or great gifts— gosahas'ras, hiranya-garhhas and tida- 
bhdras. He was succeeded b}^ Neduhjadaiyan, the donor of the 
famous Velvikudi grant. 

V. THE WESTERN GANGAS 

The Eastern Gahgas, or the Gahgas of Kalinganagara, traced 
their descent from the Western Gahgas, or the Gahgas of Mysore, 
who claimed to belong to the Ikshvaku family, perhaps of Nagarjuni- 
konda. It has been suggested that the founder of the Gahga line 
of Kolar acted like Mayurasarman Kadamba in taking advantage 
of the political confusion resulting from the southern expedition 
of Samudra-gupta. The circumstances of the origin of the Western 
Gahgas detailed in their inscriptions are valueless for historical 
purposes. The name of the dynasty cannot be satisfactorily explain¬ 
ed. Classical accounts mention the Gangaridae, or people of the 
Ganga valley, and the Gangaridae Calingae or Gahgas of Kalinga. 
But the connection of the two Gahga dynasties with the river Gahga 
is not clear. The territory of the Western Gahgas of the Kanvayana 
gdtra was called Gahgavadi, 96,000 and their titles were Konguni- 
varman and Dharmamaharajadhiraja. Their inscriptions on copper- 

1. See p. 263. 


2 OS 




DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


plates and stones, the former predominating before 680 and the 
latter after that date, enable us to trace their genealogy, though 
there are difficulties in connection with the early Gahgas. But 
their chronology based on the data of their copper-plates is defective 
in several respects. Still some definite landmarks are provided by 
some copper-plates, which give A.D. 750 for the 25th regnal year of 
Srlpurusha. We have also noticed the synchronism of Hari-varman 
and Simha-varman I Pallava, who ascended the throne of Kanchi in 
436 . Therefore the foundation of the Western Gahga power may 
be assigned to the second half of the fourth century A.D. 

The founder of the Western Gaiiga line was Kongunivarman or 
Madhava I, who ruled probably from 350 to 400, with his capital 
at Kolar. He is said to have been helped by Sirhhanandi, a Jain 
Acharya. Madhava II (c. 400-435) was a scholar who mastered not 
only the Nitisdstra or politics, but also the Upanishads . He wrote a 
vritti or commentary on the Sutra of Dattaka, a predecessor of 
Vatsyayana the Kamasutrakara, on courtesans. 1 Under Hari-varman 
(c. 450-460) the capital of Gahgava^i was Talakad (Talked, Talavana- 
pura) on the Kaver'i, near Sivasamudram. He was crowned king by 
Simha-varman I Pallava with a view to crush the Banas, and there¬ 
fore must have been feudatory to the Pallavas. He donated a village 
to a Brahmana who had vanquished his Buddhist adversary in philo¬ 
sophical disputation. Most of the Gahgas were Jains, but Vishnu- 
gopa, who is not mentioned in some records, was a Vaishnava and 
more a saint than a king, Madhava III (c. 460-500), a brawny king, 
married a Kadamba princess, ’worshipped Siva, and made grants to 
Brahmanas, Jains, and Buddhists. His coronation by a Pallava king 
shows the continuance of the latter’s supremacy over Gahgavadi. 
Avinlta (c. 500-540) became king in his infancy, and was trained by 
Vijayaklrti, an erudite Jain. Avirnta made donations to Jains and 
Brahmanas. Though a Jain, he worshipped &iva. 

Durvinita (c. 540-600) had to overcome some difficulties in the 
way of his accession to the throne. He conquered Punnad (Southern 
Mysore) and Kongudesa, and maintained friendly relations with the 
Chalukyas, but not with the Pallavas. He is said Ho have defeated 
the Ka^uvetfi of Kanchi. He favoured Vaishnavism and extended 
his benefactions to Jains, Brahmanas and others. He was not only 
a man of letters in Kannada, but also a reputed Sanskrit scholar. He 
was a pupil of Pujyapada, 2 a Jain grammarian and author of the 
Sabdavatdra. and a patron of the famous poet Bharavi. Durvinita 

1. Dattaka-sutra, a treatise on erotics, is sometimes wrongly .taken to be a 

treatise on adoption (cf. NHIP, VI. 248-9). 

2. This is regarded as highly improbable by S. S. Sastri (Early Gangas of Talakad, 

p. 45). 


269 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


is the reputed author of a commentary on the 15th Sarga of his 
protege Bharavi’s Kirdtdrjuriiya, but the commentary is regarded 
as a literary forgery by some scholars like A. B. Keith. Durvinita 
himself is said to have compiled a grammar called Sabdavatdra , and 
translated the Prakrit Brihatkathd into Sanskrit. In short, he was 
one of the greatest rulers of the Western Gahga dynasty. He was 
not only a conqueror, but also a scholarly king who patronised 
Sanskrit and Kannada learning. His successors, Mushkara, Sri- 
vikrama, Bhuvikrama and Sivamara I, belonged to the seventh cen¬ 
tury. Their part in the contest between the Chalukyas and the Palla- 
vas is not clear, but they were friendly towards the former and 
hostile to the latter. All the Western Gangas from the seventh 
century were Jains. 

Sivamara I, the great-grandson of Durvinita, ruled probably 
from A.D. 670-713. He was succeeded by a ruler whose name is 
uncertain. Then the throne was occupied by Sripurusha, the 
grandson of Sivamara (or son according to some) who ruled for some 
time as a viceroy. 1 During his viceroyalty, Sripurusha overcame 
the Ban a ruler Jagadekamalla or Malladeva, son of Vijayaditya I. 
There was a contest between the Pallavas and the Pandyas for the 
Kongudesa, which was occupied by Rajasimha I Pandya who mar¬ 
ried a Gahga princess, probably Srlpurusha’s daughter. Sripurusha’s 
greatest victory was w T on over Nandi-varman Fallavamalla, but we 
cannot identify the Kaduverti said to have been slain by him. The 
Gahgavadi 'was exposed to Rashfrakuta invasions under Krishna I 
from 760 to the end of the reign of Sripurusha (725-788), but that did 
not prevent him from assuming many titles, including the imperial 
title of Kohguni-R&jadhiraja-Paramesvara. He transferred his capital 
to Manyapura or Mamie, near Bangalore, His Gajasdstra is a treatise 
on elephants, and he was thoroughly acquainted with elephant-war- 
fare. 'The Gahgas may be said to have reached the height of prospe¬ 
rity during the long reign of Sripurusha, in whose time the kingdom 
w~as called the Sri-rajya or fortunate kingdom.’ 2 

VI. THE KADAMBAS 

The name of the Kadamba dynasty is explained in the Tala- 
gun da Pillar Inscription of Kakutstha-varman as having been derived 
from the kadamba tree which grew near the ancestral home of the 
Kadambas. The successors of the Satavahanas in Kuntala (Western 
Deccan and Northern Mysore) were the Chutus, whose capital was 
VaijayantI or Banavasi. The Pallavas were the next rulers of 
Kuntala, and the Kadambas stepped into their place in that region. 

t. M. V. Krishna Kao, Gangas of Talkad, pp. Xf, 49; Rice. Mysore and Coorg p. 38. 
2. Rice, op. eit. pp. 38, 50. 


270 


DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


The legendary accounts of their origin are found in the inscriptions 
of the later Kadambas of Hangal and Goa. These connect the ancient 
Kadambas with Northern India, but the Kadambas of Banavasi seem 
to be indigenous to Kuntala, and this is apparent from their very 
name, as well as from their claim to Naga descent. Their genealogy 
is well established, but not their chronology. 

The Talagunda Inscription elucidates the circumstances leading 
to the establishment of the Kadamba power by Mayura-sarman, an 
orthodox and learned Brahmana belonging to the Manavya gotra. 
He proceeded to Paliavendra-purl (Kanchi) with his guru Virasarma 
in order to study pravachanam nikhiiam (the whole of the Vedas) 
and entered the ghatika. There he was angered by a fierce quarrel 
with a Pallavasvasaihstha, and sadly reflected on the physical infe¬ 
riority of Brahmanas to Kshatriyas and on the fact that Brahma- 
siddhi (attainment of full holiness) was dependent on the king’s 
pleasure. The usual interpretation of the above story is that 
Mayura-sarman went to Kanchi, a famous centre of higher learning 
(perhaps the seat of a Brahmanical University), and that his object 
was frustrated by his quarrel with a Pallava horseman. But this is 
doubtful. In the first place, pravachanam nikhiiam is complete study 
of the Vedas, one branch of which he had already studied. Secondly, 
ghatika does not seem to be a college or any place of higher learning, 
but the Brahmana quarters of Kanchi which he entered for guru - 
kutavdsa, and it was for making arrangements for it that his old 
guru had accompanied him. Thirdly, asvasarhstha means not a horse¬ 
man, but a mounted spy, and Mayura-sarman probably came into 
conflict with him for offending against the passport regulations, 
which must have been strictly enforced at Kanchi about the time of 
Samudra-gupia’s Dakshinapatha expedition. 1 

But be that as it may, the result of Mayura-sarman’s deep 
chagrin was that ‘with the hand dexterous in grasping the kusa- grass, 
the fuel, the stones, the ladle, the melted butter and the oblation 
vessel, he unsheathed a flaming sword, eager to conquer the earth/ 
Then followed a conflict, in which he defeated the antapdlas or 
frontier-guards of the Pallavas and occupied the forest region up to 
Srlparvata (read also as Triparvata) 2 or Srisailam (Kurnool Dis¬ 
trict). Subsequently he subdued “the Great Bana” and foiled the 
attempts of the Pallavas to subdue him. So they came to terms with 
him; he became their feudatory and rendered valuable services to 
them. At last he received from them the territory bounded by 
the Western Sea and the Prehara, a river near Aparanta. 3 The 

1. R. Sathianatbaier, Studies in the Ancient History of Tcndamandalam, pp. 48-50. 

2. JIH, XII, 357. 3. AOR, V, Part 2, p. 3. 


271 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Chandravalli Prakrit inscription of Mayura-sarman ascribes to him 
extensive conquests, viz. those of Abhlra, Traikuta, Paliava, Pari- 
yatrika, Sakasthana, Sayindaka, Punata, and Mokari. In the light of 
his extensive conquests, there might be some substance in the claim 
recorded in later inscriptions that he performed eighteen horse- 
sacrifices, though the Talagunda epigraph does not mention any of 
them. On palaeographical grounds the record has been assigned to 
various dates from A.D. 250 to 300. If this opinion is confirmed, the 
current view about the date of Mayura-sarman will have to be 
revised, and there have been recent attempts to assign him to the 
period between 250 and 350, and even earlier. But, as mentioned 
above, 1 some scholars doubt the genuineness of the Chandravalli 
Inscription. In any case, it is more likely that Mayura-sarman 
flourished about the middle of the fourth century A.D. We may 
hold in that case that he exploited the political confusion in South 
India consequent on Samudra-gftpta’s invasion of if, and carved out 
a principality for himself with its capital at Banavasi. He probably 
ruled from c. A.D. 340-370. 

Mayura-sarman was succeeded by his son Kanga-varman (read 
also as Skanda-varman) 2 who ruled probably from 370-395. He 
assumed the title of Dharmamah&rajddhirdja and changed the 
dynastic title from sarman to varman. He seems to have been 
defeated by Vindhyasena Vakataka who claims to have annexed 
Kuntala. 3 Bhagiratha (c. 395-420), son of Kahga-varman, appears 
to have been the ruler of Kuntala, to whom, according to late tradi¬ 
tion, an embassy led by Kalidasa was sent by Chandra-gupta II 
Vikramaditya, perhaps with a view to concluding a marriage 
alliance. 4 Bhaglratha’s sons were Raghu (c. 420-430) and 
Kakutstha-varman (c. 430-450). 5 The latter distinguished himself as 
a Y uvamahdr&ja. The Talagunda inscription mentions his marriage 
alliances with the Guptas and others. During his reign, his kingdom 
appears to have been prosperous. The Talagunda inscription des¬ 
cribes his greatness at length and refers to the perfect safety of 
travellers in his kingdom, the respect he commanded in the neigh¬ 
bouring countries, and his excavation of a great tank at Talagunda. 

The death of Kakutstha-varman was perhaps followed by the 
division of his kingdom between his two sons §anti-varman (c. 450- 
475) and Krishna-varman. Santi-varman’s son and successor 
Mrigesa-varman (c. 475-490), who ruled from Banavasi, is said to 
have defeated the Western Gangas and the Pallavas. He was well 

disposed towards Jainism, which flourished in the Kadamba domi- 

• * * 

1 . See p. 188, n 1. 2. J1H, XII, 361. 3. See above, p. 185. 

4. See above, p. 183 f. 

5. For a different view about the date of this king, of. p. 183. 


DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 

nions. About A.D. 475, Kumara-varman, probably a brother of Santi- 
varman, ruled over Uchchangi. Mandhatri-varman (c. 490-497), son 
of Kumara-varman, enjoyed his usurped power for a short period. 
Ravi-varman (c. 497-537), son of Mrigesa-varman, secured the throne 
by defeating a combination of his enemies, including Vishnu-varman 
of the younger branch of the Kadambas. Ravi-varman was a distin¬ 
guished and popular ruler, and triumphed over the Western Gangas. 
His son and successor Hari-varman, however, was a very weak king 
and ruled for a short time (c. 537-547). During his reign his feuda¬ 
tory, Pulakesin I Chalukya, revolted and established his dynasty at 
Badami. 1 Hari-varman came into conflict with the younger branch 
of the family and perished. With him ended the elder branch of the 
Kadamba royal family. 

Krishna-varman I (c. 475-485), brother of Santi-varman and 
founder of the younger branch of the Kadamba line, became an 
independent ruler in the southern part of the Kadamba kingdom, 
with his capital at Triparvata, perhaps Halebid. He performed 
the horse-sacrifice, but was finally defeated by the Pallavas. His 
son Vishnu-varman (c. 485-497) was crowned by a Pallava king, 
to whom he appears to have been subordinate. His attempt to 
seize the throne of Banavasi with Pallava help failed and cost him 
his life. His successor Simha-varman (c. 497-540) appears to have 
been subordinate to the elder branch. Krishna-varman II (c. 540- 
565) overthrew that branch and performed the horse-sacrifice. He 
strengthened his position by marrying his sister to a Ganga prince. 
Aja-varman (c. 565-606), son of Krishita-varman II, became sub¬ 
ordinate to Klrti-varman I Chalukya, who was “the night of doom” 
to the Kadambas. Bhogi-varman (c. 606-610), son of Aja-varman, 
tried to re-establish the independence of his dynasty, but was 
overpowered by Pulakesin II, who besieged Banavasi, an event 
mentioned in his Aihole inscription. The Kadamba dynasty came 
to an end with the death, probably in battle, of Bhogi-varman and 
of his son. The Kadambas seem to have attempted to re-establish 
their independent position during the interregnum in the Western 
Chalukya kingdom following the death of Pulakesin II in 642, but 
the situation turned against them with the accession of Vikrama- 
ditya I in A.D. 655. There was, however, a revival of their power 
towards the close of the tenth century. 

VII. THE BANAS 

The Banas were among the most important feudatory dynasties 
of South India. Their name is connected with Mahabali, the asura 

' 1. See p. 232 f. 

273 

C.A.—18 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(demon) king, whose son was Bana. Their epigraphical records are 
found in Kolar and North Arcot Districts. They were particularly 
associated with Nandagiri (Nandidurg) in Kolar District, and with 
Parivipura (Parigi, near Hindupur) in Anantapur District. Their 
crest was a bull. We have seen Mayura-sarman’s reduction of “the 
Great Bana” and Hari-varman Ganga’s coronation by Simha-varman I 
Pallava with a view to crushing the Banas. The genealogy of 
the Banas is given in the Udayendiram and Gudimallam plates of 
Vikramaditya II. 1 Jayanandi-varman is the first ruler mentioned 
in the former plates, though they say that many other Bana princes 
had preceded him. He is described as “the unique hero of 
great might” ruling over ‘the land to the west of the Andhra country.’ 
His predecessor is eulogised as a Bodhisattva in compassion. 2 A 
Gudimallam inscription of the 23rd regnal year of Nandi-varman 
Pallavamalla mentions a Bana chief named Vikramaditya, who must 
have been different from the first Vikramaditya, mentioned in the 
Gudimallam plates; he must have been a successor of Jayanandi- 
varman. 3 The Banas were the feudatories of the Pallavas, but the 
inscriptions of the latter do not contain sufficient information about 
them. At a later period, the Banas played a conspicuous part in the 
frontier wars. 

VIII. THE ALUPAS 

• 

The Alupa kings ruled over the Tuluva country (South Kanara) 
and their capital was Udayavara, south of Udipi. Their territory 
was a 6000 province, and they worshipped Siva. Their power must 
have originated in the early centuries of the Christian era; for 
Ptolemy (second century) refers to Oloikhora (Aluvakheda). An 
inscription of the fifth century justifies the assumption that the 
Alupas were rulers on the West coast. They were conquered by 
the Western Chalukyas under Kirti-varman I and Pulakosin II. 
Gunasagara (c. 650) was Governor of Banavasi under the Chalukyas. 
His son Chitravahana I (c. 675-700) was the first great Alupa ruler. 
Civil war broke out at Udayavara, and though Chitravahana I was 
successful, it continued till about 750. 

IX. KONGUDESA AND KERALA 

The Kongudesa (the region from the Anaimalai to the Shevaroy 
hills, i.e. the whole of Coimbatore and most of Salem District), 
which some scholars regard as identical with Asoka’s Satiyaputra, 
was a distinct political entity in the Sangam Age, and had active com¬ 
mercial intercourse with the Roman Empire. During the period 

1. El, III, 78-79; XVII, 6-7. 2. Rice op. cit., p. 20. 3. JIH, XXIX. 1G8. 

27 i 


DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


under review, it was invaded successively by the Western Gangas, 
the Pallavas and the Pandyas, as we 'have seen. After the Asokan 
and Sarigam ages, the annals of Kerala are mostly unknown, though 
we know that it was under the Perumals. Cosmas Indicopleustes, 
author of the Christian Topography , 1 vouches for the existence of 
Christianity in Malabar in the sixth century A.D. 

Appendix 

GENEALOGY AND CHRONOLOGY OF THE PALLAVAS 

2. Rise of the Pallavas 

The Pallavas, whose name appears to be of totemistic origin 
like that of the Kadambas, are referred to as Kshatriya in the 
Talagunda inscription of the fifth century A.D. But they had pro¬ 
bably in their veins an admixture of the blood of a Brahman a family 
of the Bharadvaja gotra hailing from northern India and that of 
an aboriginal family of the Nagas. This Naga family held sway 
over the district round Kanchl, modern Conjeeveram in Chingleput 
District, Madras State. This land lying between the northern 
and the southern Penner was called Aruvanadu which is apparently 
the same as Arouarnoi of Ptolemy’s Geography (c. A. D. 140). 
According to the Greek geographer, Arouarnoi was, in his time, 
under the rule of a king named Basaronaga, no doubt belonging 
to an aboriginal family of the Nagas. There is cpigraphic reference 
to the marriage of Asvjattliaman, a descendant of the gotrarshi 
(Bharadvaja) of the Pallavas and the Brahmana progenitor of the 
family, with the Apsaras Madam, while the Velurpalaiyam inscrip¬ 
tion distinctly says that an early member of the dynasty, named 
Vlrakurcha, obtained the insignia of royalty along with the hand 
of a Naga princess. Although these are mere legends, the Naga asso¬ 
ciation of the Pallavas may be deduced from Ptolemy’s evidence. 
The Pallavas may have been originally provincial rulers under the 
Later Satavahanas and risen to power in the Kanchl region at the 
expense of the Nagas. Pallava occupation of the land round Kanchl 
has to be assigned to a date later than the second quarter of the 
second century when, according to Ptolemy, the Nagas were ruling 
there. But their rise must have taken place considerably earlier 
than the middle of the fourth century, when Samudra-gupta came 
into conflict with “Vishnugopa of Kanchl”, undoubtedly a mem¬ 
ber of the Pallava family. The earliest records of the family are 
the Prakrit inscriptions of the Pallava rulers Sirhha-varman, Siva- 
skanda-varman and Skanda-varman, which may be assigned to the 
last quarter of the third and the first half of the fourth century 

1. See above p. 36. 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


on grounds of language and palaeography. Prakrit was ousted by 
Sanskrit from South Indian epigraphy in the latter half of the 
fourth century. The dynasty however might have established itself 
at Kanchl some time before, but probably not long before, the date 
of the Prakrit inscriptions referred to above. Certain early medieval 
records of the family trace its descent from Brahman, the lord of 
creation, through the gotrarshi Bharadvaja; but the names of the 
early members of the dynasty as found in them are certainly 
mythical and hence unreliable. The legend of the ‘Three-eyed 
Pallava’ is manifestly folklore; but traditions about Skandasishya 
subduing a king named Satyasena, Kumaravishnu capturing Kanchl, 
and Buddhavarman fighting with the Cholas appear to have germs 
of truth, although they cannot be definitely assigned to a date earlier 
than that of the kings known from the Prakrit inscriptions. The 
genealogical lists found in the later records appear to have confused 
the names of more than one line of the Pallava royal family. 

2. Pallavas of the Prakrit Records 

The Mayidavolu grant contains an order issued from Kanchipura, 
in the 10th regnal year of the father of the Pallava crown-prince 
Sivaskanda-varman, to the governor of Andhrapatha residing at 
Dhanyakataka (Amaravati in the Krishna District). The Hirahptda- 
galli grant was issued from the same city in the 8th regnal year 
of Sivaskanda-varman himself, who had already performed the 
Asvamedha to assert the then recent, at least not very old, assump¬ 
tion of the family’s independence. The dominions of the Pallavas 
of Kanchl about this time included wide regions of the Krishna- 
Tungabhadra valleys as well as Kuntala or the Kanarese country 
and probably also the Ganga country in south Mysore. The 
Krishna-Guntur region appears to have been conquered from the 
Ikshvakus who became powerful after the decline of the Satavahanas 
in the first quarter of the third century and ruled at least for three 
generations. 

Sivaskanda-varman refers to his father as Bappa which should 
be taken as the Prakrit word meaning “father” rather than as 
a personal name, because the word is used in the former sense in 
numerous royal charters and because it is quite unlike any of 
the many names in the traditional Pallava genealogy found in later 
records. A Prakrit inscription of a Pallava king named Simha- 
varman has been recently discovered in Guntur District. Its 
palaeography closely resembles that of the Ikshvaku records and 
is earlier than that of Sivaskanda-varman’s charters. It is not im¬ 
probable that Simha-varman was the father of Sivaskanda-varman. 
In any case, Simha-varman appears to have ruled about the last 


276 


DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


quarter of the third century, and Sivaskanda-varman about the first 
quarter of the fourth. 

A successor of Sivaskanda-varman appears to have been king 
Skanda-varman (called srivijaya- Skanda-varman) of the British 
Museum grant discovered in Guntur District. Some scholars believe 
that the word siva in the name Sivaskanda-varman is an honorific 
like srivijaya prefixed to the name of Skanda-varman and that $iva- 
Skanda-varman and 5?%ijat/a-Skanda-varman are identical. Con¬ 
sidering, however, the facts that Sivaskanda, Bhavaskanda, etc., 
were quite popular names in South India in ancient times (cf. also 
modern Tamil names like Sivashanmukham), and that the officials 
responsible for drafting the charter coiild hardly have been 
unmindful of the ambiguity likely to be caused by the use of the 
word siva alone as an honorific prefix to the king’s name, it is better 
to take Sivaskanda-varman and Skanda-varman as two different 
kings. As the influence of Sanskrit can be felt more in the language 
of the British Museum grant, Skanda-varman may be assigned to 
a date slightly later than that of Sivaskanda-varman, It may, how¬ 
ever, be admitted that early medieval records have confused Siva¬ 
skanda-varman with one of the many Skanda-varmans of the Pallava 
family. Besides king Skanda-varman the British Museum grant 
refers to the crown-prince Buddha-varman (whose relation to 
Skanda-varman is not specified) and one of the latter’s sons supposed 
to be named Buddhyankura. It is not possible to determine whether 
even the crown-prince—not to speak of his son—ever ascended the 
throne. 

The next known Pallava king is Vishnugopa who came into 
conflict with Samudra-gupta about the third quarter of the fourth 
century, but whose relation with the kings of the Prakrit records 
is uncertain (cf. Genealogical Table No. 1 at the end of this Chapter). 

3. Pallavas of Kdnchl known from Sanskrit Charters 

There are two Sanskrit charters issued from Kanchl at a later 
date by two Pallava kings—the Chendalur grant of Kumaravishnu II 
and the Udayendiram grant of Nandi-varman. The names of the 
issuers are mentioned together with those of three ancestors. Of 
the two records the earlier seems to be the Chendalur grant issued 
by Kumaravishnu II, son of Buddha-varman, grandson of Kumara¬ 
vishnu I and great-grandson of Skanda-varman. It is not known 
whether Skanda-varman of the Chendalur grant is the same as the 
Pallava king of that name mentioned in the British Museum grant; 
but the identification is not improbable. It is also possible that 
Kumara-vishnu I and Buddha-varman of the Chendalur record are 


‘277 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 

identical with Kumaravishnu, conqueror of Kahchi, and Buddha- 
varman, mentioned in a later record of the family as “the sub¬ 
marine fire to the Chola army.” But whether Kumaravishnu I 
captured Kanchl from a member of his own family or from enemies 
such as the Cholas, who may have temporarily occupied the city, 
cannot be ascertained. Kumaravishnu II could not have possibly 
ruled later than the first quarter of the fifth century. 

The Udayendiram grant was issued by Nandivarman, son of 
Skanda-varman (III), grandson of Simha-varman I and great-grandson 
of Skanda-varman (II). King Simha-varman and his son Skanda- 
varman (III) are mentioned in the Gahga records, such as the Penu- 
konda grant, as having respectively installed on the throne the 
Gahga king Hari-varman 1 and his son Madhava-Simha-varman 
(apparently named after his father’s Pallava overlord who might 
have been his maternal grandfather). This Simha-varman Pallava 
seems to be mentioned in the Jain work Lokavibhaga. The date 
of the composition of this work is given as the 22nd regnal year 
of Simha-varman lord of the Pallavas, corresponding to the year 
380 of the Saka era (A.D. 458). Pallava Simha-varman thus ruled 
from 436 to at least A.D. 458. The four generations of the Pallava 
kings of Kahchi mentioned in the Udayendiram grant may therefore 
be assigned to the period between the first quarter of the fifth and 
that of the sixth century. 

The king of Kahchi called Chandadanda came into conflict with 
the Kadamba king Ravi-varman about the first quarter of the sixth 
century. Whether Chandadanda was a viruda of Nandi-varman of 
the Udayendiram grant or of one of his immediate successors is 
not known. But a Pallava king named Santi-varman is known to 
have been the overlord of Kadamba Vishnu-varman whom Ravi- 
varman killed. 2 It is most probable that Chandadanda was a viruda 
of king Santi-varman. 

The Greater Pallava king Mahendra-varman I, who ascended 
the throne about the beginning of the seventh century, is known 
to have been preceded by his father Simhavishnu and grandfather 
Simha-varman. Whether this Simha-varman was a king of Kahchi, 
and whether he was a direct descendant of Nandi-varman of the 
Udayendiram grant, cannot be determined. The Vayalur list of the 
Pallava kings, which is worthless as regards the earlier names but 
may be of value as to the names immediately preceding those of the 
Greater Pallavas, places three kings, viz. Simha-varman. Simha- 
varman, and Vishnugopa, between Nandi-varman (of the Udayen¬ 
diram grant) and Simha-varman, grandfather of Mahendra-varman I. 

1. See above, p. 258. 2. See above, p. 273. 

278 






DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


But the non-mention of Santi-varman-Chandadanda seems to render 
even this part of the list extremely doubtful (cf. Genealogical Table 
No. 2 at the end of this Chapter). 

4. A Collateral Line of the Pallavas 

Side by side with the house of Kanchi there ruled at least one 
collateral branch of the Pallava family in the northern part of the 
dominions of the Pallava monarchs, known from the Prakrit records* 
Rulers of this branch, who are known from their Sanskrit charters, 
flourished, roughly speaking, in the period A.D. 375-575. 

The fragmentary Darsi grant was issued by a Pallava king from 
his residence at Dasanapura (Darsi in Nellore District). The only 
other known fact about this ruler is that his great-grandfather was 
king Virakurcha-varman. Next in point of date comes the Omgodu 
grant (No. 1) issued from Tambrapa in the 33rd regnal year of king 
Skanda-varman (II), son of Vlra-varman, grandson of Skanda- 
varman (I) and great-grandson of Kumaravishnu who also performed 
the Asvamedha like Sivaskanda-varman. It is not improbable that 
this northern Pallava house was founded by a Pallava viceroy of 
the Kanchi king .shortly after the latter had been routed by Samudra- 
gupta. If such were the case, Kumaravishnu’s Asvamedha probably 
indicated revival of the fallen fortunes of the family at least in the 
northern part of the empire. 

Vishnugopa or Vishnugopa-varman, son of Skanda-varman II, 
probably remained a crown-prince even during the reign of his son 
Sirhha-varman when he issued his Uruvupalli grant from Palakkada, 
Dharmamahdrdja Simha-varman, whose latest known date is his 
10th regnal year, issued his grants from places like Menmatura and 
Dasanapura. The last known member of the house was Vishnugopa- 
varman II, who was the son of Simha-varman and issued the Chura 
or Narasaraopet grant from Palotkata (Palakkada). The house was 
probably supplanted by the Greater Pallava king Simhavishnu about 
the last quarter of the sixth century. The names of the rulers of 
this line appear to have been confused with those of the Kanchi 
house in the traditional lists of Pallava kings found in the early 
medieval records (cf. Genealogical Table No. 3 at the end of this 
Chapter). 

5. Mahendra-varman andl His Successors 

Although Mahendra-varman I and his successors, unlike some of 
their contemporaries, did not date their records according to any 
era, their chronology can be fairly fixed on the strength of their 
relations with the Chalukya kings of Badami, whose dates are 
known. As noted above, both Mahendra-varman I and his son 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Narasimha-varman were contemporaries of the Chalukya king 
Pulakesin II. 

Narasimha-varman I captured Badami, where there is an 
inscripiion supposed to be dated in his 13th regnal year, and assumed 
the title Vatapikonda, i.e. conqueror of Badami. The Ceylonese 
prince Mana-varman is known to have helped the Pallava monarch 
in defeating the Vallabha king, i.e. Pulakesin II, about A.D. 642 
and succeeded with Narasimha-varman’s help in securing the 
Ceylonese throne about A.D. 668. 

The Gadval grant of Vikramaditya I, which is supported by 
other Chalukya records, shows that the Chalukya king, after having 
defeated the Pallavas and capturing Kanchl, encamped at Uragapura 
(modern Uraiyur near Trichinopoly) to the south of the Kaverl on 
the 25th of April, A.D. 674. It is also said that, to recover the lost 
empire of his father, Vikramaditya I had to fight with the Pallava 
kings Narasimha-varman I, his son Mahendra-varman II, and his 
grandson isvara or Paramesvara-varman I. As Narasimha-varman I 
succeeded his father some time (probably 13 years) before A.D. 642- 
43, as his grandson Paramesvara-varman I was already on the throne 
in April A.D. 674, and as the accession of Mana-varman can hardly 
be placed earlier than A.D. 668, the reigns of Narasimha-varman I 
and Mahendra-varman II may roughly be assigned to the periods 
A.D. 630-68 and A.D. 668-70 respectively. 

Paramesvara-varman I claims to have defeated Vikramaditya 
(Chalukya Vikramaditya I) and destroyed the city of Ranarasika 
(Vikramaditya I), i.e. the Chalukya capital Badami. These successes 
must have been achieved after April, A.D. 674. Paramesvara- 
varman I was succeeded by his son Narasimha-varman II for whose 
reign we have a definite date. According to the Ts’o-fou-yuan-Kouei, 
a Chinese encyclopaedia compiled about A.D. 1013, Che-li-Na-lo-seng- 
kia (Sri Narasim’na), king of the kingdom of South India, sent an 
embassy to China in A.D. 720. He proposed to the Chinese emperor 
his readiness to employ his war elephants and his cavalry to chastise 
the Ta-che (Tajikas or Arabs) as well as the T’ou-po (Tibetans) and 
others. Moreover, he asked that a suitable name be given to his 
army. The Chinese emperor is said to have been pleased and con¬ 
ferred the name “the army which cherished virtue” to Narasirhha’s 
forces. 1 According to another passage, the emperor a few months 
later sent an ambassador to confer by brevet the title of “the king of 
the kingdom of South India” on king Che-li-Na-lo-seng-kia-pao-topa- 
mo (Sri-Narasimhapota-varman, the typical Pallava form of the king’s 

1. K. A. N. Sastri, Foreign Notices of South India, pp. 116-17. 


2<S0 



DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


name). According to the Kieou-T’ang-chou, Che-li-Na-lo-seng-kia- 
to-pa, king of South India, constructed in the same year a temple 
for the Chinese; and the emperor was pleased to give it the name 
“which causes return to virtue.” These Chinese notices show that 
Pallava Narasiihha-varman II continued to rule at least till A.D. 720. 
But he did not probably live much longer. His son and successor 
Paramesvara-varman II ruled at least up to A.D. 730 as Chalukya 
Vikramaditya II, still a yuvartija, claims to have levied tribute from 
him at Kalhchi in the year 25 of Vijayaditya or shortly before it. 1 
Roughly speaking, therefore, the reigns of Paramesvara-varman I, 
Narasimha-varman II and Paramesvara-varman II may be assigned 
respectively to the periods A.D. 670-95, A.D. 695-722 and A.D. 722-30. 

It is probable that Paramesvara-varman II was the king of 
Kf-nchi killed by the Ganga king Sripurusha (who ascended the 
throne in A.D. 725 but was still ruling in A.D. 788) at the battle of 
Vilarde. The Ganga claims to have won for himself the Pallava 
umbrek i (insignia of royalty) and the title Permanadi. According 
to the Vaikuntha-Perumal temple inscription, the Pallava kingdom 
was destroyed on the death of Paramesvara-varman II and anarchy 
prevailed, when nobody was willing to assume the reins of govern¬ 
ment. A deputation consisting of the Matras, Mulaprakritis and 
others waited on Maharaja Hiranya-varman (a ruling chief belong¬ 
ing to the Pallava family) who asked the chief potentates as well as 
his own sons if any of them would accept kingship. All of them 
refused, with the exception of Hiranya-varman’s 12 year old son 
Nandi-varman Pallavamalla. Hiranya-varman was persuaded to 
risk his son in the perilous undertaking and Pallavamalla ascended 
the throne. These facts may point to the genuineness of £rlpurusha’s 
claim (Cf. Genealogical Table No. 4 at the end of this Chapter). 

6. Nandi-varman Pallavamalla 

We have seen that Narasimha-varman II ruled in A.D. 720 and 
that his son and successor Paramesvara-varman II ruled at least up 
to A.D. 730 and might have died in a war with Ganga Sripurusha 
(acc. A.D. 725). Thus Nandi-varman Pallavamalla could not have 
begun to rule earlier than A.D. 730. 

The precise date of Nandi-varman’s accession may be deter¬ 
mined by considering his relations with Vijayaditya’s son Vikrama¬ 
ditya II (A.D. 733-45) who claims to have invaded the Tunclaka 
country (Pallava territory), defeated his natural enemy the Pallava 
who was king Nandipota-varman. and captured Kanchl. The occu¬ 
pation of the Pallava capital by Chalukya Vikramaditya II is proved 

1. According to the newly discovered Ulchala Ins. of Vijayaditya, year 35 (Avriont 
India. No. 5, p. 54). 


281 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


by his inscription found in the Raj asimhes vara temple at Conjeeve- 
ram. Another inscription discovered in Nellore District is dated in 
the 15th regnal year of Nandipotarasar (Nandipotaraja, i.e. Nandi- 
varman Pallavamalla) and records gift of gold to the Subrahmanya 
temple at Tirubanbur made by certain persons as djnaptis or exe¬ 
cutors of the Chalukiarasar (Chalukyaraja) at the instance of the 
Aluparasar (Aluparaja). There is little doubt that this Chalukya 
king was no other than Vikramaditya II, the Alupa rulers having 
been the feudatories of the Chalukya house of Badami. Thus the 
15th regnal year of Nandi-varman falls some time in A.D. 733-45, 
the reign period of Vikramaditya II, and this shows that the accession 
of the Pallava king could not have taken place later than A.D. 730-31. 
It would thus appear that Nandi-varman ascended the throne in 
A.D. 730. As his latest known date is his 65th regnal year, his 
reign ended not earlier than A.D. 795 but possibly some time 
later. In any case, Nandi-varman Pallavamalla’s reign must have 
come to a close some time before A.D. 804 when his son Dantiga or 
Danti-varman was already on the throne of Kanchl according to a 
Rashtrakuta record. 

GENEALOGY 

1. Tentative genealogy of the Pallavas of the Prakrit records. 

1. Sirhha-varman (end of the third century) 

2. xsivaskanda-varman (beginning of the fourth century) 

3. Skanda-varman (about the second quarter of the fourth century) 


Buddha-varman 

I 

Buddhyankura 


4. Vishnugopa (third quarter of the 
fourth century). 


2. Tentative genealogy of the Pallavas of Kahchl known from 
the Sanskrit charters. 

3. Skanda-varman I 


Buddha-varman 

l 

(Buddhyankura) 


4. Vishnugopa (third 
quarter of the 
fourth century). 


5. Kumaravishnu I 

6. Buddha-varman 

I 

7. Kumaravishnu II 
(beginning of the 
fifth century) 

8. Skanda-varman II 


9. Sirhha-varman 
A.D. 436-58 









DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


10. Skanda-varman III 

I 

11. Nandi-varman I 
• 

12. Santi-varman 
Chandadanda 
(beginning of the sixth 
century 

13. Sirhha-varman (c. A.D. 
550-575) 

14. Simhavishnu (c. A.D. 
575-600) 

15. Mahendra-varman I 
(c. A.D. 600-30) 

3. Tentative genealogy of the Pallavas (c. A.D. 375-585) of the 
Nellore-Guntur region. 


1. 

VIrakucha-varman 

2. 

Kumaravishnu 

1 

3. 

1 

Skanda-varman I 

1 

4. 

1 

VIra-varman I 

I 

5. 

I 

Skanda-varman II 

1 


1 

Vishnugopa-varman I 

1 

6. 

1 

Sirhha-varman 

1 

n 

ft . 

. 1 

Vishnugopa-varman II 

4. Tentative genealogy of the Greater Pallavas. 

1. 

Simha-varman (c. 550-575) 

2. 

| 

Simhavishnu (c. 575-600) 

1 

• 

n 

«j . 

1 

Mahendra-varman I (c. G00-30) 

1 

4. 

1 

Narasimha-varman I (c. 630-68) 

1 

5. 

I 

Mahendra-varman II (c. A.D. 668-70) 

1 

6. 

1 

Paramesvara-varman I (c. 670-95) 

1 

7. 

1 

Narasimha-varman II ( c. 695-722) 

I 

8. 

1 

Paramesvara-varman II (c. 722-30) 

i 

9. 

1 

Nandi-varman II Pallavamalla (c. A.D. 730-796) 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

R. Gopalan— History of the Pallavas of Kahchi. 

K. A. Nilakantan— Foreign Notices of South India; NH1P, Ch. XII. 

N. Venkataramanayya— JOR, VIII, 1-8; XV. 117-28. 

J. F. Fleet—Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts in Bomb. Gaz. I. ii. 

R. Sewell— Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 

D. C. Sircar— The Successors of the Satavahanas in the Lower Deccan. 

P. Seshadri Sastri— JAHC, II, 68-69. 

F. Kielhorn—Inscriptions of Southern India, El, VII. 

A. S. Altekar— The Rdshtrakutas and their times. 



283 


CHAPTER XIV 

CEYLON 

After the death of king Mahasena (A.D. 334-362) 1 of the 
Lambakarna clan, whose history has been dealt with above, 2 his 
son Srlmeghavarna became king of Ceylon. The new ruler, who 
was a virtuous man, pacified the Buddhist monks and repaired or 
reconstructed the monasteries and other buildings that had been 
damaged or destroyed by his father. In the ninth year of his reign, 
Buddha’s tooth-relic is said to have been brought from Kalinga 
and consecrated in a temple in Ceylon. Srlmeghavarna is no doubt 
the same as Chi-mi-kia-po-mo (“cloud of merit”) who, according to 
Wang-hiuen-tse’s Hing-Tchoan, sent two monks to the court of the 
Indian king San-meou-to-lo-kiu-to or Samudra-gupta, to secure 
permission for building a monastery at Gaya. 3 Srimeghavarna was 
succeeded by Jyeshfhatishya, who was either his younger brother 
or his brother’s youngest son and was a skilled carver in ivory. The 
next ruler was Jyeshthatishya’s son Buddhadasa who was a pious 
man and treated his subjects as if they were his children. Buddhadasa 
is represented in the chronicles as a great healer of diseases and 
is said to have appointed physicians to provide for the cure of the 

1. A word of explanation is necessary for the scheme of chronology followed in 
this chapter. The Pali chronicle entitled Mahavamsa (with its supplement the 
Chulavamsa ) and the Singhalese chronicles such as the Rajavaliya, Pujavaliya, 
Nikdyasahgrahaya and Rajaratnakaraya as well as the Narendracharitavalokana - 
pradlpika often contradict one another, and their dates for the earlier kings, 
when applied to the Buddha-nirvana era of 544 B.C., now prevalent in Ceylon, 
are not convincing and arc sometimes contradicted by other evidence such as 
that derived from Chinese sources. The researches of Geiger and others have 
removed some of these difficulties, and Fleet’s suggestion that in early times 
483 B.C. was regarded in the island as the epoch of the Buddha-nirvana era 
is now usually accepted. But even then inexact reference to a king’s rule in 
a round number of years or to his death in a particular regnal year (without 
mention of months and days) stands in the way of reconstructing a definite 
chronological table of the kings mentioned in the chronicles. In the following 
pages, Geiger’s approximate chronology has been followed down to the reign 
of Mahanaga, and the reign (nine years) of Lamani Singana, who is not mentioned 
in the Chulavamsa and was probably a collateral ruling chief, has been omitted. 
This has been done to rectify Geiger’s error of about nine years in regard to the 
accession of Manavarman. According to Geiger, Manavarman ascended the 
throne in A.D. 676, although his accession could hardly have taken place much 
later than A.D. 668. From the reign of this king, therefore, we have followed 
the more reliable chronology proposed by Hultzsch. It may also be pointed 
out that Geiger’s date for Jagatlpala is almost certainly wrong. On the other 
hand a slight modification of one year has been introduced in the chronology 
proposed by Hultzsch from the reigns of Mahendra I and Agrabodhi VI down¬ 
wards. This is mainly because his dates for the accession of Mahendra V and 
Vijayabahu appear to be too early at least by one year if not by two years. 

2. Vol. II, p. 241. 

3. See p. 11, where the date given for Meghavarna is based on Geiger, Mahavamsa, 
p. xxxix. 


284 




CEYLON 


sick in different parts of the kingdom. The ascetic Mahadharma- 
kathin translated the Buddhist Sutras in the Ceylonese language 
during this reign. He was very probably the same as Ta-mo-kiu-ti, 
mentioned as a contemporary by the Chinese traveller Fa-hien who 
stayed in Ceylon about A.D. 411-12. The chronology followed in 
these pages seems to indicate that the monk survived king 
Buddhadasa. Buddhadasa was succeeded by his eldest son Upatishya 
whose reign was seriously disturbed by a famine and an epidemic. 1 
Upatishya was murdered by his queen who later married his brother 
and successor Mahanaman (A.D. 409-31). During Mahanaman’s rule, 
the celebrated Buddhist writer Buddhaghosha, an inhabitant of 
Magadha, reached Ceylon where he lived for a number of years. 
Tradition ascribes Buddhaghosha’s landing in Ceylon to a date 
probably corresponding to A.D. 412-13. According to Chinese 
sources, Ts’a-li Mo-ho-nan (Mahanaman of Ceylon) sent a letter to 
the Chinese imperial court in A.D. 428. 

After a rule of twenty-two years Mahanaman was murdered by 
his son Svastisena, who was himself murdered the same day by his 
step-sister whose husband was raised to the throne. The new king died 
soon and one Mitrasena became king with the help of a minister. 
Soon after his accession, Mitrasena was killed by a Damila (Dravida 
or Tamil) named Pantfya who came from the coast of South India 
and probably belonged to the Parujya royal family of Madura. When 
North Ceylon was conquered by the Damilas, Ceylonese nobles 
fled to Rohana in the southern part of the island. Pandya and his 
five Damila successors ruled for about 27 years (A.D. 433-60), and 
then a Ceylonese chief named Dhatusena (A.D. 460-78), who belonged 
to the Moriya (Mayura) clan, expelled the foreigners and became 
ruler of the island. Buddhism does not appear to have been 
patronised by the Damila kings; but Dhatusena reinstalled the old 
order. He built an exceptionally large number of monasteries, dug 
tanks, and founded numerous other institutions. Dhatusena’s rule 
ended in a disaster. His eldest son Kasyapa (A.D. 478-96), who 
rebelled against his father, took him prisoner and usurped the 
throne. 2 The old king was murdered after a rule of 18 years. In 
the 18th regnal year of Kasyapa himself, his brother Maudgalyayana, 

1. Geiger believes that the change from the old era of 483 B.C. to the new one 
of 544 B.C. falls in the earliest period dealt with in the Chulavamsa covering 
the reign of Srlmeghavarna down to that of Upatishya I. The four kings viz. 
Srlmeghavarna, Jyeshthatishya II, Buddhadasa and Upatishya I, are assigned, 
in the Chulavamsa, reigns respectively covering 28, 9, 29 and 42 years (altogether 
108 years). Geiger is inclined to believe that these four kings actually ruled 
for 47 years, but that their reigns have been expanded by 61 years in order 
to reconcile the old era of 483 B.C. with the new one of 544 B.C. 

2. Kasyapa had no claim to the throne as his mother was not the chief queen ot 
his father. Maudgalyayana was the lawful claimant for the throne. 

285 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


who had fled to India, came back to the island with an Indian con¬ 
tingent and many people assembled under his banner. In the 
struggle that followed, Kasyapa lost his life and his brother 
Maudgalyayana (A.D. 496-513) became king of Lanka. There is a 
Chinese notice referring to king Kia-che Kai-lo-ha-li-ya who sent 
an embassy to the Chinese court in A.D, 527. Kia-che no doubt 
indicates the name Kasyapa; but it has been suggested that the 
king of Ceylon here referred to is the same as a later ruler named 
Silakaia. 

Maudgalyayana is said to have freed the island from the danger 
of hostile attacks from India by instituting a guard for the sea-coast. 
He was a pious ruler who presented his umbrella, the royal insignia, 
to the Buddhist Sangha in token of his submission to the church. 
Maudgalyayana died in the 17th year of his reign, and was succeeded 
by his son Kumaradasa or Kumaradhatusena- (A.D. 513-22). Some 
writers believe that Kumaradasa sent an envoy to China in A.D. 515, 
but the belief seems to be based on a misunderstanding. A doubtful 

i » 

Ceylonese tradition of a later date identifies this king with Kumara¬ 
dasa, author of the celebrated poem Jdnakiharana. Keith, however, 
points out that the date of the poem is later than that of the 
Kasikavritti composed about the middle of the seventh century. 
Kumaradasa was succeeded after a rule of about nine years by his 
son Kirtisena who was soon deposed by his maternal uncle Siva. 
This usurper of the throne was soon after killed by Upatishya 
(A.D. 522-24) who was the husband of Maudgalyayana’s sister and 
belonged to the Lambakarna clan. Upatishya'was succeeded shortly 
after by his rebellious son Silakaia (A.D. 524-37) whose accession 
to the throne, according to a tradition in the Rdjaratnakaraya, took 
place 1088 years after Buddha’s Nirvana and 852 years after the 
introduction of Buddhism in Ceylon. Silakaia would thus appear 
to have become king in the year 1089 of the Buddha-nirvana era 
of Ceylon corresponding to A.D. 545. According to some writers, 
the date refers to the introduction of the Vetulla canon (actually 
a Vetulla work possibly entitled Dhammadhdtu ), which tradition 
assigns to th^ king’s 12th regnal year. But even this emendation 
does not suit the chronology of Geiger who, therefore, assumes an 
error in the tradition. Silakaia made his eldest son Maudgalyayana 
governor of the Eastern Province, while his second son Damshtra- 
prabhuti was made the governor of the central mountainous country 
called Malaya and also of the Southern Province. When the king 
died in the 13th year of his reign, Damshtraprabhuti seized the . 
throne, but lost his life shortly after in a struggle with Maudgalya¬ 
yana, who next became king. 


286 


CEYLON 


Maudgalyayana II (A.D. 537-56), a poet of considerable merit, 
was a pious ruler, loved by his subjects. After a rule of about 
20 years, this king died and his son Kirtisrimegha ascended the 
throne. He ruled for a few days during which the queen-mother 
mismanaged the affairs of the state. This encouraged Mahanaga, a 
rebellious officer of Rohana in South Ceylon, to advance against 
the king. Mahanaga (A.D. 556-59) occupied the throne after having 
killed Kirtisrimegha and made his own sister’s son Agrabodhi the 
Upardja or sub-king. After about three years Mahanaga died and was 
succeeded by Agrabodhi (A.D. 559-921, 1 who was the builder of 
several monasteries, dug the Kurunduvava and Mihintale tanks, 
and founded numerous religious establishments and charitable 
institutions. Agrabodhi encouraged writing poems in the Ceylonese 
language. He conferred the dignity of Mahddipada (title of the 
heir to the throne) on his sister’s son, also called Agrabodhi, and 
died in the 34th year of his reign. During the reign of Agrabodhi II 
(A.D. 592-602), who dug the Kantalai and Giritale tanks, 

a prince of Kalinga and his queen came to Ceylon where they 
underwent the ceremony of world renunciation under the celebrated 
Buddhist teacher Jyotihpala. The migration of the Kalinga prince 
cannot possibly be associated with the Chalukya occupation of 
southern Kalinga under Pulakesin II as the latter event took place 
shortly before A.D. 630-31. Agrabodhi II is said to have dedicated 
his kingdom and person to the relic shrine of Buddha. He died in 
the 10th year of his reign. 

The next ruler was Sanghatishya, who was a younger brother 
of Agrabodhi II according to some sources, although he may have 
been a relation of the latter’s queen. A general of Agrabodhi II, 
named Maudgalyayana, revolted against the new king’s authority 
at Rohana in • the Southern Province shortly after his accession. 
In the struggle that followed, Sanghatishya was killed and 
Maudgalyayana III (A.D. 602-08) became king, Jyeshthatishya, son 
of Sanghatishya, having fled for his life. After a rule of about six 
years, the new king was himself killed by another rebel named 
Silamegha varna (A.D. 608-17) who occupied the northern part of 
the island together with the capital. By open generosity, Silamegha- 
varna won the heart of all classes of people. But a general named 
Srlnaga, who was a brother of king Sanghatishya’s queen, fled to 
South India and came back with a large army of Damilas (Tamils) 
to conquer the Northern Province now under Silameghavarna. The 

1. Certain Singhalese chronicles place the rule of a king named Lamani Singana 
covering nine years between the reign of Mahanaga and that of Agrabodhi. 
We have omitted this reign for reasons stated in footnote 1 (p. 284) and have 
closed up the succeeding reigns. 


287 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


king, however, succeeded in crushing the invading army completely. 
For a certain offence, Silameghavarna punished a large number of 
Buddhist monks and banished one hundred of them to India. He 
died after a rule of nine years and was succeeded by his young son 
Agrabodhi III (A.D. 617-32), surnamed Srlsanghabodhi. It is inter¬ 
esting to note that in later times the surnames Silameghavarna and 
Srlsanghabodhi were alternately assumed by the kings of Ceylon. 
Shortly after the accession of Agrabodhi III, Jyeshthatishya, who 
had been planning to regain the throne all the time since his father 
Sarighatishya’s death, succeeded in subjugating the Southern and 
Eastern Districts and then marched against the capital city of 
Anuradhapura. Jyeshthatishya III now became king after defeating 
Agrabodhi III, who fled to South India but returned after a few 
months with a contingent of Damila troops. Jyeshthatishya III was 
killed in the battle that ensued and Agrabodhi III regained the 
throne. But a minister of Jyeshthatishya III, -named Damshtrasiva, 
who had been sent to India by his master to secure the help of 
Damila mercenaries, now came back with an army of South Indians 
and marched on the capital. It was now Agrabodhi’s turn to flee 
to India leaving the throne for Damshtrasiva who assumed the 
name Damshtropatishya. But Agrabodhi III again came back with 
reinforcements, and the two rivals for the throne were engaged in 
a continuous struggle, much to the misery of the people. Agrabodhi III 
died in the 16th year after his accession; but the struggle against 
Damshtropatishya was continued by his younger brother Kasyapa II 
(A.D. 632-41) who compelled the rival to flee to India and 
consolidated his own position in the island. When Damshtropatishya 
next came with a great South Indian force, he was killed in battle 
by Kasyapa II, although Hastadariishtra, a son of Dariishtropatishya’s 
sister, managed to escape to India. Kasyapa II was seized by a 
bad illness and transferred the whole government* to his sister’s 
son Mana, a scion of the Ikshvaku family of Rohana. The king 
died after a rule of nine years when Mana was still fighting with the 
Damila mercenaries who had been brought from South India by 
Damshtropatishya and had become an undisciplined rabble. Mana 
now ciowned his father Dappula, who had made himself an inde¬ 
pendent ruler of the state of Rohana, as king of Ceylon; but soon 
Hastadariishtra arrived with a fresh contingent of Damilas’. Dappula 
fled to Rohana and Mana to the Eastern Province. Hastadariishtra 
or Darhshtropatishya II died after a rule of nine years (A.D. 641-50) 
and was succeeded by his younger brother Agrabodhi IV (A.D. 
60 O- 66 ), surnamed Srlsanghabodhi. A number of Damila noble¬ 
men held high offices under this king. He was a religious-minded 
man, and he and his officials were famous for their benevolence. 


288 


CEYLON 


He died after a reign of 16 years and a Damila official named 
Pustakushtha seized the government and placed on the throne one 
Datta (A.D. 666-68) who belonged to the royal family. When Datta 
died after two years, Pustakushtha raised a young man named 
Hastadamshtra to the throne. But the new king was killed after a 
few months by Mana, Manaka or Manavarman (A.D. 668-703) 1 who 
was the eldest son of king Kaisyapa II. During the rule of Hasta¬ 
damshtra or Daiiishtropatishya II (A.D. 641-50) he had fled to the 
court of the Kanduvethi (i.c. Kaduvetti or Pallava) king Narasimha 
in India. This Narasimha is no doubt Narasimha-varman I of the 
Pallava family of Kanchipura, who defeated the Chalukya king 
Pulakesin II about A.D. 642 and ended his rule some years before 
A.D. 674 when his grandson Paramesvara-varman I was on the 
throne. When Manavarman was living at Narasimha’s court, the 
Vallabha (i.e. Chalukya) king, very probably Pulakesin II, is said 
to have come to make war on the Pallava monarch. It thus seems 
that Manavarman had repaired to the Pallava court shortly be¬ 
fore A.D. 642 and soon after the death of his father Kasyapa II. 
It is said that Manavarman distinguished himself by his valour 
in Narasimha’s struggle against the Vallabha or Chalukya king 
who was totally roiited. This pleased Narasimha-varman I who 
supplied Manavarman with an army with which the latter invaded 
Ceylon. But the expedition, in spite of a victory over the forces 
of Daiiishtropatishya II, was a failure, and Manavarman had once 
again to take shelter at the court of the Pallava king. He stayed 
there during the reign of the four kings, viz. Daiiishtropatishya II 
or Hastadamshtra I (A.D. 641-50), Agrabodhi IV (A.D. 650-66), 
Datta (A.D. 666-68) and Hastadamshtra II (A.D. 668), when the Pal¬ 
lava king was persuaded to supply him with a second army. This 
time Manavarman succeeded in defeating totally the titular king 
Hastadamshtra II and the administrator Pustakushtha and in seizing 
the throne of Ceylon some time about A.D. 668. Manavarman is 
assigned a reign of thirty-five years in some of the sources. His suc¬ 
cessors v/ere his sons, Agrabodhi V (A.D. 703-09) who is said to have 
ruled for six years, and Kasyapa III (A.D. 709-16) who probably 
ruled for seven years. During Kasyapa’s reign, the king’s brother 
Mahendra administered the kingdom as Adipada. Mahendra (A.D. 
716-19) later ruled as king 2 for about three years and was succeeded 

1. Geiger assigns the accession of Manavarman to A.D. 676. This is impossible 
in view of the fact, noted above (p. 280), that his helper Narasimha-varman I 
Pallava must have died considerably earlier than April. A.D. 674. 

2. Because Mahendra repudiated the ceremony of abhisheka. he was regarded as 
“Adipada Mahendra” throughout his reign. The title Adiwda was conferred on 
Die heir to the throne. When there were several Adipadas the one nearest the 
throne was called Mahddipdda which title was closely allied to that of Yvva- 
rajn. Frequently the Yuvaraja was invested with the dignity of Uparaja which 

289 


f S. -! r > 



THE CLASCAL AGE 


by his son Agrabodhi VI Silameghavarna (A.D. 719-59). According 
to a Chinese account, an Indian monk named Vajrabodhi, on his way 
from China to India, touched Ceylon where he was invited in 
A.D. 718-19 by king Chi-li-chi-lo, i.e. Srtsila, apparently an abbre¬ 
viation of the name SrLSilameghavarna. The king may have been 
the same as Agrabodhi VI Silamegha according to the scheme of 
chronology followed in these pages, although he is identified by 
Geiger with Kasyapa III who is supposed to have assumed the same 
surname. From Chinese sources we also know that king Chi-lo-mi- 
kia, i.e. Silamegha or Silameghavarna sent two embassies to the 
Chinese court in the years A.D. 742 and 746. There is little doubt 
that this king was Agrabodhi VI Silameghavarna, 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

W. Geiger —Mahavamsa (translation); Culavamsa (translation) 

H. W. Codrington —A Short History of Ceylon. 

G. C. Mendis —The Early History of Ceylon. 

Hultzsch—Contributions to Singhalese Chronology, JRAS, 1913, p. 517. 


was a position of trust carrying with it certain rights, apparently a share in the 
government. The northern part of the island was called the Raiarashtra (the 
kings province); but the Southern Province is often described as the Yxiva - 
raja-rashtra, while the territorial division Maya rdshtra (to the south of the 
Northern Province) is believed to stand for Mahadipada-rdshtra A younger 
son of the king was o!ten given the dignity of Malaya-raja (lord of Malaya in 
the mountainous region of Central Ceylon). * 


290 





CHAPTER XV 


LITERATURE 

I. SANSKRIT 

The political unity and prosperity of India under the Guptas, 
combined with the staunch patronage that they extended to Sanskrit 
learning, resulted in the flourishing of Sanskrit literature in all its 
branches. The period under review saw the full development of 
the Puranas and the last phase of the Smriti literature. Possibly 
the Epics also got their final touches and received their present 
shape during this age. But the most important developments took 
place in secular literature. It may be fairly stated that it is this 
period that produced the best authors in almost all branches of 
literature, including even sciences like Astronomy and Mathematics. 
This is evident from the fact that dramatists and poets like Kalidasa, 
Bhavabhuti, Bharavi and Magha, prose writers like Dan din. 
Subandhu, and Bana, rhetoricians like Bhamaha, grammarians like 
Chandra, Vamana, and Bhartrihari, lexicographers like Amara. 
philosophers like Gaudapada, Kumarila, and Prahhakara, and 
astronomers like Aryabhata, Varahamihira, and Brahmagupta, all 
flourished during this period which may, therefore, be aptly described 
as the “Golden Age” of Sanskrit literature. It was at one time 
held by some scholars that there was a revival or renaissance of 
Sanskrit literature during the Gupta Age. This can no longer be 
regarded as technically correct. For Sanskrit literature was never 
altogether eclipsed and its influence continued throughout the een- 
turies preceding the Gupta Age. This is proved by the writings of 
Bhasa and Asvaghosha referred to above. 1 The inscriptions of the 
Gupta period such as the Allahabad Pillar inscription of Samudra- 
gupta and the Mandasor inscription of Vatsabhatti (A.D. 437) also 
clearly show that the high-flown Kavya style was already in a mature 
state as early as the fourth or fifth century A.D. There was un¬ 
doubtedly an efflorescence, but not a renaissance of Sanskrit litera¬ 
ture in the Gupta Age. We shall now proceed to give a short account 
of the different branches. 


1. THE PURANAS 

In the older Vedic literature the word “purJna" usually 
in connection with “itiheisa", and originally it seems to have 


occurs 

meant 


1. Vol. II, pp. 258 IT. 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


simply “old narrative” without any special significance as to the 
character of the narrative. According to the classical definition, 
however, a pur dim is supposed to deal with five topics ( pancha - 
lakshana), viz . (1) sarga or creation of the universe; (2) pratisarga 
or re-creation after destruction; (3) vamsa or genealogy; (4) man- 
vantara or the great periods of time with Manu as the primal 
ancestor; and (5) vamsdnucharita or the history of the dynasties, 
both solar and lunar. But the texts that have come down to us 
under the title Purana hardly conform to this definition since they 
contain either something more or something less than the limitations 
set by it. If it be assumed that the definition was based on the 
contents of actual texts, then prima facie it would appear that the 
present Puranas are mutilated or revised versions of older texts. 

The Puranas themselves state their number to be eighteen. 
They are in most cases enumerated as follows: Brahma, Padma, 
Vishnu, &iva or Vdyu, Bhdgavata, Ndrada, Mdrkandeya, Agni, 
Bhavishya, Brahmavaivarta, Linga, Vardha, Skanda, Vdmana, 
Kurma, Matsya, Gdruda, and Brahmanda. The Padma Purana classi¬ 
fies these texts according to the three Gunas and ascribes them to one 
or the other principal deity. Thus the Vishnu, Ndrada, Bhdgavata , 
Garuda, Padma, and Vardha, are Vishnuite sdttvika Puranas, and as 
such lead to salvation; the Brahmanda, Brahmavaivarta, Mdrkandeya, 
Bhavishya, Vdmana, and Brahma are the rdjasa texts devoted to 
Brahman and secure only heaven for their readers; lastly the 
Matsya, Kurma, Linga, Siva, Skanda, and Agni are Saivite and 
styled as tdmasa. It is surprising to note that these latter are re¬ 
garded as leading to hell. 

The Brahma Purana, which is also called the Adi Purana, due 
to the place it occupies in the lists, is narrated by Suta to the sages 
that had assembled in the Naimisha forest. The major portion of 
the work is devoted to the glorification of sacred places, and a large 
section deals with the Krishna legends. It also contains a good 
deal of matter that is common to all the Puranas—the legends of 
creation of the world, of Manu and his descendants, of the kings of 
solar and lunar dynasties and descriptions of the earth and hell. At 
the end, there are a few chapters dealing with the srdddhas, the 
duties of the castes and asramas, and the rewards of Vishnu worship, 

The Padma Purana has come down to us in two recensions of 
which the Bengali recension consisting of five books is older than 
the An. SS No. 28 consisting of six books. Besides the usual accounts 
of creation, genealogies, and glorifications, the Purana contains 
numerous myths and legends including those of Sakuntala, Puru- 
ravas, Rama, and Rishyasringa. The genealogical account of this 


LITERATURE 


Purana agrees with that of the Matsya. The last book gives an 
account of the incarnations of Vishnu. Some of the books of the 
longer version contain chapters glorifying the Ganesa and Siva cults. 

Of all the Puranas the Vishnu Purana appears to have preserved 
the original text more faithfully, since it more or less satisfies the 
classical definition of a Purana. It declares Vishnu to be the highest 
being and the sole creator and preserver of the world. The first 
book gives the usual account of the creation of the world, of gods 
and demons, etc. Among the narratives and myths that it contains 
mention may be made of the churning of the ocean, and of Dhruva 
and Prahlada. The next book gives all sorts of fantastic descriptions 
of this world, the nether-worlds, and the heavens. In the third 
book we find an account of the Manus and the ages (manvantaras ). 
The fourth book gives, in general agreement with the Vdyu account, 
the genealogical lists of the solar and lunar dynasties and a prophecy 
on the Kali age, which is described in the last book. The inter¬ 
vening fifth book speaks of the divine Krishna and his marvellous 
adventures. 

The Vdyu Purana which is referred to by Sana in his Harsha - 
charita, may also be said to have preserved much of the original 
text. Besides the usual matter, it contains many legends in glori¬ 
fication of Siva whence its second name Siva Purana. The Narada 
Purana, on the other hand, propagates the Vishnu cult and has a 
purely sectarian character. It does not contain the usual creation 
accounts and the genealogies. 

The Bhdgavata Purana is the most popular in this class of 
literature, though chronologically it belongs to a very late period. 
Doubts have been expressed in India and elsewhere as regards the 
genuineness of this Purana, and some scholars have ascribed it to 
the grammarian Vopadeva. It contains twelve books of which the 
tenth, devoted to the life of Krishna, is widely read. The other parts 
contain the usual Purana material. It is important to note that 
Kapila, the founder of the Sankhya system, and Buddha appear as 
incarnations of Vishnu in this Purana. 

The Mdrkandeya Purana , in which the sage Markandeya appears 
as the narrator, is one of the oldest in Purana literature. In some 
of the sections neither Vishnu nor Siva is glorified, but the Vedic 
deities like Indra, Agni, and Surya receive attention. It is mainly 
narrative in character, and is comparatively free from the sectarian 
element which so often predominates in the other Puranas. 

The Agni Purana is so called because Agni himself is supposed 
to have narrated it to Vasishtha. Essentially it is a Saivite work 
dealing with the cult of Linga, Durga and Ganesa. On account of 


293 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the variety of its subject-matter-—astronomy and astrology, geogra¬ 
phy and politics, law and medicine, metrics and grammar, marriage 
and death customs, etc,—it has an almost encyclopaedic character. 

From the title of the Bhavishya Parana one would expect to 
find in it different prophecies. In fact, however, it mostly describes 
the Brahmanica! rites, duties of castes, and so on. The solar priests 
Bhojaka and Maga are mentioned in connection with the sun-worship 
of Sakadvipa which is related to the Zoroastrian sun and fire cult. 1 
The extant work is not the original Purana of that name; and, as 
has been shown by Th. Aufrecht, the text which appeared in Bombay 
in 1897 in the Snvenkata press is a ‘literary fraud’. 2 The Bhavishya 
Purana is mentioned in the Apasiamba Dharraasutra 3 and hence 
the original Parana may go back to the fourth century B. C. But 
the later Bhaihskya Pnrdiia from which the Matsya , Vdyu, and the 
Brahmdnda copied their accounts existed only in the third century 
A.D. 4 The Brahmavaivarta Purana shows Brahman to be the 
creator of the world. The second book shows prakriti resolving it¬ 
self into five goddesses—Durga. Lakshmi, Sarasvati, Savitrl and 

Radha. That this Purana is devoted to Krishna can be seen not 

♦ • « 

only from the last book which describes the life of the god, but 
also from the fact that the third book regards Ganesa as the incar¬ 
nation of Krishna. 

The Lihga and the varanas do not fit in with the original 
sense of the word Purana and seem to be the creations of a later 
age. The former is composed under the influence of the Tantras, 
and teaches the worship of Siva especially in the form of a lihga. 
The latter is mainly intended to be a manual for Vishnu-worshippers, 
though it contains legends of Siva, Durga, and Ganesa. 

The ancient Skanda Purana is probably entirely lost to us, 
What remains of it is only the name to which extensive works, 
said to he the Samhitas or the Khandas of the original Purana, and 
numerous Mahatmyas claim allegiance. By some of the offshoots 
of this work we are informed that the Skanda Parana consisted 
of six Samhitas teaching the worship of Siva. The famous KdAl 
Khanda belonging to this Purana deals with the sanctity of the 
city of Banaras and narrates various legends connected with the 
origin of the temples and tirthas round about the city. A single 
ancient Manuscript of this text in Gupta characters,- belonging to 
the seventh century A.D., was found by Haraprasada Sastri; but 
even this does not agree with the five characteristics of a Purana. 

1. D. H. Bhandarkar, El IX. p. 279. 2. ZDMG, LVII, pp. 276 ff. 

3. II. 9. 242-6. 4. Pargiter, A1HT, pp. 50-51. 


294 







LITERATURE 


Similarly the Vdmana Purdna can hardly be accepted as the 
original work bearing that name. A considerable portion is devoted 
to Linga-worship and there are many legends about Siva and Uma, 
Ganesa and Karttikeya. Of the four Samhitas which constitute the 
Kurma Purdna only the first has come down to us under that title. 
Here Vishnu in the form of a tortoise (Kurma) narrates the Purana 
to king Indradyumna. It no doubt treats of the five themes of a 
Purana, but there are many of the usual Puranic additions. 

The Matsya Purana is one of those few Puranas which have 
preserved most of the original matter. It is written in the form of a 
conversation between the fish ( matsya) and Manu whom the former 
saves at the time of the great flood. As in the case of the other 
Puranas even this work tells many legends, such as those of Yayati 
and Savitrl, and gives account of various festivals and rites, and 
glorification of sacred places. 

In the Garuda Purdna more emphasis is laid on various forms 
of Vishnu-worship. Like the Agni Purdna, this work too has as¬ 
sumed as encyclopaedic form. “The contents of the Rdmdyana, 
the Mahdbhdrata and the Harivamsa are retold, and there are sec¬ 
tions on cosmography, astronomy, and astrology, omens and 
portents, chiromancy, medicine, metrics, grammar, knowledge of 
precious stones ( ratnaparikshd) and politics (nlti). A considerable 
portion of the Yajnavalkya-Dharmasdstra has been included.” 1 
Funeral rites and ancestor worship, as well as funeral sacrifices 
for a Sat!, are also mentioned in this work. 

According to the Maltsya Purdna, the Brahmdnda Purdna was 
proclaimed by Brahman in glorification of the Brahman-egg. It is 
also supposed to have contained an account of the future Kalpas. 
The extant manuscripts, however, hardly agree with this descrip¬ 
tion, for they contain only glorification of places and hymns of 
praise. The Adhydtma-Rdmdyana is considered to be a part of this 
Purana. It teaches Vedantic monism and devotion to Rama as 
paths to salvation. 

Besides these Puranas there are certain texts called Upapuranas 
whose number is also stated to be eighteen. They are more or less 
the outcome of local cults and different religious sects. Among 
the works belonging to this class may be mentioned the Vishnu - 
dharmottara which is often quoted by Alberuni. It is a Vaishnava 
work from Kashmir, and besides the usual themes it also deals with 
fine arts like dancing, singing, painting and sculpture, and numerous 
other subjects. Among other things the Bnhad-Dharma Purdna 


1. Winternitz, HIL, I, pp. 576-77. 


295 








] 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 

mentions even Valmiki and Vyasa, besides Kapila and Buddha, as 
incarnations of Vishnu. The Kalki Purdna describes the deeds of 
Vishnu at the close of the Kali age. 

The original authors of the Puranas, like those of the epics, 
were the Sutas or the bards. 1 Thus it is that in almost all the 
Puranas the Suta Lomaharshana or his son Ugrasravas (the Sauti) 
appears as narrator. Later on, however, they fell into the hands 
of priests who were not well educated and lived on worship in 
temples or places of pilgrimage. These temple priests helped them¬ 
selves by adding to the Puranas a great deal of new matter which 
served their own ends. Some of these additions have a local tinge 
so that “the Brahma Purdna may represent the Orissa version of 
the original work, just as the Padma may give that of Pushkara, 
the Agni that of Gaya, the Vardha that of Mathura, the Vdmana 
that of Thaneswar, the Kurma that of Banaras, and the Matsya that 
of Brahmans on the Narmada.” 2 The present Puranas are thus more 
or less sectarian, carrying on propaganda in favour of a particular 
deity or a place sacred to that deity. 

The importance of the Puranas for the development of later 
Hinduism can never be overrated. In fact “they afford us far greater 
insight into all aspects and phases of Hinduism—its mythology, 
its idol-worship, its theism and pantheism, its love of God, its philo¬ 
sophy and its superstitions, its festivals and ceremonies, and its 
ethics, than any other works.” 3 From the historical point of view 
the most important Puranas giving ancient royal genealogies are 
the Vayu , Brahmdnda , Matsya and the Vishnu A Besides these, some 
of the Puranas—and especially the Brahmdnda, Vayu and the Matsya 
—give also the genealogies of important Brahmana families, which 
are, however, defective. These genealogies of kings and sages 
are the only available specimens of early historical works in Sans¬ 
krit literature, as has been mentioned above. 6 

According to the orthodox tradition recorded in the Atharva- 
veda and BnliaddrarHjaka Upanishad the Puranas are of divine 

1. On the original nature of the Puranas, Pargiter observes as follows: “It is 
highly probable that they (i.e. Puranas) consisted at first mainly of ancient 
stories, genealogies, ballads, etc., which formed the popular side of ancient 
literature, and were quite probably in Prakrit originally. In fact, it seems to 
me that they were largely in an old literary Prakrit used by the higher 
classes, but that, as the spoken languages diverged in time more and more 
from Sanskrit through political vicissitudes, that literary Prakrit became unintel¬ 
ligible, while Sanskrit remained the only polished language of Brahmanic 
Hinduism. Hence it was natural that this literature should be Sanskritized, 

if it was to be preserved-’ DKA, Intr. p. xvii, footnote 2. For the theory 

that the Puranas were originally composed in Prakrits and later on turned into 
Sanskrit, cf. op. cit. pp. x-xi, and App. I. Contra, Pusalker, Acharya Dhmva 
Comm. Vol., Part III, pp. 101-104. 

2. JBBRAS, Centenary Memorial, Volume, p. 73. 

3. Winternitz, H1L, I. 529. 4. AIHT, p. 77. 5. Vol. I, pp. 47 f. 


296 








LITERATURE 


origin. Even in the Purana texts the chief speaker, who is generally 
Lomaharshana or his son Ugrasravas, is represented to have gathered 
his information through Vyasa from the Creator himself. 

Though the Purana is mentioned in Vedic literature, the actual 
existence of the Puranas can be traced only from the Sutra period 
onwards. Thus some of the Dharma Sutras like that of Gautama 
enumerate the Puranas among the sources of law, while the Apas - 
tamba refers to Bhavishyat Purana. These and other references to 
Purana in Mahdbharata seem to indicate that the original Puranas 
existed long before the Christian era. 

That the present texts hardly represent the original Puranas 
can be inferred from the disparity between the old definition of 
the Puranas and their present contents. On the one hand, some 
of the Puranas largely ignore the five subjects mentioned in the 
definition, while on the other, the definition altogether ignores the 
common factor in all the existing Puranas, viz. their glorification of 
Siva or Vishnu and places sacred to them, description of the duties 
of the castes and dsramas, and so on. 

It has been held by some 1 that there was originally a single 
Purana out of which the present texts have been evolved. While 
this may be doubted, it may be more reasonably surmised that 
several Purana texts existed before the Christian era which, revised 
and modified in later times, gave rise to the modern texts. The 
principal object of this revision was to introduce the sectarian doc¬ 
trines which had come into prominence and to add extensive 
chapters of Hindu rites and customs so as to make them authorita¬ 
tive works like the Dharmasastras. The Puranas may thus be re¬ 
garded as a deliberate attempt to bring the theistic religions like 
Vaishnavism and Saivism within the pale of orthodoxy by combining 
the new doctrines with a respect for Vedic rituals, customs, and 
beliefs, specially the orthodox ideas of caste and order (Varnasrama). 
These had fallen into disuse or comparative neglect, partly on ac¬ 
count of the rise of the new sectarian religions, which were all more 
or less anti-Vedic and anti-Brahmanical in their inception, and partly 
on account of the large influx of foreign elements in the Hindu 
population in the wake of the successive ^invasions of the Greeks, 
Parthians, Sakas, and Kushanas. Necessity was therefore felt of 
a new class of popular literature which would reconcile the moderate 
heterodox cults like Vaishnavism and Saivism to the old social cus¬ 
toms and rituals as far as practicable. The Puranas were thus 
revised and modified in order to serve as the religious texts of that 

1. Jackson, JBBRAS . Centenary Memorial Volume, pp. 67 ff; Blau. ZDMG, 62, 
p. 337; Pargiter, A1HT pp. 33 fl, 49 fl. 


297 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


large section of the people who, though devoted worshippers of 
Siva and Vishnu, were at the same time too much attached to Vedas 
and Smritis or Dharmasastras, particularly the Varnasrama, to 
abandon them altogether for the sake of the new creed. Thus a 
new class of sectarians arose who may be called Smarta-Saivas or 
Smarta-Vaishnavas. They originated what may be called modern 
Hinduism and the growth in their number led to the mutilation 
and multiplication of Puranic texts. 

Dr. Hazra 1 has made a painstaking analysis to show how the 
different sections, dealing with orthodox rites and customs in the 
manner of Smritis, were added to the different Puranas at widely 
varying periods. Although his conclusions cannot claim finality 
they may be regarded as the best working hypotheses for the present. 
The earliest and latest probable dates for such additions to some 
of the important Puranas according to his theory are as follows: 

3rd to 5th cent, A,D. (some por¬ 
tions may be much later) 

3rd to 5th cent. A.D. 

3rd to 4th cent, A.D, 

6th cent. A.D,' 

6th to 7th cent, A.D. (some por¬ 
tions may be as late as A.D. 1000 
or even later) 

As Dr. Hazra has pointed out, “there were two main stages in 
the development of the Puranic Smriti materials’In the first stage, 
between the third and fifth century A.D,, “the Purapas dealt only 
with those topics on Hindu rites and customs which formed the 
subject-matter of the early Smritis, like those of Manu and Yajna- 
valkya. In the next stage from about the sixth century A.D., they 
dealt with new topics relating to gifts, glorification of holy places, 
vraia (vow), pujd (popular worship), consecration of images, 
sacrifices to the planets and their appeasement, etc,” 

It would appear from what has been said above that the Purana 
texts, as we have them now, were written at different periods. It 
is difficult to fix their chronology, even with an approximate degree 
of certainty. The six Puranas, whose dates have been discussed 
above, were probably older than others, but as Vayu, Brahmdnda, 
Vishnu, and Bhdgavata Puranas mention the Guptas among the 
royal dynasties, they could not have been finally redacted before 

1. Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, Chs. II-IV. A 
chronological table of the Smriti-chapters in the Puranas is given on pp. 174-189. 

208 


1. Markandeya Purana 

2. Brahmanda and 

• • 

3. Vayu Puranas 

4. Vishnu Purana 

• • 

5. Bhagavata Purana 

6. Matsya Purana 








LITERATURE 


the fourth century A. D. The Vdyu Purdna is, however, mentioned 
in HarsYia-charita and was therefore earlier than the seventh cen¬ 
tury A.D. The same is probably the case with Mdrkandeya Purdna 
as Baiia’s Chandisataka and Bhavabhuti’s Mdlatimadhava were 
pfbbably inspired by the well-known section of this Purana known 
as Devl-mahatmya or Chandl. As Alberuni mentions the eighteen 
Puranas, they must all have been in existence before A.D, 1000, 
though there might have been additions and alterations in some 
of them at a later date. 

2. DHARMASASTRA AND ARTHAsASTRA 

Reference has already been made 1 to some of the Dharma- 
sastras which were probably compiled in or shortly before this 
age. The most important Dharmasastra that can be definitely 
referred to this period is that of Katyayana to which a detailed 
reference will be made later in connection with Law and Legal 
Institutions. His work, which may be dated between A.D. 400 and 
600, has not survived, arid is known only from quotations. The same 
is also the case with the Smriti of Devala who was probably a con¬ 
temporary of Katyayana. Next in point of importance comes the 
work ascribed to Vyasa which may be dated between A.D. 200 and 
500. The work comprises about 250 verses divided into four chap¬ 
ters. From citations made by Apararka and others it would appear 
that Vyasa also dealt with rules of procedure and Vyavahdrapadas 
and that his doctrines in most respects agreed with those of 
Narada, Katyayana, and Brihaspati. The extant Pardsara-smriti, 
a recast of an older text, has several verses identical with Manu 
whose views it frequently quotes. By the ninth century it had 
attained considerable authority; so much so that it may be placed 
before A.D, 500. The Brihatpardsdra, however, is only a later re¬ 
cast of the Smriti of Pa rasa ra. Pulastya, Pitamaha and Harita also 
wrote their works between A.D. 400 and 700. But our knowledge 
of these authors too does not extend beyond the quotations that we 
come across in other works on Dharmasastra. 

The beginnings of the extensive exegetical activities of the 
commentators can also be traced to the closing years of this age 
which can claim to have produced at least one of the important 
commentators, viz. Asahaya, whose Bhashya on the Narada-smriti 
has been published. From quotations elsewhere, it would appear 
that he commented on the works of Gautama and also of Manu. 
Asahaya has been quoted by Medhatithi and may, therefore, be 
placed between A.D. 600 and 700. The only notable work on Artha- 

1. See Vol. IT, pp. 254 If, 


209 





TOE CLASSICAL AGE 


sastra during this period is the Nltisdra of Kamandaka who probably 
flourished in the first half of the eighth century A.D. 1 

3. PHILOSOPHY 

The principal systems of philosophy and their tenets are des¬ 
cribed in Chapter XVIII. The earliest work expounding the Sdnkhya 
system that we have is the Sdnkhya-kdrikd of Isvarakrishna who 
is sought to be identified with Vindhyavasa who corrected his 
master’s views as expressed in the Shashti-tantra in a set of seventy 
verses which Vasubandhu criticized in his Paramarthasaptati 2 
This would make Isvarakrishna only an older contemporary of 
Vasubandhu, who flourished in the fourth or fifth century A.D. 3 
At any rate he cannot be later than 557-569 (and must be much 
earlier) when the Karikd with a commentary was translated into 
Chinese. This work has been commented upon by Gaudapada whose 
identity with the author of the Kdrikds on the Mdndukya Upanishad 
is rather doubtful. There is also a commentary on this work by 
Vachaspati, the versatile genius who flourished about the middle of 
the ninth century A.D. 

The earliest commentary on the Yogasutra of Patanjali is that 
of Vyasa who gives therein a standard exposition of the Yoga prin¬ 
ciples. He is probably earlier than Magha. In the middle of the 
ninth century Vachaspati wrote his Tattvavaisdradl on Vyasa’s 
Bhdshya. Another important commentary on the Sutras is the 
Rdjamdrtanda by Bhoja (c. A.D. 1000). 

The Nyayasutra. The earliest expositor of the Nydyasutra — 
Pakshilasvamin Vatsyayana—may be referred to the middle of the 
fourth century A.D. in view of the fact that while he combats the 
views of Nagarjuna, he is himself criticized by Dihnaga from the 
Buddhistic point of view. The works of this Dihnaga, the chief of 
the early Buddhistic logicians, are not extant, though most of them 
are still preserved for us in the Tibetan language into which they 
were translated. Dinnaga’s date can be fixed with tolerable cer¬ 
tainty from the circumstance that he is said to have learnt the 
principles of the Mahay ana school of Buddhism from Vasubandhu. 
Dihnaga may, therefore, be dated a little earlier than c. A.D. 400. 
Vatsyayana, in his turn, found a champion to uphold his views in 
Uddyotakara, a staunch pdsupata of the Bharadvaja gotra, who 
flourished in the seventh century A.D. In his Nydyavdrttika , 
Uddyotakara has defended Vatsyayana against the attacks of Dih¬ 
naga. Dharmaklrti composed his Nydyahindu to defend Dihnaga 
against Uddyotakara, who was probably his senior contemporary. 4 

1. Winternitz, GIL, III. 526. For further discussion about this work, cf. Ch. XVI. 

2. Keith, HSL, p. 488. 3. See p. 14, also n. 2. 

4. Keith, HSL, p. 308, and preface, p. xxii. 


300 






LITERATURE 


The Nydyabindu was shortly afterwards commented upon by Dhar- 
mottara which again was commented upon by Mallavadin. Nor were 
the Jain authors unrepresented in the literature of this period. 
Divakara, 1 famous as a great poet and the first systematic writer 
on Jain logic, has written among other works a very valuable treatise 
qn logic—the Nyayavatara in thirty two stanzas. He stands between 
Haribhadra on the one hand and Dharmakirti on the other, and 
may therefore be placed in the last quarter of the seventh century 
A.D. About a century later was composed the Parikshdmukhasutra 
of Manikyanandin who has based it on Akalanka’s Nydyavinischaya. 

The Padarthadharrnasangraha of Prasastapada is much more 
than a mere commentary on the Vaiseshikasutra of Kanada. It gives 
quite a new exposition of the subject-matter and makes important 
additions to the original work. Prasastapada seems to have been 
influenced by Vatsyayana or Dihnaga and may therefore be placed 
in the fifth century A.D. All the commentators of Prasastapada 
belong to the tenth century and later. The only other name to be 
noted here is that of Chandra whose Dasapadartha-sastra is preserved 
for us only in a Chinese version of A.D. 648. 

The MimdmSa sutra 2 of Jaimini and the earliest extant Bhnshya 
thereon by Sahara have been assigned to the fourth century B.C. 
and first century B.C., respectively, by some, while others assign 
a somewhat later date. After Sahara we find this system branching 
into two main schools championed by, and named after, Prabhakara 
and Kumarila, to which, later on, a third school was added, that 
of Murarimisra. Kumarila, generally known as Bhafta, the author 
of the Slokavarttika , the Tantravarttika, and the Tuptika, together 
forming his commentary on the Bhashya of Sabara, is earlier than 
Sankara and may be assigned to the seventh century A.D. 

The other school was championed by Prabhakara, generally 
known as Guru. He is said to be earlier than Kumarila, and is 
known to have composed his Brihati, a commentary on Sahara’s 
Bhashya , about A.D. 600. His pupil Salikanatha, refers to Dharma¬ 
kirti in his famous work, the Prakaranapahchikd, which is a popular 
manual of the Prabhakara system. His commentary on the Brihati 
is known as Rijuvimald. 

Of the Vedanta writers only three great names belong to this 
age. Gaudapada, 3 the reputed Paramaguru (teacher’s teacher) of 
Sankara, is the first systematic exponent of monistic Vedanta. He 

1. Better known as Siddhasena Divakara. For his date, works, etc., see Dr. P. L. 
Vaidya’s Intro, to his edition of the Nyayavatara , Poona. 

2. Radhakrishnan, IP, II, p. 376. 

3. For his date, works, etc., see Vidhushekhara Bhattacharya, Agamasastra, Intro¬ 
duction. 


301 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


is generally assigned to the end of the seventh or the beginning* of 
the eighth century A.D. Walleser, 1 however, would place him 
somewhere about A.D, 550 on the ground that a Kdrikd from Gauda- 
pada’s work is quoted in the Tibetan translation of the Tarkajvdld 
of Bhavanatha. The identity of this author of the Mdndukyo- 
vanishat-kdrikd with his namesake, the commentator of the Sdnkhya - 
kdrikd of Is varakrishna, is doubtful. 2 The views expounded in these 
Karikds, the phraseology used, the use of particularly Buddhistic 
technical terms and of the illustration of the Alata-chakra to ex¬ 
pound his theory create a strong impression that the author of the 
Karikds was influenced by Buddhistic teachings and works. It is 
certain, however, that he was not a Buddhist. Bhartrihari’s Vdkya- 
padlya has been already noticed. From this 'work it would appear 
that his views were akin to those of Sankara though he frequently 
betrays his Buddhistic tendencies. 

4. KALIDASA 

We may begin the account of secular literature with Kalidasa, 
the most brilliant luminary in the literary firmament of the Gupta 
Age who has shed lustre on the whole of Sanskrit literature. He 
is by common consent the greatest poet and dramatist that ever lived 
in India, and his works have enjoyed a high reputation and popu¬ 
larity throughout the ages. Yet, curiously enough, we know hardly 
anything about his life, and have no definite knowledge of the time 
when he flourished. As usual, numerous legends and anecdotes 
have gathered round his name, but they possess little historical 
value. These represent him as an idiot in early life who later 
became a great poet through the grace of goddess Kali, and died in 
Ceylon at the house of a hetaera . He is said to be one of the nine 
learned men (nine jewels) who graced the court of king Vikrama- 
ditya (or king Bhoja of Dhara). It is, however, almost certain that 
the different scholars who are referred to as his associates could not 
all have been his contemporaries. Most scholars regard as a histori¬ 
cal fact his association with king Vikramaditya of Ujjain, and the 
deliberate change in the name of the hero of the Vikramor vasty am 
from Pururavas to Vikrama lends colour to it. Some regard this 
Vikramaditya as the ruler who, according to well established tradi¬ 
tions, defeated the Sakas in 58 B.C. and founded an era-—the well- 
known Vikrama samvat —to commemorate this fact. 3 Most modern 
scholars, however, do not believe that there was any king Vikrama¬ 
ditya in 58 B.C., or that Kalidasa flourished at so early a period. 

1. See Radhakrishnan, IP, II, p. 452 n.2. 

2. Nor can the author of a commentary on the Uttara-giid and also on Durgd - 
saptasatl be identified with the author of the Mandukya-Upanishat-Karika. 

3. See Vol. II, Ch, X. 


302 






LITERATURE 


The general opinion seems to be that he lived at the court of a 
Gupta Emperor, most probably Chandra-gupta II, who was also 
known as Vikramaditya, and, having defeated the Saka satraps, could 
well lay claim to the title Sakari which is associated with the Vikrama¬ 
ditya of tradition. The only definite data about the date of Kalidasa 
are that he must have flourished after Agnimitra (c. 150 B.C.), who 
is the hero of one of his dramas, and before A.D. 634, the date of 
the famous Aihole Inscription which refers to him as a great poet. 
If, as is held by competent scholars, some verses in the Mandasor 
Inscription of A.D. 473 indicate knowledge of Kalidasa's works, the 
lower limit of his date may be fixed at about A.D. 450. The theory 
that Kalidasa flourished in the Gupta Age is now generally accepted 
and is supported by various arguments, viz. that he borrowed from 
Asvaghosha and Vatsyayana’s Kdmasutra and revised Setubandha 
of the Vakafaka king Pravarasena II, that his works contain veiled 
allusions to the names of Gupta Emperors, that he knew of the 
Huna invasion, etc. 1 But these are all mere conjectures which 
do not carry conviction. While it may be permissible to argue that 
“the balance of evidence suggests that the end of the fourth century 
A.D. is the most probable date of the poet”, 2 we must admit that 
the evidence adduced in support of it is neither definite, nor direct 
and decisive. The safest course is to hold that Kalidasa flourished 
some time between 100 B.C. and A.D. 450. 

A close perusal of his works shows that Kalidasa was a pious 
Brahmin of Ujjain and a liberal Saiva by belief, who had acquired 
a knowledge of the various branches of Brahmanical learning and 
gathered vast experience by travelling far and wide throughout 
India. He shows his familiarity with the whole range of Vedie 
literature, the philosophical systems, especially the Sankhya and 
Yoga, the various works on Dharmasdstra , the Kdmasutra , Ndtya- 
sdstra, Vydkarana , Jyoiihsastra, and even fine arts like music, draw¬ 
ing, and painting. His versatile genius, his acquaintance with court 
etiquette, his shrewdness, his modesty, not without a due sense of 
self-respect, and his poetic talent are very well reflected in his works 
which are all permeated with a feeling of ease and contentment— 
“perfect satisfaction with the existing order of things”. 

The best known work of Kalidasa is his drama Sdkuntala. 
This play is, by common consent, 3 one of the best not only in 

1. For detailed discussion of this problem and references, cf. Mirashi, Kalidasa (in 
Marathi), Nagpur, 1934, pp. 9-41. For a recent attempt to justify the first 
century B.C. theory, see Prof. K. M. Shembavanekar, JUD , 1, 4, pp. 232-42. 
Dr. C. K. Raja denies Kalidasa’s association with Vikramaditya and makes him 
a contemporary of king Agnimitra ( IHQ , XVIII. 128). 

2. NHIP , VI. p. 405. 

3. Oldenberg, however, criticizes it severely. Cf. Die Literatur des altcn Indien, 
Berlin. 1903, p. 261. AlIC, p. 311. 


.303 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Sanskrit literature, but in the literature of the world. Kalidasa 
has based the play on the story of Sakuntala as found in the Mahd - 
bhdrata, but he has breathed quite a new and vital spirit into it by 
introducing several slight but effective changes in the original and 
also by adding to it some altogether new characters and incidents of 
high dramatic power. Thus, for example, while the Mahabharata 
shows Kanva as having gone out merely for fetching flowers etc.j 
Kalidasa sends him, on a plausible ground, further away, thus post¬ 
poning his return to the hermitage to an indefinite future. Similarly 
in the original we find Sakuntala herself narrating the story of her 
birth to the king and later on bargaining with him before accepting 
his suit. Kalidasa, with his dramatic instinct, has made Anasuya, 
a friend of Sakuntala, narrate Sakuntala’s past (and that too with 
proper decorum), while the idea of bargaining has been altogether 
dropped, only to give us an exquisitely charming picture of the 
working of love in the heart of a young innocent maiden. The 
curse of the wrathful Durvasas, the loss of the ring, the scene of 
the fisherman and the concluding portion of the play, which charm 
the audience by creating alternately an atmosphere of suspense and 
relief, are the product of Kalidasa’s genius. By these dramatic 
touches Kalidasa has created a magnificent edifice out of the brick and 
mortar supplied by the Mahabharata. He has succeeded, not only in 
rescuing the hero and the heroine from the crudities under which 
they labour in the original and bestowing on them the vital qualities 
required in a hero or a heroine worth the name, but also in giving us 
a very fine portrait of an ideal king in Dushyanta, and a bewitchingly 
transporting picture of the life of a truly Indian maiden in all the 
three important stages. A loving sympathy with nature forms the 
background of this play in which Kalidasa has also displayed his 
mastery in delineating sentiment, his wonderful skill in characteri¬ 
zation, construction of plots, and creating dramatic situations, as 
well as his great lyrical gifts. The dramatic power and poetic 
beauties of this unique work have elicited the highest praise and 
admiration from scholars all over the world. 

Before the Sakuntala, Kalidasa had already composed two plays, 
the Malavikdgnimitra and the Vikramorvasiya . The former is a 
court comedy wherein king Agnimitra falls in love with a maid in 
the service of one of his queens and, in spite of repeated obstacles 
on the part of the queen, at last succeeds in his project with the 
help of his friend, the Vidushaka. There can be little doubt that 
this is the first play 1 composed by the poet as is apparent from 
the way which he has in the prologue tried to plead on behalf 
of the c nava Kdvya’ (new poem). In spite of several defects, the 

1. Dr. De however demurs. Cf. 1HQ, XVI, p. 403; HSL, p. 136. 


304 




LITERATURE 


play bears the unmistakable stamp of Kalidasa’s workmanship; and 
his authorship of it can hardly be doubted. The Vikramorvasiya 
is a fairy-tale of the love of a celestial nymph and a mortal. Mme 
de Willman-Grabowska considers this to be the last of Kalidasa’s 
plays and remarks that “It already shows signs of commencing 
decline”. 1 Some hold that the play was very probably composed on 
the occasion of the installation of Kumara-gupta as Yuvaraja. 2 
Welding together the elements of the ancient Vedic legend found 
in the Rigveda and the Satapatha-Brahmana and its versions in the 
Vishnu and Bhdgavata Puranas and possibly also in the Brihatkatha , 
Kalidasa has introduced therein several incidents and scenes of his 
own creation. In this play he seems to have concentrated more on 
characterization than on plot-construction as he has done in the 
Mdlavikdgnimitra. But the most debated portion of the play is Act 
IV where the hero, distracted by separation, gives vent to his feel¬ 
ings in short, sweet, and pathetic lyrics. These in themselves are 
exquisite, but they detract from the movement and dramatic power 
of the composition. But it is this very defect that constitutes for 
posterity the peculiar charm of the work and has won for Kalidasa 
such a high degree of popularity. 3 

Kalidasa’s genius shone with equal brilliance both in drama and 
in poetry or Kavya. His two Mahakavyas, Raghuvamsa and Kumd¬ 
rasambhava, and the lyrical poem Meghaduta are universally re¬ 
garded as gems of Sanskrit poetry. The Kumdrasambhava in 18 
cantos tells us the story of the birth of Kumara, the son of Siva 
and Parvati, who led the celestial forces and vanquished the demon 
Taraka. Commentators like Mallinatha have commented only on 
the first eight cantos of this poem, and one of them has in clear terms 
recorded the belief that the poem was left incomplete owing to the 
curse of Parvati whose anger was provoked by the descriptions in 
Canto VIII. It is also evident that the later cantos are much in¬ 
ferior in poetic power and hence they are not regarded as the 
work of Kalidasa. It would seem, therefore, that Kalidasa left this 
work incomplete; for the title of Kumdrasambhava requires that 
at least the birth of Kumara should be included in the poem. Kali¬ 
dasa has displayed considerable skill in delineating the main charac¬ 
ters and the poem contains several passages of enchanting beauty, 
such as the Rativilapa, the conversations between Parvati and God 
Siva in the guise of a Jatila, the description of the Himalaya in 
Canto I, and of the sudden advent of spring in Canto III. The poet. 

1. Cf. AI1C, p. 312. Hillebrandt also is inclined to take the Vikramorvasiya as 
the last of Kalidasa’s plays. Cf. Hillebrandt, Kalidasa, Ein Versvch zu seiner 
literarischen Wilrdipunp, Breslau, 1921. p. 87. 

2. Cf. MM. Mirashi, Kalidasa , p. 161. 3. AUC, p. 313. 

305 

C.A.--20 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


however, has exposed himself to criticism at the hands of rhetori¬ 
cians like Anandavardhana by indulging in what may be called sacri¬ 
legious description in the eighth canto. 

In the Raghuvaihsa the poet has set himself the onerous task 
of describing the varied incidents in the lives of several monarchs 
who, though possessed of some common characteristics, must needs 
have individuality of their own; and it must be admitted that he 
has achieved his purpose in a superb manner. The merit of Raghu - 
vaihsa as a Mahakavya is unquestioned and the Indian estimate of it 
is well reflected in the fact that our poet is pre-eminently known as 
Raghukara (author of Raghuvaihsa) . This poem, which is based on 
the Rdmaya ua and some Puranas, describes in all thirty kings of the 
solar race among whom Raghu appears to be singularly fortunate 
in having not only illustrious ancestors but also illustrious descen¬ 
dants for at least three immediate successors. That seems to be 
the reason why Kalidasa named his poem after Raghu. This poem, 
as we have it, is evidently also incomplete, breaking off with the 
description of the lascivious Agnivarna. In spite of the reports of 
the existence of some more cantos it is likely that Kalidasa composed 
it only up to the end of the 19th canto and left it there owing to 
illness or death. This poem also, like its compeer Kuindrasambhava, 
has several enchanting sections, the most appealing among them 
being the Aja-vilapa. 

Among the lesser poems of Kalidasa, the Ritusamhara is now 
generally accepted as his first work, though some have recently ex¬ 
pressed doubts about his authorship of it. 1 The neglect by rhetori¬ 
cians and commentators and also its inferiority in some respects 
need not, however, detract from its genuineness. Its subject is so 
simple and so devoid of opportunities for characterization, etc. that 
it naturally failed to evoke much interest. It consists of six cantos 
describing the six seasons bearing ample testimony to the poet’s 
minute observation and love of nature. 

The Meghaduta is, however, among the most fascinating little 
poems that ever came to be written in Sanskrit. In a little over 
a hundred verses the poet has displayed the vitality and versatility 
of his poetic genius. An imaginary Yaksha, separated from his 
beloved through his master’s curse and maddened with pangs of 
separation at the sight of a cloud, requests this cloud to carry his 

1. Keith, JRAS, 1912, pp. 1066-70; 1913, pp. 410-2; Macdonell, HSL, p. 337; Hille- 
brandt, Kalidasa, pp. 66 ff; and Kielhorn, Biihler, Hultzsch and von Schroeder, 
among others, accept Kalidasa’s authorship of the Ritusamhara. Walter, Indica, 
HI, PP- 6 IT; Nobel, ZDMG, 66, pp. 275-82; JRAS, 1913, pp. 401-9; Harichand, 
Kalidasa et VArt Poetique de VInde, pp. 240 ff, and others dispute the authenti¬ 
city of the Ritusamhara. 


306 






LITERATURE 

message from Ramagiri—for that was where he was in exile—to 
Alaka, the abode of his beloved, and describes in detail the path 
it should follow and the various places of interest that it would 
traverse. The poet has chosen the Mandakranta metre and has thus 
given us a complete picture in each one of the constituent verses. 
This poem has been variously called a lyric, an elegy or even a 
monody, though Sthiradeva would insist on calling it a Mahakavya, 
while Vallabhadeva would call it only a Khandakavya. Ramagiri, 
where the Yaksha was in exile, is now identified with Ramtek near 
Nagpur. The story of Ashadha-krishna Ekadasi, Yoginl-mahatmya, 
is said to be the source of the theme of this poem. This exquisite 
little poem has evoked the highest admiration of literary critics of 
all ages. According to a modern European writer “it is difficult 
to praise too highly either the brilliance of the description of the 
cloud’s progress or the pathos of the picture of the wife, sorrowful 
and alone ”. 1 

As to the comparative merits of the different poetical works of 
Kalidasa, the same critic observes: “Indian criticism has ranked 
Meghaduta highest among Kalidasa’s poems for brevity of expres¬ 
sion, richness of content, and power to elicit sentiment, and the 

praise is not undeserved.To modern taste the Kumdrasambhava 

appeals more deeply by reason of its richer variety, the brilliance 

of its fancy and the greater warmth of its feeling.Though inferior 

in some slight degree to the Kumdrasambhava , the Raghuvariisa 
may rightly be ranked as the finest Indian specimen of the Maha¬ 
kavya as defined by writers on poetics ”. 2 

Kalidasa is “unquestionably the finest master of Indian poetic 
style”, and his inimitable skill in the use of the ‘simile* has become 
proverbial. His charming and graceful diction, the refinement of 
his language and sentiments, his minute observations of man and 
nature, his innate sense of beauty, his masterly use of metaphors 
and other figures of speech, his elevation of thought and sugges¬ 
tiveness of expression have immortalised him, and as has been aptly 
expressed, his works will endure so long as human beings retain a 
taste for great literature. 

Both in drama and poetry Kalidasa stands not only unsurpassed 
but even unrivalled. Nevertheless many other poets and dramatists 
flourished during the age and some of them were not unworthy 
successors of the great poet. We may now briefly refer to them. 

1. Keith, HSL , 86. 2. Ibid, 86, 87, 92. 

307 





I 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 

5. DRAMA 
(i) Bhavabhuti 

In the field of drama, the best among Kalidasa’s successors is 
undoubtedly Bhavabhuti, alias Srikantha, surnamed Udumbara, 
who was born of Nilakaritha and JatukarnI at Padmapura in 
Vidarbha (Berar). His grandfather Bhatta Gopala had performed 
the Vajapeya sacrifice. Jnananidhi was the name of his guru. 
According to Kalhana’s RdjataranginV Bhavabhuti was the court- 
poet of Yasovarman, king of Kanyakubja, who was defeated by 
Muktapida Lalitaditya of Kashmir some time after A.D. 736. From 
Gaudavaho 1 2 3 it would appear as if Bhavabhuti had not witnessed the 
downfall of his patron. He, therefore, cannot be placed much later 
than the beginning of the eighth century A.D. In his plays, Bhava¬ 
bhiiti styles himself Pada-wakya-prarnanaj'na, which would show 
that he was well up in Vydkarana, Mimdmsd, and Nyaya. He also 
appears to have been an adept in Vedanta and Veda. In one MS 
he is identified with Urnbeka and stated to be a pupil of the famous 
Mimamsaka Kumarila Bhatta. This identity, however, is not accept¬ 
ed by Kane who places his literary activity between A.D. 700 
and 730.3 

Of the three plays that he wrote, two are based on the 
Rdmayana , while the third is a social drama—a prakarana in ten 
acts. The Mahdvira-charita in seven acts depicts the earlier life of 
Rama—Rama the warrior; while the Uttarardma-charita, the last 
from his pen, also in seven acts, deals with the story of the Uttara - 
kdnda of the Rdmayana. The Mdlati-madhava treats of the love 
between Madhava and Malatl through different stages of develop¬ 
ment, and is often described as the ‘Romeo and Juliet’ of India with 
a happy ending. 4 5 

Though in grace and felicity of language, simplicity, and 
perspicacity, Kalidasa stands unrivalled, Bhavabhuti may be said 
to surpass him in depicting sentiments—particularly the karuna 
(pathos or tenderness). His style is rugged, his works abound in 
descriptive passages and long compounds out of proportion, and yet 
one must admit that he excels himself when he treats of pathos. 
The love he treats of is more spiritual than sensuous, 6 and hdsya 
(humour) is rare in his works,—he being almost unique in banish- 

1. IV. 144. 

2. Verse 799. 

3. Cf. Kane, KHDS, I. p. 263. But as against this, read Sahkara-Gurukula-Patrika. 
Vol. II, Part 8; “Problems of identity—Mandanamisra Suresvara” by P. P. S. 
Sastri, and also his article in Festschrift Kane, pp. 405-7. Keith (SD, p. 187) 
places Bhavabhuti “somewhere about A.D. 700”. 

4. Klein, Geschichte des Dramas, III, p. 135; Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 235. 

5. Cf. Winternitz, GIL , III, p. 236. 


308 




LITERATURE 


ing off the stage that standing source of humour in Sanskrit plays, 
the Vidushaka. Owing to the abundance of long compounds in the 
prose speeches in his works it has been surmised that they were 
meant more for being read than staged. 1 This supposition, however, 
may not be well founded. 

A precursor of Bhavabhuti in depicting pathos is Dhiranaga of 
Aralapura who composed a play in six acts and on the same theme 
as that of the Uttarardma-charita. He is said to have lived earlier 
than c. A.D. 500. 

(ii) Sri-Harsha 

Next in point of time is §ri-Harsha or Harsha-vardhana, king 
of Kanauj, whose career has been described above. 2 Himself a poet 
of no mean order, he was a great patron of learning and letters, 
and had great scholars like Bana, Mayura, and Divakara at his court. 
Three plays, viz. the Ratndvall, the Priyadarsikd, and the Ndgdnanda, 
are ascribed to him. Doubts have, however, been raised regarding 
Harsha’s authorship of these plays, mainly on the strength of a stray 
remark of Mammata in his Kdvyaprakdsa, and the explanation of 
the same by some of the commentators. Thus Hall and Biihler 
ascribed all the three plays to Bana, while Pischel ascribed them to 
Dhavaka, a contemporary of SrI-Harsha. Cowell, on the other hand, 
refused to admit the common authorship of all of them and ascribed 
Ratndvali to Bana, Ndgdnanda to Dhavaka, and Priyadarsikd to some 
unknown author. 3 But that all these emanated from the same pen 
is shown by their prologues, and also by various other characteristics 
which they have in common with one another. Nor is there any 
very substantial ground for doubting the authorship of Harsha who 
was known as an author from very early times—nay, even in his 
own day. Thus even Bana praises his patron Harsha as being 
endowed with poetic genius. I-tsing (end of the seventh century 
A.D.) records that king Slladitya (i.e. Harsha) versified the story 
of Bodhisatva Jlmutavahana and acted it on the stage. Damodara- 
gupta in his Kuttanlmata ascribes the RatndvaU to a royal author. 

The Ndgdnanda, a Nataka in five acts, depicts the story of 
Jlmutavahana. Though Buddhistic in its colourings, its main pur¬ 
pose would seem to be to bring about a harmonious blending of 
Buddhism and Hinduism when we take into account the parts played 
by Garuda and Gaurl therein. This, by common consent, is the last 
work of Harsha. The remaining two are very similar to one another, 
being for the most part composed in imitation of Kalidasa’s 
Mdlavikdgnimitra, and having almost the same plot. But in the 
Priyadarsikd the author seems to have gained confidence enough 

1. Ibid, p. 232. 2. See Chapter IX. 3. Konow, ID, p. 74. 


309 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


to introduce into his play a new device, the garbha-tidfaka (drama 
within a drama)—a device adopted for the first time in.the history 
of Sanskrit Drama and repeated very rarely after Harsha. In fact 
we know of only two writers in the whole range of Sanskrit 
dramatic literature who have used this device—Bhavabhuti in his 
Uttararama-charita and Raj&sekhara in his Bdlardmayana . Ratnd- 
vali , on the other hand, is said to be the most perfect play from the 
point of view of the classical canons of dramaturgy, and may, 
therefore, be said to be the earlier of the two, its excellences being 
accounted for by the fact of its being a closer and more successful 
imitation of Kalidasa. The place of Harsha among the play-wrights 
has, therefore, to be judged from the Nagananda which he had not 
composed after any model. This play, however, appears to be a 
patchwork of three parts , 1 and the humour in the second part is 
certainly not of a high order. Credit, of course, is due to Harsha 
for having succeeded in investing this play with a living interest 
and a strong appeal to its readers. Harsha’s poetic powers also are 
apparent in the verses in these plays. 

(iii) Bhatta Ndrayana and others 

To the same period belongs Bhatta Narayana of handily a Gotra, 
surnamed Mrigaraja. Wilson identifies him with a Brahmin of that 
name who was invited by Adisura from Kanauj to Bengal. As the 
legend of Adisura has no historical basis, we need not attach much 
importance to the various dates proposed for Bhatta Narayana, 
ranging from the latter half of the seventh to the ninth century A.D. 
on the strength of the identification of king Adisura. Bhatta 
Narayana probably flourished before; eighth century A.D., for he is 
quoted by Anandavardhana and Abhinavagupta. His Venlsamhara 
is a Nataka in six acts based on the Mahdbhdrata story of Bhlma 
fulfilling the vow of avenging the insults heaped upon DraupadI by 
the wicked Duryodhana. The chief sentiment of the play is Vlra 
(heroic) and the author has shown considerable skill in creating a 
fine drama out of the crude materials derived from the Mahdbhdrata. 
It may be noted that like the Ratndvall , the Venlsamhara also strictly 
conforms to the rules of dramatic structure as laid down in books 
on dramaturgy and is, on that account, held in high esteem . 2 

The Rdmdbhyudaya is another play, hitherto unavailable, 
narrating the story of Rama in six acts, composed by Yasovarman. 
This play is mentioned by Anandavardhana in his Dhvanydloka and 
also in the Dasarupaka , Ndtyadarpana, Ndtaka-lakshana-ratna-kosa , 
Gringdra-prakdsa and Sahitya-darpana . 3 This Yasovarman, like SrV 

1. Cf. Winternitz, GIL. Ill, p. 228. 2. Cf. Schuyler, BSD. Intr., p. 12. 

3. Cf. De, HSL, p. 299. 


310 




LITERATURE 


H&rsha, is a royal poet and is very probably to be identified with the 
patron of Bhavabhuti. Another royal play-wright to be noted is the 
Pallava king Mahendra-varman (c. A.D. 600-630) who has com¬ 
posed a farce named the Mattavilasa J To a somewhat later period is 
probably to be assigned Anangaharsha Matraraja, a Kalachuri king, 
son of Narendravardhana. He is often referred to as Mayuraja and 
must have flourished before the close of the eight century A.D. as 
Damodaragupta in his Kuttanimata 2 laments his death. From 
Abhinavagupta’s references, we know that this royal author 
had composed two plays—the Udattaraghava based on the Ramayana, 
and the Tdpasa-vatsardja relating the story of Udayana, Vasavadatta 
and Padmavatl. Reference has already been made to Kaumudi- 
mahotsava 3 a nameless drama ascribed to Vijjaka, who has been 
identified with Vijaya-bhattarika, wife of Chandraditya, eldest son 
of Pulakesin II and brother of Vikramaditya I. 4 Various dates, 
ranging from the fourth to “later than the eighth century”, have 
been assigned to the play, which appears to belong to our period. 
The work is a mediocre production. 

6 KAVYA 

The Kirdtdrjunlya and the Sisupdlavadha, two of the famous 
five Mahdkavyas, belong to this period. Bharavi, the author of the 
former, is mentioned in the Aihole inscription (A.D. 634) along with 
Kalidasa, and is also cited in the Kdsikd-vritti (c. 650). He is, 
perhaps, not much earlier than Bana who, however, ignores him. 
He may, therefore, be placed in the latter half of the sixth century 
A.D. His poem in eighteen cantos, giving the Mahdbhdrata story of 
the combat between Arjuna and god Siva in the garb of a Kirata, 
displays vigour of thought and language and lofty eloquence of 
expression. At the same time it evinces Bharavi’s attempts at the 
artificialities of the Chitrakavya, and also several mannerisms which 
—unfortunately—are freely and zealously copied by later poets. 
Magha, son of Dattakasarvasraya, grandson of Suprabhadeva, was 
the first poet to vie with Bharavi in every respect in his Sisupdla- 
vadha. Suprabhadeva is said to be the minister of a king whose 
name is variously read as Varmalata, Varmalakhya, Dharmanabha, 
Dharmalabha and so on. We have an inscription of one king Varma¬ 
lata of A.D. 625, so that Magha may be placed in the latter half of 
the seventh century A.D. This very well accords with the fact that 
Magha in his Sisupdlavadha 5 makes a clear reference to the 
Kasikd-vritti and the Nydsa thereon, and also knew the Nagdnanda 
of Harsha. 6 His reference to Buddha and his teaching would seem 

5. See above, p. 260. 2. Verse 777. 3. See p. 5. 

4. Cf. Kaumudi-mahotsava (Edited by Sakuntala Rao, Bombay, 1952), pp. 11-12. 

5. II. 112. 6. Cf. Keith, HSL, p. 124. 


311 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


to show that he was much in the company of the Buddhists. 1 
Traditional opinion about the workmanship of Magha is well 
expressed in the saying “In Magha exist (all) the three qualities.” 2 
Magha is rich in vocabulary and an adept in the various devices of 
poetry. He also displays great erudition in his work. And yet it 
must be said that the age of artificiality ushered in by Bharavi has 
been carried a step further by Magha. 

Among other poets of lesser repute may be mentioned Buddha- 
ghosha whose identity with the famous Pali scholar Buddhaghosha 
can hardly be seriously maintained. 3 His Mahakavya Padya- 
chuddmani, a poem of some merit in ten cantos, describes the life 
of Buddha. From Kalhana we hear of a poet Mentha at the court 
of king Matrigupta of Kashmir from whose Hayagrwavadha one 
verse is quoted by Rajasekhara and Kshemendra and one more by 
Raghava in his commentary on the Sdkuntala. The date of Mentha 
depends upon that of Matrigupta who, as the predecessor of Pravara- 
sena, may be assigned to the latter half of the sixth century A.D. 
About a century later (between c. A.D. 675 and 775) flourished 
Kumaradasa who, in his Jdnakiharana, in twenty cantos, has narrated 
the story of the abduction of Slta by Ravana. 

Slightly earlier is Bhatti, the author of the Bhattikavyai or the 
Rdvanavadha composed under the patronage of king Sridharasena 
of Valabhi. The terminus ad quern for Bhatti is therefore A.D. 648, 
the last known date of the last of the four Srldharasenas of Valabhi, 
or rather A.D. 650, the earliest known date of his successor. This 
poem is interesting as Bhatti has illustrated in it the rules of 
grammar as given by Panini in his Ashtddhydyi, and has also devoted 
one full canto to Alankaras. His identification with Vatsabhatti, or 
even with Bhartrihari (the name Bhatti is Prakritized form of 
Bhartri), is unfounded. He is certainly earlier than Magha, and was 
known to Bhamaha. On the same lines and not much later, was 
composed the Rdvanarjuniya by the Kashmirian poet Bhaumaka. 
This poem of twenty-seven cantos narrates the story of Arjuna 
Kartavirya and Ravana, and at the same time illustrates almost the 
whole of the Ashtddhydyi. Reference may be made to the Ghata- 
karpara Kdvya, a poem describing in 22 stanzas a message which 
a young wife sends by the cloud to her absent husband at the 
beginning of the rains. It thus describes a situation the reverse of 
that depicted in the Meghaduta; and is held by some to be earlier 
in date than that poem. But this view is not generally accepted. 
This poem, along with others like Nalodaya and Sringaratilaka, has- 
been attributed to Kalidasa, but this is highly improbable. 

1. Cf. Krishnamachariar, HCSL, p. 156. 

2 i.e. Upama, Artha-gaurava, and Pada-lalitya. 3. Keith, HSL, p. 143. 


312 





LITERATURE 


Lastly we may mention a class of poetical works called Satakas, 
i.e. consisting of one hundred stanzas. The best known are the three 
Satakas of Bhartrihari. The texts of these are found to vary with 
different versions. The author, Bhartrihari, 1 is identified with the 
author of the Vdkyapadiya who is said to have died in c. A.D. 650. 
The author of the Vdkyapadiya , we know, was a Buddhist, while 
that of the Satakatraya shows no trace of this faith. But we are told 
that Bhartrihari was constantly wavering in his creed so that the 
identity of the grammarian with the poet Bhartrihari is not improba¬ 
ble. His Sringara-, Niti-, and Vairdgya-satakas are good specimens 
of fine and forceful poetry. They deal with the general aspects of 
these three topics (i.e. love, wise conduct and indifference to worldly 
enjoyment), and contain sage advice on general conduct of life 
couched in memorable words. Slightly later comes Amaru, the 
famous author of the centum named after him. The Amaru-sataka 
also is found in four different versions having only fifty-one verses 
in common. In these verses Amaru or Amaruka has dealt with 
various aspects of love particularly depicting the relation of lovers. 
This Sataka has been expounded as illustrating types of heroines or 
some figures of speech. 2 But Amaru does not seem to have con¬ 
cerned himself much with either. Mayura, a contemporary of Bana, 
has given us a Mayura-sataka, also called the Surya-sataka, to 
compete with which Bana wrote his Devi-sataka. To about the same 
period belongs Matanga Divakara, of whom we hear only from 
anthologies, and who has been identified with the Jain writer 
Manatuhga, the author of the Bhaktamara-stotra, and perhaps also 
Siddhasena Divakara, the author of the Kalydnamandira^stotra . 3 

7. FABLES AND ROMANCES 
We can easily trace several stages in the evolution of fables as 
a form of literature. There are first the stories or tales which are 
told for entertainment or amusement. Then they are definitely 
framed for inculcating moral lessons and useful knowledge. Lastly 
they are reduced to a literary form in which the story is related in 
prose but verses are introduced to emphasize the point of the tale 
or fix the moral in the memory. Such a fable is gradually enlarged 
and complicated by what may be called a process of emboxment, 
i.e. by interweaving different fables into a single whole. This is 
easily done by making the different characters in the story support 

1. Ibid, 176. 

2. It may be interesting to note that Jnanananda has expounded this Pataka as 
conveying erotical as well as philosophical significance. 

3. It is doubtful whether this is the work of the famous author of the Nyaytiratarn 
(last quarter of the seventh century A.D.). This latter has composed thirty- 
two stotras each comprising thirty-two stanzas. For this author, his date, 
etc., see Dr. P. L. Vaidya’s Introduction to his edition of the Nyayavatdra. 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


their points of view by allusions to other fables which they are 
naturally asked to develop at some length. 

Although the different elements of such literature existed in 
India from a very early period, no earlier actual examples in 
Sanskrit are known than Panchatantra. The original of this work, 
now lost, goes back to the early centuries of the Christian era. It 
attained wide popularity all over India and was translated in most 
of the languages of the world, as will be related in Chapter XXIII. 
In India we have three distinct versions: the north-western, which 
can be traced in Brihat-kathd-manjafi and Kathasarit-sdgara; two 
Kashmir versions called Tantrakhydyika and two Jain recensions 
based on a text akin to it; a southern version from which was derived 
the Nepalese Panchatantra and the well-known Hitopadesa. All the 
extant versions, except Tantrakhydyika, whose date is not known, 
belong to a period later than that dealt with in this volume. The 
only other work of this type that has been assigned to this period 
is the Brihatkathd of Gunadhya, composed probably in Paisdchi 
prose. Its date is not later than A.D. 500, though some place it much 
earlier,-—even in the first century A.D. This is, however, quite con¬ 
jectural. 1 The work is irretrievably lost. 

After short stories come the longer and more elaborate and 
artificially narrated stories in the works of great masters like Dandin 
or Bana. These Romances are either based on historical facts or are 
purely imaginary. This was the main point of distinction that 
Amara 2 drew between the two classes of works going by the 
names of Akhydyika and Kathd, both of which are included under 
the term Romance. The other points of distinction which Bhamaha 3 
sought to draw between the two are flatly denied by Dan<Jin, who 
even goes to the length of declaring both these as being only two 
names for one and the same class of works. 4 The next attempt 
to distinguish between the two is that of Rudrata; and later on, bf 
Viivanatha, the author of the Sdhitya-darpana, 5 who bases his 
views on Bana’s Harsha-charita and Kddambairi which their author 
has designated Akhydyilcd and Kathd respectively. But even these 
attempts are futile; for the points of real distinction stated there are 
very flimsy and have not been regarded as such by any of the later 
writers. Amara’s view of this matter, therefore, seems to be the 
soundest. And the same view again would seem to be endorsed by 
Bana when he compares the Akhydyika and the Kathd to a ‘coSy 

1. Keith, HSL, p. 268. 2. Cf. Amarakosa, I. vi. 5-6. 

3. Cf. his Kdvydlaihkara, I. 25-29. 

4. Cf. “Tatkath&khayiketyekd jatih samjnadvaydhkita”-Kdvyddarsa , I. 28a. 

5. Cf. Rudrata, Kavyalamkarasutra, XI. 20-27; Sahityadarpana, VI. 332-6. 


314 





LITERATURE 


bed’ and ‘a young lady full of. love approaching the bed’ respec¬ 
tively. 1 

The oldest name in this branch of literature is that of Dantfin. 2 
The theory that Dandin. was a resident of Kanchi, that he flourished 
under the Pallava kings, and that Ratnavarman (or Rajavarman) 
referred to by him is a Pallava prince, is no more than a mere 
hypothesis based on not very firm ground. For, the verse 3 on which 
the theory mainly rests is a riddle so that, in the absence of definite 
evidence any solution that is offered cannot but be mere guess 
work. 

Dandin, the author of Kdvyddarsa and the Dasakumdra-charita , 
is earlier than Bana and even Subandhu, as is suggested by his 
comparative simplicity. The geographical data in the Ddsakumdra- 
charita also seem to point to a date anterior to the empire of Harsha- 
vardhana. 4 His Kdvyddcirsa is very probably earlier than 
Bhamaha. Tradition ascribes to Dandin three works, of which the 
Dasakumdra-charita may belong to the youthful Dandin, and the 
Kdvyddcirsa is probably the outcome of his mature age. As for the 
third, Pischel takes it to be the Mrichchhakatika, while others hold 
that it is the Chhandovichiti that is referred to in the Kdvyddarsa 
itself. There is also an allusion to the Kaldparichchheda in the 
Kdvyddarsa. But it is more likely that both the Chhandovichiti and 
Kaldparichchheda are merely the names of the chapters—and not 
independent works—which Dandin wanted to include in his Kdvyd¬ 
dcirsa; while Dandin’s authorship of the Mrichchhakatika becomes 
highly doubtful since the verse on which the theory is based is found 
to be common not only to the Mrichchakafika and the Kdvyddarsa, 
but also to the Charudatta which is definitely from the pen of Bhasa. 
From quotations in Bhoja’s Sringdra-prakdsa 5 it would appear that 
the third work of Dandin is the Dvisandhdna-kdvya, a poem with 
double entendre narrating simultaneously the stories of the two 
great epics of India. We have various imitations of this Dvisan - 
dhanakdvya abounding in greater feats of artificiality as seen in 
what are called the Vilomakdvyas. The Avantisundari-Kathd is 
another work which has been ascribed to Dandin by scholars who 
doubt his authorship of Dasakumdra-charita. But it is difficult 6 to 
accept the former as a work of Dandin and reject his authorship 
of the latter. Of the three parts of the Dasakumdra-charita , the 

Piirvaplthikd (introduction) and the Uttaraplthilcd (conclusion) are 
\ _ ^_ _ ^ 

1. Read introductory verses 8 and 9 of Bana’s Kddambarx. 

2. Read Dr, De’s paper in Festschrift Kane, pp. 112-144. 

3. Kdvyddarsa, III. 114. 

4. Collins, The Geographical Data of the Raghuvamsa and Dasakumaracharita, 
p. 46. 

5. See Krishnamachariar, HCSL, p. 461, n.5. 

6. See Keith, HSL. Preface, p. xvi. 


315 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


not from the pen of Dandin. But this does not go against the Dasa~ 
kumdra-charita proper being the work of Dandin. 

In the Dasakumdra-charita , as the name implies, the hero 
(prince Rajavahana) and his nine companions, who were separated 
and passed through strange vicissitudes of fortune, being again re¬ 
united, relate to each other their strange adventures. This device 
gives a sort of unity to diverse stories which treat of different types 
of men and women belonging to all classes of society and in different 
walks of life. Dandin shows in this work great powers of characteri¬ 
zation and drawing realistic scenes of life. His style is easy and 
unaffected and full of wit and humour. 

Later than Dandin, but earlier than Bana, is Subandhu, the 
author of the Vdsavadattd, which must have been composed before 
A.D. 608-9, as it is referred to by Jinabhadra in a Bhashya finished 
in that year. 1 Subandhu would thus appear to be only an older 
contemporary of Bana. His Vdsavadattd is a fine Kathd —a story of 
love and romance, comparable to Bana’s Kddambarl, with whom he 
shares all the merits and defects of the prose form. Long involved 
constructions, unusual words, use of epithets after epithets with the 
verb held back for pages together, unusually long compounds, and 
fondness for details and descriptions even to the neglect of the main 
narrative and action, are the defects with which Bana is charged. 
But we should remember that Bana wrote mainly for the upper 
classes, and that too in an age when vigour (which is defined as 
abundance of compounds) was looked upon as the main characteris¬ 
tic of good prose. Passages in the simple style are not wanting in 
the works of Bana. In his fondness for detail again he is typically 
Indian. In arts like sculpture, painting or music, and even in nature, 
may be noticed a world of difference between the east and the west. 
Fullness of details is the characteristic of the east. And if Weber 
compares Bana’s work to 'an Indian wood’, Gray, after mature study, 
is inclined to liken Subandhu’s work to “India’s own architecture, 
where the whole structure is so overlaid with minute detail that 
the eye forgets the outlines of the building in amazement at the 
delicate traceries which cover it.” 2 

Bana’s gratness can very well be seen from the fact that his 
works supplied ample material for later critics to base their theories 
on. Thus it was on the basis of his works, that Rudrata and others 
sought to lay down the points of distinction between Kathd and 
Akhydyikd. It was again after him that several varieties of prose 
such as Kalikd, Muktaka , Churnaka and Padyagandhi came to be 
recognised, whereas Dandin knows of no such varieties. The box 

1. POC, XIII, Part II, pp. 113-4, 2, Gray, Vdsavadattd, Intro., p. 27. 


3 1 f> 




LITERATURE 


system again, though old, is yet given a new life by Bana who has 
combined his boxes into one inseparable whole unlike those in works 
like the Panchatantra. So far as this technique is concerned he 
makes a decided advance even over Dandin who has shown little 
improvement in his Dasakumdra-charita in this respect. 

Besides the Kddambari and the Harsha-charita, which depicts 
the life of his patron Sri Harsha of Kanauj, there are two other 
works ascribed to Bana, viz. the Pdrvati-parinaya J and the Chandl- 
sataka. On the strength of a solitary reference by a commentator 
of the Nalachampu, Bana has also been credited with another play 
called the Mukutataditaka. 

8. POETICS AND METRICS 

The earliest writer in the field of poetics whose work has v come 
down to us is Bhatti. He is not known to have written any independ¬ 
ent treatise on poetics. But one full canto of his famous Ravana- 
vadha is devoted to the illustration of the Alankaras. The close 
resemblance 2 between the Rdvana-vadha 3 and Bhamaha’s Kavyd- 
lankdra 4 would favour the priority of the former over the latter. 
It is quite certain that Bhatti is earlier than Dandin and that he is 
not to be identified with Bhartrihari. Attempts to identify him with 
Vatsabhatti also are futile for want of any very definite ground in 
their support. A comparison of Bhatti’s treatment of the figures 
of speech with that of Bhamaha or of Dandin would show that 
he worked independently and was indebted to neither of these two 
great writers. 6 

Dandin’s Kdvyddarsa and Bhamaha’s Kdvydlankdra are two 
great works on poetics which have exercised great influence on 
subsequent writers. There is a keen controversy about the chrono¬ 
logical relation between the two, some holding Bhamaha to be the 
earlier and others the opposite view. Bhamaha’s date may be fixed 
about A.D. 700 and he was probably later than Dandin. 6 

Both Dandin and Bhamaha are supposed to have written on 
metres also, but there is no reliable evidence. 

Varahamihira, who died in A.D. 587, was himself a great versifier 
and employed quite a large number of Classical Sanskrit metres 
in his Brihat-samhitd and Brihaj-jatakci. He devotes an entire 

1. Pdrvati-parinaya, however, is really the work of Abhinava Bana named 

Vamana Bhatta Bana, the court poet of Vemabhupala (fifteenth century).— 

De, HSL, p. 299; Krishnamachariar, HCS L, pp. 215, 542. 

2. See Kane, HAL, p. xxxix; HSP, p. 116; Dasgupta, HSL, p. 529. 

3. XXII. 34. 4. II. 20. 5. See Kane, HAL , pp. xiv ff; HSP, p. 71. 

6. For the chronological position of Bhamaha and Dandin, see Kane, HSP, 

pp. 9G-125; Dasputa, HSL, pp. 530-3; De, SP . I, pp. 64-70; Keith, HSL, pp. 375-6. 

31 7 











I 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 

chapter 1 of the Brihat-sarhhita to the illustration of about 60 such 
metres. Here he introduces the names of the metres in the illustra¬ 
tive stanzas, but nowhere does he define a metre. He displays his 
knowledge of the Prakrit metres such as Gatha, Skandhaka, MagadhI 
and Gitaka, and gives their original Sanskrit names, Viz. Ary a, 
Aryagiti, Vaitaliya and Narkutaka respectively. 

Virahanka’s Vxittajatisamuchchaya is the next work on metres, 
both Sanskrit and Prakrit (in some cases even Apabhraihsa), which 
is composed in the Prakrit language for the most part. 2 Virahanka 
is very careful in defining the older Dvipadis of 4 lines each which 
by the time of Hemachandra had come to be considered as obsolete. 
Like Jayadeva, he too mentions the graphical representation of short 
and long letters almost in the same words. Besides, he gives all 
the different varieties of the Prastara and drops the Vedic metres 
altogether. 

9. LEXICOGRAPHY 

On the technical side also the Classical Age has given a rich 
harvest of works on various scientific subjects, though it cannot be 
said to have marked the beginning of any new branch as such. Thus 
lexicography in India can be traced back to the Vedic Nighantus, 
though we hardly come across any lexicon in the real sense of the 
term until we come to Amara’s Ndmalingdnusdsana, usually called 
the Amarakosa . From its commentators Kshirasvamin and Sarva- 
nanda we know that Amara was preceded in this field by Vyadi, 
Dhanvantari, Vararuchi, Katya or Katyayana, and Vachaspati, among 
authors, and by the Trikdnda, the Utpalinl and the Mala. Amara 
laid under contribution not only the Ndmamdtratantras and the 
Lingamatratantras , but also medical lexicons like that of Dhanvan¬ 
tari. But his greatness can be realised when we consider that like 
Panini’s Ashtadhydyi his work also threw into oblivion all its pre¬ 
decessors. Tradition makes Amara one of the nine jewels at the 
court of king Vikrkmaditya whose very identity it has not yet 
been possible for scholars to fix beyond all doubt. He is “known as 
a poet, and was certainly a Buddhist who knew the Mahdydna and 
used Kalidasa.” 3 His date is uncertain but he probably flourished 
before the eighth century A.D. 

The frequency with which Amarakosa is quoted by commenta¬ 
tors and the very large number of commentaries that have been 
composed upon it are convincing proof of the wide popularity 
enjoyed by this lexicon. The oldest extant, and at the same time 
the most important, commentary is the Udghdtana composed by 

1. Chapter 103. 2. Published in JBBRAS, 1929; 1932. 

3. Winternitz, GIL. Ill, p. 411; Keith, HSL, p. 413. 

318 


LITERATURE 


Kshlrasvamin, who quotes Rajasekhara and Bhoja and is quoted by 
Vardhamana and in the Ganaratnamahodadhi. He must, therefore, 
be placed in the eleventh century A.D. Gauda Upadhyaya and 
Giribhoja are the earlier commentators mentioned by him. The 
other important commentators are Sarvananda Vandyaghatlya of 
Bengal who composed the commentary called Tikasarvasva in 
A.D. 1159; Subhuti (or Subhutichandra) whose Kamadhenu 1 is 
extant only in its Tibetan version; and Brihaspati Rayamukutamani 
(or simply Rayamukuta) who wrote his Padachandrikd in A.D. 1431. 
Nor are commentators wanting in later centuries. Thus to the 
seventeenth century belong Narayanasarman (A.D. 1619), Rama- 
natha Vidyavachaspati (A.D. 1633), and Mathuresa Vidyalamkara 
(A.D. 1666), while still later are Mahadeva, Mahesvara and others. 

•Amara has followed the Vedic Nighantus in having a homony¬ 
mous section after the main body of the book consisting of synonyms, 
though there is hardly any other point of similarity between the 
two. Perhaps contemporaneous with Amara is the Anekartha * 
samuchaya 1 2 by Sasvata in which the homonyms are arranged 
according as the explanation takes a whole verse, a half verse, or a 
quarter verse, and finally come the indeclinables. The Kosa in the 
Agni Parana is, on the face of it, nothing but Amara’s lexicon 
abridged and rearranged. 

The Nighantu of Dhanvantari in its original form must 'have 
preceded the Amarakosa; but in its extant form it must be ascribed 
to a later date. 

10. GRAMMAR 

The rise of the Chandra and Jainendra—two of the several 
systems of Sanskrit grammar 3 —marks this age. Chandra or 
Chandragomin, the founder of the former, was not only a close 
student of the great Acharyas of the school of Panini, but has fully 
utilized their works in an attempt to evolve a system of grammar 
free from the taditional Brahmanical element. He was a Buddhist 
and his grammar was very popular in Kashmir, Tibet, Nepal and 
Ceylon. The earliest and the latest references- to this school are 
those made by Bhartrihari in his Vakyapadlya and by Mallinatha in 
his commentary on the twenty-fifth stanza of Kalidasa’s Meghaduta 
respectively. The Kdsikd-vritti (c. A.D. 650) has borrowed without 

1. MSS of this commentary have been noticed by Prof. P. K. Gode, ABORI, XVI, 
pp. 313 f. For Subhuti’s date, read his paper in Kuppuswami Sastri Comm. 
Vol. pp. 47-51. Also see NIA, II, p. 414. 

2. R. Sarma ( Kalpadrukosa , intr. p. xxv) argues in favour of its being older than 
Amara. 

3. For these in general, see Systems of Sanskrit Grammar by Dr. S. K. Belval- 
kar, Poona. 


319 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


acknowledgement several sutras from Chandragomin’s work. Again 
Vasurata, the preceptor of Bhartrihari, who is said to have passed 
away about the year A.D. 650, acknowledged Chandracharya as his 
master. This would give c. A.D. 600 as the probable date of Chandra. 
But this date may be pushed back by a century in view of his 
reference to a victory of a Jarta (Gupta?) over the Hunas which 
probably alludes to Skanda-gupta’s victory over them. 1 This work 
has 3100 aphorisms arranged into six chapters of four quarters each. 
The Jainendra Vyakarana which gave rise to the other school in 
this age is nothing but Panini’s Ashtddhydyi and Katyayana’s 
Vdrttikas thereon, condensed as much as possible with a number of 
ingenious shifts. Though ascribed to Jinendi'a, the real author of 
this work is Pujyapada Devanandin who probably composed it in 
A.D. 678. 

All other work in the field of Grammar during this period is 
in the form of commentaries. Bhartrihari, who according to I-tsing 
died in A.D. 650, is said to have commented on the Mahabhashya of 
Patanjali, though this commentary has not come down to us. His 
Vdkyapadiya is a metrical work on the philosophy of Grammar in 
three parts called Khandas. Jayaditya and Vamana wrote the famous 
vritti —the Kdsikd —on Patanjali’s work, and it was widely used by 
Chinese scholars for studying Sanskrit at the time I-tsing visited 
India (last quarter of the seventh century A.D.). Books I to IV seem 
to be the work of Jayaditya who presumably died before he could 
complete the work which was thereafter completed by Vamana. 
The Buddhist Jinendrabuddhi wrote his commentary—the Nytisa — 
on this Kdsikd. Magha in his Sisupalavadha 2 makes a definite 
reference to this Nydsa which may, therefore, be dated c. A.D. 700. 3 

11. MEDICINE 4 

The only great medical writer of this period is Vagbhata, who 
ranks only next to Charaka and Susruta. There were probably two 
writers of this name of whom we have two famous works—the 
Ashtdnga-sangraha and the Ashtdnga-hridaya-samhita. The former, 
like the Susruta, is in prose mixed with verse and is cited as the 
work of Vriddha Vagbhata. The latter, on the other hand, is entirely 
in verse and its author is referred to as Vagbhata only. The saying 
that Vagbhata is good for Kaliyuga while the others were good for 

1. See above, p. 26 f. 2. II. 112. 

3. One more name may be noted here—Bhlmasena. Prof. Gode has shown that 
he is earlier than A.D. 600. He is known and widely quoted.—cf NIA II, 

pp. 108 - 10 . 

4. For this section, see Jolly, Medicin, Strassburg, 1901 (Eng. trs. by C. G. Kashikar, 
Poona, 1951); Zimmer, Hindu Medicine, Baltimore, 1948; Filliozat, La Doctrine 
Classique de la Medecine Indienee: Ses origines et ses paralleles Grecs. 
Paris, 1949. 


320 





LITERATURE 


the earlier yugas (but not for the Kali age), shows that the works 
going under the name of Vagbhata are later than those of Charaka 
and Susruta. Among the two Vagbhatas there is no doubt that the 
author of the Ashfanga-hridaya-samhitti laid the other under con¬ 
tribution to a large extent. Vagbhata the senior is the son of Simha- 
gupta, grandson of Vagbhata, and a disciple of the Buddhist Avalo- 
kita. His work is in all probability referred to by I-tsing and may, 
therefore, be placed about the beginning of the seventh century 
A.D. It is not certain whether the younger Vagbhata was in any 
way related to the elder one, and very probably he is to be placed 
about a century later, i.e. about the beginning of the eighth century 
A.D. It may be noted that this younger Vagbhata also claims the 
same parentage as his elder namesake. Both these, however, were 
Buddhist and naturally enough the Ashtanga-hridaya-samhita was 
translated into the Tibetan language. 

There were also treatises on the diseases of animals. The best 
known is Hasty ay urveda' 1 which, in the form of dialogue between 
Romapada, king of Ahga, and the sage Palakapya, deals elaborately 
with the diseases peculiar to elephants. Some scholars refer it to 
fifth or even sixth century B.C., but others regard it as of much 
later date. The work was probably known to Kalidasa, though this 
is by no means certain. A similar treatise on horses— Asvasdstra — 
is attributed to the sage Salihotra. We have several later works of 
this class but their date is uncertain. 

12. ASTRONOMY 

Varahamihira, who flourished in the sixth century A.D., has 
preserved in his Panchasiddbantikd some account of five astronomi¬ 
cal works which were evidently regarded as authoritative in his own 
time. These five works or Siddhantas are referred to as Paitamaha, 
Romaka, Paulisa, Vasishtha and Surya. The first of these belonged 
to the pre-scientific period, but the other four show a more advanced 
stage of thought and spirit. It has been urged by some that all these 
four indicate a knowledge of, if not based upon, Greek astronomy. 
This seems to be undoubtedly true of the second and third, for 
though Romaka need not be taken to refer to the city of Rome itself, 
it certainly alludes to the Roman empire in a general sense. The 
Paulisa is also most probably derived from the name of Paulus 
Alexandrinus. It is to be noted that both these refer to the meridian 
of Yavanapura. The Siirya Siddhdnta , even in the revised form in 
which we have it, is said to have been revealed by Surya to Asura 
Maya in Romaka. This may be regarded as an evidence in favour 
of its western origin or at least Greek influence. Thus there cannot 

1. HBR, I. 295. 

321 

C.A.—21 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


be any reasonable doubt that the Indians had knowledge of Greek 
astronomy and were profoundly influenced by it. This view is 
supported by a careful examination of the contents of these works 
and also by various other considerations. 

Although we possess some texts bearing the names of the five 
old Siddhantas, they are ail later than Varahamihifa’s time, and 
evidently revised versions of the older texts, if not altogether new 
works under old names. The original texts, whose contents are 
noted by Varahamihira, may be placed between A.D. 300 and 500 
though seme of them are perhaps still older. 

Varahamihira refers to several other astronomers such as Lata, 
Siiiiha, Pradyurnna Vijayanandin, and, last but not the least, the 
famous Aryabhata. Of these a few works of Aryabhata alone have 
come down to us such as Aryabhatiya, Dasagiiikcisutra and 
Arydshtasata. Aryabhata was born in Saka 398 (A.D. 476), probably 
at Kusumapura or Pataliputra, and his Aryabhatiya was composed 
in A.D. 499. He was the first to treat Mathematics as a distinct 
subject and dealt with evolution and involution, area and volume, 
progressions -and algebraic identities, and indeterminate equations 
of the first degree. Aryabhata was also the first to hold that the 
earth was a sphere and rotated on its axis, and that the eclipses 
were not the work of Ra.hu but caused by the shadow of the earth 
falling on the moon. Both these views were rejected and severely 
condemned by later astronomers like Varahamihira and Brahma¬ 
gupta. Aryabhata also arrived at a “remarkably accurate value of 
tc, viz. 3.1416.” 1 

One of the most important features of Aryabhata’s mathematical 
system is his unique system of notation. It is based on the decimal 
place-value system, unknown to other ancient peoples, but now in 
use throughout the civilised world. Whether Aryabhata invented 
the system or merely improved on an existing one cannot be defi¬ 
nitely stated. But with the doubtful exception of Bakhshali 
manuscript, which is referred by some to c. A.D. 200, the earliest 
use of the system occurs in Aryabhatiya, and it is found in all later 
mathematical works. The importance of this system for the deve¬ 
lopment of science in general and of Mathematics in particular 
cannot be exaggerated. On the whole Aryabhata deservedly occu¬ 
pies a very high place among Indian astronomers and has had many 
followers and commentators. 2 

1. For Indian astronomy, cf. Keith, HSL, pp. 516 ff. Also cf. Bharatiya Jyotih - 

Sdstra by S. B. Dikshit, 2nd Edn., Poena, 1931. For Aryabhata and his pre¬ 
decessors, cf. Keith, op. cit, 517 ff, • 

2. For the divergent views on the origin of the decimal place-value system, cf. 
History of Hindu Mathematics by B. Datta and A. Singh (Lahore 1935), and 
also IHQ, III, 97 ff; 356 ff. 

322 









LITERATURE 


The next in order of time comes Varahamihira. He takes the 
Saka year 427 as the basis for calculations, so that he may be said 
to have flourished towards the close of the fifth century A.D. The 
view that he died in Saka 509 (c. A.D. 587) rests on a passage 1 of 
dubious authenticity. He has given us no less than six works on all 
the three branches into which he divides the Jyotisha-sastra, viz. 
Tantra (astronomy and mathematics), Hora (horoscope), and 
Samhita (astrology). His astronomical work Panchasiddhantikti has 
been mentioned before. His work on astrology, Brihat-samhita , is 
an encyclopaedia of useful information in various branches of 
knowledge, such as movements of heavenly bodies and their effect 
upon men, geography, architecture, construction of images, excava¬ 
tion of tanks, laying out of gardens, special characteristics of the 
different classes of women and animals, jewellery, augury, marriage, 
etc. He deals specifically with auspicious times for marriage in two 
separate works, the Brihadvivtihapatala and Svalpavivtihapatala, 
and a third work Yogaydtrd is devoted to omens about wars of kings. 
His works on Hora will be noted later. The next writer whose works 
are extant is Brahmagupta whose Brahmasiddhdnta was composed 
in Saka 550 (c. A.D. 628). His other well-known work Khandakhtidya 
was very probably composed in Saka 587 which is taken there as 
the base for calculations. He also seems to have composed the 
Dhytinagraha in seventy-two verses in the Aryti metre. “Brahma¬ 
gupta’s work covers very briefly the ordinary arithmetical opera¬ 
tions, square and cube roots, rule of three, interest, progressions, 
geometry, including treatment of the rational right-angled triangle 
and the elements of the circle, elementary mensuration of solids, 
shadow problems, negative and positive quantities, cipher, surds, 
simple algebraic identities, indeterminate equations of the first and 
second degrees, in considerable detail, and simple equations of the 
first and second degrees which are briefly treated. Special attention 
is given to cyclic quadrilaterals”. 

There were also many works on Horoscopy. Thus we know 
of the Partisan —big and small, the Jaiaka-sutra of Jaimini current 
in Malabar, the Bhrigu-samhitd , the Ntidigrantha, the Minardja- 
jtitaka, also known as the Yavanajataka, the Laghu- and the Brihaj - 
Jtitakas of Varahamihira and the Shatpanckdsikti of his son, Prithu- 
yasas. Among these, however, we know nothing definite about the 
dates of any but the last two. The two works of Varahamihira show 
distinct traces of Greek influence. 

1. “Nawdhikavanchasatasahkhyasake Vamhamihiracharyo divam gcitah” quoted 
by Dikshit, op. cit., p. 211. 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


13. MISCELLANEOUS 

In addition to the subjects mentioned above, there were others 
on which regular texts seem to have been written during this period, 
but they were all superseded by later works and lost to us. In parti¬ 
cular, mention may be made of such widely varying subjects as 
architecture, music, dancing, painting, and perhaps even the art of 
stealing. 

This inference is supported by the Kdmasutra (Art of love) 
of Vatsyayana Mallanaga. It appears from the introduction of this 
work that the subject of erotics was previously dealt with by a 
number of authors, whose names are also known from other sources 
but whose works are altogether lost. The date of Vatsyayana is 
uncertain, but he probably flourished in the fourth or fifth century 
A.D. though some scholars refer him to an even earlier date. The 
book deals with the subject in a comprehensive manner and throws 
much revealing light on the manners and customs of society. 1 The 
work is written in a style which may be regarded as midway 
between Sutra and Bhashya, and would have been partly unintelli¬ 
gible but for the excellent commentary Jayarnahgald by Yasodhara 
(thirteen century A.D.). 

14. CONCLUSION 

The broad and running survey of the Sanskrit literature pro¬ 
duced in the Classical Age clearly shows that great advance 
was made in literature on every side and in every branch. Some of 
the important sciences such as Grammar, Mathematics, Astronomy, 
and Astrology almost reached their fullest development in this Age; 
so much so that it forms what may be called the creative period 
after which they produced very little of permanent value. Similarly, 
this age was singularly fortunate in having produced the best 
authors and works in almost every branch of belles lettres. Thus 
we have Kalidasa who combines in himself poetic and dramatic 
talent of an exceptionally high order. He has produced not only 
two of the five famous Mahakavyas, and the best Sanskrit drama, 
but also the best small poem which evoked admiration and imita¬ 
tive efforts from his successors. The Uttarartima-charita, which 
ranks only next to his works, belongs to this period. Poets like 
Bharavi and Magha also shed lustre on this period. Even prose was 
carried to high perfection in this period under a band of able writers 
like Dandin, Subandhu, and Bana. But though the best in every 
branch was produced in this age, it must be noted that towards its 
close artificiality was slowly but steadily creeping into the domain 

1. Cf. Ch. XX. 


324 



LITERATURE 


of literature and was destined to eclipse and stifle all real art. In 
general, it may be said that this age was the Classical or Golden 
Age of Hindu learning and literature with glorious achievements in 
almost every branch of artistic and scientific literature. 

II. PRAKRIT 

The Svetambara Jain Canon and its exegetic literature in 
Ardha-MagadhI Prakrit, the few religious texts of the Digambara 
Jains of the South in the Maharashtrl and Saurasenl Prakrits, and the 
commentaries on Buddhist texts written in Pali constitute the most 
important Prakrit and Pali literature during the period under 
review. These have been discussed in Chapter XVIII and we may 
here refer only to a few works of outstanding importance outside 
the domain of canonical literature. 

Mention may first be made of independent religious narratives 
like the Vasudevahindi of Dharmadasa and Sanghadasa. This work 
is shown by Alsdorff 1 to contain numerous traces of the influences 
of the Brihatkatha of Gunadhya. Similarly a religious romance 
called T ctrangavati-kathd is known to have been written very early. 
It is mentioned in the Anuyogadvdra Sidra, which is itself a part 
of the Agama, fixed up at the Council of ValabhI. The author of 
this Romance is said to be Padalipta, who is also credited with the 
composition of a Prakrit commentary on a Praklrnaka called 
Jyotishkarandaka. Malayagiri mentions this commentary in his 
Tika of this work. But even comprehensive works on Jain Logic 
and Philosophy were composed in Prakrit during this period and one 
such is Siddhasena’s Sammatitarka Sutra. It consists of about 167 
Gathas divided into three chapters and is an important work on 
ancient Jain Nyaya. It is mentioned in Jinadasa’s Viseshachunii on 
the Nisitha Sutra, and also in the commentary called Dhavald, of 
Virasena, on a Digambara work called the Shatkhanddgama„ 

When the Pali and the Prakrit languages came to be progres¬ 
sively used for literary purposes, there naturally arose a tendency 
to preserve them in their purer form and so there arose grammars 
of Prakrits and Pali. Vararuchi’s Prakritaprakdsa and Chanda’s 
Prdkritalakshana are possibly the oldest among the grammars of 
the Prakrit languages; they are composed in Sanskrit and are 
moulded on the pattern of Panini. On the other hand, the grammar 
of the Pali language called Kdtydyanaprakarana was written in the 
Pali language itself. The author of this treatise is supposed to be 
Katyayana, who shows a close acquaintance with the Kasikd-vritti 
of Panini’s Ashtddhydyl and with the Kdtantra Vyakarana. But the 

1. Apabhramsa-Studien , Leipzig, 1937. 


325 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Kdtydyanaprakarana is not mentioned by Buddhaghosha in the fifth 
century A.D. and may have been composed much later. 

Even the votaries of Sanskrit language and literature some¬ 
times indulged in writing Prakrit poetry, both of the lyric and the 
narrative types. Specimens of the former are to be found in the 
large number of illustrations quoted from different Prakrit poets 
by Svayambhu in his work on Metres. 1 

Among the Prakrit Kavyas two deserve special attention, viz * 
Setabemdha and Gauda-vaho. The former is a long narrative poem 
written in the Maharashtri Prakrit. It is also known as Rdvanavaha 
(killing of Ravana) and describes the story of the Ramayana from 
the expedition to Lanka up to the death of Ravana and the recovery 
of Sita. Peterson was the first to suggest, from verse 15 of the 
Introduction to Harsha-charita , that the poem was composed by 
Pravarasena, though it is not unlikely that he was merely the patron 
of the real author. Even assuming that Pravarasena wrote the poem 
we cannot definitely identify him. He is identified by some with 
king Pravarasena II of Kashmir, and by others with the Vakataka 
king of the same name. 2 The work has also been attributed, though 
quite wrongly, to Kalidasa. It is written in the same artificial style as 
the Sanskrit Kavya and exhibits all its characteristic features. 3 

Vakpatiraja, the authoi* of Gauda-vaho, describes himself as a 
pupil of Bhavabhuti and was a court poet of king Yasovarman of 
Kanauj. The poem was written about A.D. 725 and is more of a 
panegyric than an historical poem which it claims to be. It contains 
information about the deeds of valour of the hero, i.e. king Yasovar¬ 
man, 4 interspersed with descriptions of landscapes and seasons, sun¬ 
rise and sunset, mountains, rivers and temples, in the manner of the 
Sanskrit Mahakavyas, but also mixed up with many mythical legends. 
Vakpatiraja’s style is generally free from artificial word-puns, though 
long compounds are not entirely wanting. He, however, excels in de¬ 
picting scenes from village life which is rarely seen in the earlier 
Kavyas. The present work, which runs into 1200 stanzas, is probably 
only an extract from the original poem, leaving aside the bare histori¬ 
cal parts which were not of much poetical value, or perhaps an abridg¬ 
ed form of the fuller poem which was never actually written. 

III. TAMIL 

The Tamil literature of the period is almost wholly influenced 
by the religious movements in South India which will be discussed 
in Chapter XVIII. It will suffice here to state that although Jainism 

1. Published in JBBRAS, 1935 and JUB , November, 1936. 

2. See above, pp. 182 ff. 3. Winternitz, GIL, III. 63. 4. See pp. 128 ff. 


320 







LITERATURE 


and Buddhism exercised strong influence at first, they had ultimately 
to yield to Saivism and Vaishnavism which together may be said to 
constitute orthodox Hinduism. 

From the sixth or seventh! century onwards, the Hindus found 
inspired champions of their creed in the many Saiva Nayanmars and 
the Vaishnava Alvars. These powerful forces of Hindu regeneration 
gradually succeeded in eliminating Jain influences and establishing 
on secure foundations the twin glittering edifices of Saivism and 
Vaishnavism. Join influences persisted for a considerable time in 
the Kannada country and contributed a glorious chapter to Kannada 
literature. Even in Tamil, stray Jain writers continued to enrich 
the literature with a new grammar, or a theological poem, or a 
didactic essay in verse; but supremacy in letters had for ever passed 
into the hands of the £aiva and Vaishnava poets. 

1. The Nayanmars and the Alvars 

The Saiva Nayanmars and the Vaishnava Alvars were simple- 
hearted bhaktas' rather than philosophical or theological pundits. 
The Supreme, whether approached in the first instance as &iva or 
Vishnu, was a beloved to be wooed with love and devotion, a king 
to be obeyed with simple reverence and affection. The Supreme 
revealed Himself, not to the proud ratiocinative intellect, but to the 
hungering soul that felt that without His grace it simply could not 
live! Religion threw off in the twinkling of an eye the gorgeous 
draperies of dialectic and the sack-cloth and ashes of pessimistic 
introspection. Religion became a simple and poignant human expe¬ 
rience; and the jiva and the Lord sought one another out, they 
would be together. The hitherto barred doors of Felicity were flung 
wide open, and the humblest of mortals found to his amazement 
that he could enter unafraid the sacred precincts, and claim and 
share the Fatherhood of God. These Nayanmars and Alvars, whether 
or not they were singers equally inspired, were all of them god- 
intoxicated people who transmitted their divine infatuation to 
millions of their contemporaries. But some of them were superla¬ 
tively gifted singers as well and have left behind an imperishable 
legacy of devotional poetry which has rarely been equalled in 
quantity and quality and never surpassed during the whole course 
of human history. 

We owe the collection and preservation of the devotional songs 
of the Saiva and Vaishnava saints to the indefatigable labours of two 
religious leaders, Nambi-Andar-Nambi and Sri Nathamuni. .The 
former arranged the available &aiva hymns into eleven T irumurais, 
the first seven (collectively called Tevdram), bringing together the 
hymns of Sambandar, Appar and Sundarar, the eighth (called 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Tiruvdchakam ) being the work of Manikkavachakar, the ninth 
(called Tiru-isaippd) being a miscellaneous collection, the tenth 
bringing together the mystic outpourings of a sixth century Saiva 
yogi, Tirumular, and the eleventh and last Tirumurai being another 
miscellany of poems from Nakkirar to Nambi-Andar-Nambi. Like¬ 
wise, £rl Nathamuni arranged the extant Vaishnava hymns into a 
colossal collection, Ndldyira Prabandham, a veritable treasure-house 
of devotional poetry. The four thousand hymns included in this 
collection are the work of twelve Alvars (of whom one is the woman 
mystic, Andal), the major contributions being those of Tirumahgai- 
Alvar, Nammalvar, Periyalvar, Tirumalisai-Alvar, and Sri Andal. 

2. The Saiva Saints 

Tirumular, author of the tenth Tirumurai , enunciates in his 
work (called Tirumandiram ) the Saiva Siddhanta doctrine of Pati- 
Pasu-Pasam. Tirumular believed that the spirit no less than matter 
must be accepted as real, for it is impossible to conceive of one 
quite independently of the other. Likewise, Love and Sivam are not 
different categories of experience: Love culminates into Sivam and 
rests in that beatific condition. For achieving one’s salvation, it is 
essential that the devotee should choose a reliable guide: 

The blind who spurn the guidance of the wise 
Will seek the guidance of the blind; 

The blind and the blind will dance a blind round, 

And together the blind will fall into the ditch. 

Tirumnndiram is made up of 3,000 mantras and is held in great 
veneration by the Tamil Jsaivas. 

About a century later, Manikkavachakar and the other three 
great Saiva Samayacharyas—Appar, Sambandar and Sundarar— 
flourished in the Tamil country and sounded a clarion call, a call to 
self-knowledge, a call to implicit self-surrender at the feet of the 
Supreme. It is now generally agreed that Appar and Sambandar 
were contemporaries, and that Sundarar lived two or three decades 
after Appar’s death in A.D. 681. It is, however, a debatable point 
whether Manikkavachakar preceded or came after the three 
Tevdram singers. The discussions on this point are seemingly 
endless, but to the present writer it appears probable that Manikka¬ 
vachakar also was Appar’s contemporary. The dates arrived at by 
Mr. C. V. Narayana Ayyar seem to be on the whole satisfactory; 
Appar (A.D. 600-681); Sambandar (A.D. 644-660); Manikkavachakar 
(A.D. 660-692); and Sundarar, who “must have lived for 18 years 
any time between A.D. 710 and A.D. 735. 

1. Origin and Early History of Saivism in South India, p. 462. 


828 










LITERATURE 


(i) Appar or Tirundvukkarasu Ndyandr 

Appar was originally called by his Vellala parents Marunlkkiyar. 
He at first changed from Saivism to the Jain faith but again became 
an ardent devotee of Siva. He made numerous and life-long friend¬ 
ships. He bore the pin-pricks of the Jains with dignity, and once 
he sent this message to the Pallava king who was a Jain: 

We are slaves of nobody, we fear not death; 

Sinless, we shall not taste the torments of Hell; 

Proud are we that we know no ill, no bondage; 

Ignorant of pain, we are for ever happy. 

Appars contribution to Tevdram consists of 313 hymns. Their 
tone and texture, their content and imagery, are conditioned by 
two facts concerning Appar’s life. Of the four great Nayanars, only 
Appar lived to a ripe old age, living longer than the other three put 
together. His longevity helped him, as it helped Sophocles, to see 
life steadily and to see it whole. Accordingly, Appar’s ripest and 
most characteristic hymns partake of the mellowness of age and 
breathe the persuasive gentleness that comes from experience. With 
the wise pensiveness of age, Appar quietly assured his followers: 

He is our father and mother, 

He is our brother and sister; 

Of the three worlds is He creator, 

The dweller in the flowery city; 

He’ll help us all, the Unseen God. 

Secondly, being a Vellala by birth whose ancestral calling was 
agriculture, Appar naturally insinuated himself into the hearts of 
the lowly and the wretched who mostly people our villages. He 
read Nature’s thought-processes like an open book. Birds and beasts 
were next of kin to him. The sea, the hills, the woods, the fields 
rich with crops or green grass, the winding rivers; lions, leopards, 
tigers, jackals, green-legged frogs; water-lilies, violets, the jasmine 
and the lotus, plants, creepers, trees; cascades and floods, the 
dazzling moon of which the cobra itself is afraid; these are the usual 
themes of Appar’s dissolving melodies. The devotee no less than the 
farmer speaks in verses like: 

Didst thou plough with Truth and sow the seed of Desire, 
Didst thou weed out Untruth and water with patient skill, 
Didst thou pledge with Propriety and stand by in affection, 
Then must you surely reach divan’s place and see Him. 

Verily the “King of Beautiful Speech,” Appar’s strains have the 
sumptuous quality of autumn, giving us the strength to face the 
future with courage and abiding hope. 


329 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(ii) Sambandar 

Sambandar was a “marvellous boy who died in his prime.” He 
is reputed to have composed 10,000 hymens in his all too brief life 
of but sixteen summers, though only 384 of these are now known 
to us. Tile artless grace and mellifluous sweetness of Sambandar’s 
hymns have been universally praised, but they cannot be brought out 
in translations. The following verse, the most famous perhaps of 
his outpourings, is said to have involuntarily escaped Sambandar’s 
mouth while he Was still a boy hardly three years old: 

The serpent is His ear-stud, He rides the bull, He is 
crowned with the pure White crescent; 

He is smeared with the ashes of destroyed forests; 

He is decked with a garland of full-blossoming flowers; 

When of yore His devotees called Him, He came to glittering 
Piramapuram and bestowed His grace upon all; 

He is indeed the Thief who has stolen my soul away. 

Two other frequently quoted verses may be freely rendered as 
follows: 

He will not tarry with those who sing not His praises, 

We too shall avoid their godless company .... 

One’s father is dead, one’s mother is dead, one’s own turn 
will come, 

For Yama with his mace is awaiting the appointed hour 
to carry everyone away; 

Poor soul! You hope to bide here for ever, you’ll be 
snatched away no less! 

But Felicity is yours if you follow the lead of Tiruvarur— 
fear not Death. 

(Hi) Manikkavachakar 

This great saint’s life is narrated both in the Tiruvilaiyddal 
and the Vddavurar puranams. Like Sambandar, Manikkavachakar 
too was born of Brahmin parents. Later, Manikkavachakar became 
the Prime Minister of a Pandyan king, but soon lost his confidence. 
Realization came to him in due course, and thenceforth he dedicated 
himself to the Life Divine. The collection of hymns known as 
Tiruvdchakam is Manikka vaehakar’£ spiritual autobiography, and it 
takes us as it were to the very laboratory of mysticism. Reading 
it, we feel that we peer into the very core of this great devotee’s 
heart. Dr. G. U. Pope has rendered into sensitive English verse the 
whole of Tiruvdchakam, from which the following may be quoted 
in illustration of the singular quality of Manikkavachakar’s spiritual 
fervour: 


330 


LITERATURE 


‘‘Grass was I, shrub was I, worm, tree, 

Full many a kind of beast, bird, snake, 

Stone, man, and demon. ’Midst Thy hosts I served. 

The form of mighty Asuras, ascetics, gods I bore. 

Within these immobile and mobile forms of life, 

In every species born, weary I’ve grown, great Lord! 

“I dread not mighty jav’lin, dripping gore; 

Nor glance of maids with jewell’d arms! 

But those that will not sweetly taste His grace, 

Whose glance can melt the inmost soul, 

Who dances in the hallow’d court,—my Gem 
Unstained and pure—nor praise His Name; 

Such men of loveless hearts when we behold, 

Ah me! we feel no dread like this!” 

It has been well said that Tiruvdchakam will melt the heart and 
purify all sins; that he who is unmoved by its strains is veritably 
a stone. Tiruvdchakam seems to bring out the quintessence of Tamil 
Saivism—and especially its doctrine of self-surrender to the Supreme 
God—even more completely than Tevaram, astonishing as is that 
variegated and rich collection of devotional lyrics. Sambandar’s 
artless and moving strains, Sundarar’s haunting lullabies of love, 
Appar’s home-spun similes and images bespeaking ripe wisdom and 
experience, all these fuse into a unity, dazzling like the midday sun 
and profound as night, in the fifty-one songs that constitute Tiruvd¬ 
chakam; and Manikkavachakar is indeed, in his profound humility 
and all-embracing humanity, among the most infallible of our 
“ambassadors of the Absolute.” 

(iv) Sundarar 

Sundarar—or Sundaramurti Nayanar-—was the last of the four 
great Saiva Samayacharyas. During his incredibly short life of only 
eighteen years, Sundarar crowded a career of service in the cause of 
the Divine which is astounding. Of the tens of thousands of songs 
attributed to him, hardly one hundred have been preserved. Instinct 
with singular beauty and glow of colour, Sundarar’s hymns are on 
every devout Tamil bhakta’s lips to this day, and are sung by musi¬ 
cians in temples and mutts. Here is a free rendering of one of them: 

I’m the slave of all His devotees true, 

The slave of all the laureates of the spirit, 

The slave of those whose minds do rest in God, 

The slave of all the inhabitants of Tiruvarur, 



'THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The slave of the priests who daily conduct the divine service 
thrice, 

The slave of the ascetics anointed all over, 

The slave of the bhaktas beyond Tamfiakam’s confines, 

The slave for ever of Tiruvarur’s Lord. 


Utterances like “O Madman, with the shining crescent-crown,” 
“I will not die, nor be born again, nor being born will grow old 
again”, “As I meditated on thy flower-soft feet in terms of love, my 
bonds burst away for ever”, and scores of others from his hymns, 
being once heard, must reverberate in one’s memory for ever. 


(v) Other Saiva Saints 


In addition to the eleven Tirumurais, which include only the 
devotional poetry of the Nayanars, there is also the Periyapumnam, 
a comprehensive account of the lives of the sixty-three Saiva saints 
held in veneration to this day. It is a stupendous work of over four 
thousand stanzas and fact and legend mingle freely in its pages. 
The sixty-three saints were drawn from every important Tamil caste 
then known—-kings, Brahmins, chieftains, merchants, farmers, 
shepherds, potters, weavers, hunters, fishermen, ‘untouchables’, etc. 
—and the Periyapumnam^ was thus a reminder to the Tamil people 
that God’s love and salvation were quite independent of caste or 
profession or the other material circumstances of life. In the 
hagiology are also found many memorable pictures of women 
devotees like Tilakavatiyar, Punitavatiyar and Mangaiyarkkarasiyar. 
The authorship of the Periyapumimm is attributed to iSekkilar, him¬ 
self the subject of a puranam by Umapati. 


3. The Alvars 


We now pass on to the Alvars. The word ‘alvar’ has been 
explained as ‘one in deep wisdom’; and the ‘alvars* are thus wise 
seers who exercise a spiritual sovereignty over the hearts of men. 
Tradition arranges the Alvars into three groups in the following 
order: 


(1) Ancient: Poykai Alvar 


4203 B.C. 
4203 B.C. 
4203 B.C. 
4203 B.C. 


Bhutattar 

Peyalvar 

Tirumalisai Alvar 


(2) Middle: Nammalvar 


3102 B.C. 
3102 B.C. 
3075 B.C. 
3056 B.C. 
3005 B.C. 


Madhurakavi Alvar 
Kulasekhara Alvar 
Perialvar 


An$al 


332 




LITERATURE 


(3) Last: Ton<Jara<Jippo$i Alvar .. 2814 B.C. 

Tiruppan Alvar .. 2760 B.C. 

Tirumangai Alvar .. 2706 B.C. 

As the traditional dates of these Alvars take us to anything from 
five to six thousand years backwards, these seemingly precise dates 
are of no use whatsoever as historical data. At the same time, as 
Dr. S. Krishn'aswami Aiyangar points out, “it is still possible to 
regard this traditional order as fairly in chronological sequence.” 1 
As it is impossible with the facts at our disposal to determine with 
any exactitude the dates of the Alvars, we have to be satisfied with 
the broad inference that the Alvars in all probability flourished in 
the period marked by the extreme limits of A.D. 500 and 850, and 
that it is not unlikely that some of the greatest Saiva Nayanars and 
Vaishnava Alvars were actually contemporaries. 

The Alvars hailed from different parts of the Tamil country. 
The Pallava country contributed the first four Alvars enumerated 
above, and Chola Desa the last three; the Chera country contributed 
Kulasekhara; and Fandya Nadu contributed the rest, notably 
Nammalvar, the greatest of them all, and Arwjal one of the supreme 
women mystics of the world. From this distribution it is sometimes 
assumed that the Vaishnava movement began first in the Pallava 
country in the north and then passed on to the Chola country, and 
finally gravitated to the south, culminating in the Tinnevelly (Tiru- 
nelveli) District, the place of the great. Nammalvar’s nativity. It is 
also worthy of note that the twelve Alvars, even like the sixty-three 
Nayanars, are a cosmopolitan group, being gathered from all castes 
and various strata of society, their one common characteristic being 
their fellowship in the love of God. Nammalvar, like Appar, was a 
Vellala by caste; Tirumangai came from a kaUa (robber) family; 
Kulasekhara was a princely ascetic; Perialvar was a Brahmin. All 
this illustrates the noble catholicity of the Tamils of a bygone age. 

The four thousand stanzas that make up the Ndldyira Praban¬ 
ti ham are divided into four more or less equal parts. The first 
thousand stanzas include the work of Perialvar, An dal, Kulasekhara, 
Tirumalisai, Tondaradippodi, Tiruppan, and Madhurakavi; this part 
is called Tirumoli . The second part, called Peria Tirumoli, is the 
work exclusively of Tirumangai; the third part, called lyalpd, 
includes the work of the first three Alvars, and the rest of the third 
part is made up of Tirumalisai’s, Nammalvar’s and Tirumangai’s 
contributions; the last part, Tiruvdymoli, is exclusively the work of 
Nammalvar. These four thousand hymns have been frequently 
annotated, and the verses are committed to memory and recited in 
temples by Tamil Vaishnavas to this day. 

1. Ancient India and South Indian Culture, II, p. 738. 


338 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(i) The first four Alvars 

The first three Alvars, Poykai, Bhutattar and Peyalvar have 

contributed one hundred stanzas each in venbd metre in praise of 
» 

Tirumal. The poems are richly embroidered by references to 
Vishnu’s sports in His various avatar as; but the general key-note of 
the poems is love, an upsurge of mystical longing for the Lord. The 
traditional story is that Poykai, Bhutattar and Peyalvar accidentally 
took shelter in the same place in pitch darkness. Of a sudden they 
became conscious of a fourth person, a blazing transcendence that 
lifted them up from their normal consciousness and gave them for 
the nonce the voice of poesy. And when morning came, they gave 
utterance to their ecstatic thoughts. One stanza from each is here 
freely rendered into English: 

Poykai: 

The river flows to the dark agitated sea; 

The lotus gazes at the rising sun; 

Life gravitates towards the God of Death; 
knowledge wells up to reach the Divine Consort of Lakshml, 
sprung up from the ravishing lotus. 

Bhutattar: 

P’rom the knowledge of the Veda you know that its essence 
Is the singing of Purushottama’s praise; 

If the Veda is beyond you, poor folk, know that 

The Veda’s cream is but the recitation of Madhava’s name. 

Peyalvar: 

This day I saw the Divine Consort by the side of Her blue- 
tinted Lord, 

I saw His glorious golden effulgence, bright as burning sun, 

I saw His gold-made chakra, irresistible in war, 

I saw His conch that wins the love of its beholders. 

Tirumalisai, the fourth and last in the first group, appears to have 
been a militant Vaishnavite, giving no quarter to Buddhist, Jain 
or iSaiva. He was uncompromising in his monotheism, and his 
learning was prodigious. This is how he describes the discipline of 
Gcd-realisation: 

When the grooves of the senses are barred and sealed, 

When the high-way of knowledge is lit with Wisdom’s lamp, 
When intense pity melts the heart and relaxes the bones, 
Then only can Vishnu the wielder of the Sacred Disc be 

seen. 


331 


LITERATURE 


His single-minded devotion and firm faith are revealed in an 
asseveration like: 

Be it today or tomorrow or some future day, 

Your grace is surely mine; 

I sliall take refuge in none other than you, 

Neither will you ever abandon me, O Narayana. 


(ii) Nammdlvdr 

Of the five Alvars in the second group, Nammalvar and 
Madhurakavi may be taken together. Nammalvar was a mystic in 
excdsis, one of the greatest of god-intoxicated men. Madhurakavi, 
the Brahmin scholar and saint, sought out Nammalvar and, as it 
were, nursed that great mystic bud with the warmth of his devotion, 
till, petal by petal, it blossomed to its full amplitude and dedicated 
its unearthly beauty to the God of Gods. Nammalvar sang of God 
because the urge to trumpet His praises was in him an elemental 
irresistible force; and Madhurakavi took down the verses as they 
came, and preserved them for posterity. The sweetness, intuitive 
depth, and kindling imagery of Nammalvar’s hymns have been 
praised, but cannot be praised too highly. His poems express 
piercingly the varied mystic notes from self-abasement to the fina¬ 
lity of ecstatic union. Whether he is screaming like a homesick soul 
eager to return to the Father, or affirming his faith in loud ringing 
tones, or protesting his love like one god-intoxicated in the extreme, 
or but describing the splendours of beatific union, equally is Nam¬ 
malvar gloriously articulate and a supreme laureate of the spirit. 
Quotations cannot do justice to his poetry, but the following verse 
expresses the core*of Nammalvar’s faith: 

The indwelling God is in all created things and in all the 
religions professed by Man; 

It is in vain to reach Him through the senses; and He defies 
mere intellectual cognition; 

Seek Him in the soul’s sanctuary, the source of all life, 

In firm meditation, but free from disturbing mundane 
thoughts, 

And the Lord can be secured for ever. 


Nammalvar’s contribution to the Nalciyira Prabandham consists 
of the whole of the fourth part, called TiruvdymoU, and Tiruvirut- 
tam, Tiruvasiriyam and Periyatiruvaniddi , which are included in 
the third part. TiruvdymoU is subdivided into ten parts, and each 
part contains ten poems; this century of poems taking up 1,102 
stanzas. Nammalvar’s poetry is encyclopaedic in its mystic range 
and covers the entire gamut of striving, half-lights and false trails, 


335 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the nights of darkness, the burst of morning sunshine, the splendour 
of beatitude and the ecstasy undying. The jiva seeks Him and would 
be with Him, because He has already chosen and is with His devotee. 
The jlva sometimes is compared to a love-sick maiden hungering 
and pining for the divine nectar of her Lord’s love. The symbolism 
of love is intricate and subtly elaborate, and the whole of Tiru - 
viruttam is cast in the form of such a symbolic love poem. Tiru- 
viruttam indeed is one of the incandescent peaks of mystic poetry* 
and its century of stanzas illustrate poetically every unblemished 
shade of erotic symbolism. The whole poem has been done into 
English by Mr. J. S. M. Hooper from which the following are 
extracted. Nammalvar is the maid rapt in devotion to her beloved 
Lord, Vishnu. They have met, and after a moment’s infinity He has 
left her, and she is experiencing the 'dark night of the soul’: 

“Love’s glow is paling, and instead, a dark 
And sickly yellow is spreading;—and the night 
Becomes an age! This is the matchless wealth 
My good heart gave me when it yearned and sought 
Keen discus-wielding Kannan’s tulasl cool! .... 

The flying swans and herons I did beg, 

Cringing: 'Forget not, ye who first arrive, 

If ye behold my heart with Kannan there 
Oh, speak of me, and ask it ‘Sir, not yet 
Hast thou returned to her? And is it right?’. .. 

Many a different way of worshipping 

And many clashing creeds from different minds, 

And in the many creeds their many gods 
Thou’st made, spreading abroad thy form! O thou 
Matchless, I will proclaim my love for thee !” 1 

Madhurakavi was the born disciple, his whole life being dedi¬ 
cated to Nammalvar; his short hymn in praise of his guru is sung 
by all Vaishnava devotees. It is a fervent song of but eleven stanzas 
and concludes with the verse: 

He (Nammalvar) poured the cream of the Vedas into his 
songs, 

Singing a thousand grace-filled hymns, 

To feed his devotees with the love of God: 

Praise him for his peerless grace! 

(Hi) Pe'riydlvdr and Anddl 

Periyalvar (known also as Vishnu-Chittar and Bhattarpiran) 
was a Brahmin who, according to tradition, found the child An dal 

1. Hymns of the Alvars, pp. 64, 69, 87 ( Tiruviruttam, 12, 30, 96). 


336 





LITERATURE 


at the foot of a tree while digging in his garden and, taking her 
home, brought her up with more than a fatherly affection. Peri¬ 
yalvar’s most famous song is Tiruppalldn$tu, which he composed 
when he was vouchsafed the beatific vision of the Lord: 

For many a year, many a year, 

Many a thousand year, 

Many a thousand million thousand year, 

Oh Thou victor over the Mallas, 

Thou sapphire-tinted strong-shouldered, 

Thou effulgent mighty One, 

May your shining crimson feet 
Be for ever and for ever blest! 

That the devotee should be anxious about the All-seeing, All-power¬ 
ful Eternal One is the measure of his poignant all-human love for 
the Lord. Periyalvar has contributed about five hundred hymns to 
the “Four Thousand”, and they are remarkable for their earnestness, 
learning, descriptive power, and metrical resilience. Periyalvar 
spent the best part of his life at &rivilliputtur (in Ramnad District), 
serving the local deity, and composing the Tirumoli, a splendid 
imaginative re-creation of Lord Krishna’s life. 

Periyalvar’s daughter, Andal or Kodai, from the outset thirsted 
for the Divine, and poured forth her divine love into some of the 
finest poetry in the language. She saw herself as one of Krishna’s 
gopis, sought Him with singular fervour and determination, and 
achieved union with Him at last at Srirahgam. Of her two works, 
Nachchiydr Tirumoli and Tiruppdvai, the latter is rightly more 
famous. It places her alongside of great women mystics like 
St. Teresa, Rabia, and Mira. Tiruppdvai is a pageant, a song-offering, 
a lyrical essay on the dynamics of true devotion, a feast of the most 
marvellous music, an imperishable treasure in the hearts of Tamil 
Vaishnava bhaktas, especially women. An<Jal and her girl-friends 
bathe at dawn in the fresh waters that rain from the sky and go in 
procession to Krishna’s palace; of imagination all compact, they are 
the gopis once again, seeking the nectar of divine love at Krishna’s 
hands. The processionary rhythm is in tune with the wonderful 
theme and winds its beauty into our hearts. The love-sick devotees 
know full well the efficacy of Krishna’s love: 

“When thus all pure we come, strewing fair flowers, 
Adoring, and with songs upon our lips, 

And meditating in our hearts on him— 

Mayan, the child of Northern Mathura: 

The Ruler of great Jumna’s sacred stream: 

The shining lamp which in the shepherd caste 


337 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Appeared: Damodaran, who brightly lit 
His mother's womb—faults past and faults to come 
Cease, like to cotton that within the fire 
Flames into dust”. ’ 1 

And their faith and their adoration are no transient things, but will 
abide eternally: 

“ . . ,.not for today alone 

Have we become thy slaves; but, Govinda, 

For aye, for sevenfold births! Only to thee 
We’ll service give: from us do thou remove 
All other loves. .. . ” 2 

(iv) Kulasekhara 

Kuiasekhara, the remaining member of the second group of 
Alvars, was a king of Travancore whose god-hunger made him more 
and more unworldly, till at last he renounced the throne and 
wholeheartedly consecrated himself to the service of the Divine. 
Perianal Tirumoli, his contribution to the "Four Thousand,” con¬ 
sists of 103 stanzas, one of which may be translated as follows: 

They (the worldly-wise) are but mad men to me, 

And I am mad too (they think); 

Who benefits by this talk? 

I call you, Krishna, Ranganatha! 

I am mad with longing for You! 

(v) Tiruppan, Tondaradippodi and Tirumangai 

Of the three Alvars of the last group, Tiruppan was responsible 
for only ten stanzas and Tondaradippoai for fifty-five; but Tiru¬ 
mangai contributed no less than 1,351 stanzas, a slightly larger 
number than even Namrnalvar’s contribution. Tiruppan was a 
member of the so-called 'untouchable’ caste, but so great was his 
devotion to Lord Ranganatha that He asked the Brahmin priest of 
the temple to brmg Tiruppan on his shoulders to His presence. There 
he broke into song and Amalanddippirdn was the result. Here is the 
fifth stanza of this poem: 

Having destroyed the burden of my long-gathered sins, 

He made me turn to Him in love, and entered my heart 
Himself; 

I know of no austerities that secured this love; 

Rather have I been saved by the divine grace of 
Ranganatha, wearing the pearl-necklace, with 
Lakshmi seated on His fair bosom! 

1. cit., p. 51. 2. Op. cit, p. 57. 

338 




LITERATURE 


londaradippodi, originally called Vipra Narayana, lived for a time 
with a courtesan and got into trouble, but was ultimately saved by 
Ranganatha. He now dedicated himself to God and wrote the two 
hymns, Tirumdlai and Tiruppalli Yeluchchi , addressed to Ranga¬ 
natha. The following is from Tirumdlai: 

Should men live one hundred years as the Vedas say, 

One half will be w T asted in sleep; the fifty remaining will 
be likewise wasted 

In childhood, boyhood, sensuality, hunger, disease and 

old age; 

O Dweller in Srirangam’s temple! I desire birth no more! 

The life of Tirumangai, the last of the Alvars, seems to have been a 
colourful and adventurous one; his career was not unlike that of 
St. Paul’s and his missionary fervour was catching. A prolific poet 
and a skilful versifier, Tirumangai’s songs have much rush and 
tumult and decorative matter, though as a mystic poet he has to be 
placed below Nammalvar. One stanza from Tirumangai is given 
here: 

(When you met Guha the boatman) You did not deem him 
ignorant or strange or of low birth, 

But pitied him and further showered on him your celestial 

grace 

And said: “This my companion (Sita) with the shy deer’s 
downcast eyes is your companion as well; 

My brother (Lakshmana) is your brother.” When he 
(Guha) wished not to be left behind 

You added: “You are my friend, bide here.” 

These words have come down the ages and have led my 
heart 

To Your feet, ocean-hued in colour, O Lord of Srrahgam 
rich with luxuriant trees! 

The biographical accounts as given in the Guruparamparai 
mix fact and fiction so liberally that they are of little value to 
the historian. Be that as it may, there cannot be two opinions about 
the spiritual fervour and high poetical quality of the Ndldyira 
Prabandham. 


(vi) Iraiyandr and others 

This chapter may close with a passing reference to a few un¬ 
classified writers of the 3§angam and post-Saiigam periods. There 
was Idaikkadar, who wrote a book of fifty-four verses distinguished 
for their verbal conceits; there was Kalladar, the author of a poem 
called Kalladam; Perundevanar, author of a Tamil Mahdbhdrata, of 


339 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


which only a few lines have survived; there were Divakarar and 
Pingalar, father and son, authors of dictionaries bearing their res¬ 
pective names; there was Iraiyanar, of Ahapporul fame, the greatest 
grammarian of his day; Aiyan-aritanar, the editor of PurapporuU 
venbdmdlai; there was Vamanacharyar, the author of a long Jain 
poem giving the story of two brothers; and there were also many 
women poets whose verses are represented in some of the great 
anthologies of the Third Sangam. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

1. Aiyangar, S. Krishnasvami, Ancient India and South Indian History and 

Culture, Vol. II. 

2. Ayyar, C. V. Narayana, The Origin and Early History of Saivism in 

South India. 

3. Hooper, J. S. M., Hymns of the Alvars. 

4. Iyengar, M. Srinivasa, Tamil Studies. 

5. Kingsbury & Phillips, Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints. 

6. Nammalwar: A Sketch of His Life & Teachings (Natesan). 

7. Pillai, M. S. Purnalingam, Tamil Literature. 

8. Pope, G. U., Tiruvachakam (In English Verse). 


340 


CHAPTER XVI 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE 

ORGANISATION 

I. POLITICAL THEORY 

Tne political ideas of the period covered by the present volume are 
scattered through works belonging to various branches of our 
ancient literature. These are:— 

1. The late metrical Smritis, especially those of Narada, 
Brihaspati and Katyayana, 

2. The group of works belonging to the first phase of the ex¬ 
tant Purana literature, especially, the Vdyu, the Brahmdnda and the 
Vishnu PiXrdnas, 

3. The writings of Buddhist poets and philosophers such as 
Aryadeva, Aryasura and Vasubandhu, to which list we may add the 
name of Buddhaghosa, 

4. The works of the poets, dramatists and prose writers be¬ 
longing to this golden Age of classical Sanskrit literature. In this 
list may be mentioned the names of Visakhadatta, Kalidasa, Bana 
and Magha, 

5. The works on the technical science of polity represented 
by one complete specimen, namely the Nitisdra of Kamandaka. 

It is impossible to give here a summary even of the principal 
political ideas of this period. We may consider here four of their 
branches, namely, (A) Origin of the social and the political order, 
(B) Law of the social order and the State law, (C) Relation of the 
temporal ruler to his subjects, and (D) Relation of Politics to Ethics. 

A. Origin of the social and the political order 

Narada and Brihaspati give us short accounts of the creation of 
the State and its institutions. When in days of yore, says Narada, the 
Patriarch Manu exercised sovereignty, the people were wholly de¬ 
voted to virtue and were speakers of truth, but when virtue 
(dharma) disappeared among men, law and legal procedure ( vyava - 
hdra) were instituted, and the king was created for their adminis¬ 
tration as well as for wielding the rod of chastisement. We have a 
shorter version of the above in Brihaspati. This account involves 
the conception of a primitive State ruled by a Patriarch with highly 
virtuous subjects and as such without laws, and its transformation 


341 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


because of man’s sin into the law-State under a human ruler. In 
the second place two parallel stories of the creation of the social 
order are found in the Vdyu and Brahmdnda Purdnas . In the first 
account we read how human beings were created by Brahma at the 
beginning of the present creation-period in such a way that they 
enjoyed complete equality as well as perfect happiness, and how 
the fall of man led the Gods in their own interest not only to create 
various crops for their subsistence, but also to divide them into four 
castes and prescribe their duties and occupations. The second 
account is practically a supplement of the first. Here we are told 
how the duties of the castes and the orders as laid down by Brahma 
in the Vedas and the Smritis were proclaimed by the seven sages 
at the beginning of the second creation-cycle, and how Manu created 
two kings when the people neglected their duties and fell into strife. 
This means that the Society and the State were created by the Divine 
Being or the semi-divine beings so as to keep pace with man’s grow¬ 
ing degeneracy and decline. In the third place we have two parallel 
stories of the evolution of the world and of man and his institutions 
in Vasuhandhu’s Ahhidharmakosa and Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhi- 
magga . These are imperfect visions of the original story occurring 
in the Pali canon. The accounts tell us how “the beings” at the 
beginning of the cosmic Age had god-like qualities, and how they 
were subsequently transformed into humans. When the rice lost 
its self-ripening quality through their sins, they marked the bounda¬ 
ries of their fields. When theft and other vices appeared in their 
midst, they created a king who would protect their fields in return 
for a share of their rice. The above begins with the conception of 
an original State of Nature with beings enjoying perfect happiness. 
It then tells us how the institutions of property and the State were 
created in successive stages because of their growing degeneracy and 
decline by the processes of Social Contract and Governmental Com¬ 
pact respectively. 1 

B. Law of the social order and the State law 
As regards the branch of social order, the later Smritis repeat 
and clarify the ideas of Manu and Yajnavalkya about the authority 
and sources of dharma. We may quote a few typical extracts and 
views to illustrate this point. No one, says Parasara, ever created 
the Vedas, but on the contrary the Veda was remembered by Brahma 
as the Smriti was remembered by Manu at each successive creation- 
period [kdla). This involves the novel dogma of periodical procla- 

1. Nar. Introd. p. 2, Bri. I 1.1 (stories of creation of the State)—Vdyu VIII 1-171. 
BroJim. VIII 1-172, Vdyu V 7-8 —Brahm. 62 (stories of creation of the social 
order). Vasubandhu’s Ahhidharmakosa III 98, Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagqa 
Chap. XIII ^stories of evolution of the world). For the original version see 
Dlgha Nikaya Vol. Ill, pp. 84-95. 


342 








ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


mation of the Sacred Canon by the gods and sages during successive 
time-cycles, thus reconciling the old doctrine of eternity of the canon 
with the Puranic and late Smriti theory of recurrent evolution of the 
world. Again Brihaspati and Parasara repeat Manu’s dictum (I 85-6) 
making austerities, knowledge, sacrifice and gifts the duty ( dharma) 
for the Krita, Treta, Dvapara and Kali Ages respectively. What is 
more, they quote different canonical authorities for the successive 
Age-Cycles. Dharma, we are further told, is earned in one year, 
three seasons, three fortnights and one day in Krita, Treta, Dvapara 
and Kali Ages respectively. Dharma w r as entire in Krita, it was 
three-fourths in Treta, one-half in Dvapara and one-fourth in Kali. 
The above extracts introduce us to the doctrine of different autho¬ 
rities and standards of dharma , as well as that of proportionate de¬ 
cline in the quantum of dharma along with proportionate increase in 
the facility of its acquisition for suiting man’s diminishing capa¬ 
city during the successive Ages. To turn to another point, what act 
on being done, says Visvamitra, is approved by the Aryans versed in 
the canon ( dgama) is law (dharma), and what they blame is held to 
be its opposite. This involves the important principle that en¬ 
lightened opinion in the final analysis is the criterion of law. 1 To the 
above we have to add that the Smriti authorities of this period enu¬ 
merate shorter or longer lists of what are called practices forbidden 
in the Kali age (KalUvarjya) . Taking the ancient custom of levirate 
( niyoga) as an example, Brihaspati observes that it cannot be prac¬ 
tised by others because of the diminishing potency of the later Ages. 
Men in the Krita and Treta Ages, the author explains, were en¬ 
dowed with austerities and knowledge, while those in the Dvapara 
and Kali Ages are lacking in strength. According to an anonymous 
authority Quoted in Smritichandrikd, the above acts were forbidden 
for the purpose of protection of the people by men of learning and 
high character who made a convention ( vyavasthcl) to that effect; 
for as the author remarks with striking boldness, the conventions 
(samayas) of good men are authoritative like the Vedas. The first 
extract repeats an old Smriti argument justifying the rejection of 
palpably immoral ancient practices by the transparent fiction of the 
superior stamina of the ancients. The second extract involves an 
original principle namely, that of the binding (almost canonical) 
authority of conventions of good men abrogating outworn ancient 
practices in the public interest. 2 

Turning to the branch of State Law, we have first to mention 
that the late Smritis repeat and develop the older ideas of its sources 

1. Par. I 20-24, Bri. II 4 &14, Visvamitra quoted in Krtyaratnakara p. 7 (authority 
and sources of dharma). 

2. Bri. II 267-69, Quotation in Smriti-chandrika I pp. 30-31 (Kalivarjyas) , For 
other refs, see A History of Indian Political Ideas, p. 309. 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


and their authority. To quote a few typical extracts, Brihaspati 
bestows high praise upon the king who investigates suits in accor¬ 
dance with the canonical principles. What has been established by 
themselves, he continues, among the castes born in the wrong order 
{pratiloma) as well as the residents of inaccessible places, and in 
regions, castes, families and so forth, must be maintained just as they 
are; otherwise the subjects would be disaffected, and the people 
would be alienated and the king’s army as well as revenue 
would be lost. Persons following a number of very unorthodox 
practices mentioned by name, the author concludes, do not thereby 
become liable either for penance or for punishment by the king. 
Whatever convention, we are told by Katyayana in the same spirit, 
has been settled in accordance with the consent of the people of a 
particular region must always be preserved in writing and sealed 
with the royal seal; it should be sedulously upheld like the dictates 
of the Sacred Law. According to an anonymous authority, quoted 
by the commentator on Ndrada-Smriti, usages which are prevalent in 
different regions and have been handed down from generation to 
generation must never be overruled by the authority of the canoni¬ 
cal texts. 1 In the first extract Brihaspati allows the authority of 
lav/ to the conventions of disapproved social groups as well as re¬ 
gional and family usages, while he grants complete immunity to 
people for observance of admittedly heterodox regional customs. In 
the second extract Katyayana grants the fullest authority of law to 
the popular and especially the merchants’ conventions with adequate 
provision for their official record. In the last extract the author goes 
so far as to lay down the doctrine of inviolability of usages irrespec¬ 
tively of the canonical injunctions. 

C. Relation of the temporal ruler to his subjects 
The ideas of the authority and obligation of the temporal ruler 
in the older Smritis are repeated and developed by their successors. 
Thus as regards the principle of authority the king is identified with 
Vishnu by Narada and with Indra by Katyayana. The king’s person 
according to Brihaspati was created by appropriating portions of the 
lustre of seven deities. The king, says Narada, assumes five divine 
forms according as he fulfils as many distinctive functions. All 
creatures, continues Brihaspati in the context from which we have 
quoted above, yield themselves for enjoyment and swerve not from 
their duties through fear of the king; in a country without a king the 
occupations of agriculture, trade and money-lending do not exist, and 
therefore the king was created in former times as the leader of the 
castes and the orders. In the result Narada. reflecting the extreme 

1. Bri I 1. 126-31, Kat. vv. 46, 50, Asahaya’s commy. on Nar., Introd. 37 (authority 
and sources of the State Law). 

.314 









ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


view on this point, requires the subjects to abide by the king’s com¬ 
mand whether right or wrong and to honour him, even though he 
should be worthless. 1 In the above extracts the authors develop 
the king’s authority after their predecessors on the triple basis of his 
origin, his office, and his functions, and they draw from the same the 
corollary of the subjects’ obedience to their ruler. 

As regards the complementary principle of the obligation of the 
temporal ruler towards his subjects, the king is required by Narada 
to protect all orders in accordance with the canonical rules, while his 
share of the agricultural produce is explained as his fee ( vetana ) for 
the protection of the people. The king, says Katyayana, was created 
for the three-fold purpose of constant protection of the people, of 
eradication of thorns and of honouring the Brahmanas. 2 

The early Puranas repeat the three-fold basis of the king’s 
authority as well as his obligation both in their formal statements 
of royal duties and in their stories of individual kings. 3 Special men¬ 
tion may be made in this connection of the Purana stories of the 
tyrant Vena and his illustrious son and successor Prithu in three 
more or less parallel versions. 4 We are here told on the one hand 
that the State of Nature without a king is synonymous with wild 
anarchy: even the tyrant Vena is said to be gifted with superhuman 
faculties, while his son Prithu is expressly indicated by his bodily 
signs to have been a portion of the God Vishnu. On the other hand 
the exclusive claim of the king to divine honours and to unlimited 
obedience on the part of his subjects is put into the mouth of Vena 
only to justify his deposition and death at the hands of the offended 
sages. 

As regards the authors of the technical science of polity, we 
find in Kamandaka such statements as the following. Protection of 
the people depends upon the king and their livelihood depends upon 
protection: without the king the law would disappear and with the 
disappearance of the law the world would perish. This means that 
the king’s office is the grand safeguard of the people’s security as 
well as stability of the social order after the canonical standards. 
The author’s position is amplified in other extracts. The king who 
is approved by the aged, we are told, is the cause of prosperity of 
this world: should the king not be a good guide, the people would 
suffer complete destruction like a boat without the helmsman: the 
king who is devoted to righteousness unites himself as well as his 

1. Nar. XVIII. 13, 24-29, Kat. v. 8, Bri. I 1, 6-8 (authority of the temporal ruler). 

2. Nar. XVIII. 5 & 17 Kat. 15 (obligation of the temporal ruler). 

3. Cf. Vdyu 88, 49 and 69 (stories of Kings Kuvalasva and Mandhata Markandsya 
27,21-5 (of Queen Madalasa). 

4. Vdyu 62, 104-93=Brahm. 68. 104-93 (1st version) Vishnu I 13. 11-87 (2nd ver¬ 
sion), Bhagavata IV 13. 16-23 (3rd version). 


345 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


subjects with the three-fold end of life, but he who is otherwise 
surely destroys both. 1 In other words, while the king with the re¬ 
quisite qualifications is conceived to be capable of ensuring complete 
security and happiness of the individual and prosperity of the State, 
the king without these qualifications is held to be the cause of the 
people's destruction. 

The principle of the king’s obligation is dealt with by the Bud¬ 
dhist authors in a more original fashion. As his followers, says the 
hero of a story in Aryasura’s Jatakamala, being always intent on 
carrying out his orders have charged him with the burden of ruler- 
ship, he has undertaken to bear the same with affection fixed on 
them as on his own sons. The above involves the argument that 
protection is a ruler's moral obligation towards the ruled in return 
for their obedience. A more daring line is taken by Aryadeva in 
his Chatuhsataka. How can you, asks the author addressing an 
imaginary king, feel pride,-—you who are a mere slave of the multi¬ 
tude ( ganaddsa ) fed { bhrita) by the one-sixth share (of the crops 
paid by the subjects)? 2 In the above the author lays down the 
doctrine of popular sovereignty on the basis of the old Smriti prin¬ 
ciple of the king's quasi-contractual relation with his subjects. 

A few words may be said about the ideas of the masters of classi¬ 
cal Sanskrit literature on this subject. The king is declared to be 
an image of the god Vishnu by Visakhadatta in the concluding verse 
of his Mudramkshcisa drama. An altogether different view is 
found in another passage. Some kings being deceived with more 
than mortal praises by cunning rogues, says a wise minister to a 
young prince in an extract of Bana’s Kddamhan, consider them¬ 
selves, though mortals, to be derived from divine particles, and in 
trying to act like heavenly beings become the objects of ridicule to 
all men. 3 Here, it will be noticed, the conception of the king’s 
divinity is held up to scorn as an invention of unscrupulous flatterers 
for deceiving foolish kings. 

D. Relation of Politics to Ethics 

The discussion of the relation of Politics to Ethics which is as 
old as Kautilya’s Arthasdstra and the early Smritis is repeated by 
the authors of this period. We may begin with a few extracts from 
the stories in Aryasura’s Jatakamala . The path of virtue ( dharma ), 
we read, is lost in “the royal science” ( rdjasdstra) through following 
(the goal of) wealth ( artha ): that men enter the path made unclean 
by the deceit associated with statecraft, the cause thereof is verily 

1. Nitis&ra I. 9-17, II 34. 

2. Jatakamala, verse 15, Chatuhsataka V 77. 

3. Mudrarakshasa VII i9, Kadamhari, pp. 177-78. 


346 







ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


pleasure ( kdma ): the practices set forth in “the Kshatriya science” 
( Kshatravidyd ) are contrary to righteousness ( dharma ) as following 
the crooked path of statecraft ( nlti ) and as being soiled by ruthless¬ 
ness: the lesson of statecraft is that the ministers and others exist 
for the king’s sake and not vice versa: those skilled in the science of 
politics declare it to be impolicy ( anaya) and calamity ( vyasana ) 
for kings to follow righteousness ( dharma ) which is demonstrably in 
conflict with wealth ( artha ) and pleasure (kdma). 1 The above ex¬ 
tracts repeat the early Buddhist canonical principle of the funda¬ 
mental antithesis and in fact antagonism between Politics and 
Ethics. Politics, it is held, is dominated by the ends of wealth and 
pleasure in opposition to virtue and in fact is based upon shameless 
and merciless exploitation of subjects in the ruler’s interest. 

In the second place we may quote an extract from Bana’s famous 
prose romance the Ktidambdri containing the advice of a wise minis¬ 
ter to a prince on the eve of the latter’s consecration. In this extract 
the minister condemns in the strongest terms those kings for whom 
the treatise of Kautilya, merciless in the cruelty of his teachings, is 
an authority and in particular their worship of wealth, their appli¬ 
cation to the destructive sciences and their policy of exterminating 
devoted brothers. In the same censure the minister joins the priests 
habitually practising witchcraft who are the teachers of those kings 
and the deceitful ministers who are their advisers. It follows from 
the above that Politics as represented by the great work of Kautilya 
and as practised by worldly-minded and cruel kings and their hard¬ 
hearted and tricky advisers, is based upon a creed of gross material¬ 
ism, heartless cruelty and base superstition. With the above we 
may compare an epigram of the epic poet Magha identifying Politics 
with a creed of naked self-interest. Winning success for one’s own self 
and inflicting injury upon the enemy, in this, he says, lies the double 
content of statecraft (mti). 2 

We may conclude this subject by quoting the views of Kaman- 
daka in his Nitisara. Dealing with the branch of internal adminis¬ 
tration, he tells us in one place that the king is not tainted with sin 
for slaying the wicked, and he justifies this not only by the example 
of sage-like kings, but also on the principle that the good or bad 
opinion of Aryas versed in the sacred canon is the criterion of 
dharma (law or righteousness). Again, in the course of his state¬ 
ments on the policy of peace and war the author warns the king 
against trusting the enemy even after making peace, for did not the 
god Indra destroy the demon Vritra in the midst of a truce? 

1. Jatakamala IX verse 10, XIX verse 27, XXIII 21. XXVII verse 17, XXXI. For 
earlier refs, see A History of Indian Political Ideas, pp. 49, 150-53. 

-2. Kdd. pp. 177-78, Sisupalavadha II 30. 


347 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The son as well as his father on the throne, it is further argued, under¬ 
goes change (in the normal attitude towards each other), and there¬ 
fore the behaviour of kings is held to be different from that of ordi¬ 
nary men. The author, moreover, while declaring the king’s selec¬ 
tion of the vital policies of honourable and treacherous fighting to 
be purely a matter of political expediency, justifies the king’s killing 
his enemy by the example of the Epic hero Asvatthaman. 1 In the 
above the author develops Kautilya’s policy of sacrifice of morality 
for political ends in several respects. For he justifies this policy not 
only by the interests of the king and the community, but also by the 
broader principle of the characteristic selfishness of human nature 
and statecraft. What is more, the policy is justified at the bar of 
morality by the pious examples of gods and heroes. Well may we 
claim for Kamandaka that he contributed vigorously along with his 
master Kautilya to that principle of separation of Politics from Ethics 
which goes back to the early Arthasdstra times. 2 

II. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION-—NORTHERN INDIA 
1. The Imperial Guptas, their Contemporaries and Successors 

The Guptas, whose history has been discussed above, 3 4 discarded 
the modest title of Raj an (king) which had for the most part con¬ 
tented the indigenous dynasties of earlier times, and adopted the 
high-sounding style brought into vogue by the foreign rulers of the 
past. The most characteristic of such titles was mahdrdjddhirdjd 
adopted by the Guptas from Chandra-gupta I onwards alike in their 
inscriptions, coin-legends and seals. The Gupta coins and inscrip¬ 
tions contain several variants of this title such as rdjddhirdja , parama- 
rdjddhirdja, rdjddhirdjarshi, and rdjardjadhiraja . 4 To the above, the 
great Guptas added other epithets claiming for themselves super¬ 
human qualities which raised them almost to the level of the gods. 
Thus in the Allahabad Pillar Inscription Samudra-gupta is referred 
to as a god dwelling on the earth, and a mortal only in celebrating 
the rites of the observances of mankind. In the later genealogical 
accounts also he is habitually described as “equal to the gods 
Dhanada (Kubera), Varuna, Indra, and Antaka (Yama)”, “who 
had no antagonist of equal power in the world” and “who was the 
battle-axe of the god Kritdnta (Yama)”J 5 In the records of North 


1. Nltisdra IX 5-7, XIV 54-5, XXXI 54 and 71. 

2. For a complete account of the subject-matter of this chapter (with full refs.) 
see Part V Chaps. XVII-XXII of the author’s work A History of Indian Poli¬ 
tical Ideas, Bombay, 1959. 

3. See Chs. I-VI. 

4. For variants see Allan, Catalogue, Introduction , cxi, cxv; CII, III. 35, 59; 
EL XXI. 8f. 

5. Allahabad pillar inscription (CII, III. 8). cf. also ibid, pp. 26, 43, 53. 


348 






ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


Bengal, the Gupta Emperors are given the trilogy of titles ( parama - 
daivata paramabhattdraka mahdrdjddhirdja) , which with the slight 
substitution of paramesvara for pdramadciivata became the distinc¬ 
tive designation of paramount rulers in later times. With the same 
object of claiming superhuman excellence, the coin-legends of the 
Gupta Emperors from the time of Samudra-gupta refer to them as 
having acquired heaven (by good deeds) following their conquest 
of the earth. 1 

Next in rank to the Emperor stood the Crown Prince. The rule 
of succession in the Gupta Empire was hereditary descent in the 
male line, such as can be traced back to the Vedic period. But, as 
we have seen above, 2 the Emperor frequently exercised the right of 
selecting his heir-apparent. 

The Imperial Guptas continued the traditional machinery of 
bureaucratic administration with nomenclature mostly borrowed or 
adopted from earlier times. The mantri (High Minister), whose 
office is known to Kautilya’s Arthasdstra, 3 evidently stood at the 
head of the civil administration. Among other high imperial officers 
were included the mahdbalddhikrita (commander-in-chief), the 
mahddandandyaka (general) and the mahdpratlhara (chief door¬ 
keeper, perhaps chief of the palace guards). The mahdbalddhikrita, 
probably corresponding to the mahasenapati of the Satavahana kings, 
controlled a staff of subordinate officers like the mahdsvapati (chief 
officer of cavalry), the bhatdsvapati (officer in charge of the regular 
cavalry), the mahapilupati (chief officer in charge of elephants), 
the sendpati, and baladhikrita. The mahddandanayaka, whose office 
may be traced back to the time of the Kushana emperors and the 
Ikshvaku kings of the Telugu country, was the controlling authority 
over the dandanayakas . The mahdpratlhara was similarly in charge 
of a staff of pratlharas. A high imperial officer, heard of for the 
first time in the Gupta records, but destined to have a long career, 
was the sdndhivigrahika (minister of peace and war, or more 
generally ‘foreign minister’). 4 


1. Allan, Catalogue, Introduction, cviii f. 2. See p. 7. 3. V. 3. 

4. See El, X. 71f. (for mantri and mahdbalddhikrita ); Fleet, CII III. 10, Basarh 
seal No. 17 in Bloch’s list and Bhita seal Nos. 32, 43-44, in Marshall’s list (for 
mahddandanayaka ); Basarh seal Nos. 16 and 18 in Bloch’s list (for mahdpratl¬ 
hara); Basarh seal No. 18 in Bloch’s list (for bhatdsvapati), Basarh seal No. 
572D in Spooner’s list (for baladhikrita); Bhita seal No. 32 (for mahdsvapati); 
IHQ, VI. 53f. (for mahdpilupati); Bhita seal No. 31 (for wadpati); ibid Nos. 44-51 
(for dandandyaka) ; ibid No. 52 (for pratihdra); CII, III. 10 (for sdndhivigrahika ), 
Mahasenapati of the Satavahana dynasty is mentioned in EJ, VIII, 67, 89; XIV 
!53f. while mahddandanayaka of the Kushana and Ikshvaku kings is referred 
to in El, IX. 242; XX. 14-18; XXIV 206. The description of Basarh seals' and 
sealings (with accompanying lists) by T. Bloch and D. B. Spooner occurs i n.ASI, 
1903-4 and 1913-14 respectively, while that of Bhita seals and sealings (with 
similar lists) by J. H. Marshall occurs in ASI, 1911-12. 

349 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


A link between the central and the provincial administration 
of the Imperial Guptas is furnished by the class of officers called 
kumdrdmdtyas and dyuktas. The amdlyas stand for the general 
body of officials in the Arthasastra and the Jatakas, while the dyuktas 
(or dyuktakas ) may be traced back to the yutas of the Asokan 
inscriptions and the yuktas of the Arthasastra. Out of the class 
of amdtyas the Guptas created a new order (or rank) called 
kumdrdrndtya to which belonged not only high imperial officers, 
but also officers on the personal staff of the Emperor, the Crown 
Prince and others as well as those in charge of districts. 1 Similarly 
the dyuktas (or dyuktakas) of the Gupta Empire are entrusted some¬ 
times with the task of restoring the wealth of kings conquered by 
the Emperor 2 and sometimes placed in charge of districts or metro¬ 
politan towns. 3 

In the branch of provincial administration the Guptas followed 
the older models, but with a changed official nomenclature and with 
some daring improvements. The provinces called bhuktis were 
usually governed by officers called uparikas and sometimes by 
princes of the royal blood with the title mahdrdjaputra devabhattd -• 
raka. The uparikas represented the prddesikas of Asoka’s Empire 
and the amdtyas at the provincial headquarters in the Satavahana 
administration, while the mahdrdjaputra devabhattdraka had his 
prototype in the kumdra viceroys of Asoka’s times. The province 
(bhukti ) was often divided into districts usually called vishayas, 
which were ruled by officers called kumdrdmdtyas, dyuktakas or 
vishayapatisA It is characteristic of the policy of administrative 
decentralisation followed by the Gupta Emperors that the district 
officer (in the North Bengal inscriptions of this period) is habitually 
said to be nominated by the provincial governor, though this state¬ 
ment is naturally lacking where there is no mention of either of 
these officers. 

From the series of North Bengal inscriptions just mentioned, 
we learn that the essential business in connection with the sale of 
government lands was sometimes carried out by the kumdrdrndtya 
(or the dyuktaka or the vishayapati or the prince-viceroy) in co¬ 
operation with the Municipal Board (adhishthd.yiddhikarana), and 
sometimes by the kumdrdrndtya wdth the District Office ( vishayddhi- 


1. 


2 , 

4. 


Cf. CIL III. 10. El, 71f, XV. 130f, XXI. 81f; Basarh seals Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 
20, 22 in Bloch’s list (for kumdrdrndtya ); El, XV. 138, XX. 1 (for dyuktakas ). 
On the significance of the titles mahddandandyaka and kumdrdrndtya . see the 
work Studies in Indian History and Culture by the present writer. Ch. XIII, 


pp. 445 ff. 

CIl, HI. 8. 3. El, XV. 138; XX. 61. 

For references to uparikas (in charge of bhuktis) and ri.-hayapatis. etc., (in 
charge of vishayas) under the Imperial Guptas see El, XV. L30f; XVII, 1301, 347; 
XX, 61/; XXI, 8/. The uparika of TIrabhukti had his own office ( adhikarana ) 
commemorated in Basarh seal No. 20 in Bloch’s list. 




ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 

karana ), and at other times by the ashtakuladhikarana with the 
village headman ( grdmika ), the householders ( kutumbins ), and so 
forth. The Municipal Board in the complete examples is said to 
consist principally of four members, namely the Guild-President 
(nagarasreshthi) , the chief merchant (sdrthavdha) , the chief artisan 
( prathamakulika ) and the chief scribe ( prathamakdyastha )J The 
precise significance of ashtakuladhikarana is unknown, but in one 
example it is said to be headed by the village elders (rnahattaras), 
and we may take it generally to mean the Rural Board. Whatever 
that may be, the above records point to the association of popular 
representatives with the district as well as town and village admi¬ 
nistration. In particular, there is reason to think that the members 
of the Municipal Board other than the chief scribe were the repre¬ 
sentatives (perhaps even the Presidents) of the guilds of sreshthls, 
sarthavdhas, and kulikas such as are known to have flourished in 
North Bihar at this period. In this association of the popular element 
with local government we may recognise one of the boldest adminis¬ 
trative experiments of the Imperial Guptas. We have unfortunately 
no detailed knowledge of the working of local administration in 
other provinces of the Gupta Empire. But the references to the 
tirakiimdrdmdtyddhikarana and vaisdlyddhishthdnddhikarana in the 
legends of seals recovered from the site of ancient Vaisall 2 probably 
indicate that the District and Municipal Boards were also functioning 
in North Bihar under the Guptas. On the analogy of the constitu¬ 
tion of the Municipal Board in North Bengal, we may also surmise 
that its sister institution in North Bihar consisted of representatives 
of the guilds of sreshthls, sarthavdhas and kulikas. 

With politic generosity and in accordance with the best tradi¬ 
tions of imperial policy laid down in the text-books, the Guptas 
left a number of conquered states (monarchies as well as republics) 
in a position of subordinate independence. We have a long list of 
frontier kings ( pratyantanripatis ) and republican peoples brought 
within the orbit of dependence by the victorious arms of Samudra- 
gupta. 3 In later times the so-called Parivrajaka-maharajas, 4 ruling 
in the modern Baghelkhand region, habitually issued their land- 
grants “during the enjoyment of sovereignty by the Gupta Emperors”. 
The status of the feudatories probably varied according to their 
relative strength in comparison with that of the paramount power. 
Under the vigorous rule of Samudra-gupta it is likely enough that 
the frontier kings had no other choice than to pay tribute to the 
Emperor, to render him general obedience and to attend his court 

1. See the references under f.n. 1, p. 344 above. 

2. Basarh seals Nos. 22 and 25 in Bloch’s list. 

3. See above, pp. 8 ff. 4. See above, p. 30. 


351 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


for offering homage. On the other hand it is remarkable that the 
Parivrajaka-??iaharajas are completely silent in their records about 
the name of the reigning Emperor, 1 while some other feudatories 2 
do not even refer to the suzerainty of the Guptas in their official 

records. 

We have a glimpse of the general characteristics and tendencies 
of the Gupta imperial administration in the valuable, though brief, 
account of the Chinese pilgrim Fa-hien 3 who visited Northern 
India during the reign of Chandra-gupta II. We learn from him 
how the strong arm of the Guptas was sufficient to establish such 
peace and order throughout “the Middle Kingdom” that a solitary 
pilgrim from abroad had no reason to complain of molestation by 
robbers. It was the imperishable glory of these Emperors that they 
gave their subjects the benefits of “Gupta Peace” without having 
recourse to those harsh methods of police control and criminal 
justice that had disfigured, for instance, the administration of the 
Mauryas. Introducing his account of “the Middle Kingdom” to which 
we have referred above, Fa-hien observes: “They have not to register 
their households or attend to any magistrates and their rules . . . 
If they want to go, they go: if they want to stay, they stay.” And 
again, “The king governs without decapitation or other corporal 
punishment. Criminals are simply fined lightly or heavily accord¬ 
ing to the circumstances of each case.” When we remember the 
immemorial tradition of espionage and of deterrent punishments for 
crimes in this country, we cannot but regard the administration of 
the Guptas as marking a new era of humanitarian reform in the 
penal law of Ancient India. Other features of the Gupta adminis¬ 
tration are reflected in the account of Fa-hien from which we have 
just quoted. “The king’s bodyguards and attendants”, he says, “all 
have regular salaries”. This proves that the Imperial Guptas fol¬ 
lowed the wise policy of the Mauryas in paying fixed salaries to their 
troops. Other aspects of Gupta administration may be gleaned from 
later records. From the Girnar rock inscription of Skanda-gupta 
we learn that when the ancient Sudarsana lake, excavated by 
Chandragupta Maurya’s governor and reconstructed by Asoka’s 
officer, burst its embankment in A.D. 455, it was equipped with a 
great masonry dam by Chakrapalita, the governor in charge of the 
chief city of Surashtra. The munificence of the Imperial Guptas in 
the cause of learning and religion is proved by the foundation of a 
number of monasteries at Nalanda by a succession of rulers and 
princes of this line. 4 

1. See above, p. 30. 

2. See pp. 2.0 ff. 

3. Fa-hien, tr. by Legge, pp. 42-43, 52, 79. 

4. HTW, II. 164-65. 







ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


The result of the beneficent administration of the Gupta Em¬ 
perors was revealed in the prosperous condition of the people under 
their rule. We have Fa-hien’s invaluable testimony to the effect 
that the people of the Middle Kingdom were “numerous and happy”. 
Certain parts of the Empire, specially Magadha and Sahkasya, en¬ 
joyed exceptional prosperity. Not without reason did the Imperial 
Guptas pride themselves in their records on their benevolence to¬ 
wards the needy and the afflicted as well as their success in elevating 
the moral and material standards of their subjects. 1 

The decline and fall of the Gupta Empire were followed by 
the rise of new powers, none of which, however, succeeded in build¬ 
ing up a lasting Empire. These powers, in general, continued the 
old administrative traditions of the Guptas. The Huna Toramana 2 
who assumed the title of mahdrdjddhirdja, had under him a viceroy 
called Dhanyavishnu ruling the Airikina vishaya (modern Saugor 
District of Madhya Pradesh). From the fact that Maharaja 
Matrivishnu, elder brother of this Dhanyavishnu, is known to have 
exercised his authority under a Gupta provincial governor in charge 
of the tract between the Yamuna and the Narmada, 3 we can 
conclude that even the ferocious Huna conquerors sometimes left 
intact not only the old system of provincial administration, but also 
the ancient official families. A record of king Vishnuvardhana 4 
who ruled Western Malwa with the title of rdjddhirdja pmamesvara 
mentions a certain Abhayadatta, who as rdjasihdnlya (viceroy) gov¬ 
erned the tract bounded by the (Eastern) Vindhyas, the Pariyatra 
(Western Vindhyas) and the ocean. Abhayadatta was assisted in the 
administration of his many districts ( desas ) by his own ministers 
(sachivas) . It thus appears that like the Gupta provincial governors 
in North. Bengal, the governor of Vishnuvardhana was at liberty to 
select his own subordinates in charge of districts. 5 

Among the minor dynasties of the period following the downfall 
of the Imperial Guptas may be mentioned that of the Maitrakas of 
ValabhL 6 Beginning with the modest titles of high functionaries 
of the Gupta Empire, the Maitrakas latterly assumed full imperial 
titles. The administration of the Maitrakas, while evincing the 

1. Compare the description of Samudra-gupta (C/I, III. 8) and that of Skanda- 
gupta (ibid. 59). 

2. CII ; III. 159f; Sel. Ins. 396-7. See above, pp. 35 ff. 

3. CII, III. 89; Sel. Ins., 327; cf. above, p. 31. 

4. CII, III. 152 ff; Sel. Ins., 386-92. For Vishnuvardhana alias Yasodharman, see 
above, pp. 39 ff. 

5. The explanation of rdjasthdniya as viceroy suggested by Biihler (IA, V. 207) 
on the authority of Kshemendra’s Lokaprakasa is supported in the present con¬ 
text by the reference to numerous desas ruled by Abhayadatta through his 
own ‘ministers’. Less probable explanations are ‘Foreign Secretary’ (Tripath 1, 
History of Kanauj, 138) and ‘Political Agent’ (Pires, The Maukharis, 170). 

6. See pp. 60 ff. 

353 

C.A.—23 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


general characteristics of other Indian Governments of this period, 
had some distinctive features. Among the officers of the central 
government 1 mentioned by name in their records are included a 
divirapati (sometimes with the addition of the titles sandhivigrahd- 
dhikrita mahdsdmanta) , a mahasandhivigrahdkshapatalddhipati and 
a pramdtri, Again, the list of officials specified in the formula of the 
Maitraka land-grants includes dyuktakas, kumaramdtyas, drdngikas, 
dhruvadhikaranikas, chauroddharanikas, dandapdsikas, rdjasthdnl - 
yas } and anutpannaddna-samudgrdhakas. It is easy to recognise in 
the sdndhivigrahikas of the above list officers of the same name in 
the Gupta records. The divirapati, as the name shows, was the head 
of the diviras (clerks), an office which may be traced back to a 
record of the Uchchakalpa Maharaja Jayanatha 2 dated A.D. 496. 
The dyuktakas and kumdrdmdtyas are well-known names of execu¬ 
tive officers of the central as well as local administration dating 
from Gupta times. Equally well known were the drdngikas, i.e. 
commanders of military outposts, the chauroddharanikas and the 
dandapdsikas who were police officers, and the rdjasthdhlyas who 
were probably viceroys. Among new names are those of pramdtris 
probably meaning officers connected with the department of land 
survey, dhruvadhikaranikas apparently signifying officers charged 
with supervision of revenue from farmers and the anutpannaddna- 
samudgrahakas who were probably charged with forcible collection 
of the so-called voluntary gifts from the subjects. 3 It would seem 
from the above that the central government of the Maitrakas was 
sufficiently organised to include the offices of Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, Chief Secretary and Chief Accountant besides officers in 
charge of police and revenue departments. A regular organisation 
of provincial administration under the Maitrakas is suggested by 
the location of the donated lands in specified pethas (or sthalls) 
comprised in vishayas (or dharanis or pravesyas) , which were them¬ 
selves included in bhuktis. But we have no mention of the officers 
in charge of these districts and divisions. The high prosperity of 
the kingdom under the rule of the Maitrakas is testified to by Hiuen 
Tsang who observes that “it was very rich and prosperous”. 

2. Harsha, his Contemporaries and Successors 

In the first half of the seventh century A.D. king Harsha- 
vardhana of the ruling house of Thaneswar made himself the strong- 

1. For the titles of officers and administrative divisions of the Maitrakas mentioned 
below, cf. El, I. 87; VIII, 108; XI. 81f, 104f, 174f; XVI. 17f; XVII. 105f; XXI. 179f; 
XXII. 114f, 164f; CII , III. 166; IA, XV. 186f. 

2. See p. 30. 

3. Pramdtri has also been taken to mean ‘spiritual counsellor’ (Biihler, El, I. 118) 
and ‘judge’ (Tripathi History of Kanauj, 140). On dhruvddhikaranika and 
anutpannadana-samudgrahaka, see Hindu Revenue System, 221-222. 


354 





ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


est power in Northern India by his successful wars and conquests. 1 
He assumed (as his father and grandfather had already done on 
hardly sufficient grounds) the imperial title of paramabhattaraka 
maharajadhiraja. To judge from the extent of Harsha’s empire and 
the size of his forces, his administration must have been highly 
organised, but we have few details of the same. Describing the 
incidents preceding Harsha’s accession, Hiuen Tsang tells us how 
immediately after Rajya-vardhana’s murder “the statesmen of 
Kanauj”, acting in accordance with the advice of “their leading man 
Bani (Bhandi?)”, invited Harsha to ascend the throne, and how this 
request was pressed by “the ministers of state”. This seems to refer 
to a smaller and a larger State council functioning at the beginning 
of the reign. Among the high imperial officers of Harsha’s court 
mentioned in the Harsha-charita are a mahdsandhivigrahddhikrita, 
a mahabaladhikrita, and a mahapratihara, while officers of lesser 
importance mentioned in the same work are the sendpati (general), 
the brihadasvavdra (chief cavalry officer), the katuka (probably 
meaning an officer entrusted with the administration of criminal 
justice), 2 and a grdmdkshapatalika (village notary). Harsha’s own 
land-grants refer to a mahdkshapatalddhikaranadhikrita-sdmanta- 
maharaja and a mahdkshapatalika-sdmantamahdrdja as writers of 
the charters and a mahdpramdtdra-mahdsdmanta as the executor 
(dutaka ) of the grants. 3 In the above the mahdsandhivigrahddhi¬ 
krita, the mahdbalddhikrita, and the mahapratihara, already known 
from earlier times, mean respectively the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, the Commander-in-Chief, and probably the chief of the 
palace guards. The mahdkshapatalika was the Head of the Accounts 
Office, the office of akshapatala being known from the time of 
Kautilya’s Arthaisastra. The mahdpramdtdra was evidently the head 
of the pramdtris, an office which we have traced back to the records 
of the Maitrakas of Valabhi. The title mahdsdmanta (or sdmanta- 
mahdrdja) attached to some of these offices would seem to indicate 
that Harsha utilised the services of his feudatories for the direct 
administration of his empire. The offices of the sendpati and the 
brihadasvavdra point to the organisation of the army under different 
commands. In the branch of provincial administration we find from 
the description of the donated lands in Harsha’s inscriptions that his 
kingdom was divided into bhuktis (provinces) sub-divided into 
vishayas (districts). Various officers of the local administration 
bearing the titles bhogapati, ayuktaka, and pratipdlakapurushas are 


1. See Ch. IX. 

2. On the significance of katuka see Studies in Indian History and Culture, 453. 

3. El, I. 67f; IV. 208f. 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


referred to in a passage of the Havsha-charita . 1 This would suggest 
an official-ridden village administration at that time. Another officer 
mentioned in the Harsha-charita is the grdmdkshapatalika whose 
title points to a regular arrangement for maintaining the village 
accounts. We have an insight into the general character and 
tendencies of Harsha’s administration in the contemporary, if some¬ 
what partial, accounts of Hiuen Tsang and Bana. Harsha’s strong 
love of justice, his unremitting industry, and the benevolence of 
his rule are strikingly brought out by the Chinese pilgrim in the 
following words: 2 “He (Harsha) was just in his administration and 
punctilious in the discharge of his duties. He forgot sleep and food 
in his devotion to good works . . . The king’s day was divided into 
three periods of which one was given up to affairs of state and two 
were devoted to religious works. He was indefatigable and the day 
was too short for him”. In another context the Chinese pilgrim 
says of Harsha that he was “virtuous and patriotic” and “all people 
celebrated his praises in songs”. Illustrating the king’s solicitude 
for the good government of his kingdom, Hiuen Tsang says that he 
made tours of inspection throughout his dominions, not residing 
long at any one place and not going abroad during the three months 
of the rainy season. With all his vigilance, however, Harsha was 
unable to ensure such complete peace and security as had been 
achieved by the Imperial Guptas. When going down the Gahga 
with about eighty other fellow T -passengers on board a vessel to the 
east of Ayodhya, Hiuen Tsang had the misfortune of being captured 
by a band of pirates from whose hands he could save himself only 
by the miraculous rise of a storm. In the course of the account from 
which we have quoted above, Hiuen Tsang refers to Harsha’s 
building rest-houses for travellers throughout his dominions besides 
his erection of numerous stupas and Buddhist monasteries. One of 
the most famous of these monasteries must have been the one built 
by Harsha at Nalanda which, according to Hiuen Tsang’s account, 
was covered with brass-plates and was about one hundred feet in 
height. The most impressive exhibition of Harsha’s benign rule is 
to be found in his series of quinquennial assemblies at Prayaga for 
the distribution of all his accumulated treasures, the sixth and last 
of these being witnessed and described by Hiuen Tsang. 

Among the contemporaries of Harsha none was more remarkable 
than Bhaskara-varman, the able and fortunate king of Kamarupa. 3 
In the list of officials mentioned by name in his inscription 4 are 

1. Harsha-charita, tr. by Cowell and Thomas, p. 206. 

2. For the quotations from Chinese authorities in this section cf. HTW, I 140 
168-177, 199, 340f, 364; II. 164-65, 246; Beal, Life, pp. 83, 86-9, 184-7. 

3. See pp. 139 ff. 

4. El, XII. 65; XIX. 118f. 


356 



ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


included an djndsatam-prdpayitd (an officer charged with carrying 
the king's orders into effect), a slmdpraddtd (the officer for fixing 
the boundaries of the donated lands), a nydyakaranika (a judicial 
officer), a kdyastha (scribe), a sdsayitd (officer entrusted with execu¬ 
tion of the charter), a bhdnddgdrddhikrita (superintendent of stores), 
and an utkhetayita (officer in charge of the collection of taxes?). 
The description of the donated lands as lying within the limits of 
Chandrapur! vishaya (district) and the mention of the officer 
(ndyaka ) in charge of the same in the record just mentioned, point 
to the usual administrative division of the kingdom into districts. 
The reference to the vishayapati and the adhikarana as receiving 
communication of the king’s grant suggests the association of the 
district officer with the District (or Municipal) Board**-of the kind 
existing in North Bengal under the Imperial Guptas. 

We have a connected account of the system of public adminis¬ 
tration prevailing in India in Harsha’s time from the pen of the 
illustrious Hiuen Tsang, who visited almost every part of the sub¬ 
continent except the extreme south between A.D. 630 and 644. 
Introducing his general description of India, Hiuen Tsang observes 
that the country was politically divided into about seventy king¬ 
doms. Evidently, then, in spite of the rise of great Empires like 
those of Harsha in the North and of Pulakesin II in the Deccan, the 
country was far from being politically united. The Kshatriyas in 
Hiuen Tsang’s time were traditionally held to have exercised the 
ruling power for centuries, the few instances to the contrary being 
explicitly declared to have been caused by breaches of the consti¬ 
tutional law. The aims of the Kshatriyas, again, were ‘‘benevolence 
and mercy”. In judicial administration the standard of criminal 
law reform set up by the Imperial Guptas was evidently maintained, 
if not in its fulness, at least to a great extent. For violations of the 
statute law and plots against the king, the offender was imprisoned 
for life, and though not suffering any corporal punishment was “not 
treated as a member of the community”. The law of treason in the 
seventh century was evidently more severe than in Gupta times, 
when according to Fa-hien, the penalty even for “a second attempt 
at rebellion” was only the loss of the right hand. For breach of 
social morality and filial duty, Hiuen Tsang continues, the penalty 
was mutilation or exile—a punishment which strikes one as unduly 
severe. For the remaining offences, the penalty was only a money- 
payment. In the branch of finance, Hiuen Tsang was impressed 
with the moderation of the State demand and the absence of vexa¬ 
tious restrictions against the liberty of the subject, from which 
resulted a complete security of property. He writes: “As the 
government is generous, official requirements are few. Families 


357 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


are not registered, and individuals are not subject to forced labour 
contributions”. Again he says: “Taxation being light and forced 
labour being sparingly used, every man keeps to his hereditary 
occupation and attends to his patrimony”. Hiuen Tsang’s detailed 
reference to the condition of different parts of the country at this 
period may be taken to be a general comment on his description 
of Indian administration given above. From his account it appears 
that while certain areas like West Gandhara and the tract stretching 
from SravastI to Kapilavastu lay desolate, other regions like Kanya- 
kubja, Varanasi, Chan-Chu (probably Ghazipur District), Pundra- 
vardhana and Karnasuvarna (most of which, it will be noticed, lay 
within the limits of Harsha’s empire) enjoyed high prosperity. 

In the last quarter of the seventh and first half of the eighth 
century A.D. Magadha rose to a position of imperial greatness 
under the Later Guptas of Magadha. 1 From Adityasena to Jivita- 
gupta II we find four generations of these kings assuming the usual 
imperial title. Corresponding to this title of the kings was the title 
paramabhattdrikd mahddevl borne by their queens. We have no 
direct reference to the king’s functions in these records, but no doubt 
he enjoyed the traditional headship of the civil and military admi¬ 
nistration. 2 The list of officials mentioned in the inscription of 
Jlvitagupta II includes dutas (ambassadors), simdkarmakaras 
(makers of boundaries) and other well-known designations. Referen¬ 
ces to bhukti and vishaya also point to the continuance of the Gupta 
administrative nomenclature for provinces and districts. 

III. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION—SOUTHERN INDIA 

1. The Dynasties of the Deccan 

In the region of Vidarbha (Berar and the adjoining tracts) the 
illustrious house of the Vakatakas rose to power as early as the 
second half of the third century A.D. and their rule lasted almost 
down to the middle of the sixth. 3 The administration of these kings 
presents some striking features. Pravarasena I assumed the title 
of dharmamahdrdja which was justified by his performance of 
numerous Vedic sacrifices including the Asvamedha. His example 
was followed by his son and grandson. Pravarasena I also assumed 
the title of samrat (emperor), while his successors were content with 
the modest title of maharaja . We have an instance of a Queen 
Dowager (Prabhavatl-gupta) acting as Regent for her minor son. 

1. See pp. 126 ff. 

2. Pires’s statement (The Maukharis, 169) that the powers of legislation were 
deposited in the king is wholly unwarranted and contrary to all that we know 
of ancient Indian kingship. 

3. See above, pp. 178 ff. 


358 







ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


Among officers of the central government of the Vakatakas we find 
names of the sendpati (general) and the rdjyddhikrita (Chief Minis¬ 
ter?), the former being habitually described as writing the charters 
of the land-grants. The solicitude of these kings for official prece¬ 
dent is proved by a clause uniformly found in their land-grants, 
namely that the immunities allowed to the donees were such as had 
been approved by former kings. How much the Vakatakas prided 
themselves on their right of hereditary descent is illustrated by the 
striking legend on their seals, namely, that their royalty was 
obtained in course of succession. The area of the donated land, 
given according to ‘the royal measure’ in one of their records 1 , 
probably hints at the introduction of an official standard of measure¬ 
ment for land-revenue assessment. The strict control the Vakatakas 
maintained over their charitable endowments is illustrated by a 
clause in the same record by which the king, while granting a village 
and adjoining lands to a group of one thousand Brahman^s, express¬ 
ly reserved for himself the right of resuming the grant if the donees 
were to commit certain serious offences. 

The administration of the Imperial Chalukyas of VatapI, while 
partaking of the general characteristics of the governments of this 
period, was marked by some striking features. The later kings of 
this line assumed the imperial titles of paramesvara (or rdjddhirdja 
paramesvara ), maharaja 9 and sometimes the still more ambitious 
style of mahdrdjddhirdja paramesvara paramabhattdraka. Among 
the officers of their central government is mentioned the mahdsdndhi- 
vigrahika —a title traceable to the simpler sandhivig'rahika of the 
Imperial Guptas. The list of informants in the formula of the 
Chalukya land-grants includes the vishayapati (District-Officer), the 
grdmakuta (village head-man), and the mahattarddhikdrins who 
probably represented the executive body of the assembly of mahat- 
taras (leading householders of the village). A sadly mutilated 
inscription dated A.D. 725 records the grant of a constitution by 
the Crown Prince Vikramaditya in favour of the mahajanas and 
the nagdras as well as the eighteen prakritis of a certain town. 2 
Probably other towns similarly enjoyed charters of liberties granted 
by the Crown (or the Crown representative). The record just men¬ 
tioned not only describes the duties of royal officers in detail, but 
also specifies the taxes and other charges (in cash as well as in kind) 
payable by every household to the State and to the guild of oilmen. 
The care with which local taxes were assessed at this period is 
proved by the fact that the charges above-mentioned are prescribed 

1. Cll, III. 236f. 

2. EL XIV. 190f. Barnett translates mahajanas. naqaras, and prakritis respectively 
as ‘Brahmana house-holders’, ‘burgesses’, and ‘classes of subjects’. 


.350 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


on a graduated scale according as the householders are of the highest, 
the intermediate or the lowest degrees. 

2. The Dynasties of the Telugu, Tamil and Kannada tracts . 

The administrative organisation of the dynasties that rose to 
power in South India after the downfall of the Satavahanas was 
essentially of the same type as that of their North Indian contem¬ 
poraries, but it had some distinctive features. While the kings of 
the Brihatphalayana, Salahkayana, and Vishnukundin dynasties 1 
were content with the title of raja and maharaja, some Early 
Paliava kings 2 chose to call themselves dharmamahdrdjddhirdja 
(or dharmamahdrdja) indicative of their Brahmanical orthodoxy. 
Next in importance to the king stood, as in North India, the Crown 
Prince. Under the Early Paliava kings the Crown Prince (called 
yuvamahardja) and even his wife had sufficiently high status to 
make grants of land on their own authority, and issue orders to the 
State officers to this effect. 3 It is probable that in these cases the 
Crown Prince at the time of the grant was acting as Regent on 
behalf of the reigning sovereign. Among higher officers of State 
are mentioned by name a mahddandandyaka (commander-in-chief) 
in an inscription of the Salahkayana Nandi-varman. In the list of 
officials receiving information of the king’s land-grants, the records 
of the Salahkayanas include desddhipatis, vishayapatis and ayukta- 
kas besides the indefinite rajapurushas , while a record of the Vishnu¬ 
kundin Madhava-varman I mentions vishayamahattaras and adhi- 
kdrapurushas. In the same context the inscriptions of the Early 
Pallavas refer to adhikritas, dyuktas, adhyakshas, sdsanasahchdrins 
(messengers) and naiyogikas . The longest list is preserved in an 
inscription of the Paliava Sivaskanda-varman. 4 The list comprises, 
besides the rdjakumdras (princes), the sendpati (general), the 
rashtrikas (governors of districts?), the desadhikritas, the grama- 
bhojakas (village free-holders?), the amdtyas , the arakshadhikritas 
(guards), the gaulmikas (chiefs of military outposts), the tairthikas 
(overseers of fords), the naiyogikas, the bhatamanushyas (soldiers), 
and the sancharantakas (spies). In the above lists some of the titles 
like dyuktas, adhyakshas, naiyogikas and amdtyas, evidently belong 
to the officers of the central as well as local governments. 5 On 
the other hand, the desddhipatis (or desadhikritas) and vishayapatis 
(or rashtrikas) would seem to represent officers in charge of pro¬ 
vinces ( desas ) and districts respectively. Actually the districts are 
called dharas in the records of the Brihatphalayanas, vishayas in 

1. See Ch. XI. 3. EI. VI. 86f; VII. 145f. 

2. See Ch. XIII. 4. EI, I. 5f. 

5. By way of illustration it may be pointed out that a Paliava record (El. VIII. 143f) 

refers to dyuktas belonging to a village. 


360 








ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


those of the Salankayanas, and rdshtras in those of the Early Falla- 
vas. Again, sometimes a vyaprita is stated, as in the records of the 
Satavahanas, as holding charge at the provincial headquarters . 1 
The vishayamahattaras , now mentioned apparently for the first 
time in the records of South India, would appear to signify the elders 
of the district, but their precise constitution and functions are 
unknown. The reference to the mutuda (with variants) in the re¬ 
cords of the Salankayanas points to the continuity of the village ad¬ 
ministration under the traditional headman. The administration of 
the Kadambas 2 was of the usual type known to this period. The 
kings occasionally adopted the title of dharmamahdraja (or the more 
ambitious dharmamahdrdjddhirdja) , no doubt after the example of 
the Fallava kings just mentioned. Among the officers of the central 
government are mentioned the sendpati (general) and the rahasyddhi - 
krita. Reference is also made to yuktas who were, as we have seen, 
members of the central as well as the local government . 3 The 
provinces were called vishayas. A measure of hscal reform, namely 
the use of the royal measure ( rajamana) for land-survey, is suggested 
by the description of the land granted by some of the records. 


1. El, VI. 86f. 2. See Ch. XIII. 

3. See JA. VII, 37-38; XVI, 264, etc. for references to Kadamba dharmamaharajas 
and dharmamahdrdjadhirajas; JA, VI, 24; VII. 37-38; El, VI 14 for references 
to sendpati and rahasyddhikrita of the Kadambas. 


361 








CHAPTER XVII 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 1 

In the history of Ancient Indian jurisprudence the period ex¬ 
tending from the beginning of the fourth to the middle of the eighth 
century after Christ is of high significance. On the one hand it saw 
in the last metrical Smritis the close of that long line of authorities 
on the Sacred Law which goes back to the Aphorisms of Gautama 
and Vasishtha, perhaps a thousand years earlier. On the other hand 
it witnessed in Asahaya’s commentary on Narada-smriti the dim 
beginnings of that line of Smriti commentators which was to reach 
its climax in the following centuries. We may describe the change 
by stating that the constructive phase of Hindu Law was passing 
away and its critical phase was about to begin. 

The three great works of this period which form, as has been 
well observed, “a triumvirate in the realm of Hindu Law and pro¬ 
cedure” are the Smritis of Brihaspati, Narada and Katyayana. 
Among these Narada’s work alone has come to us in its complete form, 
while the rest have been compiled by scholars piecing together the 
quotations in later works. To the latter category belong likewise 
the Smritis of Vyasa, Parasara and others. We may broadly trace the 
development of Law and Legal institutions in these works under 
three heads, viz. 

1. Courts of Justice. 

2. Judicial procedure. 

3. Civil and Criminal Law in some select branches. 

1. Courts of Justice 

The king’s court, which was the highest in the land, is called by 
such names as sabha, dharmasthana, and dharmadhikarana (“the 
Hall of Justice”). We have a full account of its constitution in 
Katyayana who requires the king in one place to decide suits in asso¬ 
ciation with learned Brahmanas, elders, and ministers well-versed 
in statecraft, and in another place to do so in the company of the 
judge, the ministers, the Brahmanas, the Purohita and the assessors. 
The complete apparatus of the sabhd consisting of “ten limbs” is des¬ 
cribed by Brihaspati. In this list are included the king, the chief 
judge, the assessors, the accountant, the scribe and the bailiff. “The 

1. For an exhaustive description of the system of law and legal institutions in the 
literature of the Smritis with complete references see KHDS Vol. Ill, Section 
Vyavahara (ibid Chapters XI-XXXI). The quotations in this chapter are from 
the same work. 




LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


chief judge”, it is explained, “declares the law, the king awards the 
punishment, the assessors examine the dispute, the accountant 
counts the wealth or subject-matter of the dispute, the scribe writes 
down the pleadings, depositions and decisions, and the bailiff sum¬ 
mons the defendant, the witnesses and the assessors.” Vyasa des¬ 
cribes the paraphernalia of the king’s court as consisting of the 
Brahmanas, the ministers, the judge, the accountant, the scribe, the 
bailiff, the arranger of seats and the assessors. In the above it will 
be noticed, the king, the judge and the assessors as well as the Brah¬ 
manas constitute the king’s court, while the rest are the court’s assis¬ 
tants and nothing more. The position of the learned Brahmanas, 
whether they are or are not appointed by the king, is that they are 
entitled to state their view of the suit. Katyayana introduces an 
additional feature by stating that the court should consist of asses¬ 
sors and learned Brahmanas as well as a few merchants, these last 
being entitled (no doubt in mercantile bases) to listen to the cause 
and take part in ihe administration of justice. The king, says 
Narada, ia to abide by the decision of the judge, while Katyayana 
solemnly impresses upon the sabhyas the obligation of giving a just 
decision and even of persuading the king to desist from a wrong 
decision. In the spirit of their predecessors the late Smritis impose 
moral and spiritual as well as legal sanctions for purity of the ad¬ 
ministration of justice. The sin for unjust decision, we are told, is 
shared in equal proportions by the litigant, the witnesses, the asses¬ 
sors and the king. By contrast Katyayana assures immunity from 
sin to the assessors who administer justice in accordance with the 
law. Of the legal sanctions imposed by our authors on the judge 
and assessors it will be convenient to speak in another place. 

The State courts are divided by Brihaspati into four categories, 
namely those fixed in one place, those which are peripatetic, the 
officers appointed by the king and using the king’s seal and the king 
himself. A complete list of courts in an ascending order is given by 
Narada. This consists of the kulas (‘village councils’), the srenls 
(‘corporations’), the ganas, a person appointed by the king, and the 
king himself. In the above list, it will be noticed, the first three are 
practically arbitration courts, and the last two alone are State 
Courts. 1 

2. Judicial Procedure 

From the point of view of judicial procedure this period marks 
the climax of Hindu jurisprudence. In the first place the transac- 

1. Kat. vv. 55-59, Vyasa vv. 4-5 (constitution of the king’s court). Bri. p. 9, vv. 
57-58 (4 kinds of sabha). Bri. p. 74 v. 87—p. 75 v. 90 (functions of ‘limbs’ of 
sabhd). Kat. 71-81 (duties of sabhyas ). The terms in the original are prddvi- 
vdka (‘judge’), sabhya (‘assessor’), ganaka (‘accountant’), hkhaka (‘scribe’) and 
svapurusha or sddhyapdla (bailiff). 


308 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


tion of legal business has, according to Narada, four stages. These 
are “receiving information from a person, then finding out under 
what title of law the information falls, the consideration of the 
pleadings of the parties and the evidence, and lastly the decision. 5 ’ 
According to the alternative view of Brihaspati the four stages of 
legal proceedings are the plaint, the reply, adducing of evidence and 
the decision. Vyasa mentions the successive stages of a judicial 
trial as consisting of the plaint, the answer, the arrest before judg¬ 
ment, the evidence and the judgment. 1 

Beginning with the plaint Katyayana requires that ‘the litigant 
appearing before the judge should be interrogated about the nature 
of the dispute or of the injury received: the judge after considering 
the reply along with the assessors and the Brahmanas should deliver 
the sealed order (“seal”) to the plaintiff, or else order the bailiffs to 
summon the defendant, if he thinks that the suit is maintainable in 
law. The plaint is to be written as a draft on the ground or on a 
board and after amendments, if any, the final plaint is to be written 
down on leaf or on paper’. The plaint, continues the same autho¬ 
rity, should have the qualities of precision, consistency and so forth: 
a plaint which is opposed to public policy or contains a mixture of 
several titles of lav/ or is indefinite, is to be rejected. Wilful dis¬ 
regard of the summons by the defendant is punishable with fines 
proportionate to the gravity of the offence. But, as Narada ob¬ 
serves, various classes of persons (including one who is diseased and 
a woman of good family or of reduced circumstances) as well as 
persons in special circumstances (including cowherds at the grazing 
season, cultivators at the sowing season and artisans engaged at 
work) are exempted from personal attendance. The parties, says 
Katyayana, may be represented by recognized agents or relatives, 
but no representation is allowed in the case of a number of serious 
offences. The plaintiff, according to Narada, Brihaspati and Katya¬ 
yana, might keep the defendant under restraint by a process of law 
called dsedha till the arrival of the king’s bailiff. At the beginning 
of the suit, according to Katyayana, sureties should be taken from 
each party for the satisfaction of the judgment. According to the 
same authority one carrying on a litigation in the absence of close 
relationship to or of special appointment by the party is to be 
punished. 2 

1. Nar. Introd. I 36 (4 stages of legal proceedings). Bri. p. 28 vv. 1-3 (4 stages). 
Vyasa (5 stages). The terms in the original are agama vyavahdrapada chikitsd 
and nirnaya (Nar); bhdshdpdda uttarapada kriydpada and pratydkalita or 
nirnaya (Bri. in Apararka and in G. O. S. edition p. 29) purvapaksha ut - 
tara pratydkalita and kriya-vdda (Kat). Pratydkalita is translated by Kane, 
op. cit. p. 298, as “discussion or consideration among the sabhyas about the 
burden of proof.” 

2. Bri. p. 29 v. f. Kat. 86 /. (plaint). Kat. 89-91 (representation by agents or rela¬ 
tives). Bri. p. 22, 136 f, Kat. 104 f. (dsedha). 

364 






LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


Unlike the plaintiff who usually gets no time for filing his 
plaint, the defendant, according to Narada and Pitamaha, may be 
granted an adjournment proportionate to the time of the transaction 
in dispute, the capacity of the parties to the suit and the gravity of 
the cause. But in certain serious cases the reply must be given at 
once. The reply, as Narada, Brihaspati and Katyayana observe, 
may be of four kinds, namely, admission, denial, special plea and 
plea of former judgment. Katyayana adds that defective answers, 
such as those ununderstandable, self-contradictory and incomplete, 
would lead to loss of the suit. A strict rule required that litigants 
who after the cause was started compromised their dispute by a pri¬ 
vate arrangement, were to pay a double fine. 1 

The burden of proof, according to Narada and Harita, was to 
lie on the plaintiff in a reply of denial and on the defendant in a 
reply of special\plea or of former judgment. The proof, as all the 
authorities agree, was of two kinds, namely, human and divine. 
The former comprised witnesses, documents and possession, and the 
latter consisted of ordeals. Narada and Katyayana, however, con¬ 
vey the warning that ordeals were to be resorted to only when hu¬ 
man means of proof were not available. A' striking dictum of 
Katyayana is to the effect that if the litigant fails by relying on a 
weak ground, he cannot raise the question again on other and 
stronger grounds. 2 

The judgment in a law-suit was given in the form of a written 
document called jayapatra (document of success), which was in¬ 
cluded by Brihaspati in a longer list of State documents ( rdjakiya - 
lekhya). Katyayana, however, limits the term jayapatra to judg¬ 
ments given in cases of those whose claims are cast off for various 
reasons, without a thorough trial. He uses instead a special term 
paSchatkara (refutation) for judgments given after going through 
all the four stages of judicial proceeding. A judgment of this last 
kind was to set forth summary statements of the parties, depositions 
of witnesses, deliberation of the court and the decision. It was to 
be written by the king under his own hand and signed by the mem¬ 
bers of the court. 3 * 

3. Civil and Criminal Law 

Coming to the body of civil and criminal law, we have room only 
for noticing some of its principal heads. As in the older Smriti law the 

1. Bri. p. 36 v. 1 f. Kat. 89 f. (reply) “The four kinds of reply are called mithya (of 
denial), sampratipatti or satya (confession or admission), karana or pratyava- 
skandana ( of special plea of demurrer), prannydya or purvanyaya ( of former 
judgment or res judicata) 9 ’. 

2. Nar. Introd. I 70, Bri. p. 45 v. 1 f, Kat. 211 /, (adducing of evidence). 

3. Nar. Introd. II 43, Bri. p. 64 v. 26 f, Kat. 259-65 (judgment). On rdjakiya - 

Aekhyas see Kane, op. cit. p. 310. 


365 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


sacred canon and approved custom were to be regarded as autho¬ 
rities for the law. Katyayana adds that the usages which are esta¬ 
blished in the country with the people’s approval and are not in con¬ 
flict with the Vedas and the Smritis should be recorded in writing 
under the king’s seal. The eighteen titles of law known to the older 
Smritis are expanded into 132 divisions by Narada. But both 
Brihaspati and Katyayana agree that the two springs of a judicial 
proceeding are injury and non-payment of what is due. This makes 
a broad approach to the logical division between civil and criminal 
law. 1 

We may now consider some of the more important topics of the 
late Smriti law. These come under the heads of Succession, 
Strldhana, Abuse and Assault, Theft and Violence. As regards the 
law of succession, the most notable development in this period took 
place in respect of the widow’s right as heir to her sonless husband. 
It is to be observed that earlier authorities like Apastamba, Baudha- 
yana and Manu had omitted the widow from the list of heirs of a 
person dying without male issue. This view is repeated by Narada. 
Sahkha however admits the widow’s right only after the brothers, 
and thereafter alternatively with the parents. The clear recognition 
of the widow as the foremost heir of a son-less man is due to Yajha- 
valkya and Vishnu. Following their authority Brihaspati and 
Katyayana permit the widow to succeed immediately to the estate 
of her deceased sonless husband, the next in order of succession 
being the daughters (unmarried daughters getting the preference), 
the father, the mother, the brother, and the brother’s sons. 2 

The term strldhana is used in the Smritis not in the etymo- 
logical sense of all property possessed by a woman, but in the techni¬ 
cal sense of “certain kinds of property given to a woman on certain 
occasions or at different stages of her life”. The complete develop¬ 
ment of the Smriti law of strldhana is due to Katyayana. He first 
defines the six classes of strldhana mentioned by the older writers, 
namely, what was given to a woman before the nuptial fire 
iadhyagni), what was given at the time of the bridal procession 
(adhyavdhanika), what was given to a woman through affection 
(prltidatta), and what was received from the brother, the mother 
or the father. To the above Katyayana adds other kinds of sfrl- 
dhana, such as the bridal price (sulk a), what was obtained by a 
woman after marriage from the family of her husband or of her 

1. Kat. 48. (record of conventions with the king’s seal). Nar. I 20-25. (132 divi¬ 
sions of law). Bri. p. 2 v. 9 /, Kat. 29 (two aspects of vyavahdra ). 

2. Nar. XIII 30. Sahkha quoted by Vij. on Yaj. II 135 (omission or limitation of 
widow’s right). Bri. p. 211 v. 92 /, Kat. 921, 926 (widow’s right as the foremost 
heir). 




LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


parents ( anvadheya ), and what was obtained by a married woman 
in her husband’s house or by a maiden in the house of her father 
(saudayika ). In the result “all property (whether movable or im¬ 
movable) obtained by a woman, either as a maiden or at marriage or 
after marriage from her parents or the family or relatives of the 
parents or from the husband and his family (except immovable pro¬ 
perty given by the husband) , is included within the scope of stri- 
dhana '. Katyayana, however, limits the amount of stndhana which 
can be given to a woman by her relations to two thousand panas, 
(silver coins), while he disallows gift of immovable property in her 
favour. Again, he declares wealth obtained by a woman by prac¬ 
tising the mechanical arts or by gift of a stranger, to be outside the 
definition of stndhana, and asserts its ownership to lie with the 
husband. The woman has absolute right of disposal over her sauda- 
yika property (including immovables) as also over gifts (except im¬ 
movables) made out of affection by her husband. Neither the 
husband nor the son, nor the father nor the mother, has a right to 
take the stndhana, or give it to others. Should anyone of them 
forcibly appropriate the stndhana, he would be liable to return it 
with interest and also pay a fine. As. regards the law of succession 
of stndhana Narada, repeating Yajhavalkya, says that it devolves 
on the daughters, and in the absence of her issue on her husband or 
on her parents as the case might be. According to Brihaspati stri- 
dhana devolves on the woman’s progeny, preference being given to 
the unmarried daughter and the married daughter getting only a 
trifle. According to Katyayana the stndhana of the mother goes 
to the sisters whose husbands are living along with the brothers, and 
it devolves on the sons on failure of daughters . 1 

( In the penal law of the late as of the early Smritis the punish¬ 
ment of crimes occupies a more important place than compensation 
for wrongs. It is, in other words, a law of crimes in the strict sense 
of the term, while the law of torts holds a subordinate position . 2 

Under the head of law called Abuse and Defamation (i mk- 
parushya ) we have to mention that both Narada and Katyayana dis¬ 
tinguish between its three varieties, namely, nishthura (“reproach¬ 
ful”), aslila (“obscene”) and tivra (“merciles”), while Brihaspati 
similarly mentions its three grades, namely the lowest, the middling 
and the highest. The fines for these offences depend upon the above 
distinctions *as well as of the castes of the parties. In the case of 
abuse imputing great sins, the offender is cleared from guilt only if 
he succeeds in establishing the truth of the imputation. Otherwise 

1. Kat. vv. 594-920. Also Nar. XIII 8-9, Bri. p. 300 v. 31 (stndhana). 

2. Cf. Priyanath Sen. General Principles of Hindu Jurisprudence , 335-336. 

3G7 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


he would be as guilty as the man he vilifies, and if his charge is false, 
he would be liable to pay the highest line. 1 

The heading Assault ( dandaparushya ) includes not only the act 
of striking a person or injuring his limb, but also throwing foul 
matter upon his body. According to Katyayana it likewise com¬ 
prises such acts as making domestic animals carry burdens at an 
improper time or in a tired or hungry condition, causing sacred 
animals to bear burdens, and destroying trees. Punishments for 
such offences are proportionate to the part of the body injured, the 
extent of the injury and the caste of the offender. The idea of com¬ 
pensation to the person injured is reflected in the clause that he who 
kills an animal must provide another animal of the same type or pay 
its value to the owner. 2 

Theft ( steya ) according to our authorities is of two kinds, name¬ 
ly, 'patent’ and ‘clandestine’. Narada and Brihaspati following 
Manu include in the class of patent thieves traders employing false 
weights and balances, gamblers and quacks, those who counterfeit 
articles and those who live by magic or palmistry by foretelling good 
fortune or portents. Katyayana adds to this list ignorant priests 
officiating at a sacrifice and incompetent teachers claiming to pro¬ 
pound the sdstras . Punishments for theft comprise mutilation, im¬ 
prisonment, confiscation of property, exile and death. The old 
Smriti clause requiring the .king to restore stolen property, and fail¬ 
ing this to pay its value to its owner is repeated by our authors. 
What is more, they extend this obligation to various classes of the 
king’s officers and even the public at large for theft committed with¬ 
in their respective jurisdictions. 3 

Crimes of violence ( sdhasa ) are distinguished by our authors 
from theft on the ground that the former is characterised by delibe¬ 
rate violence unlike the latter of which the essence is concealment. 
Narada,-and Brihaspati distinguish between three grades of sdhasa. 
“The lowest variety comprises the destruction of agricultural im¬ 
plements, trampling of roots and fruits and so forth; the inter¬ 
mediate variety comprises destruction of clothes', food and drink and 
household utensils; the highest variety * consists in killing with 

V 

weapons or poison, doing violence to others’ wives and so forth”. 
Sdhasa includes in Katyayana such acts as murder, robbery accom¬ 
panied with violence, assault on another’s wife, causing injury to 
precious articles, destroying images of gods and causing damage to 
temples, injuring the city-walls and obstructing the flow of water 
running in a channel. The punishments for sdhasa ; according to 

1. Nar. XV-XVI vv. 1-3, Bri. p. 169 vv. 2-10, Kat. 769-77 (Abuse). 

2. Nar. XV-XVI w. 4-5, Bri. p. 173, f, Kat. vv. 779-93 (Assault). 

3. Nar. App. v. i Bri. p. i78 v. 1 j, Kat. vv. 810-25 (Theft). 

368 








LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


Narada, vary according to its grade. The blending of crime and 
tort is illustrated by Katyayana’s clause that a person injuring or 
destroying valuable articles has not only to pay a fine, but also to 
give a similar article or its value to the owner. 1 

We may notice, in this connection, a class of offences in the late 
Smritis which may be called offences against public justice. Wit¬ 
nesses not replying to what is asked, we are told by Katyayana, are 
to be fined: one refusing evidence, though a witness of the trans¬ 
action, is to pay the debt in dispute and an equal amount of fine: 
a man citing a false witness is to be banished from the country. A 
judge and in particular the assessors conversing privately with a 
party are liable to punishment: an assessor who announces his deci¬ 
sion without proper understanding of the course of the trial has to 
pay a double fine: an assessor causing loss to a litigant through his 
own fault has to make good the loss, though out of regard for the 
majesty of the law the decision is allowed to stand. 2 


1. Nar. XV-XVI 6/, Bri. p. 186 v. 3.f, Kat. vv. 795-809 (violence). 

2. Kat. vv. 402-7 (witnesses), ibid vv. 70, 79, 81 (judge and assessors). 


369 



CHAPTER XVIII 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

A. GENERAL REVIEW 

The rise and spread of different sectarian religions, notably 
Buddhism, Jainism, Vaishnavism and Saivism, described in the 
preceding volume, radically changes the whole religious outlook of 
India. The Vedic pantheon and the sacrificial form of worship 
gradually recede into the background, and the lineaments of Vedic 
gods become dimmer and dimmer. Many of them are lost in oblivion, 
some are transformed beyond recognition, and the remaining few 
evoke at best memories of respect and reverence rather than spiritual 
fervour or even religious enthusiasm. Old ideas die hard, and some 
of these still receive the worship of a gradually dwindling number 
of orthodox votaries, but they have long ceased to be the centres 
of religious activity on a mass scale. The religious movement 
definitely swings forward from the abstract to the concrete. The 
ceremonial worship of the images of Vishnu, Siva, and other gods, 
installed in numerous temples, sometimes of magnificent proportions, 
takes the place of sacrificial offerings to the host of unseen Vedic 
gods of vague personality. Even, the austere and rigid morality of 
Buddhism and Jainism gives way to devotion to the concrete perso¬ 
nalities of Buddha and Mahavlra. Soon the inevitable takes place, 
and hosts of lesser divinities gather,round these primary figures. 

The resulting changes are great indeed in all cases, but the 
transformation in Brahmanical religion far exceeds that in the two 
heterodox sects. Having absorbed Vaishnavism and Saivism, the 
leaders of the orthodox religion proceed to evolve an altogether 
new pantheon whose history is told and glories sung in a new 
literature, the Puranas. These texts, whose number is ever on the 
increase, now come to the forefront and gradually become the 
principal religious literature of the people at large, in .place of the 
old Vedic Samhitas and Brahmanas. 

The nature and scope of the Puranas has been discussed in 
Chapter XV. Here it will suffice to state that although they contain 
older material, elaborate additions are made reflecting the new 
religious ideas which dominate the orthodox section. The great 
gods Brahma, Vishnu and Siva now form the official Trinity.of major 
gods who tower over the rest. Although Brahma i§ theoretically 
acknowledged to be the creator of men and even Of gods, he never 


370 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


occupies a prominent place in the actual religious devotion of the 
people. Vishnu and Siva overshadow him from the very beginning, 
as they form the central figures in the two theistic systems whose 
origin and development have been already described. As they grow 
in power, Vishnu and Siva establish their unquestioned supremacy 
over the other gods, most* of whom become auxiliary or subsidiary 
to the one or the other, and shine only in his reflected glory. To 
impress the imagination and stir the emotion of the people, the 
Puranas recite endless laudatory stories of the great gods, telling 
among other things how the Vedic gods like Indra often seek their 
protection against the demons who not infrequently drive the whole 
host of gods out of heaven and reign supreme till they are killed 
by Vishnu or Siva. They also include stories about the minor gods, 
describe the sacred places associated with the new gods, lay down 
the mode of worshipping them with pompous ceremony, and 
prescribe the lesser, but more popular, religious acts such as vows 
{vrata ), pilgrimages, sacred baths, and gifts, specially to the Brah- 
manas. Even the whole range of social duties and privileges, in¬ 
cluding ideas, of a moral character, are brought within the orbit of 
this popular religious cult by suitable stories related about the gods 
with parables and ethical maxims interspersed throughout them. 
Along with this popular aspect, the Puranas often discuss also the 
high philosophical ideas sustaining the new religion. 

It must be added, however, that the Puranas never deny, far 
less defy, the authority of the Vedas, and the Sruti is still regarded 
by them as the revelation of God,—the eternal and infallible source 
of religion. Though in actual life the knowledge and practice of 
Vedic religion was being gradually restricted to a few, this theoreti¬ 
cal admission of its superiority serves to keep up the link between 
the old and the new. The Vedic texts continue to be studied with 
meticulous care and reverence, and the Vedic sacrifices never cease 
to form part of the orthodox Brahmanical religion. As a matter of 
fact, throughout the period under review, kings of various dynasties, 
all over India, boast of having performed various Vedic sacrifices. 
The Asvamedha, in particular, seems to be in high favour, and some 
kings claim to perform as many as ten of them, or even more. 

Much of the minor Vedic rituals and practices such as the 
saihskdras 1 also continue to form an integral part of the new religion. 
It is thus obvious that the foundations of that phase of Brahmanical 
religion, which we call today Hinduism, were laid during the period 
under review. But though the Puranas form the basis of this new 
development they do not reflect the whole of it. The purely sectarian 


1. Vol. I, pp. 474 ff. 


371 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


spirit of the Yaisiinavas and &aivas is reflected in other literature 
and evolves distinct philosophies of their own, which constitute as 
integral a part of Hinduism as the Puranas. The Bhagavadgita, 
which contains the earliest and the best exposition of the Bhagavata 
cult (which later developed into Vaishnavism), may be cited as an 
example. A considerable space has been devoted in Chapter XIX. 
Vol. II, to expound its underlying ideas which are now regarded by 
common consent as the basis of the highest form of Hindu life and 
thought. In short, Hinduism has already grown into that mosaic of 
various patterns, combining the religious and spiritual ideas, be i 
old and rew, high and low, losing nothing and eternally adding 
more and more from new elements introduced into society. 

The same thing is true, more or less, of Buddhism, and equally 
strange is its transformation from the pristine simplicity of an 
austere moral code to the most complex system of Mahay ana leading 
to the still later developments of Vajrayana. Here, again, the old 
forms subsist, but are overshadowed by the later ones, which gradu¬ 
ally make a closer and closer approach to the new form of Hinduism, 
till Buddhism is ultimately absorbed into its wide fold, leaving no 
trace of its separate existence. 

Jainism was saved from a similar fate by its conservative 
character. Unlike the other religious systems it underwent little 
change in ideas and doctrines. Its consequent failure to adapt itself 
to new ideas and environments is no doubt the main reason why it 
never attained a popularity comparable to that enjoyed by Bud¬ 
dhism in and outside India. But to that very characteristic Jainism 
owes a much longer life, though in a restricted sphere, than its more 
distinguished rival. 

Reference may now be made to some general characteristic 
features of the religious life of the period. The first and foremost 
is the wide prevalence of the images of gods. The current idea on 
the subject has been summed up as follows in the Vishnudharmo - 
ttara :—“Worship and meditation (of the Supreme Being) are possible 
(only when he is) endowed with form. The form of the Supreme 
deity, as he manifests himself, should be worshipped according to 
rites. Because the invisible condition is apprehended with great 
difficulty by the corporeal beings, by the Supreme Lord, through 
His own will, was shown that (form) and the gods (too) point out 
(that) form (of Him) in his various manifestations. For this reason 
God is worshipped endowed with form. That form is full of signi¬ 
ficance.” The monographic evolution of the principal and even sub¬ 
sidiary gods forms a distinct trait in the religion of the period. 


372 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Another characteristic feature is the spirit of toleration among 
the followers of different religious sects. There are no doubt occa¬ 
sional references to religious persecution by individual monarchs. 
But, as in the case of Sasahka, 1 such stories may not always be 
historically true. Even if we take some cases as genuine, they are 
very few and can only be regarded as forming exceptions to the 
general rule. One aspect of this tolerant spirit was the attempt to 
establish the unity of different gods like Vishnu and Siva, and to 
combine in a single iconographic motif the attributes of different 
gods. The very idea of the Trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva is 
an evidence of the same spirit, which is further displayed by re¬ 
garding Buddha as an incarnation of Vishnu. There are various 
royal families whose members follow different religious persuasions, 
and also many kings who show reverence and respect for all of them. 
Harsha-vardhana of Kanauj and his predecessors 2 may be cited as 
the best illustration of this eclectic spirit. We find also adherents of 
different religious sects among the Parivrajaka and Maitraka rulers. 
Other royal families, such as the Imperial Guptas, though devoted 
followers of one sect, patronised all others and selected high officials 
from the members of different religious faiths. 

To convey an idea of the religious condition of the period under 
review is rendered difficult by the complex character and the rapid 
development of the various religious ideas and sects which flourished 
side by side and acted and reacted upon one another in a manner 
not always easy to understand. But if we bear in mind the general 
elements delineated above, and also that the older features, true of 
an earlier age, do not altogether vanish even when making way 
for new developments, we shall be able to glean some idea of the 
general picture with the help of the following sections into which 
the whole subject has been divided according to the method adopted 
in the last volume. 

B. BUDDHISM 
I. The Htnaydna 

In a previous section, 3 it has been shown that Hmayana 
Buddhism became sub-divided into several sects. During the Gupta 
period, three or four of these sects survived and carried on their 
activities in different parts of India. Many seals, images, inscrip¬ 
tions, and manuscripts v/ritten in Gupta characters have been 
discovered in the course of archaeological excavations, and these 
fully testify to the continued vigour and energy of the early Hina- 

1. See pp. 80 ff. 2. See pp. 115 ff. 3. See Vol. II, pp. 379 ff. 

373 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


yana Schools, particularly the Sarvastivadins, the Sarhmitiyas or the 
Vatsiputrlyas, and Thera- or Sthavira-vadins. These sects, it seems, 
while giving less attention to the further propagation of their 
particular views, exerted their utmost for the development of their 
monasteries into magnificent academic centres. In this effort they 
obtained the patronage of rulers as well as of rich devotees. The 
monks of each sect busied themselves with the elucidation of their 
particular doctrines or with the elaboration of their ecclesiastical 
rituals and ceremonies. In shorty the spirit of the age turned from 
propagation of doctrines to literary activities, and there appeared 
during the Gupta period a number of distinguished writers whose 
contributions to Indian exegetics and philosophy can be regarded 
as landmarks in the history of Indian literature. It is much to be 
regretted that these valuable writings have not been preserved in 
original, and we have to rest content with their Tibetan and Chinese 
translations. 

II. The Mahdydna 

In spite of the eminence of distinguished Hinayana writers and 
the magnificence of richly endowed Hinayanic monasteries, the 
older form of Buddhism was losing its hold upon the people and was 
giving way to a new movement, the Mahayana, which captured the 
imagination of the people by its ultra-altruistic .principles, by the 
scope it afforded to worship and devotion, and above all, by opening 
its portals to all irrespective of their followers being recluses or 
householders. Unlike Hinayana it did not insist on a person becom¬ 
ing a monk or a nun in order to derive the benefits of the religion, 
and it allowed anyone, even an .animal, to commence the career of 
Bodhisattvahood. This new angle of vision swept the Hinayanists 
off their feet and made Mahayana an all-India, rather an all-Asiatic, 
religious movement. Before we proceed with the history of this new 
movement, it is necessary to take a bird's-eye view of its ethical, 
doctrinal and religious aspects. 

1. Ethics of Mahdydna 

The keynote of Mahayana ethics was extreme altruism envi¬ 
saged in the development of Bodhi-chitta and fulfilment of six ' 
pdramitds (virtue-perfections). Effacement of self was the keynote 
of all Indian religions, and it was one pf the basic teachings of 
Buddha. It was taken up by the Hinayanists in a very practical 
manner in their monastic systems of life, the object of which was to 
make the inmates rise above all cares and anxieties for the well¬ 
being of their own selves. It was inculcated through the meditational 
exercises which helped their minds to realise that one’s own body 

374 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


was a store-house of impurities. The exercises made the Hinayanists 
oblivious of their own selves and taught them self-abnegation. To 
the Mahayanists this procedure for effacement of self appeared 
wrong and wholly inadequate. They approached the problem from 
a totally different angle of vision. According to them the effacement 
of self could only be effected by dedicating one’s own lif§, in his 
several existences, to the service of others. A Mahayanist niusf take 
the vow that he would not seek his own happiness, heavenly life, 
even Nirvana, unless and until he had been able to do his bit to make 
all other beings happy, attain heavenly life and ultimately realise 
Nirvana. This altruistic attitude was the keynote of a Mahayanist. 
The self-abnegation for personal benefit practised by a' HInayana 
monk, and his ultimate attainment of Nirvana, according to a 
Mahayanist, smacked of selfishness, and hence was hardly com¬ 
mendable. 

The first condition that a Mahayanist had to fulfil was to take 
the vow of dedicating one’s own self to the service of others, describ¬ 
ed in the texts as the development of Bodhi-chitta. When an adept 
developed Bodhi-chitta , he was called a Bodhisattva. His next duty 
was to commence {Bodhi-prasthdna) fulfilling the six paramitas 
(perfections in virtues), viz. ddna (liberality), sila (moral precepts), 
kshanti (forbearance), virya (mental strength), dhydna (mental 
concentration) and prajnd (knowledge of the truth). 1 To acquire’ 
fully any one of the above-mentioned six virtue-perfections he was 
required to make the highest sacrifice, i.e., of his life. It w T as not 
possible to acquire all the virtue-perfections in one life, so he had 
to be reborn several times to complete the six paramitas. Gautama 
Buddha fulfilled the six paramitas in several existences, some of 
which are narrated in the Jdtakas and the Avaddnas. Along with 
the fulfilment of the paramitas , a Bodhisattva was required to study 
and meditate, much in the same way as a HInayana monk, with the 
additional feature that his love for beings, his compassion, his piety, 
and whatever merit he wmuld acquire w r as meant not for his own 
benefit but for the benefit of all beings of the countless wmrlds. It 
was this extreme universal altruism that distinguished Mahayana 
ethics from HInayana. 

2. Monastic Life 

In the collection of Mahayana texts, there is no Vinaya Pitaka, 
i.c. a code of rules governing the life of a Mahayana monk. In the 
later texts like the Sikshdsamuchchaya , Bodhi chary avatar a, and 
Bodhisattva-prdtimoksha-sutra, there are some rules of a general 
nature, but are not intended for rigid observance by the monks 

1. These have been explained above in Vol. IT, p. 386. 

375 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


and nuns. In these texts emphasis has been laid mostly on firm 
faith in Buddha and his teaching, and on self-abnegation for others' 
good. The Bodhisattvas are advised to have a spiritual guide 
( kalydnamitra) and to study the scriptures. They are asked to 
practise meditation and particularly the four kinds of mindfulness 
( smrityupasthdna), as also to repair to the forests and meditate on 
the different stages of a dead body (asubha-bhdvand) . They are 
required to eschew all loka-dharvias such as gain, fame, and desire 
for food and clothes, and then they are recommended to exercise 
love ( mcbitri ) and compassion ( karurid ), to learn the ways of good 
conduct ( bhadracharyd ), and to practise worship ( vandana ) and 
devotion (sraddhd). In the later texts there are certain directions 
regarding dress, food, conduct, and atonement for offences peculiar 
to Mahayana. 1 From these texts it is apparent that the Mahayanists 
utilised the disciplinary rules of the HInayanists for their monastic 
life, modifying some of the latter’s practices which were not compa¬ 
tible with the Mahayanic ideals. 

Hiuen Tsang records that both the HInayanists and Mahayanists 
resided together in a number of monasteries, and this could not have 
been possible unless all the resident monks subscribed to a common 
code of ecclesiastical rules. I-tsing refers to some differences 
between HInayana and Mahayana monks relating to the eating of 
meat. The Lahkavatdra-sutra devotes a chapter to the evil effects of 
meat-eating. Perhaps with the exception of one or two such items, 
the Mahayanists followed the traditional Vinaya rules as preserved 
by the old HInayana Schools, and it was probably for this reason 
that Hiuen Tsang speaks of some monks as Mahayanists of the Stha- 
vira School. His remarks about the monks of Mahabodhi Sangha- 
rama (Gaya) are particularly interesting. He writes that “in this 
establishment there were nearly 1000 monks, all Mahayanists of the 
Sthavira School, and all perfect in Vinaya observances.” 2 Similar 
statements are made relating to the monks of Kalihga, Abhayagiri 
monastery of Ceylon and Surashtra. He expressly states that all 
the monks of Udyana were Mahayanists but they followed HInayana 
Vinaya. 3 I-tsing also stages that both the HInayanists and the Maha¬ 
yanists agreed in the observance of the same disciplinar}^ laws. The 
fact that the Tibetans, who were Mahayanists, have preserved the 
Vinaya texts of the Mulasarvastivada School, proves the high esteem 
in which they held the HInayana Vinaya. The directions given in 
the Kriyasangrahapalnjika 4 relating to the procedure of ordination 
reveal that the ceremony of ordination of Mahayana w r as done on 
the same lines and also with the same formulae as those of HInayana. 

]. N. Dutt, Aspects of Mahayana Buddhism , Ch. V. 

2. HTW, II, 136. ' 3. HTW , I, 227. 4. RASB, Ms. leaf, 160 a 

370 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


The only additional feature of Mahay ana Vinaya was the formalities 
observed in taking the Bodhi-chitta, viz. (i) worshipping of Buddhas 
and chaityas (shrines), (ii) taking refuge in the Triratna and confes¬ 
sion of sins, if any, (hi) expression of sincere approval of other’s 
merits, (iv) entreating Buddhas to be the guide of all beings, 
ignorant as they are, and (v) offering up one’s merits for bodhi. 

3. Mahay ana Doctrines 

Though the Hinayanists and the Mahayanists accepted a common 
code of monastic rules, there was a wide divergence regarding the 
doctrines and ideals of the two schools. The former were more or 
less realists or semi-realists, while the latter were pure negativists 
or idealists. The difference hinged on the interpretation of sunyatd 
or andtmatd, a term frequently used by Buddha without a clear 
definition. By the term k ' sunyam’ or ‘ andtman the Hinayanists 
understood the non-existence of any real substance as diman or 
individuality, i.e. pudgala-sunyaia , while the Mahayanists took it to 
be the non-existence of individuality ( pudgala or dtman ) as also 
of the objective world ( dharma ). The Mahayanists hold that real 
knowledge or realisation of the truth cannot be obtained without 
the comprehension of both the sunyatds , i.e. of pudgala (individua¬ 
lity) and dhbrma (phenomenal existence). The two sunyatds, they 
assert, can be comprehended only by the removal of the two veils 
(avaranas), known as klesdvarana (veil of impurities) and jneyd- 
varana (veil that covers the truth),. The Hinayanic perfects ( arhats ) 
remove the klesdvarana only by realising pudgala-sunyatd. They 
rise above the notion of identitv and difference between the various 

4/ 

objects of the world and regard them as one mass without any 
distinction. To explain it by a simile we may say that the Hinaya¬ 
nists (Sravakas) do not distinguish between an earthen jar and an 
earthen horse and regard the two as one and the same. The Mahaya¬ 
nists (Bodhisattvas) would go a step further and hold that not only 
the distinction between the joig and the horse does not exist, but 
the substance also, i.e. dharma (earth, in this case) does -not exist. 
It is by the realisation of this dharma-sunyatd., that the veil covering 
the truth ( jneya) is removed and the adept attains perfect knowledge. 

This doctrine has been developed in the Prajnd-pdramiid. 
Samddhiraja, Saddharmapund'arlka , and other Mahayana texts thus: 
A Hmayanist believes that by becoming a monk and attaining per¬ 
fection in the several Buddhistic practices, e.g., the Bodhipakshiya- 
dharmas , ashpdngikamdrga and so forth, he has reached the goal. 
But the fact, according to the Mahayanists is otherwise. The Bodhu 
pakshiya-dharmas or the eight mdrgas are only make-shift arrange¬ 
ments devised by Buddha to attract men of .average or mediocre 


877 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


intellect to religious life, and then, when they are a little advanced 
spiritually, to make them realise that these practices are as much 
matters of imagination and non-existent ( sunyam ) as are the con¬ 
ceptions of a worldly man that he has a son or property. From the 
standpoint of a Mahayanist, a monk’s attachment to his robes, his 
meditational practices, and even his desire for Nirvana are as much 
hindrances to the realisation of the truth as are the desires of a 
worldly man for sons, wealth or power. These texts teach that a 
Mahayanist does take to Hmayana practices, bearing however always 
in mind that these practices are also to be eschewed just as a person 
eschews the temporary raft that he prepares for fording a stream. 
The crux of Mahayana teaching is that a being of this world, a 
worldly man, or a recluse, lives and moves in a world of misconcep¬ 
tions, derived through the six imperfect organs of sense, and that his 
salvation lies in realising that the misconceptions are as much unreal 
as the mirage or the things seen in a dream. The moment he realises 
this fact, he breaks through the veil of ignorance which covers the 
truth (jneydvarana) and visualises the truth. In order to remove 
jneydvaraiia, he must beforehand remove the klesdvctrana 3 the veil 
of impurities, like attachment, hatred and delusion. 

4. Conception of Buddha 

The Truth, according to Mahayana, is sunyatd (which is attri- 
buteless, negation of being and non-being) or tathatd (the state of 
sameness, i.e. of noumenon) or dharmadhdtu (totality of phenomenal 
manifestations, the universe, or the universal principle) which is 
identified with Nirvana or Buddha. The Hinayanists conceived of 
Buddha at first as an omniscient human being, then, in course of 
time, attributed to him superhuman, even superdivine powers and 
qualities, and regarded him as superior to all beings, even the gods 
of Brahmaloka. The Mahayanists regarded Buddha as eternal 
without origin and decay, the truth, the end of existence ( bhiitakoti ), 
and as such beyond any description whatsoever. In course of time 
the Mahayanists indulged in certain speculations regarding Bud¬ 
dha’s body, and gave currency to the Trikdya (three bodies) concep¬ 
tion. The real kdya of Buddha was (i) the Dharma-kaya, the universe 
or the universal principle, which had no form, infinite and eternal 
without appearance or disappearance. Occasionally, for the satis¬ 
faction of his highly advanced devotees, particularly Bodhisattvas 
in the higher stages of sanctification, Buddha assumed a refulgent 
richly adorned form with all the signs of great men. This body is 
called (ii) Sambhoga-kdya. It is so called because it is shown a3 
the special acquisition of Buddha on account of merits accumulated 
in several lives. Generally for the guidance of common worldly 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


men and beings, he assumes an earthly form which is subject to all 
human frailties. This is called (iii) the Rupa-kaya (material body) 
or Nirmana-kaya (created body). Gautama Buddha, according to the 
Mahayanists, is the Nirmana-kaya of the real Buddha. There are 
such innumerable Nirmana-kdyas presiding over the countless worlds 
that compose the universe, Gautama Buddha being the Nirmana- 
kaya Buddha of Saha-lokadhatu. 

The Trikdya conceptipns gave ample scope to the common folk 
for v/orship and devotion, and so in spite of the abstruse teachings 
of Mahayana, it made a strong and wide appeal to the masses, and 
surpassed in course of time the Hlnayanists in the number of 
adherents. 

With the growth of mythological conceptions, a Mahayana 
pantheon came into being with five DhyanI Buddhas, viz. Vairo- 
chana, Akshobhya, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi, 
who are said to have issued out of Adi-Buddha through contempla¬ 
tion. Each of these Buddhas is associated with a Bodhisattva and 
a goddess, called Tara. 

5. Conception of Bodhisattva 

According to Mahayana teachings, any one who develops Bodhu 
chitta is a Bodhisattva, he. a being destined to attain bodhi 
(knowledge) and become a Buddha in the long run. In fact, every 
Mahayanist is a Bodhisattva, as distinguished from a Hlnayanist who 
is called a Sravaka. The distinction between a Bodhisattva and a 
Sravaka is that the former aspires for Ruddhahood while the latter 
aims at obtaining Arhathood. 

For the spirit of complete self-abnegation the Bodhisattvas 

began to rise higher and higher in the estimation of the masses till 

some of them became objects of veneration. The most distinguished 

of these, w r ho ranked almost as gods, were Avalokitesvara, Mahjusri, 

Vajrapani, Samantabhadra, Akasagarbha, Mahasthanaprapta, Bhai- 

shajyaraja, and Maitreya. These Bodhisattvas were highly advanced 

in spiritual perfection and could easily have attained Buddhahood, 

but they refrained from reaching the goal and preferred to remain 

as Bodhisattvas, because they held that Buddhas, being absolutely 

free from all qualities (nirguna), were unable to render any service 

to living beings, while they could alleviate the distress of beings 

and help them attain happiness, heavenly life, Nirvana, or Buddha- 

* 

hood. In ' course of time, mythological conceptions were woven 
around some of the Bodhisattvas much on the same lines as around 
the Brahmanic gods. 


37-i 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Avalokitesvara is the personification of compassion. He is full 
of mercy and extends his ever helping hand to all those who seek 
him in distress.' According to the Chinese pilgrims, the worship 
of Avalokitesvara was prevalent in India from the fourth to seventh 
century A.D. The images of Avalokitesvara are quite common among 
the archaeological finds. Usually the images are richly decorated and 
show the Buddha Amitabha in the head-dress. In some of the images 
the goddess Tara appears with this Bodhisattva. The goddess Tara 
is the personification of knowledge ( prajha j . She is so called because 
only with her help could people cross the world of misery. She 
is also known as the goddess Prajnaparamita, as it is by the fulfil¬ 
ment of this paramita that a Bodhisattva reaches the goal. 

The next popular Bodhisattva is the ever young ( Kumar abhuta) 
Manjusrl. He is the personification of wisdom and is sometimes 
associated with Lakshml (=Snmahadevi) 2 or Sarasvatl 3 or both. 
He imparts education to the people, teaches the Buddhist dharma, 
and is the instructor of Maitreya, the future Buddha. His worship 
was prevalent in India at the same period as that of Avalokitesvara. 

III. The Forms of Worship 

The Chinese pilgrims furnish us with an account of the forms 
of worship that were prevalent in India in their times. Fa-hien 
writes that the monks erected stupas dedicated to Sariputra, Maud- 
galyayana, Ananda and also to the masters of the Abhidharma, 
Vinaya and Sutras. The nuns made offerings at the stupa of Ananda 
because at his instance the order of nuns was formed; while the 
novices and the teachers of Abhidharma and Vinaya worshipped 
at the stupa of Rahula. The Mahayanists presented offerings to 
Prajnaparamita (i.e. Tara), Manjusrl, and Avalokitesvara. More 
details are given by Hiuen Tsang. ‘At Mathura,’ he says, ‘there 
were three stupas of Asoka as also stupas erected on the relics of 
Sariputra, Mudgalaputra, Purna Maitrayamputra, Upali, Ananda, 
and Rahula. There were also stupas dedicated to Manjusrl and other 
Bodhisattvas. The Abhidharma brethren offered worshin to Sari- 

X 

putra, the Samadhists (meditators) to Mudgalaputra. the masters of 
Sutra Pi taka to Purna, the masters of Vinaya to Upali, the nuns to 
Ananda. the novices ( srdmaneras) to Rahula, and the Mahay anists 
to the various Bodhisattvas.’ From the accounts of the two pilgrims 
who visited India at an interval of over two centuries, it is appa- 

-■ .1 ■ • r. I II . . . .- . I '. .. - « ■ ■ ■■«■■ ■ 1 —■»' '■ . . * ■II .1. — . —■ ' 1 ,11 .. — !■■ ■■ ■ ' " —— 1 ! ■! . 

1. Saddharmapundarika , Ch. XXIV. 

2. Suvarnaprabhasa, Ch. IX. Her function is to furnish monks with robes, food, 
and other requisites. 

3. Suvarnaprabhasa , Ch. VIII. The function of Sarasvatl Devi is to give the power 
of intonation to Dharma-preachers, teaching dharani, etymology, and of reviving 
memory, etc. 


880 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


rent that throughout the Gupta period the worship of Buddhas and 
Hinayanic saints was in vogue among the Hlnayanists, and the 
worship of Bodhisattvas and the Prajhaparamita or Tara, among 
the Mahayanists. Hiuen Tsang witnessed also the worship of Mai- 
treya in a few places. 

Both Fa-hien and Hiuen Tsang noticed another important 
Buddhist ceremony, viz. procession of images. Fa-hien saw the 
procession at Khotan and Pataliputra. His description of the Khotan 
procession reads as follows:—“On a four-wheeled chariot is seated 
m the centre the image of Buddha with tw 7 o Bodhisattvas on the two 
sides. The chariot is decorated with seven precious stones, silken 
streamers and canopies. The Mahayanic monks of Gomati led the 
procession. The king prostrated himself before the image while the 
queen and other ladies scattered flowers. The ceremony commenced 
on the first day of the fourth month and ended on the fourteenth.” 
Hiuen Tsang gives a similar account. I-tsing does not refer to such 
processions but gives an elaborate account of the daily ceremony 
of bathing images. He says that it was incumbent upon the monks 
of a monastery to w r ash the image of Buddha daily with scented 
water and other suitable requisites. 

IV. Geographical Distribution of Hinaydna and Mahdydna 

Although with the growth of Mahayanism, Hinayanism lost its 
hold upon the people, its adherents did not dwindle very much. 
Some of the Hinayana schools, particularly Sarvastivada, were still 
wielding great influence over an extensive area. The Sarvastivadins, 
later known as the Vaibhashikas, w r ere spread over the w r hole of 
Northern India, including North-West Frontier and Kashmir, Persia, 
Central Asia, China, and also Sumatra, Java, and Cochin-China. 
The Sthavira-vadins, including the Mahisasakas, were predominant 
in Ujjayini, Valabhi, Kanchl, as also in Ceylon, Siam, and Burma. 
In certain areas they were supplanted by the Sammitlyas, a sect 
which attained pre-eminence under the patronage of Harsha-var- 
dhana in the seventh century A.D. The Mahasanghikas retained 
their ancient seat in Guntur District, but w T ere dwindling in number, 
due perhaps to absorption by the Mahayanists by reason of their 
common view^s regarding Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. 

All Hinayana sects and the Mahayanists were not so bitterly 
antagonistic as to be compelled to reside separately. In many monas¬ 
teries they resided together, particularly in Magadha, in the famous 
academic centres like Nalanda. Vikramasila and Pataliputra. 

Fa-hien, v/ho visited India in the beginning of the fifth century 
A.D., speaks of the existence of both Hinayana and Mahayana monks. 


381 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


lie noticed the exclusive popularity of Hinayana (probably Sarvasti- 
vada) in Lob-nor, Darada, Udyana, Gandhara, Barmu, Kanauj and 
Kausambl, and of the Hlnayanic Sthaviravada in Ceylon, while in 
places like Afghanistan, Bhida (Punjab), Mathura, and Pataliputra, 
he found adherents of both Hinayana and Mahayana. Only in respect 
of Khotan he says that the monks were all Mahayanists. Fa-hien’s 
information about the distribution of Buddhist sects is very scanty 
but is important in view of its giving us a picture of Buddhism of 
the fifth century A.D. 

The deficiency in Fa-hien’s account is made up by Hiuen Tsang 
(seventh century A.D.), who has not only pointed out whether the 
adherents of a place were Hmayanists or Mahayanists, but also men¬ 
tioned the particular sect to which the adherents belonged. His 
account shows that many of the places, which were the rendezvous 
of Hmayanists at the time of Fa-hien, continued to be the seats of 
Hinayana adherents with occasional exceptions. The countries lying 
beyond the northern borders of India, as also those in the farthest 
north of India, e.g. Tenki, Kuchi, Poh-lu-ka, Balkh, Ka-chi, Bamian, 
Kashmir (including Gilgit) Tamasavana as also Sthanesvara, 
Srughna, Prayaga, and KosambI continued to be the exclusive 
centres of the Hmayanists, particularly the Sarvastivadins, except 
Bamian where the Buddhists were Lokottaravadins (an offshoot of 
the Mahasahghikas). He noticed the adherents of both Hinayana 
and Mahayana in Kapisa, Jalandhara, Mathura, Saketa, Nepal, 
Pundravardhana, Abhayagiri monastery (Ceylon), Konkanapura, 
Maharashtra, Ujayana, Po-fa-to, and Persia. The countries where 
he came across only Mahayanic adherents were Lampa, Takshasila, 
Kullu, Magadha, Orissa, and Vidarbha. 

At the time of Hiuen Tsang the Sarhmitlya sect (Hinayana) 
appears to have attained great importance. He noticed the existence 
of the adherents of this sect in several places, viz. Viioka, Ahichchha- 
tra, Sankasya, Sravastl, Kapilavastu, Varanasi, Vaisali,. Karna- 
suvarna, Malava, Valabhl, Hayamukha, Anandapura, Sindh, Kutch, 
Pi-to-shi-lo, and A-fan-tu (Avanta). These places were-mostly the 
favourite haunts of the early Sthaviravadins, and it is very likely 
that these Sthaviravadins, by admitting the existence of pudefala, 
became Sammitlyas. In Samatata and Dravida (capital Kanchlpura); 
he found respectively 30 and 100 monasteries with 2,000 and 10,000 
monks of the Sthavira school. His statement that he found some 
Mahayanist Sthaviras at Bodh-Gaya, Kalinga (Rajamahendry) and 

even in Ceylon, is somewhat puzzling. As stated above, it is very 

■* < 

likely that he had in mind some monks who subscribed to Mahayana 
doctrines but observed the Vinaya rules of the Sthaviravadins. He 
has referred to the Mahasahghikas as a declining sect and found only 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


a few adherents at Andarab and Dhanakataka (Amaravati), their 
ancient centre. It will be observed that there is a fair amount of 
agreement between the accounts of Fa-hien and Hiuen Tsang relating 
to the geographical distribution of the sects, only the latter’s account 
is more detailed. 1 

Y. The Four Philosophical Schools 

Hinayana and Mahayana Buddhism were divided into four 
speculative schools, the former into Vaibhashika and Sautrantika, 
and the latter into Madhyamika and Yogachara, and it is to these 
four schools of thought, and not to the earlier schools, that reference 
is made in the Brahmanical works on philosophy like Sdnkara- 
bhdshya, Sloka-vdrttika, and Sarvadarsanasahgraha. 

1. The Vaibhashikas 

The Sarvastivadins of Kashmir and Gandhara were designated 
as the Vaibhashikas on account of their acceptance of the Vibhdshds 
(commentaries) written on Katyayanlputra’s Jiidnaprasthdnasiitra 
(second century B.C.), the principal Abhidharma text of the Sar¬ 
vastivadins, as more authoritative than the original Sutras. The 
Vibhashas were compiled about the second century A.D. and were 
said to have been put in literary Sanskrit by Asvaghosha. These 
were translated into Chinese in A.D. 383-434. There are two 
redactions of the Vibhasha, one large in 200 parts and the other 
small in 14 parts. The larger one, according to Prof. Takakusu, must 
have been the translation of the Kashmirian Vibhasha while the 
shorter one of the Gandharan. 

The Vibhashas were mainly studied and preserved in Kashmir. 
There were many distinguished teachers of the Vaibhashika school, 
viz. Dharmottara, Dharmatrata, Ghoshaka, Vasumitra, and Buddha- 
deva, each of whom held different views regarding the realism of 
this school. 2 

Vasubandhu (fifth century A.D.), 3 who was a native of Gan¬ 
dhara, went to Kashmir and made a special study of the Vibhdshds 

' ^-4✓ 

with Sarhghabhadra. He then composed the Abhidharmakosa and 
its Bhdshya, in which he condensed the topics dealt with in the 
Vibhdshds. The Kosa, with its Bhdshya , came to be regarded as one 
of the classic texts of Buddhism, and was studied by monks of both 
Hinayana and Mahayana. It attained so much importance that 
schools were started in China under this name (Kosa school), and 

1. JRAS , 1891. pp. 418 f. Hiuen Tsang’s statistics run as follows:— 

32,000 Mahayana monks. 

96,000 Hinayana monks of which Sammitiyn 44,000. 

54,500 both Hinayana and Mahayana. 

2. Tar., p. 67; N. Dutt, Early Monastic Buddhism II. 145. 

3. See Infra, p. 390 as a yogachara exponent. 

388 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


it is still being closely studied both in China and Japan. It was 
translated into Chinese by Paramartha in A.D. 563-567 and by Hiuen 
Tsang in A.D. 651-654. The former studied it at Valabhi and the 
latter at Nalanda. 

During the life-time of Vasubandhu, he. about the fifth century 
A.D., Varshaganya expounded the Sahkhya-sastra to Vindhyavasa, 
who went to Ayodhya and challenged all disputants to enter into 
discussion with him. King Vikramaditya invited the Buddhist 
monks to take up the challenge, but unfortunately both Manoratha 
and Vasubandhu were away from the country. So Buddhamitra, an 
old teacher of Vasubandhu, had to take up the challenge, but he was 
defeated by Vindhyavasa. When Vasubandhu came to know of this 
discomfiture of his revered teacher, he felt humiliated and composed 
the Paramdrtha-saptaii refuting the Sankhya views. He thereby 
created such a good impression upon king Vikramaditya that not 
only did he receive rewards from the king but Was also entrusted 
with the education of the crown prince Baiaditya. 1 

Taranatha has given the biography of only one Vaibhashika 
teacher named Gunaprabha, a disciple of Vasubandhu. Gunaprabha 
came of a Brahmana family of Mathura and studied the Vedas and 
the Brahmanic sastras. He mastered the Tripitaka as also the Maha- 
yana texts. He seems to have taken special interest in the Vinaya 
Pitaka; and it is said that while residing at Agrapuri-vihara in 
Mathura, he made the resident monks observe the disciplinary rules 
punctiliously. He became the spiritual preceptor of the reigning 
king Sri Harsha. Hiuen Tsang writes that Gunaprabha who lived 
in a monastery at Matipur was a monk of great intellectual abilities 
and a voluminous- writer. He gave up his Mahayana leanings and 
became a staunch Vaibhashika and remained so till his death. 2 

2. The Sautrantikas 

The Sautrantika school came into being in Gandhara and 
Kashmir as a bitter opponent of the realism of the Vaibhashikas. 
It derived it's name from the Sutras or Sutrantas, which it recognised 
as the sole authority for its philosophical views, to the exclusion of 
the Vibhashas and even the Abhidharmas. In the Kosa 3 this 
school is described as the upholder of the Vinaya Pitaka ( vina - 
yavadi) and also a. Darshtantika as it admitted examples as proofs 
for a thesis. As against the Vaibhashikas who held the existence of 
phenomenal objects on direct perception (pratyaksha), this school 
asserted that the external objects were appearances ( prajhopti ) and 
their existence could be proved only by inference ( bdhyarthd - 


1. Cf. pp. 38, 43 above. 


2. HTW, I. 323. 

384 


3. viii. 32. 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


numeyatva) . It contended that as the fatness of a person implied 
that he had been taking nourishing food, so the existence of intellec¬ 
tion implied the existence of the truth (j neya) to be realised. In the 
Kosa 1 it is stated that the asaihskrita, e.g. } akdsa or nirvana 
is not a real object ( dravya )—it is only absence ( abhava) of all objec¬ 
tive elements. Takakusu writes in his Essentials of Buddhist Phi¬ 
losophy 2 that according to the Sautrantikas there is ‘'no sub¬ 
stance ( andtma ) no duration ( anitya) and no bliss ( duhkha ) except 
Nirvana ( sukha ).” It admitted the transference of the skandha - 
matras (the subtlest form of elements) from one existence to another, 
but asserted that the skandhamdtras cease to exist in Nirvana. 

The traditional founder of this school was Kumaralabdha, 1 * 3 
who was a native of Takshasila. He was a celebrated teacher and 
was counted among the four “suns of India”, the other three being 
Asvaghosha, Nagarjuna and Aryadeva. Chronologically Kumara¬ 
labdha should be placed somewhere between Aryadeva and 
Vasubandhu. 

The other great exponent of the Sautrantika doctrines was 
Srllabha mentioned in Vasubandhu’s Kosa-bhdshya. He was a native 
of Kashmir and was a great Sastra-master. Hiuen Tsang noticed at 
Ayodhya a monastery where Srilabha resided for some time. He 
must have preceded Vasubandhu by several years. 

The Tibetan historians are silent about the career of this school. 
Prof. Takakusu holds the opinion that the Sautrantikas developed 
out of the Satyasiddhi School of Harivarman, who lived in India 
circa A.D. 250-350. There is, however, no reference either to Satya¬ 
siddhi school or to Harivarman in any Indian work, and so it is 
doubtful if this school existed at all in India. 

3. The Mddhyamikas 

The accredited founder of the Madhyamika school of philosophy 
was Nagarjuna 4 who lived about the first century A.D. and wrote 
the Mulamadhyamakdrihd. In this work he established that the 
only Reality is Sunyata and that any positive description of the 
Reality is out of the question, and the utmost length to which one 
can go for giving an idea of the Reality is to negate everything 
conceivable. He held that the phenomenal world is a misconceived 
super-imposition on the Reality, hence, there is absolutely no diffe¬ 
rence between the phenomenal world ( samsdra) and the Reality 
( sunyata or nirvana). 

1. ii. 127. 2. Edited by W. T._ Chan and C. A. Moore. Honolulu. 1947, p. 74. 

3, LTttara, a contemporary of Aryadeva is also regarded as a founder of the 

Sautrantika School. See HTW, II, p. 224. 

4. Vol. II, p. 388 f. 


385 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The mantle of Nagarjuna fell on his disciple Aryadeva, who, 
as stated above, is regarded as one of the four luminaries of India. 
Aryadeva was the foster-son of a" king jot Sirhhala and succeeded 
Nagarjuna as the abbot of Nalanda. and as the spiritual head of the 
Madhyamika School. He achieved fame by successfully refuting 
the heretical teachers. He Wrote several treatises, of Which 
only one, viz. Chatuhsat(ikoi, has been preserved in original 
Sanskrit. He lived for a long time at Nalanda, and towards the end 
of his life he went to Kahchl where he died about the second 
century A.D. 

His disciple Matricheta came of a Brahmana family of the 
north. He became highly proficient in the Vedas and Vedahgas as 
also in the Tantras and Mantras. He worshipped Mahesvara and com¬ 
posed hymns in his praise. He made a special study of dialectics. 
His actual name was Kala, but he w 7 as called Matricheta or Pitricheta 
on account of his great regard for his parents. For his uncommon 
ability and success in disputations he came to be known as Durdhar- 
sha Kala. After his defeat and conversion by Aryadeva, he became 
an enthusiastic Buddhist preacher, composed a number of treatises 
and propagated both Hlnayana and Mahayana Buddhism: He built 
at Nalanda, during the abbotship of Rahulabhadra, fourteen Gandha- 
kutis (shrines) and fourteen monasteries. He composed thirteen 
works, of which the two stotras, Varnarhavarnastotra 1 in 400 
verses and Satapanchdsatkarw.mastotra 2 in 150 verses are well- 
known. These were recited at Nalanda by both Hlnayana and Maha¬ 
yana monks. 

Rahulabhadra, one of the disciples of Aryadeva, succeeded him 
in the abbotship/of Nalanda. He belonged to the Sudra caste and 
possessed immense wealth. He was a devotee of Amitabha Buddha. 


It is not known who succeeded Rahulabhadra as the abbot of 
Nalanda. The Madhyamika teaching, as stated by Taranatha, was 
handed down bv Rahulabhadra to his disciole Rahulamitra, 3 who, in 

i. / 


turn, handed over the same to his disciple Nagamitra. Nagamitra’s 
disciple was Sarhghar&kshita, who is said to have been a contem¬ 
porary of Asahga 4 and probably lived about the beginning of the 
fifth century A.D. Between Aryadeva and Samgharakshita about 


— ^——. — - — •*— — . . . - - — .. . ■ — ■■■ . 

1. Prof. F. W. Thomas published the first 150 verses of this Stot.rci in Tibetan in 
the Indian Antiquary, 1005, pp. 145 fl. Dr. Hoerrde published a few fragments 
of the original text in Sanskrit in. his Manuscript Remains in Eastern Turkestan, 

pp. 75 if. 

2. This stotra has been edited and published by Rahula Sarhkrityayapa in JBORS , 
1937 and recently by D. R. Shackleton Bailey, Cambridge, 1951. 

S. Tar., p. 102. I-tsing (p. 64) speaks of a distinguished monk of his time also 
called Rahulamitra who was honoured as the head of the priests of Eastern 
India. 

4. Tar. jj. 104, 


.380 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

two centuries elapsed, during which period no contribution of note 
seems to have been made by the intervening teachers to the Madhya- 
mika system. 

Incidentally it may be mentioned here that Kumarajlva, the 
famous translator of Sanskrit texts into Chinese, 1 became a follower 
of the Madhyamika School and propagated this system of thought 
in China in the fifth century A.D. 2 

The two great exponents of Madhyamika philosophy, Buddha¬ 
palita and Bhavaviveka, were the disciples of Samgharakshita. They 
may be placed towards the end of the fifth century and were senior 
contemporaries of Sthiramati and Dihnaga of the Yogachara School. 

Buddhapalita was born in a country of the south. He resided 
at Dantapura (capital of Kalihga) and propagated the teaching in 
that area. He wrote a commentary on the Mula-madhyamofka-sutra 
of Nagarjuna. He adopted the prasangika (reductio ad absurdum) 
method of Nagarjuna and Aryadeva for establishing the thesis of 
Sunyatd . 

Bhavaviveka was born in a Kshatriya family of Malayagiri, in 
the south. He came to Madhyadesa, became a disciple of Samghara¬ 
kshita, and studied with him the Mahayana texts, particularly the 
teachings of Nagarjuna. He then went back to the south and took 
charge of fifty monasteries, and had a large number of disciples. 
After the death of Buddhapalita, he wrote an expository treatise 
Prajndpradipa on Nagarjuna’s Mulamadhyamaka. He discarded the 
prasangika method of Buddhapalita, refuted some of his arguments, 
and established the Sunyatd doctrine of Nagarjuna by the svdian- 
trika (direct reasoning) method. He wrote an independent work 
entitled Mddhyamika-hridaya along with a commentary called 
Tarkajvdld, in which he dealt with the svdtantrika method as also 
with the functions of a Bodhisattva. 3 In this work, Hiuen Tsang 
says, he refuted not only the non-Madhyamika doctrines but also 
the Brahrnanic schools of thought. It was at the time of Bhavaviveka 
that a sharp cleavage took place betw r een the Madhyamikas and 
Yogacharas, and the two systems became separate independent 
schools of thought of Mahayana. There were controversies between 
the adherents of the two systems, particularly between Bhavaviveka 
and Sthiramati’s disciples. 

Chandrakirti is the next great exponent of the Madhyamika 
system, fie followed the prasangika method of Buddhapalita so 
closely that in some traditions he is described as the re-incarnation 

\. Cf. Ch. XXIII. 

2. Essentials of Buddhist Philosophy, p. 99. 

Tar., p. 136 


387 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of Buddhapalita. His Prasannapadd, the commentary on the Mula- 
madhyamaka, is a masterpiece and is available in original^Sanskrit. 
He was born in Samanta in the south and studied the Madhyamika 
philosophy with Kamalabuddhi who was a disciple of Buddhapalita. 
He became an abbot of Nalanda, and wrote various commentaries 
and a treatise in verse called the Samantabhadra. He went to the 
south, defeated in controversy some teachers ,of Konkana, converted 
a large number of Brahmanas and householders, and established 
large monasteries. He carried on controversies for long with 
Chandragomin, who was a junior contemporary of his and was an 
advocate of the Yogachara school of philosophy. He appreciated 
Chandragomin’s vast and varied erudition and offered him a place 
of honour in the monastery of Nalanda. 

Chandrakirti was succeeded by Dharmapala (A.D. 635), who 
w T as a Yogacharin, and then for a short time by Jayadeva. 1 Jaya- 
deva’s disciple was Santideva, the most famous writer on the 
Madhyamika system after Chandrakirti. 

Santideva (originally Santivarman), also known as Bhusuku, 
was the son of king Kalyanavarman of Saurashtra. He studied the 
different sciences and gave up the throne for the life of a monk. 
He was a devotee of MahjusrL He came to Madhyadesa and became 
a disciple of Jayadeva of Nalanda. He converted a large number of 
heretics dwelling in the west of Magadha, including a ruling prince, 
as also some Siva-devotees of Sriparvata in the south. He composed 
three works, Sikshdsamuchchaya, Bodhichary avatar a, and Sutra - 
samuchchaya. Two of these are extant in original Sanskrit. In the 
Sikshasamuchchaya he compiled the ethical laws which a Bodhi- 
sattva should observe, while in the Bodhichary avatar a, he delineated 
how a Bodhisattva makes gradual spiritual progress and ultimately 
realises the prajnapdramitd, in other words, the Madhyamika con¬ 
ception of siinyatd. 

After Santideva, Sarvajhamitra (eighth century A.D.), a nephew 
of the king of Kashmir, became one of the principal teachers of 
Nalanda. He was a disciple of Ravigupta, who worked in Kashmir 
and Magadha, and was a Contemporary of Jayadeva. He is the author 
of the Sragdhardstotra, which is extant in original Sanskrit. 

4. The Yogdchdrins 

The origin of the Yogachara school of thought is usually placed 
some time after the appearance of the Madhyamika philosophy of 
Nagarjuna, i.e. about the third century A.D.; and its first propounder 
was Maitreyanatha, whose history has been made hazy by Taranatha, 

1. Tar., p. 1G2. 


388 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Bu-ston, and others by identifying him with Maitreya, the future 
Buddha. The earliest treatise dealing with Yogaehara philosophy, 
according to Prof. Takakusu, 1 was the Sraddhotpadasutra of Asva- 
gliosha, composed about the first century A.D. This opinion of 
Prof. Takakusu about the antiquity of the Sutra is not, however, 
generally accepted. A few scholars regard the Pahchavimsatisahasrikd 
Prajndpdramitd 2 as the earliest treatise on Yogaehara. It was 
adapted later to Maitreya’s Abhisamaydlanhdrakdrikd. It was fol¬ 
lowed by the Dasabhiimika-sutra, Kdsyapa-parivarta and Lankava- 
tdra-sutra. After these texts, appeared the Sandhinirmochana-sutra , 
which served as a link between the nebulous idealism of the canoni¬ 
cal texts and the developed Vijhanavada of Asanga, according to 
which nothing but ideation exists and the outer world is only a 
creation of the mind. Like the Madhyamikas, it also establishes that 
Sunyata is the only Reality, which is without origin and decay, and 
is beyond all descriptions. Its only difference from the Madhyamika 
point of view is that this Reality is pure consciousness {Vijnapti- 
mdtra ), which however goes against the Madhyamika absolutism 
which rejects the attribution of any quality (guna), even of pure 
consciousness, to Sunyata. 

Maitreyanatha lived in Ayodhya about A.D. 270-350 and com¬ 
posed several works systematising the idealistic thoughts. His 
Abhisamaydlankdra-kdrikd, Madhyantavibhaga, and Bodhisattva- 
bhiimi are extant in original Sanskrit. The credit of propounding 
the Vijnanavada philosophy, therefore, should go to Maitreyanatha 
and not to Asanga as stated in the various traditions. 

Asanga was the eldest son of the court-priest of Purushapura 
(Peshawar). He joined the Mahisasaka sect and was initiated into 
the Hmayanie conception of pudgaia-sunyatd by a monk called 
Pindola. As it did not give him full satisfaction, he approached 
Maitreyanatha for being initiated into the truths of Mahay ana. He 
was inspired by Maitreyanatha and received from him the Sapta- 
dasabhumisdstra (translated into Chinese in A.D. 413-421), Mahd- 
ydnasangraha , Abhidharmasamuchchaya and a few other works. 
He developed the cryptic sayings of Maitreyanatha, and detailed the 
practices to be undertaken by a Yogaehara adept and the spiritual 
stages through which he was to pass to attain the goal. Asanga 
lived in Ayodhya about A.D. 310-390, put the system on a firmer 
footing, and assured its future by persuading his younger brother 
Vasubandhu, an intellectual genius, to give up his old faith in 
Sarvastivada and espouse the cause of the Yogaehara school of 
thought. 

1. Essentials of Buddhist Philosophy, p. 98. 

2. Edited by N. Dutt and published in the Calcutta Oriental Series. 


389 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Vasubandhu was at first a Sarvastivadin. 1 He was won over 
by his elder brother Asahga to the Yogachara school of thought. 
After his conversion to the new faith he made valuable contribu¬ 
tions to Vijnanavada, of which the Vijnaptimdtratdsiddhi is a master¬ 
piece. In twenty and thirty kdrikds, known as Vimsatikd and 
Trlrksikd , he propounded the Vijnanavada philosophy, as he under¬ 
stood it. He was not only a commentator and a philosopher but 
also a logician. During his time logic formed part of the science of 
disputation ( vdda), and so all the books written by him on logic 
have the word vdda as a part of the title, viz. Vddahridaya , Vdda - 
vidhi. Vddavidhdna. It is to the credit of Dinnaga, a disciple of 
Vasubandhu, to have separated the science of logic from that of 
disputation and replaced the v/ord vdda by nydya. 

Vasubandhu had a long and distinguished career as the abbot 
of Nalanda, and had quite a large number of disciples, among whom 
may be mentioned Gunamati, Sthiramati, Dinnaga, Samghadasa, 
Dharmadasa, Dharmapala, and Vimuktasena. 

Gunamati was a native of ValabhT and spent the greater part 
of his life there. He came to Nalanda and became one of its dis¬ 
tinguished teachers. He is often mentioned along with Sthiramati, 
who was not only his contemporary but also resided with him in 
the same monastery at ValabhI. He wrote a commentary on the 
Abhidharmakosa 2 and refuted the dualistic teachings of Madhva 
as also the Madhyamika views of Bhavya (=Bhavaviveka). The 
great scholar Paramartha, who belonged to Uj jay ini, was a disciple 
of Gunamati. He translated Gunamati’s Lakshananusdrasdstra into 
Chinese. 

Sthiramati hailed from Dandakaranya. He became a disciple 
of Vasubandhu and learned the sdstras from him. He studied both 
HTnayana and Mahayana philosophy and wrote commentaries on 
Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakosa, Abhidharmasamuchchaya and other 
works. He committed to memory the Ratnakuta-sutras and com¬ 
mented on one of its texts, the Kdsyapa-parivarta. He wrote disqui¬ 
sitions on Madhydntavibhdqa and Vasubandhu’s Trimsikd, both of 
which have been discovered in original Sanskrit. 1 2 3 

Dinnaga was another distinguished disciple of Vasubandhu. He 
came of a Brahmana family of Kahchi (Conjeeveram), and became 
a monk of the Vatsiputrlya (=SarhmitIyal sect. After he became 

1. See above pp. 383-4 as a Vaibhashika teacher. 

2. Watters (II, p, 108) thinks that Gunamati, the commentator of the kosa, was 
different from Gunamati the Yogacharin. The Kosa being a basic work of 
Buddhism was studied both by the Hinayanists and the Mahayanists and hence 
the commentator of Kosa might well have been a Yogacharin. 

3. JR AS, 1947, pp. 53 ft. 

390 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


a disciple of Vasubandhu he gave up his old faith and became a 
Vijnanavadin. He specialised in logical science, on which he wrote 
a number of treatises, the best of which was the Pramdnasamuch - 
chaya. Two of his works, Nyayapravesa and Prajriapdramitd- 
pinddrtha are extant in original Sanskrit. Some of his works were 
translated into Chinese in A.D. 560. I-tsing furnishes us with the 
titles of eight of his works which were used by students as text¬ 
books on logic. He spent the best part of his life in intellectual 
disputations, and his views have been criticised by Brahmanic 
logicians like Uddyotakara, Kumarila Bhatta, and Parthasarathi 
Misra. He was really the founder of the mediaeval school of logic. 
His predecessors like Nagarjuna, Asahga, and Vasubandhu utilised 
the logical science for the exposition of their doctrines, and it was 
Dihnaga who first formulated a systematic science of logic. He went 
to Odivisa, and converted the king’s treasurer Bhadrapalita who 
erected sixteen monasteries. He lived probably at the end of the 
fifth or beginning of the sixth century A.D., for his works were 
translated into Chinese in the sixth century. Dihnaga had a large 
number of disciples of whom Sahkarasvamin and Dharmapala deserve 
mention. 

Sahkarasvamin belonged to Southern India and was the author 
of the Nyciyapravesa-tctrkcLsdstra which was translated into Chinese 
by Hiuen Tsang in A.D. 647. 

Dharmapala was a native of KahchL Hiuen Tsang writes that 
he was the son of a high official of the king, while Taranatha says that 
he belonged to a family of chanters and that when quite young he 
could recite large portions of Buddhist and Brahmanic works. He 
was ordained by Dharmadasa, He came to Madhyadesa and became 
a disciple of Dihnaga. He could recite from memory one hundred 
large sutras. He composed many stotras and stavas. For some time 
he preached the religion at Gaya where Bhava-viveka wanted to meet 
him but failed to do so. He defeated many Hlnayana teachers in 
controversies at Visoka (near Kausambi). He became the abbot of 
Nalanda and composed a few wmrks on Yoga char a philosophy. He 
ordained Dharmakirti, and lived at the beginning of the seventh 
century. Dharmapala was succeeded in the abbotship of Nalanda 
by his disciple Silabhadra, with whom Hiuen Tsang studied the 
Buddhist texts. 

Silabhadra came of a royal family of Samatata. He became a 
disciple of Dharmapala and acquired great distinction as a disputant. 
He defeated some teachers of South India in controversies, and was 
given the revenues of a village as a reward by the ruler of the 
country. With this revenue, he built monasteries and made provi- 


391 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


sion for the maintenance of the inmates. Being a friend and teacher 
of Hiuen Tsang he has been highly spoken of by the Chinese 
pilgrim, who met him in the middle of the seventh century A.D. 
He was the last known Vijnanavadin abbot of Nalanda. The 
next distinguished writer on Vijhanavada was Haribhadra, who 
lived during the reign of the Pal a king Dharmapala. He was a 
disciple of Vairochanabhadra. It cannot be determined how many 
teachers of the Vijhanavada school intervened between Silabhadra 
and Haribhadra. 

One of the disciples of Dinnaga was Isvarasena who lived some 
time after Slladitya. He expounded Dihnaga’s Pramdnasamuchchaya 
to Dharmakirti. 

Dharmakirti came of a Brahmana family of the south 
and was probably a nephew of the famous Kumarila. When 
he was sixteen or eighteen years old he became proficient in all the 
sdstras of the heretics. Then he realised that his own doctrine was 
full of shortcomings, and the sdstras were incomplete, while the 
excellent teaching of Buddha was just the opposite. He admired 
the religion and became an updsaka. On account of his great devotion 
for Buddha he was excommunicated by the Brahmanas. He came to 
Madhyadesa and was ordained by Dharmapala. He studied Difmaga’s 
Pramdnasamuchchaya with his teacher Isvarasena, but he differed 
from his teacher on certain points and composed a fresh commentary 
on this text. He mastered the knotty points of the Sankhya philo¬ 
sophy and defeated the heretical teachers in controversies. He is 
said to have surpassed even Dinnaga in his contribution to the 
science of logic. His Nyayabindu is extant in original Sanskrit. 
Another valuable work of his was Pramdnavdrttika, on which a 
commentary was written by Prajnakaragupta. 1 His views have 
been criticised by Santarakshita in his Tattvasangraha. Since I-tsing 
mentions him he should be placed in the seventh century A.D. 

One of the most distinguished disciples of Sthiramati was 
Chandragomin who made a notable contribution to the grammatical 
literature of India. Chandragomin was born in Varendra in the east. 
He studied all the sciences including grammar and dialectics. He 
learned from Sthiramati the Sutra and Abhidharma Pitakas , and 
from other teachers, Mantras and Tantras. He worshipped Tara and 
Avalokitesvara. He married the daughter of the king of Varendra. 
whose name was Tara. One day it struck him that his wife Tara 
was not different from his deity Tara, and so he left home, became 
a recluse and retired across the Ganga to a spot which came to be 
known as Chandradvlpa. At this place he erected temples of Tara and 

1 Edited by Rahula Sarhkrityayana. 


392 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Avalokitesvara. He was a Vijnanavadin and as such he was a rival 
of Chandrakirti, who was a follower of Buddhapalita’s school of 
Madhyamika. These two scholars carried on learned discussions for 
several years. Chandragomin wTote many treatises on medicine, 
architecture, lexicography, grammar, dialectics, metrics, and poetics. 
His work Chdndra-vyakarana was highly appreciated. He took up 
the study of the Dasabkumika, Samddhirdja , Lankavatara and 
Prajndpdramitd , and compiled abstracts of these texts. He is the 
author of PradlpamdId-sastra, Samvara-vimsaka , Kdyatraydvatdra, 
Tdrdsadhanasataka , Avalokitesvarasddhanasataka and Sishyalekha . 
He visited the southern countries and went as far as Simhaladvlpa. 
He spent his last years at Potala in Dhanasrldvlpa across the ocean 
where he erected temples of Tara and Avalokitesvara. 

VI. Historical Survey 

It has been shown above, how the new movement, Mahayanism, 
was developing under the care of different teachers, and how 
Hrnayanism, though claiming comparatively a large number of 
adherents, was gradually being pushed off to the fringes of India 
and ultimately to countries outside the land of its origin. As it is 
not possible to present a complete picture of Buddhism during the 
Gupta period, we shall have to satisfy ourselves with the scrappy 
information left by the Chinese pilgrims supplemented by Tibetan 
traditions and scanty archaeological evidence, 

Fa-hien came to India in the fifth century A.D. and made a 
brief survey of the condition of Buddhism. He commenced his tour 
from Central Asian countries where he found the religion flourishing. 
On his way to Mathura he saw countless monks and monasteries, 
and in most places the kings were staunch believers in the religion 
and showed due respect to the monks. Some of the kings made 
grants of land for the maintenance of monasteries. He admired the 
monks for their strict observance of the disciplinary rules and the 
lay-devotees for their great regard for the shrines and for their 
liberal gifts to the monks. He noticed that the householders erected 
chaityas and stupas and worshipped them. 

From the account of Fa-hien it appears that even in the fifth 
century A.D. Hlnayana Buddhism was still holding its sway all over 
Northern India, and that Mahayana Buddhism was just rearing its 
head here and there. Only at Gaya and Kapilavastu did he find the 
monasteries empty and desolate. 

Hiuen Tsang visited India about two centuries after Fa-hien. 
There is no reliable source from which we can fill up this gap of 


393 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


two centuries. There are a few traditions preserved in the Mafoju - 
srimulakalpa, Taranatha’s History of Buddhism and the records of 
Hiuen Tsang, but these cannot be regarded as very reliable. 

Taranatha writes that some time after Rahulabhadra the Bud¬ 
dhist church fell on evil days. A Turushka king overran Magadha 
and destroyed many monasteries. The monks of Nalanda fled in 
different directions. The ruler of Magadha became a vassal of the 
Turushka conqueror and could no longer effectively help the church. 
A later king, nicknamed Ruddhapaksha, was a friend of the Bud¬ 
dhists. He entered into an alliance with the king of China through 
Buddhist emissaries and, with the treasure received from the 
Chinese king, slew the Persian invader and regained independence. 1 
He re-erected the monasteries at Nalanda. 

In the ManjvJrimulakalpa 2 this tradition appears in a 
slightly different form. The name of the foreign invader is given 
as “Gomi”. He entered from the north through Kashmir and 
destroyed many monasteries and killed several monks. Then king 
Buddhapaksha, who was an ardent devotee of Buddhism, re-erected 
the stupas and monasteries. His son called Gamhhira Yaksha also 
built several stupas and monasteries and dug tanks and wells. As 
Fa-hien does not allude to this inroad of a foreigner, the time of this 
persecution should be placed in the sixth century A.D. or the end Gf 
the fifth century A.D. The only persecutor that Hiuen Tsang speaks 
of is Mihirakula, who was imprisoned by Baladitya. 3 The foreign 
ruler who destroyed the Buddhist monasteries might be Toramana. 
father of Mihirakula. Hiuen Tseng writes that Sakraditva was the 
founder of the Nalanda monastery, while his son Budhagupta and 
king Tathagatagupta built two other monasteries. This testimony 
of Hiuen Tsang proves the Buddhist leanings of some of the local 
kings. The names Budha and Tathagata are also reminiscent of 
their faith in Buddhism. Several Gupta inscriptions testify to 
the Buddhist leanings of kings and peoples. 4 

Hiuen Tsang’s account gives us reliable information about the 
condition of Buddhism in India in the seventh century A.D. He 
travelled in India from A.D. 630 to 644. In Kashmir he was received 
with great honours by the king who gave him twenty panditas to 
make copies of Buddhist works, besides a few monks to help him 
in his mission. After studying there for two years, he went to a 
place near Sakala (Si alkot) and studied the Ahhidharma Pitaka for 
two years with the bhikshu Vinltaprabha who was the son of a 

1. Tar., p. 95; Bust on, II, 119. 2. T.S.S. No. 84, Part III, p. 620. 

3. See pp. 36-38. 

4. For other evidences of the royal patronage of Buddhism during the Gupta 
period, of. pp. 43, 63, 139 f, 142 f above. 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


prince. He resided for some time at Srughna with the monk Jaya- 
gupta and at Matipur with Mitrasena, a disciple of Gunaprabha, 
studying the Vibhashas and Gunaprabha’s Taitvasandesasastra. He 
remained for three months at Kanauj with A chary a Vlryasena and 
studied the treatise on VibhdshcL written by Acharya Buddhadasa 
at Hayamukha. Lastly he Became a student of Silabhadra, the abbot 
of Nalanda. He gives the number of monks and monasteries in the 
different states visited by him and sometimes adds interesting details 
and anecdotes concerning Buddhism. He carried back to China 657 
pu (parts) of the Buddhist literature composed of Hinayana sutras, 
commentaries and disciplinary rules, Mahay ana texts and commen¬ 
taries, and a few treatises on logic and etymology. 

Hiuen Tsang gives a detailed account of Emperor Harsha- 
vardhana and his zeal for Buddhism. 1 But, in all probability, he 
exaggerated a great deal. Harsha’s widowed sister Rajyasrl became 
a nun of the Sammitlya school, and due to the king’s patronage the 
Sammitiya school spread widely in Western India and in a few places 
in Eastern India. Harsha-vardhana’s faith in Hinayana is indicated 

t/ 

by the fact that at Malwa he erected a temple of great architectural 
merit and installed in it images of seven Buddhas recognised by the 
Hlnayanists. 

Though Hiuen Tsang endeavoured to give a bright picture of 
Buddhism in India, it appears from his record that the progress of 
the religion had been arrested, and in many places it had lost its 
hold upon the people and was, in fact, on the verge of disappearance. 
In the north-western parts of India, particularly in Nagarkot, 
Gandhiara, Udyana and Takshasila, he found the monasteries mostly 
in ruins and almost deserted, and the people were mostly non- 
Buddhists. At Simhapura near Takshasila he noticed a spot sacred 
to the Svetambara Jains. Likewise in Sravasti and Vaisall the reli¬ 
gion was on the wane, the monasteries untenanted and uncared for, 
while in Vaisall the Digamhara Jains prospered Similar was the 
condition in the eastern parts of India, in Champa and Pundra- 
vardhana. There were many Digam bar as in Punclravardhana, 
Samatata and Kalihga. In the south at Dhanakataka, Chola 
countries and Malakuta a few Buddhist monks resided in the several 
monasteries while there were manv Digamharas and other non- 
Buddhists. Of the kings mentioned bv Hiuen Tsang, only Harsha 
and Dhruvabhata (of ValabhT) were true lay-devotees and actively 
worked for the welfare of the religion; all the other kings were 
Brahmsnic in their faith, though they were tolerant of the religion 
which had been existing in their dominions and occasionally showed 


1. See above, pp. 117 IT 


305 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


their sympathy for its well-being. From the above account it is ap¬ 
parent that the sphere of Buddhism had already contracted in Hiuen 
Tsang’s time, and that the non-Buddhists, particularly the devotees 
of Siva and the followers of the Digambara sect, were growing in 
number and influence. But Hiuen Tsang’s records distinctly prove 
that Buddhism, though declining, was still prevalent in important 
places all over India from Kashmir and Gandhara to Dravida, and 
from Ganjam and Samatata to Sindh and ValabhI. 

In conclusion a few words may be said about the monastic life. 
Long before the Gupta period Buddhist as well as Jain monks and 
nuns had developed into important and powerful communities bound 
together by the strict rules of their respective orders. From the 
accounts of the contemporary Chinese travellers we learn how 
zealously the Buddhist fraternity in the seventh century sought to 
maintain the high intellectual and moral standards enforced by 
their canon. “The Brethren”, says Hiuen Tsang in his general 
account of India, “are often assembled for discussion to test intellec¬ 
tual capacity and bring moral character into prominent distinction, 
to reject the worthless and advance the intelligent.” While “those 
who bring out subtle points in Philosophy couched in ornate diction,” 
continues the account, are given very high distinction, “those who 
are defeated in discussion are covered with ignominy and expelled.” 
The Brethren, again, had different grades of penalties for different 
offences. I-tsing, who was driven to visit India by the laxity of 
monks in his native land, describes in great detail and with high 
praise the rules followed by Indian monks about food and drink, 
clothing and medicaments, personal hygiene and general conduct. 1 
Nevertheless it is probable that there were at times not only indi¬ 
vidual but even general lapses of the Brethren from the older stan¬ 
dards. This is proved, not so much by occasional hints in the Brah¬ 
man ical literature, as by the pointed and direct reference in a 
Buddhist work of this period. 2 Literary evidence again shows that 

1. HTW , I. 162. As an instance oi the strictness of the monastic discipline in his 
time, I-tsing mentions (Takakusu 63) the stringent rules observed by monks 
and nuns when visiting one another at a monastery in Tamralipti. In the same 
monastery lived a much esteemed monk who had not spoken to a woman 
face to face since his ordination, though this was not forbidden by the law 
(ibid. 64). 

2. In Bhasa’s Chdrndatta (Act IV, p. 74) the saucy Brahmana Maitreya uses the 
simile of a Buddhist monk kept awake at night by thinking of his assignation 
with a servant girl. In Mri., however, this scandalous reference is left out in 
the corresponding passage. What is more, a Buddhist monk, who was till 
recently a shamnooer and a gambler, is mentioned ouite naturally as shrinking 
from touching the body of the heroine to enable her to walk to a place oi 
safety. bmt much stress again is to be laid upon the character of the disrepu¬ 
table Buddhist monk portrayed in the Mattavildsa drama v/hich belongs to a 
dramatic type ( prahasana) characterised by its license. On the other hand it 
is significant that the Rashtrapalapariprichchha contains (Finot’s ed. pp. 28-33) 
a remarkable prophecy about the decadence of the church making the monks 

396 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


the Buddhist and Jain nuns in particular were often employed from 
early times in the unworthy role of go-betweens between lovers. 
The Gupta Age seems to show no improvement on this state of 
affairs. * 1 

The dramas and romances of the Gupta Age have preserved for 
us strong traces of the repugnance felt by orthodox Brahmanas 
towards Buddhist as well as Jain monks whom they could not 
but look upon as impious revilers of the Vedas and sacrificial per¬ 
formances. 2 Nevertheless, as pointed out above, mutual toleration 
of the prevailing faiths was the general rule in the country during 
the Gupta period. 

VII. Iconography 

Numerous images of Buddha of all the varieties mentioned 
above 3 prove the great popularity of the icon worship. The colossal 
recumbent Buddha figure of Kasia, made by Dinna of Mathura in 
the early Gupta period, is of unique interest, for few such figures 
of this or later period are known. The seated Buddha image at 
Mankuwar (Allahabad District), dated in A.D. 448-9, partially 
preserves the conventional treatment of hair which we find in early 
Mathura images, 4 the spiral coil being left out. The Buddha type 
of the Gupta period, numerous specimens of which have been dis¬ 
covered at Sarnath and its environs, is a fully developed one ‘charac¬ 
terised by its refinement, by a clear delineation and definition of 
features, by curly hair, absence of urnd, greater variety of mudras, 
elaborately decorated nimbus, the robe covering one or both 
shoulders and extremely diaphanous clearly revealing the figure, 
and by a lotus or lion pedestal, usually with figures of donors. 
Scarcely any trace of Hellenistic plasticity is apparent.’ This 
classical type, sublimated out of the “animal” type of Mathura, 
became the chief source of all later Buddhas both in and outside 
India. 

The Sarnath Museum also contains a number of Bodhisattvas 
of the Gupta period; these can be identified on the basis of their 

appear in the role of unabashed worldlings and hyprocitcs as well as teachers 
of false doctrines. This work was translated into Chinese between A.D, 585 
and 592, and was probably composed not much earlier than that time. 

1. Dasci' pp. 85, 168 (NSP. 1951, pp. 112, 232); KamandakI in Malati. 

2. Cf. Mri. Act IX (meeting a Buddhist monk in a public garden regarded as 
inauspicious even by the virtuous Charudatta): Har. V, Mud, IV (sight of a 
naked Jain monk taken to be an evil omen). The grounds for the Brahmanas’ 
antipathy towards Jain monks are well expressed in a remarkable anecdote in 
Dasa' p. 75 (NSP, 1951, p. 94). There we are told that a rich merchant of the 
Brahmana caste, reduced to poverty by the wiles of ganika, allows himself in 
sheer disgust to become a Jain monk. Afterwards he repents of adopting a life 
‘‘where the dress to be worn is condemnable, which is the abode of excessive 
suffering, the fruit whereof is Hell even after one’s death owing to one’s having 
constantly to listen to the blasphemy against the gods Vishnu, Siva, Brahma 
and others.” 

3. Vol. II, pp. 391 ff. 4. Vol. II, p, 394. 

397 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


special iconographic features as Avalokitesvara. Maitreya and 
Manjusil, the images of the first being more numerous than those 
of the other two. An interesting re-orientation in the representa¬ 
tion of these Gupta Bodhisattvas is now clearly discernible; almost 
all of them bear on their crown the miniature figures of their 
respective spiritual fathers—the Dhyanl-Buddhas Amitabha, 
Amoghasiddha and Akshobhya—a peculiarity which is so common 
in the case of their mediaeval counterparts. This speciality is not 
found in Mathura and Gandhara, though one or two comparatively 
late reliefs from the latter place contain it. Another iconographic 
change is noticeable in the treatment of Maitreya of the Gupta 
period; for now we see him holding a bunch of Nagakesara flowers 
in his hand in place of the nectar flask. 

The iconographic innovations just noticed indicate that changes 
of an extremely far-reaching character were being introduced in 
the Mahayana doctrine in the early Gupta period—changes which 
were destined to transform it at no distant date into Vajrayana 
which supplied mediaeval Buddhism with its bewildering icono¬ 
graphy. Some of the earlier motifs like those depicting the pre¬ 
decessors of Gautama Buddha were now falling into comparative 
disuse, and Dhyanl-Buddhas and Dhyanl-Bodhisattvas were coming 
into prominence in all their varied complexity of forms. These and 
a host of new entrants into the pantheon came to be most commonly 
represented in mediaeval Buddhist art, and many of these icono¬ 
graphic types were only next in order of importance to the principal 
cult picture. But it must be noted that the Dhyanl-Buddha figures 
were mainly used as accessories, inasmuch as they usually appeared 
either in the crown or on the top part of the prcibha of not only the 
Dhyanl-Bodhisattvas and their various forms but also of numerous 
other Bodhisattvas, both male and female, belonging to the elaborate 
pantheon. A much later addition to the list of the five Dhyanl- 
Buddhas is Vajrasattva whose Bodhisattva is Ghantapani. 1 Another 
late introduction into the elaborate hierarchy of Mahavana-Vaira- 
yana divinities was the Adi-Buddha from whom the other Dhyanl- 
Buddhas were later supposed to have originated. All these images 
of the Mahayana pantheon will he discussed more fully in the next 
volume. 


VIII. Non-canon iced Pali Literature 

The period following the closing of the canon is characterised 
by exegetic literature which was necessitated by the difficulties felt 
in understanding the canonical texts. Most of the works during the 

1. B. T. Bhattacharaya, Indian Buddhist Iconography, pp. xxiv-xxix, 2; A. Getty, 
Gods of Northern Bnddhisrr. 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


period under review are the products of the learned theras (monks) 
from Ceylon, the contribution from the mainland of India being 
meagre. The period may rightly be regarded as a brilliant epoch in 
the history of Pali literature of Ceylon. 


The beginnings of exegetical activity may be traced in the 
Suttas, and the canon itself contains a few commentaries. The 
Buddhist monks in India and Ceylon carefully studied the canonical 
texts and explained them. According to the orthodox Buddhists of 
Ceylon the Atthakathds (explanations of the meanings, or commen¬ 
taries) have been handed down since the days of the First Council. 
The canonical texts were explained both grammatically and lexi¬ 
cally. They were illustrated by narratives and legends, and 


augmented by the addition and insertion of old material and com¬ 
position of much fresh material in imitation of old models. These 
works also included legends connected with the origin and history 
of the monastic order, which were helpful in tracing the early 
history of monasteries in Ceylon. 


1. Niddna Kathd 


We get the record of the actual life of the Master and the 
earliest beginnings of a Buddha legend and a Buddha epic in the 
canonical texts. But the first connected account of the life of the 
Master reconstructed from these scattered notices is found in the 
Niddna. Kathd (narrative of the beginnings) which preceded the 
Jatakatthavannand and formed part of it. The Niddna Kathd con¬ 
sists of three sections, Dure Niddna (beginnings in the remote past), 
Avidure Niddna (not very remote), and Sdntike Niddna (in the pre¬ 
sent). In the Dure Niddna, which gives an account of the previous 
lives of the Buddha, the prose is continually interrupted by verses 
from the Buddhavamsa and Chariydpitaka with which it is directly 
connected. The Avidure Niddna relates how the Tusita gods impor¬ 
tune Bodhisattva to be born again on earth, and gives the legends 
of Bodhisattva from his conception to the attainment of Bcdhi, inter¬ 
woven with numerous miraculous phenomena. The Sdntike Niddna 
deals mainly with the first conversions. These three parts contain 
the story of the Buddha from the time of Dlpariikara Buddha, to whom 
the future Buddha as Sumedha pays homage, up to the grant of 
Jetavana to the monastic order by the merchant Anatha-pindika. 
The Niddna Kathd , which forms an essential part of the Jataka com¬ 
mentary, represents an earlier phase in the development of the 
Buddha legend than the Lalitavistara and similar Sanskrit 
works. 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


2. Commentaries 


(i) Buddhaghosha 

According to the account of the life of Buddhaghosha in the 
Mahavamsa / he was born in a Brahmana family in the neighbour¬ 
hood of Bodh-Gaya. He was converted to Buddhism by a monk 
( mahdmdtra ) named Revata, who induced him to go to Ceylon in 
order to study the authoritative and orthodox commentaries which 
were not available in India. So Buddhaghosha reached Ceylon in 
the reign of king Mahanaman (A.D, 409-31), and heard the Singha¬ 
lese commentary and the Theravada tradition from Sanghapala at 
the Mahapadhana hall of the Mahavihara. There he composed the 
Visuddhimagga, and was acclaimed a veritable Metteyya Bodhi- 
sattva. He then translated the Atthakathds from the Singhalese into 
MagadhI, and his work was honoured by the teachers of the Thera¬ 
vada as a sacred text. After finishing his task Buddhaghosha re¬ 
turned to the land of his birth to pay homage to the great Rodhi tree. 

This account was hitherto accepted as correct by almost all 
writers on Pali literature. 1 2 Dharmananda Kosambi, however, does 
not accept the view that Buddhaghosha was a native of Bodh-Gaya 
or that he was a Brahmana, and believes him to be a Telanga from 
the Telugu country of Southern India, and not a Burmese Telaing 
as recorded in the Burmese traditions. 3 

There is a wide difference of opinion with regard to the works 
of Buddhaghosha. He himself mentions Visuddhimagga, Samanta- 
pasddikd, Sumahgalavildsinl, Papanchasudanl, Sdratthappakdsini, and 
Manor athapuranl as his works. Besides these, the Gandhavamsa 
ascribes to him Kankhavitaranl, Paramatthakathd, and commenta¬ 
ries on Jdtaka , Dhammapada , Khuddakapdtha, Suttanipata, and 
Apaddna. Winternitz has scarcely any doubt about Buddhaghosha’s 
authorship of Atthasdlinl , Sammohavinodanl and the commentary 
on Patthdnapakarana. He believes that the Kankhavitaranl and 
Paramatthajotikd also most probably belong to Buddhaghosha. The 
commentaries on Jdtaka and Dhammapada ascribed to Buddha¬ 
ghosha by Gandhavamsa are so distinct in language and style from 
his other works that it is difficult to ascribe them to his authorship. 4 

The Visuddhimagga, so called because it explains the ways 
(magga) to attain to purity ( visuddhi ). is the first outstanding work 

1. Mahavamsa, Ch. XXXVII. 2. HI L, II. 190-91. 

3. Visuddhimagga. Bombay, 1940, Intr. pp. xiii fT. Law identifies Mayurasuttapattana 

the birth-place of Buddhaghosha with Mayavaram (Buddhaghosa. p. 34). 
Kosambi could not locate it (op. cit, p. xv). 

4. cf. Winternitz, HIL, II. 192. Law, however, ascribes the last two works respec¬ 
tively to a later namesake of Buddhaghosha and Chulla Buddhaghosha (Buddha¬ 
ghosa, pp. 71 ff; 63 fT). 


400 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of Buddhaghosha, and is a systematic presentation of the entire 
doctrine of Buddha. If Buddhaghosha had written nothing else, 
Visuddhimagga alone would have secured for him undying fame. 1 
It is divided into three parts: conduct, concentration (or mental 
training), and wisdom. Its style is clear and lucid, and many a dry 
doctrinal discussion is enlivened by occasional parables and legends. 
Compared to the archaic simplicity of the Pitakas, the vocabulary of 
the Visuddhimagga is surprisingly rich. Numerous miracles are told 
showing now meditation enables saints to acquire supernatural and 
magical powers. 

The greatest service of Buddhaghosha to the progress of Bud¬ 
dhist knowledge was his series of masterly commentaries on practi¬ 
cally all the texts of the Tipitaka. Samantapasddiha, dealing with 
the Vinaya texts, is a voluminous work, containing, besides commen¬ 
tary, vast material for portraying the social, political, religious, and 
philosophical life of ancient India. Dr. Law, however, ascribes this 
book and Kdhkhdvitaram (a commentary on the Pdtimokkha ), to 
another Buddhaghosha, distinct from the author of the Visuddhi¬ 
magga , on the ground that the Samantapdsadikd not only exhibits 
a greater maturity of judgment and a better intellectual equipment, 
but also represents a later development of the views advocated in 
the Visuddhimagga. 2 But the arguments are not convincing enough 
to justify the postulation of a different author. Of the commentaries 
on the four Nikayas, viz. the Sumahgalavildsini on the Dlgha-, 
Papahckasudanl on the Majjhima-, Sdratthappakdsini on the Sam* 
yutta and Manorathapurani on the Ahguttara the first shows 
Buddhaghosha’s encyclopaedic learning at its best. It contains a 
variety of information—social, political, economic, geographical, 
religious, and philosophical,—and presents a vivid picture of the 
sports and pastimes of the day. It also gives some particulars about 
the daily life of a Bhikkhu. The account of the First Buddhist 
Council shows a blending of the accounts in the Chullavagga and 
the Pali Chronicles. Buddhaghosha mentions in the PapainchaSudani 
that the Vedic teachers expounded the three Vedas in the Damila 
(Tamil), Andhaka (Telugu), or other local dialects in order to 
facilitate easy understanding. The Sdratthappakdsini sheds a flood 
of light on the everyday life in India and Ceylon. Of the Khuddaka . 
we have from Buddhaghosha, Pciramadthajotikd (on Khuddakapatha 
and Suttanipdta) Atthasalinl (on Dhammasahgani ), Sammohavino - 
dani (on Vibhahga) , and Paramatthadlpanl or Panchappakaranattha- 
kathd (on the five texts of the Khuddakaviz. Dhdtukathd , Puggala- 
pahhatti, Kathdvatthu. Yamaha and Pat.thd.na ). Besides explaining 
technical terms of Buddhist psychology, the Atthasdlinl contains 

i. Gray, Buddhaghosuppatti, Intr. p. 31. 2. Bnddhaghosa, p. 75. 


401 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


some historical and geographical information. The introduction 
gives the contents of the Abhidhamma texts, and discusses various 
textual problems. The Atthasdlini exhibits more freshness and 
originality in treatment, though it is less scholastic in style as com¬ 
pared to Visuddhimagga. ] 

Buddhaghosha’s authorship of the Jdtakatthavanriand (Jataka 
commentary) has been disputed practically by all scholars, such as 
Rhys Davids, 1 2 Law 3 and Malalasekera. 4 The Jataka commentary, 
as occurring in Fausboll's edition, contains 547 stories, each of which 
has (i) the canonical gdihd, (ii) atitavatthuni or stories of the past, 
i.e. prose narratives (iii) pachchuppannavatthuni , stories of the 
present, stating the occasion when the particular Jataka was told, 
along with samodhdndni, mentioning the characters assumed at 
present by the persons in the Jataka, and (iv) veyydkarandni, com¬ 
mentaries, explaining the verses word by word. Though both gathds 
and stories were based on the old Atthakathd, they were transmitted 
in different manners; whereas the gathds remained fixed and un¬ 
changeable, the prose portion was left to the discretion of the 
rhapsodist, somewhat in the nature of the Vedic Akhyanas. 5 The 
difference in the scenes of action between the stories of the past 
and present is striking; the former refer mostly to Western and 
Northern India (Gandhararattha, etc.), while the latter to the East 
(Magadharattha, Kosalarattha, etc.). 

Though Winternitz, Burlingame, Geiger and others question 
Buddhaghosha’s authorship of the Dhammapadatthakathd (Dham- 
mapada Commentary), Law sees no reason to disbelieve the colo¬ 
phon w’hich ascribes it to Buddhaghosha. 6 Malalasekera ascribes it 
to Chulia Buddhaghosha, though he suggests the possibility of its 
emanating from the great commentator, on the strength of the 
Sinhalese Pujdvaliya. 7 The Dhammapada Commentary is a volu¬ 
minous work explaining the stanzas of the Dhammapada, and like 
the J dtakatthavannand , contains many ancient popular stories, short 
edifying legends, and interesting fairy tales. Profuse references to 
Jataka stories, many quotations from the Jataka stanzas, and a large 
number of stories bearing close parallelism with the Jataka stories 
indicate the priority of the Jataka commentary. 8 Each story in the 
Dhammapada commentary contains the following eight sub-divisions: 
(i) gdthd (stanza) to which the story refers, (ii) person or persons 
to whom the story is told, (iii) pachchuppannavatthu, the story of 

1. Kosambi, however, doubts Buddhaghosha’s authorship of Atthasdlini “from the 
style, content and thn introduction” (op. at., p. xiv). 

2. Buddhist Birth-stories, Intr. p. lx. 3. Buddhaghosa, pp. 69 fF. 

4. PLC. p. 126 5. See above, Vol. I, p. 340. 

6. HPL, II, p. 450. 7. PLC, p. 96. 

8. Buddhist Legends, Part I, pp. 57 f. 


402 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


the present, ending with (iv) a stanza, ur stanzas, (v) word for word 
commentary on the stanza, (vi) spiritual benefits which accrued to 
the hearer or hearers, (vii) atltcivatthu, story of the past and (viii) 
identification of the persons of atitavatthu with those of pachchup- 
pannavatthu . 1 It will be seen that in general character and struc¬ 
ture of parts there is no difference between the Jataka commentary 
and the Dhammapada commentary. 

Visuddhimagga and the commentaries proclaim Buddhaghcsha 
to have been a man of remarkable erudition and extensive reading. 
It cannot be said that Buddhaghosha was a philosopher who cut out 
new paths and made an original contribution to Buddhist philo¬ 
sophy. 1 2 That he w r as a critical scholar appears from his consulting 
manuscripts of several schools and faithfully recording variant 
readings. His notes on rare words are valuable, and his preservation 
of ancient traditions entitles him to our deep gratitude. Buddha- 
ghosha’s service to the development of Pali language was singular. 
“In place of the archaic, stilted, sometimes halting Sutta speech 
. . . Buddhaghosha left behind him in his many works a language 
rich in its vocabulary, flexible in its use, elegant in structure, often 
intricate in the verbiage of its constructions, and capable of express¬ 
ing all the ideas that the human mind had then conceived.” 3 

(ii) Buddhadatta 

Chronologically, the first among the successors of Buddhaghosha 
appears to be Buddhadatta. Many scholars regard him as a senior 
contemporary of Buddhaghosha, 4 but Winternitz takes him toH>e 
a much later writer. 5 All his works w r ere written in the famous 
monastery erected by Kanhadasa on the banks of the Kaveri. He is 
reputed to be the author of Vinaya-vinichchaya , Uttara-vinichchaya, 
Abhidhammavatdra, Rupdrupa-vibhanga, Madhuratthavildsinl and 
Jindlamkdra; but according to Geiger the ascription to him of the 
above works except Madhuratthavildsinl is problematical. 6 

The first four are mostly summaries of Buddhaghosha’s com¬ 
mentaries. Madhuratthavildsinl (or Madhuratthappakdsinl ) is a 
commentary on the Buddhavamsa. Jindlamkdra is a poem of 
250 stanzas containing vignettes of Buddha’s life in brilliant rhythmi¬ 
cal cadences and elegant language. 'There are stanzas wfith internal 
rhymes, alliterations and other rhetorical devices exhibiting the 
bombastic Kavya style and artificiality in construction. There is a 

1. of. L.')w, HPL , II, pp. 449-50; also, Burlingame, Buddhist Legends , Part I. 
pn. 28-9. 

2. of. Law, Life and Work of Buddhaghosa , pp. 135 ff. Winternitz, HIL , II, p. 204. 

3. Malalasekera, PLC, p. 103.' 

4. Vinayavinichchaya: Buddhaghosuppatti , Ed. by Gray, pp. 49-51. cf. Malala¬ 
sekera. PLC, dd. 105 ff; Law! HPL, II. p. 384 ff. 

5. HIL, II, p. 220. 6. Pali Literature pud Language, p. 33. 


403 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


sharp difference of opinion among scholars as to the authorship and 
date of Jindlamkdra . 1 

Buddhadatta’s scheme of expounding the Abhidhamma with 
the four-fold division of the compendium, viz. mind, mental proper¬ 
ties, material qualities, and nibbana 3 appears to be better than that 
of Buddhaghosha in terms of the five khandhas (divisions). Buddha- 
datta obviously profited by the labours of his great predecessor. 
His style is less discursive and more graphic, his diction often less 
involved and ambiguous, and his vocabulary considerably richer 
than that of Buddhaghosha, 

(Hi) Ananda 

Ananda, also from the mainland of India like Buddhadatta, 
appears to have been a contemporary of Buddhaghosha because he 
wrote his commentary at the instance of Buddhamitta who was 
instrumental in persuading Buddhaghosha to write Papanchasiidani. 
Ananda’s Mulatikd or Abhidhamma-mulatXkd is the oldest commen¬ 
tary on the Atthakathds of Abhidhamma. 

(iv) Dhammapdla 

Dhammapala, who hailed from Padaratittha on the south coast 
of India, is credited with having written fourteen commentaries. 
The similarity of conceptions and the identical method indicate that 
he was not much later than Buddhaghosha. Paramatthadiparii 
(Elucidation of the True Meaning) is a commentary on the seven 
texts of the Khudaaka Nikaya which Buddhaghosha had left 
unexplained. Dhammapala’s other commentaries are (8) on the 
Netti, with a Tlkd on it, (9) Pdramatthamanjushd on Visuddhimagga 
(10-13) Llnatthavannand or Lmatthappakdsini Tlkd on Buddha- 
ghosha’s commentary on the four Nikayas and (14) another commen¬ 
tary of the same name (Linatthappakdsini) on the Jdtakatthakathd. 
Dhammapala follows a regular scheme in his commentaries. The 
introduction at the beginning gives the traditional account of how the 
particular collection of poems came to be put together. After des¬ 
cribing how, when, and by whom each poem originated, individual 
clauses are quoted and explained philologically and exegetically. 

Much of Dhammapala’s work is but a recast in scholastic Pali 
of the earlier Singhalese or Tamil commentarial literature. It is 
doubtful if Dhammapala, the junior contemporary of Buddhaghosha. 
was the author of all these works. Probably works of later name¬ 
sakes have been fathered on the earlier Dhammapala as he had made 
it his life’s task to supplement the commentaries of Buddhaghosha 

1. Go.ndhavamsa pp. 69, 72; Gray, Jinalamkdra, Irstr. pp. 7 ff; HIL, II, pp. 223 f; 

PLC, pp. 111-2. 


404 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


If he is to be identified with the Dhammapala of the Nalanda 
'Monastery, the teacher's teacher of Hiuen Tsang, his date would be 
a century later; but Hardy and Geiger consider the identity yet 
unproved, 1 

Dhammapala’s works show great learning, much exegetical 
skill, and sound judgment. In comparison with Buddhaghosha his 
style is simpler and less diffuse. Though Dhammapala was well read 
and well informed, Buddhaghosha’s knowledge was more widely 
diffused and more encyclopaedic; the former shows more of the 
grammarian and academician than of the exegetical compiler and 
fanciful etymologist. 

(v) Upasena 

To this period also belongs, according to Wickremasinghe, 
Upasena, author of a commentary on the Maha-niddesa (called 
Saddhammappajotikd ) which is a mere translation into Pali of what 
the author found in the Ceylon commentaries. 2 There is no attempt 
at originality, and the w T ork is inferior to the writings of Buddha¬ 
ghosha or Dhammapala. A Bodh-Gaya inscription 3 mentions one 
Upasena preceding and another following Mahanama among the 
succession of Ceylon teachers. Mahanama may well refer to the 
author of the Mahdvamsa, and his predecessor to our Upasena, in 
which case his date would be c. fifth century A.D, Any way, even 
if he be identified with the second Upasena, he belongs to the period 
under review. 

(vi) Kassapa 

The Anagatavamsa (history of the future one, i.e. future 
Buddha), a poem of about 150 stanzas, forms a sequel to the 
Buddhavamsa so far as its contents are concerned. It gives a detailed 
account of the future Buddha. Metteyya and his contemporary 
Chakravartin Sankha. The Gandhavamsa ascribes the work to 
Kassapa, the author of Buddhavamsa, and its Tiled (Andgatavamsa- 
atthakathd) to Upatissa. There have been several Kassapas and 
Upatissas during various periods; so the date of this work 
cannot be fixed with certainty. Winternitz states that it “perhaps 
belongs to an earlier period,” though many regard Anagatavamsa 
as a spurious work. 4 Malalasekera believes Upatissa’s Tiled to have 
been based on a much earlier work. 5 It is not certain whether 
Kassapa, the author of the Anagatavamsa, is identical with the author 

1. ZDMG, 51, pp. 103 ff. Pali Literature and Language , p. 34. 

2. Catalogue , p. xii, referred to in PLC, pp. 116 f. 

3. CII. III. 244. 

4. HIL, II, p. 120; De Zoysa, Catalogue of Pali, Sinhalese and Sanskrit MSS in 

the Temple Libraries of Ceiilon, p. 5. 

5. PLC, p. 161. 


405 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of Mohavichchhedam f Vimatichchhedam (or - vinodinl ), and Bodhi - 
vamsa, though the Gandhavamsa 1 ascribes these works to a single 
author. The Mohavichchhedam is a treatise on-the Abhidhamma, 
and the Vimatichchhedam is a commentary on the Vinaya. 

(vii) Dhammasiri and, Mahdsdmi 

The Khuddasikkhd written by Dhammasiri, and Mulasikkhd by 
Mahasami contain a short summary of the Yinaya rules. They are 
mostly in verse with but a few passages in prose. Their language 
is simple and free from artificiality. Tradition places the works 
prior to the advent of Buddhaghosha; Rhys Davids supports the 
tradition, but scholars differ widely on this point. 2 

3. Pali Chronicles 

While Buddhaghosha and his successors were busy with the 
collection of legends and explanation and elucidation of canonical 
texts, another type of literary activity in the form of Chronicles 
recording the chief events in the history of Ceylon and of the 
Buddhist monastic order was slowly evolving. In Ceylon the earliest 
attempt at historiography is found in the Singhalese Atthakathds, 
which had sections on ecclesiastical history containing the story of 
the introduction of Buddhism on the island, based on the legendary 
tales in the Buddhavamsa, Chariydpitaka, and Jatakas. These sec¬ 
tions are a conglomeration of myths, legends, tales and history, and 
connect Buddhism in Ceylon with the Buddha himself. Traces of 
sober history are found in them as we reach the historical period. 
Besides ecclesiastical traditions, these Atthakathds incorporated also 
popular narratives and anecdotes so that they have become a store¬ 
house of information. 

(i) Dipavamsa 

The Dipavamsa (History of the Island, i.e. Ceylon) represents 
the first attempt to put together the traditions from the Singhalese 
Atthakathds in an epic form. The name of the author is unknown. 
He has only an imperfect knowledge of Pali, and from the literary 
point of view, the Dipavamsa is a very poor performance. The verses 
are interspersed with prose passages, and there are numerous gram¬ 
matical and metrical lapses. The work suffers from repetition and 
omissions, and is fragmentary. The author abruptly jumps from one 
subject to another, leaves many gaps in presentation, and frequently 
interceding narrative verses are lost between speeches. The Dipa- 

1. JPTS, 1886, p. 61. 

2. JPTS , 1883, pp. xiii f., 86-87; Pali Literature and Language pp. 35-36; HIL 
II. p. 221. 


406 






RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


vamsa was composed later than the middle of the fourth century 
A.D,, the date of king Mahasena with whose reign it brings its 
account to a close, and is prior to Buddhaghosha who copiously quotes 
from it in his commentary of Kathavatthu. 

(ii) Mahdvamsa 

Compared to the Dlpavamsa which is but a feeble attempt at 
composing an epic, the Mahdvamsa is a perfect epic. It attempts a 
conscious and intentional re-arrangement of “the historical work 
which the ancients composed,” which “is in some places too verbose, 
and in others too brief, and also contains many repetitions”, after 
avoiding these defects. * 1 It is ascribed to Mahanama who may be 
placed in the fifth century A.D. The author aims at an ornate poem, 
and handles his material, language, and metre with great dexterity. 
He has filled in the gaps in the Dlpavamsa account, and also intro¬ 
duced considerable new material. The Mahdvamsa has added to the 
story of Vijaya and his immediate successors and has developed the 
story of Dutthagamani into an independent epic. The account of the 
Mahdvamsa comes to an end, like the Dlpavamsa , with the death of 
Mahasena (c. A.D. 362) in the 37th canto. The continuation of the 
Mahdvamsa is called the Chulavamsa, which is not a homogeneous 
work, being written by various authors at different times. Thera 
Dhammakitti (thirteenth century) was the first to continue the 
tradition in the Chulavamsa. 

According to Indian notions, the Mahdvamsa is a commentary 
on the Dlpavamsa. Oldenberg considers the Dlpavamsa and the 
Mahdvamsa as two versions of the same story. Both show great 
similarity in material and arrangement, and have a number of 
common verses. The account in both commences with the story of 
Gautama, and both are based on a common source, the Atthakathd 
Mahdvamsa of Mahavihara. Despite their love for the miraculous, 
credulity, superstition and exaggeration, as also lack of the historical 
sense and critical faculty, we cannot altogether deny historical value 
to these works as maintained by some scholars. That the information 
supplied by these authors was not quite imaginary is proved by its 
frequent agreement with Indian traditions. These chronicles are 
also supported by external sources, and their chronology is found 
to be fairly accurate. The authors recorded what they believed to 
be authentic history, and their account of historical times and of the 
period immediately preceding their own deserves credence. 

i. — — ■ ~ r "~ ~ ~ , m ""- - 1 — -- - _ ■ — "■ 

1. cf. Winternitz, H1L. II, pp. 211-2. Geiger takes this work to be Dlpavamsa, 
which Winternitz ( loc. cit..) doubts. Fleet ( JR AS , 1909, p. 5) designates Mahd¬ 
vamsa as a “commentary” on Dlpavamsa. and Geiger ( Mahdvamsa, tr., p. xi f; 
Pali Literatur und Sprache, p. 24) supports him. 


407 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


4. Grammar 

Kachchayana Vydkarana or Kachchayana gandha by Kachcha- 
yana is considered to be the oldest Pali, grammar. That Buddha- 
ghosha did not follow the grammatical terminology of this author 
of the classical Pali grammar clearly show’s the priority of the cele¬ 
brated commentator. Franke has indicated that Buddhaghosha and 
Dhammapala followed a different grammatical system based perhaps 
on the grammar of Bodhisattva. 1 

Kdsikd-vritti (seventh century A.D.), which has been utilised 
by Kachchayana along with other commentaries on Panini and the 
Kdtantra of Sarvavarman, indicates the upper limit for the date of 
Kachchayana. Two other grammatical wmrks, Mahdniriittigandhc, 
and ChuUaniruttigandha are ascribed to him. The chief defect in 
Kachchavana’s grammar is that it ignores the historical relation of 
Pali to Sanskrit, and gives an exposition of Pali wholly by itself. 
The linguistic material is not exhaustively treated. 

5. General Review 

The Augustan period of Pali literature may be said to have 
begun with the commentaries described above, and closed with the 
completion of the early chronicles—the Dipavamsa and Mahdvamsa. 
The commentaries indicate Kanchlpura, Kaveripattana, Madura, 
TJragapura, and Anuradhapura as w^eil-known centres of Pali Bud¬ 
dhism. Subsequent to the period of the Pali chronicles, there is 
hardly any literary activity. Occasionally there have appeared some 
compilations of useful manuals and poetic compositions mainly in 
imitation of Sanskrit v/crks. The Pali literature described so far is 
deficient in many branches of secular interest. Fiction, for instance, 
is conspicuously absent and so is drama. Nor are there any w T orks 
on astronomy, astrology, medicine, mathematics, logic and polity. 
Whatever works are found on some of these subjects belong to a 
quite recent date. 


C. JAINISM 
I. Spread of Jainism 

1. North India 

By the end of the third century AD. Jainism had taken firm 
roots throughout India. Starting from its original home in Magadha, 
it had slowly spread to different countries like Kalmga to the south¬ 
east, Mathura and Malwa to the west, and Deccan and the Tamil 
lands to the south. At the same time it appears to have lost its hold 

1. Gesch. und Krit. der einheim. Pali-G-rammatik, pp. 2, 3. 


408 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


over Magadha, the land of its origin, and grown powerful in the 
v/est and the south. After some initial success in winning over royal 
patronage, which w r as, in part, the cause of its rapid growth and 
expansion, it soon lost it in the North, but retained the support of 
the middle classes, like merchants and bankers, for a long time. 
This loss of kingly support in the north, was, however, made good by 
the favour shown to this religion by many ruling families of the 
Deccan; and during the period under review, the country to the 
south of the Vindhyas may be regarded as forming the chief strong¬ 
hold of Jainism. 


But along with its spread and a shift in its centre of gravity, 
there also occurred changes in the organisation of its church. The 
division of the community into Svetambaras and Digambaras had 
become finally settled, and it effected a separation not only among 
the monks but also in the ranks of the laity. Some schools of a 
compromising attitude and views like the Yapanivas 1 were yet alive 
in this period, but they never attained the importance of these two 
sects. These major sects themselves were further sub-divided into 


smaller groups like the Samghas and the Ganas in the south, and 
into Kulas, Sakbas and, later on, into Gachchhas in the north. This 
was but the natural result of the spread of the religion over a wide 
area and the wandering habit of the monk-community. The lay 
followers were also affected to some extent by this division in the 
ecclesiastical organisation, and there may have been further sub- 
divisions among them besides the two main groups. 


The age of the Gupta imperialism, which marked a revival of 
Hinduism and of classical literature in Sanskrit, proved a period 
of decline for both Jainism and Buddhism. The .paucity of epigraphic 
records about Jainism in this period, and lack of literary evidence 
from the side of Jain writers, clearly indicate that Jainism was not 
very prosperous in those days; and this is partly confirmed by the 
absence of any reference to it in the description of the Chinese 
traveller Fa-hien. This decline is primarily due to the lack of royal 
patronage. But there are indications that it continued to be popular, 
as before, among the middle classes and this is indicated by a couple 
of inscriptions of the Gupta period. 


There are two inscriptions belonging to the reign of Kumara- 
gupta, one at Mathura (A.D. 432) speaking of the dedication of a 
Jain image by a lady, and the other at Udayagiri in Malwa (A.D. 426) 
recording the erection of a statue of Parses by a private individual 
The Kahaum inscription of the time of Skanda-g-upta (A.D. 461) 
also refers to the setting up of five images of the Jain prophets in 


1. Upadhye, JUB, T. Part vi. pp. 224-231. 


4,09 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


that village. These records show that Jainism was practised by the 
people of the empire, living in such distant places as Mathura, Udaya- 
girl and Kakubha. They also suggest that the religion was popular 
more in the west than in the east. Further, we see that the erection 
of the Images of the Jain prophets was the usual mode of worship, 
and that the organisation of the community of monks continued to 
be the same as before, with its divisions into Ganas and Sakhas. 

In Bihar, the country of its origin, and in Bengal to the east, 
the Jain religion had lost much of its influence. A little later, the 
Paharpur copper-plates 1 of A.D. 478 record the donation of some 
land by a private individual and his wife, for the maintenance of 
worship at the Jain Vihara at Vata Gohall, which was presided over 
by the pupils of the Nirgrantha teacher Guhanandin of the Pahcha- 
stupanikaya of Banaras. This vihara , of the fourth or fifth century, 
probably occupied the site of the great temple unearthed at Pahar¬ 
pur fRajshahi District). It is worth noting that the founder of the 
vihara was a monk, who migrated from Banaras to the East. 

In the period following the disintegration of the Gupta empire, 
we have the testimony of Hiuen Tsang in the seventh century, who 
observes that monks of both the Svetambara and Digambara sects 
were to be found near Taxila to the west and Vipula to the east, and 
the Digambara Nirgranthas were very numerous in Pundravardhana 
and Famatala in the east. The low estimate in which the Jain monks 
were held by the Brahmin writers at the time may be seen in the 
reference to the naked Kshapanaka by Bana in his Harsha-charitci 
and In the fun Dandin makes of the conversion of a poor wretch 
to Jainism in his Dasdkumara-charita. 

Some welcome light on the activities of the Jain monks and 
literary men of the seventh and eighth centuries is thrown by the 
few facts recorded by Uddvotana at the beginning of his romance 
Kuvalayamdldkahd , 2 composed in A.D. 779. In the northern part 
of India, he tells us, there was a town called Pavvaiya close to the 
river Chandrabhaga, which was the capital of the Yavana king 
Toramana. The spiritual preceptor of this king was one Harigupta 
of the Gupta family. One of his pupils w r as Devagupta. a royal scion 
of the Gupta dynasty, who, in turn, had a pupil called Sivachandra. 
bearing the title Mahattara. In the course of his wanderings, Siva- 
chandra took up his residence at Bhinnamala, otherwise known as 
grimala. One of his pupils was the far-famed Yakshadatta, while 
a band of his other pupils are represented as converting the whole 
of Gujarat to Jainism by their wanderings and preachings. One of 
his pupils was Vatesvara, who caused a magnificent temple of the 

1. El, XX. 61 foil. 2. ABOR1, XVI. pp. 34-35. 


410 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Jina to be constructed in the town of Akasavapra. He had a pupil 
Tatvacharya, who was the teacher of Uddyotana, the author of this 
work. Uddyotana imbibed the knowledge of the scriptures from 
Vlrabhadra while he learnt logic and other sciences from the famous 
scholar Haribhadra. Though history does not help us in ascertaining 
who these Gupta kings were, and how far the Huna king Toramana 
was a regular convert to Jainism, we may readily believe that men 
of standing and petty chieftains of those times patronised the Jain 
faith, and bands of wandering monks formed the chief agency of 
spreading the religion in different parts of Western India. 

The presence of Jains in Kathiawar and Gujarat in the early 
medieval period is indicated by literary, epigraphic, and archaeo¬ 
logical evidence. But in contrast to the splendour it attained in the 
eleventh and the twelfth centuries, due to the patronage of kings, 
it remained the religion of the merchant classes undistinguished by 
any pronounced favour from the rulers of the early dynasties of 
these countries. Much of the work of preaching and preserving the 
faith was done by the monks, and there was a good deal of literary 
activity, which proved of great importance to the Jain church. 

In the seventh century, two Gurjara kings, Jayabhata I and 
Dadda II, are given the epithets ‘ Vitardga 9 and ‘Prasdntardga’ in 
their grants,—words which indicate that they probably patronised 
Jainism, though they themselves may not have been actual converts. 
In northern Gujarat, Vanaraja, the founder of the Chapotkata 
dynasty at Anahillapura, is regarded by Jain tradition as a follower 
and a patron of this faith. 

2. Deccan 

If Jainism lacked good royal support in northern India, there 
was greater help coming from the various ruling dynasties of the 
Deccan during the period under review, and consequently Jainism 
flourished in the Kannada-speaking territories. Many royal families 
of the Deccan, their ministers, and small chieftains showed decided 
inclination towards Jainism, and although in many cases it is difficult 
to prove that the rulers were actual converts to this faith, there is 
ample evidence to show that they were quite liberal in their help 
and patronage, which accounts for much of the prosperity of Jainism 
in this part of the country. 

The Gariga kings of Mysore 1 were intimately associated with. 
Jainism. ? A later tradition, which appears to have grown in detail 
with the lapse of time, makes the founder of the Gaiiga family a 
disciple of a Jain teacher called Simhanandin, and suggests that all 

1. See pp. 2G8-70. 2. Saletore, Medieval Jainism , p. 7 foil. 


Ml 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


his successors were followers of the faith. A later ruler, Avinlta, 
is said to have been brought up by a Jain sage called Vijayakirti, 
and the famous Digambara author Pujyapada is associated with 
another king of this family, called Durvimta. 'Whatever value we 
may attach to all such traditional accounts, the inscriptions of such 
Gahga kings as Avinlta, Sivamara and Sripurusha record gifts to 
Jain monks and building of Jain temples, along with others giving 
donations to Brahmanic temples. Whatever the personal religion of 
these rulers, their patronage of Jainism is quite apparent. 

The Kadamba rulers of Vaijayanti or Banavasi 1 are often 
regarded as of Jain persuasion. But the tradition about Mayura- 
sarman, the founder of the dynasty, their numerous records alluding 
to the performance of the Asvamedha sacrifice and their donations 
to Hindu gods make it more probable that the Kadamba kings were 
followers of the orthodox faith. 2 At the same time they showed 
unusual favour towards Jainism, probably the religion of a large 
section of their subjects. In any case, we have many records of 
several kings giving donations to Jain monks, erecting Jain temples 
and giving other help to the different sections of the Jain commu¬ 
nity. All these records of the Kadamba rulers show that the Jain 

V 

community was flourishing under their benevolent patronage, and 
that many high officials and rich landlords of the country were 
devout followers of this religion. There were different sects among 
them like the Nirgranthas, the Digambara community of the south, 
the Yapamyas, a sect which later on disappears, the less known 
Kurchakas, and even the Svetapatas. Building temples, feeding 
groups of monks, worship of the Jin a images, and celebration of 
festivals formed the time-honoured mode of showing religious zeal. 


There is no reliable evidence that the Chaiukyas of Badami 
showed any particular leaning towards Jainism. A couple of 
apocryphal grants purport to record donations by Pulakesin I and 
Klrtivarman and mention a few Jain teachers. But no reliance can 
be placed on them. We have, however, the famous Aihole inscrip¬ 
tion of Pulakesin II, the greatest of the Chalukya rulers, whose 
protege Raviklrti constructed a temple of the Jinendra in that village, 
called the Meguti temple. There are also a number of spurious 
grants at Lakshmesvara, professing to be from Chalukya kings like 
Vinayaditya, Vijayaditya and Vikramaditya, giving gifts to Jain 
teachers and for the building of temples. As Dr. Altekar 3 has 
pointed out, even to make these spurious grants possible in later 
days, there must have been some tradition current about these kings 
as showing favour to Jainism. A Jain cave at Badami and another 


1. See pp. 270-73. 2. Sharma, Jainism and Karnataka Culture, p. 9 foil. 

3. The Rashtrakutas and their Times, p. 310. 


412 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


at Aihole, containing figures of Tirthakaras, belong to the early Cha- 
lukya period. 

3. South India 

lx is difficult to know precisely the condition of Jainism in 
South India in the early centuries of the Christian era. The state¬ 
ment of Mahdvamsa that there were Nirgranthas in Ceylon at the 
time of Pandukabhaya, or the obscure Brahml records found in caves 
in the districts of Rammad and Tinnevelly, is of no importance in 
tracing the history of Jainism in Tamil lands. 1 But the evidence of 
early Tamil works leaves no doubt about the flourishing state of 
Jainism in South India. Although there is no unanimity among 
scholars about the date to which this literature is to be assigned, 
there is no doubt that a considerable part of it is due to the activities 
of Jain writers, and this naturally indicates a large following of 
Jain religion for whom it was meant. Like other religions Jainism 
also claims the writers of Tolkdppiyam and Rural among its 
adherents. More valuable is the evidence of the Buddhist epic 
Manimekhalai, which refers to Jain monks, mostly Digarnbaras, and 
their doctrines in a fairly accurate manner. Other famous works 
like the Jivakachintdmani, Silappadikdram , Nilakesi , Yasodhara - 
kdvya and others are obviously Jain in origin and contents, but 
the dates to which they can be assigned are uncertain. On the 
whole, they belong to a period when Jainism was flourishing in the 
Tamil country, and this must be anterior to the seventh century 
A.D. when it suffered serious reverses in South India. 

Jain tradition also lends support to the prosperous state of 
Jainism in the south. The famous Jain author Samantabhadra is 
associated with the town of Kanchl. The earliest Prakrit writer of 
the south, Kundakunda, a famous name in Digambara literature, 
is brought in relation with a ruler called Sivakumaramaharaja, 
whom tradition makes his disciple, and it is suggested that he is 
one of the Pallava kings of the Prakrit charters. From a later 
Sanskrit translation, we came to know that Sarvanandin, a Jain 
scholar, wrote his Prakrit work Lokavibhdga in A.D. 458 at the time 
of Siihhavarman, the ruler of Kanchl. According to some, the 
foreigners who invaded the south and are known as Kalabhras 2 
came from Karnataka and were followers of the Jain religion. 

A more precise and intimate picture of Jainism in the South 
can be obtained from a few facts cf its ecclesiastical history. 3 The 
Jain community of the south formed what is known as the Mula- 

1. Ayyangar and Rao, Studies in South Indian Jainism, pp. 32 foil. 

2. See pp. 265-67. 

3. Guerinot. Repertoire d’ Epigraphie Jama, p. 4. foil. 


413 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


sangha (the original group). Devasena tells us that one Vajranandi, 
a pupil of Pujyapada, founded in A.D. 470 at Madura, the Dravida- 
sahgha, which allowed greater scope and freedom in the observance 
of the rule of Ahimsa. According to a later tradition four pupils of 
Arhadbali, a pupil of Bhadrabahu II, called Maghanandin, Jinasena, 
Simha, and Deva, founded the four Ganas of the Mulasahgha, known 
respectively by the names of Nandigana, Senagana, Simhagana, and 
Devagana. The evidence of inscriptions is not quite in agreement 
with this tradition, and further divisions and designations like 
Anvaya and Gachchha, which are given along with Ganas and 
Samghas, are not easy to arrange in a hierarchical series. In any 
case, the community of the Jain monks in the south was elaborately 
organised and showed distinctions based on locality and practices, 
suggesting a wide expanse. A welcome confirmation of the same 
is furnished by Hiuen Tsang, who speaks of a large number of the 
Nirgranthas in the country of the Fandyas. 

As a result of vigorous preaching of the Saiva and Vaishnava 
saints, called the N-avanars and Alvars, Jainism lost royal support 
and began to decline in the seventh century. According to tradition, 
the famous Pallava king, Mahendra-varmau, originally a Jain by 
faith, was converted to Saivism by the preaching of the saint called 
Appar, whose hymns reveal a fierce spirit of religious hatred against 
the Jains. Similarly another famous preacher Tirujhanasambandar 
succeeded in converting the Pandya king Arikesari Maravarman, 
known to tradition variously as Nedumaran, Sundara Pandya, and 
Kun Pandya, to Saivism, and thenceforth Jainism naturally lost the 
support of this royal family. 

The picture of Jainism as a religion, which we get in this period, 
does not differ materially from what we know of it in later days. 
The community was divided into the monastic order and the lay 
following, with further sub-divisions, particularly among the former. 
The building of temples, the establishment of monasteries, the 
worship of the prophets, and celebration of great public festivals 
w r ere the normal features of the religious life of the people. Circum¬ 
stances probably led to a change of habits cf some of the monks, 
which produced the distinction between Chaityavasa (residence in 
the monastery) and Vanavasa (residence in the forest). The former 
developed a more compact organisation which led to the establish¬ 
ment of a spiritual head of the community of a given locality, called 
the Bhattarakas, whose lists of succession called the Pattavalis, often 
cover long periods of time. Many religious records of these days 
speak of the observance of the vow of Sallekhana, the peculiarly 
Jain practice of observing fast unto death, as performed both by 


414 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


monks and laity, and we observe a steady growth of holy places to 
which monks and pious householders retired towards the end of 
their life. 

II. Jain Canon 

More important than this external history of the Jain religion 
is the internal history of its church, which underwent momentous 
changes in this period. We have seen how a Council of Elders, held 
in Pataliputra two centuries after the death of Mahavira, had suc¬ 
ceeded in redacting the canon of the sacred writings, though the 
work of the council did not get the recognition of the whole com¬ 
munity. Even after this event, the canon did not remain closed, 
and new additions, in the form of works of great Jain teachers of 
later days, were made now and then,—a process which went on 
along with the loss of older material. But the ninth century after 
Vlra-nirvana (i.e. fourth-fifth century A.D.) appears to be of greater 
peril to the sacred books than usual. Tradition tells repeatedly of 
severe famines of long duration, making the preservation of the 
knowledge of sacred books more and more difficult. The difficulty 
was further increased by the loss of great teachers who had memo¬ 
rised these writings in full. In spite of the constant use of the same 
two motifs, both appear quite likely and must be held responsible 
for the great changes in the history of the Ardha-Magadhi canon. 
The early part of the ninth century after Vlra-nirvana saw, accord¬ 
ing to tradition, two attempts at the restitution of the canon, one 
by Sthandila at Mathura and the other by Nagarjuna at Valabhl in 
Kathiawar. Though not much of their work is left to us, we have 
some variant readings recorded by later commentators, especially 
attributed to Nagarjuna, which preserve something of his attempt 
at settling the canon. 

More fruitful in results, than these earlier attempts at settling 
the text of the sacred books, was another in what is generally called 
the Second Council at Valabhl. It was held under the able guidance 
of Devardhigani in either 980 A.V. or 993 A.V. (A.D. 512 or 525). 
It has been suggested 1 that this Council was held in the reign of 
king Dhruvasena I of the Maitraka dynasty of Valabhl and probably 
under his patronage. This king is also extolled as a Jain convert 
in later tradition. But the association of the Council with this king 
is doubtful. The numerous records of the Maitraka kings of Valabhl. 
who were undoubtedly ruling there at the time, make no mention 
of it, nor do they betray any inclination towards Jainism. The Jain 
tradition itself does not assign this event to the time of any parti¬ 
cular king or dynasty. All these facts would naturally lead to the 

1. Charpentier, Introduction to Uttarddhyayana. 

415 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


supposition that the community did not enjoy any special patronage 
of the Valabhi kings, and that the whole of the Second Council was 
mainly the work of the Jain church. That this locality was a famous 
centre of Jain literary activity from early times is clearly proved 
by Jain tradition. The recently discovered Digambara works of the 
ninth century embody in them older works of Dharasena, who 
taught the sacred books to his pupils Pushpadanta and Bhutabali, 
who lived in Gir.inagar a (Junagarh). In later days, Jinabhadra- 
kshamasramana wrote his famous Vtieshavasyakabhashya at Valabhi 
in A.D. 609. * - 

It was in this Second Council at Valabhi, that the Jain canon 
took its present shape. Though much of its contents and the majo¬ 
rity of its books existed before that time and had already formed 
part of the sacred writings, the peculiar arrangement and the 
classification of these books is the work of this Council. According 
to the arrangement now prevailing, the canonical books are divided 
into six groups, called the Afigas, Upangas, Prakirnakas, Chheda- 
sutras, Mulasutras and an unnamed group. Many of the books of 
the canon do not recognise some of these titles and do not incorporate 
them in their introductory portions. This means that they are of 
later origin than the books themselves and must have been added 
to them as art extraneous mark. 

Only one of these names, viz. Ahga, is old. This part of the 
canon occupies an equally important position even in the older 
classification; at least the names of the Ahga-works are common to 
both the Svetambaras and. the Digambaras. This fact, however, does 
not preclude the possibility of drastic changes in the form and con¬ 
tents of these books. In one glaring instance, that of Pannhava- 
garanal, even the later tradition of the commentators admits a 
complete change of contents; in fact, a totally new work has taken 
the place of an older work, which was lost. 

Older than the other remaining names is the title Upahga, 
‘subsidiary Ahgas.’ It occurs in the introduction of the last five 
books of this group (8 to 12) collectively called Niraydvaiiydo, and 
from this it appears that there was a time when this group consisted 
only of these, and were associated with corresponding works of the 
Ahga group. From these and other works, all of which are to be 
found in the older Ahga-bahira section, a new class was formed, 
modelled after the Ahga works, and was made to consist of 12 books 
in agreement with them. In both these groups, the same plan is 
followed. First come works dealing with points of doctrine, and then 
of narrative contents. The identical number later gave rise to the 
fiction that each Upahga is related to the corresponding Ahga. 


416 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


In contrast to these two groups, which have a settled list of 
texts, the next group of the Praklrnakas is of indefinite extent. This 
is also implied by the name “miscellaneous” texts. From the 
different lists of these works, however, it is possible to take hold of 
a fixed and stable core, which is formed by those Praklrnakas which 
have a disciplinary character. To these older ones were added 
others to conform to the traditional list of ten. Most of them are 
metrical in form, and the late Arya metre and the modem form of 
language suggests for them a late origin. 

Older in date than the Praklrnakas, is the group of the Chheda- 
sutras. They represent the oldest form of the rules dealing with 
the discipline of the Jain monks, particularly in their corporate life 
in the monasteries. The older among them are written in prose 
and deal with various punishments for violating the rules of monas¬ 
tic life. The name of this group is known to the AvasyakaniryuktV 
in the form of Chheyaggantha, and it certainly refers to the kind of 
punishment called chheda, which consists in reducing the paryaya 
of the monks for various sins. 

A more severe punishment, consisting of the complete annulling 
of the monkhood, is called Mula. Works which dealt with the basic 
principles of Jainism and which formed the beginning of the canoni¬ 
cal study were put together and given the name of Mulasutras. 
They are usually reckoned as four in number. Finally two more 
works, Nandi and Anuyogadvara, were added to the canon. They 
form a kind of methodological introduction for the study of the 
sacred writings and are left without a group name. 

Along with the process of redacting and shaping of the canon, 
vigorous literary activity went on among the Jain monks, which 
resulted in the production of a vast and rich literature of considera¬ 
ble merit. The earlier metrical commentaries, called the Niryuktis, 
were recast and greatly amplified in the form of Bhashyas by 
scholars like Saihghadasa, Jinadasa, and Siddhasena; while Prakrit 
commentaries in prose called churnis were composed on many 
important canonical books. We also observe a general tendency 
among Jain scholars to prefer Sanskrit more and more to Prakrit, 
as being of greater value in their discussions with other schools of 
thought and of greater prestige. The older commentaries in Prakrit 
soon gave place to Sanskrit Tikas, and nearly at the end of this 
period, we find the famous Jain scholar Haribhadra composing 
works and Tikas in Sanskrit, thus giving an impetus to a tendency 
which bore ample fruit in later days. The Jain philosophy received 
in these days greater emphasis on its logical side, and we know 


1. vm. 55. 


417 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of such keen intellects as Siddhasena, Akalanka, Pujyapada and 
others formulating Jain dogmatics in a more logical form, defending 
it against the views of rival philosophical schools and developing 
the doctrines of Syadvada and Nayavada with admirable skill and 
wonderful subtlety. 

In the South the Digambara Jains cultivated both Prakrit and 
Sanskrit with energy and zeal. The Prakrit dialect used by their 
early writers is generally given the name Jain Saurasenl, a dialect 
of the Saurasenl Prakrit with some peculiarities of its own which 
are also met with in other Jain Prakrits. With the loss of their 
canonical books, the Digambaras keenly felt the need of some autho¬ 
ritative works taking the place of the canon, and this was met by 
the composition of independent treatises on Jain religion and 
philosophy. Kundakunda, the most celebrated of the Digambara 
authors, who lived in the early centuries of the Christian era, has 
several books to his credit, among which Panchastikaya, Pravachanas- 
sdra, Samayasara and the Shatprabhritas may be mentioned. All 
these works are written in the usual Gatha metre. Other Digambara 
writers, who wrote in Prakrit and who mostly belong to this period, 
are Vattakera, the author of Muldchdra dealing with the rules of 
conduct of the Jain monks, Svami Kartikeya, author of the 
Dvadasdnuprekshd, which treats of the twelve reflections on the 
glaring shortcomings of the worldly life, Yativrishabha, who wrote 
his comprehensive survey of Jain cosmography in his Tiloyapannatti, 
and famous Jain patriarchs like Pushpadanta, Bhutabali and Guna- 
dhara, to whom we owe the Siddhanta granthas. Of Digambara 
scholars who wrote in Sanskrit we may mention Samantabhadra, 
Pujyapada, Akalanka, Manatunga and others. It is worthy of note 
that among the Digambaras also we find the same preference for 
Sanskrit over Prakrit, particularly in the philosophical works, 
though the latter continued to be used for a short time more in 
dealing with dogmatic topics like the Karma-doctrine. 

III. Iconography 

The Khan^agiri caves at Bhuvanesvara contain some standing 
and seated Jina images of the later Gupta and early mediaeval 
periods, which are interesting from the iconographic point of view. 
The northernmost cave known as Satghara or Satbakhra contains 
on its rear wall two rows of carvings; the upper one representing 
the first seven of the Tirthakaras, all in sarruidhi-mudra distinguished 
by their individual symbols beneath their lotus seats, and the lower 
consisting of seven female figures guarded by Ganesa, a Jain version 
of the Brahmanical Saptamdtrikd with the elephant-headed deity 


418 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


as the guardian angel. 1 Another section of the same cave contains 
two rows of figures, the upper showing the 24 Tlrthakaras, the lower, 
24 female figures, most probably the corresponding Sasanadevatas 
of the former. The Jinas are distinguishable by their symbols most 
of which conform to the texts; but the iconography of the Yakshinls 
is extremely varied, some of them endowed with eight, ten, twelve 
and even twenty arms, their corresponding textual descriptions 
being hardly available. These and a few other mediaeval reliefs 
of the Khandagiri caves fully prove that the iconographic art had 
developed to a great extent among the Jains by the later Gupta 
and early mediaeval periods. 

D. VAISHNAVISM 

The Gupta Emperor Chandra-gupta II was a devout follower 
of the Bhagavata religion, one of the many names by which 
Vaishnavism was known. 2 He assumed the title parama-Bhdgavata , 
a usage followed by his successors. Although the title is not found 
in association with Samudra-gupta, this king is known to have 
adopted the emblem of Garudadhvaja and claimed to have been 
an incarnation of the Inscrutable Being, probably indicating 
Vishnu. These facts show that Samudra-gupta was also a Vaish- 
nava, although there seems to have been a doctrinal difference 
between his faith and that of his parama-Bhdgavata successors. 3 
The patronage of the religion by the Imperial Guptas might have 
been the cause rather than the effect of the growing importance of 
the new religious creed in the Gupta age. There is no doubt that 
from the end of the fourth century it gradually grew in popularity 
all over India, and we find many other royal families assuming 
the titles parama-Bhdgavata and in some cases also parama- 
V aishnava. 

1. The Avatar as of Vishnu 

An important feature of the Bhagavata religion in the Gupta 
age was the popular worship of the Avataras, i.e. Descents or 

1. These female figures are variously depicted, ten-armed, four-armed, and two¬ 
armed. They have for their cognizances the following:— (1) Garuda and swan, 
(2) elephant, (3) bull, (4) indistinct, (5) peacock, (6) vase and lotus, 
(7) lion. The first five on the basis of the emblems in their hands have some affi¬ 
nity with BrahmanI, VaishnavT, Indram, Mahesvari, Vaishnavi and Kumari; the 
sixth and the seventh stand for the important goddesses, Padmavatl and Ambika, 
the Jain counterparts of the snake-goddess Manasa and Durga. A few of them 
(4th, 5th and 7th) carry a small child in their arms; all of them, with the excep¬ 
tion of number one seated on lotus-seats, sit in the ardhaparyahka or lalitasana. 
B. C. Bhattacharya describes the first, second, third, fifth, sixth, and seventh as 
Chakresvarl, Ajitadevi, Duritari or Prafnapti, Gauri or Manava, Padmavatl 
and Ambika; the fifth he is unable to identify. 

2. See above, p. 367. 3. BV, VIII. 109 ff. 


419 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Incarnations, of Vishnu. Epigraphic and literary records of the 
period throw light on the evolution of the theory of Avatar a, the 
germ of which is however to be traced in the later Vedic literature. 
The conception of the Vamana (Dwarf) avatar a associated with 
Vishnu, and that of the Varaha (Boar), Matsya (Fish) and Kurma 
(Tortoise) avatdras not yet connected with that god, are to be found 
in the Satapatha and other Brdhmanas. The £atapatha Brdhmana 
tells a story about the contest between gods and Asuras for a place of 
sacrifice, in which the Asuras agreed to concede as much land as 
was equal to the size of the dwarf. Vishnu, the dwarf, was made 
to lie down; but he grew so large as to encompass the whole earth 
which, therefore, passed to the gods. According to the same source, 
“having assumed the form of a tortoise, Prajapati created offspring” 
and “in the form of a boar he (Prajapati) raised the earth from 
the bottom of the ocean.” In the Taittiriya Aranyaka the earth is 
said to have been raised from the waters by a black boar with a 
hundred arms. This work also alludes to the Nrisirhha or Man-Lion. 
In the story of the Great Deluge in the Satapatha Brdhmana, the 
Fish that towed Manu’s vessel into safety was the incarnation of 
Prajapati Brahman, and this is sometimes supported by the epic 
and Puranic literature. Later mythology, however, has transferred 
the functions of the Boar, Fish, and Tortoise from Prajapati Brahman 
to Vishnu, the most benevolent of the gods. The Gita and some 
other sections of the Mahabharata represent Vishnu as an ideal 
divinity and an almighty saviour, working for the salvation of man¬ 
kind and delighting in both moral goodness and ritualistic purity, 
and as incarnating himself from time to time in human or animal 
form in order to maintain the standard of righteousness in the world. 
But the theory of avatdra presents only a stage of development 
in the Mahabharata, the earlier sections of the epic not containing 
any list of the incarnations. Traditions regarding the number of 
avatdras varied, and the later lists of the ten avatdras, sometimes 
adhered to, very often give different names. The avatdra theory, 
which apparently underwent several stages of evolution, seems to 
be based on old tales of strange animals with mysterious powers 
of assistance; but many of them had originally nothing to do with 
Vishnu. The Buddhist conception of the Pratyeka-Buddhas might 
have influenced the development of the theory. 

In a passage of the late Narayaniya section of the Mahabharata 
mention is made only of four avatdras, viz . Boar, Dwarf, Man-Lion 
and Man (Vasudeva-Krishna). In another passage of the same 
section, the deified beings Rama Bhargava and Rama Dasarathi are 
added to the list making a total of six avatdras , while a third passage 
gives the list of ten incarnations, by adding Hamsa, Kurma, Mktsya 


420 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


and Kalki (Kalkin) to the above six. According to the Matsya 
Purana, which also gives a list of ten incarnations, there were three 
divine avatai'as, viz. Narayana, Narasirhha, and Vamana, as well as 
seven human avatar as, viz. Dattatreya, Mandhatri, Rama son of 
Jamadagni, Rama son of Dasaratha, Vedavyasa, Buddha, and Kalki. 
The same section occurs in the V&yu Purana with the substitution 
of Krishna for Buddha. The Harivanhsa gives a list of ten incarna¬ 
tions which omits Matsya, Kurma, one of the Ramas, and Buddha v 
but adds Lotus, Datta (Dattatreya), Kesava, and Vyasa. There are 
three lists of the avatar as in the Bhdgavata Puraiia; but they do not 
agree with one another. One of these lists, according to which the 
incarnations are really innumerable (cf. the avatar a theory of the 
Gita), mentions no less than 24 avatar as. The Ahirbudhnya Samhita % 
probably assignable to a date earlier than the eighth century, speaks 
of 39 vibhavas (manifestations) of the Supreme Being. Other 
Pancharatra works like the Vishvaksena-samhitd mention Buddha, 
Arjuna and others in the list of secondary avataras. Buddha is 
recognised as an avatdra in the Dasdvatdra-charita of the Kashmirian 
author Kshemendra (c. A.D. 1050), and in the Gitagovinda of Jaya- 
deva (c. A.D. 1200) of eastern India. Jayadeva sings in praise of 
Krishna who is Vishnu himself, and of his ten avataras, viz. Fish, 
Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, Dwarf, Rama Bhargava, Rama Dasarathi, 
Rama Haladhara, Buddha and Kalki. The same names are found in 
a well-known Puranic verse enumerating the ten avataras, which is 
quoted in a Mamallapuram (near Madras) inscription 1 of about the 
eighth century A.D. The Belava Grant (c. A.D. 1125) refers to 
Krishna as a “partial incarnation” of Hari. 2 

The worship of some of the avatdras is amply attested to by 
the Indian epigraphic records of the period between the fourth and 
the eighth century A.D. The early worship of Parasurama in 
Western India is indicated by an inscription of the second century 
A.D. although his conception as an avatdra of Vishnu might not have 
been so early. The Nasik inscription of Saka Rishabhadatta (A.D. 
119 24) speaks of the Ramatlrtha, which was known to the Mahd* 
bhdrata as the holy abode of Rama, son of Jamadagni. and was 
situated in the suburbs of ^prparaka not far to the north of modern 
Bombay. The usual belief 3 that the wmrship of Dasarathi Rama 

1. MAST, No. 26, p. 5. The beginning of Buddha’s inclusion in the list of the ten 
ava+dras must be assigned to a da*e earlier than the eighth century. The popu¬ 
larity of the Fish god in the early centuries of the Christian era is not only 
indicated by the name of the Matsiia Purana (one of the oldest Puranas) but 
also by that of the chief Matsva-cupta (literally, ‘protected by the Fish’) men¬ 
tioned in a Mathura inscription of vear 23 of the Kanishka era, probably cor¬ 
responding to A.D. 101 (cf. EJ. XXVIII, p. 43). 

2. El, XII. 37-43. Krishna is also said to have sported with one hundred milk¬ 
maids as the leading figure in the Mahdbhdrata. 

3. VS, 46-7; EHVS, 174- 


421 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


was not popular in the Gupta Age seems to be wrong. It has to be 
remembered in connection with the Avatara theory that the deifica¬ 
tion and worship of the incarnations are earlier than their identifica¬ 
tion with Vishnu. The poet Kalidasa (c. A.D. 400) describes in the 
Raghuvarhsa , canto X, how Vishnu, lying on the great serpent in 
the ocean of milk, with Lakshmi rubbing his feet, was born as 
Dasaratha’s son for Ravana’s destruction, while the Vakataka queen 
Prabhavatl-gupta (fifth century), the atyanta-bhagavad-hhaktd 
daughter of Chandra-gupta II, was a worshipper of Bhagavat Rama- 
girisvamin (literally, the lord at Ramagiri, i.e. modern Ramtek near 
Nagpur), who seems to be no other than Rama, son of Dasaratha. 
The suggestion is supported by the reference in Kalidasa’s Megha - 
duta to the foot-prints of Raghupati (Rama Dasarathi) on the Rama¬ 
giri and by the worship of Rama, Lakshmana, and Slta in the temples 
at Ramtek at the present time. The warship of the Ikshvaku king 
is indicated in the sixth century by Varahamihira who formulated 
rules for the making of Rama’s image. The South Indian saint Kulase- 
khara, king of Kerala in the Malabar coast, was a devotee of Rama, 
The worship of the third Rama, i.e. Balarama-Sankarshana, is not 
however well attested by epigraphic records of the Gupta age. The 
Dwarf incarnation is implied by Vishjiu’s epithets Indr-dnuja (Indra’s 
younger brother) and Upendra (the lesser Indra) found in epigraphs 
like the Bihar pillar inscription of the fifth century, and also by the 
Junagarh inscription of Skanda-gupta referring to Vishnu “who, for 
the sake of the lord of the gods, seized back from Bali the goddess 
of wealth and splendour.” Krishna’s identification with Vishnu is 
alluded to in the name Vishnugopa 1 popular in the family of the 
early Pallavas from the fourth century, and also in the epigraphic 
passages referring to Vishnu as “the mighty bee on the water-lily 
which is the face of Jambavatl” (Tusham inscription) and as 
“Madhava whose feet are graced by the attentions of Sri (Lakshmi) 
and who is born from Vasudeva” (Aphsad inscription). An image 
of Krishna was installed in a cave in the Barabar hills by the Mau- 
khari chief Anantavarman in the fifth century. The Narasimha 
incarnation is referred to in records like the Alina grant of A.D. 766. 
But the most important avatara whose worship was very popular 
in different parts of India in the Gupta age seems to have been 
Varaha or the Boar whose legend may have been originally associated 
with that of the Great Deluge referred to in the later Vedic litera¬ 
ture. A stone image of Varaha, with an inscription of the time of 
the Huna king Toramana (c. A.D. 500) recording the erection of a 
stone temple of “Narayana who has the form of a boar,” was found 
at Eran. A Damodarpur inscription of the time of Budha-gupta 


1. Cf. Kalidasa’s Meghaduta, St. 15. 


422 






RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY • 


refers to the gods Svetavarahasvamin and Kokamukhasvamin, both 
representing the Varaha avatara, whose temples stood on the Hima- 
vach-chhikhara (peak of the Himalayas), apparently at the pre¬ 
sent Varahachhatra (Varahakshetra) at the junction of the rivers 
KausikI and Koka in Nepal. An inhabitant of North Bengal, who 
seems to have visited the Kokamukha tlrtha or Varahakshetra in 
the Himalayas on pilgrimage, constructed temples for the installa¬ 
tion of two gods of the same names in the forest region near 
Damodarpur in the Dinajpur District of Bengal. 1 The popularity 
cf the Boar incarnation in the far South of India is indicated by an 
early Kadamba record from Tagare belonging to the sixth century. 
The Early Chalukyas had the Boar as their family emblem, said to 
have been received through the grace of Narayana. Most of the 
records of the Chalukyas and their feudatories begin with an adora¬ 
tion to the Varaha incarnation of Vishnu. 

The inscriptions of the Gupta age do not refer to the indepen¬ 
dent worship of the Vyuhas, Sankarshana, Pradyumna, and Anirud- 
dha, although the Vyuha doctrine finds a prominent place in the 
Pancharatra literature of this period, some of the Samhitds being 
composed in Kashmir between the fourth and the eighth century, 
according to Schrader. The Amarakosa , composed much earlier 
than the eighth century, mentions all the Vyuhas. But the doctrine 
was not popular with the ordinary Vishnu worshippers of the Gupta 
period. A modified form of the Vyuha-vada is noticed in the joint 
worship of Baladeva, Krishna, and Subhadra, or Ekanaihsa, who is 
sometimes identified with Subhadra but sometimes with the Devi 
born as the daughter of Nandagopa. Varahamihira speaks of the 
combined image of Baladeva and Krishna with Ekanaihsa standing 
between them. A later inscription from Bhuvanesvara refers to the 
adoratioh of Bala, Krishna, and Subhadra. In Kashmir, which was 
a great centre of the Vyuha cult, there developed the worship of the 
Vaikuntha-chaturmurti form of Vishnu wherein the four Vyuhas 
were comprised. The Khajuraho inscription (A.D. 954) gives the 
interesting history of one such image which was originally found 
in the Kailasa (in the upper Himalayas) and was later worshipped 
in the Kira country near Kashmir. These facts, as well as the 
celebrated Svetadvlpa and Nara-Narayana traditions, point to the 
popularity of the Pancharatra doctrine in the Himalayan countries. 

According to some scholars, Bhagavatism and Pancharatra, 
which were possibly related at the beginning, became completely 
different in the Gupta period. 2 It is further suggested that the 
Vyuha-vada, exclusively associated with Pancharatra, was quite 

1. IHQ, XXI. 56 ff. 2. HBR, 402; JRA.SBL, IX. 232 ff. 


423 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


different from the Avatara-vada in the ideological basis. The first 
suggestion cannot be proved in the present state of our knowledge, 
while the second seems to be disproved by the evidence of Pahcha- 
ratra works like the Ahirbudhnya Sarhhitd and the Vishvaksena 
Samhitd, noticed above. There is no doubt that the Vvuha-vadins 
were very much influenced by the avatdra theory as early as the 
age of the early Paiicharatr a Samhitas, while Krishna and Bala ram a 
are regarded as avatar as in the Vaishnava literature from practically 
the same age. It must, however, be admitted that there are some 
indications regarding the existence of doctrinal differences amongst 
the Vaishnavas of the Gupta Age, to which reference has already 
been made. This difference, the exact nature of which can hardly 
be determined with certainty, seems to be illustrated by the Harsha- 
charita making separate mention of the Bhagavatas and the Pahcha- 
ratrikas, explained by a commentator respectively as Vishnu-bhaktas 
(devotees of Vishnu) and Vaishnava-bheda (a sect of Vishnu wor¬ 
shippers), although Pahcharatra works like the Padma Tantra would 
use the names Suri (cf. the Rigveda using the word in the sense of 
a class favoured by Vishnu), Suhrit, Bhagavata, Satvata, Pahcha- 
kalavit, Ekantika, Tanmaya and Pancharatrika. As already pointed 
out, it seems that originally the Pancharatrikas were devotees of the 
deified sage Narayana, and the Bhagavatas of the deified Vrishni 
hero Vasudeva, the two sects being later amalgamated in an attempt 
to identify Narayana and Vasudeva; but the names Bhagavata and 
Vaishnava were sometimes used to indicate Vishnu worshippers in 
general. The Gupta Age witnessed the evolution of neo-Vaishna- 
vism from the tribal form of Bhagavatism practised originally by 
the members of Vasudeva’s family. 

2. Sri or Lakshmi, Wife of Vishnu 

Another feature of Vaishnavism in the Gupta period is the 

conception of Lakshmi or Sri as Vishnu’s wife. The early history 

of Lakshmi has been discussed above, 1 but her being regarded as 

ihe wife of Visionu is much later. Vishnu is mentioned in the 

• • 

Junagarh inscription of Skanda-gupta as the perpetual resort of 
Lakshmi who is represented in the Sarnath inscription of Prakata- 
ditya as the wife of Vasudeva. The Aphsad inscription of Adityasena 
refers to Damodara, the slayer of demons, and to Vasudeva’s son 
Madhava whose feet are graced by the attentions of Sri. The Gaja- 
Lakshml device, found on some early coins and sculptures, was 
adopted as emblem by certain royal families as those of Sarabha- 
pura and Samatata. A Kadamba record of c. A.D. 500 begins with 
an adoration of Bhagavat with Sri on his breast and Brahman on 

1. Vol. II, pp. 469-71. 


424 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


the lotus sprung from his navel. A second wife of Vishnu was 
supposed to be the Earth, called Vaishnavi in some epigraphs, e.g. 
those of the Sarabhapura kings. Vishnu is described in his dhyana 
as indira-vasumati-sarnsobhi-pdrsvcidvaya and the early Chalukya 
emperors and their successors, who called themselves parama- 
Bhagavata as well as sri-prithivl-vallabha (lord of Sri and PrithivI), 
apparently claimed to be incarnations of Vishnu. 

The cult of Srl-Lakshml had probably something to do w T ith 
the worship of the Greek Goddesses, especially Pallas Athene, 
introduced in the country by the Indo-Greek kings, as indicated by 
their coins from the beginning of the secord century B.C. It is pro¬ 
bable that the Sahkhya doctrine of Purus! a and Prakriti influenced 
greatly the conception not only of Lakshrm as the consort of Vishnu 
but also of the Devi as that of Siva. 

3. Vishnu Mythology in Epigraphic Records 

In a large number of epigraphs, including the Gadhwa inscrip¬ 
tion of Kumara-gupta I, Vishnu is mentioned only as the Bhagavat 
without reference to his name. In the Eran inscription of A.D. 484 
the god is called Janardana and described as “the four-armed lord 
whose couch is the broad waters of the four oceans, who is the 
cause of the continuance, production and destruction of the universe 
and whose ensign is Garuda.” There is reference to Hari as jagat- 
pravritti-samhdra-srishti-mdyddhara in a Kadamba inscription of 
the sixth century. The god Changu-Narayana, i.e. Narayana on 
Changu or Garuda, in a temple on the Dolaparvata in Nepal, existed 
before king Manadeva’s inscription of A.D. 464. In different records 
the god is represented as the troubler of the demons called Punya- 
jana, as the supporting pillar of the three worlds (in the boar or 
tortoise form), as the slayer of Madhu and Mura, and as the bearer 
of the discus, of the club, of the bow of horn, of the sword called 
Nandaka, of the jewel known as the Kaustubha, and of the garland 
of lotuses. There is an allusion to the slumber of Madhusudana 
during the four months of the rainy season in the Gangdhar in¬ 
scription of A.D. 423. The Alina grant of A.D. 766 probably refers 
to the pdrijdta-harana episode. The Bhitari inscription of Skanda- 
gupta refers to Krishna approaching his mother DevakI after having 
slain his enemies. In an inscription from Mandasor, dated A.D. 404, 
there is probably a reference to the Sakr.a festival described as dear 
to Krishna. In this record, Vasudeva is called the lord who is saranya , 
jagadvdsa , aprameya and aja (cf. dtmabhu of the Jaunpur inscrip¬ 
tion of the Maukharis), and is represented as a great tree having 
the gods as its fruits, the celestial damsels as its fine shoots, the 
heavenly palaces as its many branches, and the showers of rain as 


425 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


its flow of honey. We probably get here an imperfect allusion to 
the Visvarupa conception of Vishnu. 

The influence of the Vishnu mythology can also be traced in 
the archaeological remains in different parts of India. The bas- 
reliefs at Badami, belonging to the age of early kings of the Chalukya 
family, some of whom are styled parama-Bhagavata , depict Vishnu 
lying on a serpent with Lakshmi massaging his feet, the Boar and 
Man-Lion incarnations, and also Hari-Hara. The Varaha, Narasnhha, 
and Vamana avataras are also found in the sculptures of the rock- 
cut caves at Udayagiri and Mamallapuram. A temple at Deogarh 
in the Jhansi District, U.P., probably belonging to the sixth century, 
has the representation of Vishnu the Eternal reclining on Ananta 
with the gods watching from above, and also that of Nara and 
Narayana, A sculpture at Pathari in Central India, probably of the 
same century, is supposed to represent the new born Krishna lying 
by his mother’s side and watched by five attendants. Krishna 
upholding the Govardhana hill is illustrated in the sculptures of 
Mathura and Sarnath. The Dasavatara and Kailasanatha temples at 
Ellora, ascribed to the eighth century, also contain representations 
of the avataras and other deities of the Vishnu pantheon. 

4. Vaishnavism and Other Creeds 

According to some writers, the Khoh inscription of A.D. 441, 
which records a grant of land actually in favour of Bhagavat and 
Aditya-bhattaraka, points to the solar association of Vaishnavism 
in the fifth century. The suggestion is, however, unwarranted. 
The language of the record seems to suggest that a person named 
Vishnunandin built a temple of Bhagavat and received on behalf 
of the god half of a village from the king, while three merchants 
named Saktinaga, Kumaranaga, and Skandanaga, who had built a 
temple of the Sun-god, received for their deity the other half of the 
village. There seems to be no evidence that the same person wor¬ 
shipped Vishnu and the Sun-god. That the Sun was not adored by 
the Vaishnavas in the fifth century is suggested by the degradation 
of Samba, a champion of the solar cult and often identified with 
the Sun-god, in the estimation of the Vaishnavas, as well as by 
verses 21-22 of the Gangdhar inscription of A.D. 423. This record, 
however, speaks of a worshipper of Vishnu building a temple, full 
of the Dakinis, in honour of the Divine Mothers “who utter loud 
and tremendous shouts in joy and stir up the oceans with the mighty 
wind rising from the magic rites of their religion.” This no doubt 
points to the influences of the Tantric cult of the mother-goddess on 
the Vaishnavas. In this connection it may be noted that, in the 
fifth century, the Maukhari chief Anantavarman installed an image 


426 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of Krishna in one of the caves in the Nagarjuni hill and also the 
images (or probably a joint image known as the ardha-ndrisvara) of 
Bhutapati (Siva) and the Devi (Durga) in another cave in the same 
hill. This no doubt points to an early approach between Vaishna- 
vism on the one hand and Saiva and Sakta worship on the other. 
The early Chalukyas of Badami, whose family god was Vishnu, also 
worshipped the god Karttikeya (associated with Siva) and the Seven 
Mothers. Mention may also be made in this connection of the cult 
of Hari-Hara (a combination of Vishnu and Siva), the Devi’s role 
as the daughter of Nandagopa (cf. the Harivamsa and the Bala ~ 
charita attributed to Bhasa), and the tri~murti conception of the 
gods Brahman, Vishnu and Siva. The representation of Hari-Hara is 
found in a Chalukya cave-temple of the sixth century. Several 
early Kadamba inscriptions of the fifth and sixth centuries contain 
adoration to Hari-Hara-Hiranyagarbha or Hara-Narayana-Brahman. 

5. Vishnu Worship in the Far South 

Mention has already been made of the adoration to Vasudeva 
in the Chinna (Krishna District) inscription which belongs to the 
close of the second century A.D., and of a Na ray ana temple in Guntur 
District, as well as the name of Pailava Vishnu-gopa in the records 
of the fourth century. In the inscriptions of the Gupta Age there 
are references to temples or hag-staffs of the god Vishnu-Narayana- 
Vasudeva throughout the length and breadth of India, in Nepal and 
the upper regions of the Beas in the north, in Bengal in the east, 
in Kathiawar in the west and the trans-Krishna region in the south 
where some of the Earfy Pailava and Early Gahga rulers were devout 
Bhagavatas. Vishnu worship was also prevalent in the Early 
Kadamba kingdom; but the most popular religion there appears to 
have been Jainism. Some of the Early Kadamba kings, who call 
themselves parama-brahmanya, may have been Vaishnavas. Several 
southern rulers, who claim to have been Kaliyuga-doshdvasanna «. 
dharm-oddharana-nitya-sannaddha, possibly attempted to suppress 
heretical creeds such as Buddhism and Jainism, to revive the 
Brahmanical religion and also possibly to represent themselves, like 
king Samudra-gupta of the north, as incarnations of Vishnu, emu¬ 
lating the god’s doings in the Varaha form. Another indication of 
the influence of Vaishnavite Brahmanism in the Far South is the 
importance attached in some Pailava and Kadamba records to the 
go-brahmana (the cow and the Brahmana) exactly as in the 
Vaishnava inscriptions from Eran. In the later part of the Mahd- 
bhdrata, Vishnu is represented as the benefactor of the cow and the 
Brahmana (cf. go-brdhmana-hita). This points not only to the 
association of the Brahmanas with Vishnu worship, but also to the 


427 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


important position to which they rose in social estimation in the 
period in question. 

The association of the name of the Pandya capital Madura, 
which is the same as Mathura, the home of the early Bhagavata 
sect, may have something to do with the Tamil country soon 
becoming the greatest stronghold of the Bhagavata religion and 
giving birth to the Alvars and their celebrated songs in Tamil on 
Bhakti and Krishna worship. The worship of Krishna and Baladeva 
in the Tamil land about the age of the Guptas is attested to by 
Tamil literature. The Silappadikdram refers to temples of the two 
gods at Madura, Kaviripaddinam and other cities, while the poet 
Kari-Kannam of Kaviripaddinam describes them as the dark- 
complexioned god bearing the wheel and the w r hite-complexioned 
god with the flag of the palmyra. 

The best evidence of the influence of Vaishnavism in the Far 
South, specially in the Tamil country, is furnished by the devotional 
songs of the Alvars of whom a short account has been given above. 1 
They sang in praise of Narayana and the Krishna, Rama and Vamana 
avatdras. They were also familiar with Krishna’s dalliance with the 
gopls (cow T herd maidens). One of them, a lady, regarded herself as 
a gopl and approached the God, her beloved, in that spirit. They 
revered the Vedic literature and knew the principal Puranas, but 
inculcated the recitation of the God’s name, meditation on his 
different forms, and their worship at the temples such as those at 
Srlrangam, Tirupati and Alagarkoil. It is apparently because of the 
Alvars and their successors, the Vaishnava dcharyas, that the Bhaga¬ 
vata Parana speaks of the existence of large numbers of the wor¬ 
shippers of Vasudeva-Narayana in the Dravida country in the Kali 
age when they were rare elsewhere in India. 

6. Iconography 

The images of worship grew in number and variety. They may 
be divided into three broad classes, such as the principal Vishnu 
icons ( Dhruva-beras ), the Vyuhas (emanatory forms), and the 
Vibhavas (incarnatory forms). These were constructed and placed 
either in the main sanctum of the shrine or in subsidiary shrines and 
niches adjoining the former. The first of these, viz. the Dhruva- 
beras, can be broadly classed under three heads, viz. the sthdnaka 
(standing), dsana (seated) and sayana (recumbent), specimens of 
each of v/hich have been discovered. 2 The commonest types of such 

1. See pp. 332 ff. 

2. The detailed Vnikhnnasdaama classification of the Dhruva-beras of Vishnu is 
not clearly applicable to the Gupta images, though there is every reason to 
believe that by the later Gupta period some of these image-groups were 
constructed. 


428 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


figures are those which are attended by Sri and Pushti in Northern 
or Sri and Bhumi in Southern India as the main accessories, and 
carry the four attributes, viz. lotus (rarely, usually a lotus mark), 
club, wheel, and conchshell in their four hands. According to the dis¬ 
position of the different attributes in different hands, twenty-four 
different forms of Vishnu were distinguished. Among these the 
Trivikrama was the most popular mode of his representation in 
which the four attributes were held respectively in the lower right, 

upper right, upper left and lower left hands. One of the earliest 

✓ 

sthanaka Vishnu images is found carved on the facade of the cave- 
temple at Udayagiri in Bhopal State, and though the relief is very 
much mutilated, enough remains to show that some of the attributes 
of Vishnu, viz. Sahkha and Chakra are personified, and Vishnu’s 
back hands are placed on the top of these Ayndha-purushas, which 
take the place of the usual attendants Sri and Pushti. 

The asana types of extant Vishnu images are not so numerous 
as the sthanaka ones described above, and very few of the extant 
specimens of this variety go back to a period earlier than the Gupta. 
One of the earliest of such types is found engraved on the central 
part of the principal architrave in the main sanctum of the Deogarh 
temple. Vishnu is seated in ardhaparyahka attitude on the coils 
of Adisesha attended by his two consorts one of whom is shampooing 
his leg. The god wears a square Kirlta and the seven hoods of the 
snake are spread canopy-wise over his head; the host of the garland¬ 
bearing Vidyadharas, singly or in couples, are shown above flying 
towards him in a row from either side. The whole composition is 
elegant and shows the characteristic excellence of the Gupta art. 1 
This form of the god seems to have been the prototype of the variety 
of Vishnu images described as Adimurti in the Vaikhdnasdgama 
text. 2 One of the earliest of the Garudasana Vishnu images is the 
unique sculpture in greyish black stone, about 6.4" in height, found 
near Lakshmankati (Backerganj District) in Bengal. The peculiarities 
of this very interesting type cannot be explained with the help of any 
known iconographic text; some of these undoubtedly show Maha- 
yana influence, and in view of this peculiarity and other features, 
the image can be ascribed to the eighth century A.D. 3 The sculp¬ 
ture No. D.37 of buff coloured sandstone in the collection of the 
Curzon Museum at Mathura 4 illustrates an interesting variety of 


1. ASC, X. pi. XXXVI; Vats, The Gupta Temple at Deogarh (MASI , No. 70), p. 14 
and pi. X (b). 

2. T. A. G. Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, Vol. I, pp. 261-3, PI. LXXVIII. 

3. For a detailed description of this image and remarks, cf. HBR, I, p. 431, PI. 
LXI-149. 

4. Vogel, Cat. M.M., pp. 102-3. He is wrong in describing it as ‘Vishnu as Buddha’. 
Agarwala’s description is more to the point. 

429 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


/ . _ . - 

the Yogasana-Vishnu. The whole relief is crowded with accessory 
figures, such as those of the triad in three miniature shrines, the 
personified representations of sahkha , chakra and gadd, the river- 
goddesses Ganga and Yamuna, Garuda, etc. on the different sections 
of the prabhdvall; the central figure is seated in baddhapadmasana 
with his front hands in the yogamudrd, his back right and left hands 
holding gadd and chakra respectively. The whole composition is 
exceedingly well-carved, and the careful and methodical grouping 
of the accessories in relation to the principal deity is praiseworthy. 

The Sayanamurti of Vishnu, comparatively rare in Northern 
India, is one of the types of Vishnu images usually enshrined in the 
main sanctum of the South Indian Vaishnava temples and known 
by the name of RahgasvamI or Rahganatha. The god is generally 
depicted as lying on the folds of Adisesha, with one or two of his 
consorts attending him, and Brahma, the creator, seated on a lotus 
flow r er, the stalk of which issues out of his navel; there are various 
other accessory figures of gods and demons clustering round him. 
The ideology underlying this image-type can be traced back to the 
tenth mandala of the Rigveda, and is the same which is found in 
the developed concept of the cosmic god Narayana in the epic and 
Puranic texts; the type visualises the state of pralaya (dissolution) 
in which the nucleus of creation lies latent in the One alone, from 
whom again creation takes place. A relief in one of the side niches 
in the Dasavatara temple at Deogarh (Jhansi, Central India) very 
characteristically portrays the iconographic motif and is one of the 
oft-reproduced Vishnu figures of the Gupta period. V. A. Smith is 
hardly justified in tracing in it marked influence of the Greek Endy- 
mion a copy of which is now housed in the Stockholm Museum. 1 

Another class of Vaishnava images depict the avatar as of Vishnu 
which are found all over India. Their images are usually carved 
in a row on stone slabs originally decorating some part of Vaishnava 
shrines, and are sometimes shown on the reverse sides of the square 
stone or metal plaques (Vishnu-pattas) found in Eastern India. The 
elegantly carved Nara-Narayana relief in one of the side niches 
of the Gupta temple at Deogarh is of special interest, for it is one 
of the rarest iconographic motifs of ancient and mediaeval India. 
The four-armed figure stands for Narayana, the two-armed one 
being that of Nara, and both are shown in a tranquil attitude. 2 
Some very fine sculptures depicting the Boar, Man-Lion and Dwarf 
incarnations of Vishnu are found carved in different parts of the 
rock-cut temples at Udayagiri (Bhopal State), Badami, and Mamalla- 
puram belonging to the Gupta, early Chalukya, and Pallava periods 

1. Baneriee, DHI, pp. 302-3. 

2. AO, XII, pp. 116-125; IHQ. XXVII, pp., 191-6, pi. I; Vats, op. cit., p. 14 and pi. XI. 

430 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


respectively. 1 Varaha is often depicted in his animal form. Nara- 
simha, as his name indicates, was always represented in his hybrid 
form, Vamana incarnation was represented in the dwarf and the 
giant (Vamana and Virata or Trivikrama) forms. Matsya and 
Kurma avatar as are usually shown in their animal forms, though 
hybrid ones are also not unknown. The past human incarnations of 
Vishnu, viz. Parasurama, Rama Dasarathi, Balarama, and Buddha 
were seldom supernaturalised, their images endowed with more than 
two hands being rare; their varieties are also fewer in number. 
Kalki, the future avatdra , depicted as a horseman brandishing a 
sword, is always found as the last figure in the Dasavatara relief. 2 
There are many sculptures illustrating the stories of Krishna, and 
the Mathura and Sarnath figures of Krishna holding Govardhana 
hill are cases in point. The former carved in red spotted sandstone, 
the usual medium of the artists of Mathura, shows the two-armed 
god standing in the dvibhahga attitude with his left hand in the 
katyavalambita pose and the right hand uplifting the mountain 
Govardhana below whose shelter are shown the people and the 
cattle of Vraja. The Sarnath sculptures, its lower portion much 
damaged, is one of the most beautiful examples of Gupta art, and 
the serene and calm expression on the face of the god lays stress 
on the effortless ease with which he had performed the superhuman 
task. The four principal Vyuha forms of Vasudeva-Vishnu, viz. 
Vasudeva, Sahkarshana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, are some¬ 
times represented in curious composite figures with four faces and 
four or eight hands with usual Vaishnava attributes; the central 
face is a placid human one, and the face just opposite—if the image 
is fully in the round—is that of an ugly demon, the side faces being 
those of a lion and a boar. Such images, found in large numbers 
in the ruins of mediaeval Vaishnava temples in Kashmir, fall under 
the Vishnu-Chaturmurti group, and portray in a striking manner 
one of the cardinal doctrines of the Pahcharatra system. 

V 

E. SAIVISM 

1. North India and the Deccan 

The coming into power of the Guptas in A.D. 320 gave a fillip 
to Hinduism. Though most of the Gupta emperors were worshippers 
of Vishnu, they were not sectarians, and under their rule, Saivism 
flourished along with other forms of Hinduism. Kumara-gupta I 
(A.D. 415-455), for instance, seems to have favoured the Skanda 

1. For a detailed description of the above reliefs, see T. A. G. Rao, Elements of 
Hindu Iconography, I, pp. 128-80 and plates XXXVI-LIII. 

2. For detailed descriptions of the different Avatara figures, see T. A. G. Rao, 
op. cit., I, pp. 119 ff. and corresponding plates. 


431 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


cult, in spite of his Vaishnavism, as is evidenced by his peacock 
coins and by the name ‘Skanda’ he gave to his son. Kalidasa, the 
greatest Sanskrit poet and playwright, was a devotee of Siva; and 
he has immortalised the paurdnika episode of the birth of Skanda 
in one of his epics, the Kumdrasambhava. Bharavi, another poet of 
great merit who lived in the sixth century, wrote a mahdkdvya 
called Kirdtarjunlya , whose theme is the conflict of Arjuna with 
&iva in the guise of a hunter, leading to the bestowal of blessings 
by the god on the Pandu prince. Two of the Puranas which are 
devoted to Siva, viz. the Vdyu and the Matsya, are assigned to the 
Gupta age. The numerous temples and images of Siva during this 
period have been referred to elsewhere. 

If the religious beliefs of the kings and royal families may be 
regarded as a fair index of the popularity of a religious cult, Saivism 
must have made great headway during this period. Its popularity 
with foreign rulers continued, and the Huna king Mihirakula, like 
some early Kushana kings, was a great devotee of Siva. Sasahka, 
king of Bengal, and some members of the Pushpabhuti family of 
Kanauj and the Maitraka dynasty of Valabhl were also Saivas. 

In the Deccan the Brihatphalayanas, the Anandas, and the 
Vishnukundins were followers of Saivism, and many Vakataka, 
Salahkayana, Kadamba and Western Gahga rulers were ardent devo¬ 
tees of Siva. 


2. South India 

In South India Saivism became a great rival of both Jainism and 
Buddhism. As the fortunes of a faith depended largely on the per¬ 
suasion of the ruler, the exponents of different creeds vied with one 
another in their efforts to convert the ruler to their faith. Thus 
Mahendra-varman I (c. 600-630), the Paliava king, was a Jain to 
start with, and it is said that as Jain he persecuted the followers 
of other faiths. But when he came under the influence of Saint 
Appar and adopted Saivism, he seems to have viewed with disfavour 
* Jain doctrine, as a consequence of which its leading exponents 
fell from grace. In a Sanskrit burlesque called Mattavilasa-praha - 
sana, which is ascribed to Mahendra, Buddhist monks are caricatured 
and mention is made of Saiva sects like the Kapalika and the Pasu- 
pata. After Mahendra became a convert to Saivism, Kanchl became 
a stronghold of this faith. He caused great temples to be built all 
over his kingdom, and the images of giva as well as of the other 
deities of the Trinity were installed therein. His successors continued 
the work in connection with the renaissance of Saivism. 

The great upsurge in favour of Saivism was mainly due to the 
enormous devotional poetry that flowed from the lips of the leading. 


432 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Saiva saints who lived in this age. Many of the sixty-three ndyan- 
mdrs or adiyars (canonical saints of Saivism) flourished during this 
period. The most famous among them and their literary works have 
been discussed above. 1 We shall give here a few further details re¬ 
garding these saints, and indicate briefly the contribution they made 
to the progress of Saivism in South India. 

Tirumular’s Tirumandiram (or -mantiram) is a highly abstruse 
work expounding the Saiva doctrine in the light of the author’s 
own mystic experience. The purpose of Tirumular’s work would 
seem to have been to reconcile the Agamas with the Vedas. For he 
says, “The Agama, as much as the Veda, is truly the word of God; 
one is general and the other is special; though some hold these words 
of the Lord, the two antas, to be different.” Tirumular uses the 
term Vedanta-siddhanta several times to mean that the end of both 
the Veda and Saiva doctrine is the same. In one place he 
declares: “Becoming Siva is the Vedanta-siddhanta. The remaining 
four {antas } viz. Nadanta, Bodhanta, Yoganta and Kalanta) are vain 
(teachings). If Sadasiva that becomes Siva attains oneness, the 
Vedanta-knowledge verily becomes Siddhanta.” Tirumular speaks 
of four forms of Saivism: suddha, asuddha, mdrga, and kadum- 
suddha. The asuddha or impure variety of Saivism is that in which 
there is not the Vedanta-knowledge. And by contrast, Vedanta is 
suddha-saiva-siddhdnta. While the former is lost largely in the 
externals, the latter penetrates into the core of Saivism. The mdrga 
Saivas are those who follow the sanmarga. Though they wear the 
external marks of Saivism, they do not stop there. For them the 
true path is the path of knowledge. Caryd, kriya, yoga, and jnana 
are the four stages in the sddhana . When the aspirant has reached 
the last stage, the grace of God descends upon him; and by that he 
is released. The descent of grace is called Sakti-nipdta by Tiru¬ 
mular—a conception which plays an important part in the later 
Saiva-siddhanta doctrine. The last class of Saivas who are termed 
kadum-suddha Saivas are those who do not stand in need of the 
external marks of Saivas, and who have no outward show. They 
go straight to Siva, and ridding themselves of the bondage of desires, 
obtain the knowledge of Siva. Their method is analogous to the 
sadyo-mdrga of Advaita-Vedanta. Naturally those who are adepts 
in this path must be rare. The goal, according to Tirumular, is be¬ 
coming one with God whom he designates Nandin or Siva. As helps 
in the attainment of this goal, he recognises some of the current 
methods like yoga and mantropdsand. But he places the san¬ 
marga of the Siddhanta above all of them. While some are outer 
creeds (purachchamayas) , according to Tirumular, others are inner 


1. See pp. 328 ff. 


433 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(utchamayas). He does not, however, specify them. Probably the 
inner creeds are the various forms of Saivism; and among them the 
Vedanta-siddhanta (in the sense in which Tirumular uses the term) 
is the highest. Thus it will be readily seen how the foundations 
of the system of Saivism prevalent in South India were laid by 
Tirumular in his Tirumandiram. 

Appar, Tiru-jnana-sambandhar (or Sambandar), Sundaramurti 
(or Sundarar), and Manikkavachakar are the four great teachers of 
the Saiva creed ( sammy achdry as), and are the exemplars respec¬ 
tively of the four main paths of devotion, viz. dasa-mdrga or the 
path of the servant, satputra-mdrga or the path of the good son, 
sakhd-mdrga or the path of the friend, and san-mdrga or the true 
path. All the four were inspired saints or godmen who flooded the 
country with a great wave of devotional poetry and thus created 
in the minds of men a disposition favourable for the pursuit of spiri¬ 
tuality. 

Manikkavachakar was born of Brahmana parents in the town¬ 
ship of Vadavur near Madura. After the name of his native town, 
he is known also as Tiru-vadavurar. He was a prodigy and mastered 
all the sastras while still in his teens. His fame as a great scholar 
and a youth of unblemished character reached the ears of the Pandya 
king who sent for him, and, after satisfying himself about the 
youth’s intelligence and worth, appointed him as his prime minister. 
Manikkavachakar served his master and the people of the Pandya 
kingdom faithfully and wisely; and in return he was trusted and 
honoured, and had at his command all the luxuries and comforts 
of a royal court. But his mind was not in such things, as it intensely 
longed to pursue the Saiva path. Like the Sakya prince of old, 
Manikkavachakar realised the vanity of earthly splendour; and he 
was yearning for the help of a guru “who would teach him the 
mystery of the ‘five letters’ ( sivaya-namah) and the ‘way of release.’ ” 
According to a widely current legend, this desire of his was fulfilled 
at Tirupperunturai whither he had gone to buy horses for his king. 
On the outskirts of the town, he came across a guru who, according 
to the legend, was no other than Lord Siva himself come down from 
his heavenly abode for the purpose of saving his beloved devotee; 
and he was transported in an instant into the ecstasy of God-love. 
Instead of buying horses, Manikkavachakar placed the treasures he 
had brought at the disposal of his guru, and at the latter’s command 
returned to Madura and told his king that the horses would arrive 
in a few days. On the appointed day the horses came, led by Siva 
himself disguised as a horse-dealer. But the horses were not real; 
they were jackals transmuted for the time being by the magic power 


434 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of the divine Magician (Mayin). And so, when the transaction had 
been completed, the jackals assumed their true form overnight and 
fled to the jungles. Seeing deceit in all this, the king got infuriated 
and ordered the torture of his prime minister. But the ordeals were 
as nothing to the saint. The unfailing hand of God saved him from 
the torments. The king now realised his folly and set free the song¬ 
bird to go whithersoever it liked. Allusions to these incidents 
are to be found in Manikkavachakar’s songs themselves. Plaving 
divested himself of temporal associations Manikkavachakar devoted 
the rest of his life to spiritual ministry and the service of God. He 
first went to Tirupperunturai, the place of his illumination, and lived 
with his master till the latter left for his heavenly abode. Thereafter 
he visited the important shrines of South India singing at each place 
the praise of the Lord, and finally made Chidambaram his head¬ 
quarters. It was here that he met some Bauddha teachers from 
Ceylon and defeated them in argument. And when his earthly 
mission was completed, it is reported, he was received back by the 
Lord of Chidambaram unto Himself. 

The Tiruvdchakam of Manikkavachakar occupies a place in 
Tamil sacred literature analogous to that of the Upanishads in 
Sanskrit scriptures. The various stages in the soul’s progress from 
the darkness of ignorance to the light of divine illumination are all 
-portrayed in the Tiruvdchakam in the most moving terms. To 
Manikkavachakar the Supreme Deity is Siva, the king of kings,, 
the lord of all beings. The saint describes Siva by the use of such 
terms as ‘brilliance,’ ‘nectar,’ ‘river of mercy,’ and ‘inner light/ 
Siva is not in the temples alone; he is everywhere; he has his dwel¬ 
ling in the heart of every being. He also comes in the form of the 
guru to save the souls that pine to reach His state. Manikkavacha¬ 
kar says: “O, Highest Truth, you came to the earth and revealed 
your feet to me, and became the embodiment of grace.” As a poet 
and mystic Manikkavachakar has his place among the immortals. 
The name by which he is known is most appropriate to him, mean¬ 
ing, as it does, ‘he whose utterances are gems.’ 

Appar was a contemporary of the great Pallava king Mahen- 
dra I (c. A.D. 600-630). He was born in a rich Vellala family in a 
South Arcot village and was named Tirunavukkarasu. A miraculous 
story is told to explain his reconversion from Jainism to Saiva faith. 
After this Appar toured the Tamil land, visiting every shrine, with 
a hoe in hand to remove the scrub from the precincts of the temples, 
and discoursed on the greatness of &iva to large audiences. Alarmed 
at his increasing popularity, the Jain preceptors induced the Pallava 
king (Mahendra I) to bring him to book; and the king, who was 


435 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


himself a Jain, put the saint to the severest of tests. With his simple 
and unshakable faith in Siva, Appar passed through all the ordeals 
unscathed. The king was so impressed by the lofty spirituality of 
the saint that he became a convert to Saivism. Then Appar conti¬ 
nued his peripatetic tours; and while at Chidambaram, he heard 
about the miraculous way in which the grace of God had descended 
upon the boy-saint Sambandhar. Some time later, at this very 
spot there was a meeting between the two saints at which Samban¬ 
dhar greeted his elder lovingly as “appa” (meaning ‘father’). From 
that time onwards the term ‘Appar’ stuck on to Tirunavukkarasu. 
The two saints travelled together several times, worshipping God 
wherever they went through songs charged with intense devotion 
and sharing with each other their rich spiritual experiences. The 
last years of his life Appar spent at Tiruppugalur; and, according 
to tradition, he was eighty-one when he passed away from this earth. 

Appar’s hymns are full of wisdom and devotion, and reflect the 
maturity of the author’s mind as well as his deep piety. He had a 
thorough knowledge of the Siddhanta and had mastered the other 
systems of thought as well. In one of the songs, he says that Siva 
is beyond the twenty-five tattvas (of the Sankhyas); and in another 
he speaks of the ninety-six categories of the Saiva doctrine. Siva, 
according to him, is the immanent and transcendent Reality. He 
seems to recognise three forms of Siva: (1) The lowest is Siva, who 
is a member of the Trinity in charge of the destruction of the 
universe. (2) The second he calls Pardpara, a combination of Siva 
and Sakti, also referred to as Pdranjoti. (3) The third and the last 
is Stambha or the pillar of light, Consciousness-absolute. It is, in 
fact, beyond all conceptions, indescribable and ineffable. It is the 
final goal of spiritual life. The way to its attainment lies through 
steady concentration and unflinching devotion. “The feet of the 
Sire (Siva) of the Kadamba youth (viz. Subrahmanya) can be seen,” 
says Appar, “if He is sought with the help of the light of wisdom 
issuing forth from the wick of life, fed with the ghee of contempla¬ 
tion in the lamp of the mind placed within the house which is the 
body.” In the strain of the Upanishad, the saint sings: “We have 
shown the way of worshipping the Isa thus: let the body be the 
temple and mind the worshipping slave; let truth be the sanctity 
(required for worship), and the jewel of the heart be the Linga ; 
and let love itself be the ghee, milk and water (which are acces¬ 
sories of worship).” Appar was never tired of stressing the need 
for taking the name of the Lord. “The rare jewel of the Brahmin 
is the Veda with its six auxiliary studies; but for us the rare jewel 
is the panchdkshara.” While he regarded the &iva-marga as the 


436 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


highest, he was not so narrow-minded as to think that there was no 
other path. Siva’s feet, he says, are capable of giving solace to 
everyone of the followers of the six samayas. 

Sambandhar was a contemporary of Appar. He was born in 
Sir kali (Shiyali) of Brahmana parents in answer, it is said, to the 
latters’ fervent prayers to Siva for the gift of a son. As a child of 
three years, he accompanied his father one day to the local tank. 
While the parent w T as bathing, so goes the legend, the child cried 
out, whereupon Siva and Parvatl appeared and, out of a golden cup, 
the latter fed him with the milk of wisdom. Henceforth he became 
‘Jnana-sambandha,’ one who is related to God through wisdom. And, 
overcome by ecstasy, he began to sing the praise of the universal 
Father and Mother. When the orthodox father realised that his 
child had been blessed by Parvatl herself, he was overjoyed and 
carried his darling on his own shoulders from one sacred place 
to another. Sambandhar visited the various temples singing the 
glories of Siva. When he was camping on the outskirts of Madura, 
he was informed by the queen-consort Mahgaiyarkkarasi and the 
minister Kulachchirai that the Jains had gained great influence over 
the king, and the saint re-converted the Pandya ruler to Saivism. 
Completing his ministry at Madura, the saint returned to his Chola 
land, and from there went on a tour to the north. The performance 
of several miracles by Sambandhar is recorded in the Pur ana. Even 
the last episode in the life of the saint was of the nature of a miracle. 
He was now sixteen years old, and it was proposed that he should 
marry. He consented to the proposal, and a bride was chosen. But 
before the conclusion of the marriage ceremony, the saint took his 
bride to the temple at Nallur-perumanam, and was merged along 
with her and his following in a divine effulgence that blazed forth 
from the deity at his request. Thus ended in glory the brief but 
brilliant life of the boy saint of ^Irkali. 

Sambandhar’s padigams are given the first place in the Tevdram 
collection; and this shows the importance that &aiva piety attaches 
to his songs. The one feature that stands out prominently in the 
hymns is the saint’s abhorrence of the Jains. He seems to have be¬ 
lieved sincerely that they were misguiding the common people. In 
one stanza he says: “O, you who get disturbed by listening to the 
foolish teachings of the Jains and the Bauddhas, come; by adoring 
the feet of the Lord of Nallur-perumanam, moksha will become easy 
of attainment.” Sambandhar came with a mission, like the other 
teachers of Saivism; and that was to spread the gospel of Saiva- 
theism as against the atheistic faiths. He is regarded as one of the 


437 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


prime instruments that brought about the downfall of Jainism in the 
Tamil country. 

Sambandhar considers £iva to be the highest God, the beginning, 
middle, and end of all beings. As a member of the Trinity, He is 
the ‘first form’ (mudaUuru). But. in truth, he is formless, and so 
neither Brahma nor Vishnu could see him. Siva is consciousness, 
light. Sambandhar says: “You became the end of jyotis ; the jyotis 
within jyotis ” Attainment of the state of Siva is release or moksha . 
The soul should free itself from mala or impurity. For this diva’s 
grace is necessary. The pane ha kshara is the potent means to invoke 
his grace, and thereby to attain ^iva^-mukti. Says Sambandhar: 
“The five letters are the final mantra through which one must reach 
6iva.” The quintessence of the saint’s teachings is: ‘Worship Siva 
with all thy heart; and thou wilt be saved.’ 

Sundaramurti, the last of the saints discussed here, was born 
in a family of Saiva temple-priests in South Axcot District. It is 
said that on the eve of his marriage &iva appeared in the guise of an 
old Brahmin and claimed him as his bond-slave. He prevented him 
from marrying at that stage, took him along with him, and revealed 
his identity as Siva, the Supreme Master of the universe. Sundarar 
thus attained sainthood and went from place to place singing the 
praise of £>iva, his saviour. He married twice, lost his eyesight and 
also the grace of Siva. After some time, these were restored and 
he gained the friendship of Cheraman Perumal, the Kerala king. 
It was during his stay with the king at Tiruvahj ikkalam that he 
passed away into the presence of God. Sundarar’s songs reveal the 
path of the sakhd or friend. But his familiarity with God did in no 
way diminish his fervent devotion and longing to live in the presence 
of Siva. Along with the other saints of the age, he shares the honour 
of having stirred the deep religious emotions of his people, and of 
having ushered in an era of &aiva renaissance. 

3. Iconography 

&ivalingas of the Gupta period show how the emphasis on their 
real character was being gradually subdued, and the inscribed 
Karamdanda Linga of the time of Kumara-gupta I indicates this cons¬ 
cious effort at conventionalisation. It would be wrong, however, 
to suppose that all realism was eschewed in the Gupta S§ivalingas, 
for several seals of the period have been found at Bhita, which depict 
them in their older aspect. 1 

Reference has been made above 2 to the evolution of particular 
types of £aiva icons, viz. Lihgodbhava-murtis and Mukhalingas. The 

1. Banerjea, DHI, pi. X, fig. 4. 2. Vol. IX, pp. 460-61. 

438 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


former are a class of icons which portray a definite sectarian bias. 
The mythology connected with them relates how Brahma and 
Vishnu once quarrelled about their individual claims for the creator- 
ship of the universe; how Siva appeared before them in the form 
of a blazing column of fire; and how they failed in their attempts 
to find its top and bottom. Brahma falsely asserted that he had 
found its top for which he was cursed by &iva that he would never 
have a cult of his own; but Vishnu confessed his failure to discover 
the ground of the column for which he was blessed by the god to 
have a cult which would be only next in importance to his own. 
The essentials of this story are depicted in one of the earliest 
Lingodbhava-murtis found in the Dasavatara cave, Ellora. This 
shows a column with flames issuing from its side, with a three- 
quarter figure of £iva Chandrasekhara inset in its front; Brahma 
is shown soaring upwards on the top left hand comer and Vishnu as 
Varaha burrowing in the ground on the bottom right; they are 
repeated in their usual forms on the left and right with their natural 
hands in the anjali pose. The Indian method of depicting a continu¬ 
ous narrative by the repetition of figures in the same panel is very 
strikingly illustrated in this piece of sculpture, and various mediae¬ 
val reliefs belonging to different regions of India are known, which 
illustrate the theme in a similar manner, sometimes with modifica¬ 
tion. The columnar form of &iva is interesting to note, for many 
of the mediaeval Aivalingas are definitely of this shape. 

The anthropomorphic figures of Siva show a bewildering diver¬ 
sity. One early specimen, now in the collection of the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta, was originally found at Kosam; it bears an 
inscription of the time of Skanda-gupta. £iva and Uma stand side 
by side, /each with the right hand raised and the open palm turned 
to the front. In his left hand Siva holds a water-vessel, while 
Parvatl carries a trisulai ?). The head dress of Parvatl is a most 
elaborate construction.’ Bloch remarks about this sculpture: ‘It is 
instructive to compare the stiff and conventional manner of treat¬ 
ment in this older image with the suggestive posture of the divine 
couple in the later statues.’ The rock-cut shrines of Ellora, collec¬ 
tively dated in the eighth century A.D., contain some very interest¬ 
ing reliefs which illustrate different varieties of the anthropomor¬ 
phic forms of &iva. One or two panels there depict the god and 
goddess seated together in the company of a host of attendants on 
either side, with Nandi below surrounded by a number of ganas. Just 
one step removed from these sculptures are the Uma-Mahesvara- 
murtis where Parvatl is shown seated on the left thigh of her 
consort who is caressing her with his hands. This is the sugges- 


439 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


tive pose alluded to by Bloch, and the greater frequency of such 
sculptures in Eastern India is undoubtedly associated with the pre¬ 
valence of Sakti cult in this region. The Tantric worshippers of 
Tripurasundari, another name of Uma and Parvatl, are required 
to meditate on the Devi as sitting on the lap of £iva in the Maha- 
padmavana 1 and these images were used as aids for their particular 
dhydnayoga . In the above types, the god and goddess are separately 
shown, but in the Ardhanarisvara one they are shown blended 
together. The right half of this composite figure possesses all the 
iconographic features of Siva, while the left half, those of Uma. The 
present writer recognised this interesting type in a Gupta seal im¬ 
pression found at Bhita, A number of sculptures depicting this 
theme, to be dated from the Gupta to the mediaeval period, have 
been found in different parts of India, showing its popularity among 
the sectaries. The Badami Ardhanarisvara stone panel is a fairly 
representative one of such figures, with some additional peculiarities 
like the natural hands of the androgynous god holding vina, Nandi 
as bull, and emaciated Bhringi standing by the side of the male half 
and a female attendant by the female one; a number of ganuis in 
dancing and other poses are shown below. Kari-Hara or Haryardha- 
murtis of 6iva are not so common as the group just described, but 
there are some such reliefs still extant. One of the earliest and finest 
ones is that which is carved in a panel in the lower cave temple at 
Badami; in the right or Hara half of the central figure are shown 
Civile attributes and emblems while in the other or Hari half, the 
Yaishnava ones. The god is attended by Parvatl and Lakshml on his 
right and left, as well as by the bull-faced human figure of Nandi and 
Garu^a; below him, as usual in Badami &aiva reliefs, is a group of 
ganas dancing and playing on musical instruments. 

F. MINOR RELIGIOUS SECTS 
1. Brahma 

Reference has been made above 2 to the great transformation of 
the Brahmanical religion in course of which most of the gods other 
than Vishnu and &iva were relegated to an inferior position and made 
subordinate to them. The first major god to suffer in this way was 
Brahma. The exploits with which he was credited in the subsidiary 
Vedic literature were gradually appropriated by Vishnu. Though 
called Svayambhu (self-created), he was now conceived to have 
sprung out of the mundane egg or of the lotus grown in the navel of 
Vishnu, and saved by the latter from destruction at the hands of the 
demon Madhu. A vague incest-myth of the Rigveda was foisted on 

2. See pp. 365-6. 

440 


1. Saundarya-lahari, v. 40 ff. 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


him, and Siva was the chastising agent for his moral lapse. These 
legends probably indicate a general transfer of allegiance from 
Brahma to the two other gods of the Trinity. Nevertheless Brahma 
had a small following, and a belated attempt is made in the Padma 
Purdna to revive his glory as a supreme god. That he enjoyed con¬ 
siderable importance during the period under review may be infer¬ 
red from the fact that both the Brihat-samhitd and the Vishnu- 

• • 

dharmottara prescribe the mode of making his images, and even the 
late Padma Purdna lays down the mode of his worship. 

Even when Brahma began to lose ground, his right to be wor¬ 
shipped as a subsidiary deity was admitted, and a niche found for 
him in the temples of Vishnu and Siva. He also figured in the image 
of the Trinity, though never accorded the central position, which 
was reserved for one of the other two. Some sacred places like 
Prayaga and Pushkara were specially associated with him. Though 
the special sect bearing the name of Brahma disappeared in course 
of time, his worship did not die out altogether. This is proved by 
the wide-spread distribution of his images from Sindh to Bengal, 
even though the extant images are not very large in number, and 
show fewer varieties. These depict him three-faced (most of them 
being relievo-sculptures, the fourth face is not shown; it is present 
only in those which are fully in the round), pot-bellied, four-armed—- 
the hands carrying sruk, sruva , akshamdla, and pustaka ,—and either 
standing or seated on his mount, a swan. One of the earliest brass or 
bronze images of this god, fully in the round, found at Mirpur Khas in 
Sindh and now in the Karachi Museum, is thus of great iconographic 
interest, because it does not at all correspond to the usual mode of 
representation of the deity. The god is four-faced, but two-armed, 
the right hand being bent wdth the palm turned inwards as if holding 
a book (this hand-pose is not described in known texts), the left 
hand holding either an akshamdla or a water-vessel which has dis¬ 
appeared (its handle only is now preserved), having matted locks 
of hair on his heads, clad in diaphanously treated garments, and 
perhaps wearing a deer-skin on his torso in the upavlti fashion. 
This is a fine specimen of the Indian metallurgist’s art of the early 
mediaeval period. 1 

It was not till the Smart as formulated their divine pentad 
(panchdyatana ) that Brahma finally lost his position as a sectarian 
deity, and was reduced to the position of a super-annuated god. 
To-day in the whole of India there are only about half-a-dozen inde¬ 
pendent temples dedicated to Brahma. He has been thrust out of 
the inner sanctuary and placed outside as parivdra-devata in the 

1. T. A. G. Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, II, pp. 509-10, pi. CXLVUI. 


441 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


temples of Vishnu, Siva, and even of Karttikeya. Even when he is 
included in the Trinity, he comes into the group as a matter of form, 
or receives worship as Surya, as in South India, showing that the 
solar cult also made an inroad into the cult of Brahma in certain 
localities. 

2. Surya 

Unlike Brahma, Surya not only retained, but even extended 
his domain. The locus classicus for our knowledge of the solar cult 
of the northern variety is the Bhavishya Parana which gives an 
account of the origin of the cult, the solar deity and his associates, 
the mode of worship, the solar priests (Bhojakas, Magas, Somakas, 
etc.), and the solar festivals. Similar accounts are to be found in 
Samba, Vardha and some other Puranas. It is no wonder that most 
of the Sun temples of the period should belong to Western India, in 
particular south of the present Rajasthan, where Sakadvlpi Brahma- 
nas settled in some strength. 1 Apart from the Mulasthana or Multan 
(originally Sambapura named after Samba) temple, where the golden 
image excited wonder and admiration, epigraphic records testify to 
the existence of other temples of note. Reference may be made to 
the Mandasor inscription of the time of Kumara-gupta recording the 
construction of a temple by a guild of weavers in A.D. 436 and its 
repair in A.D. 473, the Indor (in U.P.) copper-plate recording the 
endowment of Devavishnu in A.D. 465 for the regular lighting of a 
lamp in a sun-temple, a third grant dated A.D. 511 to another temple, 
and the Gwalior inscription of the 15th year of Mihirakula recording 
the erection of yet another temple. Royal favour was also not lacking 
and some of the princely houses were devoted to the Sun. Three 
ancestors of Harsha are called paramddityabkakia in Harsha’s inscrip¬ 
tions, and though Harsha himself was a Saiva and later inclined 
definitely towards Buddhism, he did not forsake his ancestral deity 
altogether, for in the quinquennial assembly, attended by Hiuen 
Tsang, the image of the Sun was installed along with those of Buddha 
and Siva. One of the tutelary deities of the Saiahkayanas of the 
Andhra country was the Sun (Chitraratha), and at least one Valabhi 
ruler (the fifth one) w r as a follower of the Sun. Reference may also 
be made to the Shahpur Image-inscription of Adityasena (A.D. 672) 
and the Deo Bar ana rk inscription of Jlvita-gupta II both of which 
refer to solar worship. The Martanda temple of Kashmir built by 
Mukiapida or Lalitaditya belongs to the close of this period. That 
the cult, which had at one time embraced only the western half of 
Northern India, soon spread to the other half also, is borne out by 

the large number of solar images discovered in Bengal. 

-—- - - . .. , -- *■ _ 

1. Vol. H, pp. 465-6. 

442 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


There is no doubt that the &akadvipi Brahmanas considerably 
influenced the solar cult in Northern India. This is best illustrated 
by the two types of solar images prevalent in the north and the 
south. The standing Surya figures of the Gupta period, discovered in 
several parts of Northern India, show the alien features in a very 
prominent manner as the seated ones of Mathura do. The stone 
relief of Surya, carved inside a chaitya- window of the Bhumara 
Siva-temple, depicts the god as wearing a tall cylindrical head-dress, 
dressed in a long coat with a scarf tied at the waist, with his 
legs covered in long boots of soft leather, holding two lotus-buds 
in his hands, and accompanied by two male figures clad almost in 
the same manner; the chariot and horses are absent here, perhaps 
on account of the exigencies of space. The dress of the god and of 
his attendants, in these comparatively early reliefs, distinctly reminds 
Us of that of the inscribed statue of Kanishka and the effigies of 
the Kushana monarehs on the obverse of their coins. In other more 
elaborate representations of the same deity of the Gupta period, the 
horses, the arrow-shooting goddesses, the legless charioteer Arana 
driving the horses, etc. are almost invariably present. 

The South Indian figures of Surya have the legs and feet always 
left bare, and instead of the long coat of Northern India we find 
invariably the Udarabandha. There are other minor differences too 
which grew and brought the differences into still sharper relief in 
the medieval age as will be described in the next volume. The 
Puranas are not all influenced by the Iranian tradition and some of 
them like the Kurma limit themselves to a description, of the func¬ 
tion of the Sun as a heavenly body in punctuating the time and 
seasons, in maintaining the planets in their position, and fostering 
the life of plants and animals, and make only a passing reference to 
the solar family. Some like the Vishnu Purdna also make an excur¬ 
sion into the history of the domestic life of the deity, while others 
like the Matsya Purdna , while prescribing the mode of constructing 
the solar image, direct that the feet should be made invisible. In 
this way greater details are given till we get the full description 
of the Northern variety and even reference to Zarathushtra and 
Iranian beliefs and practices. But the orthodox tradition developed 
on the lines of the Satapatha Brahmana prescription of a golden disc 
to represent the solar orb and the Upanishadic doctrine of the golden 
Purasha in the Sun, and the philosophically inclined thought less of 
the “all-red” deity and more of Brahman as the Ultimate Being with 
which the Sun was identified. The Kurma Purdna , therefore, lays 
down that while Vishnu and Indra are to be worshipped by kings, 
Brahmanas should particularly worship Agni, Aditya, Brahma and 


443 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


&iva. In it is also to be found the Suxya-hridaya hymn in which Surya 
is eulogised as the supreme deity who includes all other deities within 
himself. For some time, it appears, Surya formed with Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva, a kind of quadrumvirate, for in many ceremonial 
gifts these four go together. A lithic representation of their fusion 
finds a place in later sculpture, e.g. in the Chidambaram temple and 
the Limboji Mata temple at Delmal (N. Gujarat). As Brahma is 
gradually ousted from the field, a trinity of the other three is left; 
but not for long, for a powerful rival in the shape of &akti soon 
makes her appearance and becomes an important cult object. 

3. &akti 

The cult next in importance to the two major Brahmanical 
ones, Vaishnava and &aiva, was that of &akti, the energic female 
principle. The origin of this goddess, known by various names such 
as Uma, Parvatl, Durga, etc. has been discussed above. 1 By what 
process this goddess came to occupy a prominent position during 
'this period it is difficult to say, and also, why she should have been 
ultimately allied with Siva. But several important factors may be 
noted. Perhaps following the identification of Rudra and Agni, she 
was identified with the tongues of fire and similarly named. The 
destructive aspect gave her such names as Kali (the Destruction), 
Karali (the Terrible), Bhlma (the Frightful), Chandl, Chandika or 
Chamunda (the Wrathful), etc. Another factor is her identification 
with Sarasvati. As Sarasvati and Yak (speech) were identified, and 
speech is depicted in the Brahmana literature as a source of strength, 
naturally the Devi or goddess par excellence became a source of 
power. But Sarasvati is also the goddess of learning, the revealer 
of divine wisdom. When Devi was identified with Sarasvati she 
was not only called by this name but she also got the other epithets 
of Sarasvati as well—Vedamata, Sarvavarna and Chhandasam 
mata. It is not impossible that those who ascribed the Nigama lite¬ 
rature to the Devi at a later time had in mind this tradition of 
her wisdom as recorded, for instance, in the Kena Upanishad , or else 
■wished to assert her equality with 6iva in all matters, revelation 
not excluded. Association with some abstract qualities and virtues 
personified also enhanced her prestige. 

Another important factor that invested the Devi with power 
came probably from philosophy. The Sahkhya philosophy had 
familiarised the idea that Purusha is by nature inactive and it is 
Prakrit! who is active (though in the proximity of Purusha). Even 
the Vedanta system in its Advaita form could claim an Upanishadic 
origin for its conception that Brahman becomes the creator only 


1. Vol. II. pp. 466-67. 


444 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


when associated with Maya, which was subsequently called the 
eternal capacity or function (nityti sakti ) of Brahman. Lest this 
power should be looked upon as functioning without the active 
effort of the Supreme Soul, a theistic sect hastened to add that Maya 
was none other than Prakriti while the Mayin was Mahesvara. Now 
Maya in its alternative meanings signified both Prajna (Insight) and 
Svapna (Dream or Illusion) and Devi became both Sarasvatl and 
Moharatri. Hence Power, Wisdom and Stupefying capacity were 
added to Creative Agency to make up the composite picture of a 
goddess who as Mahalakshml (called Sakti in later Tantric literature) 
created even the gods, as Durga killed the Asuras, as Devi revealed 
the Sakta literature, and as Yoganidra sent all creation to sleep. 

The Harivamsa refers to her worship by hill and jungle tribes 
and also calls her the sister of Vishnu and of Indra (as KaushikI). 
While the Rdmayana remains content with calling Uma the daugh¬ 
ter of Himavat and the sister of Ganga, and later writers make 
them co-wives of Siva, the Harivamsa gives a description of how 
one of the three daughters of Himavat (Aparna by name) got the 
name of TJma from her mother Mena because of her severe austeri¬ 
ties to get Mahadeva as husband. While in the MahabhoTata Durga 
appears indifferently as the wife of N a ray ana and of Siva, the later 
associations became increasingly Saivite, though, as not absolutely 
unexpected, in the Vishnu Parana the Primal Energy (Adya Sakti) 
appears not as MahadevI but as Mahalakshml. But the hill associa¬ 
tion gains the upper hand and Uma Haimavati (and later on, Parvatl, 
Sailaputrl, Girija, etc.) becomes the wedded wife of Girlsa (Siva), 
who is therefore called Umapati, and she is called Mahesvan, Isani, 
SarvanI, MahadevI, Mahakall, Siva or SivanI, etc. Gaurl, who is 
originally the wife of Varuna, and is also a companion of Parvatl, 
becomes identified with Uma, and thus Girlsa also becomes Gaurlsa. 
Even in the Mahabhdrata reference is made to the Bhutas who 
accompany Siva, and the ghosts, demons and goblins who form the 
retinue of Rudra or Siva are matched by their feminine counter¬ 
parts in the retinue of his wife; or possibly the possession of a wild 
and ghoulish retinue facilitated the establishment of the relationship 
between the two. It is difficult to say to what extent the pre-Vedic 
culture of India, now discovered in the Sindhu Valley, contributed 
to the conception of a mother goddess of the type now familiar to us 
as Sakti, but that the cult of the Mother Goddess was fed by indige¬ 
nous and aboriginal beliefs is almost certain, judging by the quali¬ 
ties with which she was invested at a later time. Possibly the many 
Furies associated with her have left their surrogates in the many 
village goddesses of South India and the euphemistic designation 
of Mothers (matarah) was meant to cover up their diabolical nature 


445 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


/ 

which their association with Vinayaka and Virabhadra in Saptama- 
t|*ika slabs tends to confirm. A formidable list of such Furies created 
by Siva to lick up the falling drops of Anahakasura’s blood (whence 
new Andhaka-like demons sprouted forth) and a smaller list of those 
emanating from Narasirhha to keep these in check are to be found 
in the Matsya Pur ana. 

What raised the goddess to the supreme position were the 
exploits with which she was credited in folk-lore as recorded in 
the Chandi chapters of the Mdrkandeya Piirdna. As the destroyer of 
the demons Mahishasura, Raktavija, Sumbha and Nisumbha, C-handa 
and Munda, she literally fought her way into the orthodox pantheon 
just as Rudra had done by disturbing Daksha’s sacrifice; and her 
promise to come again and again to destroy the giants reminds one 
forcibly of a similar promise of Krishna to Arjuna. 

Suffice it to say that when once a relationship was established 
between gaivism and Saktism, assimilation of the two creeds to 
each other was rapid. We have stories of the resurrection of the 
first wife of Siva (Sati, the daughter of Daksha) as Uma, her austeri¬ 
ties to win her husband again, the marriage of Siva and Parvati, 
their idyllic domestic life on the Kailasa mount, and the dire cala¬ 
mities that befell those who tried to pry into the secrets of their 
conjugal life as represented in art by Umamahesvara, Umalingana and 
Ardhanarisvara figures. Into the vortex of the Siva-Sakti cult were 
drawn not only the cults of Ganesa and Karttikeya who began to 
figure as the sons of the couple, but also the cult of Tara which 
probably came from Buddhism. Later Saktism became very much 
complicated and many lower forms of belief and practice found an 
entry into it. 

The one noticeable thing about the Siva-Sakti cult is that both 
Siva and Sakti were worshipped in benign as well as terrible forms, 
and this helped an easy alliance between the two. If of the eight 
forms of Siva some are ghora (terrifying) and others aghora , saumya 
or dakshina (benign), so also are Devi’s forms like Uma, Gaun, 
Parvati, Bhavani, Annapurna, Lalita, etc. of gentle mien, while other 
forms like Chamunda, Durga (in most of the nine kinds of later 
times), names ending with Kali and Ratri and including Charuja, as 
also Katyayani, Bhairavi, etc. are of an opposite nature. As usual, the 
serpent cult managed to effect an entry here also, for we are told 
that the breast-band of the goddess Durga is a serpent and the noose 
with which she binds the Buffalo Demon is also a snake. There is 
no doubt that whereas probably the earlier conception of her was 
that of a composite deity constituted by the energies (the Saptamatjri- 
kas) of the earlier gods or contemporaneously worshipped major 


446 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


deities—Brahma (BrahmanI), Mahesvara (Mahesvarl), Kumar a 
(Kaumarl), Vishnu (Vaishnavl), Varaha (Varahl), Indra (IndranI) and 
Yama (Yam! or Chamunda), and also sometimes &iva (Yogesvarl), the 
later belief was just the reverse, for she was regarded as capable of 
absorbing all these forms and resuming her unitary character as the 
Supreme Goddess from whom all creation, preservation, and destruc¬ 
tion proceeded. This led to the development of the Tantra cult 
which will be discussed in the next volume. 

Once installed as Supreme Deity, Devi or Durga gradually out¬ 
grew the terrifying character,—which was perhaps the primary 
material of her composition,—through her feminine nature. A Mother 
Goddess (ambd) is approached with greater confidence by devotees 
because of her kindly nature and the patent provision of mainten¬ 
ance that proceeds from all mothers. So when the benign nature 
began to grow in importance, and the deity ceased to be a colour¬ 
less goddess with the feminine suffix simply added to the male 
counterpart, she began to be clothed with more flesh and blood and 
was promptly allied to a male deity as his bride. Once conceived 
as married, her motherhood came almost as a natural corollary, and 
Karttikeya and Ganesa came to be regarded as her children. 

The images of the different aspects of this goddess have been 
discovered in various parts of India. Bengal, or rather Eastern India 
in general, was the homeland cf the Sakta cult and it is thus natural 
that many varieties of the Devi icons should be found there. From 
the mythological point of view these are principally associated with 
Siva, but types are not wanting which show some Vishnuite 
features. Durga, known by various names as Uma, Haimavati, 
Parvatl, Ambika, etc. was primarily the consort of Siva, but she 
was also regarded in some of her aspects such as Ekanamsa or Bhadra 
as the sister of Vasudeva Krishna. The Devi was also manifest as the 
motivating energy behind many Hindu god-concepts like Brahma, 
Mahesvara (Siva), Vishnu, etc., and was known collectively as the 
‘Divine Mothers', the Saptamatrikas, whose individual names 
BrahmanI, etc. have been given above. Her images, like those of 
giva, can also be roughly grouped under two heads, ugra and 
saumya, and in the former aspect she is principally the destroyer of 
the buffalo-demon, Mahishasuramardinl. An elaborate mythology 
developed round this theme and most of her images of terriffic form 
summarily illustrate the story as recounted in the Puranas. Extant 
Mahishasuramardinl images, however, can hardly be dated before 
the Gupta period, and some miniature stone figurines unearthed at 
Bhita are a few of the earliest summary representation of this aspect 
of the goddess. They depict her with either two or four arms, 


447 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


engaged in combat with the demon in the shape of a buffalo, with 
no other attendant and accessory figures. These, including a lion 
beneath her about to maul Mahishasura coming out of the decapi¬ 
tated trunk of the buffalo, were not late in making their appearance, 
and the number of her hands holding various weapons ( praharanas) 
was multiplied. But this multiplicity of arms is also of a fairly 
early date, and one of the earliest figures of this aspect of the goddess 
is found carved on the facade of the cave shrine at Udayagiri, 
where she is twelve-armed. That the number of arms in many such 
cult images of a later date was not uniformly increased is shown 
by the fine bronze figure described as Lakshana in the pedestal 
inscription, found by Vogel in Chamfea, one of the hill states of 
northern India. The Devi is depicted as driving the trident into the 
neck of the buffalo who is being pressed down by one of her legs 
with the tail being held in one of her hands; this pose, partly to be 
found in one of the Bhita reliefs mentioned above, exactly corres¬ 
ponds to the description of the ‘ChandV { Durgd-saptasaU — seven 
hundred verses of the Mdrkandeya Purdna describing this episode) 
which runs thus: Samutpatya sariidhd tam mahdsuram pddentikramya 
kanthe cha sulenainam atd^ayat ‘(the goddess) briskly jumped on to 
the body of the great demon and, kicking him in the neck with her 
foot, struck him with her spear (or, pressing him down with one leg 
thrust her spear into his neck)’. 1 Several reliefs in Mamallapuram 
illustrate in a very interesting manner the different phases of the 
struggle between the Devi and Asura. In one of them the eight¬ 
armed goddess, accompanied by several attendants (these are exact 
replicas of ^ivaganas, dwarfish and pot-bellied in appearance), is 
shown engaged in actual combat with the buffalo-headed demon and 
his attendants. In others, she is shown standing on the severed 
head of the Asura, either accompanied by attendants or not, holding 
in her eight hands various weapons of war as well as chakra and 
sankha wdiich indicate her Vishnuite features. 

Unlike those of her consort 6iva, the ugra forms of the Dev! 
are fewer in number, but she has a variety of saumya types of 
images, some of which require brief notice. One of her earliest 
placid figures can be seen in the Mamallapuram panel which shows 
her standing under an umbrella as four-armed,—her back hands 
carrying sankha and chakra and the front ones being in the dbhaya 
and katihasta poses,—surrounded by ganas and two seated human 
figures; one of the latter seated on her proper right is shown in the 
attitude of cutting off his own head for offering it to her as a 
sacrifice. This particular feature of the relief is very interesting, 


1. Mdrkandeya Purdna , 83, 37, 


448 






RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


inasmuch as it introduces a novel Tantric element in such a com¬ 
paratively early piece of sculpture. 1 

The popularity of the goddess Durga was shared to some extent 
by her two .sons Karttikeya and Ganesa. An inscription, dated 
A.D. 414, mentions the addition of a gallery ( pratoli ) to a temple 
of Karttikeya called Svami Mahasena. The Kadamba kings were 
devoted worshippers of this god while the Yaudheyas assigned to him 
Kalasa and conch symbols reminiscent of Lakshmi. It is also note¬ 
worthy that the Gupta emperor Kumara-gupta substituted for 
Garuda the peacock symbol associated with his divine namesake. 
Subrahmanya, under which name the god was worshipped in South 
India, was evidently derived from the earlier form Brahmanyadeva. 
The wide popularity of the god in the Deccan was specially due to 
his association with Siva like whom he had malformed troublesome 
fo]lowers, the Kumarakas, who plagued children. His temples were 
generally placed on hill-tops and different types of figures were 
prescribed for cities of various dimensions. In the extant late 
Gupta and mediaeval images of Karttikeya in northern India, we 
do not find much variety; he is usually shown there as two-armed, 
riding on his mount the peacock (Sikhi Paravani), and holding in his 
hands a. citron ( matulunga) and a spear (sakti). 2 Sometimes he is 
attended by his two consorts, viz. Devasena and Valli, and is showm 
as four-armed. 

Unlike Karttikeya, Ganesa had a sect of his own, known by the 
name of Ganapatya, in later times. His importance grew r during 
this period. Though the authenticity of the Ganapatiprakarana of 
the Ydjdavalkya Samhitd has sometimes been questioned, there is 
no doubt that the cult of Ganesa as both ganesvara and vintiyaka 
was adumbrated in the Mdnava-Ghdhya-sutra where his four names 
appear as Usmita, Devayajana, Salakatahkata and Kushmandaraja- 
putra and the appeasement of the trouble-creating god is prescribed. 
In the Ydjriavalkya Samhitd Mita and Sammita replace the first two 
names while the third and the fourth are each divided into two, 
namely &ala and Katankata, Kushmanda and Rajaputra. The Brihat- 
samhitd still knows of the troublesome ganas and vindyakas . 
Latterly Ganesa became a single personality and the leader of the 
turbulent followers of Rudra (ganas). But the multiplicity of his 
forms remained—we have later reference to about fifty such forms, 
which shows the vigour of the creed. &ankaracharya, the great 
expounder of Advaitavada, is said to have vanquished in dispute 
the exponents of the tenets of its six sub-divisions, viz. the worship- 

1. T. A. G. Rao, Elements of Hindu Iconography, I. pi. C. 

2. The figure of Karttikeya shown in a ‘Chaitya window’ of the Bhumara Siva 
temple exactly corresponds to the above description (MASI , 16, pi. XIII d). 


449 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


pers of Maha, Haridra, Svarna, Santana, Navanita and Unmatta- 
Uchchhishta aspects of Ganapati. Comparatively late iconographic 
texts not only describe the images of the different forms of the 
elephant-headed and pot-bellied god, but also enumerate numerous 
other varieties of the same with appropriate descriptions. But most 
of these image-groups are of an academic nature, for the simple 
reason that very few among them were actually represented in art. 
The extant images of Ganesa of the Gupta and the post-Gupta periods 
can be broadly classified under three heads, viz. sthanaka , i.e. 
standing, dsana (seated), and nritya (dancing). Numerous images 
of Ganapati of the early and late mediaeval periods belonging to 
one or other of these varieties have been found in different parts 
of India. Their extreme popularity can be explained by the fact 
that as the god was the remover of all obstacles and bestower of 
success, he was held in great esteem not only by the various Brahma- 
nical sectaries, but also by the followers of heterodox creeds like 
Buddhism and Jainism. The Buddhists were again principally res¬ 
ponsible for carrying his image-type to the Far East and Indonesia. 
One of the earliest standing images of Ganapati is the Mathura 
sandstone figure of the elephant-headed deity in the nude. Another 
early form can be recognised in the terracotta plaque of the Bhltar- 
gaon brick temple, which shows him in an unusual pose—flying 
through the air, but the pot of sweetmeat in one of his four hands, 
to which his trunk is applied, as well as other characteristic traits 
disclose his identity. 1 Both of these Ganapati figures belong to the 
early Gupta period, and a profitable comparison can be made between 
them and two other seated figures of Ganapati, one two-armed and 
the other four-armed, found among the remains of the Siva temple 
of Bhumara which was erected some time in the sixth centurv A.D. 
The cult connection is clearly emphasised in the latter, which is 
not at all prominent in the other two; unfortunately both these 
figures are very much mutilated. 2 Several early images of Ganesa, 
in slone, metal, and terracotta, were found at Paharpur; one among 
them in grey sandstone of the late Gupta period shows him seated, 
holding in his four hands a rosary, a radish, a trident, and the end 
of a snake coiled round his body like a sacred thread. A mouse, 
the peculiar mount of the god, is crudely drawn on the pedestal and 
his third eye is suggested by the lozenge-shaped mark on the middle 
of his forehead. 3 The attributes in his hands sometimes differ and 
a pot of sweetmeat ( modaka ), a manuscript, a pen, a broken tusk, 
a hatchet, etc. are also seen in his hands. 

1. For the Mathura and Bhitargaon figures of Ganesa, cf. A. Getty, Ganesa. 

and ASI, 1908-9. fig. 2. ' ' 

2. MASI, 16, pis. XU (a), XV(a, b). 3. MASI, 55, pi. XXXII (d). 


450 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


4. Vaishnuva Gods 

With the rise of new gods and goddesses like Durga, Karttika, 
and Ganesa, some older deities lost their prestige. One notable 
example is Sankarshana. He becomes practically identified with 
Balarama, the brother of Krishna, and although he still possesses 
some importance it is only as an avatar a of Vishnu or one of the 
Vyuha forms of Vasude va-Krishna that he begins to figure now. 
With him are grouped Pradyumna and Aniruddha, the son and 
grandson of Krishna, who divide among themselves the gunas of 
Vasudeva. 1 

As the Pancharatra school developed, the emanations began to 
be invested with more intricate and wide functions in the process 
of the evolution of the world of matter and spirit, including the 
various incarnations of God himself. In this scheme room was also 
found for Lakshmi, for she was regarded as the eternal consort of 
Vishnu, and sometimes she had as her co-wives other deities like 
Bhumi and Nila with functions of their own in the plan of creation. 
Thus Baladeva becomes the immanent principle of creation, while 
Vasudeva becomes the transcendent deity—God before creation, to 
quote the language of Hegel. If God in the Purusha Sukta is regard¬ 
ed as having four quarters, then naturally two more quarters had 
to be filled, and probably in this way Pradyumna and Aniruddha 

came to be added to Vasude va and Sahkarshana. Sankarshana is 

• • 

no longer the deity of an ascetic sect, for he is considered to be 
perpetually in a state of inebriety and to be possessed of an irascible 
temper, which lands him in the sin of Brahmanicide. The palmyra 
(tala) may have been chosen for Balarama because of his drunken¬ 
ness; or his inebriety may have come from the palmyra association. 
He continues to be paired with Vasudeva as of old, and a novel 
feature is that in figured representation a female associate makes 
her appearance. She is called Ekanamsa in the Brihat-samhitd and, 
together with the two males, forms the model of the Jagannatha- 
Subhadra-Balarama trio of Puri. But Balarama definitely disappears 
from the religious field, and though in the Paharpur excavations in 
North Bengal the images of Balarama are fair in number, he appears 
not so much as a god as a brother of Krishna, though his four-handed 
figure betokens something of the extraordinary in him down to the 
age of the Pal as. An attempt at symbolism was made later in the 
Vishnudharmottara where Vasudeva, Sankarshana, Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha appear as the four faces of Vishnu and represent his 
bala, jndna, aisvarya and sakti respectively. We are told further 
that the weapons of Balarama, the langala (ploughshare) and the 


1. See above, Vol. II, p. 447 f. 


451 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


musala (pestle), represent respectively kdla (time) and mrityu 
(death). 

Lakshml also now becomes definitely a sectarian goddess though 
the abstract name she bore, namely, Sri, helped the listing of her 
name with many other abstract qualities such as HrI (Modesty), 
Medha (Talent), Dhriti (Patience), Pushti (Sustenance or Growth), 
Kshanti (Forgiveness), Lajja (Bashfulness), Klrti (Fame), Bhuti 
(Prosperity), Rati (Love), etc. This is not a new trait, for both in 
the Vedas and in the epics deified abstractions are quite common. 
The Brahmanic use of abstractions for designating gods and demons, 
however, did not go to the same length as the Zoroastrian, and Sri 
never became so abstract as did Sraddha, for instance, or the others 
mentioned above. Her role as the guardian angel of kings ( raja - 
lakshnvi) and cities ( nagaralakshml ) and the Gajalakshml (or 
Kamala) motif continued, as is evident from the seals of Bhita 
and Basarh excavations, Indo-Scythian ( Pakhalavadi-devata ) and 
early imperial Gupta coins. 

The tendency to regard some of the goddesses as indispensable 
consorts of the major gods led to the multiple matrimonial alliances 
of Sri and of Sarasvatl. As noted above 1 Sri and Lakshml (regarded 
as two personalities) appear in the Vajasaneyi Samhita as the two 
wives of Aditya. Later tradition made Sri and Mahasveta the two 
wives of Surya, one on either side of the Sun image. This was fol¬ 
lowed by the still later conception in North India (especially Bengal) 
of Lakshml and Sarasvatl as the two wives of Vishnu, placed on 
the two sides of Vishnu image. Identification of Lakshml with 
Durga, Amba, Devi or Ekanamsa is also not unknown. Even Skanda’s 
wife Devasena has Lakshml as one of her names, and Kubera, too, 
claimed her as wife at a later time. Popular belief, however, made 
her the wife of Vishnu, and in some Puranas his creative activity; 
and in the Vishnudharmottdra it is mentioned that gifts dedicated 
to Lakshml should be given only to one well versed in the Pancha- 
ratra doctrine. Her figure appears in the lintels of Vishnu temples 
at Badami and Aihole, and latterly she degenerates into a parivdra- 
dcvatd in the temple of Brahma as Visvakarma. If she has not lost 
her hold on the veneration of men, it is because she represents the 
docile type of womanhood intensely attached to the husband and 
devoted to his service, and also because she is looked upon as the 
goddess of wealth in the pursuit of which all sects are equally 
interested. 


1. Vol. II, p. 470. 


-152 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


9 5. Miscellaneous Deities 

Numerous sculptures of miscellaneous divinities, many of them 
loosely associated with Brahmanical cults, have been found in 
different parts of India. Some of them are undoubtedly regional 
while others are of an all-India character. The Dikpalas, who belong 
to the latter group, are the guardians of the four major and four 
minor quarters. They are, with some variations in location, Indra, 
the lord of the east, Yama, of the south, Varuna, of the west, Kubera, 
of the north, Agni, of the south-east, Nirriti, of the south-west, Vayu, 
of the north-west, and Isana of the north-east. A glance at the 
names will prove that with the exception of two, viz. Kubera and 
Isana who are mentioned only in the latest section of the Vedic 
literature,' all the others were prominent Vedic deities who were 
highly honoured by the Vedic seers. But now they are relegated 
to a much inferior place in the Hindu pantheon on acount of the 
rise to importance of the various sectarian gods and goddesses. 
Earliest sculptured representations of Indra or Sakra are to be 
found in Buddhist monuments of Central India, north-western 
Deccan, and the extreme north-west of India. A garlanded royal 
figure with a lotus in his hand, riding on a huge elephant and attend¬ 
ed by a standard-bearer, carved on the verandah of the Bhaja 
monastery, belongs to the early Sunga period and is regarded by 
most scholars as one of the earliest representations of Indra. The 
Hellenistic Indras of Gandhara region are characterised by a pecu¬ 
liar basket-like headdress (probably a foreign adaptation of the 
Indian kirita-makuta) and a peculiar type of thunderbolt in one of 
his hands. 1 Indra’s prominent iconographic traits are the thunder¬ 
bolt in his hand and his elephant mount; another of his noticeable 
features, the third eye placed sidewise in the centre of his forehead, 
is mentioned in the Brihat-samhita and Vishnudharmottarapurana. 
Relief No. 29 in coarse grey sandstone among the sculptures in the 
basement of the main mound at Paharpur is that of Indra with his 
mount and peculiarly placed third eye. Agni, Yama or Varuna, 
and Kubera also can be recognised among the other basement sculp¬ 
tures of the same mound; they are shown with their respective ipdno- 
graphic features which changed very little in the subsequent period. 2 
In many of the well-preserved temples, either Vaishnava or &aiva, 
in different parts of India, the figures of the Ashta-Dikpalas are found 
carved on various parts of the outside walls. 


1. For the Bhaja relief, cf. HIIA, pi. VIII. Johnston, however, suggests that the 
figure stands for Mara riding on his elephant Girimekhala ( JISOA , VTI, pp. 1-7). 
For the Hellenistic Sakra or Indra, cf. Grunwedel and Burgess, Buddhist Art, 
figs. 40, 9. 

2; HBR, I, pp. 462-64 and plates. 


458 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


It will not be possible to refer even briefly to the innumerable 
images of other deities which were connected in different ways with 
the Brahmanic pantheon. Many of these gods and goddesses were 
recruited from the folk-cults, and though they were described as 
demi-gods or Vyantara-devatas from the orthodox point of view, 
their images were originally not much less venerated by a large 
section of the Indians. The Yakshas, Nagas, Gandharvas, Vidya- 
dharas, Apsarases, etc. had their individual iconic forms, and these 
had various architectural uses in the sense that they were displayed 
in different parts of the religious shrines. The separate images of 
the Yakshas and the Nagas were made in pre-Christian or early 
post-Christian periods, and these were at first undoubtedly principal 
cult-objects of a certain class of Indians; but like many of the mem¬ 
bers of the orthodox Vedic pantheon they were gradually subordi¬ 
nated to the chief sectarian gods and goddesses. The Yakshas were 
used as Dvarapalas or gate-keepers in Saiva shrines; the Nagas singly 
or in couples served as decorative devices in many temples, and one 
Naga in particular served as the couch of the cosmic god Narayana; 
the Gandharvas, the Vidyadharas, the Apsarases, etc. were used as 
graceful ornaments on the prabhdvall of the principal cult images. 
The figures of the river goddesses Gahga and Yamuna were carved 
at first on the topmost part of the door jambs of the Gupta temples 
and were shown subsequently in their lower parts. Individual 
images of them, however, were not unknown, and reference may be 
made to the Paharpur basement relief of Yamuna and the striking 
sculptures of Ganga from Isvaripur and Deopara. 1 Separate sculp¬ 
tures of Manasa, the snake goddess with a child in her lap and 
shaded by a canopy of snake-hoods, of the uncouth goddess Jyeshtba 
with her bovine sons and crow banner, of the recumbent mother- 
goddess with a suckling baby by her side, and the host of the divine 
on-lookers on the top of the relief, etc. have been found in different 
parts of India, and many of them can be distinctly described as regio¬ 
nal in character. The Hindus took a great deal of pleasure in giving 
concrete shapes to the objects of their worship, and their love of 
iconism was so deep-rooted that they even anthropomorphised the 
emblems and attributes in the hands of their divinities. But to 
characterise this love of concrete images in their religious lives as 
pure and unmitigated idolatry would be a gross mistake. The Brah- 
manical Hindus as well as their Buddhist and Jain brethren only 
made the highest use of rational symbolism in making sensible re¬ 
presentations of their gods and goddesses. 


1. Ibid, pp. 461-62 and plates. 


454 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


G. NEW RELIGIOUS COMMUNITIES FROM 
WESTERN COUNTRIES 

One of the indirect results of India’s intimate intercourse with 
the West is the migration of different religious communities from 
this region to India. These are distinguished from various other 
foreign immigrants by the fact, that they have throughout maintained i 
their separate entities, whereas the others have been merged into 
Indian population without leaving any trace of their separate exis¬ 
tence. Before the end of the eighth century A.D., no less than three 
such important communities settled in India, viz . the Syriac Chris¬ 
tians, Muslims, and Parsis. The Parsis probably did not settle in 
large numbers till after the period covered by this volume. But the 
other two formed important elements in Indian population before 
A.D. 750. A short history of their early settlements will be dealt 
with in this volume, reserving for the next a detailed treatment of 
the Parsis. 

1. Muslims 

A new religious element was introduced in India during the 
period under review. This was Islam which, though preached by 
the Prophet Muhammad as early as A.D. 610, did not take a deep 
root in the soil of Arabia till A.D. 630. Two special features distin¬ 
guished the early history of this religion from that of others known 
in history. Firstly, the militant character of the Prophet himself, 
who, unlike the founder of any other religion, had to engage in several 
military campaigns against his own people before they would accept 
his faith; and secondly, his extreme intolerance of the'existing reli¬ 
gion. After the final conquest of Mecca, in A.D. 630, he ‘entered its 
great sanctuary and smashed its many idols said to have numbered 
three hundred and sixty exclaiming: ‘Truth hath come, and falsehood 
hath vanished! ?1 The militant character of Islam and its extreme 
intolerance of other religions, specially those which involved worship 
of images, marked its subsequent history at every step, and parti¬ 
cularly in India. 

It is beyond the scope of the present work to discuss the causes 
of the various wars waged by the Caliphs—as the successors of the 
Prophet were called-—or to examine their justification or expediency. 
But the fact remains that the spread of Islam almost invariably follow¬ 
ed in the wake of military victories, at least during the early centuries 
of its history. So far as historical evidence goes, Islam got a definite 
footing only in those parts of Asia, Africa, and Europe, which had 
first been politically conquered by the army of the Caliphs, and not 

1. P. K. Hitti, History of the Arabs , p. 118. 

455 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


beyond that limit. This area was of course quite large, but the point 
to be noted is that unlike every other religion, whose history is known 
to us, the field of early missionary enterprise of Islam was almost co¬ 
extensive with its political domains, acquired by military force. It 
is not the gunboats that followed the missionary, but the missionaries 
that followed the gunboats. There ns no real ground to suppose that 
India formed an exception to the rule. 1 

As has already been shown above, there was maritime inter¬ 
course from very early period between India and the Western World, 
including Arabia and Persia, and we have definite evidence that the 
relation continued even after the spread of Islam in those countries. 
It is therefore highly probable that Muslim traders, who frequented 
the coastal regions, near the important ports, lived there for long or 
short periods, and some of them might even have settled there on 
more or less permanent basis. 2 But there is no reliable evidence 
to show, as has been maintained by some, that they settled in Malabar 
coast in large numbers in the seventh century A.D. Such a theory 
is mainly based on the traditions current among the Moplahs, 
Navayats, and Labbes of South India, 3 but these are on a par with 


1. Attempts have been made by Mr. M. A. Ghani (POC, X, 403) to show that 
the Muslims came to India as early as A.D. 637 and settled in large numbers 
‘not as fighters but as tradesmen and missionaries’, that the Indians were so 
profoundly impressed with “the purity of their living, their zeal for the new 
faith and* the principle of world-wide brotherhood,” that they eagerly em¬ 
braced the new faith in large numbers, about fifty thousand being converted 
each year. We shall refer later to the impression that was produced by Islam 
on . h^ians after the conquest of Sindh in A.D. 712, and we have got ample 
evidence for coming to a definite conclusion on this point. As to the period 
preceding that event, Mr. M. A. Ghani has drawn a rosy picture of the early 
Muslim Colonies in India, and their happy relations with the Indians. Un¬ 
fortunately, the principal authority on which he relies is Buztirg bin 
Shahriyar’s Aja’ib ul Hind, a book composed in the tenth century A. D. and 
described in the Encyclopedia of Islam as ‘mere sailor’s tales with fantastic 
exaggerations, though there may be some elements of truth’. An account 
based on such a work does not deserve serious consideration. And some of 
the anecdotes relied upon by Mr. Ghani definitely belong to a much later 
period. 

2. The ship sailing from Ceylon with presents for Hajjaj (above, p. 169) 
contained some Muslim girls, daughters of merchants who died there 
(Bal&dhuri, Chach-nama I. 69-70). 

3. Traditional accounts of the origin of Moplahs differ materially from one another. 
Some of them, said to have settled on the Western coast in the seventh century 
are described as descendants of Hashem, expelled bv the Prophet from Arabia’ 
A Muslim merchant named Malik Medina, accompanied by some priests, is 
said to nave settled in or near Mangalore. A story is current among the 
Navayats that their ancestors fled from the Persian Gulf about the close of 
T e seventh century A.D. to escape the cruelty of a governor of Iran. Tuhfat- 
u^-Miijahidin, a work composed in the sixteenth century A.D.. preserves the 
legend of a king of Cranganore, who adopted Islam, proceeded to Arabia 

a ? < \/r Q1 i e< u ^ e f e - R 1S saic * tna1: after his death Islam was spread in all parts 
of Malabar, in the year 200 of the Hajira, i.e. ninth century AD (Tr bv 

M. J. Rowlandson p 47). These are all very late traditions and cannot in 
any case, be regarded as evidence for large Muslim settlements in Malabar 
in the seventh century, as contended by some (Sturrock South Kanara 
Madras District Manuals, pp. 180-81; Tara Chand, Influence of Islam on Indian 

450 





RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


similar traditions current among Christians in the same region which 
have been rejected by almost all students of history. 

It is not till the beginning of the eighth century A.D. that we 
come across some evidence of the settlement of a large number of 
Muslims in Sindh. It is said in Chach-ndma that king Dahar had 
a body of 500 Arab troops in his service. They were Muslims and 
are said to have fled to India to evade punishment by the Caliph. * 1 
Though this statement in Chach-ndma cannot be regarded as true 
without corroborative evidence, still it may be provisionally accepted, 
and may serve as evidence of Muslim settlements in India prdper. 

The defeat of Dahar and the conquest of Sindh by Muhammad- 
ibn-Qasim in A.D. 712, to which reference has been made above, 2 
opened the floodgates of Muslim colonisation in this remote corner 
of India. As we have no detailed contemporary history of the Muslim 
conquest of Sindh wb cannot draw any definite picture of this first 
Muslim settlement in India on a large scale. But the isolated facts 
mentioned in Al-Baladhuri’s account and the Chach-ndma enable us 
to form a general idea of its nature. 3 

It may be reasonably inferred from these accounts that even 
if there were Muslim settlers in Sindh at the beginning of the eighth 
century A.D., th^V formed quite a negligible factor. Throughout 
the course of Muhammad-ibn-Qasim’s military campaigns from one 
end of Sindh to another, there is no reference to any Muslim element 
in the population, though there are various references to'individuals 
and communities, both Buddhist and Brahmanical, who helped the 
invader. It is equally clear from the same accounts that it was a 
deliberate policy of the conquerors to make Islam a dominant force 


Culture , p. 32). Francis Day, who has recorded some of these traditions current 
in Malabar and studied the history of the Moplahs, is of opinion that the 
“Muhammadans obtained no great footing until the ninth century AD.*’ ( The 

Land of the Perumals, p. 365). 

1. Chach-ndma, X, 55-56. It is interesting to note that this body of Arab troops, 
though in regular pay of Dahar, refused to fight on his behalf against their 
co-religionists (Ibid, 127). Dahar’s secretary, Wazil (Ibid, 71), is also re¬ 
garded by some as a Muslim (IHQ, XVI. 597), but this is by no means certain. 
It has been suggested also that Amir Ali-ud-Dowla, appointed by Chach 
governor of the fort of Sikka, according to a‘ passage in Chach-ndma, as trans¬ 
lated by Elliot (HIED, I. 142), was also a Muslim. But the chronology followed 
in this book makes Chach ascend the throne 24 years before Hijira, and it is 
not likely that any Muslim took service under him. Besides, according to the 
more reliable translation of the same passage by Fredunbeg (I. 28) “Chach 
appointed the greatest of the nobles of the State,” and not a person named 
Amir Ali-ud-Dowla, “to be temporarily in charge of the fort of Sikka.” 

2. See pp. 170-2. 

3. For these and other authorities see Arab Invasion of India, Ch. II, by R. C. 
Majumdar. Baladhuri’s book, composed in the ninth century A.D., is written 
as an historical chronicle and may be regarded as fairly reliable. The 
Chach-ndma, in its present form, is a work of twelfth century. It gives a 
more detailed count of Sindh, but is less reliable. I have used the translation 
of Baladhuri, Vol. II, by F. F. Murgotten. 


457 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


in Sindh both by settlements and local conversion. Both these pro¬ 
cesses are in evidence from the very beginning. It is recorded by 
Baladhuri 1 that after the capture of Debal, Muhammad marked out 
a quarter for the Muslims, built a mosque, and settled four thousand 
colonists there. 

The conversion of the people of Sindh to Islam was mainly due 
to the policy of humiliation and terrorisation, deliberately adopted 
by the Muslim conquerors towards the non-Muslims, combined with 
the inducements offered to them to better their social status and 
material prospects in life by the adoption of the new faith. We 
have no evidence that the conquered people of Sindh were, at any 
stage, offered the alternatives of ‘sword 5 or the 'Quran’, but a letter 
from Hajjaj to Muhammad, as reported in the Chach-nama , 
undoubtedly breathes the same spirit. On receipt of the report of 
Muhammad’s great victory at Raor, Hajjaj wrote to him as follows:— 
“The great God says in the Quran: ‘O true believers, when you 
encounter the unbelievers, strike off their heads.’ The above com¬ 
mand of the Great God is a great command and must be respected 
and followed. You should not be so fond of showing mercy, as to 
nullify the virtue of the act. Henceforth grant pardon to no one 
of the enemy and spare none of them, or else all will consider you 
a weak-minded man.” 

Ai-Baladhuri and Chach-nama also give us an idea of the nature 
of mercy shown by Muhammad towards the infidels, for which he 
was so strongly rebuked by Hajjaj. After Ills men had scaled the 
walls of the fort of Debal, the besieged Indians opened the gates 
and asked for mercy, Muhammad replied that he had no orders to 
spare anyone in the town, and so. no quarter was given, and for 
three days the inhabitants were ruthlessly slaughtered. The local 
temple was defiled and “700 beautiful females, who had sought for 
shelter there, were all captured.” The same tragedy was enacted 
after the capture of Raor. Muhammad massacred 8000 fighting men 
who were found in the fort, and their followers and dependents, 
as well as their women and children, were taken prisoners. 2 * * Sixty 
thousand slaves, including 30 young ladies of royal blood, were sent 
to Hajjaj together with the head of Dahar. We can now well under¬ 
stand why the capture of a fort by the Muslim forces was followed 
by the terrible jauhar ceremony (in which the females threw them¬ 
selves in fire kindled by themselves), the earliest recorded instance 

<tf '7 

— “ 

2. Tfie accounts of Chah-namn about the massacre perpetrated by Muhammad 

are corroborated by Baladhuri. There a^e other instances than the two given 

above. The numbers massacred at Erahmanabad are put down as varying from 
6,000 to 26,000. According to Chah-nama (I. 164) Muhammad “came to the 
place of execution and in his presence ordered all the men belonging to the 

military classes to be beheaded with swords.” 

458 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of which is found in the Chach-rmma J It is interesting to note that, 
according to the same authority, the Muslim prisoners, both male 
and female, in Sindh, themselves reported to Muhammad that they 
had received very good treatment while they were in prison. On 
hearing this account Muhammad appointed to a high office the man 
who was in charge of the prisoners, of course, after he agreed to 
adopt the Islamic faith. 2 Further, we are told that when the Hindus 
of Sindan successfully rebelled against their Muslim ruler, they 
killed him, but left ‘its mosque for the Muslims to assemble in and 
pray/s The Muslim policy of defilement of temples and cruelty to 
prisoners cannot, therefore, be condoned as prevalent practice of the 
time in India. * 4 

A perusal of the available accounts thus leaves no doubt that 
it was perhaps not due to any humanitarian feeling that Muhammad 
desisted from carrying into effect the general policy of Islam and 
the order of Hajjaj by massacring all the infidels in Sindh. Expe¬ 
diency and practical considerations probably stood in the v/ay of 
executing the Islamic law in letter, but he followed the spirit of it. 
This policy is enunciated in detail in connection with the conquest 
of Brahmanabad. As a clear statement of the Islamic doctrine for 
the treatment of conquered peoples, which formed the basis of the 
policy pursued by the Muslim conquerors in India, the passage may 
be reproduced in extenso. After stating how some Brahman as were 
offered pardon by Muhammad-ibn-Qasim on condition that they find 
out the queen of Dahar and produce her before him, the author of 
Chach-nama continues: 

“As for the rest of the people, a tribute was fixed on them under 
the rules laid down by the holy Prophet of God (may the blessings 
of God be on him and his descendants). He who received the 
honour of Islam and became a convert was exempt from slavery 
as well as tribute and v/as not injured. Those, however, who did 
not accept the true faith were compelled to pay the fixed tribute 
( jizia ). These latter were divided by him into three classes. The 
first and highest class had to pay 48 dirams of silver in weight per 
head. The second, or the middle class, had to pay 24 dirams in 
weight, and the third, or the lowest class, had to pay 12 dirams in 
weight only. He then dismissed them with the following words: “I 
let you go this day. Those among you who become Mussalmans and 
come within the fold of Islam shall have their tribute remitted, but 
those who are still inclined to be of their own faith, must put up 
with injuries ( gazand ) and tribute (jizia) to retain the religion of 

1. Chach-iiama, I. 154, 163. 2. Ibid, 84-5, also p. 157. 3. Baladhuri, II. 233. 

4. Some Christian rulers in Europe are said to have been guilty of equal or even 
greater cruelties towards the people of other faiths. 

459 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


their fathers and grandfathers.” Thereupon some resolved to live 
in their native land, but others took to flight in order to maintain 
the faith of their ancestors, and their horses, domestics and other 
property were taken away from them.” 1 

An intriguing question arose in respect of the right of the 
Hindus to maintain and construct their temples and carry on wor¬ 
ship as before. Muhammad had begun the practice of building 
mosques in place of temples. 2 But after the conquest of the whole 
of Sindh was over, this question was placed before him by the priests 
of temples. They represented that ‘the temples were lying desolate 
and in ruins’, and asked for ‘permission to visit the temples and to 
worship what they worshipped before.’ Muhammad referred the 
matter to Hajjaj, whose decision in this matter showed a more 
tolerant spirit than that displayed in his previous letters. “Because 
after they have become zimmis (protected subjects) we have no 
right whatever to interfere with their lives or their property. Do, 
therefore, permit them to build the temples of those they worship. 
No one is prohibited from or punished for following his own religion, 
and let no one prevent them from doing so, so that they may live 
happy in their own homes.” 3 

In pursuance of the general policy Muhammad wrote letters to 
the rulers calling upon them all to surrender and accept the faith 
of Islam, 4 and appointed to high offices those who adopted the new 
religion. 6 This policy was continued even after the death of Mu¬ 
hammad. Calip ‘Umar II (A.D. 717-720) wrote to the kings of 
Sindh, inviting them to become Muslims and agreeing to let them 
continue on their thrones and have the same rights and privileges 
as the Muslims. Many kings including even Jaisimha, the son of 
Dahar, accepted Islam and adopted Arab names. 6 That the new 
faith was adopted more for material good than from their conviction, 
is shown by the fact that within a few years of his conversion 
Jaisimha quarrelled with the governor of Sindh, apostatised, and 
declared war against him. 7 

The same reason that induced the ruling and official classes to 
accept Islam, must have operated on a larger scale in the case of 
the masses of people. But the new faith which they were forced 
or induced to accept sat very lightly on them. Towards the close 
of the Umayyad dynasty, when the Muslim authority was consider¬ 
ably weakened and Indian rulers vigorously opposed the Muslim 
intrusion, “the people of al-Hind (i.e. India) apostatised with the 

1. Chach-nama I. 164-5. 3. Ibid. I. 168-9. 6. HIED. I. 440. 

2. Ibid , I. 105. 4, Ibid, I. 157. 7. Ibid. I. 441. 

5. Ibid, I. 85, 158. 

4 GO 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


exception of the inhabitants of Kassah.” 1 Thus by A.D. 750 Islam 
lost its footing in Sindh. 

The history of the Muslims in Sindh in the first half of the 
eighth century A.D. is of more than passing interest. In the first 
place, it shows the very slow progress of Islam in India as compared 
to its career in other countries. Secondly, it demonstrates the truth 
of the general rule, noted above, that the missionary success of Islam 
was almost entirely dependent upon its military success. Thirdly, 
it shows how the early conversions of Indians on a large scale pro¬ 
ceeded less from choice than from practical necessity, and conse¬ 
quently proves how little the creed of Islam really touched the mind 
and heart of the people. If there was an almost wholesale apostasy 
on the part of the people of Sindh as soon as the Muslim authority 
was weakened, it is difficult to believe that Islam really made any 
impression upon the Ideal people in this or any other part of India. 

The attitude of the Muslim conqueror of Sindh towards its 
people serves as a general pattern of Muslim policy towards the 
subject Hindus in subsequent ages. Something no doubt depended 
upon individual rulers; some of them adopted a more liberal, others 
a more cruel and intolerant attitude. But on the whole the frame¬ 
work remained intact, for it was based on the fundamental princi¬ 
ples of Islamic theocracy. It recognised only one faith, one people, 
and one supreme authority, acting as the head of a religious trust. 
The Hindus, being infidels or non-believers, could not claim the full 
right of citizens. At the very best, they could be tolerated as zimmis, 
an insulting title which connoted politcal inferiorty and a low status 
of helplessness, like a minor under a guardian. 

The Islamic State regarded all non-Muslims as its enemies, to 
curb whose growth in power and number was conceived to be its 
main interest. The ideal preached by even high officials was to ex¬ 
terminate them totally, 2 but in actual practice they seem to have 
followed an alternative laid down in the Quran 3 which calls 
upon the Muslims to fight the unbelievers till they pay jizia with 
due humility. 4 This was the tax which the Hindus had to pay 
for permission to live in their ancestral homes under a Muslim ruler. 

1. Balddhuri, II. 228. 

2. This ideal was preached by Hajjaj to Muhammad in his letter quoted above. 
The relevant passage in the Quran (IX. 5) runs thus: “And when the sacred 
months are passed, kill those who join other gods with God wherever ye shall 
find them.” (Transl. by J. M. Rodwell. Everyman’s Library Edition, p. 471). 

3. IX. 29. 

4. “Make war upon such of those-as believe not in God.until they pay 

tribute out of hand, and they be humbled” (Ibid, p. 473). There are slight 
differences in the interpretation of the last part, but the general meaning 
is quite clear (Ibid, fn. 6 and 7). This passage in the Quran, and the statement 
of Muhammad-ibn-Qasim, quoted above, do not support the view that the 


461 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


It will be seen from what has been stated above that Muhammad- 
ibn~Qasim followed the main principles of Islamic theocracy in his 
dealings with the Hindus. The one redeeming feature of his policy 
was the right given to the Hindus to worship freely at their temples. 
This is all the more noteworthy as very scant regard was paid to it 
by many Muslim rulers of India in later ages. 

2. Christian Settlements 

It has already been noted above, * 1 that Christian missionaries 
visited India and small Christian communities were established there, 
probably as early as the second century A.D. It has also been sug¬ 
gested on the authority of the Romance History of Alexander that 
the Christian church was firmly established in South India during 
the next two centuries. 2 But our knowledge of all these rests upon 
very vague and casual evidence, whose authenticity is often very 
doubtful. In any case, we have no knowledge of the location of 
these communities and their nature and activities. 

The first definite information about the Christian communities 
in India and Ceylon is furnished by Cosmas Indicopleustes, to w^hom 
reference has been made above, 3 in the two following passages:— 

1. “Even in Tabrobane (i.e. Ceylon), an island in Further 
India, where the Indian sea is, there is a Church of Christians, with 
clergy and a body of believers, but I know not whether there be 
any Christians in the parts beyond it. In the country called Male 
(Malabar), where the pepper grows, there is also a Church, and at 
another place called Calliana, there is moreover a bishop, wdio is 
appointed from Persia.” 4 

2. “The island (Ceylon) has also a Church of Persian Christians 
who have settled there, and a Presbyter who is appointed from Persia, 
and a Deacon and a complete ecclesiastical ritual. But the natives 
and their kings are heathens.” 5 

jizia was a kind of tax for exemption from military service (cf. Syed Ameer 
Ali— History of the Saracens (1951), p. 33). On this point cf. Sir Jadu Nath 
Sarkaks article in the Special Puja issue of the Hindusthan Standard (1950). 

1. Vol. II, p. 628. 

2. This statement is based on a little pamphlet of the fifth century A.D. on the 
Nations of India included in the Romance History of Alexander of the Pscudo- 
Kallisthenes. The writer mentions having visited Southern India. There he 
was the guest of Moses, Bishop of Adule (Rawlinson, Intercourse between 
India and the Western World, p. 147). According to MeCrindle the pamphlet 
belongs to “the Lausiac Histories of Palladius who wrote about 420 A.D.” 
(Ancient India , p. 178). If we accept tills date we can hardly accept Rawlinson’s 
view that the Bishop was a Nestorian Prelate. 

3. See p. 86. 

4. The Christian Topography of Cosmas, an Egyptian monk, translated by J. W 
MeCrindle (1897), pp. 118-19. The words within brackets are not in the original 
but are added by way of explanation. 

5. Ibid, p. 365. 


462 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


It is quite clear from the above statements that “the constitu¬ 
ency as well as the constitution of the Church both in Ceylon and on 
the west coast of Southern India was Persian”, and it appears that 
“neither had yet begun to associate the natives of the country in 
Church fellowship.” 1 In fact, the Church of Ceylon would seem 
never to have done so, and probably for that reason, its existence was 
short-lived. The Church of Malabar, on the other hand, -largely 
cultivated the fellowship of the local people, and this probably 
accounts for its permanence, though other causes also might have 
been at work. 2 

Cosmas’ statement reflects the position of Christianity in India 
during the second quarter of the sixth century A.D. when his book 
was written. The Christian community was evidently of very little 
importance in Indian society, and there is no reason to suppose that 
it enjoyed greater p'ower and prestige at any time before him. Re¬ 
ference may be made in this connection to some facts from which 
conclusions to the contrary have been drawn by many scholars. 

The Council of Nicaea, held in A.D. 325, was attended by three 
hundred Bishops representing all the dioceses of the Christian world. 
One of them, who is not otherwise known, affixed his signature as 
‘John the Bishojb of Persia and Great India'. The adjective ‘great’ 
more likely applies to the country rather than to the Church in it, 
and we need not draw any conclusion from it beyond the probable 
existence of Christain communities on the we stern borderlands of 
India. 3 The stories of the visit of Theophilus and Frumentius to 
India in the fourth century A.D. are hardly credible, and they had 
probably nothing to do with India, 4 

It is evident that the Christians of the western coast of India 
in the sixth century A.D. were Nestorians, under the Church of 
Persia. The existence of this Nestorian community at Mylapore, 
on the Coromandel coast, has been inferred from the cross which 
was discovered on St. Thomas’s Mount in 1547. It has a Pehlevi 
Inscription which has been assigned to the seventh or eighth century 
A.D. The purport of the inscription is not quite clear, but its general 
import has been regarded by some as characteristic of Indian Nes- 

1. G. M. Rae, The Syrian Church in India, p. 117. 

2. Ibid. 

3. This point has been fully discusser! by Mr, Rae (Ibid, pp. 79 fT.). 

4. Ibid. Ch. VII. The Malabar tradition, particularly the chronograms like 
<c rauravam devardpjam”, “Bhuvibhaga”, or <( Cherar,idn desam vrapa", repre¬ 
senting respectively the dates A.D. 317, 344 and 343 for some important events 
connected, with Christianity in South India, do not deserve serious consideration 
in a sober history. The same thing may be said of Travancorc traditions about 
the immigration of Christians at Quilon in A.D. 293. For some of these tra¬ 
ditions and chronograms, cf. 1C, XII. 19. 


4G3 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 

torianisrn. 1 Whatever we may think of this, the discovery of this 
cross and of similar ones at Kottayam in north Travancore shows 
that before the close of the eighth century A.D. Christian settlements 
were spread along the eastern as well as the western coast of South 
Indian Peninsula. 

The influx of fresh Christian colonies in Malabar from Baghdad, 
Nineveh and Jerusalem, is hinted at in a story widely current in this 
region. These immigrants are said to have arrived in the company 
of merchant Thomas in A.D. 745. This Thomas of Cana (Kanaye 
Thomas) seems to have made a deep impression upon the local 
people, so much so that some have even suggested that the legend 
of St. Thomas was due to a confusion with this Thomas. But the 
historical value of the story is uncertain, and it would be unreason¬ 
able to base any important conclusions on it. 2 

The Importance of the Christian community in Malabar in the 
eighth century A.D. has been sought to be proved by the Kottayam 
plate of Vira-Raghava-Chakravartin, which is now in the possession 
of the Syrian Christians at Kottayam, in Travancore. According to 
previous writers “it is dated in A.D. 774 and records a grant made 
by king Vira-Raghava-Chakravartin to Iravi Corttan of Cranganore, 
making over to him, as representative head of the Christian com¬ 
munity there, the little principality of Manigramam.’’ 3 But Mr. 
Venkayya, 4 who edited the Plate, refers it to the fourteenth century 
A.D., and adds that “there is nothing Christian in the document, 
except its possession by the present owners.” He further points out 
that Manigramam was a trading corporation and not the name of a 
principality. This plate therefore does not prove anything about 
the Christian community of Malabar. No more importance, from this 
point of view, attaches to the other Kottayam Plate of Sthanu Ravi, 
which Burnell placed somewhat later. 

H. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 

The development of philosophy has been traced already and 
also partly dealt with in connection with Buddhism, Jainism, 

1. Rae (op. cit 121) bases this inference on Burnell’s translation (L4, III. 308-16) 
which runs as follows: “In punishment by the Cross (was) the suffering of 
this One: He who is the true Christ, and God above, and Guide ever pure.” 
Mr. T. K. Joseph of Travancore, however informs me that Dr. W. B. Henning, 
Professor of Cambridge, offered the following translation in a letter dated 
September 6, 1948: 

“My Lord Christ, have mercy upon Afras, son of Chaharbukht, son of Giwargis 
who arranged this (or who set it up).” According to this translation, the in¬ 
ference of Rae would appear to be baseless. 

2. For this and similar other stories, cf. M. Rae, op. cit. (pp. 162 ff). 

3. Ibid , p, 155. 

4 ' S’ l Y- 2 ?^ date A-D ' 774 wns onginaWy suggested by Burnell (IA, I. 229) 
Cf. also I A, XX. 289: XXII. 139. 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Vaishnavism and &aivism. Important writers on Philosophy have 
also been referred to in Chapter XV. Here we propose to deal with 
the six orthodox systems of philosophy forming three distinct pairs, 
the beginnings of which have been discussed above . 1 

I-II. Nyaya-Vaiseshika 

Whether these two systems began together in a mass of inchoate 
thinking, or started independently of each other, has been a matter 
of dispute among scholars. It is just possible that the Vaiseshika 
came into existence much earlier than the Nyaya. Prof. S. N. Das 
Gupta is inclined to think that it was originally a philosophy of the 
Mimdmsd type meant to buttress the validity of the Vedas with a 
metaphysical bulwark. Whether the two systems were different in 
origin or not, their similarities are so prominent that tradition has 
always regarded them as a conjoint pair. 

As distinguished from the heterodox systems, they had a com¬ 
mon theory about the sources of knowledge (the Vedas being one 
such source), and believed in soul, God, and the reality of the out¬ 
side world. 

The world was a conglomeration of finite things possessing 
different qualities. The things could be divided into smaller and 
smaller parts, ending in atoms or indivisible constituents of things. 
The atoms are of different kinds according to the element of which 
they are constituents. The elements are earth, water, fire and air. 
The world spreads out in space and in series of events which occupy 
time. Space and time are divisible in thought but not into atoms. 

The things of the world are by themselves individual; each is 
distinguishable from another by a quality specially its own, which 
is called visesha. But they also form classes and have qualities 
common to them all called samanya. The distinction between one 
class and another, like that between one individual and another, 
is also a visesha , or a specific quality. 

In the world of things, changes also take place, one event fol¬ 
lowing another. This means there is causation. And causation im¬ 
plies that something new is brought into existence. The things, their 
qualities, and their relations in time and space are all real, and these 
make up the world. 

In this world which is knowable, there is a self that knows. 
They talk of suffering and salvation. But how can there be suffering 
if there be no sufferer, and how can there be salvation if there be 
no soul to be saved? There is a soul that knows and suffers and 
hopes to be saved from the ills of life, 

l. Vol. II, pp. 475 ff. 


465 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


According to this philosophy, not only is there a world that 
can be known and a soul that knows and experiences it, but there 
is also a God who made it out of the eternally existing atoms. The 
existence of God has to be inferred as the cause of the Universe. 
This God not only created the universe, but He also created the 
Vedas which are thus an infallible source of knowledge. It was God 
who gave to words the power to mean what they mean. 

The Nydya philosophy laid special stress on its theory of 
knowledge, so much so that in later times, in Bihar and Bengal, this 
became the chief, if not the exclusive, pre-occupation of the thinkers 
of the school. As result of this emphasis on the sources of know¬ 
ledge, this school discovered the syllogism as the method of infer¬ 
ence. In Europe, the first fore-shadowings of the syllogism appear 
in the discourses of Socrates, and it took final shape in the philosophy 
of Aristotle. It mu£t be said to the credit of the Indian thinkers that 
they discovered the syllogism perhaps earlier than the Greeks and, 
therefore, independently of them. The Indian syllogism consists of 
five propositions whereas the Greek contains three. The classical 
example of the Indian syllogism is: 

“There is fire in yonder mountain; for, there is smoke in it; 
wherever there is smoke, there is fire, as in the kitchen; there 
is smoke in the mountain; therefore, there must be fire in it.” 

This syllogism was not an unaided discovery of the orthodox 
thinkers. The Jain and Buddhist thinkers also wrote much on 
logic and contributed to its development. 

The syllogism is the basis of inference. Besides inference, there 
were three other sources of knowledge according to this school. 
These were perception ( pratyaksha ), analogy or comparison (upa- 
mana), and authority (sahda), especially of the Vedas. The discus¬ 
sion of these sources of knowledge gave rise to a profuse literature. 

III-IV. Sdnkhya-Yoga 

This pair of systems supplement each other. The Sankhya sup¬ 
plies the metaphysics whereas the Yoga delineates the psychologi¬ 
cal discipline by which the results contemplated by the philosophy 
may be actually achieved. The Sankhya starts with the premise 
that life is subject to three kinds of evil and suffering. The first 
kind of evil is due to man's own physical and mental disorders, 
diseases and agonies. The second kind of evil to which man is sub¬ 
ject arises from the action of other animals; from a mosquito-bite 
to an attack by a tiger, from a theft in the house to slander in the 
streets, there are so many ways in which animals and other men 
can cause pain and suffering to us. There is a third kind of evil also, 


466 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


produced by the elements, fire, wind, and water. A fire may burn 
down your house and property, a storm may blow away your belong¬ 
ings, and a flood may wash away your cattle. This also is a source of 
suffering. Life, therefore, has so many ills to reckon with. All this 
may, however, be escaped by true knowledge. 

What is the truth that one should try to know? The constitu¬ 
tion of the world and mans place in it. The world is evolved out of 
a primitive principle, an eternal feminine, the prakriti. It consists 
of three gunas: sattva, rajas, and tamas: three strings woven into 
one, or three qualities mixed into one, or three strata pressed to¬ 
gether; put it any way you like, but these are the three constituents 
of prakriti. Usually, however, they are understood to be three quali¬ 
ties, which being the qualities of the matrix of the universe, permeate 
all things—men and animals as well as inanimate objects, and even 
men’s actions. Besides prakriti , there are an infinite number of indi¬ 
vidual souls or purushas who do not act but are, under certain 
circumstances, able to feel and be misled. When prakriti comes into 
contact with a purusha —how and why is a mystery—the world 
begins to be unfolded through a series of stages: Intelligence, self- 
consciousness, mind or the power of attention, the five senses with 
the sense-organs, the five organs of action, viz. the organ of speech, 
hands, feet and the organs of evacuation, the five subtle elements 
of earth, water, fire, air and space, and the grosser elements called 
by the same names. This, together with prakriti as the first and 
purusha as the last, gives us a list of 25 tattoos (or truths). 

The purusha is alw T ays inactive. Prakriti becomes active when 
it is in contact with a purusha; prakriti has been likened to a 
feminine being whose nature is to woo and win the heart of the 
inactive masculine by blandishments. Prakriti has even been com¬ 
pared to a dancing girl, who displays her art just to please her 
master and stops this display* as soon as she feels that she is no 
longer wanted. Why the purusha and prakriti come together is an 
unexplained mystery. And the tragedy is that while prakriti is 
active, she is unconscious, and purusha, who is conscious, is inactive. 
This is the great truth by meditating on which the evils of life can 
be escaped. 

For Yoga, also, it is the same truth on which man should me¬ 
ditate. But the Yoga bestows more care in describing the mental 
effort necessary for this meditation and the physical discipline by 
which the body may be made fit for such meditation. In later times. 
Yoga often meant physical discipline more than anything else: the 
position in which one should sit, the way his hands and feet should 
be kept, and the various kinds of such postures, the control of breath- 


467 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


ing, etc. By practising these attitudes and the different kinds of 
meditation, many extraordinary and even superhuman powers 
could be acquired. The Yoga discusses these powers, too. But after 
all, all this is a means to an end; and the end always is the escape 
from the ills of life. 

Is there a God whose benediction may be invoked? Sdnkhya 
says ‘no’; for there is no evidence that there is God. The Yoga only 
speaks of Him indirectly as an object of meditation by pondering 
on whom the mind may be steadied in contemplation. The God 
of religion is absent from both. The Yoga, however, speaks of’Him 
as an existent being and as one who is immensely superior to man, 
because he is not touched by the evil that encircles man. And this is 
a point of difference between Yoga and Sdnkhya. 

V-VI. The Two Mimamsas 

While we make a pair of Nydya-Vaiseshika and of Sankhya- 
Yoga because of their doctrinal similarities, the two Mimamsas — 
the Purva Mimdmsd and the Vedanta —constituted not only a pair 
of similars but practically one unitary system, not so much because 
of their doctrinal similarities but rather because their fundamental 
basis was the same, Both of them were attempts at interpretation 
of the Vedas—the ehtire Vedic literature including Mantras, Brahma - 
nas and Upanishads. As an attempt at interpretation of the Vedas, 
the two Mimamsas appear originally to have constituted one system . 1 
Their philosophical affinities, however, were not so close as in the 
other two cases, and later on, they easily bifurcated into distinct 
lines of thought. About the seventh ancT eighth century A.D. the 
Purva Mimdmsd was divided into two schools, one led by Prabha- 
kara and the other by Kumarila. And the Uttara Mimdmsd or the 
Vedanta also split up into a number of more or less important schools. 
But to begin with, the two Mimamsas constituted one line of thought, 
or one philosophical system. 

The main plank on which they both rested was that the Vedas 
were unassailable as a source of knowledge and, therefore, as the 
foundation of all true philosophy. Two important dicta came out 
of this proposition: first, that the relation between words and their 
meanings was eternal, permanent, and unalterable. The Vedas were 
a body of words which did not owe their origin to any author, human 
or divine; they were, therefore, eternal. And the meanings they 
expressed were equally eternal and unchanging. The second dictum 
was that knowledge carried its own proof. If you know a thing, you 
know it, and there is no reason why you should require any other 
proof in support of it. Objects are revealed to us in knowledge, 

1. Jha, Purva-Mimahsdl, Benares, 1942, pp. 4-10; IHQ, 1928, p. 612. 


468 






RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


but we have no reason to think that they produce the knowledge. 
If there is an error, it may be due to a defect, temporary or perma¬ 
nent, in our cognitive faculty. But the possibility of such error is 
no challenge to the validity and self-sufficiency of knowledge as such. 
The words of the Vedas give us knowledge and there is no reason 
whatever to doubt its validity. 

Are there not differences of meaning in the Vedic texts? Appa¬ 
rently there may be some; but it should be the endeavour of all 
honest and faithful interpreters to reconcile and synthesise them. 
The Purva Mimdmsd does this with regard to the Brdhmana portion 
of the Vedas or the rules of religious rites, and the Uttar a Mimdmsd 
or Vedanta does the same with regard to the Upanishadic portion. 
The Vedas, according to their conclusion, speak with one voice and 
in one language and speak the same truth. 

As a result of this interpretation, the philosophical doctrines that 
emerge are: 

(i) There is a Soul. Whether the soul is permanent and ulti¬ 
mately real or not, is another question. But there must be an agent 
to perform the sacrifices and one to whom the injunctions about 
these rites can be addressed. Even the instruction of the moksha - 
sastra or the Upanishads must be addressed to some one. So, there 
is a soul, an individual being. There must be a soul to be saved. 
This soul is uncreated and, when liberated, lives a life of blessedness. 
Whether it can always, even after liberation, maintain its distinc¬ 
tive individuality has been a matter of dispute among later thinkers. 
The soul can and does act, and enjoys the fruits of its actions. And, 
apparently according to some, and in reality according to the Purva 
Mimdmsd, there is a plurality of such souls. 

(ii) A world also is there, a world of things and qualities that 
we experience. The fact that we experience a world, no body can 
deny. But whether this world is as we know it, or whether our 
knowledge of it is after all an illusion, is a question which the 
Uttar a Mimdmsd or Vedanta hotly debated at a later time. 

(iii) God, however, is not necessary, and therefore there is none. 
The world changes but was not created. Even the relation between 
a word and its meaning is uncreated. And Karma necessarily brings 
its own fruits in its trail and does not require a dispenser of justice— 
of reward and punishment. According to Vedanta, however, there 
is an ultimate substance from w T hich everything else emanates, and 
that is Brahma. 

(iv) Karma —'The Vedas enjoin the performance of certain 
actions. There are different kinds of actions. There are actions 


469 


THE CLASSICAL* AGE 


which must be done in all circumstances. They are imperative 
duties. There are others which should be performed only if some¬ 
thing is desired and as means to the attainment of that something. 
For instance, if a man desires a son, there is a ceremony which he 
should perform. But in the absence of such a desire, the ceremony 
is not binding on him. There are certain actions, again, which must 
not be performed or the performance of which is a sin. There is a 
fourth class of action which has to be performed as an expiation 
of the sin of having done a prohibited action. 

The Mimamsd held that the duties, belonging to the varna (caste) 
and adrama (the stage of life) to which an individual belonged, were 
imperative and must continue to be performed till death. But must 
they be performed even when a man had renounced the world and 
had attained true knowledge and was on the path to liberation? This 
question gradually came to the forefront and eventually brought 
about a divergence between the Purva Mimamdsa and some of the 
schools of the Uttar a Mimamsd or Vedanta. 

The most important contribution of the Purva JVKmdthsd was the 
rules of interpretation that it developed. By a careful scrutiny of 
the tenses and moods of verbs, and similar other grammatical 
niceties, it developed an elaborate code of rules for understanding 
a text. The general principles so developed continued to be the 
basis of interpretation of legal and religious texts for a long time. 
And even now in interpreting the dicta of Hindu Law and religion, 
they are found generally helpful. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

B. VTII. Non-canonieal Pali Literature 

Geiger, W. Pali Literatur und Spr a che. Strassburg. 1916. (Eng. Trans, by 
B. K. Ghosh. Calcutta, 1943). 

Law, B. C. History of Pali Literature. 2 Vols. London, 1933. 

Buddhaqhosa. Bombay, 1946. 

Malalasekera, G. P. Pali Literature of Ceylon. London, 1928. 

Winternitz, M. History of Indian Literature, Vol. II. Calcutta, 1933 (Eng. Trans, 
by Mrs. S. Ketkar). 

E. Saivism 

1. Ayyar, C. V. Narayana. Origin, and Early History of Saivism in South India, 
Madras, 1921. 

2. Kingsbury, P. and Phillips, G. E. Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints. Calcutta, 
1921. 

3. Pillai, S. Satehidanandam, “The Saiva Saints of Southern India” Cult Her 
II, pp. 235-247. 

4. Pope, G. U. The Tiruvdchagam. 

Sastri, K. A. Niiakanta. “A Historical Sketch of Saivism” Cult. Her., II, pp. 
18-34. 

G. 1. Muslims 

Same as those mentioned under Ch. X, Section 12. 

470 


CHAPTER XIX 


ART 

A. ARCHITECTURE 

The period A.D. 320 to 750 marks a parting of the ways in the 
history of Indian architecture. In one respect, it is an age of culmi¬ 
nation and ultimate exhaustion of the earlier tendencies and 
movements in architectural types and forms. In another, it marks 
the ushering in of a new* age, which is particularly connected with 
the growth and development of the temple. It is a creative and 
formative age with immense possibilities for the future, an age 
associated with the foundation of the typical styles of Indian temple 
architecture. 

I. CAVE ARCHITECTURE 

Rock-cut excavations represent an aspect in Indian architecture 
that had been characteristic of the earlier period. A marked per¬ 
sistence of this earlier aspect is no doubt due to a long familiarity 
with the method, an additional incentive being the fact that no great 
constructional problem is involved in it. Most of these excavations 
belong to the Buddhist faith, though Brahmanical and Jain establish¬ 
ments of this type are not rare. 

The rock-cut architecture of the Buddhists, as in the earlier 
period, consists of two conventional types—-the chaiiya hall. i. e. the 
shrine proper, and the sanghdrdma or the vihdra , i.e. the monastery. 
The most notable groups are found at Ajanta, Ellora and Aurangabad, 
all within the former Hyderabad State, and Bagh in the Madhya 
Bharat Of these..Ajanta has had a long history dating back to a 
period before the Christian era. Of the twenty-eight caves at Ajanta 
five belong to the earlier period while the remaining twenty-three 
appear to have been excavated during the period under discussion. 
Two of the latter group, namely caves XIX and XXVI, are chaitya) 
caves, and the rest are vihdras. 

1. Chaitya Hall 

Cave No. XIX appears to have been the earlier of the two 
chaitya halls. Though separated by a wide gap of time from the 
older group of chaiiya caves, Nos. IX and X, it retains the plan of 
its earlier prototypes, but with extensive changes in the ornamenta¬ 
tion of the fagade and in the designs of the pillars in the interior. 


471 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


x This cave shrine belongs to a group of monastic establishments, of 
which caves Nos. XVI and XVII were the pious gifts respectively 
of a minister and a feudatory of the Vakataka king Harishena. 1 The 
group may thus be referred to the close of the fifth and the beginning 
of the sixth century A.D. 

Cave No. XIX (PL I, 1) is one of the smallest in size and consists 
of a rectangular hall, apsidal at the back end, divided into a 
central nave and two side-aisles by richly carved pillars going along 
the entire length of the hall and round the votive chaitya situated 
near the apsidal end. These pillars with brackets at the top support 
a broad and elaborate triforium, which continues right round the 
nave. Over this rises the vaulted roof, the wooden ribs of the earlier 
caves being repeated in stone. The votive stupa , a tall monolith, 
has an elevated platform, square in plan but with a projection in 
the middle of each side, as its base. Over it, and separated from it 
by mouldings, rises the drum of the stupa with the standing figure 
of the Buddha in high relief within an arched niche in front. An 
elaborate moulding at the top of the cylindrical drum separates it 
from the hemispherical dome, the niche with the figure of the 
Buddha extending up to the middle height of the latter. The square 
harmikd , with a projection in the middle of each face, ends in an 
inverted pyramid formed of a series of steps, and over it is placed 
the round shaft of the chhatravail, consisting of three concentric 
discs placed one above the other in receding stages, with a pot as 
its crowning final. 

Cave No. XIX at Ajanta appears to have been originally pro¬ 
vided with an entrance court in front with subsidiary chapels at 
the sides. The hall has only one doorway with a shallow entrance 
portico, its flat roof being supported on pillars of elegant design. 

Chaitya cave No. XXVI (PI. I, 2) at Ajanta, belonging to a 
slightly later date, follows No. XIX in its general plan, arrange¬ 
ment, and architectural treatment. But the ornamentation is richer 
and more minute in detail, though rather coarser and lacking the 
proportion and rhythmic balance of that of the earlier cave. The 
votive stupa , overloaded with a wealth of carving, shows in front 
a figure of the Buddha in high relief, seated in pralambapdda fashion 
within an elaborately patterned niche. In front there appears to 
have been a broad portico extending along the entire width of the 
hall, which is entered through three doorways, instead of one as in 
cave No. XIX. 

A comparison of Ajanta caves Nos. XIX and XXVI with similar 
earlier caves at Ajanta and elsewhere will at once show that though 


1. See above, p. 186. 


472 



ART 


not far removed from the earlier prototypes in plan and general 
arrangement, there is a gulf of difference in the style of ornamenta¬ 
tion that indicates great and significant changes in the outlook of 
the worshippers for whom the caves were meant. Not only are 
the carvings and decorative motifs far richer in design as well as 
in execution, but they also belong to a totally different school of 
thought. A significant change is that though in some respects the 
wooden origins of such halls still linger, the emphasis on wooden 
forms and technique has disappeared. The solid rock out of which 
the caves were excavated presented immense scope for the appear¬ 
ance of mass, weight, and volume, and this was fully utilised by 
the workmen, the wealth of carving being intended not only for 
decoration but also for lightening the whole structure. 

The most significant innovation, noticed in these caves, is the 
wealth of figure sculptures which are made to cover every possible 
space, both in the exterior facade as well as in the interior, in 
place of the plainer architectural patterns of the earlier caves. The 
fi ade, no doubt, is a further development of the earlier types. In 
place of the rail pattern extending along the entire length of the 
fagaue there is a double roll cornice with small chaitya windows in 
relief all along its surface. These chaitya v/indows are much re¬ 
duced in size and serve as mere frames for heads peeping out. 
Above the upper cornice the enormous horse-shoe chaitya window 
stands out in bold relief against a many-storeyed screen. Apart 
from this usual and conventional feature, very little of this fagade 
is connected w r ith those of the earlier caves. Above and below, 
right and left, in the walls of the excavated court (PI. I, 1), in the 
elaborate frieze of the triforium over the aisle pillars (PI. Ill, 5), 
and lastly, but most significantly, on the votive chaitya itself (PI. I, 2) 
appear figures of the Buddha, the ‘Worshipful One/ standing or 
seated, carved in bold relief. In fact, there is an excess of figure 
sculpture in these caves in marked contrast to its absence in the 
earlier shrines of this order. “From a pure atheism,” as Fergusson 
correctly observes with reference to these caves, “we have passed 
to an overwhelming idolatry.” 1 

Cave No. X at Eilora (PL II, 3, 4), known as the Visvakarma 
cave, represents one of the latest examples of a chaitya hall of the 
excavated type. It closely resembles the two shrines at Ajanta, just 
described, although the dimensions are considerably larger. The 
internal arrangement is practically the same, but the decorative 
carvings are not as rich as in the other two. In certain respects, 
however, this chaitya cave marks a significant stage in the history 


l. HIEA, I, p.151. 


473 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of this kind of shrines. The apsidal end of the hall is entirely blocked 
up by the votive chaitya which, though not far removed in shape 
and form from those in the other two, has been almost completely 
relegated to a background for a colossal image of the Buddha, seated 
in pralarnbapada dsana between two standing attendants, that serves 
as the frontispiece and the principal object of veneration. 

It is in the exterior facade of the shrine (PI. II, 3) that a marked 
change is clearly discernible. Much of the courtyard in front is now 
gone. The fagade itself is divided into two sections, the lower com 
sisting of the portico with its range of pillars, and the upper exhi¬ 
biting a composition which is quite unusual in this context. The 
enormous horse-shoe opening, which gave such a distinctive charac¬ 
ter to the frontage of such shrines, is missed here for the first time. 
The design is not eliminated altogether, but being reduced in size, 
as we find it in the small, almost circular, opening, it loses its dis¬ 
tinctive meaning, and also apparently its traditional significance. 
This transformation is probably a foretaste of what is destined to 
come soon. With the introduction and increasing popularity of the 
image the chaitya could not expect to command as much venera¬ 
tion as it used to enjoy in earlier times. The addition of the images 
of the Buddha on the chaitya altars at Ajanta and Ellora is a clear 
indication that the chaitya, by itself, was no longer held to be 
sacred enough to claim the worship of the Buddhist votaries, who 
have undergone significant changes in their outlook. The figure of 
the "Worshipful One’ was required to sanctify it. In the Visvakarma 
cave at Ellora the chaitya , as a mere background of the image proper 
(PL II, 4), had even lost whatever was left of its earlier votive 
character. Though the process was a long one, the image has stepped 
in and occupied its rightful place in Buddhist worship. The chaitya 
hall has thus outgrown its utility and it is not surprising that this 
order of shrines very soon disappears from Indian architecture 
altogether. 


2, Sahghdmma 

The sanghardma or the vihdra was naturally planned in the 
form of rows of cells round a central court, which in excavated 
examples took the shape of a central hall approached from one side 
and with cells leading out of it on the other three. Among the nume¬ 
rous vihdra caves at Ajanta, roughly twenty belong to the period 
under discussion. Cave No. XI appears to have been the oldest of 
the series and indicates a stage much in advance of caves Nos. XII 
and XIII belonging to the earlier group. The central hall in the earlier 
group of caves had been astylar. In cave No. XI, though the hall is 
smaller in area than that of cave No. XII, four pillars have been 


474 


AKT 


introduced in the centre of the hall (Fig. 1), evidently as supports 
for the roof. There are a few ceils of irregular shape around the 
hall which is preceded by a verandah with a row of pillars in front 
forming the facade. The central one of the three cells at the far 
end of the hall seems to have been cut through to make room for 
a sanctuary consisting of the seated figure of the Buddha. This 
sanctuary is in all probability later than the date of the original 
excavation of the cave. This date itself is uncertain, but from a 
comparison of the cave with Sri Yajha cave at Nasik it appears that 
a date about A.D. 400 would not be far off the mark. 

Cave No. XI is perhaps the earliest example of the introduction 
of pillars into excavated viharas, but there appears to be a phase of 
hesitancy and natural vacillation before the system finds a fully 
co-ordinated expression, forming at once a pleasing and utilitarian 
feature and adding to the interior effect of the hall. Cave No. VII 
shows two groups of four pillars each, placed side by side, while 
the lower storey of cave No. VI, the only example of a two-storeyed 
cave at Ajanta, has four central pillars with another series of pillars 
all round. Neither of these arrangements was considered satisfac¬ 
tory, the first because of its inappropriateness and lack of cohesion 
in the square plan of the hall, usually followed in such cases, the 
second, because of the congested appearance of the hall on account 
of two groups of pillars, one inside the other. These experiments, 
however, finally led to the production of a harmonious and unified 
design of a colonnade on all the four sides of the hall, as we have 
in the upper storey of cave No. VI and in all subsequent examples. 
This was a more elegant system of columniation which, apart from 
lending support to the roof, added to the interior effect of the hall. 
The ordered design and rich decorative embellishments of the pillars 
created an effect of magnificence, enhanced further, in some of the 
caves, by elaborate paintings. 

Of the remaining vihd.ra caves at Ajanta the most important 
are caves Nos. XVI, XVII, I and II, the former two excavated about 
A.D, 500 during the reign of the Vakataka king Harishena, and the 
latter about a century later. These four caves are of further interest 
because of the elegant paintings which enrich them. No. XVI con¬ 
sists of a hall, approximately 65 feet square, with a colonnade of 
twenty pillars around, a recessed sanctuary with a figure of the 
Buddha in pralambapada dsana at the back end, and a verandah 
with its roof supported on five pillars in front. On two sides of the 
verandah and the hall is recessed a series of fourteen cells, while 
two more appear on the innermost side of the hall on either side of 
the sanctuary, thus making a total of sixteen. Cave No. XVII is very 


475 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Fig. 1. Ajanta, Cave XI: Plan. 



Fig. 2. Ajanta, Cave I: Plan. 
476 








































































ART 


similar in design. Besides the paintings, these eaves are remarkable 
for great variety and beauty of their pillars. Though indefinitely 
varied, no two of any type being exactly alike, there is, as Fergus- 
son observes, “a general harmony of design and form, which pre¬ 
vents their variety from being unpleasing.” 1 Cave No. XVI is 
characterised by vertically or spirally fluted pillars with rounded 
capitals sometimes with horizontal ribs. The pillars in cave XVII 
are generally square at the bottom and the top and fluted in the 
middle. The bracket supporting the cross-beams take the shape of 
squatting dwarfs with face downwards. The design, though strongly 
reminiscent of wooden construction, is singularly harmonious and 
satisfactory. 

Cave No. I at Ajanta is approximately of the same size and 
designed on much the same lines (Fig. 2). The fagade (PI. IV, 7) 
is one of the most elaborate and beautiful of its class, the richly 
carved pillars and sculptured friezes of the architrave adding an 
effect, at once noble and magnificent. The interior (PI. Ill, 6) is 
equally magnificent. Cave No. II is equally decorative, but is a 
superior conception on account of the regularity and uniformity 
of its design (Fig. 3). These two caves, which should be dated about 
A.D. 600 on account of their architectural style, indicate that the 
rich heritage of Gupta art, already on the decline in Northern India 
as a result of the disruption of the Giipta empire, was still yielding 
good harvest in the Deccan. 

A few other caves were excavated at Ajanta after the comple¬ 
tion of caves Nos. I and II, but none of them appears to have been 
completed. Of these caves Nos. IV and XXIV are worth mentioning, 
because, if finished and decorated as designed, they would have 
been the finest of the entire series at Ajanta. The former has a hall 
about 87 feet square, i.e. the largest of all the Ajanta caves, with 
its roof supported on twenty-eight, pillars. It is nearly finished 
excepting the monastic cells. The latter (Fig. 4), with a hall approxi¬ 
mately 75 feet square planned with twenty pillars, is in a very 
incomplete state, only the verandah with its fagade of pillars being 
finished. It is unfortunate that all the pillars, with the exception of 
one (PI. IV, 8), have perished. But the beauty of design and masterly 
execution of the capitals attached to the architrave of the roof indi¬ 
cate that the cave was intended to be one of the most magnificently 
finished vihdras in the whole group. What is known as the ‘vase 
and foliage* capital already appears in cave No. XXI in place of 
the ‘cushion* capital, which is generally characteristic of Ajanta 
pillars. The ‘vase and foliage’ capital, so popular in subsequent 


1. HIE A, I, p. 191. 


477 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 



478 





















ART 



Fig. 4. Ajanta, Cave XXIV: Plan. 


479 







































THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Fig. 5. Bagh, Cave II: Plan. 


480 


























































































































































































































ART 


|C«tt *•***««*, 



Fig. 6. 


Bagh, Cave IV: Plan. 


481 
















































































































THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Indian architecture, seems to have attained its perfection in Ajanta 
cave No. XXIV, and through this the Ajanta tradition may be said 
to have continued in other sites when work stopped at Ajanta, due 
probably, as some scholars say, to the defeat of Pulakesin II at the 
hands of Narasimha-varman Pallava in A.D. 642 and the consequent 
chaos in the Deccan. 

The vihdra caves at Bagh in the Madhya Pradesh, about 150 miles 
north-west of Ajaiita, are closely related to those at the latter place 
in general plan and arrangement. They are, however, of a plainer 
and simpler type, and a fundamental divergence from the later series 
of Ajanta caves may be noticed in the fact that the sanctuaries at 
Ihe innermost end of the hail generally contain a chaitya instead 
of an image of the Buddha. One of the larger vihdras again is pro¬ 
vided with what is known as a said or schoolroom, the exact purpose 
of which it is difficult to ascertain at present. A further interesting 
feature of these caves may be recognised in an additional comple¬ 
ment of pillars inside the usual colonnade of the central hall, intro¬ 
duced no doubt as additional supports for the roof, the rock being 
not sufficiently homogeneous and perfect. 

The Bagh series consists of nine caves excavated, so far as 
available evidence indicates, approximately between A.D. 500 and 
600. The soft nature of the rock, however, has been responsible 
for the decay and disintegration of most of the caves. Cave No. II 
(Fig, 5) conforms to the usual type of Ajanta vihdras, but with the 
additional complement of four central pillars. The most important 
of the group is the great vihdra (No IV), locally known as the 
Rangamahall (Fig. 6). It consists of a central hall, about 96 feet 
square, with a range of cells on all its sides except the front. Like 
cave No. IV at Ajanta it may be described as a twenty-eight pillared 
cave, but with an extra complement of four central pillars, usual 
in the Bagh series. The most interesting feature of the cave is sup¬ 
plied by a highly ornate porch (PI. V, 10), consisting of a deep 
entablature, supported on two circular columns, that projects in¬ 
wards form the middle of each side except on the side of the frontal 
portico. This ornamental feature inside a monastic hall is singular 
in its appearance in this cave and is not known to occur anywhere 
else. Contiguous to it is a long rectangular hall (PI. VI, 11), approxi¬ 
mately 96 feet long and 44 feet deep, joined to the previous cave 
by a long verandah measuring 220 feet in length (Fig. 7). The 
twenty pillars supporting the roof of the verandah formed no doubt 
an unusually impressive facade, but much, of it is now gone. This 
rectangular hall has usually been described as the said attached 
to the vihdra, and both the caves were at one time sumptuously 


482 


ART 





483 



























































































THE CLASSICAL AGE 


embellished with paintings, as elegant as, if not sometimes superior 
to, those at Ajanta. 

The rock-cut caves near Aurangabad 1 consist of twelve excava¬ 
tions in three groups. Only one of the entire series is a chaitya cave, 
the rest being all vihdras. The chaitya cave, as appears from the 
style, belongs to the second or third century A.D., but the vihdras 
can hardly be placed earlier than the sixth century A.D. In all 
probability they belong to the seventh century and the important 
ones possibly towards the end of it. The design and decorative 
embellishments remind one of those of the latest series of Ajanta 
caves, but here the motifs, though meticulously copied, have grown 
mechanical and lifeless (PI. V, 9), lacking that sense of balance and 
cohesion which characterise Ajanta work. Of the vihdra caves the 
most important are Nos. Ill and VII. No. Ill is of the usual plan in 
which the sanctuary containing a colossal image of the Buddha is 
recessed at the back end of the hall. Two groups of male and female 
votaries are shown kneeling before the image. These figures exhibit 
great individuality and characterisation and are justly regarded as 
the most striking productions of Aurangabad artists. Indeed, the 
artists of Aurangabad excelled in figure sculptures, which were not 
only of massive proportions but were also distinguished by bold¬ 
ness of relief and a naturalistic and almost lifelike effect, parti¬ 
cularly when unhampered by religious conventions. Cave No. VII 
is rather of unusual design. The shrine here, instead of being rele¬ 
gated to a cell recessed at the back end of the hall as is the usual 
practice, is placed just at the centre of it with a passage for circum- 
ambulation around, w T ith cells radiating from it. As this arrangement 
is characteristic of excavated temples of the Brahmanical faith, the 
suggestion is not unreasonable that it was copied from them in Bud¬ 
dhist excavations. In this cave, too, there are a number of figure 
sculptures, including a dancing scene inside the shrine chamber pro¬ 
per, which in naturalness and ease, in graceful modelling and elegant 
effect, may be regarded as among the most significant products of 
Buddhist art in India. 

At Ellora the excavations extend for approximately a mile on 
the face of a low ridge of hills overlooking a vast plain, and consist 
of three series of caves—Buddhist, Brahmanical and Jain. Twelve 
of these caves situated at the southern end form the Buddhist series 
and imply probably two centuries of activity, approximately between 
A.D. 550 and 750. This series may be subdivided into two groups, 
caves Nos. I to V in the southernmost extremity being possibly the 
earlier in date. Excepting No. V known as the Mahanwada, the 


l. ML. XI, 1937, pp. 1 fl. 


484 







ART 


others of this “group differ very little from the monastic caves at 
Ajanta. They are all one-storeyed excavations, and consist of a 
central hall approached through a verandah in front, with a shrine 
chamber recessed at the far end, and cells for monks on either side. 
Cave No. II of this group deserves mention for, instead of monastic 
cells recessed on either side of the hall, we have lateral galleries 
divided into compartments, each containing a figure of the Buddha 
as in the sanctuary chamber at the far end of the hall (PI. VI, 12). 

Cave No. V, ie. the Mahanwada, is unique having no exact 
parallel in the vast range of cave shrines in India. Of considerable 
dimensions (117 feet x 70 feet across the two fair-sized recesses), it 
consists of a long rectangular hall divided into a nave and aisles by 
two rows of pillars, with a sanctuary cell a at the far end and cells 
opening out at the sides (Fig. 8). Along the length of the nave 
appear two low y and narrow platforms, a feature of which there is 
only one other instance in the so-called Durbar Cave at Kanheri. 
The exact purpose of such an unusual plan is difficult to ascertain. 
According to some scholars this arrangement might have been 
designed for the use of the hall as a refectory, 1 while others observe, 
on the analogy of Lamaistic services in the Gumphas of Sikkim, that 
the arrangement was ritualistic in character. 2 

The second group, consisting of caves VI to XII, was presuma¬ 
bly slightly later in date than the one just described. Of these, the 
Visvakarma cave (No. X) represents a chaitya hall and has been 
noted above. The other caves were monastic establishments and 
usually resemble the later Ajanta type of monasteries. No. VIII, 
by the side of the Visvakarma cave, is important as exhibiting a 
sanctuary standing free and with a passage around (Fig. 9) as in 
some of the Aurangabad caves. 

But by far the most important of this group are the two storeyed 
monasteries, Nos. XI and XII, known respectively as the Don Thai 
and the Tin Thai. Each of them rises up to three storeys, planned 
on somewhat similar lines, and has an ample courtyard in front. 
The designation Don Thai is a misnomer, as the cave is actually 
a three-storeyed one. But the ground floor long rr named hidden 
under an accumulation of debris; and the two upper storeys, which 
alone were visible, were apparently responsible for the designation. 
No. XII or the Tin Thai is the more commodious of the two. A rock- 
cut gateway leads to an open court at the far end of which rises a 
facade in three elaborate storeys (PI. VII, 13), each with a verandah 
on eight square pillars. Each storey is, however, differently disposed 
in the interior. On the ground floor the verandah, divided into three 


1. HIE A. I, p. 203. 


3. Br. JA, p. 69. 
485 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Fig. 8. Ellora, Cave V: Plan. 


486 





































ART 



487 


Ellora, Caves VII & VIII: Plan. 































THE CLASSICAL AGE 

aisles, leads to a pillared hail with a sanctuary cella at the far end 
and small square cells on either side, A staircase in one of these cells 
leads up to the first floor, consisting again of a large pillared hall 
(Fig, 10) with a sanctuary recessed at the back end and a gallery 
for images on either side forming a kind of iconostasis., as we nave 
in cave No. II of the earlier group. On the topmost storey the hall 
may be said to have been planned in the shape of a cruciform with 
a long nave driven axially into the rock and a transept on each side 
cut at right angles to it. Pillars in regular rows have been used 
both in the nave and' the transepts to support the rock forming the 
roof. The sanctuary is placed at the far end of the nave, while the 
monks’ cells are arranged along the sides of the cruciform. 

By far the most imposing of the two three-storeyed caves, the 
Tin Thai is among the most interesting of its class in the whole of 
India.^ The fagade (PL VII, 13), rising to a height of nearly 50 feet, 
though severely plain, lends a majesty to the exterior appearance of 
the cave. The sober treatment of the fagade is amply compensated 
for by the rich profusion of sculptures in the interior arrangement 
of each storey, which, though differently treated, indicates through¬ 
out a balance and consistency of design. There is moreover a 
grandeur and propriety in its conception which, as Fergusson 
observes, 1 “it would be difficult to surpass in cave architecture.’'’ 

3. Bmhmanical Caves 

Brahmanical shrines of the rock-cut mode were also not rare, 
the earliest being those at Udayagiri, near Bhilsa in the Bhopal 
State. The Udayagiri series 2 consists of a number of such shrines, 
partly rock-cut and partly stone-built. Two of these contain inscrip¬ 
tions belonging to the reign of Chandra-gupta II, one dated in the 
(Gupta) year 82, corresponding to A.D. 401, These shrines, which 
represent one movement, may thus be dated about the beginning of 
the fifth century A.B. 

The earliest of these shrines may be recognised in what is known 
as the ‘false cave’ (No. I), which is nothing but the conversion of 
a natural ledge of rock into a shrine by adding to it a structural 
portico with pillars in front. The other shrines are elaborations of 
the ‘false cave’ and consist of plain rectangular shrine chambers 
scooped out of the rock, with shallow porticos, built of stone, in front. 
These shrines, though partly excavated and partly structural, are 
allied to the traditions and conventions of contemporary structural 
temples, to be discussed later. Cave No. IX, known locally as the 
‘Amrita cave’, is probably the last of the series, and may be considered 

1 HIEA, I, p. 204. 2. ASC. X, 41 if. 

488 





ART 



Fig. 10. Eilora, Tin Thai Cave: Plan of second storey. 


489 
















































THE CLASSICAL AGE 



.s 

fa 


490 


, Badami, Caves: Plan. 























ART 


as inaugurating a step forward in the development of the style. The 
sanctum celia is much more spacious, nearly twice the size of the 
others, and this increased spaciousness necessitated the use of four 
pillars, naturally hewn out of the rock, in the centre of the hall, to 
support the mass of the rock forming the roof of the shrine. It is 
this feature which carries forw r ard the tradition to further develop¬ 
ments in the succeeding centuries. 

The next phase of rock-cut Brahmanical shrines may be found 
at Badami in the Bijapur District in the south-eastern part of the 
Bombay State. It was the site of the ancient Vataplpura, the royal 
seat of the Early Chalukya dynasty, and contains a number of shrines, 
both excavated and structural, that are of singular interest for their 
architectural details. Of the caves, 1 three, closely related in style, 
belong to the Brahmanical faith. The third is specially important 
as it contains an inscription dated in gaka year 500 (A.D. 578) and 
this supplies a valuable landmark for determining the age of the 
other caves. 

Compared to the earlier shrines at Udayagiri the progress in 
the shrines at Badami seems to have been considerable. Each of 
the shrines was probably provided with an open fore-court (Fig. 11) 
which leads in succession to the pillared verandah, the columned 
hall, and lastly to the small square sanctum celia cut deep into the 
rock at the far end of the hall. The facade is comparatively plain, 
and but for the pillars of the verandah (PL VIII, 15) and a long 
frieze of sculpture at the stylobate, no decorative or architectural 
effect has been attempted. The interior, however, is very rich on 
account of the varied designs of the pillars and the profusion of 
sculptures and carvings which appear on all sides. 

The rock-cut caves, so widely prevalent in the Deccan, are 
hardly met with in the Dravida country, save in the eastern coast, 
where they vyere possibty introduced by the Pallava king Mahendra- 
varman I about the first quarter of the seventh century A.D. 2 Indeed, 
this king, who has been described as “one of the greatest figures in 
the history of Tamilian civilisation,” was specially fond of such a 
kind of shrines, of which a large number of examples have been 
found. 3 They are usually of the most primitive type indicating 

1. Br.IA. pp. 02-63: HIE A. II, 126-127. 

2. King Mahendra-varman proudly describes his cave temples as composed with¬ 
out bricks, mortar, metal and timber (anishtakam asudham alauham adrumam 
nirmapitam — Mandapagattu Inscription). The statement implies that the caves 
were an innovation in the south, being, in all probability, introduced by 
Mahendra-varman Pallava. 

3. Longhurst, A. H., Pallava Architecture (MAS1. Nos. 17 and 33). The caves of 
the early period are enumerated here:—Dalvanur (S. Arcot District), Trichino- 
poly ‘rock temple,’ Mandapagattu (S. Arcot Dt.). Pallavaram (Chingleput Dt.), 
Malacheri (S. Arcot Dt.), Tirukkalukkunram (Chingleput Dt.), Kilmavilangai 

491 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


thereby that the mode and technique of rock-cutting were rather 
foreign to the craftsmen of the region. Each of these shrines consists 
of a shallow rectangular pillared hall or mem^apa, as it is locally 
called, with one or more cells cut deep in one or more of the interior 
walls. On each side of the entrance into the sanctum appears the 
figure of a dvarapaia or doorkeeper, carved in high relief, a feature 
that is also to be found sometimes on either side of the entrance to 
the man^apa hall. Figures of dvdrapdlas are already seen in one of 
the caves at Radami, and they constitute an invariable feature of 
Brahma nical cave temples of later days. The facade 1s composed 
of a row of pillars, square at the top and bottom and octagonal in 
the middle. A heavy bracket of corbelled shape forms the capital 
and supports the architrave above. The earliest eaves were so plain 
and simple that no cornice can fee seen above the pillars to relieve 
the rugged appearance of the rock; but gradually there is introduced 
a convex roll cornice decorated with miniature chaitya window 
niches enclosing human heads, a motif that is locally known as the 
kudu . 

Towards the latter part of Mahendra-varman’s rule storeyed 
caves begin to appear, as in Undavalli and Bhairavakon^a; but 
in spite of this elaboration no appreciable advancement in the design 
can be recognised. At Bhairavakonda, however, a significant change 
is to fee noticed in the design of the pillars of the fagade. The shaft 
of the pillar becomes slender and takes an octagonal shape with a 
seated lion in the lower portion. This new design no doubt indicates 
the beginnings of what is known as the Pallava order which is the 
precursor of the yali pillars, characteristic of the Dr a vidian style 
of architecture in its full-fledged state. 

Narashhha-varman Mahamalla, the son and successor of Ma- 
hendra-varman I, also continued the cave style along with shaping 
out free-standing monolithic rathas from granulitic boulder-life 
outcrops at Mamallapuram, the sea-port city founded by him. The 
rathas are no doubt copies of structural shrines, and hence should 
properly be reserved for treatment in that connection. Of the caves 
of his period, specimens of which may also be seen at Mamallapuram, 
the Varaha (Fig, 12), the Trimurti, the Mahishamardim, and the 
Pandava mandapts are the most important. In plan they are similar 
to those of the Mahendra group, but their facades are usually more 
ornamental both in the design of the pillars and of the cornice. 

(S. Arcot Dt.) Bezwada (Krishna Dt), Mogalrajapuram (Krishna Dt.) Unda¬ 
valli (Guntur Dt.), and Bhairavakonda (Vellore Dt.). The caves at Bezwada 
and Mongalrajapuram in the Krishna District and Undavalli in the Guntur Dis¬ 
trict have been attributed by some scholars to the kings of the Vishnukundin 
family. But the style seems rather to indicate that they were excavated by the 
P&llavas and represent some of the earliest attempts in this direction. 


492 






ART 



Fig. 12. Mamallapuram, Varaha-mandapa: Plan. 



Fig. 13. Ellora, Dasavatara Cave: Plan of upper storey. 

403 























































THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The Pallava order of pillars is found here in a finished form. Of better 
proportions they are singularly graceful to look at. The sedent lion 
supports on its head the shaft, which is usually octagonal and some¬ 
times fluted. The capital is bulbous in shape and is surmounted 
by a wide abacus (locally known as the palagai) with corbelled 
brackets or double brackets supporting the architrave. It is for 
these pillars, apart from the finely sculptured panels, that the 
Mamallapuram mandapas are particularly celebrated, and some of 
the finest specimens may be found in the Varaha and the Mahisha- 
mardinl mandapas. 

The Brahmanical caves at Eliora, which extend along the west 
face of the rock, date from about A.D. 650. There are altogether 
sixteen excavations belonging to this faith, the Dasavatara (No. XV), 
the Ravana-ka-khai (No, XIV), the Ramesvara (No. XXI), the 
Dhumar lena (No. XXIX) and the far-famed Kailasa (No. XVI) 
being the most important. The last is an extensive establishment 
entirely excavated out of the rock in imitation of the celebrated 
Kailasanatha or Rajasimhesvara temple at Kahchlpuram. The caves 
may be divided into three different types. The first, best illustrated 
by the two-storeyed Dasavatara cave (Fig. 13), consists of a pillared 
hall with the sanctum cella scooped out at its far end. It is closely 
analogous to the design of the Buddhist vihdra and appears to be the 
earliest among the Brahmanical caves at the site. Instead of monas¬ 
tic ceils on either side of the hail, we have a kind of iconostasis, 1 
the walls being divided into regular lateral galleries containing 
images in alto-relievo in large sunken panels formed by pilasters. 
Though evidently modelled on the Buddhist vihdra it has an unmis¬ 
takable Brahmanical touch in the detached mandapa formed out of 
a mass of rock left in the centre of the courtyard in front of the cave. 

The second type is essentially identical with the above, but the 
shrine proper forms a distinct component with a processional corri¬ 
dor around it. The sanctum, a cubical cella with a passage around, 
is shaped out of a rectangular mass of rock left in the centre of the 
back end of the hall. This arrangement of the sanctuary is also 
found, though rarely, in Buddhist caves, as in Eliora cave No. VIII 
and some of the Aurangabad caves, indicating thereby parallel lines 
of development in caves of the tw T o religious denominations. This 
second type is represented best by the Ravana-ka-khai and the 
Ramesvara caves (Fig. 14) which, though agreeing with each other 
in the disposition of the sanctuary, exhibit distinct variations in 
minor details. Of these two caves, the latter is certainly the more 
important, not only because of the separate shrine of Nandi, the 

1. For a similar arrangement in Buddhist vihdras , compare cave No. II and the 
first floor of the Tin Thai at Eliora. 


494 





ART 



495 
























































THE CLASSICAL AGE 


mount of Siva, situated in the centre of the court in front of the 
cave, but also on account of the magnificent wealth of sculptures 
overlaying all its parts, and the rich and elegant design of its massive" 
pillars with their graceful bracket figures (PL VIII, 16). 

The third type, which appears to date from the second half of 
the eighth century A.D., may be recognised in the Dhumar lena, the 
last in the series of the Brahmanical caves at Eilora. It consists of 
a cruciform hall, having more than one entrance and court and with 
a shrine standing isolated within it (Fig. 15). The cruciform shape 
of the hall is obtained by a group of halls, more properly transepts, 
arranged on a transverse system, the beginnings of which can already 
be noticed in cave No. VI and the topmost storey of the Tin Thai. 
Usually there are three entrances, the principal one facing the shrine 
proper, and two others laterally on two sides of the hall. This inno¬ 
vation indeed marks the type as a singularly novel one in cave 
architecture and adds unparalleled grandeur to these excavations. 
Of course, such an arrangement depends largely on the nature of 
the terrain in which the caves were excavated. But the fact that this 
style of caves is also found elsewhere (at Elephanta and in Salsette) 
indicates that the design is pre-meditated and the selection of the 
site consequent thereto. It is possible that the cave temples of this 
class fall outside the chronological limits of the present volume but 
we may discuss them here in order to give a complete picture of 
the architecture of this type. 

The Dhumar lena at Eilora exhibits a hall of a regular cruci¬ 
form shape with three entrances, each preceded by a court on its 
three sides. The shrine is placed near the back end of the hall and 
is a massive square block with steps on four sides leading to the cella. 
The steps are guarded by gigantic figures on all sides. Massive pillars 
in regular row's support the rock forming the roof of the hall and 
these, coupled with the pillars of the wide entrances on three sides, 
lend a pleasant effect to the interior (PL IX, 17) alternated by passa¬ 
ges of light and shade. The pillars are of massive proportions. They 
are square at the bottom and circular and fluted in the upper section 
and topped by fluted ‘cushion 5 capitals. In architectural arrangement 
as well as the gracefulness of its ponderous pillars and sculptures this 
cave is probably the finest among the Brahmanical excavations, not 
only at Eilora but also at other sites. 

The Brahmanical cave in the island of Elephanta near Bombay, 
though similar to the Dhumar lena in general arrangement, is 
smaller and less regular in its plan (Fig. 16). There are three 
entrances, each with a court in front, but in spite of the transverse 
arrangement of the adjuncts the cruciform shape is not as explicit 


ART 



497 


Fig. 16. Elephanta, Cave: Plan. 























THE CLASSICAL AGE 

as in the Dhumar lena. Though there is a detached Lihga shrine 
within the main hall, the principal sanctuary in the cave appears 
to be placed in the transept enshrining the image of Siva as Mahesa, 
justly described as one of the finest sculptures in all India (PI. XXXV, 
85). The pillars (PL IX, 18) are closely analogous to those of the 
Dhumar lena in style, in proportions, as well as in their disposition^ 
Indeed, it may be said that this order of pillars with ribbed ‘cushion' 
capitals, which had been in use from the sixth century A.D., had 
reached their fullest development and beauty of form in these exca¬ 
vations. The sanctuary, too, as in the Dhumar lena, is flanked by 
colossal figures of guardians, and sculptures have been accommodated 
in huge panels all around the cave. In the beauty and quality of its 
sculptures, enthusiastically praised as marvels of plastic art, the 
Elephanta excels the Dhumar lena at Ellora, which, however, is a 
more balanced and organic creation from the architectural point of 
view. 

The cave temple of Jogesvara in the island of Salsette, 1 of 
much inferior execution, may be taken to be the latest example of 
Brahmanical cave architecture. So far as extant remains go the 
followers of the Brahmanical faith began to make excavated shrines 
from about the close of the fourth century A.D. or the beginning of 
the fifth, but the more important Brahmanical cave excavations 
belong to a period from the close of the sixth to the eighth century 
A.D. Even in caves the shrines proper are more or less imitations of 
structural forms. The practice of excavating temples was little 
suited to the needs of Brahmanical worship, and it is not surprising 
that of the twelve hundred cave temples of India not more than 
approximately a hundred are Brahmanical. It is possible that the 
practice was inspired by the Buddhists. But its unsuitability for 
Brahmanical worship became more and more felt, a fact that becomes 
apparent in the growing desire to cut out of the rock monolithic 
shrines in direct imitation of structural temples with all their appur¬ 
tenances. 

4. Jain Caves 

The number of Jain caves excavated during the period under 
review is very small. Mention may be made of one cave at Badami 2 
and another at Aihole. Both of them appear to date from about 
the middle of the seventh century A.D. and are essentially similar 
in plan and other arrangements, not entirely dissimilar to other 
contemporary caves of the Buddhist and Brahmanical denomina¬ 
tions. Each of them exhibits a pillared quadrangular hall with a 
cella cut out at its far end and chapels on either side. 

1. Br. I A. pp. 85-86. 2. Ibid . p. 64. 

498 






ART 


The most notable group of Jain caves are to be found at Ellora 
among the northern horn of the ridge. Although they are not earlier 
than A.D. 800 and thus fall outside the chronological limits of this 
volume, they may be treated here for the sake of a complete study 
of excavated architecture. Of the five shrines of the group three 
are of some importance, namely, the Chhota Kailasa (No. XXX), 
the Indra Sabha (No. XXXII) and the Jagannatha Sabha (No. 
XXXIII). The first, as its name suggests, is a smaller copy of the 
famous Kailasa, mentioned above. The second is also partly a copy 
of structural form. The monolithic shrine in the centre of the court¬ 
yard (Fig. 17) and the gateway to the court, both shaped out of the 
rock, are essentially Dravidian in style like the celebrated Kailasa, 
Behind the monolithic shrine rises the facade of the cave in two- 
storeys (PI. VII, 14), each of which is roughly of the plan of a pillared 
hall with a cella at *its back end and range of cells on either side. 
The Indra Sabha at Ellora, particularly the upper storeys of the cave 
(Fig. 18), is one of the most perfect specimens among the cave 
temples at the site. The Jagannatha Sabha follows the Indra Sabha 
in general principles and in the treatment of its esential elements, but 
lacks the balanced and organic character of the composition of the 
latter. 

With the Jain caves at Ellora the cave architecture of India 
ceases for all practical purposes. The close of this long persisting 
tradition is already foreshadowed when, instead of halls and shrines 
being axially driven into the interior of the hill side, monolithic 
shrines came to be shaped in direct imitation of structural forms, 
as we have in the celebrated Pallava rathas at Mamallapuram cul¬ 
minating in the great Kailasa at Ellora. The more and more fre¬ 
quent use of this novel practice was an indication that the doom of 
the rock-cut technique, which had such a long history in Indian archi¬ 
tecture, was not far off. The structural method with its immense 
scope and possibility placed unlimited powers in the hands of the 
builders who had already been acquainted with its advantages over 
the rock-cut method. It is not surprising, therefore, that with the 
rapid progress of structural buildings this archaic rock-cut mode, 
in spite of its long use and its peculiar advantages, would in the end 
become obsolete. 


II. STRUCTURAL BUILDINGS 
1. Temples 

The Gupta age heralded a new epoch in the history of Indian 
architecture. Hitherto shrines and sanctuaries, being usually con¬ 
structed of perishable materials like wood, bamboo, etc., had but 


499 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 




500 


Fig. 17. Eliora, Indra Sabha Cave: Plan of lower storey. 




































































ART 


little scope for the proper application of the principles of architec¬ 
ture as an art, either in respect of form or in that of composition. 
Now, with a new outlook, Indian builders began to erect their monu¬ 
ments in permanent materials, especially brick and dressed stone. 
Their output was prolific. The contemporary inscriptions not only 
give us a fair idea of the large number of temples erected during the 
period, but also speak of cities of great beauty and magnificence 
being adorned with lofty temples and other imposing edifices. 1 
Hiuen Tsang’s account furnishes clear evidence how, within a com¬ 
paratively short time, the country came to be literally studded with 
buildings of diverse orders. Most of these buildings have, however, 
perished. A few that have escaped destruction bear the stamp of 
primitiveness and insufficient technique. But these early efforts 
are not devoid of interest. On account of their bearing upon future 
development they are invaluable for the study of Indian architecture. 

Cave excavations are ill-suited to the ritualistic needs connected 
with the worship of images, and structural temples are required 
for the proper enshrinement of the deity. The new movement is, 
therefore, particularly concerned with the construction of structural 
temples widely differentiated in details of form and general appear¬ 
ance. It is this wide variety of forms and types that lends to the 
architecture of the period its special importance. It marks the period 
as an age of initial experiments in various types and forms until 
significant forms were chosen for further elaboration and final 
crystallisation. The following well-defined groups may be distin¬ 
guished among the temples belonging to this period: 2 — 

1. The flat-roofed square temple, with a shallow porch in front. 

2. The flat-roofed square temple, with a covered ambulatory 
around the sanctum and preceded by a porch in front, some¬ 
times with a second storey above. 

3. The square temple with a low and squat tower or sikhara 
above. 

4. The rectangular temple with an apsidal back and barrel- 
vaulted roof above. 

5. The circular temple with shallow projections at the four 
cardinal points. 

The fourth and the fifth groups may be recognised to be sur¬ 
vivals of earlier forms, the former from the celebrated chaitya halls 
of the Buddhists, the latter from stupa designs, especially those of 
the Andhra country of the second, third and fourth centuries A.D. 

1. Compare the Mandasor inscription vv. 10-12 (Oil III, No. XVIII; Sircar, 
Select Ins. 291). 

2. JISOA, VIII, pp. 146-58. 


501 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 



502 


Fig. 19. Chezarla, Kapotesvara temple: Section and elevation. 


































































































ART 


The temple at Ter (Sholapur District) 1 and the Kapotesvara temple 
at Chezarla (Krishna District) (Fig. 19) 2 , both referable to the 
fourth-fifth century A.D., belong to the fourth group. They are 
relatively small structures with little pretensions to any architec¬ 
tural merit. They appear to have been structural chaitya halls, 
later on appropriated to Brahmanical usage, to which fact they owe 
their preservation. 

The Durga temple at Aihole, 3 probably of the sixth century A.D., 
is distinctly connected with the above group. The roof, however, 
is flat and is surmounted by a sikhara over the sanctum. An outer 
pillared periphery runs all around the temple which stands on a 
high basement of several horizontal courses. 

These structural temples were no doubt built upon the lines 
of the Buddhist chaitya hall, which was the prevailing architectural 
type of the earlier period. With the introduction and growing popu¬ 
larity of images, the chaitya hall as a votive shrine gradually went 
out of use. 

The fifth type may be seen in the peculiar cylindrical brick 
structure, known as Maniyar Math, i.e. the shrine of Mani Naga, 
standing almost in the heart of the old city of Raj agriha. 4 Syste¬ 
matic excavations have revealed that the structure is the result of 
successive accumulations of ages, of which one definitely falls within 
our period. This particular stratum shows a circular wall with 
shallow projections at the four cardinal points and decorated with 
fine stucco sculptures in niches all around (PI. X, 19). It is sup¬ 
ported on an earlier structure of a hollow cylindrical shape with a 
projection at each of the cardinal points, closely resembling the 
ay aka projections of the early stupas of the Andhra country. It has 
an entrance doorway in the north, and the surrounding wall, which 
is square now, also appears to have been originally circular. In 
the structure belonging to the period under review the cylindrical 
form is more the result of following the alignment of the earlier 
building beneath than a conscious or deliberate attempt towards a 
new form. The forms presented by the fourth or fifth group do not 
appear to have any marked effect on subsequent architecture, though 
they survived in stray and isolated instances down to a later period. 

(i) The first group 

The three other groups of the temples of the period may, how¬ 
ever, be regarded as the forerunners of the mediaeval Indian archi- 

1. HU A. p. 47. 2. Ibid. Fig. 147. 

3. Ibid. Fig. 152: Cousens, H. Ancient Temples of Aihole (ASI. 1907-08, p. 194); 

Cousen, H. Chalukyan Architecture of the Kanarese Districts, pp. 38-40, 

Pis. IX-XI. 

4. Quraishi, M. H. & Ghosh, A. Guide to Rajgir, pp. 23-24. PI. V. 


503 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


tectural styles. The first group, the flat-roofed square temple, appears 
to have been the basic form of which the second and the third are 
but elaborations. A representative example of the first may be found 
in the temple No. XVII at Sanchl (PI. X, 20), 1 a tiny and unpreten¬ 
tious shrine consisting of nothing more than a simple squafe 
chamber with a pillared porch in front (Figs. 20, 21). Though modest 
in dimensions, its structural propriety, symmetry and proportion, 
appreciation for plain surfaces, and restraint in ornamentation may 
very well compare with the best creations of classical architecture 
in Greece. Other temples of this group are found at Tigawa (PI. XI, 
21) 2 and at Eran. 1 2 3 Numerous sculptures and architectural remains 
of the period have been discovered at Nachna Kuthara, 4 Garhwa, 5 
Bilsad, 6 Khoh, 7 etc. but the structures themselves, probably built 
of bricks, are gone. 

The temples at Sanchl, Tigawa, and Eran are the best preserved 
examples of this group. Cunningham long ago proposed a chrono¬ 
logy of these temples on the basis of the relative proportion between 
the diameters and heights of the so-called ‘belP capitals of the 
portico pillars. Though this point need not be stressed unduly, the 
ornamentation of this so-called ‘bell’ offers an approximate indica¬ 
tion as to the relative dates of the temples. Every pillar in the 
Eran temples shows a highly ornate s belP with elaborate turn-overs 
below the comers of the abacus. In the Tigawa temple (PI. XI, 21) 
we have just the beginnings of these turn-overs, and the stylistic 
indications of the carvings themselves ascribe it to a period earlier 
than that of the Eran temples. At Sanchl we have the ‘plain reeded 
bell’ without turn-overs of any kind, and the suggestion of its being 
the oldest structural temple 8 may be quite correct. The temple at 
Tigawa has been ascribed by Smith 9 to the period of Samudragupta, 
a date that may not be far off the mark. But his suggestion that 
the Vishnu temple at Eran also might belong to the time of Samudra¬ 
gupta is hardly acceptable. Apart from the stylistic character of 
the ‘bell* capital, a much later date should be inferred also from the 
appearance in the Vishnu temple of a buttress-like projection 10 in 
the middle of each of the three faces of the temple, corresponding 
to the projection of the doorway in front, a feature that is itself a 
later appearance. The plain and bare walls are thus diversified, and 

1. ASC. X, 60-62, Pis. XVI, XX; HIIA, p. 78, Fig. 151; Marshall, J. Guide to Sanchl , 
pp. 117-119, PI. vn, b. 

2. ASC. IX. 42, 45-46, Pis. X & XI; Banerji, R. D. AIG f PI. VI; Brown, Percy, 
Ind. Arc. Bud. & Hind. PL XXXIV. 

3. ASC. X, 82-89, Pis. XXV-XXX. 4. PRASI. WC, 1919, p. 61. 

5. ASC. X. 1-19. Pis. VI- Vn. 6. Ibid. XI, 17-18, Pis. V-VI. 

7. Ibid. X. 6; PRASI.WC, 1920, pp. 105-06 & Pis. 

8. ASC X 62 

9. Smith, V. A. Indian Sculpture of the Gupta Period. (OZ. HI, 4). 

10. ASC. X, PI. XXV. 


504 




ART 



■awl**) 


%■ 





? • 




Fig. 20. Sanchi, Temple No. XVII: Diagram. 



Sanchi, Temple No. XVII: Plan and section. 

505 


























































































































THE CLASSICAL AGE 


this scheme is destined henceforth to play a most significant role in 
the effective distribution of light and shade in temple architecture 
of later days, not only in India, but far beyond its frontier, in South¬ 
east Asia, 

The group has a distinct place among the temple forms of the 
period as the basis for future elaborations. The ground plan of the 
sanctum is almost always a definite square, though a rectangular 
plan is also occasionally met with, as in the Vishnu and Varaha 
temples at Eran. The sanctum is preceded by a shallow porch with 
four columns supporting the architrave on which the roof rests. 
The intercolumniation is slightly greater in the middle than at the 
sides. Cunningham regards it as one of the minor marks of the 
style. 1 2 Tlie porch is approached by flights of steps in front of the 
middle intercolumniation. The walls of the temple are quite plain 
except for a moulding around at the top in continuation of the line 
of the architrave of the roof of the porch—also a characteristic 
feature of the style according to Cunningham. The roof was com¬ 
posed of rectangular slabs of stone, placed side by side on the walls, 
occasionally with overlapping grooves, as we have in the temple 
at Tigawa. On the top can be found projecting spouts for the dis¬ 
charge of rain water. The plainness of the walls offers a striking 
contrast to the decorative richness of the pillars and door-frames. 

The nucleus of a temple, viz . a cubical ceila (gtirbhagriha) with 
a single entrance and a porch ( mandapa ), appears for the first time 
in this archaic group of structural temples. Identical rock-cut 
shrines, each preceded by a structural porch in front, may be seen 
at Udayagiri, two of which, as noted above, belonged to the time 
of Chandra-gupta. Similar cave shrines were also possibly in exist¬ 
ence in earlier times, and it is not unlikely that this simple primi¬ 
tive-looking type of buildings was, in its early stages, nothing but 
a translation in structural form of the plain rock-cut shrines of the 
earlier period. The fiat roof, the plain square or rectangular form 
and the stern simplicity of the walls lend strong probability to this 
hypothesis. The structural mode at Sanchl, Tigawa, Eran and other 
places and the partly excavated and partly structural method at 
Udayagiri of approximately the same date represent what might 
be called the twin reverberations of the same style. 

(ii) The second group 

Examples of this group may be seen in the so-called Parvatl 
temple at Nachna Kutbara (Fig. 22), 2 the &iva temple at Bhumara 

1. Ibid. IX, 45. 

2. Ibid . XXI, 98-97, Pis. XXV-XXVI: PRASI.WC, 1919, p. 61, Pis. XV-XVI; MR. 

XLY, 54-56; AIG. pp. 137-39, Pi. HI. 


506 




ART 


(Fig. 23), 1 and the Lad Khan (Fig. 24), the Kont-Gu^i and the 
Meguti temples at Aihole. 2 The first two are situated in Central 
India and the rest in the Deccan. The remains of the brick-built 
temple at Baigram (Dinajpur District, Bengal), 3 possibly the temple 
of Lord Govindasvamin to which a grant of land was made in 
A.D. 447-48, also exhibit a similar plan and might probably have 
belonged to the same type. 

The type consists of flat-roofed square sanctum cella inside 
a similar roofed cloister. 4 5 In plan, therefore, the sanctum is 
a smaller square within a larger square that forms the covered 
gallery for pradakshhia around the inner sanctum. The bigger 
square is preceded by a slightly smaller rectangular porch, open 
and of the pillared variety, with the projection of a flight of steps 
in front. The covered gallery is lighted by a trellis or trellises in 
each of the three sides, and in the Nachna Kuthara temple the inner 
sanctum is also dimly lighted by two trellises in the two side walls. 
The doorways leading to the gallery and to the sanctum are in a 
line with the flight of steps in front. A variety may be noticed in 
the provision of an upper storey above the inner sanctum, as we see 
in the Parvati temple at Nachna Kuthara (PI. XI, 22) and in the 
temples at Aihole (PI. XII, 24). The second storey being supported 
on the inner sanctum is necessarily set back from the bigger hall 
and forms a distinct scheme in the elevation of such temples. The 
Bhumara temple, a highly ornate example that indicates a later 
date, shows a miniature shrine on either side of the staircase, a 
design that came to be perfected in the temples of which remains 
have been unearthed at Nalanda. 6 With the remains of four minia¬ 
ture shrines, one at each corner of the temple proper, these temples 
at Nalanda may be said to be the logical culmination of an arrange¬ 
ment noticed at Bhumara. Such an arrangement is known as the 
Panchdyatana in the Sdstras, and may be seen in respect of temples 
of the subsequent period, irrespective of the style to which they 
belonged. 

The simplicity of design and of decoration places the Parvati 
temple at Nachna Kuthara along with the early examples of the 
first group, with which it is probably co-eval in date. The facade 

1. Banerji, R. D. !§iva Temple at Bhumara ( MASI. No. 16); MR, XLV, 57-58; AIG. 
pp. 142-45, Pis. II & IV. 

2. Cousens, H. Ancient Temples of Aihole (ASI. 1907-08, pp. 190, 192. 195-96); 
Cousens, H. Chalukyan Architecture, pp. 32-38, 29-32, Pis. V-VI, III-IV; Hl’IA. 
p. 79, Fig. 148. 

3. ASI. 1934-35, p. 42, PI. XIX, b, c, d. 

4. The temples are essentially all alike, though some minor variations may be 
noticed in some details. But these variations do not fundamentally affect the 
general arrangement and disposition of the type. 

5. Ghosh, A. Guide to Nalanda , p. 17, plan at end. 

507 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Fig, 22. Nachna Ku^hara, Parvat! temple: Plan. 


508 














































ART 


! 


P»A0AK5}rttHA-P*T HA' 


i 

t 


£ 

a 



a 

a. 


PSACMKSVHJAPATKA 






Mandapa- 


i 


Small jwpine 




1¥ 

11 
It 
-U 




a 


■scuta 


I 


SMALL SHSINE' 


f 




is 


II 
• I 


©CD. pavimcht 


Fig. 23. Bhumara, Siva temple: Plan. 

509 







































































































THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Fig. 24. Aihole, Lad Khan temple: Plan and section. 


510 











































































































































































































ART 


of the temple bears carvings in imitation of rock-work. The 
exterior walls are further decorated by a few sculptures of early 
Gupta workmanship. The Lad Khan and the Kont-Gu^i at Aihole 
probably come next in the order. The walls of the hall are formed 
by latticed screens joined to pillars placed at intervals. The massive¬ 
ness of the pillars and their design as well as the extreme simpli¬ 
city of construction place these temples earlier to Badami cave 
No. Ill for which we have the date A.D. 578. The Siva temple at 
Bhumara, which is all but a ruin, was splendidly ornamented with 
figures of ganas, klrttimukhas , and divinities in finely wrought 
chaitya window niches. The carving and workmanship are in the 
best tradition of Gupta art and the rich arabesques of the pillars 
and door-frames indicate a date somewhere in the first half of the 
sixth century A.D., though the late Mr. R. D. Banerji, who dis¬ 
covered the temple, was inclined to place it about the middle of 
the preceding century. The Jain temple of Meguti at Aihole 
(PI. XIII, 26), erected in 558 Saka (A.D. 634) by one Raviktrtti 
during the reign of the Western Chalukyan king Pulakesin II, was 
thus the latest in the series of temples mentioned above. Conse¬ 
quently, as is naturally to be expected in a formative age, it repre¬ 
sents, even in its fragmentary state, the most perfect example of 
the series, so far as its scheme and other arrangements go. Not only 
is there an improvement in the quality of masonry and technique, 
but a refinement and delicacy are noticeable in the ornamental 
treatment of the temple as a whole. The decoration of the outer 
walls by means of narrow pilasters with little bracket capitals, the 
intervals between the pilasters being filled up or intended to be 
filled up with sculptures, undoubtedly exhibits a mature mind that 
evolves a pleasing scheme of projections and recesses out of the 
primitive process of forming such walls as shown in the earlier 
examples. Further, the plan of the temple also marks a distinct 
progress inasmuch as it leads to a balanced and organic scheme. In 
plan the temple is a long rectangular building consisting of two 
parts, the shrine with its surrounding gallery and the forward hall 
with its roof supported on pillars and probably originally open all 
around. The two are joined together by a narrow vestibule or ante¬ 
chamber in between. This unified design, a logical outcome of the 
earlier attempts, had significant bearings on the history of subse¬ 
quent architecture. 

To about the same period as the Jain temple of Meguti at Aihole 
belong the rathas at Mamallapuram, the sea-port city founded by 
Narasimha-varman Mahamalla at the mouth of the Palar river 32 
miles south of Madras. They are all free-standing monoliths, shap¬ 
ed out of a series of boulder-like granulitic outcrops on the sandy 


511 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


shore (PI. XIII, 25). Though rock-cut, they reproduce the contem¬ 
porary types of structural buildings and as such exemplify an entire¬ 
ly novel form of expression. Of the various types furnished by 
these rathas one is particularly related to the temple group, now 
under discussion, and another to a group examined above. 

Of the eight rathas the smallest is named after Draupadi, the 
wife of the five Panqlava brothers. It is square in plan with a square 
curvilinear roof which indicates it clearly as a copy of the plain and 
simple thatched structure. The other rathas have the characteristic 
pyramidal elevation of storeyed arrangement. Every storey is pro¬ 
vided with a roll cornice decorated with miniature chaitya arches, 
each enclosing a human head. In spite of this general resemblance, 
there is a great difference in the shape and form of these excavated 
temples which are, to some extent, determined by the shape and plan 
of the cellas on the ground floor. The Nakula and Sahadeva rathas 
with their vaulted roofs and apsidal backs reproduce the form of 
the Buddhist chaitya halls, structural examples of which are found 
in the fourth group of temples mentioned above (cf. the Kapotesvara 
temple at Chezarla and the temple at Ter). This form, as has al¬ 
ready been observed, went out of use. But among the rathas of 
Mamallapuram there can be recognised two other forms which have 
important bearings for the subsequent architectural movement in 
this part of the country. The Bhima and Ganesa rathas have an 
oblong plan. Each of them rises in gradually receding storeys 
topped by a rectangular barrel-vaulted roof with gables at either 
end. The Arjuna and Dharmaraja rathas (PI. XIV, 27), of a square 
shape and similar storeyed elevation, are each crowned by a domical 
member, known as the stupi or stupikd. It is not difficult to find in 
this type an adaptation of the storeyed form of the temple group, now 
under discussion. Indeed, the connection between these two rathas 
and the storeyed temples of the Gupta period is too obvious to be 
missed. A structural temple of this shape and form, but belonging 
to the reign of Rajasimha Pallava, successor of Narasimha-varman, 
may be seen in the Shore temple, also at Mamallapuram. With this 
there begins an unbroken series of structural monuments which 
shed lustre on the South Indian architecture of later days. The 
rectangular type also gradually develops into the enormous gateway 
building, known as the gopuram, which is a necessary, and perhaps 
far more imposing, feature of a South Indian temple. The various 
experiments through the rock-cut method in these rathas crystallis¬ 
ed into the square and rectangular types, each of which is to exer¬ 
cise immense influence on the subsequent architectural activities of 
the Dravi<Ja country, A detailed treatment of these types of rathas 
in that light is therefore reserved for the next volume of this history. 


512 


ART 


(iii) The third group 

The third group appears to be but an elaboration of the type re¬ 
presented by the first group, from which it differs very little in gene¬ 
ral plan and arrangement. But its great importance lies^ in the in¬ 
novation of a sikhara or tower that caps the sanctum. In religious 
architecture there is always an aspiration for ascending height, and 
it is no wonder that in this connection sikharas or towers soon made 
their appearance providing a significant contrast to the early and 
archaic flat-roofed temples. The inscriptions tell us that already 
by the fifth century A.D. high and lofty towers had come into exist¬ 
ence and they are figuratively described to be as high as the Kailasa 
mountain 1 or as reaching the sky. 

So far as extant monuments are concerned, however, no sikhara 
temple can probably be placed earlier than the sixth century A.D. 
The most representative and well-known example of the sikhara 
type is the Dasavatara temple at Deogarh (Jhansi District, U.F.). 2 
Among other examples may be mentioned the Mahadeva temple at 
Nachna Kuthara, 3 one at Pathari, 4 the brick temple at Bhitargaon 
(Kanpur District), 5 and the great Mahabodhi at Bodh-Gaya, as 
seen by Hiuen Tsang. 6 The Durga and the Hucchimalligudi tem¬ 
ples at Aihole 7 exhibit each a tower on the top of the flat roof of the 
sanctum, but their plans and other arrangements differ radically from 
those of the temples, just mentioned, which form a distinct group 
by themselves. 

Of the different examples of this group it will suffice to describe 
the Deogarh and the Bhitargaon temples as two representative spe¬ 
cimens, the former in stone and the latter in brick. The Dasava¬ 
tara temple at Deogarh (PI. XIV, 28) stands on a lofty wide base¬ 
ment (Fig. 25) reached by a flight of steps in the centre of each side. 

1. It is not clear whether these epigraphic statements have any reference to the 
class of buildings, known as the Kailasa in the different texts, like Varaha- 
mihira’s Brihat-sarhhita, the Matsya Parana, etc. 

2. ASC. X, 105-10, Pis. XXXIV-XXXVI; HIIA. p. 80; MR. XLV. 58-59; AIG. 
pp. 146-52; Vats, The Gupta Temple at Deogarh ( MAS! , No. 70). 

3. ASC. XXI, 98; PRASI.WC. 1919, PI. XVI, b; MR. XLV, 60; AIG. pp. 154-55. 

4. ASC. X, 70-71. 

5. Ibid. XI, 40-50; ASL 1908-09, pp. 6-16, Pis. I-V; HIIA , p. 80; AIG. pp. 133-135. 

6. HTB. II, 118. 

7. Cousens, H. Ancient Temples of Aihole (ASI. 1907-08, pp. 194, 196-197); 
Cousens, H. Chalukyan Architecture , pp. 38-41, Pis. IX-XIII. The Durga 
temple, as has already been noted, shows a rectangular plan with an apsidal 
end, and the Hucchimalligudi is similar in plan to the second group of 
temples, described above. R. D. Banerji includes the temples at Sankargadh 
( PRASI. WC. 1920, p. 104, Pi. XXVII; AIG. p. 146) among the examples of Gupta 
temple architecture, but thinks the sikhara to be a mediaeval addition. But 
a study of the carvings of the door-frame and of the decorative motifs, which 
are definitely of a later date, leaves no doubt that both the lower and upper 
members of the structure were built at one and the same time, which cannot be 
earlier than the tenth or eleventh century AD. 


513 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Fig. 25. Deogarh, Dasavatara temple: Plan. 


514 















































































































ART 


The basement, which illustrates the aspiration for height and 
majesty, is embellished by a continuous frieze of sculptured niches 
on all sides. The plainness of the walls of the sanctum was also 
relieved on three sides by sculptured niches, each as a sunken panel 
between two pilasters, and on the. fourth by an elaborate doorway. 1 

Towards the top of the walls there is a frieze of miniature 
arched niches between a double cornice from over which rises the 
sikhara (now in a dilapidated condition), consisting of blocks or tiers 
of gradually receding stone courses. In contour it appears to have 
been a straight-edged pyramid, and the projections of the niches on 
the walls of the sanctum have been carried up the body of the sikhara , 
the predominating decorative element of which is the chaitya win¬ 
dow. Probably there were angle-dmalakas at the corners, 2 but the 
top, with whatever finial there was, has wholly tumbled down. 

The brick temple at Bhitargaon (PI. XV, 30) consists of a square 
sanctum eella and a similar, but smaller, vestibule, connected with 
it by a passage. The interior passage and the outer entrance were 
roofed by semicircular vaults, while the sanctum and the vestibule 
were covered by domes, the voussoirs, in both cases, being placed, 
not face to face, but end to end—a mode of construction that 
Cunningham calls the Hindu fashion. Above the sanctum there was 
an upper chamber also covered probably by a similar dome. 3 

The ground plan (Fig. 26) is square with doubly recessed corners, 
i.e. with a projection in the middle of each of three sides and the 
vestibule in front. The walls rise in bold mouldings, their upper 
part being decorated with regular terracotta panels alternating with 
ornamental pilasters, and terminate in a double cornice of carved 
brickwork w T ith a recessed frieze of smaller terracotta plaques. This 
double cornice separates the body of the sanctum from that of the 
tower, which exhibits well-defined superposed courses with straight 
or almost straight sides. These courses are decorated with tiers of 
niches containing boldly projecting busts or heads or entire figurines. 
As each successive course recedes by several inches, the tower 
gradually diminishes towards the top. The projection on the body 

1. From pillars lying on the platform on which the temple stands Cunningham 
thought that there were four pillared porticos on the four sides, one protecting 
the entrance doorway in front and the other three, the sculptured niches on 
the three walls. R. D. Banerji, however, thought that the whole platform was 
covered over with a flat roof surrounding the sanctum with its sikhara. In the 
present fragmentary condition of the temple, it is difficult to ascertain whether 
the platform was open to the sky or was wholly covered or whether tnere were 
narrow porticos only to protect the carvings of the doorway and of the sculp¬ 
tured niches. The last appears to be the most plausible. 

2. Burgess, J. Ancient monuments, temples and sculptures of India. Fics 248 & 2~2. 

3. The reconstruction of the top of the temple by Percy Brown ( Br.I.A. PI. XXXIII, 
5) as consisting of a barrel-shaped vault does not appear to fit the square plan 
and other arrangements of the temple. 


515 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Foundation Waite of Piaffe 


■Terra-cotta Pan eh 


SANCTUM 


Fig. 26. Bhltargaon, Brick temple: Plan. 


516 

























































































ART 


of the sanctum has been carried up the body of the tower, but as 
the top has tumbled down no definite idea of the crowning elements 
is possible here, as is also the case in the Deogarh temple. As recent 
excavations have shown, this temple, like those at Deogarh and 
Nachna Kuthara, stood on a raised platform, built on cell-like foun¬ 
dations. 

The temple at Deogarh, by the style of its reliefs and carvings, 
may be placed in the sixth century A.D. There is, however, not the 
same unanimity with regard to the Bhltargaon temple. Cunningham, 
who first described it, was of opinion that it cannot be placed later 
than the seventh or eighth century A.D., and might probably be 
even older. Yogel, on the analogy of the decoration of pilasters and 
cornices with similar elements in the Parinirvana temple at Kasia, 
was inclined to place it at least three centuries earlier than the 
date suggested by Cunningham. R. D. Banerji observes that it can¬ 
not be earlier than the mediaeval period. The vigorous and spirited 
carvings of the terracotta panels, the form of the sikhara, etc. suffi¬ 
ciently indicate it as a product of the Gupta age; and though the 
date proposed by Vogel may appear to be too early, it is not pro¬ 
bably far removed from the Deogarh temple, which it resembles 
in all essential features. 

The great Mahabodhi temple at Bodh-Gaya has been restored 
and renovated so many times that it is difficult to determine its 
original architectural form. As it now stands (Pi. XVI, 31), it con¬ 
sists of a high straight-edged pyramidal tower, surmounted by a hti 
with a fluted dmalaka-like lower member, and with angle^dmalakas 
at the corners demarcating the different stages. The entrance porch, 
evidently later than the original temple, appears on the east. Each 
of the four faces of the tower presents several .tiers of niches, every 
one of which no doubt originally contained Buddhist figures. The 
front face has a tall lancet opening for the admission of light into the 
sanctum. At the base of the tower there rises at each of the four 
corners a turret, which is a replica in miniature of the main tower. 
In the seventh century A.D. Hiuen Tsang minutely describes the 
temple at Bodh-Gaya under the name of the ‘Mahabodhi vihara * The 
dimensions and general appearance and form of the temple, as given 
by the Chinese pilgrim, practically correspond to what we have now 
in the temple before us, and the suggestion that the temple in its 
present shape and essential elements existed in the seventh century 
A.D. is quite reasonable. The technique of construction in brick, the 
straight contour of the tower, the tall lancet opening in front, the 
chaitya niches on the four sides of the tower accommodating, accord¬ 
ing to Hiuen Tsang, figures of the Buddha, have close parallels in 


517 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the Bhltargaon temple to which it is probably co-eval in date. Iliuen 
Tsang also describes the great temple at Nalanda erected by Kara- 
simha-gupta as being over 300 feet in height, and resembling the 
tower at Bodh-Gaya. 1 Nothing now remains of this lofty structure 
except its massive basement. There is hardly any doubt that when 
entire, it presented a shape and form similar to those of the early 
sikhara temples of the period. 

The chief interest of this group of temples lies in the sikhara 
or tower surmounting the sanctum which presents a marked con¬ 
trast to the early low and fiat-roofed temples. In almost every case 
the tower is either badly damaged or gone altogether, but the con¬ 
tour of the examples that have been preserved suggests a straight- 
edged pyramidal form, not unlike that of the present Mahabodhi 
temple at Bodh-Gaya. The sikhara temple at Pathari, which from the 
remains near about may be said to belong to about the sixth century 
A.D., is slightly better preserved. Its height is just twice the width 
of the building in strict accordance with the prescription laid down 
by Yarahamihira ( yo vistdro bhaved yasya dvigum tat samunnatih) . 2 
The straight contour of the tower, however, gradually gives place to 
a slight inward curvature towards the top, as we find in the Maha- 
deva temple at Nachna Kuthara, probably of the seventh century, and 
the brick temple of Lakshmana at Sirpur (PI. XVI, 32) of about 
the same or somewhat later date. 3 The former, a perfectly preserved 
example, exhibits angl e-amalakas at the corners, to demarcate the 
different stages of the tower, and a complete dmalaka crowning the 
top of the temple. The latter, a beautiful example of the early sikhara 
temples, consists, as usual, of a square sanctum with the porch pro¬ 
jecting from it in front, the whole standing on a high plinth.. A 
greater variegation over the plan of the Bhltargaon temple may be 
noticed in the addition to the number of projections on each side 
of the sanctum, the receding planes of the walls leading to attractive 
effects of light and shade. It is also richer in ornament and more 
refined in treatment, indicating considerable experience in the art 
of building. The deeply recessed false windows in the centre of each 
of the three walls of the sanctum also constitute a noticeable feature. 
Unfortunately, the top has fallen down, but the crowning elements 
were undoubtedly similar to those of the Mahadeva temple at Nachna 
Kuthara. In the perfect disposition of its parts, and in the richness 
and refinement of its ornament, this modest brick temple at Sirpur 
is perhaps unsurpassed among the early sikhara temples of India. 


1. HTB. II, 167 ff. 

2. Brihat-samhitd (Vangavasi ed.) Chap. 56. 

3. H1IA. pp. 93-94, Fig. 186. The temple has recently been assigned, with very 
little reason though, to the 9th century A.D. (AST. 1923-24, p. 28). 


518 




ART 


(iv) The Nagara and Dravida styles 

The Gupta temples described above can be easily recognised to 
have heralded the two important styles, Nagara and Dravida, which 
characterised the mediaeval temples of India to be described in the 
succeeding volumes. The cruciform plan and the Relzha tower 
which form the distinctive features of the Nagara style already 
make their appearance in the Dasavatara temple of Deogarh and the 
brick temple of Bhltargaon. The curvilinear form of the tower fol¬ 
lows slightly later in the Mahadeva temple at Nachna Kuthara and 
Lakshmana at Sirpur. The sculptured niches on the three walls of 
the Dasavatara temple and the projection in the Bhltargaon temple 
even foreshadow the setting forward of the middle of each side of 
the square temple which is another characteristic of the ground plan 
of the Nagara temples. 

Similarly the second group of Gupta temples shows many of the 
characteristic features of the Dravida style. The upper storey placed 
over the sanctum foreshadows the roof formed by a succession of 
gradually receding storeys, and some sculptured reliefs of the Gupta 
period even offer closer parallels. The plan of the inner sanctum 
with a cloistered gallery around, the scheme of the division of the 
walls by pilasters and niches, and the use of the roll cornice carved 
v/ith well-shaped chaitya arches which we find in this group of 
Gupta temples, also constitute the distinctive marks of the Dravida 
style. 

It would thus appear that the characteristic features of what 
afterwards came to be known as the Nagara and Dravida styles had 
already been evolved in the Gupta period. During this period was 
laid the basic foundation of subsequent Indian temple architecture, 
the history of which is the story of the two styles, the Nagara and 
the Dravida, with their various elaborations and ramifications. In 
this respect the architecture of the period presents a picture contrary 
to what we find in sculpture. In the history of Indian sculpture it 
has truly been observed that the period marks the fulfilment of 
earlier tendencies. In the history of Indian architecture it is just 
the formative and creative age with unlimited scope for future deve¬ 
lopment and elaboration. 

2. Monasteries and Stupas 

Although temples form the most important class of monuments, 
a brief reference should be made to the stupas and monasteries 
which were also built in large numbers during the period. The 
monasteries, usually built of brick, were, as before, designed as a 
square block formed of four rows of cells round an inner courtyard, 
with perhaps a sanctuary in the centre of the back end. They were 


5H» 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 



Fig. 27. Mirpur Khas, Stupa: Plan. 


hO)U>* 


WEST 


520 




































































ART 


usually extensive conglomerations of religious establishments con¬ 
nected with famous Buddhist sites, but have mostly perished. A 
few of them have been unearthed in extremely fragmentary condi¬ 
tion and these do not call for any special notice. 

Of the stupas built during the period, two at least deserve 
particular mention, namely the stupa at Mirpur Khas (PL XV, 29), 
in Sindh 1 and the Dhamekh stupa at Sarnath (PL XVII, 33). 2 
The former is a brick structure showing a hemispherical dome raised 
over a square basement. What is interesting is the existence of three 
chapels or cellas within the mass of the basement on the western 
side (Fig. 27), the central chapel having an arch constructed on the 
radiating principle. From stylistic indications of the decorative 
scheme the structure may be dated about the fourth century A.D. V 
certainly not later than the fifth, and the appearance of the true 
arch about this period clearly indicates that the principle was known 
to Indians long before the advent of the Muslims. 3 The Dhamekh 
stupa at Sarnath rises in three stages, the basement, the drum and 
the dome, the last having a cylindrical, instead of the normal hemi¬ 
spherical shape. The basement is solidly built of stone and is reliev¬ 
ed on the outside by eight projecting faces, each with a niche for the 
reception of an image (now gone) and a broad band of exquisitely 
carved ornament, geometrical and floral (PL XVII, 34). The upper 
stage, the dome proper, was built of bricks, probably originally 
faced with stone. The rich and elegant patterns of the ornamental 
scheme constitute the chief beauty of the monument, the cylindrical 
shape of which possibly indicates a date about the sixth century A.D. 
One of the two stupas at Jarasandha-ka-Baithak at Raj agriha is of 
a similar shape and probably belongs to the same period. Because 
of their shape they look like towers and as Hiuen Tsang designates 
the stupa by the term ‘tower’ this shape seems to be the prevailing 
one during the period. 

B. SCULPTURE 

I. ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS 

The pivot of Gupta sculptural art is the human figure. Already 
at Mathura and Amaravati we have seen figures of men and women 
away from and independent of the animal and vegetal world that 
used to surround them at Bharhut and Sanchl. Now all animal and 

1. Br.IA., p. 52, Pi XXXII, 9. 

2. Sahni, D. R. Guide to the Buddhist ruins of Sarnath , pp. 36-37. 

3. There are many stray occurrences of a true voussoir arch in Indian architecture 
of pre-Muhammadan date, the example at Piprawa (JRAS. 1898, pp. 573 ff) and 
the arch-stone of possibly Maury an date ( ASI. 1921-22, PI. XXXVI) being 
probably two of the earliest instances of its use. 


521 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


vegetal patterns are pushed altogether out of the narrative on to the 
borders or to panels where they keep themselves confined in their 
exclusiveness; carved with deep oblique cuts the rich vegetal scrolls 
exuberantly recoil on themselves in playful contrasts of light and 
shade. But such rich vegetal patterns of decoration only underline 
the importance of the human figure. At Mathura and Amaravati we 
have seen the richness and abundance of vegetation pass on, in so 
far as the quantitative aspect is concerned, to the human figure 
itself. In the art of this period a deeper, qualitatively meaningful, 
transformation of the human figure takes place, and here, too, it 
is the vegetal life that causes this transformation. Thus the human 
figure itself becomes the conveyor or carrier of the unceasing flowing 
movement that used to reside in every vegetal device, especially the 
creepers and lotus stalks; the latter while moving away from the 
world of human beings seem to have passed on their lively rhythm 
and ceaseless flow in bends and curves to the human figure itself. 

Since it is in youth that this inner movement of life finds its 
fullest expression, it is almost invariably youth that captures the 
imagination and engrosses the vision of the artist of this period. 
The body indeed seems to shine in smoothness and in the almost 
transparent luminosity of its texture. Whereas this illumination 
itself belongs to the vision of the artist, it is given perceptual form 
with the help of a plastic and full modelling that, in its naturalism 
and rarification, has hardly any parallel in any other period of Indian 
art. A largeness of conception endows the human figure with a 
mental and physical discipline that discards the earthiness of 
Mathura and the sensuousness of Vengl and elevates it to a stale of 
experience of either a subtle spiritual or a deeper rational, or a 
sturdier and more vital existence. The face is lit up with this expe¬ 
rience which is ‘wisdom’ itself, while the eyes with drooping eyelids, 
instead of looking out into the visible world, seem to look within 
where every thing is at rest in contemplative concentration. 

This is true not only of Buddhist and Brahmanical gods and 
goddesses, but also of ordinary mortals, whether men or women. 
Basically it sprang from the notion of a disciplined body and con¬ 
quered mind which were sought to be achieved through centuries 
of conscious physical and intellectual effort. Once this bodily dis¬ 
cipline is achieved, there remains no scope for nervous tension oi 
the body, conditioned by emotions or suggestive of physical energy. 
The body, whether seated, standing, or bending, thus reaches a poise 
and a balance, and the related muscular mass seems to pulsate with 
the glow of the vital current flowing unceasingly beneath the skin. 
The characteristically Gupta plastic idiom is born of the intense 
physical experience of this notion. Slowly it dawned that super- 


ART 


human strength lay not in voluminous bod} 7 and concentrated energy 
alone, but in a conquest of the mind itself. The wide open eyes thus 
began to close themselves under heavy eye-lids and look inwards; 
the lips began to close in calm determination and firm fulness; the 
body began to relax itself in ease and grow in full roundness from 
within. 

For such an experience of existence there is obviously no need 
of elaborate draperies or decorative jewelleries. Indeed in the art 
of this period they are very sparingly employed, and that too always 
with a keen eye on the sensitiveness of the plastic surface, for dra¬ 
pery and jewelleries are but unavoidable superfluities that cloud and 
weigh the body that happens to be the receptacle of supreme joy and 
bliss. 

Nor in an experience of the kind narrated above is there any 
scope for agitated physical or emotional action, or any argument 
for inter-relatedness of movements of the figures composed in a 
group. Each figure, whatever be its position or action, exists by 
itself in a slowed and subtly integrated tempo of existence rich with 
a deeper understanding of life. Even in attitudes and positions 
where two figures are supposed to be emotionally inter-related, the 
air they breathe is one of complete detachment, and hence, com- 
positionally they are merely juxtaposed against the flat binding 
surface of the relief-ground, 

II. EVOLUTION OF GUPTA SCULPTURE: MATHURA AND 

SARNATH 

Dated or definitely datable sculptures of the early Gupta period 
are few and far between; but the few we have help us to determine, 
howsoever roughly, the beginnings and the early stages of the evolu¬ 
tion of the Gupta plastic conception. 

So far as extant examples go, Gupta plastic conception seems 
to have had its birth at Mathura which, in the early centuries of the 
Christian era, produced the massive earth-bound Bodhisattvas of 
extraordinary strength and energy. The Mathura laboratory used 
to export its products to &ravastl, Prayag, Sarnath and presumably 
to other places as well The practice continued in the fourth century 
as well and we find Mathura artists and Mathura inspiration work¬ 
ing at Kasia, Bodh-Gaya and also at Sarnath. A Ecdhisattva from 
Bodh-Gaya 1 , dated in the year 84 of one Maharaja Trikamala 
(PI. XVIII, 35), is perhaps the earliest example of plastic art that 
can be dated in the Gupta culture period. Structurally and icono- 
graphically it belongs clearly to the Mathura tradition of the first 
and second centuries; but the massiveness and ponderosity of an 

1. Cunningham, Mahabodhi, PL XXV; KIS, fig. 54. 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


earlier age are now brought under a stem and disciplined modelling, 
and a firm outline and a harsh geometrical composition restrain a 
vigorous and monumental body of full rounded limbs within a heavy 
and ruthless concentration. 

In the figures of the Buddhas or Bodhisattvas of this period, 
the plastic theme of disciplining the body conquering the mind 
is perfectly clear, the body has been fully brought under discipline, 
but the inner world has not yet been conquered. They have not yet 
experienced bliss, the joy and glow of weightless existence. To this 
phase of the Mathura tradition belong the two remarkable three¬ 
eyed Sivaite heads, one in the Mathura Museum, 1 and the other in 
the Calmann galleries (PI. XIX, 38, 39) London, 2 the latter quali¬ 
tatively of a higher level. 

It was given to Sarnath, where Buddha first turned the Wheel of 
Law, to give expression to this supreme bliss in concrete plastic 
shape in the course of the next one hundred and fifty years. In the 
countless seated or standing images of Buddhas or Bodhisattvas, 
also certain Brahmanical images (e.g. the Karttikeya of the Bharat 
Kala Parishad, Banaras), of the Sarnath school of this period, the 
body sheds off all its toughness, attains full and soft roundness and 
exhales an aroma of complete ease and serenity. All this is achieved 
with the help of a soft and delicate modelling, a softly gliding, 
smoothly flowing, melting line, and an utmost economy of plastic 
differentiation. With the passage of time, the physiognomical type 
grows longer, the head slightly smaller and lighter, plastic treat¬ 
ment more delicate and sensitive, and altogether a supra-sensuous 
extra-mundane soaring elegance results, till finally the modelling 
and outline seem to throb with an almost uncanny sensitiveness. 
Such perfection, such pointed ecstasy of blissful experience ren¬ 
dered in such concrete form is almost unbelievable, and means that 
it must either turn the corner or vanish into formlessness. A good 
specimen is the well-known seated Buddha in dharma-chakra- 
pravarttana attitude from Sarnath (PI. XVIII, 37), 3 but there are 
examples in the Sarnath Museum which are perhaps equally good, 
if,not better still. 

It was at Sarnath that the Buddha preached his first sermon, 
and this act is referred to in the canonical texts of Buddhists as 
dharma-chakra-pravartiana or turning the Wheel of Law. It is repre¬ 
sented by a seated Buddha with the fingers of the two hands held in 
front of the body in a special position. The Sarnath image is a 
fine expression in stone of the meditative and compassionate 

1. Cat MM. 2. JISOA, VI. 202, PI. XLIV. 

3. HU A. Fig. 161. FAS, pp. 168-9, Pi. XXXVIII. 


524 







ART 


Buddha giving his first message of deliverance to the world. The 
Wheel or Chakra , the symbol of the dharma, occupies the centre of 
the pedestal and on its two sides are the figures of the five disciples 
to whom the first sermon was preached. The woman with a child, 
whose figures are added at the left corner, is probably the figure of 
the donor of the image, which in some respects represents the high- 
water mark of the art of sculpture in ancient India. 

Mathura, during all these decades, must have also gone through 
the same stages of experience, but the plastic formulations were of 
a slightly different character. There a certain heaviness of form 
persists for a considerable time, and despite strong influences from 
Sarnath, aesthetic and monographic, a certain toughness in plastic 
treatment of the body-surface remains. The treatment of the folds 
of the drapery, the eye-brows, and eyelids in their round ridges 
also remain traditionally Mathuraesque. Taken all together the head¬ 
less seated Mahavlra image (A.D. 432-33) and the Buddhas (PL XVIII, 
36) and Bodhisattvas of Mathura of somewhat later date lack the 
supra-sensuous elegance, sensitiveness, and high spirituality of 
Sarnath. The influence and tradition of Mathura are also found in 
distant localities, e.g. the seated Buddha image dated A.D. 448-49 
from Mankuwar, Allahabad District (PI. XX, 43). 1 This image has 
a peculiar head-dress and also the webbed hand, a traditional mark 
of Buddha. 

III. EARLY SCHOOLS OF SCULPTURE (FOURTH TO 

SEVENTH CENTURY) 

1. North India 

The process and experience that Mathura and Sarnath went 
through in the fifth and sixth centuries was largely shared by other 
centres as well, in varying degrees of depth and intensity according 
to local pre-conditions—-ethnical, social and religious. 

Very few specimens from Aryavarta proper (Ganga-Yamuna 
valley) and Malwa register the experience of the elevated spiritual 
existence of Sarnath or even Mathura. Such examples as that of 
the Karttikeya (PL XX, 44) (Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras), 2 the 
Lokesvara or Siva (Pl. XXI, 46) (Sarnath Museum), 3 one or two 
images from Gwalior (PL XXII, 51), 4 the Ekamukha Linga 5 from 
Khoh in the Nagcd State (PL XXI, 48), etc., which come nearest to 
the Sarnath plastic conception, are relatively slightly thinner in 
spiritual experience and hence also slightly different in treatment 

1. FAS, p. 173, fig. 119. 3. Ibid. fig. 171. 

2. HIIA, fig. 175. 4. H1IA, fig. 173; KIS, fig. 60. 

5. MASI, No. 16, p. 5; PRASL WC, 1920, pp. 106-7, PI. XXIX. 


525 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


as well. Generally speaking, the figures are relatively heavy and 
spread out; the modelling terse and the outline more slow and 
polished than gliding and melting. The Ganga relief from Besnagar 
(PI. XXII, 49), 1 the Durga-MahishamardinI and the bust of Siva from 
Bhumara have the characteristically quiet poise and balance of the 
Sarnath tradition, but they too partake of the qualities of relatively 
short and heavy appearance, terse modelling and a slow outline. 
The figures of the Anantasayin relief (PI. XXII, 50), Dasavatara 
temple, Deogarh, perhaps of a slightly later date, are heavier still, 
modeling relaxed without meaning and the outline almost hardened 
to an extent that the figures are confined within their own shape. 
Here, in all these examples, there is perhaps a lower level of expe- 
rience—the kind is the same—-which is responsible for the difference 
in aesthetic treatment and achievement. 

The strong accent of the common denominator of Gupta art is 
equally impressed on the reliefs (fifth century) from the architrave 
of Garhwa (PL XIX, 40-42), near Allahabad (Lucknow Museum). 
The equipoise and balance, the ease and spontaneity of existence, 
the subtle and delicate plastic treatment, and the proud but detached 
and self-composed disposition of the figures belong essentially to 
the age and the locality that produced them, in spite of the Hellenic 
contrapost motif learnt from Vengi and the draped garment motif 
from Mathura noticeable in some of the figures. 

But even in Aryavarta other forces and traditions were at work. 

The Siva-Parvati relief from Kosam (PL XXIII, 53) 2 and the 
Ramayana panels from the Dasavatara (PI. XXIII, 52), 3 Deogarh 
(Jhansi), bring up-to-date an older tradition of narrative reliefs, 
and are different in conception and treatment from those of the 
larger number of Sarnath relief sculptures. Whereas in the latter 
the figures are not only compositionallv detached but also emotional¬ 
ly and spiritually so, in the former, in spite of a quiet poise and 
detachment which are the common denominator of Gupta sculptures 
of the North, there is a compositional linking up of figures and planes 
and a certain coarseness which spring from a different level of social 
experience. Definitely they are much less elegant and spiritual, much 
less refined and luminous than the products of the Sarnath School, 
but more homely and more intimate which is perhaps due to a closer 
relation w T ith day-to-day life. 

Closely related to these in socio-religious experience, and simi¬ 
larly bringing up-to-date the older tradition of narrative reliefs, 
are such examples as the Krishna-Govardhana-dharana panel from 


1. HU A, fig. 177. 


2. ASI, 1913-14, PI. LXXb. 


3. HIIA , fig. 167. 




ART 


Mandor (PL XXI, 47), 1 and the door panel from Nagari, 2 both in 
Raj put ana and belonging to about the beginning of the fifth century. 
While in the physiognomical type and plastic form of a softer body- 
surface of the Deogarh and Kosam examples the Sarnath idiom 
makes itself felt, the sturdy and broad body-type, the pronounced 
linear accent and a relatively general hardness of plastic treatment 
of the Rajputana examples belong to the legacy of Kushana-Mathura. 
But in both cases the quiet poise of the figures is derived from the 
age that produced them, while their homely intimacy and sturdi¬ 
ness seem to belong to a social and religious experience different 
from what produced the luminous Buddhist sculptures of Sarnath. 
It is the same difference that distinguishes the highly subtle Maba- 
yana-Yogachara thought from the broad and homely philosophy 
of the Puranas, a difference reflected not only in the respective 
plastic formulations but also in the themes and subjects of the speci 
mens discussed above. 

This broad, and homely sturdiness of physical type and artistic 
vision-—an inheritance from the days of Sanchl—was understood 
again in a different context in Malwa. There the sturdy physical 
type, relatively broad and of heavy consistency, is treated in con 
centrated roundness and in a tough plastic idiom. This will be evi¬ 
dent from a close comparison of the female busts from different 
sites in Malwa [Gahga image, Besnagar (PL XXII, 49) ; 3 Apsara, 
Gwalior Museum (PL XXI 45) ; 4 lintel of torana gateway, Pawaya, 
Gwalior Museum] 5 on the one hand and those from Banaras, Rajgir 
and Tezpur on the other The Malwa specimens are invariably 
heavy, round and tough, while the eastern ones are soft, slender 
and delicate. But the heavy consistency and concentrated round- 
ness of the sturdy body is nowhere more in evidence than in those 
specimens where the figures are formed out of the live rock, as those 
of the Bdayagiri caves near Bhilsa (e.g. the Vishnu of Cave No. 2; 
Anantasayin Vishnu; the figure of Bhudevi of the Varahavatara 
relief; also the standing Siva, Mandasor; the figures of the Yaso- 
dharman pillars, Mandasor; and the Narasimha image in the Gwalior 
Museum). 6 Even the Buddhist images of the Bagh caves have not 
been able to escape this broad and heavy consistency and this con¬ 
centration in height and roundness. It is not unlikely that these 
qualities are indirectly conditioned by local ethnic legacy on the 
one hand and the vigorous social thought of Puranic integration on 
the other. 


1. HII A, fig. 16 . 3. HII A, fig. 177. 

2. Ind. Sc., p. 172, fig. 61. 4. H1IA, fig. 175. 

5. AS1, 1924-25, p. 165, PI. XLIII (c) and (d). 

6. HII A, fig. 170; KIS. 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The monumental Varahavatara relief in Udayagiri (PI. XXIV, 
55), however, stands by itself. While it fully shares in the average 
plastic qualities of the Udayagiri sculptures, its monumental quality 
belongs as much to the cosmic myth it portrays, as to the live rock 
itself that lends its deep impressiveness to the heaving, commanding 
mass of the image rendered in slow, heavy and tough plasticity. 
Located in Malwa, traditionally and psychologically the Varahavatara 
(fifth century) stretches one of its arms towards the Surya of Bhaja 
(second century B.C.) and the other to the sculptures of heavy but 
dynamic mass of Badami, Eliora and Elephanta (sixth, seventh and 
eighth centuries). 

2. Eastern India 

The soft and subtle music of Sarnath was listened to in Eastern 
India with rapt attention. But the Prachya country, which had in¬ 
herited a culture and ethnic character different from those of 
Aryavarta, endowed the subtle delicacy and spiritual refinement of 
Sarnath with a warmth of emotion and a sensuous appeal. This is 
evident not only in the colossal copper image of the standing 
Buddha from Sultanganj (PI. XXV, 58), Bhagalpur (Birmingham 
Museum) 1 and the huge metal image of the Buddha from Nalanda 
(Nalanda Museum), but also in such examples as the stone image 
of the Buddha from Bihar ail (PI. XXV, 57) (Rajshahi Museum), 
the stucco reliefs of the Maniyar Math (PI. XXV, 59), Rajgir, and 
the two stone images of the river-goddesses of Ganga and Yamuna 
from Dah Parvatiya (PL XXVI, 60, 62), Tezpur. 2 The Sultanganj 
and Nalanda examples seem still to prefer the Mathuraesque treat¬ 
ment of the robe in conventional folds and curly fringes, but the 
Rajgir, Biharail and Tezpur specimens closely follow the vision and 
idiom of Sarnath; but everywhere, nevertheless, the unearthly sub¬ 
limation of Sarnath is subtly touched by a charm and emotion that 
are essentially human. This is achieved by very slight variations 
of the form of the face and the plastic treatment of the body. 

In the Brahmanical bas-reliefs on the pillars from Chandimau 
(PL XXIV, 56), decidedly of a homelier and more variegated charac¬ 
ter than the schematic ones from Sarnath reliefs of the same period, 
altogether a different aesthetic impulse and social experience seem 
to have been at work. Plastically the figures are concentrated in 
height and roundness, and if the decorative embellishments wind 
their curly way in a rhythmically capricious manner, the figures 
themselves are also poised in lively and vivacious movements. Un¬ 
doubtedly these reliefs reveal a fondness for contrast in light and 


1. HIIA,, fig. 160. 


2. AS1, 1924-25, p, 98, PL XXXII (a) and (b). 
528 





ART 


shade, for vivacious and lively narration and a homelier feeling and 
atmosphere unknown to or uncared for by Sarnath. 

3. The Deccan 

The Deccan has yielded to us very few specimens that can de¬ 
finitely be dated in the fifth century or are representative enough 
for a clear understanding of the tendencies. But the sixth century 
introduces us to forces that are vital and varied. 

The quality of the Aihole reliefs (PI. XXVII, 63) is on the whole 
mediocre, both compositionally and plastically, and a thin lyricism 
imparts to the figures of gods and their flying associates a feminine 
grace that has nothing to do with other contemporary sculptures of 
the Deccan of this period—Parel or Badami, Ajanta or Kanheri. Of 
the sublimated energy, deeper wisdom, and spiritual bliss of Sarnath. 
these reliefs have heard but hardly experienced anything. But at 
the same time Sarnath has imparted her quiet poise and balance and 
her soft and delicate plastic treatment to the supple and elongated 
human body of Aihole. This suppleness and elongation, however, 
are contributions from the South; they connect Aihole with the 
Andhra school on the one hand and the Pallava school on the other. 

The contemporary Buddhist reliefs of the Kanheri (PI. XXVII, 
64) 1 caves somewhat register the reverberations of Sarnath, but 
that too very feebly and without any sign of illumination or the 
slightest suggestion of latent energy. A stiffness of pose and a tight 
modelling hold the figures within their outlines, and they seem to 
carry their burden with a mute insensibility. Compositionally de¬ 
tached and without any inter-relatedness of inner idea or outer 
rhythm, the insensitive stiffness of the figures reveals that at least 
so far as Buddhist art in the Deccan was concerned, the meaning and 
significance of the fluid and luminous thought that produced the 
weightless figures of the Ganga-Yamuna valley were but little under¬ 
stood and experienced. 

This is equally noticeable, though in a different wav, in the 
numerous seated or standing figures of Buddhas (Pl. XXVIII, 66) 
and other divinities that decorate the walls and facades of the Ajanta 
caves of about the same period. There the figures are condensed 
in height and characterised by a spongy roundness. Seemingly 
weighty, they have hardly any suggestion or feeling of energy and 
strength, either physical or spiritual, and despite a more sensitive 
treatment of the plastic surface and a quiet poise they seem to be 
mute and drowsy. Of spiritual luminosity they know nothing; and 
whatever physical vigour they have appears to be disintegrating 
under the burden of drowsy exhaustion. 

TTHiiiCfigT:163! ~ 


529 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


It is not by the standards of the common denominators of the 
age and more particularly of the North that we can evaluate con¬ 
temporary plastic achievements of the Deccan, for ethnic and geo¬ 
graphic preconditions seem to have marked out this region for mak¬ 
ing contributions to Indian art of altogether a different character, 
different in vision and outlook, different in social and psychological 
origins, and different in method and treatment. Outstanding illus¬ 
trations of this character, so far as the sixth century is concerned, 
hail from Badami and Parel which bring up-to-date the trends and 
traditions that had been at work at Bhaja and Karli. 

Of heavy and monumental size and proportion are the figures 
of the magnificent relief from Pare! (PL XXVIII, 65). 1 The three 
vertical figures seem to rise slowly upwards from the formless cos¬ 
mic depths of the earth’s bottom; remnants of the unformed still 
cling to the figures of the ganas at the bottom. Deeply absorbed in 
themselves in supreme concentration, their dynamic but latent 
energy and strength, that belong to the heaving earth, seem to swell 
them from within with heavy solidity. The accessory figures, rang¬ 
ed in a vigorous and dynamic composition and connected in inherent 
relation, are also dynamic in movement, but they too sink them¬ 
selves in deepest absorption and like the main figures, of whom they 
are manifestations, hold their dynamism in store, mainly in the chest 
which expands in breadth and roundness, but also in other parts of 
the body where solid masses take shape and form by pressure from 
within. All this is controlled by a clear but flowing outline. Such 
powerful plastic conception and treatment of the body surface, such 
latent dynamism and movement, and such radiation of energy are 
unknown to contemporary Sarnath; yet paradoxically enough, both 
proceed from the innermost concentration of mind or Yoga. 

The same vision and conception of form bring forth the figures 
and compositions of the rock-cut sculptures of the Badami caves. 
What lies latent in the Parel figures or in that of the Anantaiayin 
Vishnu of cave III (Badami) bursts forth in powerful and dynamic 
gestures in the reliefs of the Badami caves (PL XXIX, 68-71). 2 Here, 
too, the bodies of the principal divinities are heavy and monumental 
in proportion; they are full and solidly built, but unlike those of 
Parel the plastic treatment is slightly coarse and more generalised. 
What is significant is that here, too, the emphasis is cn the plastic 
conception and execution of dynamic but latent energy, condensed 
and concentrated within the physical frame, an energy that rises 
from deeper and more vital sources of life. These principal figures 
entirely dominate their respective compositions, and the actual 
limits of their bodies and limbs are not the connoted or suggested 
TTkIS, fig. 66. ~2 T ibid. fig. 67. ~~ 

530 







ART 


limits of their dynamic extension. In fact, their latent dynamism 
extends far beyond their shapes to the limits of the panel itself and 
embraces all subsidiary figures which, since they have hardly any¬ 
thing to contribute to the main figure, are sometimes worked out 
more freely and elaborately. But the minor figures and the elabo¬ 
rate apparels of the principal divinities are all fully subordinated 
to the large and spreading composition of the main figures. The 
weightiness of their monumentalised bodies and their condensed 
energy, pent up within the body along with the dynamic extension 
of the composition, lend to the reliefs of Badami a meaning and 
significance unknown to Sarnath. They make the live rock the 
cradle of their superhuman energy and aboriginal vitality. 

IV. LATER SCHOOLS OF SCULPTURE (SEVENTH CENTURY) 

1, Middle and East India 

No dated sculpture of the seventh century is so far known, but 
quite a considerable number of them can be assigned to the period 
on stylistic and other grounds. The first half of the seventh cen¬ 
tury enjoyed a kind of loose political cohesion under the Pushya- 
bhuti empire, but immediately after the death of Harsha-vardhana 
the political fabric disintegrated into numerous warring and petty 
autonomous states, and not until the middle of the eighth century 
did Northern India settle down to comparatively secure social and 
political conditions. A century of regional psychology, fostered by 
political and geographical exclusiveness, gradually helped to bring 
to the fore local tastes and prejudices, and give scope for regional, 
social, and aesthetic ideals to slowly crystallize into concrete visual 
forms, and thus give rise to local regional schools. But though the 
process seems to have been at work already from the seventh century, 
this did not actually happen in any appreciable form before the 
middle of the eighth. 

Throughout the Canga-Yamuna valley, mainly represented by 
Sarnath, and in Bengal and Bihar, the Gupta plastic conception of 
the fifth and sixth centuries was disintegrating from sheer exhaus¬ 
tion and almost unbearable grace and refinement. Further explo¬ 
ration along the same line seemed impossible, and the soft tender¬ 
ness and fluid illumination held by a melting line and unbelievably 
sensitive modelling were slowly but surely collapsing; the result 
was an all round coarseness of treatment and meaningless heaviness 
of form. 

The more important mid-Indian examples assignable to the 
seventh century continue to hail mainly from Sarnath (PI. XXVIII, 
67) and its spiritual extension, Nalanda. A meaningless and drowsy 


531 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


heaviness of form, generated by a heavy and continuous feasting 
on the remnants of a generation, burdens ail figures. What had 
been creative means is now reduced to formulas that carry no signi¬ 
ficance. The plastic surface grows coarse while the outline loses its 
fluidity. In the subsequent century, however, Nalanda puts a brake 
to the process of disintegration by a tightening up of the modelling 
and deficiency of a firm outline. The bodily type remains throughout 
a legacy from the Gupta ideal and tradition of the Gahga-Yamuna 
valley. What happens at a later stage need not be discussed here 
but will form the subject-matter of the regional Eastern school of 
sculpture, to be dealt with in a subsequent volume. 

A couple of metal images from Bengal (the Sarvani image of 
queen Prabhavatl, Dacca Museum; 1 bronze &iva, Ajit Ghosh col¬ 
lection, Calcutta) which may be assigned to the seventh century 
also reveal the slowing down of the high tide of Gupta tradition in 
its Eastern version, and very little remains in them of the latter’s 
refined sensuousness and sensitive abstractions. The stiff and coarse 
Sarvani is but a forerunner of the conventional cult image of a 
later age. But a few stone sculptures from Paharpur, 2 assignable 
roughly to this or a slightly later period, cling more honestly and 
tenaciously for some time yet to the East Indian version of the 
Sarnath tradition. The plastic character of the so-called Radha- 
Krishna relief (PI. XXX, 72) of Paharpur and of the lady with a 
bird on a jamb from Bhagalpur (PI. XXXI, 74) has all the grace 
and poise, and warm sensuousness and human charm of the Nagin! 
of Maniyar Math (Rajgir) 3 and the Ganga and Yamuna of Dah 
Parvatiya (Tezpur). 4 

But a very deep aesthetic and social significance attaches to a 
good number of stone reliefs (PI. XXX, 73) from the same Paharpur 
monument. Of heavy and coarse features and appearance and of 
indifferent proportion, without any trace of refined sensitiveness or 
cultured sophistication, the naive and simple figures of these reliefs 
are modelled into form in a carefree manner. Their plasticity is in 
their movement and in their dynamic composition and powerful 
rhythm. Free from the trammels of formularisations, the art of 
these sculptures derives its inspiration directly from the day-to-day 
life around, and it is the immediate experience of the dynamism and 
purposeful rhythm of daily life itself that has been imparted into 
these sculptures. Intensely lively, powerful and human, these ex¬ 
amples represent what must have been a submerged art of the peo¬ 
ple of Bengal, which was given but little scope for coming to the 

1. HBR , fisr. 147. 

2. NASI. No. 55, by K. N. Dikshit. Delhi, 193S, pp. 37-55. 

3. HU A, fig. 176. 4. See above, p. 528. 


532 



ART 


fore again before the late mediaeval period, when social and politi¬ 
cal conditions were favourable for a re-assertion of local and popular 
expressions in art and literature. 

2. Malum and Rajputdna 

What happened to the art of Malwa and Rajputana in the seventh 
century cannot be definitely ascertained. A few stray examples 1 
that may stylistically be dated in the period are not substantial 
enough to suggest conclusions. 

Generally speaking, condensed plasticity, concentrated round¬ 
ness and a terseness of treatment seem to characterise the products 
of this period. In Sanchi (PI. XXXII, 77) for example, these charac¬ 
teristics are visible in a number of sculptures assignable to the 
seventh and eighth centuries. To what extent Deccan contributed 
to this phase of Malwa art is difficult to say, but a certain impress 
of contemporary Deccanese accent seems to be indicated. 

With this Malwa-Rajpntana idiom we can perhaps link up cer¬ 
tain wooden reliefs of the Brahmor temple 2 and some large metal 
images of Chamba, 3 assignable to the end of the seventh or the 
beginning of the eighth century. The essentially Malwa firmness 
of outline and lightness of modelling that grip a solid body are here, 
too, marked by an elegance that recalls the Aryavarta ideal of a 
previous age. 

A comparison of the Malwa-Rajputana specimens of the late 
seventh and eighth centuries with those of Nalanda, Bengal, and 
Orissa of the eighth century, strikingly illustrates the interesting 
fact noted above that a slow but gradual transition of the plastic 
conception was taking place all over Middle and Eastern India. 

3. The Deccan 

While Aryavarta was going through the pangs of disintegration 
of an old tradition and the birth of a new art, Deccan was fulfilling 
her destined mission of carrying on the tradition of Bhaja and Karli, 
of Parel and Badami to its final creative perfection. The results at 
its most important stages are to be seen in the caves at Ellora, 
Pattadakal, Aurangabad and Elephanta. 

Seventh century work at Ell ora (Ravana-ka-khai, Dasavatara 
Romes vara and Dhumar Lena caves; cf. Pis. XXXII, 79; XXXIII, 89; 
VIII, 16 and IX, 17) is distinguished by the same heaviness and 

1. Cf. Avalokitesvara from Sanchi (PI. XXXII. 77) and a female bust from Gwalior 
(PI. XXXT. 75) and the lower part of a female figure (Pi. XXXI, 76). 

2. Vogel, Av iquilies of Camba Slate, p. 7, fig. 2. 

3. Ibid. cf. Metal image of the Buddha from Fathpur, Kangra (PI. XXXII, 78). 


533 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


broadness of physiognomical form, and by the same concentrated 
power and energy that radiate and transcend the physical frame as 
in Badami of a previous generation. But while in Badami a general¬ 
ised modelling diffuses the total accumulated power and energy 
evenly to all parts of the body, in Ellora a differentiated modelling 
localises the widespread energy in particular parts of the body ac¬ 
cording to its flexions, attitudes, and movements, and there it is 
condensed and focussed. To keep harmony with such differentiated 
modelling and localised and condensed energy, the clear and flow¬ 
ing outline of Badami is replaced by one that is tense and terse 
in agitated restraint. What in Badami and Parel was in deepest 
absorption and meditation, accumulating endless power and energy, 
now seems to be slowly on the surge to expand and act, but is yet 
kept in fullest restraint. Eyes that had once been closed with the 
inward look have now opened and the figures are slowly emerging 
out into the world of creative gestures and movements; monogra¬ 
phic gestures and movements were known in Badami as well, but 
there they had remained steeped in absorption. 

The slow 7 emergence of this life of movement, of tension and 
differentiation is brought about by the character of the relief as well. 
The reliefs are as a rule sunk at the darkest and deep st bottom of 
the recesses of the caves whence the figures are made to emerge 
towards light and space in a slightly diagonal direction of forthcom¬ 
ing. This direction of emergence and movement is underlined by 
projecting pilasters as well as by a sideward flexion of the upper 
part of the body with horizontal shoulders. The modelled volume 
of the figures is thus given a lively play in light and darkness and 
the diagonal direction towards space lends to the plastic conception 
and composition a widened meaning and significance. Space which 
dwells apart thus becomes an integral part of the relief and fully 
plays its part in both. 

The same plastic conception of volume and compositional move¬ 
ment characterises the relief of the Aurangabad caves (PI. XXXIII, 
81) as well, where differentiated modelling of volume exploits more 
fully the darkness of the recesses of caves and the light of unfilled 
and delimited space. 

Towards the middle of the eighth century the reliefs of the 
temples of Pattadakal register the impress of the South Indian Pal- 
lava tradition of Mamallapuram (also called Mahabalipuram) and 
Kanchlpuram right on their Deecanese inheritance; but the two are 
not yet fully blended into a creative synthesis. The figures attain 
a slender suppleness and elegance so characteristic of the south of 
a previous age. The easy, silent and graceful movements add charm 


ART 

to the architectonic dignity and proportion of not a few of the panels 
worked in high relief. Indted, much more refined and elevated in 
taste and serious and condensed in spirit, the Pattadakal reliefs lift 
to a much higher level the light and thin plastic conception of the 
South. 

But. in the array of the powerful and magnificent reliefs of the 
Kailasanatha temple of eighth century at Ellora, the process at work 
at Pattadakal reaches maturity, and the creative fusion of concen¬ 
trated and sustained power and heaviness of form of the Deccan 
and of ease, grace and suppleness of the South results in mighty 
carvings of forceful movement and noble and dignified elegance 
blended into one. The slowly rising movement of the seventh century 
Ellora now gathers speed and bursts forth into moments of intense 
activity and abandon of the body and spirit. The condensation of 
ever-present energy and latent power now releases itself in force¬ 
ful direction that bends the figures in a bowlike arch diagonally 
pushing forward (the Mahishamardinl relief—PL XXXV, 84) 1 or 
brings them in rapturous and violent embrace (the Mithuna relief) 
or surges them into violent gestures and vigorous movements (the 
scene of Havana shaking Kailasa, PL XXXIV, 82). 2 Even when 
they are seated or standing at ease (the Siva-Parvatl scene, 3 the 
river-goddess reliefs), they retain in their slender bodies an attitude 
of dignified command, and while hying exhibit an active and con¬ 
scious effort at speed. 

All this is attained by a thorough mastery of a detailed and 
differentiated modelling of the volume. The degree of localised 
tenseness and condensation of power depends upon the speed and 
vigour of the movement itself. The diagonal direction of forthcom¬ 
ing is equally potent here and is nowhere more in evidence than in 
the bow-like arches of principal and subsidiary figures. In not a 
few of the reliefs the entire composition is dictated by this direction 
of movement with a slight flexion of the chest and horizontal 
shoulders (scenes of Dance of &iva, of Vishnu, Narasimha, of Mahi- 
shamardinl, etc.). Effects of light and darkness are exploited to the 
full, not only according to the degree of coming forward into snace, 
but also in accordance with the requirements of the theme and the 
psychological states of the actors on the stage. This is done, as 
required, by grading the relief with the help of receding cuts or 
by effecting deep and dark recesses into the rock of the cave. 

If Pattadakal and Ellora release stage by stage the stored up 
power and energy of Bhaja, Karli, Parel and Badami into forceful 
and violent movements of might and command, Elenbanta 4 brings 

1. KIS, fig. 75. 2 1 Ibid , fig. 78. 3. HIIA, fig. 193. 4. Ibid , figs. 194-5. 

535 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


forth the final vision of primeval energy drawing its sap from the 
bottom of creation and accumulating it through millenniums within 
the limits of the human frame, till the concentrated vigour and 
latent power sw T ell the body to its utmost limits in solid and rounded 
forms of mighty proportions (PI. XXXV, 85). There it abides for 
all time in pristine grandeur and absorbed in deepest concentration. 
In Badami the tall and heavy crowns elaborately carved weighed 
on the gods with their downward thrusts; here they are worn 
lightly and accentuate the upward direction, and the curly locks 
and rich ornaments frame the weighty and impersonal faces of the 
mighty divinities in a significant plastic contrast. A simple and 
highly generalised modelling of the volume gives to them power and 
dignity unsurpassed. In concentrated and latent power and energy, 
in sublimated consciousness of dynamic movement, in monumental 
poise and grandeur, in elemental dimension and in power and 
balance of composition, the Elephanta reliefs are the last word in 
rock-cut sculptures of the Deccan. The last limit of perfection is 
reached and nothing remains to be explored. 

The dharmachakra-pravarttana Buddha of Sarnath (PI. XVIII, 
37) and the ^ivaite reliefs of Elephanta represent the two utmost 
heights and extensions of India’s quest in the realm of spirit reached 
in the concreteness of plastic vision and form, while the bronze Nata- 
raja of the Tamil genius of a later period represents the third. But 
the first and second are truly classical in the strictest sense of the 
term and reach the highest level of supreme classical consummation. 

An Ajanta inscription of presumably the fifth or sixth century 
records, in a moment of self-deluded exultation of the author, that 
Krishna, Sankara and other gods have beaten a precipitate retreat 
before the advance of the doctrine of the Buddha! Whatever might 
have been the case with Buddhism in the South in the sixth and 
seventh centuries, Buddhist art in the Deccan as represented by 
examples at Ajanta and Kanheri, we have seen, was already on the 
verge of collapse and disintegration. The same languorous 
and spongy modelling of an otherwise heavy but elegant body cha¬ 
racterises the reliefs of the almost contemporary Buddhist caves at 
Lon ad, not very far from Bombay. In the eighth century, how¬ 
ever, the rock-cut reliefs of Nasik (cave XVI) show figures whose 
flowing and disciplined outline seeks vainly to impart subtlety to 
an otherwise thin and spread-out volume of the body. On the 
whol°, compared with contemporary Brahmanical works at Ellora. 
Aurangabad, Pattadakal and Elephanta, all pregnant with the vigo¬ 
rous energy and dynamic movement, latent or expressed, of a renas¬ 
cent culture, the heavy and languorous Buddhist works bear the 


ART 


mark of evident exhaustion and final collapse. In the north, we 
have seen, this collapse was arrested in time by a fresh process of 
integration with a new conception and outlook of life. 

4. The South: Mdrnallapuram and Ktinchlpuram 

The sea-shore rocks of Mamallapuram in the South burst forth 
in stately and elegant flowers in the seventh century under the great 
Fallavas. Enriched in the meanwhile by the experience gone 
through in Aryavarta, Malwa and the Deccan, they brought the in¬ 
heritance of the Andhra school up-to-date and contributed to it their 
own share of knowledge and experience that belonged to the age. 

The enormous Gangavatarana (?) relief (PL XXXIY, 83),' ! carved 
in epic scale, in epic breadth, simplicity, and directness, on the 
entire face of a cliff, is inspired by the rock itself. The theme be¬ 
longs to the rock and it utilises the surface composition of the rock 
with its cracks, crevices, rectangles and roundels for purposes of 
relief composition itself. Such attempts were made at Bhaja and 
Udayagiri, but nowhere else than at Mamallapuram are the reliefs 
so organically related to the rock. Inside the enormous, concep¬ 
tually unlimited expanse of the composition, and along either side 
of the Ganga descending from heaven to earth, is grouped a whole 
world of men, animals, gods, ascetics, serpent-deities and semi-divine 
beings. The sympathy with, and understanding of, all sentient 
beings and the deep and fresh love of nature that were once in evi¬ 
dence on the early Buddhist reliefs of Sanchi are here once more 
brought to the fore, and all creatures in their most loving and 
joyous existence are drawn together round the life-giving current 
of the river. That ascetic cat, so humorously realistic, or that ele¬ 
gant and intensely life-like pair of deer, that old and emaciated 
Brahmana ascetic bent with age, or on the other adjoining cliff, that 
intensely lively pastoral scene of the milking of a cow, or that sculp¬ 
tured block showing a monkey family-—all these testify to the un¬ 
bounded love of this art for the little joys and little sideways of 
life, and to its close observation and love of nature. 

The joyous and effortless existence of life is here taken for 
granted; everything here is thin, light and obvious and, frankly 
there is here no trace of spiritual quest. What gives them poise and 
dignity is the restrained measure of their movement. The figures 
just burst forth like flowers into light from the body of the rock and 
there they exist against a flat ground, jostling in a crowded world 
without vegetation or any sort of decoration. Since they all disport 

1. KIS, fig. 71. Mr. Ramachandran has recently identified the rock-cut reliefs 
of Mamallapuram as representing the epic and Pauranic story of the encounter 
of Arjuna with the Kirata (Kirutdrjuntyam). Cf. JISOA, XVIII, 54 ff. 

537 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


themselves on the hat face of the rock, any deep display of light 
and darkness is uncalled for; there is thus no deep mystery or in¬ 
tense drama of vigorous action as one experiences at Eliora or 
Bad ami. Everything here is clear and self-evident; a simple, clear 
and definite experience gone through with a cultivated detachment 
and disciplined strength calls for no subtlety and depth of conception 
or form. 

There are also other reliefs at Mamallapuram (PL XXXVI, 87) 
which belong to temples cut out of live rock. They are in most 
cases made to emerge from the vertically set, low sunk, rectangular 
panels hanked by shafts of pilasters, and are obviously architectonic 
in character. Of tall and slender Andhra type, but with a much 
simplified and generalised modelling and much more disciplined 
and restrained, the height of the figures is underlined by the verti¬ 
cal direction of the shafts and the panel itself as well as by tall and 
slim arms and legs and high and pointed crowns. Despite bhangas 
of intended grace and refinement the figures never, not even the 
female ones, miss their architectonic discipline. This is so even in 
those reliefs where no architectural device is called for, as in those 
of the Gangavatarana rock. 

With a simplified and generalised modelling the sensuousness 
of the Andhra school melted away, but not the pliability which is 
now endowed with a cultured dignity and detachment. A conscious¬ 
ness of power heightened by broad shoulders in the case of male 
figures and by disciplined strength gives to gods and men a noble 
and aristocratic bearing. Gods perforce had to be formularised, but 
kings and queens—we are told by epigraphs that they are contem¬ 
porary ‘portraits—and even ordinary mortals, despite comparative 
ease of posture and attitude, never fail to achieve this bearing. 
Female figures are much slighter and thinner with their narrow chest 
and shoulders, smaller breasts, minimum jewellery and apparel, and 
their generally very submissive and dependant attitude. Invariably 
they appear to lean or incline towards their male counterparts with a 
graceful bhang a that bases itself on a pair of firm hips. But whether 
it is a male or a female, a god or a king (there is nothing to distinguish 
them except by the inscriptions), a divinity or an ordinary mortal, a 
disciplined impersonal attitude characterises all facial and bodily 
appearances. This attitude, as already pointed out, is not born of 
any inner experience or meditative principle or of any deep expe 
rience of life. It is but formal acceptance of life with a cultured 
and aristocratic detachment. Indeed, for deeper or subtler expe¬ 
rience, either in the sense of the Deccan or of Aryavarta, Mamalla¬ 
puram seems to care little. 


538 


ABT 


In the eighth century reliefs of the Kailasanatha temple of 
Kanchipuram the thin and light plastic context of Mamallapuram 
has become thinner and lighter still. The collapse and disintegra¬ 
tion is just arrested as in the North by a firmer and more precise 

outline. 

V. VEGETAL AND GEOMETRIC DECORATIVE CARVINGS 

A word must be said about the vegetal and geometric carvings 
of the period. It has already been pointed out that the human figure 
pushed all rich decorative patterns comprising the animal and 
vegetal v/orld or purely abstract geometric devices out of the reliefs 
on to the borders or to sculptural and architectural bands and panels 
where they kept themselves confined in their exclusiveness. There 
they are vital, prolific, and brimful in their richness and exuberance, 
but always chaste and elegant. Precisely outlined beads and roset¬ 
tes, exquisite arabesques and dentils, fully and richly modelled stalks 
and foliages, twisted rope-designs with hanging pearls and other 
ornaments, intertwined creepers and figures of ganas, men, women, 
and grotesques, all deeply and obliquely cut into clear and precise 
form, meander their sinuous and capricious courses in a curly and 
concentric manner, and are bathed all over in a rich display of light 
and darkness. The technical perfection of rich craftsmanship of the 
period and of imaginative fertility is everywhere in evidence. 

Apart from such rich and exuberant vegetal patterns there are 
other devices, often side by side, of geometric abstractions, like 
Swastika motifs in repetitions and combinations, diamond-shaped 
ornaments formed by crossing of parallel lines, chess-board patterns, 
etc,., all cut with flat and angular surfaces—-nowhere so prominent 
as in the ornamentation of the Dhamek stupa of Sarnath and in 
certain door-frames of contemporary temples. Here too there is a 
pleasing display of light and darkness, but the general effect is com¬ 
paratively less warm and variegated. Abstract geometrical devices 
had so far been very rare in Indian plastic art; the Gupta period 
introduces and makes them popular, and from now onwards, i.e. from 
the eighth century they are used in profusion throughout Northern 
India. 1 

A study of these rich vegetal and geometric decorative patterns 
of the period in a geographical context showes that they are most 
prolifically and profusely used in the plastic art and architecture of 
the Gahga-Yamuna valley and the Prachva country. Already in 
Malwa they are but sparingly employed, while in the rock-cut reliefs 


1. FAS . fig. 115, PI. XXXVII. 


539 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of the Deccan and the South they are practically excluded. While 
this may have been due, basically, to ethnic reasons, it is not alto¬ 
gether impossible that it was also partly due to the respective gov¬ 
erning ideologies of the times, at least in the Aryavarta and the 
Deccan. The subtle and mystical thought process of Aryavarta left 
in her elevated and spiritual plastic formulations of the relief, with 
its pivotal human figure, hardly any scope for richly imaginative and 
capricious decorative devices which had perforce to find their place 
away on the borders and architectural panels. And, since the vegetal 
principle was alive and potent in the human figure itself, it was al¬ 
ready there and had to find its place somewhere. In the Deccan, 
rock-cut themes themselves enter into elemental depths and dimen¬ 
sions, and reside in realms where is eternal darkness and where there 
is no vegetation, no movement, no light, and no scope for any diffe¬ 
rentiation. Nor was the vegetal principle alive and active anywhere 
in the conception of the human figure as in the North. 

VI. GENERAL REVIEW 

The Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of Sarnath. of the fifth and sixth 
centuries represent the plastic process and final achievement of a 
highly subtle and mystical, fluid and luminous thought known to us 
as the Mahayana-Yogachara brought up-to-date by contemporary 
Buddhist thinkers. They are the culmination of a spiritual quest 
that started its career in the early centuries of the Christian era. 
In the context of plastic examples extant, the most important centres 
of this quest were Mathura and Sarnath, roughly the Ganga-Ya¬ 
muna valley, though reverberations of Mathura and Sarnath were 
heard from Assam to the farthest North-west and from Kashmir to 
the Vindhyas. What we see in Aryavarta during these centuries 
is the fruition of this quest, so far as plastic creations, mainly Bud¬ 
dhist at any rate, are concerned. But contemporary Brahmanical 
sculptures also, at least quite a few of them and those of Aryavarta 
again, were inspired by this quest; it is enough to refer in this con¬ 
nection to the Karttikeya from Banaras and the Ekamukha Liziga 
from Khoh in the Nagod State. But the majority of Brahmanical 
sculptures, though belonging to the common denominator of Gupta 
plastic vision, was not touched by this thought and spiritual quest, in 
a word by the Yogachara cultural outlook; it is enough to refer the 
readers to the Brahmanical reliefs from Rajaona, Deogarh, Udaya- 
giri, Mandasor and Besnagar. 

A study of the reiigio-philosophieal literature, both Buddhist 
and Brahmanical, of the period shows that from about the third 
and fourth centuries, Aryavarta was in a great ferment of thought 


540 


ART 


and minds and ideas came into conflict with minds and ideas, and in 
these and following centuries combatants came roughly to be ranged 
on two sides, one representing the thought of Nagarjuna, Aryadeva, 
Asahga, Vasubandhu and Dihnaga, another represented by the Yoga- 
sutras and Nyayasutras, by Vatsyayana, Uddyotakara and Kumar ila, 
to name only a few. Out of this ferment and turmoil evolved a neo- 
Brahmanism, sturdy and vigorous in action, robust and virile in 
imagination, fertile in creation and comprehensively ethnic in ori¬ 
gin. This neo-Brahmanism found popular expression in the con¬ 
temporary redactions of the Puranas and the Epics that brought up- 
to-date the basic Indian notions of creation, preservation and des* 
truction of life. The more significant Brahmanicai sculptures of 
this period are mainly concerned with these notions and their con¬ 
crete manifestations. When we are told that a Purana ought to 
consist, among other things, 1 of the evolution of the universe from 
its material cause and its recreation from the constituent elements 
into which it is merged at the close of each aeon, we seem to catch 
a glimpse of what seems to have been the vision and thought that 
inspired the reliefs of the Udayagiri caves of Malwa or of Badami, 
Ellora, Aurangabad and Elephant a, or, on a lower level, of even 
Mamallapuram. We seem only then to realise more fully and deeply 
the origin and meaning of the dynamic strength and power, latent 
in meditative absorption or expressed in vigorous action, in these 
magnificent reliefs, or of the manifold manifestations of the notions 
of three supreme principles, in concrete plastic terms. Here we really 
witness the birth of a new thought and outlook, indeed of a new 
culture and civilisation. 

Contemporary Buddhist plastic art of the Deccan remained on 
the whole untouched by this new vision and thought, and with all 
possibilities of the sources they drew from explored and exhausted, 
it slowly and gradually collapsed. Contemporary Buddhist painting, 
we shall see, drew from other vital sources of life as well, and had 
other reasons for its inherent potency and strength, which enabled 
it to survive longer and that with refinement and vigour, but on 
a lower level of creation. 

In Aryavarta and Eastern India, however, the older vision of 
a highly subtle and mystical significance and of corresponding plastic 
expression, after a short period of torpor, was effectively integrated 
by the new vision and thought of neo-Brahmanism, and its corres¬ 
ponding plastic expression. A new and integrated art was thus born 
in the following centuries as will be described in the next volume. 


1. See above, p. 292. 


541 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


C. PAINTING AND OTHER ARTS 
I. PAINTING 
1. Scope and Nature 

While the quest for form in stone during all these centuries 
concerned itself with themes and expressmns of a deeper and more 
f undamental significance, painting (also, clay-modelling and terra¬ 
cotta) partook oi a secular character, and was presumably more 
in general practice and popular demand than stone sculpture. A 
perusal of the literature of the period, both creative and technical, 
would show that painting was considered as an essential social accom¬ 
plishment not only in the cities, among the members of the upper 
strata of society including princes and ladies and nobles of the court, 
but also elsewhere among the members of the various professional 
guilds, and was practised even by amateurs. The Kamasutra of 
Vatsyayana includes painting as one of the sixty-four kalds or fine 
arts—repeated later on in text after text—and mentions paints, 
brushes and drawing boards as essential furniture of an average 
citizen’s ( ndgaraka ) personal apartment. If Yasodhara’s commen¬ 
tary on Vatsyayana’s great work is any indication of the period 
under review, then it has further to be admitted that attempts were 
already being made to give theoretical and practical guidance to an 
increasingly large number of amateurs and professionals who came 
to practise the art. Yasoahara refers to the Shadanga or Six Limbs 
of Painting, viz. rupabheda, pramdnas, bhdva, lav any ay oj ana, 
sddrisya and varnikabhanga , which are rendered by Coomaraswamy 
as distinction of types, ideal proportions, expression of mood, em¬ 
bodiment of charm, points of view r (with reference to stance, sthdnam) 
and preparation of colours (grinding, levigation, etc.). The render¬ 
ings are open to question, but this is not the place to enter into a 
discussion on this point. The Vishnu-dharmotfaram, admittedly a 
text of the Gupta age, in devoting a complete chapter to the art of 
painting, discusses the details of quite a good number of such canons 
and is followed, later on, by other texts as well, the Silparatna, for 
example. Already the Vishnu-dkannottaram introduces such techni¬ 
cal details as vajralepa or the method of preparation of the ground 
for murals, preparation and application of colours, methods of shad¬ 
ing the line, adding high lights, fore-shortening of limbs and features, 
different methods of treating the volume, expression of mood (bha- 
vand) and movement ( chetand ), and classification of painting accord¬ 
ing to themes as satya , vainika , nd,gara and misra which Coomara¬ 
swamy translates, respectively, as realistic, lyrical, secular and 
mixed. All these and other references in contemporary literature 


542 


AKT 


leave no doubt that the intellectual ferment of the Gupta culture- 
period led to serious and aeianed thinking about the theory and 
tecximque of painting, and that it was during this period that aesthe¬ 
tic Canuiis in respect of me art of painting Were formuiarised. These- 
canons were closely related to tne canons of the art of dancing, and 
bom together evolved a language of gestures ( mudrds ) and also a 
canon ot poses {okangas .), attitudes ( sciwnam ), and proportions (p'ra- 
mdnam), etc. Curiously, however, the theory and technique of paint¬ 
ing had little or no concern with sculpture as plastic art. The reason 
is difficult to explain, but it seems that painting, terracotta, etc. were 
not considered as the media suitable for flightst creative expression 
understood in a deeper context. Of comparatively poorer and less 
durable materials, and usually considered as a social accomplishment, 
these arts were generally employed for rendering moods and move¬ 
ments that did not claim to be permanent, whereas stone was con¬ 
sidered to be the most suitable material for the registration of the 
deepest and highest aspirations and of the most permanent values of 
life. But whatever the reason or reasons, even the best and pro- 
foundest remains of paintings of the period, namely those of Bagh, 
Ajanta, and Badami, appear to be thin and light when compared with 
the sculptures of the period, whether of the North or ox the Deccan 
or of the South. 

In this connection it may not be out of place to refer to the 
intrinsic aspect of the art of painting as understood by the Indian 
mind. According to both Buddhist and Jain conceptions painting 
is the product of the seeing faculty of the mind, seeing without the 
operation of the sense of sight, and proceeds from the pratyaksha 
or direct intuition, not from paroksha or sense knowledge by percep¬ 
tion. Painting is thus said to originate ‘from the darsana activity of 
the mind, as distinct from its jndna function.’ 1 According to Indian 
conception the former is distinctly of a lower level than the latter. 

The Vishnu-dharmottaram distinguishes different kinds of paint¬ 
ings suitable for religious edifices, palaces, and private houses. We 
have no extant remains to judge what courtly paintings or those 
in private houses were like; presumably both were concerned with 
secular themes as distinguished from ecclesiastical for religious 
edifices. The remains of paintings at Ajanta and Bagh, Badami and 

Sittannavasal are all ecclesiastical in so far as their themes are reli- 
• « * • 

gious, and they are designed to serve religious ends. But in inner 
meaning and spirit, and in their general direction and atmosphere, 
nothing could be more secular or even more courtly and sophisti¬ 
cated. Despite their subject-matter their direction is towards ex- 

1. Kramrisch, JISOA, V. 221-22* Coomaraswamy, Eastern Art , III, 218-19; Trans - 
jormation of Nature in Art, Ch. V. 


543 





THE CLASSICAL, AGE 


pression of mood and unfoldment of charm, their appeal is wordiy 
and aesthetic, i.e. limited to sensory experience, not spiritual nor 
intellectual in any way. It is omy in sucn examples as those of the 
Avalokitesvara and Padmapani of Cave I and the Return to Kapila- 
vastu of Cave XIX, both at Ajanta, that contemporary painting 
aspired to reach the heights and depths attained by contemporary 
sculpture. 

Contemporary literature, including the epics, reveals that fiat 
walls and ceilings, etc., of royal palaces and houses of the rich were 
elaborately decorated with mural paintings and furnished with 
separate picture-galleries (chitraidlas or chitrasadmas) . These 
picture-galleries, which were presumably decorated with portraits 
and portrait panels, among other things, for portrait painting, usually 
on wooden boards, occur as a frequent and popular device in Sanskrit 
dramas and romances of the period. Bhasa’s pratimti-grihas were 
indeed sculptural portrait galleries, the devakulas of Scytho-Kushana 
monarchs. Chitras&lds were probably painted counterparts of such 
pratimd-grihas. A casual remark by Bana is respect of wall-pantings 
seems to indicate that the themes of murals that used to decorate 
the walls and ceilings of palaces and houses were generally very 
broad and comprehensive and embraced the entire panorama of life 
and nature ( darsita vUvarupa ). Besides mural paintings which he 
(also other contemporary writers) knew as hhittichitra, Visakhadatta 
(sixth century), the author of the Mudmrakshasa, refers to another 
kind of painting, presumably of a folk and popular character. Such 
paintings, called Yamapatas, were executed on textile scrolls and 
dealt with themes of a narrative-didactic nature, showing the results 
of Kdrma m the other world. Ruddhaghosha, the celebrated Buddhist 
scholar and divine of the period under review, also refers to a 
similar kind of painting to which he gives the name of c haranachitras 
which consisted of scenes of happy and unhappy destinies of men 
after death with appropriate labels attached to them and shown 
in portable galleries. There can be no doubt that these yamapatas 
or charanachitras are the ancestors, in form, meaning and presenta¬ 
tion, of the patachitras that were widely current in Eastern India 
even in the nineteenth century and persist even to-day, as well as of 
the Javanese and Balinese scrolls called Wayang Beber. No contem¬ 
porary example of Yamapata or charanachitra, executed presumably 
on fragile materials, has survived to this day; but it was evidently 
a folk-art of ethnic and religious significance and of wide popular 
appeal, an itinerant school of deep and great educative value for the 
rural masses. 


ABT 


The way Visakhadatta uses bhittuchittra as a literary metaphor 
(saiveyam mama chitra-karma-rachand bhittim vind variate) seems 
to indicate that mural paintings were long in vogue. But in spite 
of their decided popularity and esteem the art does not seem to have 
been held in the highest estimation as creative art. Rajasekhara 
(c. 1000) places the ehitra-lepya-krit or mural painters (as distin¬ 
guished from lekhya-chitra) in the category of Apabhrauisa poets, 
ie. those who wrote in the language of the common people, and not 
in that of classical Sanskrit poets who wrote for and in the language 
of the highly intellectual and cultured. 

2. Extant Remains 

The actual remains of ancient paintings of this period are very 
few in number. There are faint traces of paintings in the caves at 
Bedsa which have been assigned to the third century A.D. but they 
are not substantial enough to admit any definite conclusion. Faint 
traces exist also in the caves at Kanheri (cave XIV, sixth century), 
Aurangabad (caves III and VI, sixth century), and Pitalldiora 
(chattya cave I, sixth century), all in the Deccan; and in the rock- 
cut temples at Tirumalaipuram (Digambara Jain, seventh century) 
and Malayadipatti (Vaishnava, between A.D. 788-840), both in the 
South. But more substantial remains are to be seen in the caves 
at Ragh (notably cave IV, c. 500), Ajanta (caves I, II, XVI, XVII, 
XIX), 1 and Badami (cave III, sixth century); in a Jain shrine at 
Sittarmavasal (seventh century), and a Saiva shrine at Kanchlpuram 
(Kailasanltha temple, seventh century), both in the South; and in 
the rock cave at Sigiri in Ceylon (sixth century). But whether such 
paintings hail from the North, the Deccan, or the South, the norm 
is supplied by those at Ajanta, and all paintings of the period belong 
to a common denominator, differentiated to an extent only by those 
at Ellora (eighth century) where a new tradition seems to emerge. 
Of local and regional schools it is hardly necessary to say much, 
since they are local only in certain conventions and idiosyncracies, 
physiognomical and otherwise. Basically, Bagh in Central India or 
Sitfanna vasal and Kanchlpuram in the South or Sigiri in Ceylon are 
not very much different from Ajanta except in those slight but 
peculiar elements that make them locally distinguishable. 

3. Technique 

A most interesting part of the technique of the paintings of the 
period is the method of preparation of the ground for painting. 
The Vishnu-dharmottaram lays down a complete prescription for 
laying of the ground for painting which it calls vajralepa; but judg- 

1. For the date and description of Ajanta (and other) eaves, cf. the previous 
section on Architecture. 


C.A.—35 


545 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


ing from extant remains this prescription does not seem to have 
been used anywhere. Powdered rock, clay and cowdung, not 
infrequently mixed with chaff or vegetable fibres, sometimes also 
with mudga decoction or molass, were made into a paste-like sub¬ 
stance which was thoroughly and evenly pressed like plaster on the 
hard and porous surface of the rock. The plaster was then levelled 
and polished with a trowel and, when still wet, was laid over with 
a coat of fine white lime wash so that the piaster could take the 
lime. The entire ground was generally allowed to dry before any 
colour was applied; that it was kept moist while the colours w 7 ere 
applied, as Coomaraswamy thinks, is doubtful. Indian mural paint¬ 
ings, of this period at any rate, are thus fresco secco and not true 
frescoes or fresco buono. After application of colours the painted 
surface was lightly burnished. 

The outlines were drawn first, before any underdrawing in 
colour of the contours was made. These outlines were always and 
invariably boldly drawn, first in dhdturaga or red ochre; the con¬ 
tours were then filled in with red overlaid with a very thin mono- 
chrone terra verte that shows the red through it; then while the 
local colour in different tones was applied, the outline was also 
renewed in brown, deep red or black, with thin or broad shading 
by dotting, (vindu) or cross-lines ( patra ) to give to it an effect of 
rounded three dimensional volume fully modelled. Indian line thus 
aims not at calligraphic fineness but at bold and rounded elasticity. 
If the modelling quality of the line is potent in varying degrees 
(except in a class of paintings at Ellora), the modelling quality of 
colour is also equally valid. The latter was done not only by the 
employment of colour-shades and tones but also by laying on high 
lights, to suggest natonnata or different planes. It is not thus correct 
to say that there was no attempt at modelling at Ajanta or in other 
paintings of the period. Brush strokes were always and invariably 
free and bold, particularly firm in the outlines which are not a 
little responsible for the strength of the drawing. Colour too is 
always and invariably fully modelled which shows the figures as 
if bodied forth in fully rounded and plastic volumes. 

The principal colours in use were red ochre (dhatiadga) , vivid 
red ( kumkuma or sindura), yellow ochre ( haritdla ), indigo blue, lapis 
lazuli blue, lamp black ( kajjala ), chalk white (khadi-mdti) , terra 
verte (geru-mdU) and green (orpiment or powdered verdigris, jangal). 
Banabhatta refers to a kind of very deep lightening yellow colour 
produced from manahsild, an arsenic colour, which however does not 
seem to have been used in the extant paintings of the period. All the 
colours were locally available except lapis lazuli blue which may 


546 


ART 


have been imported from Jaipur or from outside the country. Mixed 
colours were also used, for example grey, but not usually. Not ail 
the colours are used everywhere, nor with the same consistency, 
which is determined by the theme and the local atmosphere. Gene¬ 
rally speaking, classical Indian painting does not aim at contrasts 
of a medley of colours, but attempts at saturating the surface with 
highly charged and dense colours, mainly terra verte, Indian red and 
earth buff, in innumerable tones and shades. This charged satura¬ 
tion, fully modelled and shaded, adds to the classic dignity of the 
paintings. 

4. Ajanta: Caves XVI, XVII, and XIX; Caves I and II 

Only a very small fragment remains of what must once have 
covered the entire flat spaces of the long series of caves at Ajanta. 
But even these unmistakably portray a crowded world of lively and 
fresh vegetation, of gods and semi-divine beings, of apsarases and 
kinnaras, of genii and grotesques, of a rich and varied flora, of page¬ 
antry and processions, of gaiety and love, of grace and charm, of sub¬ 
limity and coarseness, ail bathed in the mellowed light of the softness 
and elegance of a highly intellectual, refined and sophisticated civili¬ 
sation. The joyous naturalism of a bygone age (cf. Sanchl reliefs) 
seems to have come back, but not without a great difference wrought 
by the intervening centuries, and more by the governing ideology of 
the age to which these paintings belong. A dramatic panorama of 
rich contemporary life of princes and peoples, nobles and warriors, 
sages and beggars—of different ethnic and national types—a life lived 
in cities and palaces, in courts and forests, waysides and gardens, lived 
with dignity and nobility and in grace and charm amidst decorative 
splendour, moves before our eyes in radiant joy and freedom born of 
a healthy and effortless material existence. Such simple and graphic 
narration endowed with the richness of expression of refined emo¬ 
tions and sensibilities of a highly cultured society is indeed unsur¬ 
passed in the whole history of graphic art. Yet all this is lifted to 
a higher spiritual level by the intensity of a subtle and mystical ex¬ 
perience approached from a direct and broad humanistic level and 
gone through with a noble and lofty detachment. 

This attitude and outlook of life are brought out from the level 
of consciousness to that of vision by making the figures body forth 
from darkness to the light of the surface of the rock. In the process 
of this coming forward which Kramrisch significantly calls ‘the direc¬ 
tion of forthcoming’, the world with its objects and events that re¬ 
mained crowded and compact in density, each with its own assign¬ 
ment in space, within the realm of consciousness, achieves a direction 
of movement that seemingly stops before our eyes but goes on cease- 


517 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


lessly in the mind. This movement of each figure and of each story 
is linked up rhythmically with that of the other narrative, and thus 
the entire painted surface is held by a ceaseless rhythm and move¬ 
ment which impart the joyous freedom that belongs to the scenes of 
life depicted, and give to the bodies of objects the reality of effortless 
existence, lithe and light in appearance, moving forward, backward, 
and sideward with ease and freedom, bending and oscillating in a dis¬ 
ciplined but careful manner as in a dance. 

Among the themes that are still recognisable in Cave XVI are 
the three Buddhas, a sleeping woman, and the sequel to the Shad* 
dania jdtaka represented by a dying princess (PI. XXXVII, 89); in 
Cave XVII, the seven Buddhas, the Sfahhaldvaddna, Wheel of Causa¬ 
tion, Return to Kapilavastu, Consecration Ceremony, a love scene, 
the Mahdhamsa, Mdtriposhaka , Ruru , Shaddanta , &ihi, Visvaniara- 
and Ndlagiri jdtakas, and gandharvas and apsarases (PI. XXXIX, 
92) besides; in Cave XIX (which may be slightly later in date), re¬ 
turn to Kapilavastu and a number of Buddhas; in Cave I, the Great 
Bodhisattvas (PL XXXVIII, 91), Mdradharshana (PL XXXVII, 90), 
Pamchika story, &ihi and Ndga jdtakas f love scenes, etc,; and in 
cave II, Aravasti miracle, palace and Indraloka scenes, Kshdntivddin 
and Maitfibala jdtakas , etc. 

Horizontal bands, in which the paintings of the first phase (Caves 
IX and X) were laid, have now become practically coterminous with 
the entire area of the walls. No frames except those broad scroll- 
borders of the cell-doors in Cave XVI hamper the free march of the 
narrative; even the horizontal bands have now been dissolved, though 
in Cave XVII veiled suggestions of horizontal arrangement remain 
here and there. Usually one story merges into another in unbroken 
continuity, and the crowded narratives move forward both horizon¬ 
tally and vertically, above and below. 

Cave XVI shows the aesthetic validity of the direction of forth¬ 
coming to its very best. Large volumes carefully modelled in the 
round and fully shaded in outline crowd the painted surface with a 
warm impact of form (scenes from Buddha’s life and that of the con¬ 
version of Nanda—-right and left walls). Perfect poise and reserve 
give to ample curves of movement a quiet dignity and detachment. 
Certain fragments, mostly on the back wall and showing scenes from 
the life of the Buddha, lack this poise and dignified detachment; 
colour profusely modelled and outlines deeply shaded bespeak more 
technical awareness and efficiency, but rob the bodies of not a little 
of their suavity and grace. 

In Cave XVII, the human figure dwindles to smaller sizes and, 
endowed with greater ease and added elegance, fill the space in dense 


54S 


ART 


compactness and sways them in rhythmical waves. This swaying 
rhythm and the fullest extension of the direction of forthcoming 
bring forth the exhaustive and powerful compositions of the scenes 
of the VUvantara jdtaka and the Simhaldvaddna into their fullest 
maturity. But the figures themselves do not rise fully to the stature 
of the composition. Slender and supple and consciously elegant, 
they have not, despite their open eyes, the fullest comprehension of 
what is happening before them; they participate in the world festival 
with an abandon, elation and acuteness (also see scenes of bi and 
Hamsa jdtahas )—sharpened by flaming and acute colours and fine 
linearism—-that are oblivious of any deeper mystery of existence. 

Cave XIX reveals the same mastery of compositional power and 
majesty (scene of Return to Kapilavastu), but the numerous Buddhas 
presage the complete coming forth of the Bodhisattva paintings of 
Cave I. 

In Cave I the large Bodhisattvas (PL XXXVIII, 91) have grown 
to their full stature, both outwardly and inwardly. Of large dimen¬ 
sions they are yet weightless; fully bodied forth in solid rounded 
plasticity, they are yet melting in Karima , and seemingly in motion 
in the midst of a radiantly moving and rejoicing world, they seem 
to have become stilled into silence before a great realisation. With 
eyelids lowered they withdraw themselves into their own depths 
(Bodhisattva Padmapani and Avalokitesvara). 

Not all the scenes reach to this height, nor are they all techni¬ 
cally on the same level; some are even coarse, sodden, and blunt, and 
are seized by a languid torpor. A strengthening of the spread-out 
contour by a thick modelling in colour and a distended outline only 
emphasise this defect, as is illustrated by the left bottom of Padma¬ 
pani scene. But the scene just above this is of a much finer texture; 
there the slight and small figures with their animated faces reveal 
themselves in a spirit of spiritual humility and surrender. 

Much more comprehensive in composition than these is the scene 
of the Mahdjanaka Jdtaka which is on a par with that of the Visvan- 
tara jdtaka of Cave XVII, but here the modelling is less sensitive and 
a certain mannerism has cropped up. This mannerism is also evi¬ 
dent in the Mdradharshana scene where, besides, both modelling and 
outline have become coarsened. The Sibi jdtaka scene reveals yet 
another aspect within the common trend; here the ample curves and 
plasticity of modelling are replaced by angles and coarser treatment 
of body surface resulting in thinness and insipidity. 

In both colour and modelling, the paintings of Cave II reach the 
highest perfection in the direction of forthcoming. Indeed, the paint¬ 
ings of this cave exhaust the possibility of what colour can achieve 


519 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


in solidity and in the third dimension. In other respects the majority 
of the scenes of this cave follow either the manner of the Mahdjanaka 
j at aka or that of the Sibi jataka , both of Cave I. Still in others there 
is evidence of exhaustion and disintegration shown in careless brush 
work and conventional mannerism. 

It is in the paintings of these caves, so far as the modelling 
of volume is concerned, that painting comes nearest to sculpture, 
Sculpture in India was always considered to be the main exponent of 
artistic vision, while painting tried to come up to it with its own 
means. In Caves I and II, and also at Badami, Cave III, painting 
seems to run almost a parallel course with contemporary sculpture. 
It is here that painting, for once at least, reaches the elevated classic 
cal or Samskrita height and dignity of contemporary sculpture. 

5. Bdgh: Caves IV and 111 

The paintings of Cave IV of Bagh correspond to those of Caves 
I and II of Ajanta. There is nothing to distinguish the small frac¬ 
tional remains of what seems to have been an enormous output in 
these caves from those of the last phase at Ajanta. Stylistically too 
both belong to the same norm. But there is a slight difference. 
There can be no doubt that the Bagh paintings like those of Ajanta 
are affiliated to Buddhism—presumably they relate jataka stories; 
but whereas in Ajanta. despite a secular, even slightly pagan atmos¬ 
phere, the paintings are informed by a religious spirit, and present 
the dominant figures of the compositions in an inwardness of vision 
and a superior detachment of outlook that spread like a web over the 
entire surface, those at Bagh are frankly secular, depicting contem¬ 
porary life with its evident religious associations. The languorous 
drowsiness, so evident in the half-closed drooping eyelids and the 
soft and sensuous modelling, of a large number of figures is more the 
result of the intensity of participation in the joyous pageantry than 
of physical exhaustion or of deep spiritual experience. Yet an emo¬ 
tional discipline and a detached vision lift them above the transitori¬ 
ness of daily life (PI. XL, 93). 

Relatively more earthly and more human than those at Ajanta 
are also the Bodhisattva figures inside Cave IV. The supramundane 
and highly graceful and melting vision of Ajanta divines (Cave XVII) 
is here touched by an earthly nobility held by a tightened modelling 
and a more precise outline; no inner vision illuminates them, but an 
aristocratic bearing and detachment, coupled with a compassionate 
look, make them abide in the midst of a fresh and luxuriant, moving 
and teeming world. 

All the technical knowledge of the age manifests itself in the 
scene of the female cfr rum-bearer in Cave III where a soft, delicate 


550 


ART 


but full bodied woman, bending under the weight of her full round 
bosoms and presented in back and three-quarter profile, reveals all 
the mastery of delicate and sensitive colour-modelling of volume, 
fine shading of the outlines, and the fullest meaning of the direction 
of forthcoming. Luscious and sensuously drowsy, yet restrained and 
detached, it integrates an intensely mundane experience with an ele- 
vated spiritual aloofness. 

6. Badami: Caves 111 and 11 

The earliest Brahmanical paintings, so far known, are the frag¬ 
ments found in Cave III (Cave II also contains slight traces) of Badami 
(A.D. 578). The cave is Vishnuite but the paintings themselves seem 
to depict Sivaite subjects, the most important and well-preserved 
being that of the so-called betrothal of Siva and Parvati (PI. XL, 94). 

Seen on a monochrome photograph the figures look as if they 
have been worked out of live rock in full but soft rounded volumes, 
sensitively dense and malleably compact. Indeed, they* have been 
bodied forth by modelling the colour in full roundness, shading the 
outlines and profuse application of high lights where the painted re¬ 
lief reaches the highest point. The technique follows that of Ajanta 
and Bagh, but the style hardly conforms to that of any of them, not 
even the last phases of Ajanta with which they are considered to be 
contemporaneous. In Caves I and II of Ajanta the modelling is sum¬ 
marised to a firmness that gives a hard and tight appearance to the 
texture of the body; the outline, too, is shaded thickly and slightly 
harshly. The modelling of Badami, on the other hand, is much more 
sensitive in texture and expression and the outline much more soft 
and elastic. With a slackening of the contour the figures exhale an 
i; 4 mate warmth and delicacy of feel and atmosphere that are un¬ 
known to the last phases of Ajanta. 

But Badami, too, belongs to the common denominator of classical 
Indian painting and interprets its potentialities in its own way. It 
is essentially a painting of volume being bodied forth on to the sur¬ 
face in full and round modelling; in the process of coming forth, 
bodies of objects crowded in the realm of mind produce an impact, 
the resultant movement of which abides on the painted surface. Each 
one centre and phase fulfils this tendency in its own way. As to the 
rest, namely the joyous and radiant naturalism the poise and balance, 
and sensuous charm and disciplined grace, the intensity of mundane 
experience and the noble reserve and spiritual detachment, the 
physiognomical norm, etc. are all products of the age characterised 
by a highly urbanised, intellectual and sophisticated culture to which 
the paintings belong. 


551 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


7. £iptannavdsal: K&nehipuram: Tirumalaipuram 
If Bagh, Ajanta and Badami represent the classical tradition of 
the North and the Deccan at its best, ^itfaiinavasal and other cognate 
paintings show the extent of its penetration in the South. The paint¬ 
ings of Sittannavasal (i.e. the vdsah or abode of the Jain Siddhas) are 
intimately connected with Jain theme and symbology. The paint¬ 
ings that are still extant and are relatively better preserved are to be 
seen on the walls and ceilings of the Jain shrine and the pillared 
mandapa in front; the sides of the pillars also seem to have been ori¬ 
ginally painted over, and there remain today at least three panels, 
two occupied by dancing apsarases (PI. XLI, 96) and the third by a 
couple, identified as the Pallava king Mahendra-varman I and his 
wife, accompanied by another figure. The ceiling of the pillared 
hall is divided into three painted lotus panels of which the middle 
one, the largest of the three, shows a lotus pond; indeed, the green 
lotus blooms or white lotus buds with white scalloped lines for the 
petals or with black outlines shaded towards the edges, that play so 
prominent a part in the composition and the fresh liveliness of the 
painted panels, are all supposed to have been culled from this pond. 
The ceiling of the main shrine is also similarly painted with an analo¬ 
gous division, central lotus pond and lotus blooms. But whereas 
the latter is purely floral and relatively more spacious, the former is 
compact with bulls and elephants, hamsas and stirasas, makaras and 
human figures, etc. all intertwined with the thick growth of lotus 
stalks, blooms and petals. On both the ceilings there is a painted 
cloth canopy which is but a painted version of a textile fabric with 
unending abstract and flat geometrical patterns formed of the cross, 
square, and trisula. Inset in the rectangles are the figures of gods 
and demi-gods. Despite the fluidity of curves and the general design 
and the slightly modelled lines and volumes, the fiat abstract geome¬ 
trical vision of the cloth canopy painting is in striking contrast with 
the vision and treatment of the lotus pond where fresh stalks, petals, 
and blooms, including bodies of man, animal, etc, are all modelled in 
the round with a feel of their texture. While in the latter the classi¬ 
cal tradition is at work, in the former the mediaeval tradition of flat 
and abstract surfaces and linearised designs is already making itself 
felt. This is clearly visible in the human figures of the painted cloth 
canopy where they are treated in a flat and linear manner with wide 
extended eyes and angular movements. Compared to these the 
figures of the lotus pond on the ceilings or those of the apsarases on 
the pillars (also the lotuses, animals, etc,) are treated in fuller round¬ 
ness of modelling; though it must be admitted that here even the 
modelling is much more abstract than at the last phases of Ajanta 
curves shallow, and colour thin and flat. But it still suggests the 


ART 


fresh, living and breathing body. Physiognomically the conception of 
human figuration at Sittarmavasal corresponds to that of Mamalla- 

puram reliefs. 

Precarious traces of painting belonging to the end of the seventh 
century survive in the Sivaite Kailasanatha temple at Kahchl and the 
rock-cut Vishnuite temple at Malayadippati. In both these places, 
painting seems to correspond to the carved reliefs of the time and the 

locality. 

The remnants of painting in the Sivaite cave temple at Tirumalai- 
puram are also extremely fragmentary, though it seems that the 
entire ceiling, wails, panels and brackets were all originally painted 
over. All that now remains are certain stray fragments of lilies, 
lotuses, scrolls, ducks, dancing ganas, human figures and part of what 
seems to have been a dancing and musical scene. The angularity of 
movement that characterises the human figures supersedes the classi¬ 
cal tradition of ample curves and conforms to the carved reliefs of 
Mamallapuram. As in the temples at Kainchi and Malayadippati, 
mentioned above, the outline in black attains sharpness and perhaps 
also a nervous agitation, colour becomes thin, modelling slight, and 
the paintings altogether thinner in meaning and appearance. The 
classical tradition continues still, but in increasing abstraction. Cer¬ 
tain human figures, small in size and proportion but with large heads, 
recall a similar tradition at work at Ajanta, notably in the scenes of 
the Sankhapala and Mahdjanaka jdtakas . There, as here, the model¬ 
ling is relatively of little consequence, and the movements relatively 
more angular, 

II TERRACOTTA 

Quite a different attitude of life and artistic vision are revealed 
by the deluge of terracotta reliefs dug out from all over Northern 
India, but nowhere so profusely as in the Ganga Valley and Bengal 
where the riverine plains ensured inexhaustible supply of malleable 
earth and clay which were the average man’s material for sculptural 
decoration. It is curious to note that Deccan and the South have not 
yet yielded any substantial, or even mentionable, quantity of terra¬ 
cottas from any of their archaeological sites, rich usually in stone. 
Small in size they were usually produced from sketchy moulds in 
large quantities, and not unusually very carefully finished by chisel¬ 
ling before and after baking or burning. From traces of colour on a 
large number of specimens from Raj ghat (Banaras), Ahiehchhatra. 
Rhita and other places, it seems that painted terracottas were also 
quite common, colours usually employed being white, yellow, red 
ochre, and pink. The final paint was generally laid on a slip of 
neutral earth colour. It is interesting to note that Kalidasa refers to 


553 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


one such painted terracotta peacock ( chitrita-mrittikd-mayura ) in his 
Sdkuntala. 

Terracotta plaques and figurines belonging to the period under 
review are known, among other places, from Harvan, Kashmir (deco¬ 
rative mouled brick tiles with various vegetal, animal, and human 
motifs); several sites like Sahri Bahlol, Takht-i-Bahi and Jamalgarhi 
in the Punjab (mostly Buddhist subjects and portrait heads); Hanu- 
mangarh, Bikanir, Rajputana (decorative tiles); Brahmanabad (orna¬ 
mental bricks with various designs) and Mirpur Khas (carved bricks, 
figure heads, etc.-—Buddhas and donors—PL XXXVI, 88) in Sindh; 
Saheth-Maheth (Kamayana plaques), Kasia (Buddha and Buddhist 
figures), Bhitargaon (Brahmanical reliefs—PL XXXVI, 86), Bhita 
(seals and small reliefs), Basarh (seals and small reliefs), Kosam 
(terracotta figurines, moulded animals, heads, etc.), Ahichchhatra 
(large size figures of Sivaite affiliation-—PL XLII, 98), Rajghat (rich 
yield representing secular scenes, human heads and figures, gods, etc., 
mckctra , elephant, boar, lion, horse, figurines, etc.), Pa way a (figure 
reliefs), Patna (Ramayana panels), Mahasthan and Bangadh in Bengal 
(large-size plaques and medallions—PL XLII, 97), etc. 

An examination of the finds enumerated would show that terra¬ 
cotta plaques and reliefs were made and employed for various pur¬ 
poses. Temples and Buddhist establishments mainly brick-built, 
such as Mahasthan, Paharpur, Chausa, Bhitargaon, Mirpur Khas, etc. 
had their surfaces covered with plaques and figures of divine and 
semi-divine beings, not unoften in disregard of monographic canons, 
but more with themes with which the common people at large were 
concerned in their day-to-day life. The exterior walls of residential 
houses made of impermanent materials were also decorated with 
plaques representing gods and goddesses, narrative scenes from the 
Epics and Purdnas , animals and semi-divine beings; mantels and 
niches of private apartments and bed chambers were often decorated 
with plaques of amorous couples, portrait heads, toys and human and 
animal figures and beautiful female figurines. Different types of clay 
figures were made for definite vratas, pujds and socio-religious festi¬ 
vities. Bana testifies to the fact that a host of clay-modellers were 
employed on the occasion of Rajyasrfs marriage to make terracotta 
figures of auspicious fruits, trees, and aquatic animals as well as of 
female figurines holding auspicious fruits, for purpose of decoration. 
To what extent terracotta objects of various sizes and descriptions 
were employed for decorative and festive purposes would be evident 
from a statement of this seventh century romancer when he states 
that the four quarters appeared to him as if beautified by clay-model¬ 
ling (pastamayaiva chakdsire kakubhah). What has come down to us 
must, therefore, be regarded as only a very small fraction of the total 


554 


ART 


output of those days, not only because most of the temple and house 
decorations have gone to dust whence they came, but those made 
for the round of vratas } pujds and socio-religious festivities we re, 
according to custom, immersed in the ponds and rivers immediately 
afterwards. 

Made of soft, plastic and fragile materials, these terracottas 
present the Indian modeller-artist from a different angle. Relieved 
of iconographic injunctions and religious dictates, and concerned 
more with things on the surface of vision, the artist in clay moves 
and works with an intensely playful and joyous freedom of imagina¬ 
tion and action, and uses his soft and pliable material with an easy 
sensitiveness of his fingers and palm. Passing moods, contemporary 
tastes, fashions and prejudices which have less scope in sculpture 
or even in painting, register themselves in the plastic idiom of the 
age; no claim is made of permanency, neither in material nor in 
form or content. Whatever the themes, they are presented in vigorous 
action, playful freedom and emotional abandon, and are inherently 
related with the life of the people as lived from day to day. The 
essential dynamism and rhythm of daily life with its varied associa¬ 
tions, not usually recognised by hieratic 1 and high-bred standards, 
find their joyous and free expression in this inexhaustible inventory 
of contemporary form and social life, much more complete and 
variegated than either sculpture or painting. In the representations 
of hieratic gods and goddesses the artists had perforce to conform 
to certain fixed types and forms, but nowhere does everyday life 
find more unhampered expression than in the terracotta human 
figures, male and female, animal figures, and miscellaneous objects, 
whether presented singly or in groups and narratives. Eut whatever 
the action or movement, theme or presentation, the essential plastic 
treatment is the same as that of contemporary sculpture of the 
respective localities. 

Yet another aspect*of the complex cultural and ethnic set-up 
of the age is revealed by these terracottas. Men and women of every 
social and economic strata of life-blue blooded aristocrats of noble 
bearing; courtly and fashionable ladies of high society; mendicants 
and beggars; dancers, acrobats, and snake-charmers; ordinary beings 
of every walk of life including jesters, dwarfs, elephant-riders and 
grooms; foreigners (Bactrian Greeks, Parthians, Sakas, Kushanas, 
Hunas etc.) with their distinctive facial types and dress and hair 
decoration, etc., richly represented by finds at Harvan, Rajghat, 
Kosam, Bhita and other sites including those of the Punjab and the 
North-west; Indian nationals both male and female, mostly female, 
with rich decorative coiffures curled coquettishly in spirals or twisted 
in short crisp ringlets or arranged in curly hanging loops, so 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


picturesquely described by contemporary poets and romancers; 
charming feminine types of warmth and sensuousness—all move 
before our eyes in a never ending series, and always within a simple, 
but lively realistic and vigorous pattern of existence in which animals, 
real and fantastic, in abstraction or naturalistic forms, and local 
flora, again in abstract or naturalistic designs, vegetal scrolls, etc. 
play their full role. 

Of special technical and aesthetic significance are the terra¬ 
cottas from Ahichchhatra, Raj ghat, Paharpur and Maynamati. The 
baking of the almost life-size terracottas of Ahichchhatra, executed 
in the usual plastic idiom of the Gahga valley of the period, must 
have presented a difficult technical problem which was successfully 
solved by the potters of the age whose large cylindrical pits for 
special kilns were 10 to 12 feet in depth. Besides their general 
aesthetic appeal and their value as documents of contemporary social 
life, the Raj ghat terracottas, especially the heads, afford interesting 
study of facial types and expressions as well as of playful imagina¬ 
tion, while those from Paharpur and Maynamati are interesting 
aesthetic documents of immediate power, purposeful rhythm and 
dynamic action and movement. 

Terracottas assignable to the centuries immediately following 
the period under review are known from but very few sites. Certain 
specimens are known from Belwa, Gaya, and Banaras that can be 
assigned to the pre-Muslim period; but generally speaking they are 
conventionalised forms of Gupta and post-Gupta types, somewhat 
mechanical and petrified. This does not however mean that terra¬ 
cottas were not made and the creative urge did no more seek expres¬ 
sion in this very easy and pliable material. What seems to have 
been the case was that plaques and figures made for worship and 
decoration were left exposed to time and nature and went the way 
of all things, while earlier ones were protected underground and only 
recently dug out. In Bengal, Assam, and South India, for example, 
such terracottas continued to be made and used for covering the 
wide surfaces of brick temples throughout the mediaeval period. 
But they have a different aesthetic tale to tell, a different vision and 
a different plastic treatment. 

III. POTTERY 

The high skill and efficiency of baking and burning, and not 
unoften of colouring also, the deluge of terracotta seals, plaques 
and figurines, and bricks and tiles testify also to a very high standard 
of the potter’s art in the period under review. Unfortunately our 
archaeological excavations uptil recent times have not been such 
as to enable us to set up a scientific and chronological framework 


550 


ART 


for a proper study of this important branch of art. However, at 
Ahichchhatra it is possible to build up such a frame and study the art 
right from about 300 B.C. to about the end of the early mediaeval 
period (c. A.D. 1100); and though important pottery finds of the 
period under review are known from a few sites in the Punjab and 
the North-west, from Brahmanabad in Smdh, Sambhar (ancient 
Sakambharl) in the Jaipur State, and Raj ghat near Banaras, etc., it 
is indeed the finds at Ahichchhatra that epitomise the styles and 
sequences of the art throughout the North, more particuiarlv in the 
Ganga-Yamuna valley and Eastern India. No important find from 
either the Deccan or the South can yet he assigned to this period. 

The main types of the pottery of this period and their variants 
form a long and large series with minor differences. Generally 
speaking pots'were wheel-made, but mould-made pots are also con¬ 
siderable in number; indeed this period may be considered as the 
most important* for the mould-technique. Grey wares of the Sunga 
period disappear altogether as well as the Mauryan and pre-Mauryan 
painted and polished wares. The majority of the vessels of the 
period are ordinary red wares with a red or brownish slip; quite a 
number of them also show a highly polished red ground. The mate¬ 
rial is ordinary clay, but for special types of vessels mica dust was 
sometimes mixed with clay to impart a glossy and metallic surface. 
Whatever the type or variety—dishes, bowls, jars, lids, basins, cas¬ 
kets, etc,—-all pots of the period are characterised by fine finish and 
graceful designs—lotuses, rosettes and small vegetal patterns, recti¬ 
linear or curvilinear geometrical patterns, spirals, girds, zig zags, 
fan-shaped or ornate nandipada pendants, etc.—-either incised with 
blunt points or imprinted in relief by moulds or stamps. There are 
certain painted specimens as well where simple designs of broad or 
narrow bands are drawn in black on the red ground. The large 
number of pottery spouts assignable to this period and picked up 
at Ahichchhatra, Raj ghat, Sakambharl arid other sites is indeed 
remarkable; they are mostly designed in the form of animal heads 
such as boar, elephant, lion, makara, etc. There is no doubt that 
such utilitarian devices as these spouts and lug-handles or lug-ears 
of cooking and drinking vessels, etc. were evolved from earlier 
models, with modifications. The one new invention of the period was 
however the intermittent groups of indentations on the rims of cook¬ 
ing pots. A most graceful and highly imaginative design is that of the 
river goddess Ganga appearing on the handles of the drinking vessels. 
The mould-made decorated jars and bowls are remarkable examples 
of fine potting; their decoration usually consists of two or three 
cordons with demarcating ribs or ridges and show on the reserved 
bands a polished red ground; on the decorated bands designs such 


557 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


as beads or fish scales are also in relief. Imported wares also do not 
seem to have been unknown; we have at least one specimen.of a jar 
with a pinched spout, a loop-handle twisted rope-likc, a polished 
black surface and a black core. Presumably it belongs to the Medi¬ 
terranean type of similar wares. 

Cylindrical pits of large dimensions and depth laid bare at the 
Gupta level at Ahichchhatra seem to reveal that special kilns for 
the baking and burning of high class vessels, presumably of tiles 
and ornamental pottery, w r ere made. The practice continued through¬ 
out the period under review when richly and elegantly designed 
enamelled tiles, ornamental bricks and ornamental pottery seem to 
have been very much in demand. 


IV. COINS AND SEALS, ETC. 

Imperial Gupta gold and silver coins are marked by refinement 
and elegance and represent the high-water mark of early Indian 
coinage. Whatever the type ana size and the intrinsic value, they 
are always marked by clarity and elegance of design and lettering, 
regularity of shapes and forms and precision and refinement of 
execution. With the weakening of the imperial authority, however, 
Gupta and cognate coinage shows a downward grade not only in 
intrinsic value but also in artistic merit, so that towards the end 
of the period under review it reached a bottom from which recovery 
seemed w r ellnigh impossible. 

The Saraswati Collection of Calcutta contains, among other 
things, a couple of copper seal matrices, both from Raj ghat, one con¬ 
taining the inscribed (Sri Jayavarma ) representation of a bull, 
and the other that of a sedent lion, also inscribed (Sri Bhadrasya) 
(PI. XLIII, 99-102). On paleographicai and stylistic grounds they are 
assignable respectively to the fourth and fifth century A.D. A dyna¬ 
mic naturalism, characterises both the representations; fully model¬ 
led in high relief they are comparable to the conception and execution 
of animal figures of Gupta coin types and of the very interesting 
burnt and baked clav seals from Basarh. The lion tvpe still smacks 
of Hellenistic modelling, but the bull is a typical Indian bull con¬ 
forming strictly to the contemporary plastic idiom. 

The clay seals from Bhita, Basarh (PI. XLIII, 103-5) and Kosam 
form a large but very interesting series by themselves. The ideal of 
human figuration as well as their artistic form and treatment follow 
in the main those of Gupta stone sculpture and terracotta of the 
Gahga-Yamuna valley; but the animal types and treatment, though 
subscribing to the same plastic idiom, are more in intimate relation¬ 
ship. with those on Gupta coins. Among the rich specimens from 
Basarh, special attention may be drawn to two clay seals where an 


558 




ART 


admirable and highly skilful foreshortening, that speaks of long ex¬ 
perience and close observation, presents two bulls in full frontal 
view within a narrow space. 1 

There can be no doubt that early Gupta gold and silver coinage 
was evolved from Hellenistic and Saka-Kushana coinage, not only 
in design but also in treatment and execution. The dress the kings 
don and its treatment retain their Scytho-Kushana characteristics 
in quite a good number of the Imperial coins up to Skanda-gupta, 
and the modelling of the body-contour is appreciably Hellenistic, 
especially in the male figures, but less so in the female ones. Even 
the Hellenic contrapost, noticeable in the Garhwa relief, is conspi¬ 
cuous here. But the type of human figuration increasingly conforms 
to contemporary Indian conception. A specific example is afforded 
by the gradual transformation of the Ardochsho type of Kushana 
coins to one of characteristically Indian Lakshmi type in form and 
attitude. 

V. OTHER ARTS 

The archaeologist’s spade has not yet unearthed for us any gold 
or silver or any other precious jewellery that can be assigned to this 
period, nor any specimen of ivory w T ork pf any significance. Beads 
and precious stones are known, but they too are not substantial 
enough for building up an account of the art of jewellery of the 
period. 

This is certainly very strange since, from painted or carved or 
moulded counterparts, as w T ell as from fairly elaborate and vivid 
descriptions in contemporary literature, 'we know that the jeweller’s 
art, already at a high level of demand during the preceding centuries, 
was brought up to a very high artistic standard of simplicity, refine¬ 
ment, and elegance which was exactly in keeping with the spirit of 
the age. Quite a good portion of the rich repertory of plastic decora¬ 
tion of the period is derived from, and inspired by, the jeweller’s 
art displayed in pearl pendants, twisted rope, or metal designs, 
kundalas, keyuras, and haras , etc. The high intrinsic value and 
aesthetic quality of Gupta gold and silver coins also suggest that the 
jeweller’s art in these metals must have been of a fairly high standard 
of excellence in design and execution. 

The excellence of the carpenter’s art can easily be presumed. 
Forts, royal palaces, in fact all kinds of civil architecture of the 
upper strata of the people still continued to be made of wood. The 
simplicity and elegance of their structure, designs, decorations and 
ornamentations, etc. as w^ell as of household furniture, etc. can well 
be seen in the elaborate paintings of the Ajanta caves and some of 
the stone reliefs of the period. 

1. ASR, 1913-14, PI. L. figs. 085, 798? ~ ~ ” ~ ~~ 


559 



CHAPTER XX 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 

I. INTRODUCTORY 

By the beginning of the Gupta Age a strong Brahmanical reac¬ 
tion had set in against the ascendancy of rival faiths like Buddhism 
and Jainism. In the field of social life this movement manifested 
itself in a tendency towards intensification of the social division into 
four fundamental Varnas with its corollary of the pre-eminence of 
the Brahmanas. As a result we find that, within India’s borders at 
any rate, the Reform movement started by the founders of Buddhism 
and Jainism had lost much of its “momentum, while the Brahmani¬ 
cal Counter-Reformation had become a pow T er to reckon with. 
Simultaneously with this change successful attempts were made to 
solve the complex social problem created by the influx of hordes 
of foreigners into the north-western and western parts of the coun¬ 
try in the preceding period. For w’hile the barbarians gradually 
adopted the faiths and languages as well as the manners and cus¬ 
toms of the indigenous population, even the framers of the orthodox 
Brahmanical society met them half-way by conceding to them the 
original status of Kshatriyas. 1 During the same period the remark¬ 
able development of industry and trade with its resultant increase in 
w-ealth and prosperity led to a pronounced rise in the standard of 
living and taste for town-life, at least among the upper classes. The 
long peace which the Gupta Emperors in the North and their con¬ 
temporaries in the South gave to the country, and which was sought 
to be maintained in the new grouping of states following their down¬ 
fall, enabled the social tendencies of the preceding epoch to take 
firm root in the soil. 

II. SOCIAL DIVISIONS 
1. The Four Varnas 

The age-old doctrine of the division of society into four Varnas 
is the keynote of the whole system of social life in the Smritis. We 
have no reason to doubt that the rules relating to the duties and 
mutual relations of the four Varnas in the preceding period 2 were 
generally observed during the Gupta Age. We may quote by way 
of evidence the high authority of Hiuen Tseng, himself an intelligent 
foreigner belonging to a different faith, who not only refers to the 

1. Vol. II, pp. 103, 122, 548. 2. Vol. IX, pp. 542 ff. 

560 





SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


four hereditary castes of Indian society together with their respec¬ 
tive occupations, but adds that the members of a caste group marry 
within the caste . 1 To this we may add that Varahamihira in his 
Brihat-samhita assigns the different quarters of a city to the Brah- 
manas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, as does Kautilya in his 
Arthasastra . 2 The distinction is carried by Varahamihira to the 
number of dwellings, as well as classes of chowries and umbrellas 
allowable to the four Varnas respectively . 3 Nevertheless there were 
in the Gupta Age as in earlier times undoubted departures from the 
strict Smriti law. This is proved by a number of authentic instances 
of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas adopting the occupations of the classes 
below them, and of Vaisyas and Sudras following those of the classes 
above them . 4 An inscription of the fifth century A.D. refers to two 
Kshatriya merchants living in a city in the upper-Ganga basin, 
while another inscription of the same century mentions a body of 
weavers from Gujarat as having gradually adopted various other 
occupations in their new home in Malwa. In the seventh century 
Hiuen Tsang and his companions, escaping from a band of robbers 
in the Takka country, met a Brahmana who was ploughing the land, 
with his own hands .' 5 In the Dasakumdra-charita , 6 a contemporary 
prose romance, we hear even of a colony of Brahmana robbers living 
by the occupation of kirdtas in the Vindhya forests. 

In the next place, we have in the Gupta period authentic 
examples of inter-marriages between Varnas, not only in the 
anuloma but also in the pratiloma order . 7 In the contemporary 


1. HTW , I, 168. 

2. Kaut, II. 4. The northern, eastern, southern and the western quarters are 
assigned respectively to the Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. 

3. BS. LIII. 70, 91; LXXXI. 4. In LOT. 84 the comers of a city or village or house 
are declared to be auspicious for Chandalas and such other low castes, though 
unsuitable for others. 

4 . Historical references are:—(a) Mayura-sarman (p. 271) deliberately exchanged 
Brahmana’s role for that of a Kshatriya warrior and eventually became the 
founder of the Kadamba dynasty, (b) CII, III. 89 (Maharaja Matrivishnu, 
great grandson of Brahmana saint Indravishnu), (c) HTW. II. 250-51 (Brahmana 
kings of Ujjayini, Jijhoti and Mahesvarapura in Hiuen Tsang’s time), (d) EL 
XIV. 306 f (mahasdmanta Pradoshasarman descended from strictly orthodox 
Brahmana family), (e) HTW. I. 300, 343 (Vaisya kings of Thaneswar and 
Paryatra, (f) HTW. I, 322; II, 252; Beal, 79 (Sudra kings of Matipura and 
Sindh). 

5. CII, III. 70-71, 81-4; Beal. 73. 

6. P. 24 (NSP. 1951, p. 26). 

7. Cf. Above, p. 179 (Prabhavati-gupta, daughter of Chandra-gupta II married 
Rudrasena of Brahmana Vakataka dynasty); El. VIII, 24 (daughters of Kakutstha- 
varman of Brahmana Kadamba dynasty married to Gupta and other kings); 
ASWI. IV, 140 (Brahmana Soma, ancestor of minister of Vakataka king Devasena 
married Brahmana and Kshatriya wives); EL XV, 301 (maternal ancestor of 
Lokanatha was a Brahmana, but begot a son by a Sudra wife); HTW. II, 246 
(daughter of Harsha of Thaneswar belonging to Vaisya family married Ksha¬ 
triya king of Valabhl); Har. I (Bana’s father married a 6udra wife by whom 
he had two sons). 


C.A.—86. 


5G1 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Sanskrit dramas and prose romances we find Brahmanas and Ksha- 
triyas even marrying the daughters and female slaves of courtesans. 1 
It follows from the above that the Smriti law in the Gupta Age, 
though followed by the people in general, was far from possessing 
the rigidity of later times. On the other hand, the Brahmana appears 
from the authoritative accounts of the Chinese Buddhist travellers 
to have retained the high social position assigned to him in the 
Smritis. 2 The old Smriti law, declaring exile to be the utmost 
penalty for a Brahmana offender and exempting him from capital 
punishment and confiscation of property, is repeated in the Katya ~ 
yana-Smriti. That this rule was followed in actual practice is to be 
seen from concrete references in the dramas and prose romances 
of the period. 3 

2, Low Castes 

As in the preceding age, there were also numerous mixed 
castes. 4 5 We know something about the condition of the Chandalas 
and similar classes who occupied the lowest rank in the order of the 
mixed castes. According to the Smriti law the Chandalas were to 
perform the meanest work, such as carrying unclaimed corpses and 
executing criminals. They were not to walk about during night in 
villages and towns, and even during day-time they were to move 
about with distinguishing marks fixed by the king. In fact they 
were to live outside the village. Strict rules were laid down for 
preventing pollution of other classes by their contact. 15 The evi¬ 
dence of contemporary Chinese travellers shows that these rules 
were followed in the Gupta Age. In Madhyadesa, at the beginning 
of the fifth century, as Fa-hien tells us, 6 the Chandalas were re¬ 
quired to live outside the boundaries of towns and market places on 
approaching which they had to strike a piece of wood as a warning 


1. Cf. the stories of Brahmana Charudatta marrying Vasantasena and Brahmana 
^arvilaka marrying her slave Madanika in Mrichchhakatika, and the story of a 
prince marrying the younger daughter of a courtesan of Champa in Dasa - 
kumdracharita. Such marriages are approved by an ancient Kamasutra 
authority (fn. 1, p. 565). 

2. Hiuen Tsang ( HTW. I, 140) says that the Brahmanas were the purest and most 
esteemed of the various castes and clans of the country. According to I-tsing 
( Record , p. 182) Brahmanas were regarded throughout the four parts of India 
as the most honourable. 

3. Kdt. V. 483 (immunity of Brahmanas); Mri. Act. IX (Charudatta, though found 
guilty of murder by the presiding judge is recommended for exemotion from 
the death penalty for his Brahmana birth); Dasa. p. 131 (NSP, 1951, p. 181) 
(Brahmana minister charged with treason against the king is sentenced by judge 
to be blinded in lieu of capital punishment). 

4. HTW. I. 168. For a comprehensive account of mixed castes compiled from 
Smritis of c. 500 B.C. to A.D. 1000, see KHDS , II. 169 L 

5. Cf. Vi. XVI, 11. 14, Manu. X, 51-56. Bri. p. 96, V. 18 (disabilities of Chandalas). 
Manu. V. 85, Bri . p. 359, v. 8, Par. Ill, 24, Chyavana and Devala quoted by 
Vij. on Ydj. III. 30 (Brahmana touching Chan^ala to purify himself by bathing). 

6. Giles, 21. 


562 



SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


to others to avoid their touch. For them was reserved the occupa¬ 
tion of hunters and dealers in fish. In the first part of the seventh 
century, according to Hiuen Tsang, 1 butchers, executioners, scaven¬ 
gers, etc. (corresponding no doubt to Chandalas and similar castes) 
lived in dwellings marked by a distinctive sign and lying outside the 
city. The references in the literature of the Gupta period confirm 
the above accounts. We learn from them how the Chandalas, who 
were confirmed meat-eaters, were habitually engaged as public 
executioners and were regarded as untouchables. 2 

3. Aboriginal Tribes 

- Removed still further from the Chandalas and other castes 
lying within the pale of Indo-Aryan society were the aboriginal 
tribes (Pulindas, Sabaras, Kiratas, and so forth) who lived in the 
hills and forests of the Vindhyas and other mountain ranges. In 
the Dasakumdra-charita, the Harsha-charita, the Kddambarl and 
other works of the late Gupta period we get vivid glimpses of the 
dress and manners as well as the religious and social customs of 
these tribes. We learn that the Sabaras of the Vindhya forests In 
the seventh century were used to such reprehensible and outlandish 
practices as the offering of human flesh to their deities, living by 
hunting, partaking of meat and wine, and kidnapping women for 
marriage. 3 

4. Slaves 

The Smriti law of the Gupta Age develops the rules about slavery 
in the preceding period 4 in some respects. Katyayana, while repeat¬ 
ing the law of Yajnavalkya and Narada forbidding enslavement in 
the ascending order of castes, categorically declares that a Brahmana 
can never be a slave, and further that the sale and purchase of a 
Brahmana woman are to be annulled. With the same Brahmanical 
bias he declares, in modification of the older law, that while a 
Kshatriya or Vaisya apostate from asceticism is to be made a slave, 
a Brahmana offender is simply to suffer banishment. Introducing 
a new clause, Katyayana 5 says that a free woman marrying a slave 
herself becomes a slave, but a female slave bearing a child to her 
master is immediately released from servitude. 

1. HTW. I. 147. I-tsing, though he does not refer to Chandalas by name, says 
(Record , p. 139) that persons engaged in clearing filth had to strike sticks when 
going about and anyone touching them by mistake washed himself and his 
garments. 

2. Cf. Mri. X and Mud . VII (pair of Chandalas told off to lead condemned criminal 
to public execution) Mud. loc. cit (person contaminated by Chandala’s touch 
unfit to be touched by others). Lahkavatara, p. 246 (Dombas, Chandalas, 
Kaivartas mentioned as typical exampks of meat-eaters). Ktid. p. 21 (Chandala 
girl, entering king’s audience-hall, strikes pavement with bamboo stick repeat¬ 
edly from a distance to attract attention). 

3. Kdd, 59 f. 4. Vol. II, p. 570 f. 5. w. 715 ff. 


563 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


References in the Mrichchhakatika , a drama of the Gupta Age, 
partly confirm and partly supplement the data given above. In the 
character of the gambler, who offers himself for sale in payment of 
a debt due to a gambling master, we have an illustration of the 
class of self-sold slaves mentioned by Narada. Again, the fate of the 
slaves Sthavaraka and Madanika shows how the treatment of slaves 
depended upon the temperament of the individual owners. For 
while Madanika is regarded by her high-minded mistress as a friend 
and confidante, Sthavaraka is beaten and put in fetters by his brutal 
master. Again, while Madanika is released by her mistress to make 
possible her union with her lover, Sthavaraka has to wait for his 
release till the disgrace of his master and the issue of an order by 
the new king. 


III. MARRIAGE 

The rules relating to marriage, formulated in the older Smritis, 1 
are not materially altered during this period, but there is a growing 
tendency to lower the marriageable age of girls. Some texts make 
it compulsory for the guardian to marry the girl before puberty. 
According to Vishnu Pur ana the age of the bridegroom should be 
three times that of the bride, but according to Ahgiras the differ¬ 
ence in age should be considerably less. 2 Vatsyayana’s view of the 
marriageable age of girls, which may be taken to reflect the pre¬ 
vailing practice, is somewhat different from that of the Smritis. He 
quotes in one place, though anonymously, a text of Apastamba’s 
Grihy&-sutra 3 forbidding marriage with a girl reaching the age of 
puberty. But this evidence is somewhat modified by his detailed 
rules relating to courtship by or on behalf of a suitor and conjugal 
relations immediately after marraige. From these rules it appears 
that* girls were married before as well as after puberty. Elsewhere 
the author declares himself definitely in favour of a man marrying 
a girl younger than himself by three years or more. 4 

It appears from Hiuen Tsang’s statement 5 that, as in the pre¬ 
ceding age, marriage was prohibited within certain degrees of 
relationship, and marriage within the same caste was preferred. 
Vatsyayana in his Kdmasutra declares that the blessings of (lawful) 
progeny, fame, and public approval are obtained by a man uniting 

1. Vol. II, pp. 558 ff.~ 

2. Vi. Pur. III. 10.16. Angiras quoted in Smritimuktaphala, Part I. 125 (bride to be 
2, 3, 5 or more years younger than bridegroom). For an exhaustive account of 
the Smriti law about age of marriage, see KHDS, II. 1. 438-45. 

3. I. 3. 11. 

4. KS. III. 1. 2 (girl younger by three years); ibid. 12 (girl reaching age of puberty). 
An anonymous text quoted by the commentator on the second passage definitely 
declares that a man should marry a girl who is younger than himself by three 
to seven vears, neither more nor less. 

5. HTW. I. 168. 


504 





SOCIAL CONDITIONS 

himself in love according to canonical rites with a virgin of the same 
Varna. The contrary practice of making love to girls belonging to 
higher Varnas as well as to married women is forbidden. Love 
for women of inferior Varnas, who are sufficiently pure not to have 
their dishes cast off after meals, like love with harlots and re-married 
widows (punarbkus ), is neither approved nor prohibited, as its 
object is only pleasure. 1 From this it follows that inter-marriages 
between different Varnas were hedged round with even greater 
restrictions in the society of Vatsyayana’s time than those contem¬ 
plated by the Smritis. For, according to Vatsyayana, not only is 
marriage in the pratiloma order absolutely forbidden, but marriage 
in the anuloma is put on the same low level as union with harlots. 

Like the Smritis, Vatsyayana contemplates marriage as being 
normally settled by the parents (or other guardians) of the parties. 
Vatsyayana, moreover, adds a detailed account of the methods of 
selection of the bride that were in vogue in his time. The parents 
and relatives of the bridgegroom, as well as his friends to whom his 
wishes have been made known, are to move in the matter. Girls 
suffering from various defects, including defective names, are to 
be avoided. But according to the sensible view of an old canonical 
authority, 2 quoted anonymously by Vatsyayana, happiness depends 
on the choice of a girl upon whom one’s heart and eyes are set, and 
not on any other. Accordingly the guardians of the girl are recom¬ 
mended to array her in gay clothes when giving her away, and to 
show her to advantage on occasions of festivities and the like. The 
ceremony of selection of the bride is to result in one or the other 
of four forms of marriage known to the Smritis, namely Brahma, 
Prajdpatya, Arsha and Daiva 3 

Vatsyayana’s testimony also shows how r a young man could, 
under special circumstances, apply himself to win the girl of his 
choice by courtship or even by trickery and violence. The courtship 
is to take different forms according as the girl is a child or a young 
woman or a woman of advanced age, and wooing, when successful, 
is to be followed by a gradual winning of the girl’s confidence. 4 

The account of Vatsyayana is also important as illustrating the 
Smriti rule allowing the girl in some instances to select her own 

1. KS. I. 5. 1-3. In the same context Vatsyayana quotes (ibid 5-26) the opinions 
of five ancient authorities on Erotics successively allowing, in special circum¬ 
stances, love with a married woman, with a widow, with a female ascetic, with 
an unattached daughter or female servant of a ganikd , and with a girl of high 
family past her childhood, and he concludes by expressing his agreement with 
these authors. The author’s view of such unions is illustrated by his statement 
that connection with a married woman even belonging to a higher varna who 
is known to be a wanton ( svairini ) with many lapses of conduct, like connec¬ 
tion with a harlot, does not involve the breach of dharma. 

2. Apastamba Grihya-sfUra, I. 30, 20 f. 

3. KS. III. 1. 4-21. See Vol. II, p. 559. 4. KS. III. 3. 1-44. 

565 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 

husband. 1 Such a maiden is to pay court to a young man, hand¬ 
some, virtuous and intelligent, with whom she had shared her 
affections from childhood, or to one whom she knows to be so deeply 
smitten with love as to be ready to marry her even against his 
parents’ wishes. The methods of wooing, which show considerable 
knowledge of human nature, are given in some detail, but they 
need not be quoted here. In fine, says the author, the girl should 
marry one in whom she would find a haven of happiness, and who 
would be completely devoted to her. It is better to have a husband 
devoted to herself, though poor, or one supporting himself alone 
though without parts, than a husband who, though virtuous, has 
many to share his affections. Nor is marriage desirable with a man 
of humble birth, or who is too old, or addicted to dice, or with a 
wife and child, and so forth. Of several equally desirable suitors, 
the best is one with whom there is reciprocity of love. 2 

Vatsyayana’s account of the methods of courtship given above 
leads naturally to his description (drawn no doubt from life), of the 
three forms of marriage known to the Smritis, namely, Gandharva, 
Paisdcha and Rdkshasa . 3 More details are given of the Gandharva 
marriage. Where the suitor cannot meet his beloved often in secret, 
he is to engage the services of his nurse’s daughter who is to press 
his claims upon her. When the girl is so prepared, she should meet 
her lover at some appointed time and place. Then the marriage is 
to be solemnised by her walking thrice round a sacred fire, brought 
from a &rotriya’s house and fed with oblations according to Smriti 
rules. When this is done, the parents are to be informed of the 
matter, for as the teachers say, marriage performed before a fire 
as witness can never be annulled. After the consummation of the 
marriage the relatives are to be informed and made to bestow the 
girl in the formal fashion under the fear of social obloquy and 
punishment in law. Unlike the Gandharva marriage, the Paisdcha 
and R,akshasa forms do not require to be confirmed by religious 
rites, and it is enough to inform the relatives after consummation 
of the marriage and induce them to give her away. Vatsyayana’s 
view of the relative merits of different forms of marriage is some¬ 
what different from that of most of the Smritis. For in the first 
place he makes out the Paisdcha marriage to be superior to the 
Rdkshasa, no doubt (as the commentator says) on the ground that 
the former is not accompanied with violence, though they are equally 
unrighteous. Again, he declares the Gandharva marriage to be the 
most respected and the best, as it is attended with happiness, is not 

1. Vol. II, p, 561. 2. KS . III. 4. 36-59. 3. Vol. II, p. 559. 

506 



SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


accompanied by troubles and negotiations, and is the result of mutual 
desire, 1 

The literature of the Gupta Age contains repeated references 
to Gdndharva manages between the leading characters, but these 
are concerned in general with ancient kings, or heroes, or with ficti¬ 
tious characters of princes and nobles. The popular attitude on this 
point is well expressed in the artful advice given by the wise nun 
Kamandaki to the love-lorn heroine in the Mdlatdmddhava. She says 
that generally fathers as well as destiny have authority over the 
disposal of maidens, the contrary examples of Sakuntala marrying 
Dushyanta, Ur vail marrying Pururavas. and Vasavadatta marrying 
Udayana involve rashness and therefore do not deserve to be fol¬ 
lowed. In the historical example of the Princess Rajyasri of Thanes- 
war, her marriage was arranged by her father, king Prabhakara- 
vardhana, the mother meekly acquiescing in the choice with the 
observation that ‘the father is the judge in the bestowal of the 
daughter’. The literary works of the Gupta period themselves con¬ 
tain examples of marriage being arranged in advance by the parents 
on both sides in anticipation of a son being bom to one couple and 
a daughter to another. Above all they illustrate the strong repug¬ 
nance of high-born maidens, though themselves deeply smitten with 
love, to select their husbands by their own free will, 2 

IV. POSITION OF WOMAN 
1. Female Education 

Long before the Gupta times the Brahmanical sacred law had 
denied to women Vedic study and even the utterance of Vedie 
mantras on the occasion of their sacraments. 3 Nevertheless we 
have good grounds to believe that girls of high families had sufficient 
opportunities for acquiring proficiency in general learning. In 
Vatsyay ana’s Kdmasutra princesses and daughters of nobles are 
mentioned among instances of women whose intellect is sharpened 
by the knowledge of sdstras. In particular, Vatsyay ana gives us a 
long list of sixty-four subsidiary branches of knowledge ( angavidyd) 
which should be learnt by women. These include solving riddles 
of words, chanting recitations from books, completing unfinished 
verses, knowledge of lexicons and metres, and so forth. Vatsyayana’s 

1. KS. III. 5. 1-30. Contrast Mann. III. 34 ( paisdcha marriage is most base and 
sinful), but cf. Baudh. I. 11. 16 ( gdndharva marriage is the best). 

2. §ak. III (ref, to numerous daughters of royal sages marrying in gdndharva 
form with approval of their parents). Mdlatl. Act II (Kamandakl’s advice). 
Harsha. IV (Raiyasrl’s marriage). Dasa. pp. 109, 136 (NSP, 1951, pp. 148, 188) 
(marriage arranged by parents even before birth of parties). Kdd. 249 f and 
Mdlatl. Acts II and VI (reluctance of high-born maidens to select their own 
husbands). 

3. Vol. II, p„ 564. 


567 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


picture of the good wife, again, shows how she was expected to be 
sufficiently educated to frame the annual budget and regulate her 
expenditure accordingly. 1 The literary evidence of the Gupta Age 
proves that girls of high families, as also those living in hermitages, 
read works on ancient history and legend, and were educated suffi¬ 
ciently to understand and even compose verses. What is more, 
girls of high families, and above all those living at the royal courts, 
were usually trained in the arts of singing, dancing, and the like. 2 
Later evidence seems to suggest that there were regular institutions 
where girls could receive their training, sometimes in the company 
of male students. 3 Mention may be made lastly of the fact that 
the Amarakosa , 4 a work of the Gupta Age, refers to words meaning 
female teachers (upadhyayd and upadhyayi) as well as female 
instructors of Vedic mantras (dcbdryd). 

2. The Ideal Wife 

Vatsyayana draws a picture of the good wife, which carries into 
greater detail the account in the Smritis and may be taken as usual 
to be a faithful reflection of real life. The picture exhibits those 
qualities of service and self-restraint as well as sound household 
management which have remained the hallmark of Hindu wives 
down to the present day. Where the woman is the only wife, says 
the author, she is to devote herself to her husband as though to a 
deity. She is personally to minister to his comforts at table, on his 
reaching home and so forth. She shares in her husband’s fasts and 
vows, not brooking a refusal. She attends festivities, social gather¬ 
ings, sacrifices, and religious processions, only with his permission. 

1. KS. I, 3. 12 ('knowledge of sdstras by princesses, etc). Ibid. 16 (knowledge of 
64 arts). Ibid. IV. 1. 32 (wife’s framing of family budget). 

2. Historical ref:— Har. TV (Princess Rajyasii grows up with daily increasing 
knowledge of dancing, singing, and other arts). Other references:— §dk. I 
(Anasuya’s knowledge of itihdsa, metrical love message composed by £akuntala 
and written by her on lotus leaf). Ibid. TV (Anasuya’s knowledge of painting 
or drawing); Meqha. I, 23 (lute played by exiled Yaksha’s wife); Mdlav. II 
(Malavika trained by paid dramatic master at royal court and made to exhibit 
her skill in song and dance in a musical contest with female ascetic acting 
practically as judge); Ibid. I—II (work on the difficult chhalika dance composed 
by Lady Sarmishtha); Ratndvali. II (Sagarika draws picture of her royal lover); 
Priya. Ill (Aranyaka made to play the lute to the accompaniment of a song 
at performance of a mimic play); Mdlati. II (Malatl draws a picture of her 
lover and understands a difficult Sanskrit verse written by him in return). In 
Priya. I singing, dancing and instrumental music are mentioned as the type of 
accomplishments in which a noble damsel should be trained. 

3. Kdd. 270 (Princess Kadambarl and Lady Mahasveta together learned singing, 
dancing and other accomplishments in their youthful days). Mdlati. I (Kaman- 
dakl sat at feet of same master with fathers of hero and heroine and with girls 
gathered from different lands for study). Uttara. II (female ascetic Atreyl 
studied with ascetic boys Lava and Kusa at Valmlki’s hermitage and afterwards 
repaired to Dandaka forest to learn Vedanta from sage Agastya and other 
teachers). These accounts (except the last) may have been drawn from con¬ 
temporary life. 

4. II. 6. 14. 


568 



SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


She engages in sports approved by him. That the husband might 
not find fault with her, she avoids the company of disreputable 
women, shows him no signs of displeasure, and does not loiter about 
at the door-step, or in solitary places for a long time. She is not 
puffed up with prosperity, and she does not give charity to anyone 
without informing her husband. She honours her husband’s friends, 
as is their due, with gifts of garlands, unguents, and toilet. She 
serves her father-in-law and mother-in-law and abides by their 
commands. When in their presence, she makes no replies, speaks 
few but sweet words, and does not laugh aloud. She engages servants 
in their proper work and honours them on festive occasions. Above 
all, when her husband is gone abroad she lives a life of ascetic res¬ 
traint: she gives up wearing all ornaments excepting the marks of 
her married state: she engages in religious rites and fasts: she acts 
as bidden by her superiors: she does not go out to visit her relations 
except on occasions of calamities or fetsivities: when she visits 
them, she does so only for a short while and in the company of her 
husband’s people. When her husband returns home, she goes forth 
immediately to meet him in her sober dress, and then she worships 
the gods and makes gifts. 

Apart from attending to her husband and his parents, relations, 
as well as his friends, the wife has complete and comprehensive 
charge of the household. She keeps the house absolutely clean, 
adorns it with festoons of flowers, and polishes the floor completely 
smooth. She looks after the worship of the gods at the household 
shrine and the offering of ball oblations three times a day. In the 
garden attached to the house she plants beds of various vegetables, 
herbs, plants, and trees. She collects seeds of various vegetables 
and fruit-trees as well as medical herbs, and sows them at the proper 
season. She lays by a store of various provisions in the house. She 
knows how to spin and weave, how to look after agriculture, cattle- 
breeding, and draught animals, how to take care of her husband’s 
domestic pets, and so forth. She frames an annual budget and maker- 
her expenses accordingly. She keeps daily accounts and makes up 
the total at the end of the day. During her husband’s absence she 
exerts herself in order that his affairs may not suffer; she increases 
the income and diminishes the expenditure to the best of her power. 
In case the woman has a co-wife she looks upon the latter as a 
younger sister when she is older in age, and as a mother when she 
herself is younger . 1 

The rule of life for the virtuous wife sketched above from the 
Smritis and the Kdmosutra appears to have been generally followed 


1. KS. IV. 1. 1-55; IV. 2. 1-38. 


569 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


|n the Gupta Age. Following in the wake of the older Smritis, 
Katyayana declares that the wife must never live apart from her 
husband, she must always be devoted to him, she must worship the 
domestic fire, she must minister to her husband during his lifetime, 
and she must observe the vow of chastity after his death. Again, 
according to Katyayana and Veda-Vyasa, the wife is to be associated 
with the husband in the performance of his religious acts, but all 
acts done by her to secure her spiritual benefit without his consent 
are useless. In thorough accord with the older Smriti rules is the 
direction in the Matsya Purtma to worship the husband as a god, 
as well as that of Veda-Vyasa requiring a wife, whose husband is 
gone abroad, to emaciate her body and refrain from all personal 
embellishments. 1 Further, in the admonition addressed to the king 
by the sage Kanva’s disciple in the AhhijndnaJakuntalam, we have 
echoes of the Smriti rules deprecating long residence of the wife 
with her paternal relatives and admitting the husband’s complete 
authority over her. Kanva’s own summary of the duties of a wife, 
addressed to ^akuntala on the eve of her departure for her husband’s 
place, is based upon the Smriti and Kamastitra rules quoted above. 2 
On the other hand the wife, says Daksha 3 * after Mann and other 
authorities cited above, must be maintained by the husband, while 
the Brihat-samhitd 4 repeats Apastamba’s penance for the husband’s 
desertion of his faultless wife. In the character of Dhuta, wife of the 
hero in the Mrichchhakatika we have a typical instance of the 
good wife described in the Smritis. The belief in the extraordinary 
powers of the devoted wife (pativratd ), which is expressed in the 
Mahdbhdrata and other works, is reflected in a story of the Doia- 
kumdra-charita. The attitude of high-born ladies is illustrated in 
another story of the same work, where a woman, repudiated by her 
husband, declares it to be a living death for women of high birth 
to be hated by their husbands, for the husband alone is the deity 
of such women. Still another story shows how the qualities of 
economic house-keeping and absolute devotion to the husband were 
highly prized among wives. 5 

3. Unchaste Wife 

As in the preceding period, side by side with ideal pictures of 
conjugal love and faith we come across numerous references to 
unhappy and even unchaste wives. Vatsyayana’s evidence confirms 

1. Flat. w. 835-37, Veda-Vyasa, II. 12, 19; Matsya P ., 210-18, Veda-Vyasa, II. 15. 

2. &dk. XV-V. In the former Act §akuntala is admonished by her foster-father 
to serve her superiors, to behave towards her co-wives as towards her friends, 
not to turn against her husband even though angered by his fault, to be 
considerate towards her attendants, and not to be puffed up by pride; for thus 
do young women qualify for the position of the mistress of the house. 

3. IT, 36. 4. LXXTV. 13. 

5. Dasa. pp. 164 f, 159 f (NSP. 1951, pp. 227 f, 220 f). 

570 




SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


that of the Smritis about the prevalence of polygamy. This practice 
was not confined to kings, but extended also to other people. Indeed, 
it appears that rich men generally married many wives who were 
outwardly happy in the enjoyment of affluence but inwardly misera¬ 
ble. A woman suffered the misfortune of getting a co-wife if she 
was stupid, or incontinent, or barren, or if she repeatedly bore 
daughters, or if the husband was fickle by temperament. 1 2 There 
is a separate branch of Erotics dealing with illicit love with married 
women, and a number of occasions is mentioned, both in Kdmasutra 
and Brihat-samhitd, 2 as offering opportunities for meeting between 
unchaste wives and their paramours. But the actual instances of 
seduction of married women, even in the contemporary literature 
of stories and fables, are limited in number. 3 

According to the Smriti law, adultery ranks among the Lesser 
Sins ( upapdtakas ) which should be expiated by performances of 
appropriate penances. The guilty wife, so long as she does not 
perform the penance, is to be treated with studied scorn and neglect 
and given only a starvation diet. But after she has undergone 
penance (or according to some authorities passed her monthly period), 
she becomes pure and is restored to all her rights. Only in extreme 
cases, as when she commits adultery with a Sudra or other low- 
caste man, or has conceived, or borne a child, or attempts to kill 
her husband, is she to be abandoned altogether. The records of the 
Gupta Age point to the continuance of some of the above ideas and 
practices. Echoing the liberal views of Vasishtha and Yajnavalkya, 
Veda-Vyasa, Atri and Devaia declare that a woman becoming preg¬ 
nant by connection with a man of another Varna remains impure till 
her delivery and next period, when she regains her purity. 

4. The Widow 

The Smriti law of the pre-Gupta period requires the widow 
as a rule to live a life of strict celibacy and self-restraint, though 
Brihaspati 4 recommends, as an alternative, that she should bum 
herself on the funeral pyre of her husband. The Smritis of the 
Gupta Age followed the older law in prescribing a life of vows and 
fasts as well as of renunciation for the widow and allowing her to 
inherit her husband’s property. 5 But Sankha and Angiras as well 
as Harita strongly urge her to sacrifice herself on her husband’s 

1. KS. Ill, 4. 55-6; IV, 2. 1; IV, 4. 72-90. 

2. KS. I. 5. 33-4; BS , LXXVIII. 10-11. 

3. Dasa. pp. 102 f, 167 f, (NSP, 1951, pp. 138 f, 231 f); Tantmkhyayxka (story of 
cuckold artisan and his wife). 

4. w. 483-4. 

5. Rat. 626-27, Par. IV. 31, Vriddha-Marita. IX 205-10 (widow’s ascetic life). 
Vrddha-Manu and Vriddha-Vishnu quoted by Vij. on Ydj. II. 135-36. (widow’s 
right to husband’s property). 


571 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


pyre. In the case of Brahmana widows self-immolation on the fire 
was forbidden absolutely or conditionally by Paithlnasi, Angiras, 
Vyaghrapad, and Usanas, while Veda-Vyasa recommended it as an 
alternative course . 1 Literary references show that the custom of 
sati was extolled by some authors , 2 but strongly condemned by 
others in the Gupta period . 3 We have, again, a few instances, both 
in contemporary history and fiction, of actual or attempted self- 
immolation of women immediately before or after the death of their 
husbands . 4 But a wide-spread prevalence of this practice in the 
Gupta Age is disproved by the complete silence of the observant 
Chinese travellers on this point and frequent references to widows 
in the Smritis and other literature. On the whole we may infer, on 
general grounds, that widows in the Gupta Age, as in earlier times, 
usually lived the chaste and austere life prescribed by the Smritis* 

But the re-marriage of widows, and of other women , 5 though 
gradually coming into disfavour, was not absolutely forbidden. 
Hiuen Tsang’s evidence is definitely against the remarriage of 
women , 6 but Amarakosa 7 gives the synonyms not only for the 
punarhhu (remarried widow 7 ) 8 and her husband, but also for a twice- 
born man having a punarhhu as his principal wife. Katyayana 9 
refers to the case of a widow betaking herself to another man re¬ 
gardless of her adult or minor son, and deals, under his law of parti¬ 
tion and inheritance, with the share belonging to the son of a woman 
who has left her impotent husband. 

In so far as the punarhhu is concerned, Vatsyayana gives us 
a somewhat different view of her status. The punarhhu is a widow 
who, being smitten with love through inability to control her passion, 
unites herself again with a man seeking pleasure and having excel¬ 
lent qualities. In choosing her mate she follows, above all, the incli¬ 
nations of her heart. She possesses a degree of independence denied 
to the w 7 edded wife. She persuades her lover to spend money on 
drinking parties, garden parties, etc. At her lover’s house, she 
assumes the role of a mistress, being affectionate to his wedded 
wives, generous to bis servants, and friendly with his companions. 
Possessing greater knowledge of the arts of love than the wedded 
wife, she practises them on her lover in secret. She joins in festive 

1. Par. III. 32-33, ^ahkha, Angiras and Harlta quoted by Vii. on Yaj. I. 86. 
Paithnasi, Angiras, Usanas and Vyaghrapad quoted by Apararka on Yaj. I. 87. 
Veda-Vyasa, II. 53. 

2. BS. LXXXIV. 16. 3. Kdd. 64, Mri. X. 

4 .Historical references:—(a) Widow of Goparaja (p. 33); (b) Queen Rajyavati 

(p. 82); (c) Queen Yasomati (p. 98). Other references are: (a) Dasa. n. 132 
(NSP, 1951, j. 182 f), (b) Priya, I. V 

5. Vol. IT, p. 565. 6. HTW. 1. 168. 

7. II. 6, 23. 8. Cf. Vol. II, p. 565. 

9. vv. 562, 571, 574-77, 860. 


572 





SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


gatherings as well as in drinking and garden parties and other 
games. The punarbhu’s connection, unlike that of the wedded wife, 
is not a permanent one. If she leaves the house of her own accord, 
she has to return to her lover all presents except those given out 
of affection, but if she is driven out, she need not give back anything. 
In other passages, the punarbhu’s social status is correctly defined by 
placing her midway between the virgin (kanyd) and the harlot, and 
between the queens ( devi) and the courtesans ( ganika l. 1 It follows 
from the above that in the society of Vatsyayana’s time public 
opinion permitted a widow to live with the man of her choice, but 
she never enjoyed the social status of a wedded wife. 

5. The Courtesan (ganika) 

It appears from Vatsyayana’s Kdmasutra 2 that because of their 
graces of form and manners and accomplishments, a class of courte¬ 
sans enjoyed high social esteem as in the older times. 3 We learn 
also from other contemporary literature that they were renowned for 
their beauty, wit, and other accomplishments, as well as their w T ealth 
and luxury. Occasionally, as in the character of Vasantasena in the 
Mrichchhakatika and those of Ragamahjari and Chandrasena in the 
Dasakumdra-charita, there were courtesans of the better sort, who 
deliberately gave up their profession and, after braving persecution, 
united themselves with worthy men of their choice. But in general 
the courtesans were notorious for their greed and wiles. In the 
Dasakumdra-charita story, to which we have referred above, w T e have 
a very vivid account, no doubt drawn from life, of their up-bringing 
and training with the sole object of qualifying them for squeezing 
money from their dupes. 4 Allied to the institution of courtesans 
was that of girls maintained in the great temples for the worship 
of the gods. Such girls were kept at the great temple of Mahakala 
at UjjayinI in Kalidasa’s time, and at a shrine of the Sun-god in a 
city east of Sindh in the time of Hiuen Tsang. 5 

1. KS. IV. 2. 39-59; I. 5. 4, IV, 4, 75-78: 

2. I. 3. 20-21. 3. See Vol. II, pp. 568-70. 

4. Cf. Mri. I and IV (Vasantasena skilled in acting, singing, dancing and painting 
but not entitled to enter the inner courtyard of the hero’s house); Dasa. p. 65 f, 
NSP, 1951, p. 78 f. (Ragamahjari gave a musical concert to the townsmen at 
a public place. Ordinary type of ganika represented by Kamamanjari, elder 
sister of Ragamahjari). Description of upbringing and training of ganika 

Dasa pp. 66-68 NSP, 1951, pp. 80-4); the ganika is to be tenderly nursed by 
her mother from her birth; she is to be trained in the arts of singing, dancing, 
acting and painting, cooking, preparing perfumes, reading, writing and speaking 
with ready wit and in the elements of grammar, logic and astrology; she is to 
receive practical lessons in the science of Erotics; she is to appear with a large 
retinue at public festivals; her auspicious marks and accomplishments are to 
be advertised among townsmen and a high price set upon her favour. 

5. Megha, I. 36, HTW. II. 254. 


573 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


6. The General Status of Women 

The disabilities and inferior status of the women, introduced 
in the previous period, continued more or less in the Gupta Age. 
Among the most striking changes during this period may be men¬ 
tioned the increased recognition in Katyayana of the woman’s right 
to her property, and the remarkable rule in Atri and Devala allow¬ 
ing women molested by robbers and others to regain their social 
status. 1 That women in the Gupta Age were not disqualified from 
the exercise of public rights is proved by the example of queen 
Prabhavatl-gupta, 2 daughter of Emperor Chandra-gupta II, who 
ruled the Vakafaka kingdom as regent on behalf of her minor son 
in the fourth century^ and that of princess Vijayabhattarika 3 who 
acted as provincial governor under Vikramaditya I of the Chalukya 
dynasty of VatapI in the seventh century. 

References in the general as well as technical literature of the 
early centuries before and after Christ seem to indicate that married 
women in high families did not usually appear in public 'without 
veils. This custom was probably continued in the Gupta Age. 4 5 
The silence of Hiuen Tsang and X-tsing, however, indicates that the 
women did not generally observe the Purdah and remain in seclu¬ 
sion. For, such a peculiar custom, to which they were absolute 
strangers, would surely have been noticed by them. Besides, as 
noted above, 6 sculptured representations of female figures definitely 
negative the idea of a Purdah. 

V. LIFE OF THE PEOPLE 
1. General Character 

In a vast country like India the general character of the people 
must have varied in different localities and among various classes. 
Vatsyayana has noted striking differences of temperament and 
habits among the people in different parts of the country. 6 In the 
seventh century the discerning Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang, in the 
course of his travels extending almost over every part of India except 
the extreme south, recorded his opinion of the character of the people 

1. Kdt. w. 921-27; Atri. 197-98; Devala. 48-49. 

2. See p. 180. 3. See p. 242. 

4. Older references: Pan. HI. 2. 36 ( asuryampasyd applied to queens); Ram. 
Ayodhyakanda, 116. 28 (women’s appearance in public not blamable during 
calamities, troubles and wars as well as at svayamvara, sacrifice and marriage); 
Pratimd. I (proper occasions for married woman being seen in public are 
marriages, calamities and residence in forests). Later references:— §dk. V 
(£akuntalii appears at royal court with a veil, but unveils herself when pressed 
to prove her identity); Bar. Ill (practice of high bom ladies to wear veil); 

ibid. IV (Princess RajyasrI wears veil of red silk when seen by bride-groom); 
Mri. X (heroine made to put on veil when given the status of legally married 
wife). 

5. Vol. H, p. 573. 6. KS. II, 5. 21-33; II, 7. 24-28. 

574 



SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


in each region. From his account we learn that while the people 
of the Ganga and the Brahmaputra basins were generally remark¬ 
able for their qualities of honesty, courage, love of learning, and so 
forth, those of North-Western India and of the Deccan plateau as well 
as the people of the extreme North, East, West and South were 
generally of a contrary disposition. 1 In general, however, the 
character of the people was marked by an exceptionally high degree 
of honesty. The Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas in particular were 
distinguished for the purity and simplicity of their lives. 2 The 
Indian love of charity and benevolence is proved by references in 
the records of the Chinese pilgrims to the endowments made by kings 
and private individuals for the free distribution of food and medicine 
to the needy and the sick and for similar objects. 3 

2. Standard of Living 

The literature of the Gupta Age points to the continuity of the 
high standard of living attained in the preceding centuries. The 
evidence of the Brihat-samhitti, which claims to be a compendium 
of works of previous masters, proves that clubs, umbrellas, elephant- 
goads, canes, bows, canopies, halberds, standards, and chowries 
were in general use. 4 5 The most costly of such articles, naturally 
enough, were reserved for the royal family and the officers. 6 We 
learn from the same work that sets of five mansions each were con¬ 
ventionally prescribed for kings and queens down to the ordinary 

1. People praised by Hiuen Tsang are those of Nagar, Takshasila, Poonch, £atadru, 
J§rughna, Matipura, Govisana, Ahichchhatra, Kanyakubja, A-yu-to, A-ye-mu-ka, 
Prayaga, KausambI, Visoka, Varanasi, Chan-chu, Vaisali, Magadha, Iranaparvata, 
Kajangala, Pundravardhana, Kamarupa, Karnasuvarna, Dravida, Maharashtra, 
Mo-la-p’o, Valabhl and Mulasthanapura. People condemned by the pilgrim are 
those of Lampa, Gandhara, Sirhhapura, Takka, Jalandhara, Paryatra, Brahma- 
pura, Nepal, Andhra,. Dhanakataka, Chola, Malakuta, Broach, Surat, Kliche-lo, 
Ujjayini and Mahesvarapura. People having a mixed character were those of 
Udyana, Kashmir, Tamralipti, Ota, Kongoda, Kalihga and Sindh. 

2. Describing the character of the Indian people in his general account of India, 
Hiuen Tsang says ( HTW, 1, 171):—“They are of hasty and irresolute tempera¬ 
ments, but of pure moral principles. They will not take anything wrongfully 
and they yield more than fairness requires. They fear the retribution for sins 
in other lives, and make light of what conduct produces in this life. They do 
not practise deceit and keep their sworn obligation.” Elsewhere (I, 140, 168) 
he declares the Brahmanas to be the purest of all the castes and he speaks 
admiringly of the continent lives of the Brahmanas and the benevolent and 
merciful aims of the Kshatriyas. In yet another context (I. 151) he observes 
that the Kshatriyas and the Brahmanas were clean-handed and unostentatious, 
pure and simple in the lives, and very frugal. 

3. Giles. 47-48. HTW. I. 286 , 328 ; II. 286 . 

4. BS. LXXII. 4 (clubs etc. of different colours declared auspicious for the four 
Varnas ); ibid . LXXIX. 8-9 (couches and seats of diminishing sizes recom¬ 
mended for kings, princes, ministers, generals and priests). 

5. BS. LXXII. 3 (King’s chowrie to be made of favourable wood decked with gold 
and silver and ornamented with variegated gems); ibid. LXXIII. 1-4 (king’s 
umbrella to be white, to be made of feathers or covered with silk-cloth, studded 

with pearls, to have pommel of crystal and stick of pure gold and to be adorned 
with jewels; umbrellas of others to be decorated at top with gold fillets, to be 
furnished with wreaths and jewels and to be made of peacock’s feathers). 

575 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


court-officials, while four, three, two, and one mansions were re¬ 
served successively for the four Varnas. 1 Other evidences also illus¬ 
trate the wealth and luxury of the people of that time. The gorge¬ 
ous description of the splendours of Vasantasena’s palace at Ujja- 
yini in the Mrichchhakatika conveys to us in a general way the 
lavish magnificence of women of this class in real life . 1 2 Kings and 
nobles adopted extraordinary rich dress and modes of living which 
set the fashion for the rest. In the Sikshdsamuchchaya, a Mahay ana 
Buddhist work probably of the seventh century A.D., the author 
vividly describes the luxurious life of kings in contemporary 
society . 3 4 Other works indicate acquaintance with the luxury of 
summer-houses surrounded by water (samudragriha) and of foun¬ 
tain-houses (dhdragriha): 4 We have a vivid description of the 
luxury of a king’s bath and toilette in the Kddambarl . 5 Literary 
evidence also shows that jewels were habitually worn not only by 
members of royal family but also by their attendants . 6 The wear¬ 
ing of jewels is recommended by the Brihat-samhitd not only for 
kings and queens and court-officials, but also for those engaged in 
religious performances . 7 The Amarakosa gives a long list of words 
signifying ornaments for the head, forehead, the ears, the neck, 
the arms and the forearms, the fingers, the waist (both for males 
and females), and the legs. The same authority gives technical 
terms not only for the upper and the lower garments, but also for 
women’s bodices and petticoats, for a winter cloak, and for a cloak 
reaching down to the feet. Women’s dresses known by the same 


1. BS. LIII. 4-13. 

2. Mri. Act IV (lofty gateway had ivory portal and doors of gold thickly set with 
diamonds: of its eight courts the first consisted of rows of rooms with gem- 
encrusted, golden stairways and crystal windows, the third had a gaming table 
with dice of gems, the sixth was crowded with workers in gold and gems and 
the eighth was occupied by Vasantasena’s brother and mother in suitable 
dress). 

3. &ikshd. p. 208. 

4. KS. V. 5. 17. Svapna. V. 194 (samudragriha); Raghu. XVI. 19, Megha. I. 61 
(dhardgriha); Ritu. X. 2 (jalayantramandira, meaning a summer-house or 
fountain-house, used during summer). 

5. Kad. 31-33 (the king after taking exercise at palace-gymnasium ( vydyama - 
bhumi) went to the bathing place ( srudnabhumi ). This was covered with a white 
canopy and it contained a crystal seat for bathing as well as golden water- 
vessel and other pitchers filled with scented water. The king, after being 
besmeared with fragrant dmalaka- fruit, stepped into a water-trough. Rising 
up from the trough, he sat on a crystal slab where he was bathed by courte¬ 
sans with water-jars of emerald, crystal, silver and gold. After the bath the 
king put on a pair of white garments and wrapped his head with a piece of 
silken cloth. He then went to the toilette-room (vilepabhumi) where his body 
was anointed with sandal-paste, perfumed whh musk, camphor and saffron. 
Then he took his meal and after smoking fragrant drugs and chewing betel- 
leaves, he repaired to the retiring hall). 

6. Cf. e.g. Har. I, II, IV, VII and Mdlati. VI. 

7. BS. LXXX. 11, 17; LXXXXII. 1, VOX. 2-3. 


576 





SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


and other terms are mentioned in the works of Kalidasa and Banr.- 

bhatta . 1 

The description of the life of the people during different seasons 
of the year in the Srihgtira-sataka (a work attributed to Kalidasa and 
evidently of early date) throws some further light upon the manner;> 
of the times. In the spring season the people delighted in shrubberies 
(lata^mandapa) , vocal 'with the songs of cuckoos, and they assembled 
in social gatherings (goshfhts) attended by good poets . 2 In the 
summer seasons the girls wetted their hands with very pure sandal 
paste, the fountain-houses were patronised, the upper portions of 
the mansions were cleansed up for use, fine garments were worn, 
and very fragrant sandal dust was applied to the bodies . 3 In autumn 
the men enjoyed drinking wine at dead of night, while in the hemaaita 
season they put on clothes dyed with madder, and painted their 
bodies thickly with sandal juice . 4 

The authority of Hiuen Tsang proves that in the seventh century 
not only did kings use rich dresses, couches and the like, but their 
example was followed by the people down to the rich merchants. 
The clothing of the people was made of silk, muslin, calico, linen 
and line wool of two varieties. In particular the people of Takka 
(tract between the Sindhu and Beas) wore glossy white clothing 
made of silk and muslin, and those of Kanyakubja were dressed in 
glossy silk. I-tsing, in the same century, implies that a piece of silk 
cloth formed, not unoften, a part of the equipment of the Buddhist 
monks .' 5 To judge from Bana’s description of a king of Vidisa sitting 
in state in his council-hall, the king’s public appearance was marked 
by lavish display of luxury and magnificence . 6 Equal pomp attend¬ 
ed the processions of kings and princes as well as highborn ladies . 7 8 

3. Toilette and Personal Hygiene 

The high standard of cleanliness and comfort formed in the 
older times was maintained during the Gupta period. The 
Amarakosa 8 has a whole set of synonyms for bodily em¬ 
bellishments. The extensive use of tooth-sticks is proved by the 

1. Amara. II. G 102-9 (terms for ornaments): 115-19 (terms for clothes); Ritu. IV. 16, 
V. 8 ( kurpasaka); Har. I and III ( ckandataka, gatrika and kanchuka): Ritu. 
(I. 4-7, II. 19-25, III. 19-20, 25, IV. 2-4, V. 8, VI. 4-6, 13-24) mentions various 
ornaments and dresses worn by women at different seasons of the year. 

2. £ ringara-sataka > v. 28 3. Ibid . w. 31-32. 

4. Ibid. vv. 40-41. 

5. HTW. I. 147, 148, 151, 287, 340: Record, pp. 67-8. 

6. Kdd. 18f. 

7. Historical ref:— Har. VI (Prince Graha-vnrman’s marriage procession). Other 

refs:— Har. I (Prince DadhTcha going to his father’s hermitage); Mdlatt, Act I 
(MalatT visiting the city-garden); Ibid. VI (Maloti visiting a temple). 

8. IT. 6. 129-36. 

577 


C.A.—37. 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Brihat-samhitd references to the supposed auspicious (or inauspi¬ 
cious) qualities of sticks made from different kinds of trees. We are 
introduced in the same work to a recipe for dyeing the hair and 
formulas for preparation of different kinds of incense, scented hair- 
oils and hair-lotions, and other perfumes . 1 The variety ot coiffure 
practised by men and women is illustrated by the terracotta figu¬ 
rines . 2 It is also illustrated by a striking reference in the 
Mrichchhakatika , 3 The literature of the period contains repeated 
references to the use of sandal-juice, camphor, and the like as un¬ 
guents, and specially as sedatives. References are also made to the 
use of camphor with betel, and of aloe-wood incense for perfuming 
drinking water . 4 5 In the first part of the seventh century Hiuen 
Tsang, while introducing his general account of India, mentions 
various sanitary rules observed by the people for their personal 
cleanliness as also the general use of unguents and flowers. In the 
latter part of the seventh century, I-tsing gives a detailed account 
of the sanitary practices and personal comforts of the people . 6 

4. Food and Drink 

References in the Sinritis and the general literature of the 
period do not indicate any noticeable change in regard to food and 
drink . 6 The Lankdvatdra Sutra 7 gives in a list of approved foods 
the names of sdli rice, wheat and barley, pulses of three kinds, clari¬ 
fied butter, oils, molasses as well as raw r and coarse sugar. But 
there is no doubt that the people took fish and meat and were addicted 
to intoxicating liquor. It is remarkable that in the contemporary 
dramas and prose romances even the queens and other high-born 
ladles are repeatedly described as drinking wine . 8 It is in the ob- 


1. BS. LXXXV. 1-7: LXXVII. 1-37. 

2. See ASL 1903-4 (terracottas of Basarh), JUPHS (1941), 1-8, JlSOA, IX (1941), 
7-10 (terracottas of Raj ghat). 

3. Act IX. 

4. Raghu. VI. 60, Kum. V. 69, Dasa. pp, 41, 45, 48 (NSP, 1951, pp. 44, 48, 52), Ritu. 
I. 6, II. 21, 24, III. 19, IV. 5, etc. Kdd. 245, 320. 

5. HTW . I. 147 (floor of Indian houses purified with cow-dung and strewn with 
season flowers), I. 148 (garlands worn on head by Indians), I. 152 (Indians 
wash before every meal, throw away or polish utensils after use, chew tooth- 
sticks after meals, smear bodies with scented unguents like sandal and saffron). 
Record, IV-VI (utensils not used again after meals, washing mouth before and 
after meals, chewing tooth-stick after meals, clean water for drinking to be 
kept in earthenware or porcelain jar while water for cleaning purposes 
to be kept in jar of copper or iron), VIII (use of tooth-sticks every morning), 
XVIII (daily personal purification), XX (bathing at proper times), XXII (floor 
cleansed with cow-dung, pillow covers made of silk or linen, pillows stuffed 
with wool, hemp, cotton, etc. and made high or low according to season). 

6. Paithlnasi and Ahgiras quoted by Vij. on Yaj. III. 253 (ban against drinking 
wine). BS. XLVIII, 30 (meat offering to Manes). Uttara. IV (canon law 
requiring householder to offer heifer, big bull or big goat to Srotriya guest). 

7. Lankdvatdra Su. p. 250. 

8. Mdlav. Act. Ill (Queen Iravatl drinking wine); Kum. VII. 62; Raghu. VII. 11, 
IX. 36; Ritu. V. 10, VI. 10-12; Nag . Act. Ill; Kc,d. 136, 149. 


578 



SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


jective descriptions of the Chinese Buddhist travellers that we get the 
most faithful account of the habits relating to food and drink of the 
people in their time. In the fourth century Fa-hien declared ? doubtless 
with some exaggeration, that killing animals, drinking wine, and eat¬ 
ing onions or garlic were unkown throughout Madhyadeia. More 
detailed and accurate is the account of Hiuen Tsang in the first 
half of the seventh century Introducing his general account of 
India, he says that while cakes and parched grain, milk and sugar 
with their preparations, as well as mustard-oil formed the common 
articles of food, fish along with the flesh of goats and sheep was 
occasionally taken, and some kinds of meat were forbidden. Eating 
onions and garlic was visited with loss of caste. On the other hand, 
different kinds of beverages and wines were drunk by the respective 
castes—syrup of grapes and of sugar-cane being drunk by Brahmanas 
and Buddhist monks, wines from vine and sugar-cane by Kshatriyas, 
strong distilled spirits by Vaisyas, and unspecified kinds of drinks 
by the low r mixed castes. The above account is partly confirmed 
and partly supplemented by the shorter notice of I-tsing in the 
latter part of the same century. The Indians, says this authority, 
did not eat onions, while the Buddhist monks in India, unlike those 
of ‘the islands of the Southern Sea 5 , abstained from eating even 
the three pure kinds of meat on the Uposatha (weekly sabbath) 
day. 1 

5. Popular Superstitions 

The use of magical incantations and spells of various kinds may 
be traced back in Indian literature to the Atharvaveda-samhitd. In 
later times the popular belief in charms and spells as w T ell as Astro¬ 
logy and Divination attained such proportions as to give rise to 
technical treatises on the subject which were afterwards utilised in 
the compendiums of Varahamihira called the Brihaj-jdtaka and the 
Brihat-samhita.' By the fourth century A.D. there arose a class of 
works called dhdranis (Protective Spells) within the fold of Maha- 
yana Buddhism, and they quickly acquired immense popularity not 
only in India but also in the countries influenced by its culture. 2 
The literature of the Gupta period contains repeated references to 
the belief in omens, portents and the like, prevalent among the 
people in all walks of life. 3 But deep and widespread as was the 

1. Giles, 21. HTW. I. 178, Record, p. ^6. 

2. See Winternitz, MIL. II. 380-87 for an excellent summary of the literature on 
dhdranis . 

3. Cf. Mri. IX (astrologer’s prophecy of kingship of cowherd); Har. IV (Queen’s 
dream presaging birth of two sons and one daughter, astrologer’s prediction of 
Harsha’s greatness at his birth); ibid. V (Prince Harsha’s dream and omens 
foretelling king’s death; mahdmdyiirl charm being recited at palace to avert 
king’s calamity; wide-scale portents on eve of king’s death); ibid. VI (Harsha’s 


579 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


popular faith, it could not but provoke a reaction among the intelli¬ 
gent people. Literary evidence belonging to the Gupta times, proves 
that kings and princes often rose above the popular superstitions 1 
and, what is more, unscrupulously exploited them for their own 
ends. 2 


6. Town-life 

In conclusion, we may delineate a typical picture of the fashion¬ 
able man of the town, called ndgaraka. Such a type was not, of 
course, a novelty of the age, and may be traced back at least as 
early as the time of Panini who defines him, 3 significantly enough, 
as a man skilled in the arts as well as knavery characteristic of a 
great city. In the account of Vatsyayana’s Kdmasutra not only is the 
nagaraka’s way of life described with considerable fullness, but it is 
held up as a model for others to follow. 4 The picture is one of 
indulgence in refined Epicureanism by an accomplished young man 
with ample wealth and leisure at his disposal. When a man has 
finished his education, says the author, and entered the life of a 
householder with the help of self-acquired or inherited property, 
he has to betake himself to a large or small town, which is the 
abode of many good men, and adopt the life of a ndgaraka. He first 
builds a house and furnishes it in a manner indicating elegance and 
taste. The house consists of two parts, an outer one reserved for 
his amorous enjoyment, and an inner one meant for the residence 
of his wife. The garden attached to his house has a swung, shaded 
by trees, and raised seats strewn with flowers. The outer house is 
fitted with a pair of couches provided with soft pillows and white 
sheets. At the head of the couch is a stand for a divine image as well 
as a raised seat containing the requisites of the n&garaka’s morning 
toilette (unguents, garlands, small pots of bees’ wax and scents, skin 
of citron, and betel-leaves). On a bracket fixed into the wall are de¬ 
posited his lute, picture-board, and box of painting-brushes, as well 
as a book and a garland of the yellow amaranth. On the floor, not 
far from his couch, is spread a carpet with pillows as well as boards 
for chess and dice-playing. Outside the room are the cages of his 
sporting birds, and at a secluded place lies the spot where he takes 
his recreation with the lathe, the chisel and so forth. 

dream on eve of Rajva-vardhana’s murder, evil portents at courts of hostile 
kings on the eve of Harsha’s conquering expedition); ibid. VII (auspicious day 
fixed for Harsha’s expedition). 

1. Cf. Har. VII (Harsha reproves courtiers for taking the incident of his dropping 
an engraved seal on the ground as an evil omen). 

2 ‘ p ?- 39f ’ 82f ’ 116f > 178f ’ 204f > etc - (NSP, 1951, pp. 42f, 106ff, 158ff, 243f, 

2<3 ff, etc.). # 3. VI. 2. 128. 

ff ac ^ one without friend or associate, one without wealth, one who has run 
through his fortune, one skilled in only a few arts, and one forced bv his occu¬ 
pation to live in a village. 


580 





SOCIAL, CONDITIONS 


The daily life of the nagaraka is in keeping with the above. Ris¬ 
ing in the morning and attending to his physical needs, he arranges 
his toilette. He uses unguents, moderately perfumes his clothes with 
the smoke of burnt incense, and wears a garland. He applies colly- 
rium to his eyes and lac-dye to his lips. He looks at himself in a 
mirror and chews perfumed betel-leaves. After finishing his busi¬ 
ness he takes his bath every day, getting his limbs massaged every 
second day and cleansed with soap-lather every third day. He shaves 
every fourth day, and undergoes a more extensive tonsorial operation 
every fifth or tenth day. He takes two meals a day—-one in the fore¬ 
noon and another in the afternoon (or according to an old authority, 
in the evening). After his mid-day meal he amuses himself in 
various ways (such as listening to the talk of parrots, watching the 
fights of quails, codes, and rams, engaging in exhibition of artistic 
skill, and conversing with his companions), or else he enjoys a siesta. 
In the afternoon he goes out fully dressed to attend his social gather¬ 
ing ( goshthi ) and in the evening he enjoys music. Then while his 
room is dressed up and made fragrant with incense, he awaits the 
arrival of his beloved ones. In the alternative he sends a female 
messenger to bring them or goes out himself to seek them. 

Besides his daily round of pleasures, the nagaraka has his periodi¬ 
cal entertainments, such as the samdja and the ghatd (assemblies 
connected with worship of deities), the goshthi (social gathering), 
dpdnaka (drinking party), udydnaydtrd (garden party), and sama- 
syd-knda (public sports). The samdja takes place on an appointed 
day every fortnight, or every month, when the actors and others 
employed by the nagaraka are gathered together at a temple of the 
goddess Sarasvati, the presiding deity of learning and the arts. On 
such occasions other actors coming from outside also exhibit their 
skill and receive rewards. On special occasions actors of both 
classes co-operate with one another and the gana (guild or club), 
to which the nagaraka belongs, entertains the guests. The goshthi 
takes place when the nagaraka, with his associates of the same age, 
wealth, learning, and temperament meet together for pleasant talk 
at the house of a courtesan or in a public hall, or at the residence of 
one of themselves. There they engage in poetical contests as well as 
exercises in arts, and end by presenting one another with bright fine 
dresses and the like. At the goshthi it was considered proper to 
speak neither too much in Sanskrit nor too much in the spoken lan¬ 
guage. Wise citizens were to avoid goshtliis which were hated by 
the people, or were harmful to them, or were given over to license, 
and attend only those which were meant to amuse, instruct, and 
divert the people. The ndgarakas also met at one another’s houses 
to hold drinking bouts where the courtesans supplied them with 


581 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


liquors of various kinds which they afterwards drank themselves. 
Similar scenes took place at the garden parties as well as at the 
water-sports during summer. On these occasions the nagarakas, 
richly ornamented and mounted on horses, went out in the forenoon 
in the company of courtesans and attendants, and having spent the 
day in various diversions, returned home in the evening with some 
token of the entertainment. Lastly the nagarakas joined with the 
common folk in various festivals prevailing in dfferent parts of the 
country, and on such occasions they attempted to win the greatest 
distinction. 1 

The standard type of a ndgaraka is illustrated in the character of 
Charudatta in the Mrichchhakapka, In the inner portion of his 
house lives his devoted wife, while he himself spends the day and 
night, with his companions and servants, mostly in the outer por¬ 
tion, to which is attached a garden. The slender furniture of his 
outer house consists of a large and a small drum (mridanga and 
panava ), a flute ( dardura ), a lute (vina), reed-pipes (vaihsa) and 
manuscripts. Though reduced to poverty he wears a perfumed 
upper garment. He also attends a musical concert in the evening, 
and returns late at night with sweet memories of the song and music. 
Although he does not go out on horse-back and in company, he sends 
his mistress in a covered bullock-cart to meet him in a garden out¬ 
side the city. 

Other references in the contemporary literature point to the 
gay life of townsmen in the Gupta Age. 2 In the works of poets 
and prose writers of the period we have glowing descriptions of the 
splendour and magnificence of many well-known cities of that time. 3 
We can check these accounts by means of matter-of-fact notices of 
the observant Chinese travellers. We can conclude from this con¬ 
joint evidence that India was studded with a large number of towns 
which really attained a high level of wealth and prosperity. In 
point of splendour the royal palace towered over all other buildings 
in the city. References in the literary works, both of this and an 
earlier period, show that the palace contained many wonders such 
as the jewel-house (manibhumi) , the room paved with mosaic of 
coral (pravalakuttima) , the vine pavilion (mridvikamandapa), the 
summer-house, the fountain-house ( dhdragriha ), the concert-house 

1. KS. I. 4. 1-52. 

2. Cf. Megha. I. 23 (amorous sports of young gallants with harlots at Vidisa city 
in stone-houses of adjoining hill); Kum. IV. 11 (girls going out at night to meet 
their lovers); Mud. Act III (harlots expected to crowd streets of capital on 
occasion of festival proclaimed by the king); Kad. p. 252 (love-messengers sent 
by women crowding highways and girls veiled in silk-garments going out to 
meet their lovers at moon-lit night). 

3. CIL in 74f, Blf, Megka. 1. 24, 31, 33; Kad. 84f; Malatl. Act IX. 


582 



SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


(sahgitasala or prekshdgriha) , and the picture-gallery ( chitrasala J. 1 
The contemporary description of Prabhakara-vardhana’s palace at 
Thaneswar by Sana shows that the palace area was an extensive one 
and comprised several courts and chambers with appurtenances. 2 

The high level of Gupta urban culture evolved also a high and 
relined, delicate and elegant art of toilets and cosmetics. A cross 
section of Vatsyayana’s ndgaraka ideal and of the dramas and roman¬ 
ces of the period vividly presents a picture of highly sophisticated 
toiletting—not only by women but by men-folk as well—which in¬ 
cluded painting of long nails, scenting the body, face, and the hair 
with aguru incense and other perfumes, powders and pastes, mass- 
aging the body and the face with scented oils and pastes, elaborate 
arrangements of the hair in elegant curls and coiffures, etc. Female 
Prasddhihas and male masseurs, expert in toiletting and applying 
cosmetics, were employed by the royalty, the. nobility and the well- 
to-do, Indeed, whatever was done to beautify the body and the soul 
during this period was raised to the standard of lalitakala or fine art 
in which simplicity, delicacy, refinement and elegance were the main 
watchwords. 


1. Both Fa-hien and Hiuen Tsang refer to a large number of towns and the latter 
gives their area as 20, 30, or 40 li in circuit, one li being about one-sixth of an 
English mile. Cf. KS. V. 17, Svap . Ill and V. Malav. Act II, Priya. Act III 
( prekshdghara ), Uttar a. Act I. 

2. Entering the palace through the royal gate Prince Harsha passed in due course 
to the third court where lay the White House with its vestibule, its saloon, its 
moon-chamber, its screened balcony for ladies and the sick-chamber of the 
king with jewelled pavement ( Har. V ). In the camp of king Harsha, Bana saw 
crowds of elephants, horses and camels at the royal gate and, passing through 
three successive courts, was ushered into the fourth court where the king sat 
in state with all his retinue (Har. II). 


583 






CAPTER XXI 


EDUCATION 

I. General View 

There is no appreciable change in the system of education pre¬ 
vailing in the preceding age / 1 But a few contemporary records 
throw interesting light upon if. We learn from the accounts of Hiuen 
Tsang and I-tsing (seventh century) that the four Vedas were studied 
by the Brahmanas, the term of studentship terminating, according 
to the former authority, at the thirtieth year. Hiuen Tsang speaks 
with high praise of the learning and zeal of the Brahmana teachers. 
He also refers to a class of wandering teachers who deliberately adopt¬ 
ed a vow of life-long poverty for the purpose of study and instruc¬ 
tion , 2 The practice of young Brahmanas residing with their 
teachers is illustrated by an incident in the early life of Sana, the 
celebrated author of the Harsha-charita, who speaks of his returning 
home from his teacher’s .house when about fourteen years of age. 
Lastly we have seen above 2 how the Brahmana Mayurasarman, the 
founder of the Kadamba dynasty, before faking up the role of a 
warrior, had entered a gkatikd at Kahchi with the object of studying 
the sacred lore. The ghafika in this ease probably means a perma¬ 
nent educational establishment founded by a king or a great noble , 4 

2. Teachers and. Pupils 

In the Buddhist works on monastic discipline the rule of life 
of the pupil (saddhivihdrika) in relation to his teacher ( upddhydya) 
is laid down on lines very similar to the one sketched above on the 
basis of Brahmanical texts. We have the testimony of I-tsing to 
prove that these rules were closely followed by pupil and teacher 
alike in the Buddhist monasteries during the latter part of the seventh 
century. 

Describing the manner of the pupil waiting on his teacher in 
India in his time I-tsing says : 5 ‘He goes to his teacher at the first 
watch and at the last watch in the night. . . The pupil rubs the tea¬ 
cher’s body, folds his clothes or sometimes sweeps the apartment 
and the yard. Then having examined water to see wdielher insects 
be in it, he gives it to the teacher. This is the manner in which one 
pays respect to one’s superior. On the other hand in case of a pupil’s 

L Vol. II. Ch. XXII. 2. HTW, L 159-61. 3? See p. 271. 

4. For a different view, see above, p. .271. 

5. Record, pp. 117-20. 


581 * 






EDUCATION 


illness his teacher himself nurses him, supplies all the medicine 
needed, and pays attention to him as if he was his child/ In another 
context I-tsing speaks of how the pupil in accordance with the Vinaya 
law enquired every morning about his teacher’s health, and then 
going forth to salute his seniors in their apartments, studied the 
scriptures and waited for the teacher’s permission to take his meals. 

I-tsing further observes in the same connection: “The teacher 
bids him sit down comfortably. (Selecting some passages) from the 
Tripitakas , he gives a lesson in a way that suits circumstances, and 
does not pass any fact or theory unexplained. He inspects the pupil’s 
moral conduct, and warns him of defects and transgressions. When¬ 
ever he finds his pupil faulty he makes him seek remedies and repent.” 
In another context I-tsing says that every morning the pupil after 
his salutation to his seniors studies a portion of the canon and re¬ 
flects on what he has learnt. Thus the instruction was sufficiently 
thorough and embraced training in the canon as well as in moral 
discipline. 

According to the same authority the pupil could live apart from 
his teacher after five summers when he was expected to have master¬ 
ed the Vinaya , but he had still to place himself under the care of 
some teacher wherever he went. The pupil’s tutelage ceased after 
ten summers, but if he still did not understand the Vinaya he had 
to live under the care of another teacher or sub-teacher during the 
rest of his life. 

To I-tsing we owe the further information that monastic schools 
had, besides the novices, two classes of lay pupils. The former, call¬ 
ed mdnavas (children), chiefly read the Buddhist scriptures with the 
intention of receiving ordination at some future date, while the latter, 
called hrahmachdrin (student), read the secular books alone without 
any intention of quitting the world. Unlike the novices who were 
maintained by the common fund of the Samgha , the lay pupils had 
to provide for their own expenses. 1 

3. Advanced Centres of Learning 

Among the Buddhist monasteries of the late Gupta period none 
became so famous as that of Nalanda in Magadha, which was renown¬ 
ed alike for the magnificence of its establishment and the intellectual 
as well as moral pre-eminence of the inmates. Owing its foundations 
to six successive generations of Gupta kings, it housed a population 
of several thousands who were maintained out of the revenues of a 
hundred (or more) villages specially endowed for its upkeep. The 
resident monks were esteemed not only for their learning but also 

1. Record, pp. 105-106. In the alternative the lay pupils received food from the 
monastery in return for some service. 


585 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


for their high character, so much so that they were, according to 
Hiuen Tsang, looked up to as models all over India. Because of its 
fame, Nalanda attracted students from abroad, but so strict was the 
examination test that only two or three out of ten succeeded in getting 
admission. The monks spent their time wholly on study and debates 
and the monastery had a long line of distinguished alumni to its 
credit/ 1 The ruins of the Nalanda monastery recently unearthed by 
excavations testify to its grandeur and vouch for the substantial 
correctness of the accounts of the Chinese pilgrims. The only rival of 
Nalanda as a centre of learning in India in the seventh century was 
Valabhl in Kathiawar. According to the imperfect account of I-tsing, 
Nalanda and Valabhl were the two places in India where advanced 
students generally repaired to complete their education. The emin¬ 
ent men who crowded to these places discussed possible and impossi¬ 
ble doctrines and, after the testing of their views by wise men, 
became renowned for their wisdom. 2 

4. Curriculum of Studies 

Reference has already been made above 3 to the long list of sub¬ 
jects of study which embraced various branches of sacred and secular 
learning extending from the four Vedas and the Itihasa-Purana down 
to snake-charms and the arts of singing, dancing and preparing un¬ 
guents. The different vidyds were held by some later authorities to 
be fourteen, and by others, eighteen in number. In the eighteen 
branches of learning were included the four Vedas, the six Vedangas, 

1. HTW, XL 164-65. Beal. 110-113. I-tsing, Record, pp. 65, 154-155, Memoire, 85-98 
(Condition of Nalanda monastery in the seventh century). El, XX, 43 (ref. to 
pre-eminence of Nalanda monastery and accomplishments of its scholars in the 
middle of the seventh century). Names of successive royal donors of monasteries 
at Nalanda according to Hiuen Tsang ( loc. cit.) are Sakraditya, his son Buddha- 
gupta, his successor Tathagata-gupta, his successor Baladitya, his son Vajra 
and an un-named king of Mid-India. Number of resident monks given by 
Hiuen Tsang (Beal, 1121 as 10,000, but by I-tsing (loc. cit.) more reasonably 
as more than 3000 or 3500 ( Memoire , 87). The buildings consisted of 8 halls be¬ 
sides the great college according to Hiuen Tsang (Beal. Ill) and, of 8 halls with 
300 apartments according to I-tsing (Record, p. 154, Memoire, 87). Revenues of 
about 100 villages enowed by the local king for upkeep of Nalanda, according to 
Hiuen Tsang (Beal. 112), more than 200 villages bestowed by former kings upon 
Nalanda according to I-tsing ( Record , p. 65). Names of distinguished teachers of 
Nalanda are given by Hiuen Tsang (HTW, II. 165) and I-tsing (Record, p. 184). 
Teachers of later date were Chandrakirtti, £antideva, and J§antarakshita (refs, in 
Wintemitz, H1L, II. 363, 366, 375). Hiuen Tsang notes the unique fact that 
since the establishment of the monastery there was not a single case of breach 
of its discipline. 

2. I-tsing, Record , p. 177. Of the 60 foreign Buddhist pilgrims visiting India in the 
latter half of the seventh century, whose lives are described by I-tsing, many 
stopped at Nalanda for advanced studies in Buddhist texts (cf. Memoire. 17-18, 
29-30, 32, 34, 40, 137, 145, etc.). I-tsing himself lived at Naianda for 10 years 
for study ( Memoire. 125). A late ref. to Valabhl as a centre of learning is found 
in Kathasaritsagara (XXXII. 42-43), which tells us how a Brahmana of the 
Antarvedi country (tract between the Ganga and the Yamuna), after completing 
his 16th year, prepared to proceed to Valabhl town for education. 

3. Voh IX, p.p 585-589. 


580 







EDUCATION 


Purana, Nyaya, Mlmamsa, Dharmasastra, Dhanurveda, Gandharva- 
veda and Arthasastra. 1 The records of the Gupta Age prove that the 
fourteen (or the eighteen) vidyds were regarded as not being beyond 
the achievements of learned Brahmanas. 2 A long list of vidyds, 
with the year of commencement of each by the aspiring student, is 
given by Brihaspati, who may not be the famous Smriti authority of 
that name quoted above so often. The list comprises the arts of 
acting, painting, soothsaying, the knowledge of cocks, horses and 
elephants, the sciences of politics, astronomy, grammar and mathe¬ 
matics, the knowledge of the supreme soul and so forth. 3 The ac¬ 
counts of the Chinese Buddhist pilgrims in the seventh century throw 
valuable light upon the curricula of studies in vogue in Buddhist as 
well as in Brahmanical circles at that time. In his general account of 
India, Hiuen Tsang observes that the children, after finishing a work 
called ‘the Twelve Chapters’, are Introduced in their seventh year 
to a group of five sciences, viz. (a) the science of sounds or grammar, 
(b) the science of arts and crafts, (c) the science of medicine, (d) the 
science of reasoning, and (e) the science of the Internal. Elsewhere 
Hiuen Tsang mentions the grammatical treatises in use in his time 
as comprising Panini’s Sutras (in 8000 slokas ), an abridgement of the 
same by a South Indian Brahmana (in 2500 slokas ), a still shorter 
summary (in 1000 slokas), and special treatises called Mandaka(?), 
Unadi and Ashtadhatu. 4 We have a more complete and accurate 
account in the work of Hiuen Tseng’s junior contemporary I-tsing. 
The children, we are told, began the work called ‘Siddha- composition’ 
(otherwise called ‘ Siddhirastu ’) in their sixth year and mastered it 
in six months. In the eighth year they took up Panini’s Sutras and 
the Dhatupatha which they completed in eight months’ time. In their 
tenth year they began and finished within three years the three 
Khilas, namely (i) the aslitadhdtu dealing with cases and numbers of 
nouns, as well as the tenses and endings of verbs, (ii) the manda (or 
munda) and (ill) the Unddi dealing with the suffixes of verbal roots. 
In his fifteenth year the young student began the Kdsikdvritti on 
Panini’s grammar which he finished in five years’ time. For the com¬ 
plete mastery of grammar four other works were studied by monks 
and laymen alike. These were (i) the Churni (otherwise called 

1. Chh. Up. VII. 1. 2, ibid. 4, ibid. 7. 1 (vidyds studied by learned Brahmanas), 
Vdyu Pur. 1, 61-70, Garuda Pur. CCXXIII. 20, Naishadha-charita I. 4 (14 and 
18 vidyds). 

2. Raqhu. V. 21 (14 vidyds taught by Brahmana teacher Varatantu). Tantravdritika 
I. 3, 6 (14 or 18 vidydsthdnas regarded as authoritative for the knowledge of 
dharma). El, VIII, 287 (ins, of A,D. 517-18 referring to proficiency of Brahmana 
ancestor of king Samkshobha in 14 vidydsthdnas). 

3. Bri. p. 264. 

4. HTW. I. 134 f. Beal, 122. The work called ‘Twelve chapters’ by Hiuen Tsang is, 
as Watters notes, a Sanskrit primer containing letters of the alphabet with their 
combinations. 


587 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Mahxibhdshya of P&tanjali, (ii) Bhartrihari’s commentary on the 
Churnd, (iii) his Vdkyapadlya, and (iv) his unidentified work called 
the Pei-na. After studying the Kasikavritti, X-tsing continues, the 
students learnt the hetuvidyd (logic), the abhidharma (metaphysics) 
and so forth, while the monks learnt in addition all the Vinaya works 
as well as the Sutras and the Sdstras J 

The detailed account of X-tsing makes it clear, even more than 
the meagre sketch of Hiuen Tsang given above, that grammar form¬ 
ed the major part of the course of studies in India in the seventh 
century A.D. During the same period advanced courses were pro¬ 
vided by such centres of learning as Nalanda in Magadha and Valabhl 
in Kathiawar. At the former monastery the course of studies com¬ 
prised, as we learn from Hiuen Tsang, not only the works of all the 
eighteen schools of Buddhism, but also the Vedas , the hetuvidyd 
(logic), the sabdavidyd (grammar), the chikitsdvidyd (medicine), the 
Atharvavidyd , the Sdnkhya and so forth. 1 2 

If the course of studies sketched above, evidently meant for the 
higher intellectual classes, appears to be sufficiently comprehensive, 
it was not less so for the agricultural and mercantile class. A diffe¬ 
rent course of study was prescribed for them even in the early period. 
Thus, according to Manu, 3 the Vaisya was to have knowledge of the 
value of gems, pearls, corals, metals, cloth, perfumes, and condiments, 
of the manner of sowing seeds and the qualities of soils, of weights 
and measures, of the varieties of merchandise and the probable profit 
and loss in its traffic, of the means of rearing cattle, of the wages of 
servants, of different languages and different countries. The Divyd- 
vaddna, a collection of Buddhist stories, probably belonging to the 
fourth century A.D., contains two stories indicating the subjects 
supposed to have been learnt by the sons of rich merchants at that 
time. The list comprises knowledge of writing and arithmetic as 
v/ell as coins, debts, and deposits, examination of gems and houses, 
of elephants and horses, of young men and women, and so forth. 4 
We have unfortunately no means of knowing whether any, and if so 
which, of these branches of knowledge were actually learnt by the 
Vaisyas in the Gupta Age. 

The rise of the science of Arthasdstra led at an early date to the 
concentration of attention upon the education of the Prince who was 
regarded as the bey-stone of the political arch. In consideration no 
doubt of the multifariousness of the Prince’s duties, the Smritis and 
the Arthasdstra prescribed for him a comprehensive course of intel- 

1. See Record , p. 170 f with Takakusu’s remarks. The ‘Siddha-composition’ of 
I-ising is identical with the ‘Twelve Chapters’ of Hiuen Tsang. 

2. Beal. 112. 3. IX. 329-332. 4. Dlvy. 26, 99-100. 


588 



EDUCATION 


iectual training combined with moral discipline. 1 Unfortunately 
we have little direct knowledge of the education of princes in the 
Gupta Age. The prose romances of the late Gupta period indeed 
occasionally give us glimpses of the education of the young prince. 
But the accounts are so exaggerated as to border on the grotesque. 2 
We can, however, draw some inference from the known literary as 
well as artistic attainments of some famous kings of this period. Of 
emperor Samudra-gupta we are told by his panegyrist that he was 
skilled in music and song, and he earned for himself the title of 
king of poets because of his poetical accomplishments. To a later 
date belong the royal poets Fravarasena, Harsha, Mahendra-varman 
and Yaso-varman, not to speak of the mysterious ^udraka, author of 
the Mrichchhakatika. 3 


i 


1. Cf. Vol. II, p. 586. 

2. In Dada, pp. 21-22 (NSP, 1951, pp. 23-24), the subjects learnt by the princes at 
the court of king Rajavahana comprised all scripts and languages, the Vedas with 
their auxiliaries, poetry and the dramatic art, law, grammar, astrology, logic, 
rrnmamsa, political science, music and poetics, the art of war and (strangest of 
all) gambling, thieving and such other crooked arts. In Kdd. 125f. prince 
Chandraplda at the age of six is sent by his father to a specially built and closely 
guarded school-house (vidyamandira) outside the city. There he lives for 10 
years under the guidance of teachers versed in all branches of learning. The 
author may have drawn this part of his description from life, but he surely 
indulges in fancy when he says that the royal pupil acquired during this period 
supreme proficiency £ in grammar, in mimdm-sd , in logic, in the science of law, in 
the various branches of political science.... in the use of all the difficult 

weapons_in playing on various musical instruments-in ail the alphabets, 

all the dialects of the country, all the mechanical arts, in the Vedas and in many 
other different accomplishments.’ 

3. Cf. respectively pp. 182ff, 116f, 259f and 128ff above; for Sudraka, see Vol. II, 
p. 264f. Reference may also be made to the Vakataka king Sarvasena (c. A.D. 
336-355) who has been plausibly identified as author of the Prakrit kdvya 
Horavijaya ( IHQ , XXI. 193f); see above,.p. 187. 


589 




CHAPTER XXII 


ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 

It has been shown in the preceding volumes that long before 
the rise of the Imperial Guptas, India had developed an advanced 
system of agriculture, industry and trade. This progress was main¬ 
tained during the Gupta period. The conquest of almost the whole 
of the Ganges Valley by Samudra-gupta and that of Malwa, Gujarat 
and Kathiawar by his son and successor Chandra-gupta II ensured 
the blessings of a strong well-organized government for the richest 
and most populous regions of India. The prestige of the newly found¬ 
ed empire rose so high by the time of Samudra-gupta as to secure 
respect for the imperial authority from local rulers up to India’s 
natural frontiers in the east as well as the west. The crisis of the 
decline and fall of the Gupta empire during the latter half of the 
sixth century could not but produce an inevitable setback. But the 
way was prepared for a fresh economic revival by the subsequent 
rise of a succession of able rulers in Northern India and of powerful 
dynasties in the Deccan and South India which ensured for the three 
great geographical zones of India the blessings of a sound 
administration. 

1. AGRICULTURE 

The development of agriculture during the period under re¬ 
view seems to have been continued on the traditional lines. 1 The 
age-long dependence of Indian agriculture upon rainfall in spite of 
richness of the soil and abundance of natural supplies of water in 
selected areas is reflected in the sixth century work, the Brihat- 
Samhnd. The author, Varahamihira, gives numerous references to 
rains and rainfall and, in particular, careful forecasts of excessive, 
scanty and sufficient rainfall in the light of astronomical and 
meteorological data as well as observations of omens and portents. 
Varahamihira in this connection even gives us statistics of quantities 
of rainfall in the current ( drona ) measure, and refers to a standard 
rain gauge for measuring the same. 2 A concrete illustration of 
State care for agriculture is furnished by the Junagarh Rock inscrip¬ 
tion of Emperor Skandagupta belonging to the years 455-58 of the 

1. On the condition of agriculture in the preceding period, see Chapter on Econo¬ 
mic Conditions (Post-Mauryan) (Chapter XFV) by the present writer in A 
Comprehensive History of India. Vol. Ill (Orient Longmans, 1958). 

2. See Brihat-Samhita, English Index, s.v. Rain. Rainfall. Rainy season. Ibid XXI, 
32, 34, etc., XXIII 6-9 (Statistics of Rainfall); XXIII, 2 (Rain-gauge). 


590 









ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


Christian Era. It records the restoration of the historical Sudarsana 
lake at Girnar by the local governor of Skandagupta. 1 The agricul¬ 
tural implements and lines of agricultural operations appear like¬ 
wise to have been of the traditional type. The Amarakosa, a work of 
the sixth century A.D., gives synonyms for the plough and its com¬ 
ponent parts, the harrow for loosening the soil, the hoe and the 
sickle. From the Brihat-Samhita we further learn that there were 
two principal harvests, namely, for the summer and for the autumn 
crops, although a minor spring crop was also known. 2 

The variety of agricultural crops and products of trees and 
plants during this period was as remarkable as in the preceding 
centuries. The Amarakosa and the Brihat-Samhita refer to rice of 
several varieties (one ripening in the course of 60 days), wheat, 
barley, peas and lentils, oil-seeds of many different kinds (such as 
sesamum, linseed and mustard), ginger and other vegetables, pepper 
and other spices, medicinal and other herbs. Sugarcane trees were 
grown for ,the production of raw as well as refined sugar. 3 The care 
for the growing of trees and plants is reflected in a chapter 
(Chapter 55) of the Brihat-Samhita relating to the treatment of 
trees ( Vrikshdyurveda )—a science which is sufficiently ancient for 
mention in Kautilva's Arthasdstra . In this chapter Varahamihira 
gives rules for preparation of the soil, for grafting a tree-branch on 
another tree and for watering the trees at the proper season. Rules 
are also given for spacing the trees, for treating their diseases and 
for promoting the growth of fruits and flowers of the trees, creepers 
and shrubs. Elaborate directions are given for treatment of the 
seeds and for digging the pit for sowing the same. Tree-growing was 
to be practised as well for its aesthetic effect as for piety. For we 
are told that gardens should be laid out on the borders of watering 
places, as these would not be lovely without shading on the borders. 
Auspicious trees, again, are required to be grown in gardens and near 
dwelling houses. 

We may notice in the present place some of the chief agricul¬ 
tural regions of this period along with their products. Saffron was 
a native product of the lands on the banks of the Sindhu according 
to the Raghuvarhsam , while the Amarakosa more specifically men¬ 
tions Kashmir as its place of origin. Sandal-wood is stated in the 
Amarakosa to be a product of Malaya (southern part of the Western 
Ghats below the Kaveri). From some allusions in the Raghuvarhsam 
we learn that pepper, cardamom and sandal-vvood were native to 

1. Fleet, CII., III, p. 56. 

2. Amara, II, 9, 6f; B.S.V 21f, IX 42, X 18. XXV. 2, XXVII. 1, and XL. 

3. Amara, III, 9. 6f; B.S. English Index s.v. 


591 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the Malaya hill in the Pandya country in Kalidasa’s time. 1 In the 
first half of the seventh century Hiuen Tsang in his general account 
of Indian products observed that much rice and wheat were grown, 
while ginger, mustard and pumpkins were also cultivated. Among 
the most prized fruits were mango, melon, cocoanut, jaekfruit, plan¬ 
tain, tamarind, and wood-apple, as well as pomegranate and sweet 
oranges, these last being grown in all tracts. This general account 
is supplemented by the pilgrim’s detailed notices of the different 
regions that he visited. Udyana, Darel and Kashmir, we are told, 
produced saffron, while Kashmir and Kuluta produced medicinal 
plants. In Poonch and Mathura, fruits were grown in orchards ad¬ 
joining the homesteads. Pariyatra (Bairat) produced a variety of 
rice which in sixty days was ready for cutting, while Magadha grew 
another variety with large grains of extraordinary fragrance which 
was called ‘rice for grandees’. ‘Ota’ (Ogra) produced fruits larger 
than those of other lands. Sandal-wood, camphor and other 
(fragrant) trees grew on the Malaya hill in the south of the Maiakuta 
(Pandya) country near the sea coast. 2 

The account of Hiuen Tsang is partly confirmed and partly sup¬ 
plemented by the much shorter notices of his junior contemporary, 
I-tsing. From this later writer we learn that non-giutinous rice, 
sweet-melons, sugar-canes and tubers were abundant in the country 
and that the fruits were too numerous to mention, but millet was 
scarce. We further learn that wheat flour was abundant in the 
North-West, rice or barley in the West, and rice in Magadha- In so 
far as the Sthanvlsvara tract is concerned, Hiuen Tsang’s brief refe¬ 
rence to its abounding fertility is supplemented by Sana’s detailed, 
if somewhat poetical, account of the same area. The products of the 
Srlkantha region (comprising the Sthanvlsvara tract) according to 
Bana, consisted of rice and wheat, sugar-cane of the Pundra variety, 
beans of different varieties, as well as vines and pomegranates. We 
have a glimpse of the technical advance of agriculture in the author’s 
statement that vines and pomegranates were grown in orchards, 
while the cumin was watered by means of Persian water-wheels. 3 

We may notice here a few clauses of the late Smriti law for the 
encouragement of agriculture. A heavy fine of a hundred panas 
was the penalty for destroying or otherwise injuring agricultural im¬ 
plements, dams, roots, fruits and flowers. A smaller fine was im¬ 
posed for obstructing the flow of water along the water channels. 

1. Raghu, IV. 6, Amara, II. 6f, 124 (saffron). Amara , II, 6, 131; Raghu IX 46-48 
VI. 64 (Pepper etc.) 

2. HTW, I. 177-78, (India’s general agricultural products); ibid, 261, 298 (products 
of Kashmir etc.); ibid, I. 283, 301 (Of Poonch and Mathura); ibid. I 300 II 81 
(of Pariyatra and Magadha); ibid, II. 193, 228 (of Maiakuta). 

3. Records , pp. 43-44; Harsha, III. 


592 




ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


Cultivators, taking leases of fields, were fmed on a sliding scale for 
neglecting cultivation. On the other hand, a person turning fallow 
into arable land, or cultivating a field when the owner was unable 
to do the same, or was dead or was unheard of, was entitled to the 
enjoyment of its produce (less an eighth part) for a period of seven 
or eight years. 1 

2. INDUSTRIES. 

The branches of industry were maintained at the same high 
level as in the preceding period, no doubt, because of abundance of 
the raw materials and the skill and enterprise of the artisans and 
the craftsmen- Beginning with the very ancient textile industry, 
we have to mention that the literary works of our period mention a 
large variety of our clothing materials. These consisted of cotton, 
silk, wool and linen as well as of barks of trees. 2 These data are 
corroborated by the testimony of contemporary writers in the 
seventh century. In Bana's Hdrshacharita we are told that there 
were displayed on the occasion of Princess Rajyasrl’s marriage gar¬ 
ments of kshauma (linen), badara (cotton)* dukula (bark-silk), laid- 
tontu (spider’s silk?), amsuka (muslin), and netra (shot silk). In his 
general account of India Hiuen Tsang classifies the clothing materials 
of the Indians under the heads silk, cotton, linen, wool and goats’ 
hair (?). This is confirmed by his detailed notices of the dressing 
materials of the people in different parts of the country. 3 

The textiles were of various types. From the Amarakosa we 
learn that different terms were in use for finer and coarser varieties 
of cloth, as well as for unbleached and bleached silk and the like. In 
the Harshacharita we find mention of pulakabandha (gaily coloured 
cloth) and puskpapatta (flowered silk), not to speak of barks for the 
use of ascetics. A close examination of the Ajanta frescoes has re¬ 
vealed four distinct weaving techniques, namely, gold or silver 
brocade, “tie and dye work”, weaving after separate dying of the 
warp and the woof, and the spotted muslin. 4 

We may form some idea of the famous centres of the textile 
industry from the records of this time. From a passage in ;&anti- 
deva’s Sikshd-samuchchaya (a work of the seventh century) we 
learn that Banaras (Varanasi) retained its ancient reputation as the 

1. Nar. XIV, 4, Bri I. 235 (fines for destroying dams) Bri, I. 19, 53-55 (fines for 

neglect of cultivation). Kdt vv. 764-67 (seven or eight year’s enjoyment). 

2. Aviara, II. 6. 110-11 (doth made of bark of trees, cotton and cocoon of silk¬ 
worms, wool from hair of animals). BS, 412, 51, 19 (clothes made of goat’s 

hair, silken cloth). 

3. Harsha, I. HTW, I. 148; II, 151. 287. 340 etc. 

4. Aviara, II, 6, 115-16; Harsha, T; for textiles in Ajanta frescoes see the paper 
of K. de B. Codrington in I A., 1930, pp. 162-69. The translation of pulaka- 
bandha is after Motiehandra in J1SOA, XII, p. 14. 

5 


C. A. 38 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


producer of the best silk garments. A slight reference in the Harsha- 
charita proves that the kshauma cloth of the Pundra country was 
sufficiently well-known to find its way into the author's village home. 
More specifically we are told by Hiuen Tsang that Mathura produced 
a fine striped variety of cotton cloth in his time. Indirect evidence 
of the advanced condition of the textile industry in Kamarupa in the 
same century is found in the list of presents sent by its King to Harsha 
according to Harshacharita. The list comprised bundle of kshauma, 
jdiipaitika (woven silk) and chitrapata (figured textiles). 1 

Among the industries dealing with animal products there are two 
deserving special mention. As regards the leather industry the 
Amarakosa has synonyms for leather-fan, leather-bottle for contain¬ 
ing oil, leather shoes and boots- Representations of human or divine 
figures in leather boots or shoes are found in the contemporary sculp¬ 
tures and paintings. As regards ivory work, repeated references are 
found in the literary works of this period to the use of this material 
by the people for a variety of purposes. Ivory seals have been re¬ 
covered from Gupta levels on the site of Bhita near Allahabad. 2 

We have little or no clue to the sources of the supply of metals 
in the Gupta period properly so-called. It would seem that copper 
and probably tin and lead as well had to be imported from abroad as 
in earlier times. The abundant supplies of gold which provided 
materials for the Imperial Gupta coinage were probably derived 
from the gold coins of the Byzantine Emperors obtained in exchange 
for Indian products. By contrast we have both general and parti¬ 
cular references to the working of mines for metals in the work of 
Hiuen Tsang. In his general account of India he informs us that 
gold and silver were products of the country and were very abun¬ 
dant. From his detailed notices we learn that the regions of Udyana 
and Darel in the extreme North-west, Takka between the Beas and 
the Sutlej and Sindhu produced gold and silver, while copper and 
iron were found in the tract between the Beas and the Sutlej just 
mentioned- Copper was found in Nepal as well as in Kuluta (the 
Kulu country). 3 The location of the mines in the areas cannot be 
determined at present, 

1. Sikshasamuchchaya, p. 208 (Banaras silk). Harsha, IV (kshauma of Pundra 
country and textiles from Kamarupa). HTW, I (Mathura cloth). 

2. Amara, II. 6. 110-11 (cloth made of bark of trees cotton and cocoon of silk- 
frescoes see 1A, 1930. p. 160. Also see Rayliu, XVII, 21 (ivory-throne used 
at King’s coronation); Harsha, VII (ivory boxes and rings of hippopotamus 
ivory presented to Harsha by King of Kamarupa); Kad. 96, 113 (ivory-fan 
and bedstead with ivory legs); AS1 1911-12, pp. 47f, 93 (ivory seals from 
Gupta levels at Bhita). 

3. Amara, II. 9; 97 (copper from Mlechchha countries) HTW. I, 178, 225, 239, 
286. 501 (gold and silver). Ibid, I, 280, 298; II, 83 (copper). 


594 





ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


As in the earlier centuries the technical sciences were utilised 
for the manufacture of metals. Vatsyayana in his Kamasutra in¬ 
cludes rupa-ratna-panksha , dhatuvada and manimga-kara-jiianam 
(meaning probably the testing of precious stones, the smelting of 
metals and the technology of jewels and so forth) in his list of sixty- 
four fine arts ( kalds ). According to Hiuen Tseng’s testimony brass 
{tou-si) was extensively produced in the country. A colossal copper 
image of the Buddha, attributed to King Purnavarman, and a brass 
(tow-si) temple which was then being built by King Siladitya (Harsha) 
were found by the pilgrim at Nalanda at the time of his visit. The 
former was more than 80' in height, and the latter was expected to 
reach a height of 100' or more. A copper statue of Buddha, 7' 1/2" in 
height, which belonged to this period, was discovered in modern times 
at Sultangunj in Bhagalpur district and is now preserved in the 
Birmingham Museum. The famous iron pillar of Emperor Chandra 
(Chandragupta II?) at Meherauli in old Delhi is over 23' high and 
16' 4" in diameter, and has undergone no corrosion in spite of centuries 
of exposure to the weather. The representations of metallic mirrors 
have been traced by a competent scholar among the Ajanta frescoes. 
It remains to mention that the literary works'of the Gupta period con¬ 
tain numerous references to the use of gold and silver ornaments by 
the people. 1 

The art of the jeweller seems to have been in the same advanced 
condition as in the preceding period. The Brihat-Samhita, in one of 
its chapters (Chapter 80), mentions no less than twenty-two jewels. 
The list includes diamond, sapphire, emerald, ruby, beryl, amethyst, 
crystal, moon-gem, azure, topaz, opal, pearl, and coral, besides agate, 
conch-shell and other less precious substances. Synonyms for 
emerald, ruby, pearl and coral as well as conch-shell are found in the 
Amarakosa. 2 In the working of gems use was made of ratna-parik - 
shd (the science of testing gems). Vatsyayana, in his Kdmasutra , in¬ 
cludes it in his list of sixty-four arts, while Varahamihira’s chapter, 
quoted above (Chapter 81), bears the above title. In this and the 
two following chapters Varahamihira deals successively with varieties 
of diamond, pearls, rubies, and emeralds. Of the seven sources of 
diamond mentioned by Varahamihira in this context, all the names 
are Indian, some being identifiable with the sources of diamond given 
by Ptolemy in the former period. 3 Varahamihira’s list of eight 

1. Kamasutra. I. 3. 16 (sixty-four arts). HTW, I. 178 ( tou-si ); ibid. 171 and Life 
119 (copper linage and brass temple at Nalanda). Fleet. C/I, III, 139 (Mehe¬ 
rauli pillar inscription). A SI, 1911-12 pp. 89-93 (Bhita) K. de B. Codrington 
in I A, 1930, p. 172 (metallic mirrors in Ajanta frescoes). For copper Seals in 
Raj ghat see above p. 553. The translation of tou-si as brass is after Laufer, 
Sino-Iranica, pp. 511-12. 

2. BS, 80. 4-5; Arnara, II. 9. 92f. 

3. Thus Kosa of Ptolemy (VII. 1. 17) which has been identified with Berar up 

595 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


sources of pearls contains the well-known names of fisheries of Cey¬ 
lon, Persia and the Pandya country. Hiuen Tsang, in the early part 
of the seventh century, noted white jade and crystal lens among the 
products of the country which were very abundant. * 1 Precious sub¬ 
stances, he further observed, were found in Dravida. Literary evi- 
dance proves that jewels were used at the period for a large variety 
of purposes,—for being set in gold ornaments and seals, for adorning 
dresses, for covering couches and seats as well as mirrors and lamps, 
for decorating doorways, and for inlay of the floor of a house. Jewels 
were also worn as good omens. 2 The characteristics of gems were 
sufficiently well-known to the poets of this period to be drawn into 
similes in their works- We have a vivid picture of jewellers at work 
in a rich household in a famous description of the heroine’s palace in 

the Mrichehhakatika drama. 3 
>• • 

No branch of the jeweller’s art appears to have been followed at 
this period with such industry and success as that of the worker in 
pearls. The Brihat-Samhita gives a long list (recalling that of Kau- 
tilya’s Arthasastra ) of the names of pearl necklaces which range from 
those of one thousand and eight strings to one string, and comprised 
other varieties with gem or gold globules set in the centre. A shorter 
list is found in the Amarakosa. Some of the varieties, e.g., of the 
pearl-necklace of a single string ( ekdvali ) and of twenty-seven strings 
(nakshatramala ) are mentioned in the great literary works of this 
period. Pearls were also used for inlay work in the manufacture of 
ornaments, sword-handles and drinking vessels, as also for ornament¬ 
ation of ladies’ dresses. 4 5 

The art of the worker in semi-precious stones which may be 
traced back to the prehistoric Indus culture was practised in Gupta 
times- Beads and other small objects of jasper, agate, carnelian, 
quartz, lapis lazuli and the like have been recovered from Gupta strata 
on the sites of Basarh and Bhita. 6 

3. INLAND TRADE. 

Although direct evidence on this point is somewhat scanty, we 
can infer that the benefits of peace and order established throughout 

to the Vara river corresponds to Kosala or Mahakosala of BS 81. 31f. Mouth 
of the Adams river in Ptolemy (loc. cit) corresponds to Kalinga of BS. 

1. HTW, I. 178. II 226. 

2. Sak , Act V; Raghu, XVI, 43; XVII, 13; Dasa p. 41 (NSP. 1951, p. 43f); Harsha, 
IV; Kad. 296, 313; BS XLIV 25-6 (ornamental use). BS LXXX, 2. 15-17; LXXI, 
30; LXXXII. 6; LXXXIII (auspicious diamonds, pearls, rubies and emeralds). 

3. Raghu, XVIII. 32. (topaz); ibid, 42 (sapphire); ibid, XIII 48, 54; XVI 69; 
Megha. I. 47 (pearls necklace set with sapphire); Kum, III. 53 (ruby, gold 
and pearl ornaments); Raghu, XII. 13 (coral). 

4. BS LXXXI 31-36; Amara, II. 6, 105-06 (lists of pearl necklaces). Harsha, IV 
and VIII; Kad 142; Malati, Act I (nakshatramald and ekdvali); Harsha, II, 
IV and VII (uses of pearls). 

5. ASI, 1903-04 pp. 99-100; ibid 1911-12 p. 94. 




ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


Northern India by the strong arm of the Guptas helped the expansion 
of internal trade. This process was helped by the issues of abundant 
gold and silver coinage of excellent quality by the Emperors. The 
merchants must have travelled more or less along the well-known 
land- and water-routes. The Amarakosa has synonyms not only for 
markets and shops but also for merchants travelling by boats. Dis¬ 
coveries have been made on the Gupta site at Bhita of rows of shops 
along what have been called ‘the High Street’ and “the Side- 
Street.” 1 

The sea-ports mentioned in the records of this period must have 
served as the natural outlets of the import and export trade borne 
along long-distance routes from the interior- A number of the most 
important trading stations of India is mentioned by Cosmas writing 
in the early part of the sixth century. The list comprises ‘Sindu’, 
‘Orrhotha’ (unidentified), ‘Calliana’, ‘Sibor’ and no less than five 
marts of ‘Male’ (Malabar) on the west coast, as well as ‘Marallo’ 
(unidentified) and ‘Caver’ along this coast. 2 Among other ports 
flourishing during this period, may be mentioned Tamralipti at the 
head of the Gaiiga delta. Because of its happy geographical position 
at the meeting place of land and water communications, as Hiuen 
Tsang observes, it became the emporium of the vast trade of Eastern 
India across the seas. It was the true successor of the great sea¬ 
ports of Gange and Tamalitis mentioned by the classical writers. It 
was the port of call for voyagers from China, Indonesia and Ceylon 
to Eastern India and back. We have direct evidence of the great 
trade carried from it into the interior. I-tsing was accompanied on 
his journey from Tamralipti to Bodh-Gaya by many hundreds of 
merchants. Journeys of merchants from distant Ayodhya to Tamra¬ 
lipti are recorded in the eighth century inscription of Udayamana- 
In Odra country there was, according to Hiuen Tsang, a famous sea¬ 
port called Charitra, while Kongoda (modern Ganjam district), 
according to the same authority, grew very rich because of its mari¬ 
time trade. That the people of the Gangs delta had the overwhel¬ 
ming share in the trade from Tamralipti is proved by reminiscences 
of their maritime activities in the Raghuvamsam and the Dasakumara- 
charita 3 

1. Amara, II. 20. 2; ASIAR , 1911-12 p. 38. 

2. Cosmas, 366-67 (list of Indian ports). In the above Sindu is evidently the 
port of the Indus delta; Calliana is Kalyana on the eastern coast of Bombay 
harbour; Sibor is Chaul situated 25 miles south of Bombay, Caver is Kaveri- 
paddinam at the mouth of the Kaveri river. For the lists in the Periplus and 
in Ptolemy’s Geography, see A Comprehensive History of India Vol. II. p. 438. 

3. HTM, II. 190, 194, 196 (Tamralipti, Charitra and Kongoda) El, II. 95 (Udaya- 
mana’s inscription) Raghu, IV (maritime activities of the people of Suhma). 
Dasa, (NSP. ed.) pp. 215f (story of sea-fight between Indian galley by Prince 
of Suhma and Yavana vessel with a Magadha Prince on board). 


597 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The late Smritis, like those of Manu and Yajnavalkya, contain 
clauses of law relating to traders under such heads, as ‘Sale by one 
who is not an owner’ and ‘Repentance after purchase and sale’. Com¬ 
parison of these clauses reveals one striking contrast. According to 
Manu and Yajnavalkya, prices of commodities should be periodically 
fixed by the King, Manu adding that arrangement should be made for 
official stamping of the weights and measures and their periodical in¬ 
spection. These provisions are conspicuous by their absence in 
Narada and his successors. On the other hand, we have a remarkable 
clause in Katyayana, declaring what is fixed by the knowledgeable 
and honest body of neighbours to be the proper price. This is followed 
by the emphatic statement that what is more or less than this price 
even by one-eighth is deemed as the improper price and that what is 
sold for an improper price may be annulled even after a hundred 
years. 1 This clause is another index of the strong reaction charac¬ 
teristic of this period against the policy of administrative centralisa¬ 
tion in the preceding centuries. For the rest, the late Smriti clauses 
repeat those of the earlier works. Under the title ‘Sale without owner¬ 
ship’ we read that sale by a person, not the owner, should be annulled 
and that the property should be restored ( to the original owner. Un¬ 
der the head of lav/ ‘Repentance after purchase and sale’, we are told 
that a period of examination varying according to different articles 
should be allowed to the buyer or the seller for returning or taking 
back the article if he repents of the transaction. 2 

4. FOREIGN TRADE. 

The most important event in the economic history of Eastern and 
Southern Asia during this period is the development, by the third 
decade of the sixth century, of an inter-oceanic trade reaching from 
China through Indonesia and the east coast of India up to Ceylon, 
and extending thence along the west Indian coast to Persia and the 
Homerite country (in Arabia) and Adule (the port of Assuro, capital 
of the Ethiopian Kingdom). We learn from Cosmas that merchandise 
from China and Indonesia and South India was carried to Ceylon, 
whence it was exported to the western lands just mentioned. It 
would appear that India had a fair share in this trade, for we are told 
that Ceylon was much frequented by ships from all ports of India as 
well as from Persia and Ethiopia. The carrying trade in silk seems 
to have been monopolised by the Persians, who exported it to the By¬ 
zantine Empire. The sea-route from Tamralipti was used by the 
Chinese Buddhist pilgrims from Fa Hian downwards on their outward 
or return journeys or both. Besides the overseas routes just men- 

1. Kat 705-06. Contrast Manu , VIII, 401-03 and Ydj II. 251. 

2. Bri. I. 12, Sf and Kat. 612f after Manu VIII and Ydj, II. 16S. 


598 



ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


tioned a number of overland routes connected India with China- 
From the itineraries of Fa Hian and Hiuen Tsang we learn that a 
great North-western route ran by way of Central Asia and Bactria 
to the passes of the Sulaiman range and thence to the interior of 
India. A more difficult route connected China with India directly 
across the Karakoram range and Kashmir. In the north-east a route 
ran from Tonkin through Kamarupa across Pundravardhana (North 
Bengal) to Magadha and the regions further beyond. 1 

5. OBJECTS OF TRADE. 

We may begin with a list of India’s principal objects of trade 
with the outside world during this period. Among agricultural pro¬ 
ducts the first place belongs to spices. We know from Cosrnas that 
spikenard among other articles was gathered at Sindhu (no doubt, 
from the Upper Himalayas) for export, while pejDper was exported 
from no less than five ports of Malabar. In the list of articles forming 
the subject of Justinian’s regulations on customs duties are included 
such typically Indian spices as cinnamon, long pepper, white pepper, 
costus, cardamom and other aromatics. Among the products of use¬ 
ful and fragrant trees sesame logs, we are told by Cosrnas, were ex¬ 
ported from Kalyana, while the Annals of the T'ang Dynasty state 
that Indian sandal-wood and saffron were exported to the Roman 
Orient (Ta’tsin), Fu-Nan (the predecessor Kingdom of Cambodia) and 
Kiaochi (unidentified). We have an interesting testimony to the 
high value of Indian products in eastern lands, for we are told that 
Rudravarman, king of Fu-Nan, sent a mission to the Chinese Emperor 
in 519 A. D. w r lth the present of a Buddha image made of Indian san¬ 
dalwood. From the Amarakosa we learn that mdshaparni, a medi¬ 
cinal plant, was acquired from Kamboja, beyond Gandhara, in ex¬ 
treme north-west, while silhaka (a kind of incense) as well as asapho- 
etida was supplied by Turuska, Bahlika and Ramatha (lands of 
Western Asia) It remains to mention that aloes, cloves and sandal¬ 
wood are included by Cosrnas in the list of products reaching Ceylon 
from South-East Asia by way of the Coromandal ports. 2 * 4 

As regards the trade in animals, the best breeds of horses, as 
before, were imported from Arabia, Persia and modern Afghanistan. 
But a local breed, reputed to be of dragon stock, was found by Hiuen 
Tsang in Kashmir. Among animal products the most important 

1. Cosmos 385-66 (inter-oceanic trade). For maps of Fa Hian’s and Hiuen 
Tsang's itineraries see Legge and HTW respectively. For the route from 
Tonkin via Kamarupa to Magadha see Pelliot in BEFEO, TV. 131 f. 

2. Cosrnas 366-67 (list of exports from Indian ports) Corpus Juris Civilis Vol. I, 

p. 606 (Justinian’s list). Laufer Sino-lranica p. 45 (Indian exports to Roman 
Orient etc.) BEFEO , 270-71 (Rudravarman’s embassy to China). Amara IT, 

4. 138 (mdshaparni); ibid, II, 6, 128; IT, 3, 9 ( silha and silhaka); ibid, II. 9, 
40 (hingu). 


599 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


were pearls, corals, silk, and ivory. Pearls from the junction of the 
Tamraparnl river with the sea formed the most precious product of 
the Pandya country in the time of Kalidasa, while Hiuen Tsang knew 
the same land (under the name of Malakuta) as a depot for sea- 
pearls. To judge from the extensive references to the use of pearls 
in the Gupta Age, the pearl trade of the Pandya country must have 
been very important at that period. Pearls as well as raw silk, silk 
yarn and silk robes, partly at any rate of Indian origin, are included 
in Justinian's list of imported articles above mentioned. Corals were 
obtained from the sea, separating India from Ceylon, in Kalidasa’s 
time according to an allusion in the Raghuvamsam. The literature 
of the Gupta period contains occasional references to Chinese silk, 
while Cosmas not only mentions silk as a product of China but also 
includes it in the list of articles sent through Indonesia and the East 
Indian coast to Ceylon for export to the West- Silk from China 
must have likewise been brought down by the great land-routes to 
Central Asia. Ivory was exported from Ethiopia to India in the 
time of Cosmas, who adds that Ethiopian elephants were numerous 
and had larger tusks than the Indian elephants. An additional ar¬ 
ticle of trade was musk, which according to Cosmas was procured 
at Sindh (no doubt, from the Upper Himalayas) for export. 1 

As for the trade in mineral products copper was obtained from 
Mlechchha countries (of the Western Mediterranean) according to the 
Amarcikosa. The copper which, as Cosmas informs us, was exported 
from Kalyana was probably likewise imported from abroad. For 
Kalyana was one of the principal marts of Western India at that 
time. We know from the last-named authority that sapphire was 
imported into India from Ceylon, while emerald was imported by the 
Ethiopians who secured it from the Blemmves (natives of Nubia). 
On the other hand, Tndian iron not liable to corrosion’ (Indian 
steel?) is comprised in Justinian’s list of imported articles above 
quoted. Diamonds are included in the list of exports from India to 
the Roman Orient, Fu-Nan and Kiaochi in the passage of the Annals 
of the T’o.ng Dynasty cited above. 2 

As regards textiles, Cosmas tells us that cloth for making 
dresses was exported from Kalyana- A variety of fabrics called 
po-Uc ('cotton brocade’ or ‘cotton stuffs’) is mentioned in the autho¬ 
ritative Chinese works as an Indian product which was exported to 
China from Ho-Lo-Tan or Java. 3 

1. Amara, II. 8, 45; Raghai, IV. 70; Harsh a, II. Rac.hu, IV. 50, HTW . II. 228 (pearls). 
R.aghu , 3. (corals). Sak Act I; Kum, VII. 3; Mdlair. Act VI; Dasa. p. 129 
(Chinese silk) Cosmas, 386 (mask). 

2. Amara, II, 9. 97, Cosmas, 384, 386-71. Also se-> references under f.n. 29. 

3. Cosmas 366; Laufer in Sino-Iranica. pp. 490-91. The translation of po-tie is 
after Laufer, loc. ait. 


600 




ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


6. CAPITAL AND LABOUR. 

It is needless to point out that capitalistic methods of production 
and distribution were prevalent during this period along with the 
age-old domestic system. The extreme form of capitalism involved 
the employment of forced labour and slave labour. While the use 
of forced labour belonged, as before, almost exclusively to the State, 
slaves were commonly employed by the public mostly as personal 
attendants. 1 The later Smritis enumerate the kinds of impure work 
reserved for slaves unlike the pure work for hired labourers. 2 

Hired labour was employed for agriculture, animal rearing, in¬ 
dustry and trade as well as for domestic service- We may summa¬ 
rize the description of the status of hired labourers according to the 
late Smriti authorities under the following heads:— 

(i) Law of Wages. 

Hired labour was divided into three grades, the first grade com¬ 
prising soldiers, the second grade consisting of cultivators, and the 
third grade comprising bearers of loads as well as domestic servants. 
The terms and conditions of service were various. The labourers 
were employed by the day, fortnight, three months, six months and 
one year. They were paid in cash or in a share of the grain. Narada 
allows one-tenth of the grain-produce to the agricultural servant. 
According to the more liberal clause of Brihaspati one-fifth of the 
produce with food and clothing, or, else, one-third of the crop without 
the same, should be paid to the servants of cultivators. I-tsing, in the 
latter part of the seventh century, after stating how the Indian Bud¬ 
dhist monasteries had their lands cultivated by servants and others, 
observed that the Sangha provided the bulls and the fields and nor¬ 
mally received one-sixth share of the produce. These shares were 
sometimes modified according to seasons- It would, therefore, seem 
that the share of the cultivating tenants amounted in the case of 
monastic lands to as much as five-sixth of the produce. 3 

(ii) Law of mutual relations of labour and capital. 

The late Smritis following the lines of Manu and Yajnavalkya 
lay down clauses for enforcement of reciprocal obligations of the 
master and the servant. On the one hand, the hireling committing 
the slightest treachery in the performance of v/ork for his master for¬ 
feits his wages and is liable to be sued in a court of law: the hireling 

1. The subject is treated in the Smritis under three heads of law, namely, Veta- 
nasyanapakarma , Abhyupetyasusrushd and Svarnipalavivada (non-payment of 
wages, non-rendition of service, dispute between master and herdsman). For 
an exhaustive treatment of the above subjects see Kane, History of Dharma- 
shastra Vol. Ill Chap. XX. 

2. Nar. V. 5-7; Brl. I. 15. 16-18 (work for slaves). 

3. Bri. I. 15, 15-16; Kat 657f, 173f. Record pp. 61 1 


601 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


receiving his wages but failing, though able to perform his work, is 
to pay twice as much as fine to the King and give back his wages: one 
not carrying out his work after giving an undertaking is to be forced 
to complete the same and, in case of failure, to pay a heavy fine. On 
the other hand, the master not paying wages after completion of the 
work is to be compelled by the King to pay the same, and is, besides, 
liable to a proportionate fine. A servant, says Katyayana, is not liable 
to pay for the value of the article in his keeping which is carried away 
by thieves or burnt or swept away by flood: a master abandoning on 
the road a servant, who was hired or afflicted with disease, is liable to 
a fine. 1 


7. UNSECURED AND SECURED LOANS. 

The late Smritis develop the clauses of Manu and Yajhavalkya 
relating to the loans. 2 We may summarise their account under the 
following heads:— 


(i) Types of Loans. 

As in the early Smritis, the loans are held to be of different types, 
namely, those without security, those with security ( pratibhu ), and 
those with security or pledge ( ddhi ). Erihaspati and Katyayana 
classify pledges under four heads, while three, four, and five classes 
of securities are mentioned by Narada, Erihaspati and Katyayana. 
This is accompanied by a detailed statement of the law relating to 
pledges and sureties. But it is not possible here to go into these de¬ 
tails. 3 


(ii) Lavj of Interest. 

Narada and Erihaspati describe several types of interest, namely, 
what is used by the creditor for his own purpose, what is paid perio¬ 
dically, what is interest on interest (in other words, compound inte¬ 
rest), what is stipulated interest, what is paid by the day, and what is 
paid by engagement. As in other respects, the late Smritis follow 
the lines of their predecessors regarding the rates of interest. Manu 
and Yajhavalkya had declared the legal interest to be 1J% per month, 
but allowed extra r *es in special eases. According to Narada and 
Katyayana, while nt nterest is due on loans made for friendship and 
without agreement, the interest should be as high as 5 r / c when the 
money is not paid on demand. Vyasa’s rates ar e li% 1 % and 2% 

per month for loans with security, with surety, and without security, 
respectively. According to Erihaspati and Katyayana the debtor is 

1. Bri. I. 15, 3-7; 9-11, and Kat. 857-60 after Manu, VIII. 215 and Yidj, II. 193. 

2. See Kane, op. cit. pp. 418f. 

3. Bri, I 10, 38 f; ibid 73, Kat. 516f., 530f. 

602 




ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


liable to pay the stipulated interest in excess of these legal rates, if 
the same was promised in a time of difficulty, but not otherwise. The 
late Smritis likewise deal with the laws against usury- Manu and 
Yajhavalkya, while laying down the general rule that the interest 
accumulating at any time must not exceed the principal, had allowed 
extra interest on the loan of selected articles. The provisions in the 
late Smritis are on the same lines. The rates are 2, 3, 4 and 8 times 
the loan in the case of gold, grain, cloth and fluids respectively 
(Narada), 4 times the loan in the case of copper and some other arti¬ 
cles (Brihaspati), 2 times in the case of jewels, pearls, corals, gold and 
silver, fruits, silken cloth and woollens, 5 times the same in case of 
metals other than gold and silver, and 8 times the same in case of 
oils, liquors, clarified butter, molasses, salt and land (Katyayana). 
The above differences evidently reflect the changes in the relation 
of demand and supply concerning a large number of consumer 
goods. 1 

(ill) Relations between creditor and debtor. 

The late Smritis provide for full security of che creditor’s title. 
According to Brihaspati the creditor is to grant the loan after taking 
full pledge on a good security or a written deed attested by witnesses. 
Brihaspati likewise declares mortgage by means of documents and 
witnesses to be of superior authority over oral evidence- Katyayana 
gives elaborate accounts of disqualifications of sureties, of the re¬ 
quirements of written documents, .and of the qualifications and dis¬ 
qualifications of witnesses. 2 Brihaspati and Katyayana repeat the 
older clauses regarding the process of recovery of debt by the credi¬ 
tor from the debtor. The approved methods are declared to be by 
trickery, by force, by performance of works, by public pressure and 
by suit in public. There is, however, the saving clause that the cre¬ 
ditor would lose his claim and pay an equivalent fine if he harasses 
the debtor desiring investigation in a court of law. 3 

8. GUILDS AND PARTNERSHIPS. 

It remains to notice two other types of economic organisation, 
namely, guilds and partnerships. The late Smritis from Manu 
downwards have title of law* called Violation of Compacts’ ( samvit - 
vyatikrama), or non-performance of agreements ( samayayanapa - 
krama ), which relate to groups (samuhas or vargas). In this last cate¬ 
gory are included the srenl , the pug a, and the naigama. Now srenl is 
the familiar term for guilds of artisans and traders from the period 

1. Nar. I. 9S; Bri, I. 10, 4f; Kjat; 505f. and Vyasa quoted by Sulapani on Yaj, II. 37. 

2. Bri, I. 10, 5f and Kat, 114f. (disqualification of witnesses). Kat. 215£, (require¬ 
ments of written documents), ibid 549£. (qualification and disqualifications of 
witnesses). 

3. Bri. I. 10 9f and Kat. 477, 580. (process of recovery of debt). 


003 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of the early Buddhist literature. Pilga is defined differently by 
different authors, but Katyayana takes it to mean a group of mer¬ 
chants and so forth: naigama is. explained by Katyayana in the 
colourless sense of a group of various inhabitants of the same town, 
but it is more particularly applied in the Amarakosa to a merchant. 1 
The general tendency in the late Smritis is to improve the status of 
guilds and associated bodies. We may discuss this point under the 
following heads:— 

(i) Constitution of guilds. 

(ii) Operation of their conventions or compacts. 

(iii) Rights and duties of the individual members. 

(i) Constitution of guilds. 

The srenis and other bodies are contemplated in the late Smritis 
to be headed by high executive officers ( adhyakshas or mukhyas ) 
who are assisted by committees of two, three, or five persons called 
advisers for the public good ( samuhahitavadins ) or for public 
business ( kdrya-chintaka ). A high degree of administrative decen¬ 
tralisation is implied in the clauses relating to the authority of 
executive officers over their constituents. According to Brihaspati, 
the adhyakshas are permitted to punish wrong-doers by reprimand 
and censure as well as by excommunication. Their judgements in 
the discharge of their duties are required to be respected by the 
King, for, as the author says, ‘such powers are regarded by the 
sages as delegated to them.’ The opinion of the advisers, according 
to Narada, is to be followed by the guilds and similar bodies. On the 
other hand, the King is to settle disputes between the chief executive 
officers and the groups. 2 

(ii) Conventions or Compacts of guilds. 

Narada and Brihaspati give various examples of conventions or 
compacts made by the groups. Katyayana calls such compacts by the 
title of sthitipatras which he defines as a deed of convention made by 
the sreips and other bodies for preserving their usages intact. The 
corresponding title in Brihaspati is samvitpatras. The conventions 
of the naigamas, the srenis , the pugas, and other bodies, says Narada 
are to be enforced by the King, the only exceptions being made 
against these which are adverse to the King’s interest, or are dis¬ 
approved by the people, or are harmful to the public good. The 
members of the groups, says Katyayana, are bound to follow their 
respective conventions or rules in all their acts, subject to their obli- 

1. Kat, 678-79 (puqa and nigama), Amara II. 9 98 (naigama). For an exhaustive 
study of the whole subiect of the Smriti law of groups see Kane. op. cit., 
Chapters XVIII and XXI. 

2. Bri. pp. 151 vv. 8 A. 


004 




ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


gation of performing their individual duties (as laid down in the 
scriptures) and to obey the King’s order not conflicting with the 
same. The extreme penalty of confiscation of property and banish¬ 
ment is prescribed by Brihaspati for a member who fails to perform 
his share of the convention, though he is capable of the same. 

(iii) Rights and duties of the individual members. 

Narada prohibits mutual combination and unlawful wearing of 
arms as well as mutual conflicts among the groups. 1 Brihaspati lays 
down the extreme penalty of banishment for one who injures the 
common interest or insults those who are learned in the Vedas. 
According to Katyayana, one committing a heinous crime, or causing 
a split, or destroying the property of the groups, is to be proclaimed 
before the King and ‘destroyed’. On the other hand, all members, 
we are told by Brihaspati, have an equal share in whatever is ac¬ 
quired by the committee of advisers or is saved by them, whatever 
they acquire through the King’s favour as well as whatever debts 
are incurred by them for the purpose of the group. 2 

The evidence of the late Smriti law of guilds is corroborated in 
part by a certain type of clay-seals, which- have been recovered from 
the excavations of Gupta sites at Basarh (ancient Vaisall) and Bhita 
(near Allahabad). These seals bear the legend nigama in Gupta 
characters (Bhita) and more particularly the legends srem-kulika - 
nigama and srenl-sdrthavdha-kulika-nigama (Basarh). These names 
are often joined with those of private individuals. 3 We have here 
a probable reference to the conventions or compacts made by local 
industrial and trading groups with private individuals or individual 
members. Such documents would be called sthitipatras or samvit - 
patras in the technical sense of the late Smritis. 

We may quote in the next place the concrete example of the 
working of a guild in the time of the Gupta Emperors. The Indore 
copper plate inscription of the Emperor Skandagupta 4 records 
the endowment (perpetual gift) of a sum of money by a Brah- 
mana donor to the local guild of oilmen for the purpose of (daily?) 
provision of a fixed quantity of oil for a Sun-temple. No doubt, the 
guild invested the sum in its own or other business for meeting the 
necessary expense out of the resulting income. The Gupta record is 
in line with a number of historical inscriptions of the earlier period 

1. Ndr, X, 3-4, 7; Bri, p. 150, vv 5ff.; Kdt. 668-70. 

2. Ndr , X. 5-6; Bri p. 154 vv. 23ff Kdt 671-72, 677. 

3. For ref. see ASI 1903-4., pp. lOlf. and plates (excavations at Basarh by T. 
Bloch); ibid 1910-11 pp. 56ff. (excavations at Bhita by Sir Joshn Marshall) 
See also writer’s paper entitled On the ivorking of village assemblies econo¬ 
mic, guilds, religious congregations and other assemblies during the Gupta 
period* (Journal of the Asiatic Society. Vol. I, 1959, No. 2). 

4. CII. p. 70f. 


605 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


recording endowments by princes and private individuals in favour 
of guilds for regular performance of acts of piety or charity. The 
above illustrates the function of the guilds in the capacity of bankers 
receiving private endowments for pious and charitable trusts. 

The subject of partnership is treated in the Smritis under a 
separate title of law called sarribhuya samuthana (business in part¬ 
nership). The topics are treated in the later works on the lines of 
the early Smritis. Thus in the first place, as regards the assets and 
liabilities, we are told that the income of each member should be in 
proportion to his share or according to agreement. According to 
Katyayana the partners should share, in accordance with their agree¬ 
ment, the cost of merchandise, the food and other charges, the losses, 
the freight and the charge for supervision of valuable property. The 
shares of the partners dealing in cash (gold), grain or liquids shall 
be the same as their shares in the joint capital. In the case of arti¬ 
sans there are special rules evidently because of the difference of 
skill required from the partners. According to Brihaspati and 
Katyayana the four grad-es of artisans, namely, the apprentice, 

( sikshaka ), the advanced student (abhijna), the expert ( kusalci) and 
the teacher (dcharya) shall divide the profit in the proportion of 1:2 : 
3:4. In the case of builders of palaces, continue the same authori¬ 
ties, the head architect shall receive two shares of the profit. In 
the second place, as regards the rights and duties of the partners we 
read that one-tenth of the property is to be given to one who has 
saved it from danger and the rest is to be shared by all. A property 
given or a document passed by a partner with the approval of the 
rest is binding upon them all. On the other hand, a partner causing 
-loss through negligence by acting without consent or against the 
assent of the rest is to make good the loss. A partner who is found 
to have practised deceit in the matter of purchase or sale is to clear 
himself by an oath. In the case of suspected deceit the partners 
themselves are to be witnesses and examiners provided they are not 
prejudiced against the accused. A partner, unable to do his work 
himself, may have it done by an agent, but if he pursues crooked ways 
he is to be deprived of his profit and expelled. 1 

GENERAL ECONOMIC CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE. 

The high standard of living and the luxury of town-life, to w T hich 
the literary records of the Gupta Age bear witness, tell their own tale 
of economic prosperity at least among the upper classes of the peo¬ 
ple. Direct evidence of the material condition of the Indians is 
provided by the matter-of-fact accounts of the contemporary Chinese 

1. Ndr. VI. If: Bri, I. 13, 1-39: Kat. 624£. On the whole subject see Kane, op. cit. 

IT, pp. 466-70. 


606 




ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 


travellers. In the beginning of the fifth century the people of the 
‘Middle Kingdom.’ according to Fa-hien, were prosperous and happy. 
Fa-hien in particular refers to the high prosperity of the people of 
Sankasya and Magadha. In the first part of the seventh century, 
according to Hiuen Tsang, the towns and villages of Gandhara (no 
doubt owing to the ravages of the Hunas in the previous century) 
lay desolate, while a belt of country lying along the foot of the 
Nepal hills and comprising the ancient cities of Sravasti, Kapila- 
vastu, Ramagrama and Kuslnagara lay deserted and was the haunt 
of robbers ana wild beasts. A tract of country along the east coast 
comprising Kalihga, Dhanakataka and Chola was thinly populated, 
the iast region being covered with jungle. Great forests extended 
over the territory to the east of Takka as well as south-east of Maha¬ 
rashtra. But the greater part of the country undoubtedly enjoyed 
high prosperity. This is proved indirectly by the pilgrim’s reference 
to the luxurious dresses of the people in certain tracts and the num¬ 
ber of rich families in other regions. It is also demonstrated by 
Hiuen Tsang’s positive testimony to the affluence of the people in 
many areas. 1 Above all the general prevalence of peace and prospe¬ 
rity is indicated in an unmistakable manner by the rich and varied 
specimens of architecture, sculpture and painting described in Chap¬ 
ter XIX. 


1. HTW, I. 286, 340 (luxurious dress of people in Takka and Kanyakubja); ibid, 
316 (rich families in S than vis vara); ibid, I, 296. 299, 329, 330, 340, ibid II. 47: 59, 
184, 190, 191, 200, 243, 245-50 (affluence in Jalandhara, Satadru, Brahmaputra, 
Govisana, Kanyakubja, Varansi, Chan-chu, Pundravardhana, Tamralipti, Kar- 
nasuvarna, South Kosala, A-ta-ti, Cutch, Valabln, Anandapura, Surat, Gurj- 
jara and UjjayinI). On the richness of the people of Tamralipti see Record, 
general introduction by Takakusu p. XXXIV. 


607 



CHAPTER XXIII 


INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 

1. China—up to the T'ang Period 

It has been described in a preceding chapter 1 how, during the 
first three centuries of the Christian era, Buddhism, and along with 
it Indian culture, had spread over Central Asia and obtained a de¬ 
finite footing in China. As centuries rolled by, the power and in¬ 
fluence of Buddhism gradually increased in China and, as before, 
Buddhist monks of Central Asia, of sundry nationalities, took part 
in the missionary activity. 

The monks of Kuehi took a leading part in the propagation of 
Buddhism in China from the fourth century A.D. The greatest of 
them was Kumarajlva whose life remarkably illustrates the wonder¬ 
ful religious and cultural internationalism of the period. 

Kumarayana, the father of Kumarajlva, was born in a respect¬ 
able family of hereditary ministers to an Indian state. He, however, 
abdicated his rights to this high office in favour of his relatives and 
went to Kuchi. The king of Kuchi cordially welcomed him, and he 
shortly rose to the high position of Rajaguru or royal preceptor. He 
married Jlva, a princess of the royal family who had fallen in love 
with him. Soon after the birth of her son Kumarajlva, Jlva became 
a Buddhist nun and, when her son was nine years old, took him to 
Kashmir. Here Kumarajlva studied Buddhist literature and philo¬ 
sophy under a teacher named Bandhudatta and attained great pro¬ 
ficiency in a variety of subjects. After completing his studies, 
Kumarajlva, with his mother, visited a number of renowned Bud¬ 
dhist institutions in Central Asia, and obtained high reputation as 
a Buddhist scholar. He then returned to Kuchi. Shortly after, 
hostilities broke out between Kuchi and China. A Chinese force 
besieged Kuchi which surrendered after a brave fight. As was 
customary in those days, the victorious Chinese general took the re¬ 
nowned. scholar Kumarajlva to China. This happened in A.D. 383. 
Kumarajlva remained with the ruler of Ku-tsang in Kan-su for near¬ 
ly fifteen years. The Chinese emperor repeatedly invited him and 
he proceeded to the capital in A.D. 401. From that date till A.D. 412 
Kumarajlva worked and stayed in the Chinese capital. He de¬ 
voted his whole energy to translating Buddhist texts and inter¬ 
preting Buddhist religion and philosophy. He translated more than 

1. Vol. II, Ch. XXV. 


608 



INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 

one hundred Sanskrit texts and was the first to interpret Mahayana 
philosophy in China. His great command over both Sanskrit and 
Chinese, and vast erudition in different branches of philosophy, 
made him eminently fit for this task. His translations were a great 
improvement upon those of his predecessors. Many scholars from 
different parts of China became his disciples and he may be justly 
regarded as having ushered in a new epoch in the history of Bud¬ 
dhism in China. 

The fact that Kumarajiva was taken all the way from Kuchi to 
Kashmir by his mother for purposes of education shows the high 
position held by that region in the then Buddhist world. It was, 
therefore, quite in the fitness of things that learned Buddhist monks 
of Kashmir should play the leading part in the propagation of Bud¬ 
dhism in China. It is said that the Buddhist scholars who went to 
China from Kashmir during the fourth, fifth and sixth centuries A.D. 
far exceeded in number those who went from the other parts of 
India taken together. Among these Kashmirian scholars special 
mention may be made of Sahghabhuti (A.D. 381-384), 1 Gautama 
Sahghadeva (A.D. 384-397), Punyatrata (A.D. 404), Vimalaksha (A.D. 
406-413), Buddhajlva (A.D. 423), Dharmamitra (A.D. 424-442), and 
Dharmayasa (c. A.D. 400-424). Two of them, Punyatrata and Vima¬ 
laksha were collaborators of Kumarajiva, while Dharmayasa was a 
pupil of Punyatrata. They all engaged themselves in translating 
Buddhist texts into Chinese and expounding Buddhist philosophy, 
and received high honours from the people as well as the officials. 

More importance attaches to another Kashmirian scholar 
Buddhayasa. He was born in a Brahmanical family but became a 
Buddhist monk. After completing his studies he proceeded to Cen¬ 
tral Asia. The king of Kashgar had invited three thousand Buddhist 
monks to a religious ceremony and Buddhayasa went with them. 
He made a profound impression on the king and was invited to live 
in the palace. Kumarajiva met him there and studied some sacred 
texts with him. When, after Kumarajlva’s return to Kuchi, this 
kingdom was invaded by the Chinese, its king appealed for help to 
the king of Kashgar. The latter started with his army for Kuchi 
leaving the young prince in charge of Buddhayasa. Buddhayasa was 
very much upset by the news of the fall of Kuchi and the deportation 
of Kumarajiva. He stayed in Kashgar for ten years more and then 
went to Kuchi. A year later he went to China and worked with 
Kumarajiva. After the latter’s death he returned to Kashmir. He 

1. The dates put within brackets refer to the known period of residence in China. 
The account of the Indian and Chinese missionaries and the pro,stress of Bud¬ 
dhism in China, unless otherwise stated, is based on Dr. P. C. Bagchi’s India, 
*nd China and his articles in Sino-Indian Studies, Vol. I, pp. 1-17, 65-84. 

609 

C.A, 39 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


was a man of strict principles and never accepted any present even 
from the Emperor on the ground that it was unbecoming for a monk 
to do so. 

Reference may also be made to another noble son of Kashmir, 
namely Gunavarman. He was born in the royal family, but became 
a Buddhist monk. When he was thirty years old, the king of Kash¬ 
mir died and he was invited by the ministers to ascend the throne. 
Gunavarman refused and retired to a forest life. He then went to 
Ceylon and preached Buddhism. Later he proceeded to Java and 
converted the king and his mother to the Buddhist faith. At this 
time Java was attacked by hostile troops and the king asked Guna¬ 
varman whether it would be contrary to the Buddhist law if he 
fought against the enemy. Gunavarman replied that it was the 
duty of everyone to punish the robbers. The king then fought with 
his enemy and won a great victory. Gradually, through the efforts 
of Gunavarman, the Buddhist religion spread throughout Java. The 
name and fame of Gunavarman had now spread all over the Bud¬ 
dhist world. In A.D. 424 the Chinese monks of Nanking requested 
their emperor to invite Gunavarman to China. Accordingly the 
Chinese Emperor sent messengers to Gunavarman and the king of 
Java. Gunavarman embarked on a vessel owned by the Hindu 
merchant Nandin, and after visiting different places on the way, 
reached Nanking in A.D. 431. The Chinese Emperor himself went 
out to receive him and put him up in a monastery called Jetavana-^ 
vihara after the famous monastery of that name in Sravastl associat¬ 
ed with the hallowed name of Buddha. Gunavarman died there 
within a year, but so great was his industry that even during this 
short period he translated no less than eleven Sanskrit texts into 
Chinese. 

A number of learned Buddhist monks from other parts of India 
also carried on missionary activity in China. Among these may be 
mentioned Gunabhadra (A.D. 435-468) of Madhyadesa (Central 
India), Prajharuchi of Banaras (A.D. 516-543), Upasunya of Ujja- 
yini (sixth century), and three monks Jnanabhadra, Jinayasas and 
Yasogupta (sixth century) from Eastern India ( i.e . Bengal and 
Assam. Three others, Buddhahhadra, Vimokshasena and Jina- 
gupta hailed from the North-Western frontier. The first two claim¬ 
ed descent from the Sakya family of Kapilavastu. It is said that 
when Kapilavastu was attacked by Vidudabha, 1 king of Kosala, four 
members of the Sakya clan disobeyed the Buddha’s law of non-vio¬ 
lence and fought with the enemy. For this offence they were ex¬ 
pelled, and two of them, proceeding west, became rulers of Uddi- 


1. See Vol. H, p. 6. 


610 




INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


yana (Swat Valley) and Bamiyan (near Kabul). Vimokshasena 
claimed to be the descendant of the first, while Buddhabhadra, who 
was born at Nagarahara (Jelalabad), was probably a descendant of 
the second. When Buddhabhadra was in Kashmir, a Chinese monk, 
who accompanied Fa-hien to India, came there and requested the 
Buddhist community to send a learned scholar to China. Buddha¬ 
bhadra, who was selected for this purpose, went to China via Burma 
and Tonkin and collaborated with Kumarajlva. 1 

The third, Jinagupta, was born in Gandhara and was the pupil 
of Jhanabhadra and Jinayasas, mentioned above. They reached 
Ch’ang-ngan (A.D. 559) where a monastery was built for them by 
special orders of the Emperor. Owing to political troubles they 
were forced to leave China (A.D. 572). On their way home they 
stepped in the country of the Turks at the request of their king. 
Jinagupta’s teachers died there; but he stayed on till 581 doing mis¬ 
sionary work and translating Buddhist texts. He returned to China 
in 585 and died in A.D. 600. 

We may refer, in some details, to a few other Indian monks who 
did missionary work in China, as their lives offer special points of 
interest. 

Dharmakshema., born in Central India, went through Kuchi to 
Western China which was then an independent principality. He 
was engaged there from A.D. 414 to 432 in translating Buddhist texts. 
He wanted then to return to India, but the local ruler refused him 
permission lest he might go to other Chinese kingdoms. Dharma¬ 
kshema, however, defied the order and proceeded on his journey, 
only to be murdered by the ruthless king in A.D. 433. This is a 
strange, though fortunately a solitary, instance of barbaric cruelty, 
untempered by Buddhist piety. 

Of all the Indian monks who went to China, probably no name 
is better known in India than that of Paramartha. Born in UjjayinI 
he became proficient in all branches of Buddhist learning and pro¬ 
bably settled down at Pataliputra. At that time a Chinese mission 
sent by the emperor Wu came to the king of Magadha and requested 
him to send a renowned Buddhist monk to China. The king was 
probably the last Imperial Gupta ruler Vishnu-gupta. He selected 
Paramartha who took with him a large number of Buddhist texts 
and reached China in A.D. 546. Although political troubles inter¬ 
rupted his work in A.D. 557, he stayed on till his death in A.D. 569 
and translated no less than 70 Buddhist texts. 

1. According to Anesaki Buddhabhadra arrived in China in A.D. 398, i.e. two 
years before Fa-hien entered India (JRAS, 1903, p. 368). 


611 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Dharma-gupta, another famous monk, was born in Lata (south¬ 
ern Gujarat) and studied with some learned teachers in the Kau- 
mudi-sangharama at Kanauj. He stayed in the royal monastery 
named Devavihara in Takka (N. Punjab) for some time, and then 
proceeded towards China. He followed the overland route through 
Afghanistan, staying on his way at Kapisa (Kafir istan), Badakhshan, 
Wakhan and Tash Qurghan. He spent two years at the royal mon¬ 
astery of Kashgar and proceeded by the northern route. He passed 
through Kuchi, Agnidesa (Qara Shahr), Turf an and Kami. These 
were all flourishing seats of Buddhism and their monks were eager 
to profit by the learning of the great Indian monk. So after staying 
a year or two in each of these places Dharmagupta reached Ch’ang- 
ngan in A.D. 590. In addition to the usual activity of translating 
Buddhist texts, he is said to have composed a treatise giving minute 
geographical details of all the countries visited by him, and even 
noting down such topics as their system of government, social and 
economic condition, including food and drink, dress, education, man¬ 
ners and customs. Such a book from an Indian author would have 
been a unique literary production, but unfortunately no copy has sur¬ 
vived. 

The Indian monk who obtained the greatest celebrity in China 
was Bodhidharma. He was the third son of an Indian king (pro¬ 
bably the Pallava king of Kanchi). He is almost a semi-mvthical 
figure, and various miracles are attributed to him. He was received 
by the Emperor Wu, and is credited with the introduction of the 
contemplative form of Mahayana into China. He visited China in 
the second quarter of the sixth century A.D. Reference may also be 
made to Vinltaruchi, a Brahmana of South India, who reached the 
Chinese capital in A.D. 582 and translated two works into Chinese. 
He then proceeded to Tonkin and founded the Dhyana School 
there. 1 

The activities of Indian missionaries in China during the fourth, 
fifth and sixth centuries A.D., which have been briefly described 
above, had a great effect upon the Chinese. In the first place, it 
aroused greater interest than before among the Chinese for Bud¬ 
dhism and Indian culture. Secondly, it whetted the desire of the 
Chinese to know Buddhism at first hand and come into direct con¬ 
tact with Indian culture by visiting India. 

The career of the great Chinese scholar Tao-ngan, w T ho flourish¬ 
ed in the second half of the fourth century A.D., illustrates this new 

1. According to Dr. P. C. Bagchi Vinltaruchi was a Buddhist monk of Uddiyana 
(India and China, p, 228), but cf. BEFEO. XXXII. 235, which also gives an 
account of his activity in Tonkin. For an account of some other missionaries, . 
specially those from Ceylon, who visited China, cf. JRAS, 1903, pp. 368-70. 


G12 






INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


spirit in China. Born in a family famous for its erudition in Chinese 
classics and strong devotion to Confucianism, Tao-ngan became a 
staunch Buddhist and read Buddhist literature with the help of able 
teachers. He studied critically the Chinese translations of Buddhist 
texts, corrected them, and compiled a series of commentaries in 
order to explain the true meaning of Buddhist philosophy and doc¬ 
trines. His scholarship and mastery over the sacred texts attract¬ 
ed a number of Chinese from all over the country. He trained them 
thoroughly and sent them to different parts of the country to preach 
Buddhism. 

Tao-ngan also wrote a book on India in order to encourage the 
Buddhist monks of China to visit the Holy Land. This bore fruit 
and quite a large number of them undertook the long and perilous 
journey. Their main objects were not only to learn at first hand 
the true doctrines of Buddhism and the correct principles of conduct 
to bo observed by the monks and the laity, but also to collect Bud¬ 
dhist texts and sacred relics, and acquire merit by visiting the holy 
places associated with the Buddha. 

A party of five monks under the leadership of Fa-hien started 
for India in A.D. 399. They met on the frontier another group of 
five monks who had started a little earlier, and travelled together 
for some time. At Tunhwang the district officer supplied them 
with the means for continuing the journey. Fortunately Fa-hien 
has left a detailed record of his travels, and this gives us an insight 
into the objects of their journey, the difficulties of the road, and 
the condition of Buddhism and Indian culture in Central Asia. The 
objects of the journey have been stated above. As regards the diffi¬ 
culties of the road, we may quote the following extract describing 
vividly the perils of the desert—“(Travellers) who encounter them 
perish all to a man. There is not a bird to be seen in the air above, 
nor an animal on the ground below. Though you look all round 
most earnestly to find where you can cross, you know not where to 
make your choice, the only mark and indication being the dry bones 
of the dead (left upon the sand).” 

We are further told that “the difficulties which they encounter¬ 
ed in crossing the streams on their route, and the sufferings which 
they endured were unparalleled in human experience.” 

Fa-hien entered India through Kashmir and travelled all over 
North India. He stayed at Pataliputra for three years, learning 
Sanskrit, reading Sanskrit books, and writing out the Vinaya rules. 
At Tarnralipti, again, he stayed for two years writing out his Sutras, 
and drawing pictures of images. 


613 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Of Fa-hien’s companions, one died on the way and several went 
back to China at an earlier stage. Another was so deeply impres¬ 
sed by the dignified conduct of the Indian monks that he resolved to 
stay in India. “He sadly called to mind the imperfections of the 
monks in China and prayed that in future births he might be born 
in India alone.” 

Fa-hien, however, whose original purpose had been to secure 
the introduction of the complete Yinaya rules into China, returned 
there alone. He embarked on a large merchant vessel from Tam- 
ralipti and after fourteen days reached Ceylon. Having stayed here 
for two years and collected a number of Sanskrit works not avail¬ 
able in China, he took his passage in a merchantman bound for 
China. Fa-hien has vividly described the perils of the sea and how 
he narrowly escaped a w T atery grave. At last he landed in China 
in A.D. 414. 

After his return to China Fa-hien, along with the Indian monk 
Buddhabliadra, mentioned above, translated some of the works he 
had brought from India. He died at the age of 88. 

Of the monks of the other group who joined Fa-hien, Pao-yun 
studied Sanskrit in India and translated Sanskrit Buddhist texts on 
his return to China. 

Soon after Fa-hien and Pao-yun, another group of fifteen monks 
led by Che-mong started for India in A.D. 404. Nine returned from 
the Pamirs, and one died of fatigue. The remaining five visited 
India and made a collection of Buddhist texts. Three died on the 
return journey and Che-mong reached China in A.D. 424 with only 
one companion. 

In A.D. 420 Fa-yong started with 25 Chinese monks along the 
northern route of Central Asia and reached India through Kashmir 
After having travelled all over Northern India they returned by the 
sea route. 

/ 

Names of several other Chinese monks who visited India dur¬ 
ing this period have also been preserved, but no details are known. 

Simultaneously with the new enthusiasm for visiting India, we 
notice a growing practice of inviting Buddhist scholars to China. 
In this matter also the initiative was taken by Tao-ngan, the great 
leader of the new movement in China. He invited a large number 
of scholars from Central Asia. His example was followed by others, 
and as we have seen above, in connection with Paramartha and 
Gunavarman, even the Emperors sent envoys and formal invitations 
for bringing the renowned Buddhist teachers from India to China. 


614, 


INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


Reference may be made in particular to two instances of royal 
solicitude for the cause of Buddhism. In A.D. 518 Sung Yun, an 
envoy, with a Chinese monk, was sent on an embassy to the western 
countries by the Empress Dowager of the Great Wei dynasty to 
obtain Buddhist books. Fortunately v/e have a detailed account of 
this embassy. They passed through Central Asia to the Huna king¬ 
dom and visited Udyana and Gandhara. They procured altogether 
170 volumes, all standard works of the Mahayana sect. Emperor 
Yang of the Sui dynasty (A.D. 605-617) also sent a mission to 
Central Asia and India. 

These facts and the high honours shown to Indian teachers on 
their arrival in China by all ranks of people, from the Emperor 
downwards, reveal the great hold that Buddhism and Indian culture 
had over China. 

This is confirmed by what we know of the development of 
Buddhism in China. The kings of the Eastern Tsin dynasty, like 
their predecessors, were great patrons of Buddhism. Two of them 
built four large monasteries, each accommodating one thousand 
monks. During the rule of this djmasty (A.D. 317-420) 17,068 
Buddhist institutions, great and small, were founded all over China, 
and 263 volumes of Buddhist texts were translated into Chinese. 
Under the foreign Wei dynasty, which ruled over the northern part 
of China from A.D. 386 to 534, Buddhism made rapid progress. 
Even before this period one of their chiefs had issued an edict in 335 
in which he said; “As Buddha is a foreign, god it is in the fitness 
of things that I should worship him. When a thing is found perfect 
and faultless why should they still stick to the customs of the an¬ 
cient dynasties? My people are called barbarians. I grant them 
the privilege to worship Buddha and adopt the Buddhist faith if 
they like to do so.” 

Such an attitude on the part of the ruling family naturally 
gave great impetus to Buddhism. Many Wei kings were themselves 
devout Buddhists and copied, recited, and explained sacred texts. 
The first ruler Wu-ti (A.D. 386-407) is said to have founded 15 
chaityas and two monasteries, erected 1,000 golden images, and 
entertained every month 3,000 Buddhist monks in a religious assem¬ 
bly. Altogether 47 big monasteries were built by the Wei Emperors 
and during the period of their rule more than 30,000 temples were 
constructed by private families. The number of monks and nuns 
exceeded two million. 

The rulers of the Northern Ts’i dynasty, which succeeded the 
Wei in A.D. 550. were also great patrons of Buddhism. One of them 
copied 12 Buddhist texts with his own hand and regularly maintain¬ 


ed 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


ed 3,000 monks. Another erected a chaitya in gold. Another ruler 
sent in A.D. 575 a Buddhist mission to the Western countries in 
search of Sanskrit books, and it brought back 260 texts, though the 
dynasty was overthrown by that time. It was during their rule 
(A.D. 550-577) that Buddhism was introduced among the Turks. A 
Chinese monk took courage to go to the chief of the Western Turks, 
named To’ po Kaghan (A.D. 572-581), and told him that China was 
prosperous and mighty for having favoured Buddhism. Thanks to 
his teachers the Kaghan adopted Buddhism, observed its rules of 
conduct, and made regularly the pradakshina (circumambulation) of 
the stupas . He built a monastery and sent an ambassador to the 
Ts’i emperor for securing Buddhist books. At his request the Mahd - 
pmnnirvana-sutra was translated into Turkish by a Chinese scholar. 

Buddhism was equally favoured by the ruling dynasties of 
South China, viz. the Song (A.D. 420-479), the Ts’i (A.D. 479-502), 
and the I^eang (A.D. 502-557). The Chinese official history gives 
details of the personal activities of various rulers by way of copying 
Sanskrit texts and reciting them, founding monasteries to accommo¬ 
date monks, and erecting golden statues. One of them lived like a 
monk, and prohibited the killing of animals either for sacrifice or 
for food. As usual, the work of translating Buddhist texts into 
Chinese was continued throughout this period with the help of 
Indian scholars. 

An important landmark in the history of Buddhism in China 
was the foundation of a monastery at Lu-shan by Hui-yuan, a dis¬ 
ciple of Tao-ngan. This attracted numerous Buddhists from all over 
China and their number is said to have exceeded one thousand 
Hui-yuan selected 17 disciples including two Indian scholars—Bud- 
dhayasas and Buddhabhadra—and founded a school known as “The 
School of White Lotus.” It introduced the ‘cult of Amitabha,’ based 
upon the Mahayana philosophy. This new doctrine plays an important 
role in the modern Buddhism of the Far East. The Lu-shan school 
made a positive contribution to Buddhism which may henceforth 
be regarded as a living force in the life and culture of the Chinese. 

The meditative form of Mahayana was introduced in China 
by Bodhidharma, as noted above. One of his disciples, Chi-k’ai, 
founded a new school, called T’ien-t’ai according to the name of 
Chi-k’ai’s place of residence. He made a new classification of 
Buddha’s teachings and Buddhist literature, and attempted a syn¬ 
cretism of the different forms of Buddhism. His views were accept¬ 
ed by all and henceforth the Chinese respected and studied both 
Hlnayana and Mahayana without being troubled by any sense of 


616 


INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


contradiction. Chi-k’ai’s teachings met with great success in Japan 
which follows his syncretism even today. 

During the rule of the Wei dynasty (A.D. 386-534), whose pat¬ 
ronage of Buddhism has been referred to above, no less than eight 
embassies from North-Western India were sent to the Imperial court 
in China. The Chinese official history gives the following list: 

Country Date of Embassy 


A.D. 

451, 502, 508, 517 


Ki-pin 

Kia-pi-sa (Kapisa) 

Pu-lm-sha (Purushapura or Peshawar) 
Kan-ta (Gandhara) 

Kia-shih-rni (Kashmir) 


503 

511 

511 

511 


The identification of Ki-pin is a matter of dispute among scho¬ 
lars. Pelliot, in agreement with S. Levi, held that prior to A.D. 600 
Ki-pin denoted Kashmir, and after that date it designated Kapisa. 
Rapson and Sten Konow, however, identified it throughout with 
Kapisa. Dr. P. C. Bagchi endorses the views of Pelliot after an 
elaborate discussion of the problem, giving full reference to previous 
writings on the subject. Dr. L. Petech, the latest writer on the sub¬ 
ject, thinks that Ki-pin was used by Chinese historiographers, from, 
the very beginning, to denote Kapisa and the adjacent country poli¬ 
tically associated with it, though the Chinese Buddhists applied the 
name to Kashmir from the second to the early seventh century A.D. 
In his opinion “the two traditions run for centuries parallel to each 
other, and to a great extent ignoring each other.” 1 

If Ki-pin denoted Kashmir, the separate mention of the two 
countries is difficult to explain. If, on the other hand, it means 
Kapisa, similar difficulty arises with regard to the second name in 
the above list. The third and fourth names also denote politically 
the same region. Petech thinks that “perhaps the local governors or 
tributary princes had sent embassies of their own”. 

Embassies were also sent from other parts of India. A king of 
South India, for example, sent an ambassador to China during the 
period A.D. 500-516. 2 


2. China—T’ang Period 


The T’ang dynasty ruled in China from A.D. 618 to 907. This 
period constitutes one of the most glorious chapters in the history 
of China. The whole of China came under one political authority 

1. Cf. Bagchi, Sino-Indian Studies, II. 42; L„ Petech, Northern India according to 
the Shui-Ching-Chu (Rome, 1950), pp. 63 ff. The list of embassies during the 
Wei period is given on p, 74 of this work, 

2. Sostri, Foreign Notices , 83. 


6*7 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


whose power once more extended over Central Asia. The inter¬ 
course with India and the influence of Buddhism and Indian culture 
reached the highest peak in China during the period. Thousands 
of Indians—missionaries, merchants and others—thronged the prin¬ 
cipal cities in China, and more Chinese monks and royal embassies 
came to India in the seventh century than during any other period. 

The fame of the Nalanda University 1 was now at its height and 
it came to be the great international centre of Buddhism which at¬ 
tracted Buddhist monks from all over Asia. The Chinese Buddhists 
also shared the general enthusiasm for studying at Nalanda, not 
merely Buddhist philosophy and literature, but also other subjects 
like Brahmanical philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, and medi¬ 
cine. They were encouraged by the Emperors who gave them all 
facilities to undertake the journey. 

The first Chinese monk to visit India during this period was 
Hiuen Tsang who played the most distinguished part in establishing 
Buddhism on a solid footing in China, and improving the cultural 
relations between that country and India. Born in A.D, 600 of an 
orthodox Confucian family, he became a Buddhist monk at the age 
of 20. Not being content with the existing translations of Buddhist 
books in Chinese, he decided to visit India. He started in A.D. 629 
by the northern route in Central Asia. He reached Kapisa (Kafiris- 
tan) in A.D, 630 and during the next fourteen years travelled all 
over India. He stayed two years in Kashmir and for shorter periods 
in other places, for studying the Buddhist texts. He also resided 
in Nalanda, on different occasions, for a total period of two years, 
and learnt the Yogachara system from Silabhadra, the famous monk 
who presided over the institution, Hiuen Tsang was highly honour¬ 
ed by the great Indian rulers Harsha-vardhana and B ha ska r a-va r m an, 
as noted above. 2 He left India with a large number of books and 
images at the beginning of A.D. 644 and, proceeding along the south¬ 
ern route in Central Asia, returned to China in A.D. 645. 

Hiuen Tsang has left a long account of his travels, giving details 
of the various Indian kingdoms visited by him. This book, Si-yu-ki , 
forms an invaluable source of ancient Indian history, and has been 
frequently referred to in this volume. It also gives us a graphic 
picture of the condition of Buddhism in India and all the territories 
outside it through which the traveller passed, 

Hiuen Tsang left India almost in a royal procession. Harsha- 
vardhana gave him a big elephant with 3,000 gold and 10,000 silver 
pieces for defraying his expenses, and his numerous books and 
images were entrusted to the military escort of king of North India 

2. See pp. 118f, 139f. 

618 


1. See p. 580£. 





INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


called Udhita. As the elephant was drowned on the way, and he 
could not secure means of transport for his books, he halted at Kho~ 
tan and sent a memorial to the Chinese Emperor. After referring 
to the extreme hardships of the journey over more than 50,000 li . 
he returned, he said, with a mind satisfied with the accomplishment 
of his vows. ‘‘I have beheld the Gridhrakuta mountain, worshipped 
the Bodhi tree; I have seen traces not seen before; heard sacred 
words not heard before; witnessed spiritual prodigies, exceeding all 
the wonders of Nature/’ This passage from the petition shows the 
devout spirit with which Hiuen Tsang regarded Buddhism and 
everything connected with it. 

The Emperor sent a gracious reply. “I pray you come quickly, ?> 
he said, ‘‘that we may see each other.” He also sent instructions to 
his officials at Khotan and other places on the way to help Hiuen 
Tsang with guides and conveyances. As Hiuen Tsang approached 
the border of China, the Emperor asked the Governor of the western 
capital to send proper officers to receive him. Hiuen Tsang arriv¬ 
ed in a boat by way of a canal and received a unique welcome. The 
news of his arrival spread fast and the people came in large num¬ 
bers to behold and pay homage to him. The streets were so crowd¬ 
ed that when he wished to disembark he could not advance and had 
to pass the night in the canal. 

On his arrival at the capital Hiuen Tsang received a royal 
ovation. According to his biographer, “the Emperor and his court, 
the officials and the merchants, and all the people made holiday. 
The streets were crowded with eager men and women who ex¬ 
pressed their joy by gay banners and festive music.” Such an honour 
is usually reserved for kings and generals on their return from a 
victorious military expedition. That Hiuen Tsang was thought 
worthy of it on account of his prolonged visit to India speaks volumes 
not only for the great veneration which the Chinese had for Bud¬ 
dhism, but also for the new angle of vision which contact with 
Indian culture had inspired among the Chinese. 

Hiuen Tsang spent the remaining years of his life in translat¬ 
ing Buddhist texts, and training his pupils. He founded a new 
school of Buddhist philosophy in China which carried on his work 
after his death. His book Si-yu-ki or ‘Record of the Western coun¬ 
tries’ gave a strong impetus to the love of Indian culture in China. 
His personal influence with the Emperor was probably at the root 
of the new policy of establishing political relations with the Indian 
rulers. 

Hiuen Tsang translated altogether 74 different works consist¬ 
ing of 1,335 chapters. He had, moreover, drawn a vast number of 


619 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


pictures, and written out with his own hands copies of various 
texts. He died in A.D. 664 and was buried in the Western capital. 
But in A.D. 669 his remains were removed by order of the Emperor 
to another place where a tower was constructed in his memory. 

The noble example of Hiuen Tsang induced the Chinese monks 
to visit India in large numbers. Chinese texts have preserved the 
biographies of sixty monks who visited India during the latter half 
of the seventh century A.D. The greatest among these later pil¬ 
grims was I-tsing. He left by the sea route in A.D. 671 and having 
passed several years at Sri-Vijaya, an important centre of Buddhist 
learning in Sumatra, arrived in A.D. 673 at the port of Tamralipti 
in Bengal. He stayed at Nalanda for ten years (c. A.D. 675-685). 
studying and copying Buddhist texts. He returned to China with 
a collection of 400 Sanskrit manuscripts containing more than 
50.000 slokas. He translated a number of texts and compiled a 
Sanskrit-Chinese dictionary. Fortunately we still possess his book 
entitled “A 'Record of the Buddhist Religion as practised in India 
and the Malay Archipelago In this he has noted in detail the 
rules of monastic life as practised in India, a subject in which he 
evidently took a special interest. He also wrote a biography of 
about sixty Buddhist monks who visited India. Almost all of them 
were associated with China, though many of them were natives of 
other lands such as Korea, Samarkand and Tushara (Turk) country. 
This biography shows the international position of Buddhism in 
Asia and indicates its influence in outlying countries like Korea, 
The fact that about sixty Buddhist monks came to India from China 
in one generation, shows the frequency of such pilgrimages in these 
days, though most of them have not been probably recorded. 

The seventh century A.D., which saw the arrival of so many 
distinguished Chinese monks in India, also witnessed the journey 
of noted Indian Buddhists to China. The earliest was Prabbakara- 
mitra, a famous scholar of Nalanda. Born in a royal family of 
Central India, he took to the life of a Buddhist monk and studied 
at Nalanda. He was later appointed a Professor there and his dis¬ 
ciples became famous scholars in course of time. Starting with ten 
disciples, he reached the country of the Western Turks and taught 
Buddhism to their Chief. The Chinese ambassador at the Turkish 
court invited him to China, but the Turkish chief would not let 
him go. At last, at the request of the Chinese Emperor, the Turkish 
ruler accorded the necessary permission, and Prabhakaramitra reach 
ed China in A.D. 627. He was engaged in translating Buddhist texts 
there, and 19 scholars were appointed by the court to assist him in his 
work. Some translated his words into Chinese, some verified this 


620 


4 


INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 

translation, while others wrote it down. Another group copied it and 
high officials, under the orders of the Emperor, examined the final 
redaction and supervised its execution. Prabhakaramitra died in 

A.D. 633. 

Another Indian scholar, Bodhiruchi, went to China in A.D. 693 
at the request of a Chinese envoy, probably at the court of a Cha- 
lukya king. A regular Board was set up to help Bodhiruchi in 
translating Buddhist texts. It consisted of both Chinese and Indian 
scholars. The latter included Brahma, an ambassador of the king 
of Central India, and Isvara, a chief of Eastern India. The Emperor 
himself was occasionally present when the translation was being 
made and took down notes with his own hand. Sometimes the 
queen and other ladies of the palace and the high officials of the 
court were also present. Bodhiruchi translated fifty-three volumes, 
and died in A.D. 727. 

Vajrabodhi, son of Isana-varman, king of Central India, was a 
famous scholar at Nalanda. He was the teacher of the Pallava 
king Narasimha-varman II 1 at Kahchl for some time and then pro¬ 
ceeded to Ceylon. The king of Ceylon sent a mission to China for 
presenting a sacred Buddhist text and other objects to the Em¬ 
peror. Vajrabodhi accompanied it and reached China in A.D. 720 
Vajrabodhi propagated the mystic doctrines of Buddhism known 
as Tantrayana and translated a number of texts on the subject, 
This had great effect and the cult w T as popularised in China. Vajra¬ 
bodhi died in A.D. 732. His work was continued by his disciple, 
Amoghavajra, who was with him in China. In 736, Amoghavajra 
came back to Ceylon but returned to China ten years later with 500 
texts. Between A.D. 746 and 771, he translated 77 texts. He died 
in A.D. 774. 2 

It is unnecessary to describe in detail the visits of other indivi¬ 
dual monks; and we may now refer to the development of political 
relations betv/een India and China as evidenced by the despatch 
of embassies from one court to the other. Mention has already been 
made above 3 of Harsha-vardhana’s embassy to China in A.D. 641 
and of three other Chinese embassies, the first under Liang-hoai- 
King, the second under Li-y-piao and Wang-hiuen-tse in A.D. 643, and 
the third under Wang-hiuen-tse in 646. Wang-hiuen-tse was sent 
a third time in A.D. 657. A Brahmana thaumaturge (probably a 
Tantrik named Narayana-svamin), who claimed that he possessed 
the secret of prolonging life, was sent to China by an Indian king at 

1. See p. 280£. 

2. For a different version, cf. Sastri, op. cit., p. 17. 

3. See pp. 120f, 124ff. 


621 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


the request of the Chinese Emperor. 1 As the Emperor was not 
satisfied with his skill, he was sent back with Wang-hiuen-tse. 
The envoy also carried presents offered by the Emperor to various 
Buddhist shrines in India. He was sent a fourth time to India in 
A D. 664 in order to bring back a Chinese pilgrim whom he had 
previously met in India. Wang-hiuen-tse wrote an account of his 
travels in India, but the book has been lost and only a few extracts 
from it have been preserved in other works. 

Reference has already been made to an embassy to China sent 
by Yasovarman, and the exchanges of envoys between China and 
Kashmir have also been related above. 2 

Many other embassies are also referred to in the T’ang history 
which has preserved a systematic account of the political relations 
between China and different parts of India. This may be summed 
up as follows: 3 

In A.D. 717 the Emperor awarded the title of “king of Pu-lu 
(Bolor)” to the local chief Su-fu-sho-li-che-li-ni (Subhasri). In 719 
the king of Bolor, Subhasri, sent an ambassador to the'Emperor to 
express his gratitude for the award. In 720 the title of “the king 
of Bolor” was awarded by the Emperor to the local chief Su-lin-t’o- 
i-che (Surendraditya?). In 731 the title of “the king of little Bolor 
(Yasin)” was awarded to Nan-ni by the Emperor. In 733 the king 
of (little) Bolor, Mo-kin-mang, sent a noble named Cha-cho-na-se- 
mo-mo-sheng to thank the Emperor for the award. In 741 the title 
of “the king of little Bolor” was awarded to Ma-hao-lai. In 745 the 
king of little Bolor sent a Buddhist teacher named Kia-lo-mi-to 
(Kalamitra) to pay respects to the Emperor. 

The political condition of Kapisa, Gandhara and Uddiyana was 
uncertain in this period. The two latter kingdoms were certainly 
dependent on Kashmir. We know from the Chinese official history 
that in 720 the title of the “king of Wu-ch’ang (Uddiyana)” was 
given to the local chief by the Emperor. The king of Gandhara 
sent an ambassador to China in 758 with presents to the Emperor. 
The title of “ tegin ” was awarded to the chief of Kapisa in 720. 

The king of Kapisa sent an embassy to China in 710 and again 
about A.D. 750. In A.D. 751 the Chinese Emperor sent a mission 
under Wu-K’ong to escort back the Indian ambassador from Kapisa. 

1. According to Bagchi, the Brahmana thaumaturge accompanied Wang-hiuen-tse 
to China in A.D. 648. He “failed to give long life to the Emperor who died in 
A.D. 649.” Hence the new Emperor sent him back to India ( Sino-Indian 
Studies, I. 69). 

2. See pp. 130, 132ff. 

3. This summary is based upon Chavannes, Documents Sur les Tou-kiue ( Turcs ) 
Occidentaux (Notes Additionelles). Cf. also Dr. P. C. Bagchi’s account ( Sino- 
Indian Studies, I. 70). 


622 



INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


On his arrival in India, Wu-K’ong was converted to Buddhism. He 
spent several years in Kashmir, visited the holy places and re¬ 
turned to China in A.D. 790. No less than six embassies were sent 
from Ki-pin to China between A.D. 619 and 750. Ki-pin has been 
identified with both Kapisa and Kashmir, 1 but as already noted 
above, 2 it referred to Kapisa from the seventh century A.D. 

As early as 692 a representative of king Ti-po-si-na (Devasena) 
of Central India came to pay respects to the Emperor. The envoy 
must have been the same as Brahma (Fan-mo) who assisted Bodhi- 
ruchi in 693 in the work of translation. In 741 the son of the king of 
Central India came to pay respects and he was given a Chinese 
name Li Ch’eng-ngan. 

In 692 representatives of the king of Eastern India, Mo-lo-pa-mo 
(Malavarman ?), and the king of Western India, Sha-lo-yi-to (Sila- 
ditya), came to China to pay honiage. We do not know who Mala¬ 
varman was but the other king was certainly Slladitya III of 
Valabhi who reigned at the end of the seventh century. In 692 the 
king of Northern India, Na-na, the king of Central India, Ti-mo-si-na, 
and the king of Southern India, Che-lu-ki-pa-lo (Chalukya Vallabha), 
sent ambassadors to the Emperor. 3 The Chalukya king, reigning 
in 692, was Vinayaditya. The king Sha-li Na-lo-seng-kia-pa-to-pa-mo 
(&rl Narasirhha Potavarman) proposed to the emperor in A.D. 720 
to send elephants and cavalry to fight with the Arabs and the Tibe¬ 
tans. Narasirhha Potavarman was the Pailava ruler of Kahchl. He 
sent two embassies to China, in A.D. 710 and 720, and the Chinese 
Emperor sent him an embassy in the latter year. The details of these 
embassies 4 show an intimate and cordial relation between the two. 

It appears from the Chinese chronicles that China maintained 
diplomatic relations with Kapisa, Uddiyana, Gandhara, Magadha and 
Kashmir for more than a century since the first political mission 
was sent by Harsha-vardhana in A.D. 641. Many envoys were 
sent by China as well as by these kingdoms, but the details have 
not been preserved in all cases. Even so late as A.D. 787 we hear 
of the Chinese Emperor forming alliance with Indian princes against 
the Tibetans. 

The increased intercourse with India naturally led to a further 
advancement of Buddhism in China, and ushered in what may be 
called its most glorious period in that country. The rapid growth 

1. JA, 1895, p. 376. 2. See p. 617. 

3. According to Ma-twan-lin, “the Five Indians (or five kingdoms of India) sent 
ambassadors to the court of the Emperor” in A.D. 667. (Sastri, op. cit., p. 117). 
Probably Ma-twan-lin refers to the same embassies as are mentioned in 

the text above, and confused the date. Otherwise, we have to presume that 
the five Indian kings also sent embassies earlier, in A.D. 667. 

4. Sastri, op. cit., 116-7. 


623 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


of tills new foreign religion alarmed the orthodox section who cai- 
ried on an active and vigorous campaign against it almost through¬ 
out the Tang period. In a memorial submitted to the Emperor 
in A.D. 624, the leader of the campaign attributed to Buddhism 
almost all the ills the country was suffering from—even the foreign 
invasions, the tyranny of the government, and the treacnerv of the 
ministers. But there were more legitimate grievances too. Apart 
from the neglect of religious sacrifices, the memorialist drew point¬ 
ed attention to the deterioration in civic life caused by Buddhism, 
as the following passage shows: ik The result is that tne monks and 
the nuns now count by tens of thousands. I request you to get 
them married so that the country may have a hundred thousand 
families. They will then bring up children to fill the ranks of 
your army.” 

The campaign had some success at first, and for a time the 
Tang Emperor withdrew his patronage of Buddhism. But what¬ 
ever might have been his personal feelings, the issue was really 
decided by political considerations. All the important political 
powers and the petty states surrounding China—-the Turks, the 
Tibetans and the various peoples of Central Asia—had adopted 
Buddhism, and the newly founded Tang empire could hardly dare 
to oppose what was now a great international power in Asia. Ac¬ 
cordingly the Tang emperors, after a brief interval, again adopted 
a pro-Buddhist policy, and the triumph of the new religion was 
assured. 

The close contact with India established by Hiuen Tsang must 
be regarded as another important factor in this change of policy, 
and the success of Buddhism in China was phenomenal. New monas¬ 
teries were built in all the important cities, and increasingly larger 
numbers were attracted to Buddhism. Hiuen Tsang introduced a 
new 7 era in the translation of Buddhist works. Numerous Buddhist 
texts were translated and, as we have seen above, regular boards 
were set up to organise and expedite the work of translation. 1 Owing 
to this work of translation, undertaken on a colossal scale, the volu¬ 
minous body of Sanskrit Buddhist literature, now almost entirely 
lost in India has been preserved in Chinese translation. An idea of 
the bulk of this literature may be had from the various catalogues 
compiled in China from time to time. The oldest catalogue, compil¬ 
ed by a Chinese scholar in the sixth century A.D., mentions 2,213 
works and the official catalogue, prepared about the same time at the 
orders of the Emperor, gives a list of Buddhist texts numbering 
about 5,400 volumes. An authoritative catalogue of the Buddhist 

1. For a detailed account, cf. B. C. Law Volume, I. 66fL 


624 






INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


canon prepared in the Tang period mentions in the first section 
2,487 works in 8,476 fasciculi , and in the second, 799 works in 3,364 
fasciculi. There were many other catalogues to which it is not 
necessary to refer in detail. The printing of these texts by wooden 
blocks began as early as A.D. 972. 

Hiuen Tsang, to whom the Buddhist literature in China owes so 
much, was also instrumental in establishing two new schools of Bud¬ 
dhism, viz. Yogachara or the Vijnanavada and the Sarvastivada school. 
The former belonged to the Mahayana and the latter to the Hinayana 
sect, and this shows the syncretising spirit in China, referred to 
above. A disciple of Hiuen Tsang founded the Vinaya school. The 
mystic or Tantric school, introduced by Vajrabodhi in the eighth 
century, 1 paved the way for the decline of Buddhism as in India. 

We need not pursue further the history of Buddhism in China, 
but may conclude this review by a* brief reference to the other aspects 
of Indain culture which Buddhism brought along with it. The most 
important of these was art, which exerted a great influence on the 
native traditions and produced a new school of art that may be called 
Sino-Indian. The Wei period saw a great development of this art. 
A number of rock-cut caves at Tunhwang, Yun-kang and Long-men, 
colossal images of Buddha, 66 to 70 ft. high, and fresco paintings on 
the walls of the caves illustrate this art. It was inspired not only 
by the images and pictures and the reports and models of sanctua¬ 
ries carried from India by Buddhist monks (both Indian and Chinese), 
but also by the Indian artists who visited China. We know the 
names of at least three Indian painters—&akyabuddha, Buddhaklrti 
and Kumarabodhi—who worked in China in the Wei period. The 
different early schools of sculpture in India, such as the Gandhara, 
Mathura, and the Gupta, are all represented in the Chinese art. The 
best statues of the Wei period, which have justly received very high 
praise from modern European scholars, recall, and seem to have been 
inspired by, the elegant Buddha images of Ajanta and Sarnath. 

A further development of this art is noticed in the T’ang period. 
The construction of cave-temples was continued at Tunhwang, and 
these are known collectively as “Grottos of the thousand Buddhas,” 
as there were one thousand images of Buddha in them. The later 
caves here show the art of the T’ang period at its best and “a pro¬ 
gressive Chinese adaptation of the Gandhara, Gupta, and Iranian 
models.” Gradually the Chinese artists absorbed the Indian art 
tradition and gave it an increasingly Chinese character. Apart from 
sculptures, paintings, and rock-cut caves, the Indian influence is 
manifest in the peculiar type of temples with superimposed storeys 

1. See p. 621. 


C.A.—iO, 


625 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


whose origin may be traced to India. In fact the name ‘Indian 
style’ was given to a class of temples in China in the Song period. 
This style was very much in use in the province of Shan-si and found 
its way to Japan. 

Among the fine arts, Indian music also seems to have exerted 
a great influence upon China. It was introduced by Indian musi¬ 
cians settled in Kuchi, and soon became very popular. A musical 
party went direct from India to China in A.D. 581. While the Em¬ 
peror Kaotsu (581-595) vainly tried to proscribe it by an imperial 
decree, his successor encouraged it and got a number of new tunes 
composed. According to the traditions current in Japan in ancient 
times, two principal types of music called Bodhisatva and Bhairo 
were taken from China to Japan by an Indian Brahmana named 
Bodhi in the T’ang period, 

Indian astronomy, mathematics, and medicine were also popu¬ 
lar in China. Indian astronomers were appointed on the official 
boards set up to prepare the calendars. There were three Indian 
astronomical schools, known as Gautama, Kasyapa and Kumara, in 
the capital city in the seventh century. The Indian system of nine 
planets was adopted in China, and the translation of a Sanskrit astro¬ 
nomical work, Navagraha-siddhdnta , is still to be found in the collec¬ 
tion of the T’ang period. A number of Indian mathematical and 
astronomical works were translated at an earlier date, but they have 
been lost. 

Indian medical treatises were also in great favour in China. A 
Chinese work, composed in A.D. 455, is either a translation of a 
Sanskrit text or a compilation from several Sanskrit texts. A number 
of medical texts are found in the Chinese Buddhist collection, and 
Rdvana-Kumdra-charita, a Sanskrit treatise on the method of treat¬ 
ment of children’s diseases, was translated in the eleventh century. 

The Chinese emperors and nobles were fond of Indian thau¬ 
maturges who professed to possess the secrets of longevity. On more 
than one occasion the emperors had them fetched from India in 
order to prolong their lives. Sometimes they sent an official to India 
in order to collect rare medicines. 

The T’ang period also witnessed a great development of the sea¬ 
borne trade between India and China. An account written about 
A.D. 749 refers to the numerous merchantmen belonging to the Polo- 
men, i.e. Brahmanas of India, and other countries, on the river of 
Canton. The same account refers to three Brahmana monasteries 
at Canton where Brahmanas were residing. It is evident that Hindu 
merchants sailed in large number to this Chinese port, and had built v 
temples there for worship during their stay. According to Harsha* 


626 


INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


chdrita, Chinese cuirasses were used by the chiefs of Harsha’s army. 1 
The discovery of coins of the T’ang Dynasty in South India may 
also be regarded as an interesting relic of the commercial relations 
between India and China during this period. 2 

The foreign ships in Canton are said to be 60 to 70 ft. deep. 
Another Chinese work says that the foreign ships visiting Canton 
“were very large, and so high out of the water that ladders, several 
tens of feet in length, had to be used to get aboard.” 

3. Central Asia 

It will appear from what has been said above in regard to China 
that Central Asia continued to be a strong centre of Indian culture 
and influence, and could justly be regarded as Ser-India. As in the 
earlier period, we have remains of ancient stupas, temples, monas¬ 
teries, images, and paintings, and also a large number of Sanskrit 
Buddhist texts and translations in different languages. Fortunate¬ 
ly, we have no longer to depend upon mere archaeological finds in 
reconstructing the history and culture of this region, as the detailed 
accounts of the Chinese travellers to Indi$, notably those of Fa-hien 
and Hiuen Tsang, have thrown a flood of light on this subject. 

Shen-shen, the first kingdom visited by Fa-hien on leaving 
China, was situated near Lop Nor at the eastern extremity of Can- 
tral Asia. The king was Buddhist and there were more than four 
thousand monks in the country. Nothing illustrates more forcibly 
the vitality of Indian culture at this period all over Central Asia 
than the following observations made by Fa-hien in reference to 
Shen-shen:— 

“The common people of this and other kingdoms, as well as the 
sramans (monks), all practise the rules of India, only that the latter 
do so more exactly, and the former more loosely. So (the travellers) 
found it in all the kingdoms through which they went on their way 
from this to the west, only that each had its own peculiar barbarous 
speech. The monks, however, were all students of Indian books 
and the Indian language.” 

This general picture is fully borne out by the details given by 
Fa-hien of the two kingdoms through which he passed before reach¬ 
ing India. Hiuen Tsang supplies further particulars of Agni (Qara 
Shahr), Kuchi, Bharuka (Aqsu), Kashgar, Khotan, and one or two 
other localities which cannot be exactly identified. In all these 
places, Buddhism was in a flourishing condition, and Indian scripts 
and books were used. Buddhism was also flourishing in Turfan in 
the extreme eastern part of this region. There were several htrnd- 

2. Sino-lndian Studies, I. 60. 

627 


1. HC., p. 202. 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


reds of monasteries in Kashgar. As in the earlier period, Khotan 
in the south and Kuchi in the north were two powerful centres of 
Indian culture in the Tarim basin. 

Both Fa-hien and Hiuen Tsang refer in glowing terms to the 
flourishing condition of Buddhism in Khotan. In Fa-hien ? s time 
the monks amounted to tens of thousands, who strictly followed the 
rules of discipline and possessed a high sense of decorum. The royal 
family and people were all Buddhists, and each family had a small 
stupa in front of its door, the smallest of which was twenty cubits 
high. There were four great monasteries of which the most distin¬ 
guished was the Goraati Vihara, containing three thousand monks. 
These took precedence in the big annual religious processions of 
images carried in lofty chariots (like Rathayatra processions of 
modern India) of which a detailed account is given. 1 These proces¬ 
sions, attended by the king and queen, were continued for fourteen 
days, each monastery being allotted a separate day for the proces¬ 
sion of its own chariots. Fa-hien gives the following description of 
another big monastery:— 

“The king’s New Monastery, the construction of which took 
eighty years and extended over three reigns, is about 250 cubits in 
height; it is rich in elegant carving and inlaid work, and covered 
above with gold and silver. The Hall of Buddha is of the utmost 
magnificence and beauty, the beams, pillars, venetianed doors and 
windows being all overlaid with gold-leaf. The apartments for the 
monks are imposingly and elegantly decorated beyond the power of 
words to express.” Fa-hien states that six kings of Eastern 'Turkes¬ 
tan gave all their valuables as offerings to this monastery keeping 
only a few things for their own use. 

Hiuen Tsang also refers to the various sanctuaries and sacred 
sites in Khotan, and narrates the traditions connected with them. 

Reference has been made above 2 to the Tibetan account of 
the royal family of Khotan up to the reign of Vijita-kirti. No infor¬ 
mation is available about the next ten or eleven generations during 
which Khotan was oppressed by foreigners. These probably refer 
to T‘u-yii-hun (A.D. 445), the Juan-Juan (c. A.D. 470), the Hephtha- 
lites (A.D. 500-556), and the Western Turks (A.D. 565-631), who 
conquered Khotan. 

We are next introduced to king Viiita-samgrama who evidently 
freed the country from the Turks. In A.D. 632 he sent an envoy, 
and three years later his son, to the Chinese court. The next king 
Vijita-simha sent his son to China in A.D. 648 and later went there 
hinxself. He was probably ruling when Hiuen Tsang stayed at Kho- 

1. See p. 376, 2. Vol. II, p. 640. 


628 






INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 

tan during his return journey. The dynasty continued to rule for 
at least another century, and the Tibetan annals mention Vijita-klrti, 
Vijita-samgrama, Vijita-vikrama, Vijita-dharma, Vij ita-sambhava and 
Vijita-bohan. The last of them ruled in the second half of the 
eighth century A.D., and is probably to be identified with Visavaham, 
whose name occurs in two documents, found somewhere in Central 
Asia, which are written in Indian alphabet and an Iranian language. 

Like Khotan, Kuchi was also an important centre of Buddhism, 
as noted above. 1 The people of Kuchi spoke a language belong¬ 
ing to the Indo-European family (called by various names such as 
Kuchean, Tokharian, Arsi, etc,). The intimate intercourse between 
India-and Kuchi as early as the fourth century A.D. will be evident 
from the story of Kumarajiva. 2 According to Chinese records, 
there were nearly 10,000 stupas and temples in this kingdom at the 
beginning of the fourth century A.D. The History of the First Tsin 
Dynasty gives a detailed account of Buddhism in Kuchi in the fourth 
and fifth centuries A.D. There were numerous monasteries and also 
several convents for nuns. Four of these monasteries and three 
convents were in charge of Buddhasvamin, the teacher of Kumara¬ 
jiva. The nuns in these convents were mostly the daughters and 
wives of kings and princes. They received regular training and 
obeyed strict rules of discipline and decorum. 

Kuchi was a flourishing seat of Buddhism in the days of Hiuen 
Tsang. It had one hundred monasteries housing more than five 
thousand monks. They followed Indian doctrines and rules of dis¬ 
cipline, and studied the original Indian texts. Outside the capital 
city were two standing figures of Buddha, 90 ft. high, in front of 
which a religious assembly was held every five years for a period 
of ten days. These were observed as public holidays, and the king 
and all classes of people attended the assembly. There were also 
religious processions as in Khotan. 

According to Hiuen Tsang the people of Kuchi excelled in their 
skill in playing on the lute and the pipe. We get more interesting 
information about it from other Chinese sources. There is no doubt 
that Kuchean skill in music was due to Indian influence. Not only 
did the Indian musical system spread to Kuchi, but Indian musicians 
actually went there and some even settled down in the country 
The Chinese annals refer to a Brahmanical family called Ts’ao (Jha 
or Upadhyaya?) in Kuchi who were hereditary musicians. A mem¬ 
ber of that family visited China between A.D. 550 and 577. Another 
musician named Sujlva went from Kuchi to China about the same 

1. Vol. n, p. 643. 2. See pp. 608f. 


629 





INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 

time. These Indo-Kuch'ean musicians were so skilled that they 
could reproduce a tune after hearing it only once. The Chinese 
accounts leave no doubt that the musical system followed in Kuchi 
was essentially Indian, and that it was long in favour in the Chinese 
court Besides music, other arts and sciences of India flourished 
in this region. The famous Bower Manuscript, found near Kuchi, 
Contains seven texts of which three are medical treatises. This 
manuscript is written in Gupta characters, and the language is 
Sanskrit mixed with many Prakritisms. These texts prove the 
study of Indian medical science in Kuchi. Reference may also be 
made to the caves of thousand Buddhas excavated on the southern 
slopes of the Tien Shan mountains. They were decorated with 
mural paintings belonging to the period from seventh to tenth cen¬ 
tury A.D., and some Sanskrit manuscripts were also found in them. 

Regarding the influence of Indian culture in the region to the 
west of the Tarim basin, our knowledge is more limited. There is 
no doubt, however, that Buddhism was widely prevalent all over the 
hilly region between the Tarim basin and the valley of the Upper 
Sindhu. Fa-hien, who followed the short and direct route between 
KhotSn and N. W. India, has given a graphic description of the do¬ 
minance of Buddhism all over the region through which he passed. 
The condition was more or less the same even in Hiuen Tsang’s time. 
From the valley of the Upper Oxus, almost all along the route to 
Hindu Kush and back, Hiuen Tsang found abundant traces of Bud¬ 
dhism. Balkh (old Bactriana), to the south of the Oxus, was a great 
centre of Buddhism. Its capital was called little Raj agriha, evi¬ 
dently after the famous city in ancient India. It had one hundred 
monasteries containing three thousand monks. Hiuen Tsang found 
here many relics of Buddha and old sanctuaries. The convent call¬ 
ed Navasangharama was a renowned Buddhist institution. 

We learn from Arab chronicles that Khalid, the Vizier of Caliph 
al-Mansur, was the son of a Barmak , i.e. chief priest in a Buddhist 
monastery in Balkh called Nawbahar. This is evidently the Arabic 
form of Navavihara, i.e. Navasangharama. The Arab conqueror of 
Balkh captured Khalid’s mother in A.D. 705. The son was converted 
to Islam and founded the famous Barmaki family. Khalid ibn- 
Barmak came to occupy the highest office under the Caliph, and his 
son and two grandsons practically ruled the Abbassid Empire from 
A.D. 786 to 803. They were instrumental in introducing Indian 
astronomy, mathematics, medicine, and other sciences into Arabia. 

Among other localities where Buddhism flourished in the time 
of Hiuen Tsang may be named Tsau Kuta (Ghazni), Hwoh (Kunduz), 
and various places between Badakshan and Kashgar. Rulers of two 


630 



INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


of these localities are said to have been descended from the Sakyas 
of Kapilavastu. Brahmanical religion also flourished in some of 
these places and specially at An-ta-lo-po (Andarab). 

There was, however, a considerable decline in the influence of 
Buddhism in the land between the Oxus and the Jaxartes. On his 
way to India, Hiuen Tsang passed through various localities in this 
region. He does not mention any trace of Buddhism in the large 
stretch of territory between Lake Issiq Kol (immediately beyond 
Tarim basin on the other side of the mountain passes) and the valley 
of the Oxus. The people were fire-worshippers and Buddhism had 
no hold on them. But the influence of Buddhism was not altogether 
absent. The Great Khan of the Western Turks, who lived west of 
Issiq Kol, had a high reverence for Buddhism. He received Hiuen 
Tsang hospitably and asked him to expound the religious teachings. 
At the conclusion of it, “the Khan raising his hands bowed and gladly 
believed and accepted the teaching.” The Khan detained Hiuen 
Tsang and wanted to keep him permanently. But when he could 
not dissuade Hiuen Tsang from continuing his journey, he sent a 
reliable guide with the pilgrim to conduct him up to Afghanistan. 
As stated already, the Indian monk Prabhakaramitra of Nalanda 
stayed with the Turkish chief and taught him Buddhism. This must 
have deeply impressed the latter and paved the way for the great 
welcome that Hiuen Tsang received at his hands. Thus Buddhism 
had begun to exercise its influence over the Western Turks who 
were the dominant power in this region. Some time before the 
middle of the eighth century A.D., a Turkish king visited India with 
his queen and son, and built two temples in Kashmir and two in 
Gandhara. Sanghavarman, an inhabitant of Samarkand, became an 
eminent Buddhist monk and visited the Mahabodhi temple at Gaya. 
I-tsing makes some incidental references to the influence of Buddhism 
in Turkestan and its contact with India. He refers to the temple 
which the people of Tukhara (i.e. Turks) formerly built in India 
for the monks of their own country.’ “The temple is rich and 
opulent and surpasses others in respect of endowments and good 
management.” We are further told that “when the monks of nor¬ 
thern countries come to India they live in the temple of which they 
are considered Viharasvamin.” I-tsing elsewhere informs us that 
the Viharasvamins formed the community proper in a monastery to 
whom belonged in common all its property. 1 

4. Afghanistan 

The testimony of Fa-hien and Hiuen Tsang leaves no doubt that 
a considerable portion of Afghanistan was still regarded as a part of 


1. JBRS, XXXVIII, p. 411. 


631 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


India. Referring to Udyana or the Valley of the Swat river, Fa-hien 
remarks: ‘It is indeed (a part) of North India. The people all use 
the language of Central India. The food and clothes of the common 
people are the same as in that Central kingdom. The Law of Buddha 
is very flourishing.’ Hiuen Tsang also includes Lamghan, Jelalabad, 
and the regions further east including the Swat valley within India 
proper. 

Hiuen Tsang, however, notices that the people of Bamiyan and 
Kapisa were considerably influenced by the rude civilisation of the 
Turks. As regards the former we are told that ‘their written lan¬ 
guage, their popular institutions, and their currency were like those 
of Tokhara, and they resembled the people of that country in appear¬ 
ance but differed from them in their spoken language.’ They had 
harsh rude ways, though they w r ere honest. The written language 
of Kapisa was also very like that of Tokhara, but it differed in other 
respects. The people were rude and coarse. The change was un¬ 
doubtedly due to the large influx of Huns and other Turkish hordes 
in this region in the fifth and sixth centuries A.D. Nevertheless, 
Buddhism was in a very flourishing condition in both these places. 

The Bamiyan valley lay at the foot of the Hindu Kush moun¬ 
tains. It was surrounded by hills, and commanded one of the most 
important passes which connect the Kabul valley with Balkli (Bac- 
tria). It was an important halting place on the overland route from 
India to the West. According to local traditions the royal family 
had migrated from Kapilavastu. Whether this is true or not, Bami¬ 
yan was an important centre of Buddhism from very early times. 
Caves were hewn out of the surrounding hills for the residence of 
monks, and Buddhist texts, written in Kushana and Gupta alphabets, 
have been found in these caves. 

In Hiuen Tsang’s time, Buddhism was very powerful in Bamiyan, 
There were numerous monasteries with several thousands of monks, 
and many sacred relics. The king was a Buddhist and performed 
a quinquennial festival like Harsha-vardhana. Hiuen Tsang found 
here many caves and colossal figures of Buddha, carved on the hill¬ 
sides, many of which exist even today. 

Kapisa (Kafir is tan) was a large and powerful kingdom exercis¬ 
ing supremacy over ten neighbouring states extending as far as the 
Sindhu. The king was a Kshatriya by caste and was a devout Bud¬ 
dhist. There were 100 monasteries, with 6000 priests, and many 
sacred relics and sites associated with the early history of Buddhism. 
There were also some Brahmanical temples. I-tsing says that there 
was a ‘Kapisa Temple’ in Bodh-Gaya where priests from the north 
dwelt. 


632 


INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


Recent archaeological excavations have revealed the strong 
influence of Indian culture over the whole of Afghanistan, as far as 
and even beyond the Hindu Kush. The artistic remains unearthed 
by these expeditions show the existence of Indian art traditions, 
winch had their full development in Khotan, Kuchi, Turf an, Tunh- 
wang and the other Indian Colonies in Central Asia. The site of 
Hadda, visited both, by Fa~hien and Hiuen Tsang, has been explored. 
Ruins of 531 stupas have been excavated and about 500 sculptures, 
mostly stucco heads, have been found. These stucco figures display 
artistic skill of a very high order. The important site of Bamiyan 
has also been explored, and a number of valuable fresco paintings 
and Sanskrit manuscripts have been discovered. In addition to the 
colossal figures of Buddha and numerous caves, which were hitherto 
well known, some old caves, with decorative paintings, have come 
to light. These paintings show some Iranian influence, A Surya 
image and the remains of a temple of the Gupta style have been 
found at the hill of Khair Khaneh, north-west of Kabul. Begrum, the 
site of Kapiii, has yielded a large number of ivories with designs 
recalling the Mathura art of the Kushana period. At another site, 
a little to the east, have been found a number of clay modellings and 
mural paintings of Indian type resembling those of the Gupta and 
Pala periods. 

5. Tibet 

According to the Tibetan chronicles of mediaeval ages the 
founder of the Tibetan royal dynasty was the son of an Indian king. 
The kings of Ladakh or Western Tibet also traced their descent from 
the Sakya family of India, While these traditions prove the strong 
influence of India on the history and culture of Tibet, they cannot 
be regarded as historical facts. 

There is no definite information about any contacts between 
India and Tibet prior to the sixth century A.D. In the last two de¬ 
cades of that century one of the local chiefs, who were hitherto rul¬ 
ing in different parts of Tibet, subjugated the rest and set up a power¬ 
ful kingdom. This king, named Gnam-ri-sroh-btsan 1 , is said to have 
led a victorious campaign to Central India. 2 This statement is very 
doubtful, but there is no doubt that his kingdom touched the fron¬ 
tier of India and he might have had some relations with a few border- 
states. 

1. The Tibetan names are written in different ways by different authorities. The 
system of spelling, adopted by Francke (Antiquities of Indian Tibet), has been 
followed here. 

2. According to the Chinese sources relied on by Levi (Nepal II, 147). But the 
Chronicles of Ladakh says that ‘some kings who dwelt in the west of India > 
were subdued’ (Francke, op. cit., p. 82). Cf. also Petech, op. cit., pp. 35-6. 


G33 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The son and successor of this king was the famous Sroh-btsan- 
sgam-po who occupied the throne of Tibet during the first half of 
the seventh century A.D. He is said to have conquered Assam and 
Nepal and exercised suzerainty over half of Jambudvlpa (i.e. India). 
In spite of obvious exaggeration, there is no doubt that this Tibetan 
ruler exercised suzerainty over Nepal, and probably also over Assam 
and some other regions. 1 

With Sroii-btsan-sgam-po begins the influence of Buddhism 
which was soon to transform the whole culture of Tibet. He married 
a daughter of king Aiiisuvarman of Nepal and also a Chinese princess. 
Both the queens were devout Buddhists, and the king, under their 
influence, adopted the religion. He had temples and monasteries 
built, and a number of Buddhist texts translated. Images and sacred 
relics were also brought from India and China. 

But the most notable contribution of the king to the cultural 
development of Tibet was the introduction of Sanskrit language and 
the system of writing from India, The following account of it is 
culled from Tibetan sources 2 :— 

“The king clearly saw that a written language w T as most essen¬ 
tial to the establishment of religion, and more particularly to the 
institution of laws for the good of the people. He therefore sent 
Sambhota, with sixteen companions, to study carefully the Sanskrit 
language and thereby obtain access to the sacred literature of the 
Indian Buddhists. He also instructed them to devise means for the 
invention of a written language for Tibet by adapting the Sanskrit 
alphabet to the phonetic peculiarities of the Tibetan dialect. He 
furnished the members of the mission with a large quantity of gold 
to make presents to the Professors. 

“Sambhota and his companions reached India and acquired a 
thorough knowledge of Sanskrit language, Buddhist scriptures, and 
Indian scripts. After returning to Tibet they framed the system of 
Tibetan characters and composed a grammatical work. The king 
ordered the intelligent class of people to be taught the art of reading 
and writing and many Sanskrit Buddhist books to be translated into 
Tibetan. He then required all his subjects by royal edicts to observe 
the ten virtues besides a code of sixteen moral virtues specified by 
him” 

Whatever we might think of the details in the foregoing account, 
there is no doubt that the Tibetan alphabet is derived from the Indian 
Gupta script current from fifth to seventh century A.D. The gram- 

1. See above, pp. 86, 141. 2. JASB, 1881, pp. 218-19. 


634 







INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


mar composed by Sambhota is practically the same which is in use 
in Tibetan schools even today. 1 

Thus the foundation of Buddhism was laid and Tibet started 
on her way of cultural evolution under the guidance of India. Sroii- 
btsan-sgam-po. who initiated the new movement, naturally loomed 
large in the eyes of the people when, in a later age, Buddhism became 
the dominant force in Tibet. He was regarded as an incarnation of 
the Bodhisattva Avalokita; the Nepalese queen was considered the 
incarnation of Bhrikuti, and the Chinese queen, that of Tara. No 
less than 900 monasteries, including the famous Ra-mo-che, are said 
to have been built by this king. He also invited to his court the 
Indian teacher Kumara, the Nepalese teacher Slla-manju, the Kash¬ 
miri teachers Tabuta and Ganuta, the Brahmana Li-byin and the 
Chinese teacher, Ha-sah-Mahadheva. 2 

Sroh-btsan-sgam-po died about A.D. 650. For the next half a 
century we do not hear much of the new religion or of Tibetan con¬ 
tact with India. Some time about A.D. 702 Nepal and the border 
states of India threw off the yoke of Tibet and the Tibetan king died 
in the course of a campaign against them (A.D. 704). The next king 
was Khri-lde-btsug-brtan, more commonly known by his surname 
Mes-’ag-tshoms (A.D. 705-55). In order to avenge the defeat of 704 
he led frequent raids into India. The North Indian rulers Lalita- 
ditya and Yasovarman, harassed by these frequent aggressions, even 
applied to China for help. 3 

The renewed contact with India promoted the cause of Buddhism 
in Tibet. The new king erected temples and monasteries, and 
arranged for the translation of sacred texts. But soon there was a re¬ 
action. During a pestilence in A.D. 740-41 all the foreign monks 
were expelled from the country in order to appease the irritated 
gods. Thus when king Mes-’ag-tshoms died in A.D. 755 the pros¬ 
pects of Buddhism were not very bright in Tibet. 4 

6, Other Countries in the Far East 

Buddhism, and along with it Indian culture, spread from Central 
Asia, China, and Tibet to other parts of Northern and Eastern Asia 
Mongolia, Korea, and Japan were the most important countries to 
be affected in this way. Korea and Japan were, no doubt, greatly 
influenced by Chinese Buddhists, and in a later age, Tibet was an 
important centre for propagation of Buddhism, especially in Mon- 

1. Francke, op. cit, p. 84. 

2. Thomas, op. cit, pp. 62, 83, 84. 

3. Sastri, Foreign Notices, p. 117; also see above, pp. 130, 134. 

4. According to some version of the Chronicles of Ladakh the reaction against 
Buddhism commenced in the next region. (Francke, op. cit, p. 86). 


635 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


golia. But we have also evidence of direct intercourse between 
India and some of these countries. 

As regards Korea, we know from I-tsing that five Korean monks 
visited India in the seventh century A.D. Two of these set out in 
A.D 638, and lived and died at Nalanda. A third, Sarvajhadeva 
came through Tibet and Nepal in A.D. 650. The fourth monk 
Prajna-varman stayed for ten years in India. Another Korean monk 
died in India, and two more died on their way to India. 

There was also direct intercourse between India and Japan. 
The Indian monk who is best known in this connection is Bodhisena 
whose history has been preserved in Japanese chronicles. 1 Bodhi¬ 
sena was a Brahmana of South India and his family name was 
Barachi (Bharadvaja gotra?). He set out for China by sea, and met 
on the way a ship-wrecked priest of Champa named Buttetsu. They 
arrived together in China in A.D. 733. 

Bodhisena went to China to meet Mahjusn, who was generally 
believed in India to have lived there. Bodhisena could not find him 
there, but was told that he had left for Japan. An imperial Japanese 
envoy at the court of China, who was just leaving foi his country, 
invited Bodhisena to accompany him. Both Bodhisena and Buttetsu 
joined, him and reached Japan in A.D. 736. On their arrival at the 
port of Naniwa (Osaka) they were received with great honour by 
the imperial messenger, the chief priest accompanied by a hundred 
others, masters of ceremonies, musicians, and high dignitaries of the 
foreign office. 

It appears that boih Buddhism and Sanskrit were already well- 
known in Japan. For Bodhisena carried on conversation with the 
Japanese priest 'both in Sanskrit and Japanese' as if they were old 
friends. He was lodged in a Buddhist monastery, and the imperial 
court furnished him with clothes and other necessaries of life. 

When in A.D. 749 a colossal image of Buddha Vairochana was 
installed, Bodhisena was asked to perform the consecration ceremony, 
and Buttetsu took charge of the musical arrangements. 

In 750 Bodhisena was appointed the head of the Buddhist order 
in Japan and he came to be popularly known as the Bararnon Sojo 
(Brahmana Bishop). He taught Sanskrit and the Mahayana doctrine 
of Gandavyuha in three different monasteries and died in 760 at the 
age of 57. A stupa was erected over his remains, and one of his 
disciples composed an inscription for it in A.D. 770. 

The arrangement of Japanese syllabary in fifty phonetic sounds, 
closely following the Sanskrit alphabet and undoubtedly based upon 

1. BEFEO, XXVIII 24-26. 


636 





INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 

it, is attributed by some Japanese scholars to Bodhisena, though 
others relegate it to a later period. The use of the Indian alphabet 
in Japan, however, dates probably from even an earlier period. It 
is interesting to note that fragments of palm-leaf manuscripts written 
in Indian alphabets of the fourth century A.D. have been found in 
some monasteries of Japan. 1 There is also good evidence to show 
that the palm-leaf manuscript at the Horiuzi monastery, which can¬ 
not be later than the sixth century A.D., was brought to Japan in 
A.D, 609. 2 

Buttetsu was not only a scholar but was highly proficient in 
music and dance. He spent a number of years in the famous Nara 
University of Japan and gave lessons and demonstrations in Indian 
music and dance. Hie Indian system of seven musical notes (8ha» 
$ja, Rishabha, etc.) was highly admired and in great demand, both 
in religious assemblies and at the imperial court, Buttetsu taught 
Sanskrit and wrote a manual for teaching this language. 

7 . Western Countries 3 
(i) Trade and political intercourse 

Although Indian trade with the Roman empire declined to a 
considerable extent after the third century A.D. there is no doubt 
that it continued for at least two or three hundred years more. This 
is clearly demonstrated by the finds of Roman coins in Southern 
India. At Madura, for example, were found a large quantity of 
copper coins of Arcadius, Emperor of the East (A.D. 395-408), and 
Honorius, Emperor of the West (A.D. 395-423), one gold coin of 
Constantins II ( 337 - 361 ), one of Theodosius II (408-450), one of Zeno 
(474-491), and one of Anastatius (491-518). Coins of Theodosius II, 
Marcian ( 450 - 457 ), Leo (457-474), Zeno, Anastatius, and Justinus I 
(518-527) have been found in Travancore. Coins of Theodosius I 
(379-395), Valentinian (364-375) and Eudoxia (401-404) have been 
found in various places in South India. These coins as well as the 
Indian embassies to Roman Emperors mentioned above 4 * prove the 
continuity of trade between India and Rome down to the beginning 
of the sixth century A.D. Another evidence of the flourishing nature 
of this trade is furnished by the fact that when Alaric "spared Rome 
in A.D. 408, he demanded and obtained as part of the ransom three 
thousand pounds of pepper.’ 6 

1. JA., 1885, pp. 228-9. 

2. Anecdota Oxoniensia—Aryan Series Vol. I, Part III. p. 64. 

3. The following may be cited as general references for this section:— 

(a) Rawlinson: Intercourse between India and the Western World. 

(b) M. Hamidulla: Ancient India from Arabic Sources (PIHC, } V. 246-48). 

(c) P. K. Hitti: History of the Arabs . 

4, Yol. H, p. 625. 5. JRAS., 1964, pp. 307 ff. 


6 37 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Trade relations with Western Asia were also flourishing through¬ 
out the period treated in this volume. We learn from Amianus 
Marcellinus 1 that Indian wares were sent to the great annual fair 
at the mart of Batne, not far from the bank of the Euphrates, about 
the second half of the fourth century A.D. Chinese Annals refer to 
a brisk trade between China and western countries like Arabia and 
Persia. This trade must have passed through India, and kept up the 
old trade relations between India and the -western countries* The 
Arabs and Persians sent a large number of vessels to China and these 
passed through Indian ports. I-tsing left China for India in a 
Persian ship. 2 We learn from the account of Vajrabodhi’s journey 
to China in A.D. 720 3 that when he reached a port in Ceylon he 
saw thirty-five Persian vessels there. 

There was commercial intercourse between India and Arabia 
even in pre-Isiaraic days. The sword made of Indian steel is pro¬ 
verbial in Arabic literature. 4 5 Aden is mentioned as a centre of 
the perfumery industry which had markets in Sindh and Hind and 
all parts of the world. Indian spices were imported in large quan¬ 
tities into Arabia, and ilrabic words like quranful are derived from 
Indian names (Karan-phul ). 

We learn from Arab literature that Daba was one of the two 
major ports of Arabia in pre-Islamic days. It was situated in Oman, 
in the south-eastern corner of Arabia. There was an annual fair at 
Daba to which traders came from Sindh, Hind, China, and Greece,— 
in short from all the countries of the world. 

An interesting evidence of a close contact between India and 
Persia has been preserved by Tabari (A.D. 838-923), the Persian 
historian, on the authority of a Pehlevi work written shortly after 
the death of Khusru II. We learn from his account that in the 36th 
year of the reign of Khusru (A.D. 590-628) a king of India sent to 
the Persian king ambassadors carrying a letter and presents for him 
and his sons. The letter to one of the princes was marked ‘private* 
and contained the information—-a sort of prophecy—that he would 
be crowned king two years hence. It has been held that the Indian 
king was Pulakesin II, and that one of the paintings in the ceiling of 
cave 1 at Ajanta portrays not only the Persian king Khusru II and 
his famous queen Shirin, but also the scene of a Persian embassy at 
the court of king Pulakesin. This interpretation of the picture, as 
w r ell as the identification of the Indian king mentioned by Tabari 
with Pulakesin, has been questioned, 6 but there is no doubt that 

1. XIV. 3. 33. 2. IRT., p. XXVIII. 3. See above, p. 610. 

4. Schoff, Perivlus, 70-71. 

5. The question has been fully discussed with references to different views by 

Sastri (Foreinn Notices, p. 9) and B. Ghose (JBRS.. XXX, 1 ff.) Cf. also the 
author’s article “Pulakesi and Khusru II” in JIH., Vol. IV. Part II. 


638 



INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


both the story and the painting prove an intimate connection between 
India and Persia. It may be also noted that according to Rana- 
bhatta’s Harsha-charita, the stable of the emperor Harsha-vardhana 
was filled with horses from Persia. It appears from the same au¬ 
thority that Harsha’s court was familiar with Persia and other king¬ 
doms in the west. For among the boastful expressions, uttered by 
Harsha’s military chiefs, occurs the following: “The land of the 
Turushkas is to the brave but a cubit; Persia is only a span; Sakas- 
tbana, but a rabbit’s track.” 1 

We learn from a Pehlevi work that half a century before Harsha 
and Pulakesin another Indian king, named Devsaram (Devasarman ?), 
sent an embassy to the Persian king Khusru I with rich presents and 
a set of chessmen with board. 2 

The historian Tabari, mentioned above, has preserved a number 
of anecdotes wdiich, whatever may be their historical value, indicate 
an intimate intercourse between Indian and western Asiatic countries. 
According to him Anushirvan despatched an expedition to India and 
conquered some provinces, but the truth of this story may be 
doubted. 3 

There is a long story describing in detail how an Indian king, 
with a huge army, including contingents from his vassal states in 
Turkey and Persia, attacked Palestine. Being defeated by divine 
intervention on behalf of the king of Palestine, the Indian king fled 
to the coast with a lakh of soldiers and tried to escape with the help 
of their boats. But the whole army perished in ship-wreck by a 
typhoon in the Mediterranean. 

The Indian navy is referred to even in historical times. Ubulla, 
near Basra, was known in those days as the ‘gateway of India,’ and 
its governor is said to have “always had to fight against either the 
Arab Beduins on land or Indian navy on sea.” 

Many kings of the west are said to have visited India, and some 
of them conquered, or received tributes from, different kingdoms in 
this country. 

1. HC., 2i0. 

2. The Persian poet Firdausi says in the Shahnama that ambassadors from the 
sovereign of Hind came to Khusru I (Anushirvan) with a chess-board and 
men asking him to solve the secrets of the game. Other Persian and Arabian 
writers state that Shatranj (i.e., chess, from Sanskrit Chaturanaa ) came into 
Persia from India and there appears to be a consensus of opinion that may 
be considered to settle the question. Thus we have the game passing from 
the Hindus to the Persian and thence to the Arabians (the seventh century) 
and from them, directly or indirectly to various parts of Europe, at a time 
which cannot be definitely fixed, but either in or before the tenth century 
fcf. Encycl. Britannica —under chess; also H. J. R. Murray: A History oj Chess 
(1913)]. 

3. Sir Percy Sykes: History of Persia, p. 456. 


639 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(ii) Influence of India on the West 

We have positive evidence that Indian literature and sciences 
exerted great influence upon Western countries during the period 
under review. 

That Indian literature was highly valued in these countries and 
made a deep impression upon their people is proved by the history 
of a single book Pahchat antra 1 which is a collection of fables con¬ 
taining wise maxims. It was translated in the sixth century A.D. 
from Sanskrit into Pehlevi, and then from Pehlevi into Arabic and 
Syrian. 2 The Arabic translation made the book well known all 
over the Western world, and it was rendered into Persian, Hebrew, 
Latin, Spanish, Italian and various other languages of Europe and 
Asia, As Max Muller has remarked, the triumphant progress of 
this work from India to the west is more wonderful and instructive 
than the stories contained in it. Other Indian folk-tales also found 
their way to Europe and can be traced in Mediaeval collections such 
as the Gesta Romanorum, and in the stories of Boccacio, Straparola, 
Chaucer, and La Fontaine. Jataka stories and the traditional account 
of Buddha were also current in Western countries. St. John of 
Damascus (eighth century A.D.) wrote Barlaam and Josaphat which 
contained numerous Buddhist legends and portrayed the life of 
Buddha as a pious Christian saint. As a result of this Gautama, 
the Bodhisattva, under the guise of Saint Josaphat, was included in 
the Martyrology of Gregory XIII (1582). 3 

Like Hindu literature, the Hindu sciences, notably Medical 
Science and Arithmetic, were highly prized in the West. Many 
scholars hold that the later Greek physicians were acquainted with 
the medical works of the Hindus. Nearer home Iran also was largely 
indebted to India for her knowledge of medicine and other sciences. 
It is on record that Barzouhyeh. a subject of the Sassanid king 
Armshirvan (Khusru I, A.D. 531-579), visited India to acquire pro¬ 
ficiency in Indian medicine and other sciences. 

It is thus evident that Indian literature and sciences made their 
influence felt and that the cultural relation with the west was con¬ 
tinued throughout the period. The religious influence was also not 
altogether absent, Hiuen Tsang notes that Lang-kie-Io, a country 
to the west of India and subject to Persia, had more than 100 mon¬ 
asteries and 6,000 monks, and several hundred Deva (i.e. Brahmani- 

1. See above, p. 314. 

2. Wintemito: GIL,, III. 294 if. According to Hitti (op. cit. 404), the basis of the 
famous Thousand and one nights was a Persian work containing several 
stories of Indian origin. 

3. Rawlinson: op. cit., 142, 180. 


040 




INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


cal) temples, mostly of the Pasupata Sect. Even in Persia itself, 
according to the same Chinese authority, there were two or three 
Buddhist monasteries and numerous Deva temples. 

Reference may be made in this connection to a picture found at 
Dandanuliq in the Chinese Turkestan. It presents a four-armed 
Buddhist saint or Bodhisattva in the guise of a Persian, with black 
beard and whiskers, holding a thunderbolt in his left hand. The 
picture shows distinct Indian features, but it is the product of a type 
of Buddhist art which developed in Iran and thence travelled towards 
the east. It may be referred to the eighth century A.D., and proves 
that even up to the sixth or seventh century Buddhism was a living 
force in Iran and had cultural contact with India and other centres 
of Buddhism in Asia. The introduction of Persian figures in Ajanta, 
mentioned above, considered along wifh this picture, establishes, 
in the opinion of some scholars, a close relationship between the arts 
of India, Persia and Central Asia in the seventh century A.D. 1 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

1. S. C. Das, Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow. 

Do. Contributions on the Religion, History, etc. of Tibet ( JASB 1881, 
pp. 187 ff; 1882, pp. 1 ff). 

2. A. H. Francke, Antiquities of Indian Tibet, Part II. 

3. L. Petech, A. Study of the Chronicles of Ladakh. 

4. S. Levi, Le Nepal, Vol. II. pp. 147, 153-4. 

5. F. W. Tomas, Tibetan Literary Texts and Documents concerning Chinese 
Turkestan. 


1. FAS. 310. 


641 


C.A.—41 





CHAPTER XXIV 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION IN 

SOUTH-EAST ASIA 

I. SEA-VOYAGE TO THE SOUTH-EAST 

An eye-witness has left us a thrilling account of the perilous 
sea-voyage to South-east Asia which he made in A.D. 414. This 
is the Chinese pilgrim Fa-hien to whom frequent references have 
been made before. He embarked in a large merchant-vessel at 
Tamralipti (Tamiuk in Bengal), and sailing day and night, reached 
the island of Ceylon after fourteen days. After staying there for 
two years he sailed for China. The details of this journey may be 
told in his own words: 

“Fa-hien took passage in a large merchantman, on board of which 
there were more than 200 men and to which was attached 
by a rope a smaller vessel, as a provision against damage or injury 
to the large one from the perils of navigation. With a favourable 
wind, they proceeded eastward for three days, and then they encoun¬ 
tered a great wind. The vessel sprang a leak and water came in. 
The merchants wished to go into the smaller vessel; but the men 
on board it, fearing that too many would come, cut the connecting 
rope. The merchants were greatly alarmed, feeling their risk of 
instant death. Afraid that the vessel would fill, they took their 
bulky goods and threw them into the water. 

“In this way the tempest continued day and night, till on the 
thirteenth day the ship was carried to the side of an island, where 
on the ebbing of the tide, the place of the leak was discovered, and 
it was stopped, on which the voyage was resumed. On the sea 
(hereabouts) there are many pirates, to meet with whom is speedy 
death. The great ocean spreads out, a boundless expanse. There 
is no knowing east or west; only by observing the sun, moon, and 
stars was it possible to go forward. If the weather were dark and 
rainy, (the ship) went as she was carried by the wind, without any 
definite course. In the darkness of the night, only the great waves 
were to be seen breaking on one another, and emitting a brightness 
like that of fire, with huge turtles and other monsters of the deep 
(all about). The merchants were full of terror, not knowing where 
they were going. The sea was deep and bottomless, and there was 
no place where they could drop anchor and stop. But when the 


642 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

sky became clear, they could tell east and west and (the ship) again 
went forward in the right direction. If she had come on any hidden 
rock, there would have been no way of escape. After proceeding 
in this way for rather more than ninety days they arrived at a 
country called Java-dvlpa (Java).” 1 

The above account vividly describes the risks and dangers of 
the sea-voyage that confronted Indian colonists. Nevertheless the 
Hindu colonisation continued to make rapid progress during the 
period treated in this volume. The Hindu kingdoms in Annam and 
Cambodia, founded as early as the first century A.D., 2 continued 
to prosper; other new colonial kingdoms sprang into existence; ana 
we have more striking evidence of the triumph of Hindu culture 
all over the vast region and in almost £very phase of life. 

II. INDO-CHINA 
1. Cambodia 

The kingdom of Fu-nan passed through great political troubles 
in the first half of the fourth century A.D. There were several 
claimants for the throne, one of whom, referred to by the Chinese 
as Hindu Chan-tan, took the title of the king of Fu-nan and sent an 
embassy to China in A.D. 357. The name of this Indian may be 
restored as Chandana or Chandra. 

Towards the end of the fourth or the beginning of the fifth 
century A.D. another Indian, named Kaundinya, was elected king 
by the people of Fu-nan. He was a Brahmana and had come direct 
from India. He probably represents a fresh stream of Indian influ¬ 
ence which thoroughly Brahmanised the country. 

The Chinese annals tell us a great deal about another king 
Jaya-varman, a descendant of Kaundinya. Jaya-varman had sent 
some merchants to Canton for purposes of trade. The Indian monk 
Nagasena joined them there, but on the return journey a storm 
forced them to land in Champa. The Chams plundered all their 
goods, but Nagasena returned safely to Fu-nan. Jaya-varman had 
other grievances against Champa. One of his rebellious subjects 
had occupied the throne of Champa and had adopted a hostile attitude 
towards him. Jaya-varman accordingly sent Nagasena to the 
Imperial court, with a petition asking for help against the Cham 
king. Nagasena arrived in China in A.D. 484 and presented a poem 
eulogising the god Mahesvara, Buddha, and the Emperor of China. 
The Emperor praised the god Mahesvara whose cult was dominant 
in Fu-nan, and condemned the king of Champa, but sent no active 

1. FTL, 111 f. 2. Vol. II, pp. 656-8. 


643 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


help against him. In A.D. 503 Jaya-varman again sent an embassy 
to the Imperial court with presents including an image of Buddha, 
made of coral. He sent two more embassies in A.D. 511 and 514, 
and two Buddhist monks of Fu-nan settled in China and translated 
Buddhist texts. 

Jaya-varman’s queen was named Kula-prabhavati and they had 
a son named Guna-varman. We possess two Sanskrit inscriptions 
of Guna-varman and his mother. But Guna-varman did not succeed 
his father. Jaya-varman’s elder son Rudra-varman, born of a con¬ 
cubine, succeeded him after killing the younger son, born of the 
legitimate wife. 

Rudra-varman also has left a Sanskrit inscription. He sent no 
less than six embassies to China between A.D. 517 and 539. During 
or shortly after his reign the kingdom of Fu-nan was invaded by 
the rulers of Kambuja which was originally a vassal state but had 
recently thrown off the yoke of Fu-nan. The struggle went on for 
some time, but Fu-nan was completely conquered before the end 
of the seventh century A.D. 

The kingdom of Kambuja was situated in North-eastern 
Cambodia. According to legends current in later times the kingdom 
was founded by Kambu Svayambhuva, the king of Aryadesa (India), 
and named after him. The two earliest rulers of this kingdom, 
known to us, are &ruta-varman and his son Sreshtha-varman. The 
latter threw off the yoke of Fu-nan, and the capital of the indepen¬ 
dent kingdom was named after him Sreshthapura. It was quite 
close to the Vat Phu Hill near Bassac in Laos. On the summit of 
this hill, called Linga-parvata, was the temple of Bhadresvara Siva, 
the tutelary deity of the royal family. 

Bhava-varman, who occupied the throne of Kambuja about the 
close of the six;th century A.D., was the founder of a new royal 
family, 1 and he transferred the capital to Bhavapura. He was a great 
conqueror and considerably increased the extent of the kingdom. 
His brother Chitrasenai, who assumed the name Mahendra-varman 
on ascending the throne, invaded Fu-nan and conquered nearly the 
whole of it. He died some time before A.D. 616, and was succeeded 
by his son Isanasena or Isana-varman. The new king continued the 
war against Fu-nan and finally conquered it, probably about A.D. 630. 
He ruled over an extensive kingdom comprising the whole of 
Cambodia and Cochin-China and also the valley of the Mun river 
to the north of the Dangrek mountains. He founded a new capital 

1. According to some scholars Bhava-varman belonged to the royal family of 
Fu-nan and became king of Kambuja by his marriage with a princess of this 
country (Coedes, J titats, p. 116). 


644 





COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

city, called after him Isanapura. He sent an embassy to China and 
had probably diplomatic relations with India as well. He also 
played a part in the history of Champa as will be related later. 

Isana-varman died some time about A.D. 635. He was followed 
by two kings Bhava-varman II and Jaya-varman I of whom nothing 
is known. Jaya-varman ruled till at least A.D. 681 and is the last 
known king of the family of Bhava-varman. 

The history of Kambuja for the next hundred years is very 
obscure and will be dealt with in the next volume. 

The dynasty of Bhava-varman raised the small principality of 
Kambuja into a big kingdom. Fu-nan gradually passed into oblivion 
and Kambuja took its place as the leading state. It established 
a powerful kingdom, comprising not only the whole of Cambodia 
and Cochin-China, but also a part of Laos. In spite of occasional 
vicissitudes of fortune, Kambuja continued its glorious career for 
nearly seven hundred years, and attained to a height of splendour 
and renown not acquired before or since by any other kingdom in 
Indo-China. 

2. Champa 

The throne of Champa was usurped by Fan Wen, the general 
of Fan-yi, when the latter died in A.D. 336. He was an able ruler 
and skilful general. He resolved to extend the kingdom of Champa 
up to the Hoan Sonh mountains in the north, by annexing the 
Chinese province of Nhut-Nam (corresponding to modern districts 
of Thua-Thien, Quang Tri and Quang Binh). When he failed to 
achieve his purpose by negotiations he sent a military expedition 
and conquered the province in A.D. 347. Two years later he again 
defeated, a vast Chinese army, but was wounded in the fight and 
died in A.D. 349. 

Fan Wen carried the frontiers of Champa to its furthest limits 
to the north, but his aggressive policy involved his son and grandson 
in a protracted war with China for more than fifty years (A.D. 349- 
413). Both sides claimed occasional successes and even great 
victories, but the result was indecisive. 

The grandson of Fan Wen is called by the Chinese Fan-Hu-ta, 
but he is probably the king referred to in the Sanskrit inscriptions 
of Champa as Bhadra-varman. 1 He was a great general and scored 
some successes against the Chinese. His kingdom probably included 
all the three provinces of Champa, viz. Amaravati (northern), Vijaya 
(central), and Panduranga (southern). He was a great scholar and, 

1. Some scholars identify Bhadra-varman with, Fan Fo, father of Fan-Hu-ta 
(Coedes, ttats, p. 84). 


645 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


according to the inscriptions, studied the four Vedas. He constructed 
a temple of &iva, called after him Bhadresvara-svami, at Myson. 
This temple became the national sanctuary of Champa, and the later 
kings followed his example of setting up images of deities named 
after themselves. 

Bhadra-varman was succeeded by his son Gangaraja who 
abdicated the throne in order to spend his last days on the bank of 
the sacred Gahga river in India. The departure of the king was 
followed by anarchy and civil war in Champa which was brought 
to an end in A.D. 420 by the accession of Fan Yang Mai who founded 
a new dynasty. 

War with China continued under Fan Yang Mai and his son 
who also bore the same name. Fan Yang Mai II, elated by a tem¬ 
porary success, sent an expedition almost every year against Tonkin. 
The Chinese emperor thereupon decided to crush this turbulent 
chief. After three years’ elaborate preparations the Chinese army 
invaded Champa in A.D. 446. Yang Mai suffered a terrible defeat 
and fled. The Chinese entered the capital city Champa in triumph 
and secured 100,000 pounds of pure gold by melting the images in 
temples sacked by them. 

After the retreat of the Chinese army Yang Mai II returned to 
his capital, but died of a broken heart (A.D. 446). He was succeeded 
by his son and grandson. The latter pacified the Chinese Emperor 
by sending rich tributes in A.D. 455, 458 and 472. 

The death of this king was followed by a period of troubles 
in course of which a man from Fu-nan (according to some accounts 
the son of Jaya-varman, king of Fu-nan) usurped the kingdom, as 
mentioned above. But the usurper was defeated and the family 
of Yang Mai regained the throne. Vi jaya-varman, the last king of 
this dynasty, sent two embassies to China in A.D. 526 and 527. 

Vijaya-varman was succeeded by Rudra-varman. He was a 
Brahma-Kshatriya and claimed descent from king Gangaraja, men¬ 
tioned above, who abdicated the throne and retired to the bank of 
the Ganga. Rudra-varman received investiture from China on 
.payment of tribute in A.D. 530. The tribute was renewed in 
A.D. 534. 

Rudra-varman was succeeded by his son Prasasta-dharma who 
took the name of Sambhu-varman at the time of his coronation. He 
took advantage of the weakness of the Imperial Chen dynasty and 
stopped the customary tribute. Although he hastened to send 
tribute in A.D. 595 after the Sui dynasty was established on the 
Imperial throne, the Emperor decided to teach him a lesson. The 


646 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


Chinese army invaded Champa in A.D. 605. Sambhu-varman suffered 
several defeats and fled. The Chinese sacked the city of Champa 
and carried off an immense booty, including the golden tablets of 
18 kings of Champa and 1,350 Buddhist works. It is said that they 
cut off the left ears of 10,000 Chams who were taken prisoners in 
the battle. 

Sambhu-varman was succeeded in A.D. 629 by his son Kandarpa- 
dharma. He maintained good relations with China by regular 
payment of tribute, and his reign was peaceful. But internal 
troubles broke out shortly after his death. One Satyakausika-svamI, 
descended from the royal family through female line, claimed the 
throne, but being unsuccessful fled to Kambuja court. But shortly 
after Prabhasa-dharma had succeeded his father Kandarpa-dharma, 
the attempt was renewed and he was killed with all the male mem¬ 
bers of the family (A.D. 645). The kings of Kambuja, Mahendra- 
varman and Isana-varman, really pulled the strings from behind 
in order to establish their influence over the neighbouring state. 
This object was fully achieved. Satyakausika-svamI ascended the 
throne of Champa (A.D. 645), and his grandson Jagaddharma was 
married to SarvanI, daughter of isana-varman. Soon after the death 
of Satyakausika-svamI (A.D. 653), Prakasa-dharma, son of Jagad¬ 
dharma and SarvanI, ascended the throne under the title of Vikranta- 
varman (A.D. 657). 1 Not much is known of the history of Champa 
during the next hundred years. The last known king of this family 
is Rudra-varman II who sent tribute to China in A.D. 749 and died 
about A.D. 757. 

3. Burma and Siam 

Although we do not possess a continuous history of any other 
colonial kingdom, we know the existence of several such kingdoms 
during the period under review. Hiuen Tsang refers to several 
Hinduised kingdoms in Indo-China, viz. ^Hkshetra, with its capital 
at Prome (Lower Burma); D varava tl, comprising a large part of 
Siam; Isanapura (Kambuja), and Maha-champa (Champa), in addition 
to two other kingdoms which cannot be identified. Hiuen Tsang 
heard these names while in Bengal, but did not visit these countries. 
The fact that he refers to Kambuja as Isanapura, a name associated 
with his contemporary king Isana-varman, shows that there was a 
regular and intimate intercourse between India and these countries. 
Dvaravati was inhabited by the Mons or Talaings who had adopted 
Hindu culture. The Hindui^bd Mons also occupied the coastal 
regions of Lower Burma known as Ramannadesa. The Hindu 

1. This period is very obscure. For a slightly different version, cf. Coedes, fitats, 

pp. 122-3. 


647 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 

colonists in the Mon country spread their power and influence in 
the more inaccessible regions in North Siam and Laos. A number 
of Pali chronicles have preserved the history of many local princi¬ 
palities founded by them. These texts furnish a long list of royal 
names (mostly in Indian form) and pious foundations of Buddhist 
monasteries. The discoveries of Buddhist images and inscriptions 
fully confirm the general picture supplied by the chronicles. 

Further north, Hindu colonies were also established among 
the Thais who occupied the southern and south-eastern part of the 
country, now called China, and the region intermediate between 
it and Burma on the west and Siam in the south. Their most 
important kingdom in Yunnan was known as Gandhara and one part 
of it was also called Videha-rajya. 

To the north of the Mons in Lower Burma lived the tribe called 
Pyu. The Hindu colonists settled among them and founded a 
kingdom with ;§rlkshetra (Prome) as capital. According to local 
chronicles this kingdom was founded by a member of the Hindu 
royal dynasty of Tagaung. 1 It is, no doubt, quite possible that the 
Hindus who had colonised Upper Burma had spread southwards 
along the Iravati. It is, however, also not unlikely that different 
bands of colonists had proceeded to Prome, by way of sea or through 
Arakan. A number of inscriptions, written both in Sanskrit and 
Pyu languages, but in Indian script, have been found in this region. 
A Sanskrit inscription of the seventh century A.D., engraved on 
the pedestal of a Buddha image, mentions king Jayachandra- 
varman. Three other kings Hari-vikrama, Simha-vikrama and 
Surya-vikrama ruled in Srlkshetra at a much earlier period. 

We possess the record of a Hindu dynasty called :§rI-Dharma- 

•« 

rajanuja-vamsa ruling in Arakan from A.D. 600 to 1000. The names 
of kings ended in Chandra, such as Bala-chandra, Deva-chandra, etc. 
The coins have preserved the names of kings Dharma-chandra, Vlra- 
chandra, etc. According to local chronicles a Chandra dynasty ruled 
in Arakan with Vaisali as capital, the two previous capitals being 
Ramavati and Dhanyavati. The ruins of Vaisali (now called Vethaii 
8 miles to the north-west of Mrohaung) testify to its former great¬ 
ness. The famous Buddha image, called Mahamuni, was the tutelary 
deity of Arakan throughout the historical period. 

4. Malay Peninsula 

The geographical position of the Malay Peninsula made it the 
centre of carrying trade between India and the Far East. Takkola, 

1. Vol. II, p. 655. 

648 




COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


modern Takua Pa, 1 was the first landing stage of the Indian traders 
and colonists. From this port some crossed over the mountain range 
to the fertile plain on the eastern coast round the Bay of Bandon, 
and then proceeded by land or sea to Siam, Cambodia, Annam and 
even further east. Others continued the voyage through the Straits 
of Malacca. Ruins of shrines and images, Sanskrit inscriptions, and 
other vestiges of Indian settlements are found at Takua Pa, and 
along the trans-peninsular route to the Bay of Bandon, as well as in 
the Province Wellesley. These prove that there were Hindu colonies 
all over the Peninsula as early at least as fourth or fifth century A.D. 
One of these incriptions, in the northern part of Province Wellesley, 
records a gift by, and a prayer for the successful voyage of, the great 
sailor ( maha-navika ) Buddhagupta, an inhabitant of Raktamrittika. 
This place has been identified by some with Rangamati, 12 miles 
south of Murshidabad, in Bengal. 2 This, interesting inscription has 
perhaps preserved the name and memory of one of those mariners of 
India who carried the pioneers of Indian colonisation across the Bay 
of Bengal. 

The Hindu colonists set up several kingdoms in Malay Penin¬ 
sula. Some details of these have been preserved in Chinese 
chronicles. Unfortunately many of them cannot be definitely 
located, and different identifications have been proposed by different 
scholars. But taken collectively they leave no doubt that there 
were many Hindu kingdoms in the Peninsula. The Chinese account 
shows their intimate connection with India. About the state Lang- 
kia-su, probably in the Isthmus of Ligor, we are told that a relation 
of the king, on being driven out of the kingdom, went to India and 

married a princess. When all on a sudden the king of Lang-kia-su 

* 

died, the high officers called back the prince from India and made 
him king. He died after a reign of 20 years and was succeeded by 
his son Bhagadato (Bhagadatta?) who sent an envoy named Aditya 
with a letter to the emperor of China in A.D. 515. The Chinese 
account adds that this state was “founded more than 400 years ago”, 
i.e. in the first or second century A.D. 

The court of another state, Pan-pan (Bandon), was frequented 
by Brahmanas. “They had come from India in order to profit by the 
munificence of the king who had very high regard for them.” 

Names of several other states and their kings (Gautama, 
Subhadra, Vijaya-varman,. etc.) are known from Chinese sources. 

1. This is the general view, but some scholars locate Takkola a little further to 
the south, at Trang ( J . Mai Br. R.A.S., XXII. 25). 

2. Some scholars, however, locate it on the Gulf of Siam in the region of P’at’alung 
(Coedes, ttats, p. 89). 


649 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Indian literature refers to the kingdoms of Kalasapura and Karma- 
rariga which were probably in Malay Peninsula or Lower Burma. 

The archaeological discoveries in Malay Peninsula have thrown 
a flood of light on the Hindu colonisation in this region. The views 
of two eminent archaeologists on this subject may be summed up 
as follows:—* 

‘The colonies were large in number and situated in widely 
remote centres, such as Chumphon, Caiya, the valley of the river 
Bandon, Nakhon Sri Dhammarat (Ligor), Yala (near Patani), and 
Selensing (in Pahang) on thd eastern coast; and Malacca, Province 
Wellesley, Takua Pa, and the common delta of the rivers Lanya 
and Tenasserim, on the western. 

‘The most important of these was unquestionably that of Nakhon, 
Sri Dhammarat (Ligor). It was an essentially Buddhist colony which 
probably built the great stupa of Nakhon Sri Dhammarat and part 
of the fifty temples which surrounded it. A little to the north was 
the colony of Caiya, which appears to have been at first Brahmanical, 
and then Buddhist. These two groups of colonies were mainly 
agriculturists. The others which occupied Selensing, Panga, Puket, 
and Takua Pa, prospered by the exploitation of tin and gold-mines. 

‘The available evidence justifies the assumption that the region 
around the Bav of Bandon was a cradle of Further Eastern culture, 

a/ 7 

inspired by waves of Indian influence spreading across the route 
from the west. At the same time persons of an Indian cast of fea¬ 
tures are common on the west coast near Takua Pa, while colonies 
of Brahmans of Indian descent survive at Nakhon Sri Dhammarat 
and Patalung, and trace the arrival of their ancestors from India by 
an overland route across the Malay Peninsula.’ 1 

III. EAST INDIES 

Many Hindu colonial kingdoms were also established in the 
various islands of the East Indies which were collectively known 
as Suvarnadvipa. We shall briefly refer to the most important of 
them. 

1. Sumatra 

The earliest Hindu kingdom known in Sumatra is &rI-Vijaya 
(Palembang). It was founded in or before the fourth century A.D. 
and rose to great eminence towards the close of the seventh century 
A.D. It had by that time conquered another Hindu kingdom named 

1. BCAI, 1909, pp. 184-85; 1AL, IX, 1-31. 


650 




COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


Malayu (modern Jambi) and established its political supremacy 
over the neighbouring island of Banka. In A.D. 684 it was ruled 
over by a Buddhist king named Sri-Jayanasa (or Jayanaga). In 
A.D. 686 this king (or his successor) sent an expedition against Java 
and issued an interesting proclamation of which two copies, engraved 
on stone, have reached us. 

It begins with an invocation to the ‘gods who protect the king¬ 
dom of Sri-Vij aya\ It holds out threats of severe punishment to 
the inhabitants of countries, subordinate to §ri-Vijaya, if they revolt, 
or even aid, abet, or meditate revolt, against the suzerain authority. 
Punishment was to be meted out not only to the actual rebels, but 
even to their family and clans. On the other hand, the people who 
would remain loyal to the government of Sri-Vij ay a, together with 
their clan and family, would be blessed with all sorts of blessings 
divine. 

I-tsing tells us that Sri-Vij ay a was a centre of Buddhist learning 
in the islands of the Southern Sea, and that the king of Sri-Vij ay a 
possessed trading ships sailing between India and Sri-Vij ay a. We 
also learn from his memoir that the city of Sri-Vij ay a was the chief 
centre of trade with China, and that there was a regular navigation 
between it and Kwan-Ttmg. 

That Sri-V ij ay a was fast growing into an important naval and 
commercial power appears clearly from an inscription discovered at 
Ligor (Malay Peninsula). This inscription, dated in Saka 697 
(=A.D. 775), refers to the mighty prowess of the king of Sri-Vij ay a. 
He is said to be the overlord of all neighbouring states whose kings 
made obeisance to him. It shows that the Buddhist king of Sri- 
Vijaya had extended his political supremacy over the Malay Penin¬ 
sula, as far at least as the Bay of Bandon, before A.D. 775. 

The inscriptions thus give clear indication, in broad outline, of 
a purely aggressive policy pursued by the kingdom of Sri-Vijaya 
during the century A.D. 675-775. By A.D. 686 it had absorbed the 
neighbouring kingdom of Malayu, conquered the neighbouring island 
of Banka, and sent a military expedition to the powerful island king¬ 
dom of Java. Before a century was over, we find its power firmly 
established in the Malay Peninsula. The Chinese annals state that 
several embassies came from Sri-Vijaya to China during the period 
between A.D. 670 and 741. 


2. Java 

There were several Hindu kingdoms in Java. Two of these, 
called Cho-po and Ho-lo-tan by the Chinese, sent regular embassies 


651 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


to China in the fifth century A.D. The names of kings in both these 
countries ended in Varman. 

Four Sanskrit inscriptions, all found within the Province of 
Batavia in Western Java, mention a king Purna-varman. One of 
them, dated in the twenty-second year of the king, calls his grand¬ 
father rajarshi (royal sage) and another ancestor, probably his father, 
rajadhimja (king of kings). The latter is said to have dug the Chan- 
drabhaga (a canal or a river) which reached the sea after passing by 
the capital city. Purna-varman himself dug a similar canal, called 
the Gomati river, and paid a fee of a thousand cows to the Brah- 
manas. Purna-varman’s capital city was named Taruma, and he 
reigned in the sixth century A.D. 

There were several other kingdoms in Java in this and the fol¬ 
lowing century. According to two Chinese historical works of the 
Sui period (A.D. 589-618), there were ten kingdoms in Java. In the 
history of the T’ang period (618-906) reference is made to 28 feuda¬ 
tory kings acknowledging the supremacy of the king of Java. 

The most important kingdom in Java during the T’ang period is 
named Ho-ling. Ho-ling is generally recognised as a Chinese form 
of Kalihga. The leading kingdom in Java was thus named after 
the well-known province of India on the eastern coast, and it may be 
reasonably inferred that colonists from Kalihga dominated Java, or 
at least a part of it. This may be due to a fresh stream of immigra¬ 
tion from Kalihga about this time, as is generally supposed. But it 
is not unlikely that a region or principality in Java was called 
Kalihga from much earlier times, though it did not attain any 
eminence till the T’ang period. In any case, this name and the tradi¬ 
tion that the original colonists of Java came from Kalihga 1 indicate 
a close relation between Java and Kalihga country. 

It is probable that the kingdoms of Ho-lo-tan and Ho-ling men¬ 
tioned in Chinese chronicles were situated respectively in Western 
« 

and Central Java. The predominance of Indian civilisation in West¬ 
ern Java is proved by the Sanskrit inscriptions of Purna-varman, 
noted above. An inscription in Central Java, probably belonging 
to the seventh century A.D., shows that this region, too, was 
thoroughly influenced by Indian culture. 

3. Borneo 

The Hindu colonisation in Eastern Borneo is proved by seven 
Sanskrit inscriptions found at Muara Kaman on the Mahakam river, 
an important sea-port in old days. They refer to king Mula-varman, 
son of Asva-varman and grandson of king Kundunga. Mula-varman 


1. Vol. II, p. 655. 


652 






COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


performed a sacrifice called Bahusuvarnaka (lit. large quantity of 
gold), and made gift of 20,000 cows to the Brahmanas in the holy 
field of Vaprakesvara. 1 These inscriptions were incised about 
A.D. 400. We may, therefore, hold that Hindu colonists had esta¬ 
blished kingdoms in Borneo by the end of the fourth century A.D., 
if not before. The inscriptions testify to the great predominance of 
the Brahmanas and the Hindu culture in Borneo. 

The grandfather of Mula-varman is called Kuntfunga, a form of 
Kaundinya. 2 We have already seen that an Indian Brahmana of this 
name was elected king of Fu-nan towards the close of the fourth 
century A.D. We do not know whether he is identical with the 
grandfather of Mula-varman, but this is not unlikely. 

The Hindu colonists advanced into the interior of Eastern 
Borneo along the Mahakam river. A number of Buddhist and 
Brahmanical images were found at Kombeng, and they probably be¬ 
longed to one or more temples higher up in the valley of the Maha¬ 
kam river. Similarly the discoveries of archaeological remains on 
the banks of the Kapuas river show that the Hindus colonised West 
Borneo and set up a number of settlements in the valley of this river. 3 

4. Bali 

The Hindus had colonised the island of Bali and set up a kingdom 
there before the sixth century A.D. The Chinese history of Leang 
Dynasty (A.D. 502-557) gives the following interesting account of 
Bali: “The king’s family name is Kaundinya. When asked about 
his ancestors, he could not state this, but said that the wife of 
Suddhodana was a daughter of his country.” In A.D. 518 the king 
sent an envoy to China. 

The name Kaundinya is interesting and shows the influence of 

that family in all the Hindu colonies of Suvarnadvlpa. The Chinese 

author gives a detailed account of the manners and splendours of 

the court, and there is hardly any doubt that in the sixth century 

A.D. the island of Bali was the seat of a rich and civilised kingdom 

■* 

ruled by Hindu colonists professing Buddhism. I-tsing also men¬ 
tions that Buddhism was dominant in the island of Bali. 

1. The inscriptions refer to other sacrifices and various ceremonies called Maha- 
danas, such as Kalpa-briksha, Bhumi-dana, Go-sahasrika, Jala-dhenu, Ghrita- 
dhenu, Tila-dana and Kapila-dana (JGIS, XII. 14). 

2. This view is, however, opposed by Chhabra. “Why should,” he asks, “a good 
Sanskrit inscription use this corrupt form?” It has been conjectured by several 
scholars that Kundunga is a Tamil name. But N. L. Rao opposes this view 
(J. Mai. Br. R.A.S. XV. Part III, p. 118). 

3. Two standing Buddha images of Gupta style have been found at Sambas. It 
has been suggested that Barhina-dvlpa, mentioned in the V&yu Purana, refers to 
Borneo (Sastri, Srivijaya, p. 23). 


658 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


IV. HINDU CIVILISATION IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA 

We have so far discussed the history of Hindu colonial kingdoms 
set up in Indo-China and in the various islands of the East Indies. 
Of these the kingdoms of Champa and Kambuja are better known 
than others. The inscriptions, temples, images, and other remains 
of this period are so plentiful in these two kingdoms that no doubt 
remains of the thorough-going character of Hindu culture in these 
regions. But although less plentiful, similar evidence exists in re¬ 
gard to the other colonial kingdoms referred to above. We may, 
therefore, briefly review the general character of Hindu civilisation 
in South-east Asia as a whole. 

The most important remains of the Hindu colonists are the 
Sanskrit inscriptions, written in Indian scripts, pure or slightly modi¬ 
fied. They have been found all over the region, in Burma, Siam, Ma¬ 
lay Peninsula, Annam, Cambodia, Sumatra, Java and Borneo. A 
perusal of these inscriptions shows that the language, literature, reli¬ 
gion, and political and social institutions of India made a thorough 
conquest of these far off lands and, to a large extent, eliminated or 
absorbed the native elements in these respects. The local peoples 
mostly belonged to a very primitive type of civilisation, and it was 
the glorious mission of the Indian colonists to introduce a higher cul¬ 
ture among them. In this task they achieved a large measure of 
success. 

These inscriptions, written in good flawless Sanskrit, show that 
this language was highly cultivated and was used in court and 
polished society. They hold out before us the picture of a civili¬ 
sation moulded by, and thoroughly saturated with, Indian elements 
We have reference to Hindu philosophical ideas, Vedic religion, 
Puranic and epic myths and legends, all the prominent Brahmanical 
and Buddhist divinities and ideas associated with them, Indian 
months and astronomical system, and Indian system of measurement. 
The well-known habit of colonists to introduce familiar geographical 
names is also much in evidence. This reached its climax in Burma 
where we find a deliberate attempt to create a New India by locating 
there not only numerous places associated with Buddha and Asoka, 
but also scenes of subsequent episodes in the history of Buddhism 
and in the lives of previous Buddhas or holy men referred to in 
Buddhist literature. Outside Burma, too, we have not only im¬ 
portant names like Dvaravati, Champa, Amaravatl, Gandhara, Videha, 
Kamboja, and Kaliriga, but also even river-names like Gomatl, 
Chandrabhaga and probably also Gahga. 

The numerous images of gods and goddesses, found all over 
this wide region, corroborate the evidence of inscriptions re- 


654 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


garding the dominance of Indian religion, both Brahmanical and 
Buddhist. These images and the remains of temples further prove 
the thorough-going influence of Indian art. 

The Chinese chronicles also testify to the dominance of Indian 
culture in this region. The story of Gunavarman 1 shows the 
gradual spread of Buddhism in Java, and I-tsing has left interesting 
details of the influence of Buddhism in this region. Both on his way 
to India and back, the pilgrim stayed at SrI-Vijaya, and he later 
returned to it, to study Buddhism. ‘Tn the fortified city of &rl- 
Vijaya,” says he, “Buddhist priests number more than 1000 who 
investigate and study all the subjects that exist just as in India.” 
Apart from its position as a great political power and a strong centre 
of Buddhism, SrI-Vijaya merits distinction as the earliest seat, in 
this region, of that Mahay&na sect which was destined ultimately to 
play such a leading part in the whole of Suvarnadvipa. It was visit¬ 
ed by several eminent Buddhists from India, such as Dharmapala, 
an inhabitant of Kanehi and a Professor at Nalanda (seventh cen¬ 
tury), and Vajrabodhi (eighth century). 2 

On the other hand we have evidence of the colonists maintaining 
contact with India. Reference has already been made to kings who 
came to India to spend their last days on the banks of the Gahga, or 
had fled there for safety. One of them is even said to have married 
an Indian princess. 

The materials for reconstructing the social system and adminis¬ 
trative machinery in the colonies are very scanty. But such as we 
possess show a definite Indian stamp in both. There can be hardly 
any doubt that a New India had taken shape beyond the sea. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

R. C. Majumdar, Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East: 

Vol. I. Champa, Lahore, 1927. 

Vol. II. Suvarnadvipa , Parts I and II. Dacca, 1937, 1938. 

B. R. Chatterji, Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia. Calcutta, 1928. 

R. C. Majumdar, Kambuja-desa. Madras, 1944. 

R. C. Majumdar, Hindu Colonies in the Far East. Calcutta, 1944. 

G. Coedes, Les Etats Hindouises D’Indochine et D’lndonesie. Paris, 1948. 

K. A. N. Sastri, History of Sri Vijaya . Madras, 1949. 

K. A. N. Sastri, South Indian Influences in the Far East. Bombay, 1949. 


1. See above, p. 610. 


655 


1. See above, pp. 386, 621. 







LIST OF BIBLIOGRAPHIES 

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. Original Sources: Literary Texts and Translations 

1. Indian Sources: 

(A) Brahmanical 

(i) Epics 

(ii) Pur anas 

(iii) Philosophy 

(1) Mlmamsa 

(2) Nyaya 

(3) Sahkhya 

(4) Vaiseshika 

(5) Vedanta 

(6) Yoga 

(iv) Dharmasastra 

(v) Historical Works 

(vi) Polity 

(vii) Kamasastra 
(viii) Lexicons 

(ix) Astronomy 

(x) Medicine 

(xi) Belles-Lettres 

(B) Buddhist 

(i) Pali 

(ii) Sanskrit 

(C) Jain 

(D) Muslim 

2. Non-Indian Sources: 
tA) Chinese 

(B) Tibetan 

II. Original Sources: (1) Inscriptions 

(2) Coins 

III. Modern Works: 

(1) Histories of the Period 

(2) Histories of Literature 

(3) Religion and Philosophy 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Chapters I-VI 

Chapter VII 




Chapter XXIV 


656 


Mahabh&rata 


Rdmayana 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. ORIGINAL SOURCES: 

Texts and Translations 
1. Indian Sources 
(A) Brahmanieal: 

(i) EPICS 

(Bom. Ed.) with the comm, of Nilakaii^ha. 

Edited by R. Kinjawadekar. Poona, 1929-33. 
(Cal. Ed.) Edited by N. Siromani and others. 
BI. Calcutta, 1834-39. 

(Kumbhakonam Ed.) Ed. by T. R. Krishna- 
charya and T. R. Vyasacharya. Bombay, 
1905-10. 

(Southern Recension) Ed. by P. P. S. Sastri. 

I^lsdrss 1931 ^ 

(Critical Edition) I. Adiparvan. Ed. by V. S. 
Sukthankar. Poona, 1927-33. 

II. Sabhaparvan. Ed. by F. Edgerton. Poona, 
1943-44. 

III, IV. Aranyakaparvan, Ed. by V. S. 

Sukthankar. Poona, 1941-42. 

V. Virataparvan. Ed. by Raghu Vira. Poona, 
1936. 

VI. Udyogaparvan. Ed. by S. K. De. Poona, 
1937-40. 

VII. Bhlshmaparvan. Ed. by S. K. Belvalkar. 
Poona, 1945-47. 

XIII. &antiparvan. Ed. by S. K. Belvalkar. 
Raj adh arms. Poona, 1949-50; Moksha- 
dharma. 1951-3. 

Eng. trans. by K. M. Ganguly. Published by 
P. C. Roy. Calcutta, 1884-96; New Ed. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1926-32. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1895-1905. 
(Bengal Recension) Ed. by G. Gorresio. Turin, 
1843-67. 

(North-Western Indian) Ed. by Pandit Rama 
Labhaya and others. Lahore, 1923 ff. 

(North and South) Bombay, 1902. 

(South) Madras, 1933. 

(Critical Ed.) Ed. by Raghu Vira. First Fasc. 
Lahore, 1938. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1892-94. 
Trans, into English verse, by R. T. H. Griffith. 
Benares, 1915. 

657 


I 


C.A.—4 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(ii) PURANAS 


Agni Purdna 


Bhavishya Pulrdna 

Brahma Purdna 

Brahmdnda Purdna 
• • • 

Harivamsa 
Mdrkandeya Purdna 

Matsya Purdna 


Padma Purdna 


Pargiter, F. E. 

Vdyu Purdna 

Vishnu Purdna 
• » 


Ed. by R. Mitra. BI. Calcutta, 1873-79. 

Ed. ASS. Poona, 1900. 

Eng. trans, by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1901. 
Pub. _ Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1910. 
Ed. ASS. Poona, 1895. 

Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1913. 

Ed. R. Kinjawadekar. Poona, 1936. 

Ed. K. M. Banerjea. BI. Calcutta, 1862. 

Eng. trans. by F; E. Pargiter. Calcutta, 1904. 
Ed. ASS. Poona, 1907. 

Eng. trans. by a Taluqdar of Oudh. SBH. 2 
Vols. Allahabad, 1916-17. 

Ed. V. N. Mandlik. ASS. 4 Vols. Poona, 
1893-94. 

Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1895. 

The Purana Text of the Dynasties of the Kali 
Age. Oxford, 1913. 

Ed. R. Mitra. BI. 2 Vols. Calcutta, 1880-88. 
Ed. ASS. Poona, 1905. 

Bombay, 1889. 

Eng. trans. by H. H. Wilson. 5 Vols. London, 
1864-70. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1894. 


(hi) PHILOSOPHY 

(1) Mlmamsa 

Brihati of Bhatta Prabhakara Misra on Mimamsa-Sutra-Bhashya of 
Sabarasvamin with Rijuvimalapahchika Comm, of &alikanatha 

Ed. by A. Chinnaswami Sastri. Madras, 
1927-33. 

Ed. by S. K. Ramanatha Sastri. Madras, 
1934-36. 

Prakaranapanchika of Salikanatha 

Benares, 1904. 

Slokavdrttika of Kumarila Bhatta 

Ed. in Chowkhamba SS. Benares, 1898-9. 

Ed. in Pandit , NS, Vols. 3-4. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. BI. Calcutta, 1900 ff. 
Tantravarttika of Kumarila Bhatta 

Ed. in Benares SS. Benares, 1890. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. BI. Calcutta, 1903 ff. 
Tuptika of Kumarila Bhatta 

Ed. Benares SS. Benares, 1903. 

Vidhiviveka of Mandana Misra 

Ed. Pandit , NS, XXV-XXVIII. 

(2) Nyaya 

Nydya-bhdshya of Pakshilasvamin Vatsyayana on the Nyaya-sutras 
of Gautama. JASB, 1910. 

Eng. trans. G. Jha. Allahabad, 1915. 
Nydyabindu of Dharmaklrti 

Ed. in BI. Calcutta, 1899. 

658 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Nydyapravesa of Dihnaga 

Ed. by A. B. Dhruva. Baroda, 1930. 

Nyayavdrttika of Uddyotakara Bharadvaja 

Ed. in BI. Calcutta, 1907. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. SBH. Allahabad, 1915. 

(3) Sankhya 

Sdiikhya-kdrikd of isvarakrishna 

Ed. in Benares SS. Benares, 1883. 

Ed. with intr., notes, and Eng. trans. by S. S. 

Suryanarayana Sastri. Madras, 1948. 

Eng. trans. by Th. Colebrooke. London, 1837. 
Eng. trans. by J. Davis. London, 1881. 

Eng. trans. by N. L. Sinha. SBH. Allahabad, 
1915. 

Bhashya on Sahkhya-karika by Gaudapada. 
Poona, 1933. 

Eng. trans. by Wilson. London, 1837. 

(4) Vaiseshika 

Padarthadharmasamgraha of Prasastapada 

Ed. in Vizayanagaram SS. Benares, 1895. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. Pandit, NS, XXV- 
XXXIV. 

Vaiseshika Sutra of Kanada 

Ed. in Benares SS. Benares, 1885 ff; BI. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1861. 

Eng. trans. by Gough. Benares, 1873. 

Eng. trans. by N. L. Sinha. SBH. Allahabad, 
1923. 


(5) Vedanta 

Agamasdstra of Gaudapada 

Ed. with transliterated text, Eng. trans., intr., 
and notes by MM. V. Bhattacharya. Calcutta, 
1943. 

Ed. with his own comm, in Sanskrit and 
exhaustive intr. by MM. V. Bhattacharya. 
Calcutta, 1950. 

Brahmasutras (or Vedantasutras) of Badarayana, with the Comm, 
of Sahkaracharya 

Ed. in ASS. Poona, 1900-1903. 

Eng. trans. (Vedanta Sutras with the Comm, of 
Sahkaracharya and Ramanuja) by G. Thibaut. 
SBE. Oxford, 1890-1904. 

Gaudapddakdrikas of Gaudapada 

Ed. in Ass. Poona, 1911. 

Ed. with intr., notes, Eng. trans., etc. by R. D. 

Karmarkar. Poona, 1953. 

* 

Eng. trans. by Dvivedi. Bombay, 1909, 
German trans. (Sechzig Upanishad’s des Veda, 
pp. 537 ff) by P. Deussen. Leipzig, 1921. 

r 


659 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(6) Yoga 

Yogasutras of Patanjali with the commentary of Vyasa and the gloss 
of Vachaspati 

Ed. by R. Bodas. BSS. Bombay, 1892 Eng. trans. 
by J. H. Woods. HOB, Cambridge, Mass., 
1914. 

Eng trans, by Rama Frasada. SRH. Allahabad, 
1910. 


(i v) DHARMA-&ASTRA 

Brihaspati-Smriti Ed. by A. Fiihrer. Leipzig, 1879. 

Eng. trans. by J. Jolly. SBE. Oxford, 1889. 
Reconstructed by K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar. 
GOB. Baroda, 1941. 

Dharma-Sdstra-Samgraha Ed, by J. Vidyasagara. 2. Yols. Calcutta, 

1870. 

Kdtydyana-Smriti Ed. by N. C. Bandyopadhyaya. Calcutta, 1927. 

Kdtydyana Additional verses by K. Y. Rangaswami Aiyan¬ 

gar, P. V. Kane Commemoration Yolume, 
1941. 

* 

Kdtyayana-smriti-sdroddhara (Katyayana-smriti on Vyavahara, Law 

and Procedure). 

Ed. v/ith reconstituted text, trans., notes and 
introduction by P. Y. Kane, Bombay, 1933. 

Ndradiya Manusamhiid with commentary of Bhavasvamin 

Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. TSS, Trivandrum, 

1929. 

Ndrada-Smriti Shorter version, trans. by J. Jolly. 1878; larger 

version ed. v/ith two additional chapters 
from Nepal Ms. by J. Jolly. BI 1878. Trans, 
by J. Jolly. SBE Vol. LIII,‘l889. 

Pardsara Dharmasamhita or Pardsara-Smriti with commentary of 

Sayana-Madhavaeharya by Vaman Sastri 
Islampurkar. Bombay, 1893. 

Smritindm Samuchchaya Ed. in ASS. Poona, 1905. 

Smriti-Sandarbhah, Vols. I-III. Gururnandala-granthamala. Calcutta, 

1952. 

Vydsa-Smriti Dharmasastra-Samgraha. II. pp. 321-42; ASS. 

Ed., pp. 357-71. 

Vydsa-Smnti (Vyavahara Chapter) Ed. by B. K. Ghosh. 1C , 

IX, pp. 65-98. 


660 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(v) HISTORICAL WORKS 
Harsha-charita 

Ed. A. Fhhrer, Bombay, 1909. 

Ed. J. Vidyasagara, Calcutta, 1892. 

Ed. P. V. Kane. Bombay, 1918. 

Eng. trans. by E. B. Cowell and F. W. Thomas. 
London, 1897. 

Kddamhafl 

Ed. P. Peterson. Bombay, 1900. 

Ed. K. P. Parah, Bombay, 1896. 

Eng. trans. by C. M, Ridding. London, 1896. 

Dasa kum&ra-charita 

Ed. bv G. Biihler and P. Peterson. 

BSS. Bombay, 1887, 1891; 2nd Ed, 

Ed. by G. J. Agashe. Bombay, 1919, 

Ed. with intr., notes, and Eng. trans., by 
M. R. Kale, 3rd Ed, Bombay, 1928. 

Ed. by Narayan Acharya. NSP. Bombay, 
1951. 

Eng. trans. by A, W. Ryder. Chicago, 1927. 
French trans, by H. Fauche. Paris, 1882. 
German trans. by J. Hertel. Leipzig, 
1922 by J. J. Meyer. Leipzig, 1902. 

R-dj a ta'rangini 

Ed. Durga Prasad, Bombay, 1892. 

Eng. trans. by M, A. Stein, London, 1900. 
Eng. trans by R. S, Pandit, Allahabad, 
1935. 

Vakpati Gaudavaho 

Ed, S. P. Pandit. BSS. Bombay, 1887; 2nd 
Ed. by N. B, Utgikar. Poona, 1927. 

(vi) POLITY 

Rdrhaspaiya-sutram 

Ed. and trans, by F. W, Thomas (Le Museon 
1916) Reprinted in Devanagari characters by 
Bhagad Datta. Lahore, 1921. 

Kdmandakiya Nitisdra 

Ed. R. Mitra. BL Calcutta, 1884 Ed. with the 
Comm, of Sahkararya, by T. Ganapati Sastri. 
TSS. Trivandrum, 1912. 

Ed. with Jayamahgala of-Sahkararya and Upa- 
dhyaya nirapeksha by scholars of Sahga 
Veda Vidyalaya of Varanasi and preface 
by.V. V. Deshpande. Vol I. Poona, Ananda- 
srama Press, 1958. 

Somadeva, Nitivdkydmritam 

Ed. with anonymous commentary by Pandit 
Pannalal Soni. Bombay, V. S. 1939. 


Bana 


Bana 


Dan^in 


Kalhana 


661 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Kokkoka 

Vatsyayana 


Amarasirhha 


Halayudha 

Kesava 


Aryabhata 


Garga 

Surya-siddhanta 


Varahamihira 


(vii) K AM AS ASTRA 

Ratirahasya. Benaras, 1922. 

Kamasutra, with the commentary Jayamangala. 
Ed. by Sahityacharya D. L. Goswami. 
Benares, 1929. 

Eng. trans. by K. R. Iyengar. Lahore, 1921. 
Eng. trans. by Dr. B. N. Basu. Revised by R. L. 
Ghose and with a foreword by Dr. P. C. Bag- 
chi. 5th Ed. Calcutta, 1944. 

(viii) LEXICONS 

Amarakosa with the commentaries of Kshiras- 
vamin and Vandyaghatiya Sarvananda. 

Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri 4 parts Trivan¬ 
drum, 1914-17. 

AbhidhanaratnamaId. Ed. by Th. Aufrecht. 
London, 1861. 

Kalpadrukosa. Ed. by Ramavatara Sarma. 
GOS. Baroda, 1928. 

(ix) ASTRONOMY 

Aryabhatlya, with the comm. Bhattadipika of 
Paramadisvara. Ed. by H. Kern. Leyden, 
1874. 

Eng. trans. by P. C. Sen Gupta. JDL, XYI. 
Gdrgi-samhitd. 

Ed. by F. E. Hall and B. D. Sastrin. BI. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1859; 2nd Ed. Ed. with the comm. 
Sudhavarshini by Sudhakara Dvivedi. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1925. 

Eng. trans. with notes and appendix, by E. 
Burgess. New Haven, 1860; Reprint. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1936. 

Brihaj-jataka 

With an Eng. trans. and notes, by V. 

Subrahmanya Sastri. Mysore, 1929. 
With Bhattotpala’s comm. Ed. by Sita 
Rama Jha. Benares, 1934. 
Brihat-samhiid 

Ed. by H. Kern. BI. Calcutta, 1865. 

Eng. trans. by H. Kern. JR AS, 1870-1875; 

Parts 1-5. London, 1870-73. 

Ed. with Eng. trans. and notes by V. 
Subrahmanya Sastri and M. Rama- 
krishna Bhat. 2 vols. Bangalore, 1947. 
Hordsdstra. Eng. trans. by C. Iyer. Madras, 
1885. 

Panchasiddhantikd. Ed. by G. Thibaut and S. 

Dvivedi. Benares, 1889. 

Yogaydtrd. Ed. and trans. by H. Kern. 

Ed. by Jagdish Lai. Lahore, 1944. 


662 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(x) MEDICINE 

Ashtahgahridaya of Vagbhata 

Ed. by A. M. Kunte. Bombay, 1891. 
Charaka-samhita Ed. by J. Vidyasagara. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1896. 

Susruta-samhitd Ed. by J. Vidyasagara. 3rd Ed. Calcutta, 

1889. 

(xi) BELLES-LETTRES 

{Note: References to most important works in Sanskrit are given 
here. Full details will be found in the Histories of Sanskrit 
Literature by De and Das Gupta, Keith, Krishnamachariar, 
Winternitz, etc.) 

Bharavi Kiratarjuriiya 

With the comm, of Mallinatha. Calcutta, 
1815; Ed. J. Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 
1875. Trans, into German and explain¬ 
ed by C. Cappeller. HOS, Vol. 15. Cam¬ 
bridge, Mass., 1912. 

Bhatta Narayana Venisamhdra 

Ed. J. Grill. Leipzig, 1871. 

Eng. trans. by S. M. Tagore. Calcutta, 
1880. 

Bhavabhuti Mahavira-charita 

Critical Edition by Todar Mai. Revised by 
Macdonell. Lahore, 1928. 

Eng. trans. by J. Pickford. London, 1892. 
Mdlatimddhava, with the comm, of Jagaddhara. 
Critically edited by R. G. Bhandarkar. BSS. 
Bombay, 1876. 

Uttar ardma-charita 

Edited with an intr. and Eng. trans. by 
S. K. Belvalkar. HOS, Text: Poona, 
1921; Trans, and intr., Cambridge, 
Mass., 1915. 

Eng. trans. by C. H. Tawney. Calcutta, 
1871. 

Dandin Avantisunddrikathd and Avantisundarikathd- 

sara. Ed. by M. R. Kavi. Madras, 1924. 
Kdvyddarsa 

Ed. with original comm, by R. Raddi. 
Poona, 1938. 

Ed. with Eng. trans. by S. K. Belvalkar. 
Poona, 1924. 

Harsha Ndgdnanda 

Ed. by G. B. Bramhe and S. M. Paranjpe. 
Poona, 1893; Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. 
TSS. Trivandrum, 1917. 

Eng. trans. by P. Boyd. London, 1872; by 
H. Wartham. London and New York, 
1911. 


663 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Harsha 


Kalidasa 


Priyadarsikd 

Ed. V. D. Gadre. Bombay, 1884. 

Eng. trans. by G. K. Nariman, A. V. Wil¬ 
liam Jackson and C. J. Ogden, New 
York, 1923. 

Ratnavali 

Ed. by K. P. Parab. NSP. Bombay, 1895; 
Ed. by K. Nyayapanchanan. Calcutta, 
1864. 

A b h ijnaria~£d kunta lam 

(i) Devanagari Hec. Ed. M. Williams. 2nd 
Ed. Oxford, 1876; (ii) Bengali Rec. Ed. 
R. Pischel. Revised by C. Cappeller. 
HOS. Cambridge, Mass., 1922; (iii) 
South-Indian Rec. Ed. Vani Vilas Press. 
Srirangam, 1917; (iv) Kashmiri Rec. 
Ed. K. Burkhard. Wien, 1884. 

Earliest Eng. trans. by William Jones. 
London, 1790. 

Kumdrasamb hava 

Ed. by A. F. Stenzler with Latin trans. 
London, 1838; NSP. Bombay, 1927 
(10th Ed.). 

Eng. trans. by R. T. H. Griffith. 2nd Ed. 
London, 1879. 

Malavikagnimitra 

Ed. with the comm, of Katayavema by S. 
P. Pandit. BSS. 2nd Ed. Bombay, 
1889. 

Eng. trans. by C. H. Tawney. London, 
1891. 

Meghaduta 

Ed. by E. Hultzsch. London, 1911; also 
NSP. 4th Ed., 1881; Trivandrum, 1919; 
Benares, 1931; Gondal, 1953; etc. 

Ed. with metrical Eng. trans. by H. H. 
Wilson. Calcutta, 1813; Eng. trans. by 
C. King. London, 1930. 

Raghiivamsa 

Ed. by S. P. Pandit. 3 vols. BSS. Bom¬ 
bay, 1869-74. 

Ed. with Eng. trans. by G. R. Nandargikar. 
3rd Ed. Bombay, 1897. 

Ritusamhara 

Ed. NSP. 6th Ed. Bombay, 1922. 

Eng. trans. by E. P. Mathers. London, 
1929. 

V ikramorvastyam, 

Ed. by S. P. Pandit. 3rd Ed. Revised by 
B. R. Arte. BSS. Bombay, 1901. 

Eng. trans. by E. B. Cowell. Hertford, 
1851. 


664 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Magha 

Vijjaka 


Visakhadatta 


Sisupalavadha: Ed. NSP. 9th Ed. Bombay, 
1927. 

Kaumudimahotsava 

Ed. by M. R. Kavi and S. K. Ramanatha 
Sastri. Madras, 1929. 

Ed. with intr., Eng. trans., etc. by Sakun- 
tala Rao Sastri. Bombay, 1952. 
Mudrdrakshasa 

Ed. K. T. Telang. BSS. 3rd revised Ed. 
Bombay, 1900; Ed. A. Hillebrandt. 
Breslau, 1912, 

Ed. with Eng. trans. by K. H. Bhruva. 
2nd Ed. Poona, 1923. 


(B) BUDDHIST 
(i) PALI 

(Note: Important references only are given here. Further parti¬ 
culars will be found in Geiger, Law, Winternitz, etc. given 
under “Histories of Literature 5 ’ below.) 

Anuruddha A.b hidhammatthasangaha 

Ed. Rhys Davids. JPTS , 1894, pp. 1 If. 
Eng. trans. by S. Z. Aung. Ed. Mrs. Rhys 
Davids. PTS. London, 1910. 
Buddhaghosa AXihasdlinl 

Ed. by Ed. Muller. PTS. London, 1897. 
Eng. trans. by Maung Tin. Ed. and revis¬ 
ed by Mrs. Rhys Davids. 1920-21, 
Dhammapadatthakathd . Ed. by H. C. Norman. 

4 vols. PTS. London, 1906-14. 
JatakaUhavannand. In Jataka with comm, 
Ed. by V. Fans boll. London, 1877-96. 
Kathdvatthuppakarana-AtthakatM . Ed. by 
J. P. MinayefL JPTS, 1889. 

ManorathOr-Puram, I. Ed. by Max Walleser. 
1*924. 

Papanchasudam. Ed. by 3. H. Woods and D. 
Kosamhi, 1922. 

ParaTnattha-Jotika , I. Ed. by H. Smith. 1915; 
II. 1916-18. 

Puggalapannatti-Atthakathd. Ed. by G. 
Landsberg and Mrs. Rhys Davids. JPTS , 
1913-14, pp. 170 ff. 

Samantapdsddikd. Ed. by J. Takakusu, 2 vols. 

PTS. London, 1924, 27. 

Sammohavinodirii. Ed. by A. P. Buddhadatta 
Thera. PTS. London, 1923. 
Sumangalavildsini. Ed. by T. W. Rhys Davids 
and J. E. Carpenter. f^S. London, 1886. 
Visuddhimagga. Ed. by C. A. F. Rhys Davids. 
2 vols. PTS. London, 1920-21; Ed. by D. 
Kosambi. Bombay, 1940; Ed. by H. C. 


665 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Dhammapala 


Dhammasiri 


Dipavamsa 
Geiger, W. 
Kachchayana 

Kassapa 


Mahanama 


Mahasamin 

Upatissa 


Warren and revised by D. Kosambi. HOS. 
Cambridge, Mass., 1950. 
Yamakappakarana-Atthakatha. Ed. by Mrs. 
Rhys Davids. JPTS, 1910-12, pp. 51 ff. 

Paramatthadipani — 

on the Petavatthu. Ed. by E. Hardy. 
PTS. London, 1894. 

on the Therigaihd . Ed. by E. Muller. 
PTS. London, 1893. 

on the Vimdnavatthu. Ed. by E. Hardy. 
PTS. London, 1901. 

on the Uddna. Ed. by F. L. Woodward. 
PTS. London, 1926. 

Khuddakasxkkhd (and Mulasikkhd by Maha¬ 
samin) Ed. by E. Muller. JPTS, 1883, pp. 
86 ff. 

Ed. and trans. by H. Oldenberg. London, 1879. 
Dipavamsa und Mahavamsa. Leipzig, 1905. 
Kachchdyana-Vydkarana. Ed. and trans. by 
Vidyabhusana. Calcutta, 1891. 

Andgatavamsa i. Ed. by J. P. Minayeff. JPTS, 
1886, pp. 33 ff. 

Mahavamsa 

Ed. by W. Geiger. PTS. London, 1908; Eng. 
trans. by W. Geiger assisted by Mabel 
H. Bode. London, 1912. 

Text in Roman characters with trans. etc. 
Part I (Chs. 1-36) by G. Tumour. 
Colombo, 1887; Part II (Chs. 37-100) 
trans by L. C. Wijesinha Colombo, 1909. 
See above under “Dhammasiri”. 

Mahahodhivamsd Ed. by S. A. Strong. PTS. 
London, 1891. 


(ii) SANSKRIT 

Ahhidharmakosa With Bhashya, Ed. by P. Pradhan. Santiniketan 

(under preparation). 

Ahhidharmakosa Vyakhya. Chs. I-II. Ed. by S. Levi and Th. 

Stcherbatsky. B. B. 1918-1930, complete Ro¬ 
manised text, Ed. by U. Woghihara Tokyo, 
1932-36. 

French trans. by L. de la Vallee Poussin. Paris, 
1923 ff. 

Abhidharmasamuchchaya Ed. by P. Pradhan. Visva-Bharati Series. 

Santiniketan. 

Bodhicharyavatdra Mongolian text. Ed. by B. G. Wladimirzov. BB. 

Leningrad, 1929. With Pahjika. Ed. by L. de 
La Vallee Poussin. BI. Calcutta 1902-14. 
French trans. Paris. 1907. 


666 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Lankavatara 

Mahavastu 
Mahay anasamgr aha 


Ed. by Bunyiu Nanjio. Kyoto, 1923. Eng. trans. 

with intr. by D. T. Suzuki. London. 1932. 

Ed. by E. Senart. Paris, 1887-97. 

Ed. with comm, by E. Lamoutte. Louvain 1938- 


39. 

Nydyabindu Tibetan trans. with comm. Ed. L. de la Vallee 

Poussin. Calcutta, 1908-13. 
Prajnaparamitapindartha 

Ed. G. Tucci. JRAS, 1947. 

Prajhapradipa Tibetan text Ed. by M. Walleser. Calcutta, 


1914. 


Pramdnasamuchchaya Ch. I. Tibetan restoration. Ed. by H.R.R. 

Iyengar. Mysore, 1930. 

Samadhiraja-Sutra Ed. Gilgit MSS. Vol. II (Chs. I-XVI) Calcutta, 

1914; three Chs. ed by K. Regamey, Warsaw. 


1939. 


Sutrasamuchchaya 

Chatuhsataka 


Jatakamdla 


See A. C. Bannerjee IHQ. XVII, pp. 121-26. 
by Aryadeva. Fragments of text with commen¬ 
tary. Ed. by Hara Prasad Sastri MASB III 
no. 8, Calcutta, 1914. 

Editions of select chapters by Vidhusekhara 
Bhattacharyya and P. L. Vaidya. 
by Aryasura Ed. by H. Kern, Boston 1891. 
Trans, by Speyer, London, 1895. 


(C) JAIN 


(Only important authors and works are listed here. For full details 
reference may be made to Winternitz, History of Indian Literature , 
Vol. II, and Velankar, Jinctratnakosa, Poona, 1944.) 


Akalanka 


Devanandin 

Dharmadasa 


Haribhadra 


J inadasa 
Manatunga 


Manikyanandin 


Grantha-traya. Ed. by M. K. Shastri. SJS. 

Ahmedabad, 1939. 

Nydyavinischaya 

Tattvdrtharajavdrttika 

Sarvarthasiddhi 

Uvaesamald. Ed. by L. P. Tessitori. GSAI, 25 
(1912) pp. 162-297. 

Vasudevahindi, Bhavnagar, 1930. 
Anekarthajayapataka. Baroda, 1940. 
Dharmabindu. BI, Calcutta, 1912. 
Dhurtdkhydna. SJS. Bombay, 1944. 

Samaraichchakahd. BI Calcutta, 1926. 
Shaddarsanasamuchchaya. Calcutta, 1915. 
Yogabindu. Ed. L. Suali. Bhavnagar, 1911. 
Yogadrishtisamuchchaya. Ed L. Suali. 

Ahmedabad, 1912. 

Viseshachurni. 

Bhaktamarastotra. Ed. and trans by H. Jacobi 
IS, XIV, pp. 359 ff; Ed. with comm, by H. R. 
Kapadia, Bombay, 1932. 

Parlkshdmukhasutra. Bombay 1905; Calcutta, 
1909. 


667 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Padalipta Tarahgavatikaihd. 

Prabhaehandra Prameya-kamala-martanda. Ed. Vamsidhara 

Bombav, 1912. 

Samantabhadra Aptamlmdmsd. Bombay, 1905. 

Siddhasena Divakara Kalydnamandira-stotra, K„ M. VII; Ed. and 

trans by H. Jacobi. IS. XIV, pp. 376 ff. 
Nydyavatara. Ed. with comm. etc. by S. C. 

Vidyabhushana. Calcutta, 1904. 
ganrnatitarka. Ed, by D. Malvania. Bombay, 
1939, 


Svayambhu 

Vidyananda 


Vimala-suri 


Svayamhhu-ehchhandas . Ed. by H. D. Velan- 
kar. JBBEAS. 1935; JBB, Nov., 1936. 
Aptaparikshd and • Patraparikshd. Benares, 
1913. 

Ashtasahasri. Bombay, 1915. 

Paumachariyam . Ed. by H, Jacobi. Bhavnagar, 
1914.. 


(D) MUSLIM 

Chach-numa, of Muhammad ‘All 1. Hamid i. Abu Bakr KufI, trans. by 

Mirza Kalich Beg Fredunbeg. Two vols. 
Karachi, 1900, 

Extracts trans. HIED, I, pp, 131-211. 
Habib-us-Siyar of Khond Mir, Bombay, 1857. 

Kitdb-ul-Hind and Athar-al-Baquia of al-Blrunl 

Eng. trans (Alberuni’s India) by E. C. Sachau. 
London, 1914. 

Kitdb Futuh al Baldan of Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn-Jabir al-Baladhuri 

Eng. trans. by P. K. Hitti and F. C. Murgotten. 
Muruj-ul-Zahab of al-Ma‘sudi 

Text and French trans. by Barbier de Meynard. 
Paris, 1861. 

Extracts trans. HIED , I, pp. 18-25. 
Rauzat-us-Safa of Mir Khond 
Tabaq&t-i-Akbari of Nizamuddln 

Trans, by B. Bey. BI. Calcutta, 1913. 
Tabaqdt-kNdsiri of Minhaj-ud-dln 

Trans, by H. G. Raverty. London, 1881. 
Taj-ul-Matisir of Hasan Nizami 

Ta’rtkh-i-Firishta Lucknow, 1905. Eng. trans. (Rise of the 

M&homedan Power in India) by J. Briggs. 
Vols. MV .London, 1829. 

Ta'rlkh-i-Yaimni of Al Utbi 

Ed, by All. 

Trans, by J. Reynolds. London. 

Extracts trans. HIED , II, pp. 14-52. 

Elliot, Sir H. M. History of India as told by its own Historians. 
and Dowson, John. 8 Vols. London, 1866-77. Vol. II. Aligarh, 

1952. 


668 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Beal, S. 

Chavannes, E. 

Giles, H. A. 
Julien, S. 

Legge, J. H. 

Takakusu, J. A. 

Watters, T. 

Taranatha 


Aiyer, K. V. Subra- 
manya. 

Bhandarkar, D. R. 
Fleet, J. F. 
Hultzsch, E. 

Krishnamachrltj, 

C. R. 

Raniero Giioli 
Rangacharya, V. 
Rice, Lewis. 


. NON-INDIAN SOURCES 

(A) CHINESE 

Si-yu-ki. Buddhist Records of the Western 
World. Trans, from the Chinese of Hiuen 
Tsang. 2 Vols. London, 1906. 

Life of Hiuen Tsang by the Shaman Hwui-li. 
London, 1911. 

Memoire Compose d Vepoque de la grande 
dynastic T*ang sur les Religieux Eminents 
qivi alterent chercher d loi dans les pays 
d’Occident, par X-tsing. Paris, 1894. (A 
summary in English of this work is given 
in Beal's Life, Intr.), 

The Travels of Fa-hien or Record of Buddhi¬ 
stic Kingdoms . Cambridge, 1923. 

Memoires sur les Contrees occidentales. Trans, 
of Hiuen Tsang. Paris, 1857-58. 

Record of the Buddhistic Kingdoms, being an 
account of the Chinese monk Fa-hiens 
Travels. Oxford, 1886. 

Record of the Buddhistic Religion as practised 
in India and the Malay Archipelago, by 
I-tsing. Oxford, 1898. 

On Yuan Chmang’s Travels in India . Ed. by 
T. W. Rhys Davids and S. W. Bushell. 2 vols. 
London, 1904, 1905. 

(B) TIBETAN 

German trans. by F. A. von Schiefner (Geschu 
chte des Buddhismus in Indian) . St. Peters¬ 
burg, 1889. 

II. ORIGINAL SOURCES 

(1) Inscriptions 

South Indian Inscriptions. 2 vols. (ASI, New 
Imperial Series, Vols. 52, 53). Madras, 1928, 
1933. 

‘‘List of Inscriptions of Northern India”. 
Appendix to El, XIX-XXIII. 

Inscriptions of the Early Gupta Kings and 

their Successors. CII, III. Calcutta, 1888. 

South Indian Inscriptions. 3 vols. ( ASI, NIS. 
Vols. 9, 10 and 29). Madras, 1890-1929. 

Bombay-Katrnataka Inscriptions . Madras, 1940. 

Nepalese Inscriptions in Gupta Characters. 
Rome, 1958. 

Inscriptions of the Madras Presidency. 3 vols. 
Madras, 1919. 

Madras and Coorg from Inscriptions. London, 
1809, 


669 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Sastri, H. Krishna. 

Sewell, R. and Ai- 
YANGAR, S. 
Krishnaswami. 
Sircar, D. C. 


South Indian Inscriptions. 2 vols. (ASI, N1S, 
Vols. 44, 49). Madras, 1924, 26. 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 
Madras, 1932. 


Select Inscriptions hearing on Indian History 
and Civilisation. Vol. I. Calcutta, 1942. 
(Also Epigraphia Indica, Vols. I-XXVIII, etc.) 


Allan, J. 


Banerji, R. D. 
Brown, C. J. 


Cunningham, A. 


Elliot, E. J. 
Rapson, E. J. 
Rapson, E. J. 


Singhal, C. R. 
Smith, V. A. 


Aiyangar, S. 

Krishnaswami. 
Basak, R. G. 
Biiandarkar, R. G. 

ClIATTOPADHYAYA, 

Sudhakar. 


(2) Coins 

Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India (in the 
British Museum). London, 1936. 

Catalogue of the Coins of the Gupta Dynasties 
and of Sasdnka, King of Gauda (in the 
British Museum). London, 1914. 

Prdchlna Mudrd (Bengali). Calcutta, 1322 
B.S. 

Catalogue of Coins of the Guptas, Maukharis, 
etc. in the Provincial Museum, Lucknow. 
Allahabad, 1920. 

Coins of India. Calcutta, 1922. 

Coins of Ancient India from the earliest times 
down to the seventh century A.D. London, 
1891. 

Coins of the Indo-Scythians. Reprinted from 
the Numismatic Chronicle. London, 1888- 
92. 

Coins of Mediaeval India from the seventh 
century down to the Muhammadan con¬ 
quest. London, 1894. 

Later Indo-Scythians. Reprinted from the 
Numismatic Chronicle: London, 1893-95. 

Coins of Southern India. London, 1896. 

Indian Coins. Strassburg, 1897. 

Catalogue of the Coins of the Andhra dynasty, 
the Western Kshatrapas, the Traikiitaka 
dynastry and the Bodhi dynasty (Cat. of 
Indian Coins in the British Museum, Vol. IV) 
London, 1908. 

Bibliography of Indian Coins . Bombay, 1950. 

Catalogue of the. Coins in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta, including the Cabinet of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal. Vol. I, Oxford. 1906. 

III. MODERN WORKS 

(1) Histories of the Period. 

Ancient India. 2 Vols. Poona, 1941. 

History of North-Eastern India. Calcutta, 1934. 

A Peep into the early history of India Bombay, 
1920. 

Early History of North India. Calcutta, 1958. 


070 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


JAYASWAL, K. P. 


J ouveau-Dubreuil 

G. 

Majumdar, R. C. and 
Altekar, A. S. 
(Ed.) 

Ma,sson-0 ursel, P. 

and others. 

Yirji Krishna- 

KUMARI, J. 

Ray, H. C. 

Raychaudhuri, 

H. C. 

SlNHA, B. P. 

Smith, Y. A. 

Yaidya, C. Y. 


Das Gupta, S. N. 

(Ed.) 

De, S. K. 

Fraser, R. W. 
Geiger, W. 


Gowen, H. H. 
Kane, P. Y. 


Keith, A. B. 

Krishnamachariar, 

M. 

Law, B. C. 
Macdonell, A.A. 

WlNTERNITZ, M. 


Bhandarkar, R. G. 


History of India, 150 A.D. to 350 A.D. Lahore, 

1933. 

Imperial History of India, Lahore, 1934. 
Ancient History of the Deccan (trans. from the 
French by V. S. Swaminadha Dikshitar) 
Pondicherry. 1920. 

A New History of the Indian People. Vol. VI: 
The Vakataka-Gupta age. Lahore, 1946. 

Ancient India and Indian Civilization. London, 

1934. 

Ancient History of Saurashtra, Bombay, 1952. 

Dynastic History of Northern India. 2 Vols. 
Calcutta, 1931, 1936. 

Political History of Ancient India. 4th Ed. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1938; 5th Ed. Calcutta, 1950. 

The Decline of the Kingdom of Mdqadha. 
Patna, 1954. 

Early History of India. 4th Ed. Oxford, 1924. 
History of Mediaeval Hindu India. 3 Vols 
Poona, 1921-1926. 

(2) Histories of Literature. 

A History of Sanskrit Literature. Classical 
Period. Vol. I, Calcutta, 1947. 

Sanskrit Poetics. 2 Vols. London, 1923, 1925. 
Literary History of India. London, 1898. 

Pali Literatur und Sprache. Strassburg, 1916. 
Eng. trans. by B. K. Ghosh (Pali Literature 
and Language) Calcutta, 1943. 

History of Indian Literature. New York, 1931. 
History of Alahkara Literature. 2nd Ed. Bom¬ 
bay, 1923; History of Sanskrit Poetics. 3rd 
Ed. Bombay, 1951. 

Sanskrit Drama. Oxford, 1924. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. Oxford, 1928. 
History of Classical Sanskrit Literature. Mad¬ 
ras, 1937. 

History of Pali Literature. 2 Vols. London, 
1933. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. London, 1900. 
History of Indian Literature (Eng. trans. by 
Mrs. S. Ketkar) Vols. I & II Calcutta, 1927, 
1933. 

Geschichte der indischen Litter atur, Band III, 
Leipzig, 1920. 

(3) ’ Religion and Philosophy. 

Vaishnavism, Saivism and other minor Reli¬ 
gious Systems. Strassburg, 1913; Indian Edi¬ 
tion, Poona, 1938. 


671 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Das Gupta, S. N. 

Farquhar, J. N. 

Kane, P. V. 

Radhakrishnan , S, 
Vidyabhijshana, 

S. C. 


History oj Indian Philosophy. 4 Vols. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1932-49. 

An Outline of the Religious Literature of India. 
Oxford, 1920. 

History of Dharmasdstra. 3 Vols. Poona, 
1930-46. 

Inidan Philosophy. 2 Vols. London, 1923, 1927. 
Hist dry of Indian Logic. Calcutta, 1921. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(Note : In the Bibliographies to the different chapters, the Original 
Sources and Modern Works, mentioned earlier, are not re¬ 
peated save in exceptional cases). 


CHAPTERS I-VI 
THE IMPERIAL GUPTAS 
1. Original Sources 
(A) TEXTS & TRANSLATIONS 


Ary amah j usrimhlakalpa 

Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. Vol. Ill TSS. Trivan¬ 
drum, 1925. 

Devi-Chandragupta of Visakhadatta 
Kdliyugarajavrittanta See HCSL, Intr. pp. liv-lvi. 

Kaumudimahotsava by Vijjaka 

Ed. by M. R. Kavi and S. K. Ramanatha Sastri. 
Madras, 1929; Ed. with intr. Eng. trans. etc. 
by Sakuntala Rao Sastri. Bombay, 1952. 
Parana Text of the Dynasties of the Kali age by F. E. Pargiter. Ox¬ 
ford, 1913. 

For Chinese Accounts, see General Bibliography, I (A) 2, i. 


(B) INSCRIPTIONS 

(See Fleet and Sircar in General Bibliography) 

A complete list of Gupta inscriptions is given on pp. 480-2 of 
A New History of the Indian People, Vol. VI. An up-to-date list of 
all Gupta inscriptions and those of contemporary rulers and dynas¬ 
ties is given below. 


LIST OF GUPTA INSCRIPTIONS 

Abbreviations: 

B ~ Buddhist Image. 

Br Brahmanical Image. 

C = Cave. 

CP = Copper-plate. 

J — Jain Image. 

P = Pillar. 

S — Stone. 

(Unless otherwise stated the year refers to the Gupta Era. The 
object on which the inscription is engraved is mentioned after the 

find-place.) 


672 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


SAMUDRA-GUPTA 

Serial Year Find-place Reference 

No. 


1 . 

5 

Nalanda-CP \ 

EL XXV, 50; XXVI, 135. 

2. 

9 

Gaya-CP J 

CIL III, 254; 1C. X. 77; XI 
225. 

3. 


Aliahabad-P 

CIL III, 1; 1HQ. I, 250; 
JRORS. XVIII, 207; 

JRAS. 1935, p. 697; 

EL XXII, 35. 

4. 


Eran-S CIL III, 18; JIH. XIV, 27: 

XIX, 27 

CHANDRA-GUPTA II 

5. 

61 

Mathura-P 

EI. XXI, 1; IHQ. XVIII. 271: 
ABORI. XVIII, 166. 

6. 

82 

Udayagiri-C 

CIL III, 21. 

7. 

88 

Gadhwa-S 

CIL III, 36. 

8 . 

93 

Sanchl-S 

CIL III, 29. 

9. 

— 

Mathura-S 

CIL III, 25. 

10. 

-— 

Udayagiri-C 

CIL III, 34. 

11. 


Basarh Clay Seals ASR. 1903-4, p. 107. 

(Govinda-gupta) 

KUMARA-GUPTA I 

12. 

96 

Bilsad-P 

CIL III, 42. 

13. 

98 

Gadhwa-S 

CIL III, 40; cf. also pp. 264 
267. 

14. 

106 

Udayagiri-C 

CIL III, 258. 

15. 

113 

Dhanaidaha-CP 

EL XVIII, 347. 

16. 

113 

Mathura-J 

EI. II, 210. 

17. 

116 

Turoain-S 

EL XXVI, 115; JOR, XVII. 
205. 

18. 

117 

Karamadanda-Br. 

EI. X, 71. 

19. 

120 

Kulaikuri-CP 

IHQ , XIX, 12. 

20. 

124 

Damodarpur-CP 

EI. XV, 129. 

21. 

128 

Damodarpur-CP 

EI. XV. 132; XVII, 193. 

22. 

128 

Baigram-CP 

EL XXI, 78. 

23. 

129 

Mankuwar-B 

CIL III, 45. 

24. 

129 

Gadhwa-S 

CIL III, 39. 

25. 


Basarh Clay Seals ASR. 1903-4, p. 107. 

(Ghatotkacha-gupta) 

SKANDA GUPTA 

26. 

136-8 

Junagadh Rock 

CIL III, 56. 

27. 

141 

Kahaum-P 

CIL III, 65; IHQ , XXVIII 
298. 

28. 

141 

Rewa-P 

POC, XII. Vol. Ill, p. 587. 

29. 

146 

Indore-CP 

CIL III, 68. 

30. 

— 

Bhitari-P 

GOVINDA-GUPTA AND 

CIL III, 52. 

PRABHAKARA 

31. 

V.S. 524 Mandasor Fort Wall 
(A.D. 467) 

EI. XXVII, 12. 


673 


C.A.— 43 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 




NARASIMHA-GUPTA 

32. 

— 

Nalanda Clay Seal 

MAS!. No. 66, p. 65. 



KUMARA-GUPTA II (OR III) 

33. 

154 

Sarnath-B 

ASR. 1914-5, p. 124. 

34. 

-—- 

Bhitari Seal 

JASB. LVIII, 89. 

35. 

— 

Nalanda Seal 

MAS!. No. 66, pp. 66-7; 
IA. XIX, 225. 



BUDHA-GUPTA 

38. 

157 

Sarnath-B (Duplicate) 

ASR. 1914-5, p. 125. 

37. 

159 

Baharpur-CP 

El, XX, 61. 

38. 

159 

Benares (Rajghat) 

JRASBL, XV, 5. 

39. 

163 

Damodarpur-CP 

EL XV, 134. 

40. 

165 

Eran-P 

CIL III, 88. 

41. 

■—- 

Damodarpur-CP 

EL XV, 138; IC, V, 432. 

42. 


Nalanda Seal 

MASL No. 66, p. 64; 
IHQ, XIX, 119,‘272. 



OTHER GUPTA 

KINGS 


43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 


169 


188 


48. 191 


49. 224 


Name of the King 
(Successor of 
Puru-gupta) 


Vishnu-gupta 

Vainya-gupta 

Vainya-gupta 


Bihar-P CIL III, 47; 

JBORS. XIX, 
"377- 1C* X 170 

Nandanpur-CP EL XXIII, 52. 
Nalanda Seal EL XXVI , 235; 

IHO. XIX, 119. 
IHQ, VI, 40. 


Gunaighar- 

CP 

Nalanda Seal 


Bhanu-gupta Eran-P 


Bhanu-gupta 


Damodarpur- 

CP 


MASL No. 66, 
p. 67; IHQ. XIX, 
275 

CIL III, 91; EL 
XXII, 16; IHQ. 
XIX, 143. 

EL XV, 142; XVII, 
193. fn. 1. 


INSCRIPTIONS OF CONTEMPORARY RULERS AND 

DYNASTIES 


50. 

481 

51. 

474 

52. 

480 

53. 

493 


529 


(V.S.) Nara-varman 
(V.S.) Nara-varman 


(V.S.) Viiva-varman Gangdhar-S 
and Bandhu-varman Mandasor-S 
(V.S.) 


Mandasor-S EL XII, 315; XIV, 

371. 

Bihar Kotra-S EL XXVI, 130; 

JBORS. XXIX, 
127 

CIL III, 72. 

CIL III, 79; IC. 
Ill, 379; IV, 110, 
262, 361, VI, 

110, 339, S. K. 
Aiyangar Com. 
Vol, p. 69. 


674 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


54. 

156 

Hastin 

Khoh-CP 

CIL III, 93. 

55. 

158 

Lashmana 

Singrauli-CP 

ASL 1936-7, p. 88. 

56. 

158 

Lakshmana 

Pali-CP 

EL II. 364. 

57. 

163 

Hastin 

Khoh-CP 

CIL III, 100. 

58. 

167 

Subandhu 

Barwani-CP 

EL XIX. 262; IHQ. 
XXI. 81. 

59. 

191 

Hastin 

Majhgwan- 

CP 

CIL III, 106. 

60. 

198 

Hastin 

Navagram- 

CP 

EL XXI, 124. 

61. 

199 

Saihkshobha 

Betul-CP 

EL VIII, 284. 

62. 

209 

Samkshobha 

Khoh-CP 

cn. in, ii 2 . 

63. 

—i 

Hastin and 
Sarvanatha 

Bhumara-CP 

CIL III, 110; IHQ. 
XXI, 137. 

64. 

174 

Jayanatha 

Karitalai-CP 

CIL III, 117. 

65. 

177 

Javanatha 

Khoh-CP 

CIL III, 121. 

66. 

191 

Sarvanatha 

Sohaval-CP 

EL XIX, 129. 

67. 

193 

-Do- 

Khoh-CP 

CIL III, 125. 

68. 

197 

-Do- 

-Do- 

CIL III, 132. 

69. 

214 

-Do- 

-Do- 

CIL III, 135. 

70. 

*—- 

-Do- 

-Do- 

CIL III, 129. 

71. 

250 

Prithivlvigraha 

Sumandala- 

CP 

IHQ, XXVI. 75; 
Orissa Hist. Res. 


Journal, I. 66. 


(For the era used in Nos. 64-69, cf. EL XXII! , 171; Bh. List , 
p. 159 fn.) 

72. — Chandra Meharauli- CIL III, 139. 

Iron-P 

73. 1 (Regnal) Toramana Eran-S C1I. III, 159. 

74. 15 (Regnal) Mihirakuia Gwalior-S CIL III, 162. 

75. —- Yasodharman Mandasor-P \ CIL III, 142, 150; 

76. 589 (V.S.) Yasodharman Mandasor-S / I A, XVIII, 219; 

XX, 188. 

For two Inscriptions in Khandesh, with dates doubtfully attri¬ 
buted to the Gupta Era, cf. El, XV. 289, 291; IHQ, XXI. 82, XXII. 64; 
XXIII. 156; XXIV. 71; ABORI, XXV. 159; PIHC , VII. 62. 

(C) COINS 

(See Allan, Brown and Rapson in General Bibliography) 


Alterar, A. S. 


Bayle, Sir E.C. 
Bhattasali, N. K. 


Gupta, P. L. 


“Asvamedha Coins of Samudra-gupta.” Bhd- 
rata Itihcisa Samsodhaka Mandala Quarterly, 
Special Number, 1948, pp. 1-7. 

4 'Attribution of Chandragupta-KumaradevI 
type.” Num Suppl. XLII, pp. 105 If. 

Catalogue of the Gupta Gold Coins in the 
Bay ana Hoard. Bombay, 1954. 

“Notes on Gupta Coins.” IA, VI, pp. 57-8. 

“Notes on Gupta Coins.” JASB, NS, XXXVII, 
pp. 54-64. 

“The Coins of Ramagupta.” JNSI, XII, pp. 
103-111. 


675 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Mookerji, R. K. 
Narain, A. K. 
Saraswati, S. K. 
Sastri, Hirananda 
Sinha, B. P. 


Smith, V. A. 


“Some Considerations on Gupta Coinage.” 

B. C. Law Volume, I, pp. 164-9. 
“Budhagupta and his Gold Coins.” JNSI, 
XII, pp. 112-5. 

“A Gold Coin of Budhagupta.” 1C, I, pp. 
691-2. 

“The Asvamedha Coins of Samudragupta.” 

JASB, NS, XI, pp. 447-478. 

“Bearing of Numismatics on the History of 
the Later Imperial Guptas.” JBRS, XXXIV, 
3-4, pp. 18-26. 

“The Coinage of the early or Imperial Gupta 
dynasty.” JRAS, 1889, pp. 1-141. 
“Observations on . Gupta Coinage.” JRAS, 
1893, pp. 77-148. 


II. Modern Works 
(A) BOOKS 


(See Basak, Jayaswal, Raychaudhuri and Smith in General 

Bibliography) 

Aiyangar, S. Kri- Studies in Gupta History. Madras, 1928. 
shnaswami. 

Banerji, R. D. The Age of the Imperial Guptas. Benares, 

1933. 


Bandekar, R. N. 
Mehta, G. P. 

Mookerjx, R. K. 
Saletore, R. N. 
Shastri, Raghu- 
nandana. 
Shembavnekar, 
K. M. 


A History of the Guptas. Poona, 1941. 
Chandragupta Vikramaditya (in Hindi). Alla¬ 
habad, 1932. 

The Gupta Empire . Bombay, 1948. 

Life in the Gupta Age. Bombay, 1943. 
Guptavamsakd Itihdsa (in Hindi). Lahore, 
1932. 

The Glamour about the Guptas. Bombay. 
1953. 


Upadhyaya, B. S. Gupta Sdmmjyakd Itihdsa (in Hindi). 2 vols. 

Allahabad, 1939. 


Aiyangar, S. Kri- 
shnaswami. 

Alterar, A. S. 

Banerji, R. D. 
Bhandarkar, D. R. 


(B) SELECT ARTICLES 

“The Huna Problem in Indian History.” I A, 
XLVIII, pp. 65-76. 

“Vikramaditya.” AMV, I, pp. 143-63. 

“A New Gupta King.” JBORS, XIV, pp. 223- 

53. 

“Further Discussion about Ramagupta.” 

JBORS, XV, pp, 141-181. 

“Chronology of the Late Imperial Guptas.” 
ABORI, I, pp. 67-80. 

“Govinda-gupta and Puru-gupta.” IC, XI, 
p. 231. 

“Identification of the Princes and Territories 
mentioned in the Allahabad Pillar Inscrip¬ 
tion of Samudra-gupta.” 1HQ, I, pp. 250 IT. 
“New Light on the Early Gupta History.” 
Malaviya Comm. Vol., pp. 189-211. 


676 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bhattacharyya, B. 
Bose, S. K. 
Chhabra, B. Ch. 
Das Gupta, N. N. 

Ganguly, D. C. 

Ghosh, A. 
Gokhale, B. G. 
Gupta, P. L. 


Heras, H. 


Jag an Nath. 


Jayaswal, K. P. 

Lakshminarayana, 

L. 

Majumdar, R. C. 


“New Light on the History of the Imperial 
Gupta Dynasty.” JBRS, XXX. 1-46. 
“Studies in Gupta Palaeography.” 1C, IV, 
pp. 181 ff, 325 ff. 

“Allahabad Inscription of Samudra-gupta is 
not posthumous.” 1HQ, XXIV, pp. 104-13. 
“Kacha Problem.” IHQ, XX, pp. 351-3. 

“On the Successors of Kumara-gupta.” B. C. 

Law Vol., I, pp. 617-25. 

“Early Home of the Imperial Guptas.” IHQ, 
XIV, pp. 532 ff. 

“The Original Home of the Imperial Guptas.” 
IHQ, XVIII. pp. 386 ff. 

“Nalanda Seals of Budha-gupta and Vishnu- 
gupta”. IHQ, XIX, pp. 119-25. 

“The Origin of the Imperial Guptas.” JBBRAS, 
XXVII (1952), pp. 275-278. 
“Ghatotkacha-gupta.” IHQ, XXII, pp. 316- 
329 

“Kacha Problem Solved.” IHQ, XXII, pp. 

60-1. 

“Kacha: A step-brother of Samudra-gupta.” 
JNSI, V, pp. 33-36. 

“Kacha-gupta and Ram a-gup t a.” JBRS, 

XXXIV, 1-2, pp. 19-27. 

“Relations between the Guptas, Kadambas 
and Vakatakas.” JBORS, XII, pp. 455 ff. 
“Two Controversial Points in the Reign of 
Samudra-gupta.” ABORI, IX, pp, 83-90. 
“Are Skanda-gupta and Puru-gupta Identical?” 
BV, VIII, pp. 7-10, 

“Govinda-gupta, a new Gupta Emperor.” 
PIHC, IX, pp. 78-82; IHQ, XXII, pp. 286-90; 
Bhdrata Kaumudi , II, pp. 1083-8. 
“Identification of Budha-gupta with Puru- 
gupta.” BV, VI, pp. 235-6. 
“Kaliyugamjavritttinta and the Imperial 
Guptas.” JBRS , XXXI. pp. 28-33. 

“Kalki.” IA, XLV, pp. 145 ff. 

“Ramagupta”. JBORS, XVIII, pp. 35-36. 

“A Note on the identity of Puru-gupta and 
Skanda-gupta.” PIHC, VI, pp. 86-9. 

“Bihar Stone Pillar Inscription of Skanda- 
gupta.” 1C, X, pp. 170-73. 

“Forged Purana-text on the Imperial Guptas.” 
IHQ, XX, pp. 345-50. 

“Gaya and Nalanda Plates of Samudra-gupta.” 
1C, XI, pp. 225-30. 

“Original Home of Imperial Guptas.” JBRS, 
XXXVIII. 410. 

“Revised Chronology of the last Gupta 
Emperors.” IA, XLVII, pp. 161-7. 

“Seal of Vainya-gupta.” IHQ, XXIV, p. 67. 


77 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Majumdar, R. C. 

Mirashi, V. V. 

Modi, J. J. 

Panna Lal. 

Pathak, K. B. 

Raychaudhuri, 

H. C. 

Saletore, B. A. 

Sen Gupta, P. C. 
Sharma, D. 

Sinha, B. P, 

Sircar, D. C. 


“Successors of Kumara-gupta.” JASB , NS, 
XVII, pp. 249-55. 

“The Successors of Skanda-gupta.” JUPHS, 
XVIII, pp. 70 If. 

“Were the Maharajas of Khandesh the Feuda¬ 
tories of the Guptas?” IHQ, XXIII, pp. 
150 if. 

“Early History of the Hunas.” JBBRAS, 
XXIV, pp. 589-95. 

“Dates of Skanda-gupta and his successors.” 

Hindvsthan Review, Jan. 1918. 

“New Light on Gupta Era and Mihirakula.” 

1A, XLVI, pp. 287 ff; XLVII, pp. 16 ff. 

“The Successors of Kumara-gupta I.” IHQ, 
VIII, p. 352. 

“Samudragupta’s Conquest of Kottura.” 

ABORL XXVI, 120-141. 

“Gupta Era.” JRASB(L), VIII, pp. 41 ff. 

“The Sska rival of Rama-gupta.” IC. V. pp. 
328-30. 

“Bearing of Numismatics on the history of 
the Imperial Guptas.” JBR.S, XXXIV, Parts 
III-IV. 

“Kumara-gupta III” JBR.S . XXXVI. Parts 
III-IV. " 


“Gupta Rule in Orissa.” 


IHQ, XXVI. pp. 75 ff. 


CHAPTER VII 


MINOR STATES IN N. INDIA DURING THE GUPTA EMPIRE 


I. Original Sources 


(i) LITERARY 

(See Pargiter in General Bibliography) 

(ii) INSCRIPTIONS 

Herzfeld, E. Paikuli: Monument and. Inscription of the 

Early History of the Sassanian Empire. 2 
vols. Berlin, 1924. 

Sastr-i, Hirananda. “Nalanda Stone Inscription of Yasovarma- 

deva.” EL XX, pp. 37-46. 


(See Cunningham, 
Acharya, G. V. 

Banerji, R. D. 
Herzfeld, E. 

Martin, M. F, C. 
Paruck, F. D. J. 


(iii) COINS 

Rapson and Smith in General Bibliography) 

“Hoards of the Coins of the Western Kshatra- 
pas.” Num. Suppl (JRASB ), XLVII, pp. 95 
ff. 

“Notes on Indo-Scythian Coinage.” JASB , 
NS, IV T , pp. 81-96. 

Kushano-Sassanian Coins. MAST No. 38. 
Calcutta, 1930. 

“Coins of the Kidara Kushanas.” Numismatic 
Suppl (JRASB), XLVII, pp. 23-50. 

Sassanian Coins. Bombay, 1924, 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Whitehead, R. B. Catalogue of Coins in the Punjab Museum, 

Lahore . Vol. I. Oxford, 1914. 

II. Modern Works 

(See Jayaswal, Majumdar and Altekar in General Bibliography) 

“The Later Kushanas.” JRAS, 1913, pp. 1054 ff. 
“Kushan Chronology.’’ JDL, 1920. 
“Rudradeva and Nagadatta of the Allahabad 
Pillar Inscription.” PIHC, VII, pp. 78-81. 
“History of the City of Kanauj and of king 
Yasovarman.” JRAS, 1908, pp. 765-93. 
“Invasion of the Punjab by Ardashir Papakan, 
Persian king.” JRAS, 1920, pp. 221 ff. 
History oj Kanauj. Benares, 1937.* 

CHAPTER VIII and X 
NORTHERN INDIA 
(1) VALABHX 

Original Sources: Inscriptions 

Bhandarkar’s List, Nos. 17, 1289-1375; also inscriptions in El and I A. 
Virdi CP grant of Kharagraha. POC, VII, pp. 659 If. 

Modem Works 


Kennedy, J. 
Majumdar, R. C. 
Sircar, D. C. 

Smith, V. A. 


Tripathi, R. S. 


(See Histories by Ray, Smith and Vaidya in General Bibliography) 
Bombay Gazetteer, Vol, I, Part I, Ch. VIII. 

Jag an Nath:. “Early History of the Maitrakas of ValabhI.” 

1C, V, pn. 407-14. 

Ray, N. R. “Maitrakas of ValabhL” IRQ, IV, pp. 453-74. 

Sankalia, H. D. Archaeology of Gujarat (pp. 28-32). Bombay, 

1941. 

Virjee, K. J. Ancient History of Saurdshtra . Bombay, 1952. 


(2) RAJPUT AN A AND GUJARAT 
Original Sources: Inscriptions 

(i) Inscriptions of Guhilots 

Atpur, Insc, of Saktikumara. JPASB, VIII, pp. 63 ff. 

Chatsu Inc. of Baladitya. EL XII, pp. 10 ff. 

Dhod Ins. of Dhavalappadeva and Dhanika, G. E. 407 ( wrongly 
read as H. 207). El, XX, pp. 122 ff. 

Nagar Ins. of Dhanika, V. S. 741, Bhdrata Kaumudl, I, pp. 267 ff. 
Nagda Ins. of Aparajita, V. S. 718. EL IV, pp. 31 if. 

Samoli Ins. of Siladitya I, V. S. 703. El, XX, pp. 97 If. 

(ii) Inscriptions of Gurjaras 

Five Ghatiyaia Ins. of Kakkuka. JRAS , 1895, pp. 513 ff; 

El, IX, pp. 277 IT (Three of these are dated V. S. 918). 
Gwalior Ins. of Bhoja. EL XVIII, pp. 99 ff. 

Jodhpur Ins. of Banka, V. S. 894. EL XVIII, pp. 87 ff. 

Navsari, Plates of the Gujarat Chalukya Pulakesiraja, K. 490 
(Bh. List, No. 1220). 

For Inscriptions of the Guriaras of Broach, cf. Bhandarkar’s 
List, Nos, 1209-1213, 1218-19; and also, El, XXIII, pp. 147 ff; 
XXV, pp. 292 ff. 


679 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Texts and Translations 

(Rajasekhara, in Bibliography to Ch. XV below) 

Vikramdrjunu-Vijaya (or Pampa-Bharata ). Ed. B. L. Rice. 
Bangalore, 1898. 


Modern Works 


(See Histories by 

Banerji, A. C. 
Bombay Gazetteer 
Bhandarkar, D. R. 

IIoernle, A. P. R. 


Ganguly, D. C- 


Ghosh, Miss Bhra- 
mara. 

II alder, R. R„ 


Majumdar, R. C. 


Mankad, D. R. 
Munshi, K. M. 

Ojha, Pandit G. H. 

Raychaudhuri, 

G. C. 


Sarma, Dasaratha. 


Ray, Smith, Vaidya, in General Bibliography) 

Rajput Studies (Ch. I) Calcutta, 1944. 

Vol. I, Part I. 

“Guhilots.” JPASB, 1909, pp. 167 ff. 

“Gurjaras.” JBBRAS, XXI, pp. 405 ff. 

“Some Problems of Ancient Indian History.” 
JRAS, 1904, pp. 639 ff; 1905, pp. Iff. 

“The “Gurjaras” in the Rashtrakuta Inscrip¬ 
tions.” PIHC, III, pp. 513-1*5. 

“History of the Gurjara Country.” IHQ, X, 
pp. 613-623. 

“Origin of the Pratlhara Dynasty.” IHQ, X, 
pp. 337-43; “(A Reply):” IHQ, X, p. 762; 
XI, pp. 167-8. 

“The Pratiharas and the Gurjaras.” JBORS, 
XXIV, pp. 221-30. 

“Origin of the Pratiharas.” 1C, I, pp. 510-2. 

“The Guhila kings of Me war.” IA, 1927, 
pp. 169 ff. 

“Who were the Imperial Pratiharas?” 1A, 
LVII, pp. 181-4. 

“The Gujara Pratiharas.” JDL, X, pp. 1-76. 

“Some Problems concerning Gurjara-Pratl- 
haras.” Munshi Diamond Jubilee Vol., 
Part II (BV, X), pp. 1-18. 

(Both these articles give full references to 
earlier literature on the subject). 

“Origin of the Pratiharas.” IHQ, X, p. 584. 

The Glory that was Gurjaradesa, Part III: 
The Imperial Gurjaras. Bombay, 1944. 

History oj Rajputana (in Hindi) Ajmer, 
1936 ff. 

“Guhilot Origins.” D. R. Bhandarkdr Vol., 
pp. 311-16. 

“A Note on the Early Home of the Guhilots.” 
1C. Ill, pp. 219-22. 

“A Note on the Rise of the Guhilots in Chitor 
and its Neighbourhood.” PIHC, III, 
pp. 813-7. 

“Dr. Ganguly on the Gurjaras and Gurjaratra.” 
IC, IV, pp. 113-5. 

“The Imperial Pratiharas—A Revised Study.” 
JIH, XXII, pp. 93-105. 

“Origin of the Pratlhara Dynasty.” IHQ, X, 
pp. 582-4. 


680 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Smith, V. A. 

“The Gurjaras of Raj put ana and Kanauj.” 

Tod, James. 

JR AS, 1909, pp. 53 if; 247 ff. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan. Edited 
by William Crooke. Oxford, 1920. 

(3) MAUKHARIS 

Original Sources 


Literary: 

(Bana’s Harsha-charita in General Bibliography) 


Fleet, J. F. 

Haraha Ins. 

Nalanda Seal 

Inscriptions: 

CII, III, Nos. 47-51. 

El, XIV, pp. 110-20. 

El, XXIV, p. 224. 

Coins: 

Bidyabinod, B. B. 

Supplementary Catalogue of the Coins in the 
Indian Museum, Calcutta (Non-Muhamma¬ 
dan Series). Vol. I. Calcutta, 1923 
(pp. 36-7). 

Burn, R. 

“Some Coins of the Maukharis and of the 
Thanesar Line.” JR AS, 1906, pp. 453 ff. 
Modern Works 


(See Basak, Smith, Vaidya in General Bibliography) 
Aravamuthan, T. G. The Kaveri, the Maukharis and the Sangam 


Jagan Nath. 

Age. Madras, 1925. 

“New Light on Maukhari Genealogy.” Wool- 
ner Comm. Vol. pp. 116-8. 

Katare, S. L. 

“Sidelight on the History of the Maukharis.” 

Pires, E. 

Saletore, R. S. 

POC, VII, pp. 569-73. 

The Maukharis. Madras, 1934. 
“Reminiscences of Maukhari Rule in Kar- 

Tripathi, R. S. 

natak.” NIA, II, pp. 354-8. 

History of Kanauj. Benares, 1937. (Ch. II). 
“The Maukharis or Kanauj.” JBORS, XX, 
pp. 49-79. 

Aphsad Inscription 
Deo Baranark Ins. 
Gunaighar CP grant 
Mangraon Ins. 

(4) LATER GUPTAS 

Original Sources 

Inscriptions 

CII, ill, No. 42, pp. 200-8. 

CII, III, No. 46, pp, 213-8. 

1HQ, VI, pp. 45-60. 

El, XXVI, pp. 241 ff. 

Coins 


(See Allan, Brown in General Bibliography) 

Modern Works 

(See works given under Chs. I-VI) 

* 


Banerji, R. D. 

“Later Guptas of Magadha.” JBORS, XIV, 

Chattopadhyaya, 

K. 0. 

pp. 254-65. 

“Damodaragupta: Did he die in battle?” D. 
R. Bhandarkar Volume, pp. 180-2. 


681 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Ganguly, D. C. 

Mookerji, R. K. 

Ray, H. C. 

Raychaudhuri, 
H. C. 


Sircar, D. C. 


“Malava in the sixth and seventh centuries 
A.D.” JBORS, XIX. pp. 399-412. 

“Later Guptas of Magadha.” JBORS, XV, 
pp. 251-62. 

“The Line of Krishnagupta.” IC, VIII, pp. 
133-6. 

“The Gupta Empire in the sixth and seventh 
centuries A.D. 5 ’ JPASB, 1920, pp. 313-26. 

“A Note on the Later Guptas.” JBORS, XV, 
pp. 651-4. 

“The Maukharis and the Later Guptas,” 
JRASB, XI, pp. 69-74. 

(5) BENGAL 


Original Sources 
Inscriptions 

-A. 

Five Damodarpur EL XV, pp. 113-145. 

CP Ins. 

Ghugrahati CP Ins. JASB . NS, VI, op, 429 ff; VII. pp. 476 ff; El, 

XVIII, pp. 74-86. 

Grant of Dharma- LA, XXXIX, pp. 193-216. 
ditya; second 
grant of Dharma- 
ditya; Grant of 
Gopachandra 

Kurpala CP of Samacharadeva, year 7 (.unpublished! 

Nalanda seal of Samacharadeva.— MASI, No. 66. p. 31. 

Mallasarul CP of El, XXIII, pp. 155-61. 

Gopachandra 

Two CPs of Sasahka JRA.SB(L), X I, pp. 1-9. 
from Midnanore 

JL. 

Literary Sources 


(See Gaildavaho , 

' *7 


Majumdar, R. C. 
(Ed.) 

Sinha, B. P. 


Harsha-charita , Monjusrimulakalpa , Beal. in 
General Bibliography) 

Modern Works 

History of Bengal , Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. Chs. 

IV and V, and t£te references there. 
“Sasahka”. JBRS, XXXV, pp. 111-153. 

(6) NEPAL 


Original Sources 

Bendall, C, Catalogue of Buddhist Sanskrit MSS at Cam¬ 

bridge. Cambridge, 1883. 

Historical Introduction to H. P. Sastri's “Cata¬ 
logue of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper MSS 
belonging to the Durbar Library, Nepal.'' 
Calcutta, 1905. 

Journey in Nepal and Northern India. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1886. 


682 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bendall, C. 

Bhagvanlal Indraii. 
Levi, S. 

Sastri, H. P. 

Walsh, E. H. 
Wright, D. 


“On Some Nepalese Coins in the Library of 
the German Oriental Society.” ZDMG, 
XXXVI, pp. 651-2. 

“Inscriptions from Nepal.” L4, 1880, pp. 163- 
193. 

“Aneiennes Inscriptions du Nepal.” JA, 1907, 
IX, pp. 49-114. 

Le Nepal Vol. III. Paris, 1908. 

Catalogue of Palm-leaf and selected Paver 
MSS belonging to the Durbar Library, 
Nepal. Calcutta, 1905. 

“The Coinage of Nepal.” JR AS, 1908, pn. 669- 
705; 1122-36. 

History of Nepal (translated from the Par- 
batiya). Cambridge, 1877. 


Modern Works 

(See Basak, Hay, Taranath# in General Bibliography) 

Buhler, G. “Bhagwanlal Indraji's Some Consideration 

on the History of Nepal.” I A, XIII, pp. 411 


90 

A/O. 


Fleet, J. F. 

Kirkpatrick, Col. 

Landon, Percival, 
Levi, S. 


Majumdar, R. C. 


“Chronology of the Early Rulers of Nepal.” 
JA, XIV, pp. 342 ff. 

An Account of the Kingdom of Nepal. London, 
1811. 

Nepal. 2 Vols. London, 1928. 

“Les missions d.e Wang Hiuen-Tse dans la 
Inde.” JA, 1900, XV, pp. 297-341. 

“Note sur la Chronologie du Nepal.” JA, 1894, 
IV, pp. 55-72. 

Le Nepal, Vols. I, II. 

“Chronology of the Early kings of Nepal.” 
B. C. Law Volume I, pp. 626-41. 

(7) KAMARUPA 
Original Sources 

(See Beal, Harsha-charita, Watters in General Bibliography) 
Bhattacharya, Pad- Kdmctriipasdsandvali (in Bengali). Rangpur, 

1931. 

Nepalese Inscriptions in Gupta Characters. 
Rome. 1956. 

JARS , XII. 16. 

MASI. No. 66; JBORS , V, pp. 802-4; VI, 
pp. 151-2. 

Nidhanpur CP insc, El, XII, pp. 65-9; XIX. pp. 115 fr. 

Modern W orks 

“Common Ancestry of the Pre-Ahom Rulers 
etc.” IHQ, XXIII, pp. 200-220. 

History of Kamarupa, Vol l Shillong, 1933, 
“New Light on the History of Assam.” IHQ. 
XXL pp. 19-28; 143 ff. XXII, pp. Iff., 112 ff , 
245 ff.' 


manatha. 
Raniero, Gnoli 

Doobi CP insc. 
Nalanda Seals 


Barua, B. M. 

Barua, K. L. 
Bhattasali. N. K. 


683 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Dutta, K. 

Gait, E. A. 
Sircar, D. C. 


“New Light on the Early History of Assam.” 
PIHC , XII, pp. 154 ff. 

History of Assam. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1926. 
“Harsha and Bhaskaravarman.” PIHC, VI, 
pp. 48-51. 

“Gauda-Kamarupa struggle in the Sixth and 
Seventh Centuries.” IRQ, XXVI, pp. 241- 
246. 


(8) ORISSA 
Original Sources 

Hiralal. Descriptive Lists of Inscriptions in the C.P. 

and Berar. Nagpur, 1916. 

(A list of Inscriptions is given in Majumdar, JAHRS, X, pp. 1-15, 
to which the following two are to be added:—) 

1. Puri CP of Madhavavarman Sainyabhita. Year 13. El, 
XXIII, pp. 122-31. 

(date corrected in El, XXIV, p. 149 n. 1) 

2. Cuttack Museum Plate of Madhavavarman. Year 50. El, 
XXIV, pp. 148-53. 

3. Banpur CP of Ayasobhlta Madhyamaraja. El, XXIX. 33. 

4. Purushottampur CP of Sainyabhita Madhavavarman II 
Srinivasa, year 13. El, XXX. 284. 

5. Chandeswar CP of Manabhita Dharmaraja, year 18. El, 
XXX. 269. 

6. Banpur CP of Manabhita Dharmaraja. El, XXIX. 38. 

7. Samandala Ins. of Prithivlvigraha. El, XXVIII. 79. 

8. Khadipada Ins. of Subhakara. El, XXVI. 247. 

9. Inscription from Sitabinji. JAHRS, XIX. 191. 


Modern Works 


(See Basak, Ray in General Bibliography) 


Banerji, R. D. 
Chakravarti, M. M. 

Das, M. N. 

Mahtab, II. 
Majumdar, R. C. 


Mazumdar, B. C. 


Misra, B. 


History of Orissa. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1930-31. 

“Chronology of the Eastern Ganga kings of 
Orissa.” JASB, 1903, pp. 97-147. 

Glimpses of Kalinga History. Calcutta, 1949. 

The History of Orissa. Lucknow, 1949. 

“Sailodbhava Dynasty.” JAHRS, X, pp. 1-15 
(gives full references to authorities and list 
of inscriptions). 

Orissa in the Making. Calcutta, 1925. 

“Sketch of the History of Orissa.” JBORS, 
VI, pp. 348-60. 

Orissa under the Bhauma Kings. Calcutta. 
1934. 


Mitra, R. L. 
Ramdas, G. 

Sircar, D. C. 


Dynasties of Medieval Orissa. Calcutta, 1933. 
Antiquities of Orissa. 2 vols, Calcutta, 1875- 
80. 

“SuryavamsI Kings of Orissa.” JBRS, XXXI, 
pp. 172-94. 

“Gupta Rule in Orissa.” IHQ, XXVI, pp. 75- 
79. 


684 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(9) KANAUJ-YAsOVARMAN 
Original Sources 

(See Gaiidavaho, Rdjatdrangini in General Bibliography) 

Sastri, Hirananda. “Nalanda Stone ins. of Yasovarmadeva.” El, 

XX, pp. 37-46. 


Modern Works 

(See Basak, Smith, Tripathi in General Bibliography) 


Majumdar, R. C. 

Mirashi, Y. V. 
Mrithyunjayan, A. 
K. 

V ENK ATARAMANA Y YA, 

N. 


“Nalanda Stone ins. of Yasovarmadeva,” IHQ, 
VII, pp. 664-8; VIII, pp. 371-3. 

“A Note on Vajrata.” IHQ, XX, pp. 353-9. 
“Nalanda Stone ins. of Yasovarmadeva.” IHQ, 
VII, pp. 228-30; VIII, pp. 615-17. 

“Vajrata.” IHQ, XX, pp. 181-8. 


(10) THE CHINESE RAID 


(See Beal, Watters in General Bibliograpny) 


Bagchi, P. C. 

OiIAYANNES, 

Edouard- 


“Sino-Indian Relations.” SIS, I, pp. 65-84. 
Documents sur Les Tou-kiue ( Turcs ) Occiden - 
taux. St. Petersberg, 1903. 


Levi, S. 


Majumdar, R. C. 
Stein, M. A. 


“Les Missions de Wang Hiuen Ts’e dans 
l’lnde.” JA, 1900, XV, pp. 401-68. 

“Wang Hiuan-ts’o’s Indian Campaign.” 

JASBL, XIX. 37. 

Ancient Khotan. Oxford, 1907. 

(11) KASHMIR 


(See Gaiidavaho, Rajatarahgini in General Bibliography) 

Cunningham, A. Ancient Coinage of Kashmir. London, 1843. 
Das Gupta, N. “Date of Lalitaditya Muktaplda.” IC, XIV. pp. 

11 ff. 

Ghoshal, U. N. “Dynastic Chronicles of Kashmir.” IHQ, 

XVIII, pp. 195-207; 302-341; XIX, pp. 27-38; 
156-72. 


Goetz, H. “Conquest of India by Lalitaditya Muktaplda.” 

JBBRAS, XXVII (1952), pp. 43 ff. 

Stein, M. A. “Notes on the Monetary System of Ancient 

Kashmir.” NC, XIX, pp. 125-74. 


(12) SINDHI AND THE ARAB INVASION 

(See Muslim Sources and also Beal, Watters, Rdjatarahgini in 

General Bibliography) 

Silsilat ut-Tawarikh of Sulayman 

Extracts trans. in HIED, I, pp. 1-7. 
Ta’rikh-i-Ma’sumi Extracts trans. in HIED, I, pp. 212-52. 

Tuhfat ul-Kiram of ‘Ali Shir Qani’ 

Extracts trans. in HIED, I, pp. 327 ff; also 
JASB, 1845, pp. 78 ff. 


085 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Modern Works 

(See Ray, Vaidya in General Bibliography) 


Arnold, Sir Thomas. 
Carter. 

Dhar, S. N. 

Ghani, M. A. 


Gibb, H. A. R. 


Majumdar, R. C. 


Muir, Sir William. 


Raverty, Maj. IT. G. 
Le Strange, G. 

Tod, Lt. Col. James. 


The Caliphate. Oxford., 1924. 

A Short History of Sind. Karachi, 1926. 

“The Arab Conquest of Sind.” IHQ, XVI, 
pp. 598-604. 

“The Advent of the Arabs in Hindustan: 
Their Relations with the Hindus; and the 
Occupation of Sindh,” POC, X, pp. 403-10. 

Arodo Conquests in Central Asia. London, 1923. 

“Chinese Records of the Arabs in Central 
Asia.” BSOS, II, pp. 613-22. 

“The Arab Invasion of India.” JIM, X, part 
1, Supplement (gives full references- to 
authorities). 

Annals of the Early Caliphate. London, 1883. 

Caliphate, its rise f decline andl fall. Revised 
by T. H. Weir. Edinburgh, 1915. 

Notes on Afghanistan. London, 1888. 

The Lands of the Eastern Caliphate. 1930. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan. Ed. by 
William Crooke. Oxford, 1920. 


CHAPTER IX 

HARSHA-VARDHANA . AND HIS TIME 

tr 

Original Sources 


(See Gaiidavaho, Harsha-charita, Beal, Watters in General 

Bibliography) 


Banskhera Copper¬ 
plate 

Madhuban Copper¬ 
plate 

Nalanda Seals 
Sonpat Seal 


Inscriptions 
El, IV, pp. 208-11. 

El, I, pp. 67-75. 

El, XXI, pp. 74-6. 
CII, III, No. 52. 


Modern Works 

(See Basak Ray, Smith, Vaidya in General Bibliography) 


Agra w ala, V. S. 

Banerji, A.C. 

Basak, R. G. 
Chatterji, Gauri- 
shankar. 

Ettinghausen, M. L. 
Ganguly, D. C. 


Harsha-charita—A Cultural Study (in Hindi). 
Patna, 1953. 

“The Empire of Harsha.” JAHRS, VI, pp. 
147-58. 

“Sasahka.” IHQ, VIII, pp. 1-20. 
Harshavardhana (in Hindi). Allahabad, 1938. 

Harshavardhana: Empereur et Poet Paris, 
1906. 

“Rajyavardhana and Sasahka.” IHQ, XXIII, 
pp. 51-5. 


686 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Majumdar, R. C. 


Mookerji, R. K. 
Panikkar, K. M. 
Ray, N. R. 

Sampurnananda 

Sircar, D. C. 

Tripathi, R. S. 


Vaidya, C. V. 


“Harshavardhana: A Critical Study.” JBORS, 
IX, pp. 311-25. 

“The Harsha Era.” IHQ, XXVII, pp. 183-90; 

XXVIII, pp. 280 ff. 

Harsha. Oxford, 1926. 

Sri Harsha of Kanauj. Bombay, 1922. 
“Harshavardhana Siladitva—a revised study.” 
IHQ, III, pp. 769-93. 

Sanirdt Harshavardhana (in Hindi). Bombay, 
V. S. 1977. 

“Evidence of the Nalanda Seals.” IHQ, XIX, 
pp. 272-81. 

“Harsha’s accession and the Harsha Era.” 

IHQ , XXVII, pp. 321 ff. 

“Harsha as author and patron of letters.” 
JEHU, I, pp. 231-42. 

History of Kanauj to the Muslim Conquest. 
Benares, 1937. 

“Harsha and his times.” JBBRAS , XXIV, 
pp. 236-76. 


CHAPTER. XI 

DECCAN IN THE GUPTA AGE 
(A) CENTRAL DECCAN 


Original Sources 

(See Allan, Fleet, Bhandarkar’s List in General Bibliography) 
For inscriptions of the Vakatakas, see NHIP, VI, pp. 476-7. 


Alter ar, A. S. 
Krishna, M. H. 
Mirashi, V. V. 


Mirashi, V. V. and 
D. B. Mahajan 
Pargiter, F. E. 

Balaghat Plates 
Kothuraka Grant 
Riddhapur Plates 


“Some Alleged Naga and Vakataka Coins.” 
JNSI, V, pp. 111-34. 

Mysore Archaeological Survey Report, 1929 
(pp. 197 ff). 

“Vakataka Inscriptions in Cave XVI at Ajanta” 
(Hyderabad Archaeological Survey , XIV). 
Hyderabad, 1941. 

“Basim Plates of Vakataka Vindhyasakti II.” 
El, XXVI, pp. 137-155. 

Purdna Text of the Dynasties of the Kali Age. 

Oxford, 1913. 

El, XXII, pp. 207-212. 

El, XXVI, pp. 155-161. 

El, XIX, pp. 100-104. 


Modern Works 


(See Jayaswal, Jouveau-Dubreuil, Majumdar and Altekar, 
Raychaudhuri and Smith in General Bibliography) 

Aiyangar, S. K. “The Vakatakas and their Place in the History 

of India.” ABORT, V, pp. 31-54. 

“The Vakatakas in Gupta History.” QJMS, 
XV, pp. 153-64. 


687 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Altekar, A. S. 
Gopalachari, K. 
Majumdar, R. C. 


Mirashi, V. Y. 


Pai, M. G. 
Raghavan, V, 

Rag, B. Y. Krishna. 
Sircar, I). C. 


Smith, Y. A. 
Subramanian, K. R. 


‘‘Were the Vakatakas defeated by the Guptas 
in e. 350 A.D.?” 1C , IX, pp. 90-106. 

Early History of the Andhra Country . Madras > 
1941. 

“Note on the Genealogy and Chronology of 
the Vakatakas.” JRASB{L), XII, pp. 1-5. 

“The Vakataka Queen Prabhavati-gupta” POC, 
XIII, pp.* 423-5. 

“Historical Data in the Dasakumaracharita.” 
ABOR1, XXVI, pp. 20-31. 

“Some Royal Poets of the Yakataka Age.” 
IHQ, XXI, pp, 193-201. 

“The Yakataka Chronology.” IHQ, XXIV, 
pp. 148-55. 

“The Yakataka Dynasty of the Central Pro¬ 
vinces and Berar.” Annual Bulletin of the 
Nagpur University Historical Society, No. 1, 
pp. 8-37. 

“Genealogy and Chronology of the Vakatakas.” 
J1H, XIV, pp. 1-26; 165-204. 

“Kalidasa’s Kuntalesvaradautya.” B. C. Law 
Volume, II, pp. 191-7. 

History of the Early Dynasties of Andhradesa. 
c. 200-625 A.D. Madras, 1942. 

“A Note on the Vakatakas.” JRASB(L), XII, 
pp. 71-3. 

“Further Notes on the Vakatakas.” JRASB(L), 
XIII, pp. 75-8. 

Successors of Sdtavdhanas in Lower Deccan. 
Calcutta, 1939. 

“The Vakataka Dynasty of Berar in the 4th 
and 5th centuries.” JRAS, 1914, pp. 317-38. 

Buddhist Remains in Andhra and the History 
of Andhra between 285 and 610 A.D. 
Madras, 1932. 


Rudra Kavi. 


Altjekar, A. S. 


Gai, G. S. 
Krishna, M. H. 


Mirashi, Y. Y. 


■(B) WESTERN DECCAN 
Original Sources 

Rashtraudha-varhsa. GOS. Baroda, 1917. 

Modern Works 

Rdshtrakutas and their times. Poona, 1934. 

“Was there a Rashtrakuta Empire in the 6th 
century A.D.?” ABORI , XXIV, pp. 149-55. 

“On the date of the Ellora Plates of Danti- 
durga.” IHQ, XXVII, pp. 79-82. 

“The Early Rashtrakutas of the sixth century 
A.D.” PIHC, VII, pp. 70-7. 

“Rashtrakutas of Manapura.” ABORI, XXV, 
pp. 36-50. 

“A Note on the Tivarkhed Plates of Nanna- 
raja.” IHQ, XXV, pp. 138-43. 

“The Date of the Ellora Plates of Dantidurga.” 
JBBRAS, NS, 26, pp. 163-7. 


688 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Reu, B. N. 

Sanyal, N. B. 

C-hhabra, B. Ch. 
Ghosh, A. 
Majumdar, R. C. 

Hirashi, V. V. 

11 A AIA C H ANDR AMURT Y, 

V. s. 

Sircar, D. C. 


Subbarao, R. 

Vaidyanathan, K. S 
VlSWANATHA,. S. V. 

Rangaciiarya, V. 
Sewell, R. 

Fleet, J. F. 


“The Rashtrakutas and the Gahadvals.” JRAS, 
1930, pp. lllff. ' • 

“The predecessors of the Gahadavalas of 
Kanauj.” JASB, 1925,- pp. 103-6. 

(C) EASTERN DECCAN 
Modern Works 

“Kingdom of Mekala.” Bhdrata Kaumudl, I, 
pp. 215-9. 

“Date of the Pandava kings of Southern 
Kosala.” El, XXV, pp. 266-70. 

“Outline of the History of Kalinga.” Dacca 
University Studies, II. 2, pp. 1 ff. 

“The Sailodbhava Dynasty.” JAHRS, X, pp. 
1-15. 

“Note on the date of the Somavamsi kings of 
Southern Kosala.” El, XXVI, pp. 227-230. 

“The Date of Tlvaradeva”. Jha Comm. Vol., 
pp. 223-34. 

“Genealogy of the Vishnukundins”. JAHRS, 
X, pp. 187-93. 

“Evidence of the Nalanda Seals”. IHQ, XIX, 
pp. 272-81. 

“Genealogy and Chronology of the Vishnu¬ 
kundins. QJMS, XXV, pp. 299-301. ^ 

“Genealogy of the Salahkavanas”. IHQ, IX, 
pp. 208-14. 

“A Note on the Chronology of the Sailod- 
bhavas.” IHQ, XXVII, pp. 166-9. 

“A Note on the Genealogy of the Somavamsls”. 
IHQ, XX, pp. 76-82. 

“Vishnukundins and Mr. S. V. Viswanatha”. 
QJMS, XXVII, pp. 231-3. 

“Early History of North-East Deccan from 
Original Sources”. POC, V, Part 1, 
492-524 

“History of the Vishnukundins”. QJMS, XXX, 
pp. 308-331; XXXI, pp. i3-24. 

“Vishnukundins”. QJMS, XXV, pp. 75-86; 
XXVI, pp! 142-4. 

CHAPTER XII 
CHALUKYAS 
Original Sources 

Inscriptions of the Madras Presidency. 3 vols. 
Madras, 1919. 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 
'Modern Works 

“Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts.” BG, I 
Part 2. 

“Chronology of the Eastern Chalukya Kings. 
IA, XX-XXI. 

689 


C.A.—44 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Ganguly, D. C. 
Gopalan, R. 

Rao, B. V. Krishna. 


Sarma, M. Somase- 
khara. 

Sircar, D. C. 
Tripathi, R. S. 

Y ENKATARAMAMAYYA, 

N. 


The Eastern Chdlukyas. Benares, 1937. 
History of the Pallavas of Kanchi. Madras, 
1928. 

“Origin and Early History of the Chalukyas.” 

PIHC , III, pp. 386-410. 

“Revised Chronology of the Eastern Chalukya 
kings.” JAHRS, IX, pp. 1-32. 

“The Chronology of the Eastern Chalukyas.” 
JOR, IX, pp. 17-45. 

Successors of the Sdtavdhanas in the Lower 
Deccan. Calcutta, 1939. 

History of Kanauj. Benares, 1937. 

The Eastern Chdlukyas of Vehgl. Madras, 1950. 


CHAPTER XIII 
DYNASTIES OF SOUTH INDIA 


Ayyar, Y. Yenkata- 
subba. 

Aiyangar, P. T. S. 

Aiyengar, S. Kri~ 
shnaswami. 

Aiyer, K. G. Sesha. 

Aiyer, K. Y. Subrah- 
manya. 

Dikshitar, Y. R. R. 

Gop ALAN, R. 

Heras, H. 


Jayaswal, K. P. 

J ouveau-Dubreuil, 
G. 


Mahalingam, T. Y. 

Minakshi, C. 

Moraes, G. M. 

Pai, M. Govinda. 

Rao, B. Y. Krishna, 


Original Sources 

South Indian Inscriptions. Vol. XII. Madras, 
1943. 

Modern Works 

History of the Tamils to 600 A.D. Madras, 
1929. 

Some Contribution of South India to Indian 
Culture. Calcutta, 1923. 

Seran Vanji. Ernakulam, 1940. 

Cher a Kings of the Sang am Period. London, 
1937. 

Historical Sketches of Ancient Deccan. Madras, 
1917. 

Studies in Tamil Literature and History . 
London, 1930. 

History of the Pallavas of Kanchi. Madras, 
1928. 

Origin of the Pallavas. JUB, 1936. 

The Pallava Genealogy. Bombay, 1931. 

Studies in Pallava History. Madras, 1933. 

History of India. Lahore, 1933. 

Ancient History of the Deccan (translated 
from the French by V. S. Swaminandha 
Dikshitar). Pondicherry, 1920. 

Pallavas (translated from the French by V. S. 
Swaminadha Dikshitar). Pondicherry, 1917. 

The Bdnas in South Indian History, Madras, 
1952. 

Administration and Social Life under the 
Pallavas. Madras, 1938. 

The Kadamba Kula. Bombay, 1931. 

“Chronology of the Early Kadambas.” JIH, 
XII, pp. 354-73; XIII, pp. 18-34; 132-73. 

A History of the Early Dynasties of Andhra - 
desa. Madras, 1942. 


690 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Rao, M. V, Krishna. 
Saletore, B. A. 
Sastri, K. A. N. 


Sathianathier, R. 
Sircar, D. C. 


(See Dipavamsa 

Ddthd-vamsa 

Hatthavanagalia- 

vihara-vamsa 

Attangalu-vamsa 

Daladdpuydvaliya 
Daladatirita 
Nikdya Sahgraha 

Puydvaliya, Ch. 34 


Rdjaratndkaraya 

Rdjdvaliya 


CoDRINGTON, H. W. 
COOMARASWAMY, A. 

K. 

Gopalan, R. 
Hultzsch, E. 

Mendis, G. C. 
Smith, Y. A. 


Turnour, G. 

WICKREMASINGHE 


The Gangas of Talkad. Madras, 1936. 

Ancient Karnataka. Vol. I. Poona, 1936. 

The Colas. Vols. I, II. 1. Madras, 1925, 37. 
History of South India. Bombay, 1952. 

The Pandyan Kingdom. London, 1929. 

Studies in Chola History and Administration. 
London, 1932. 

Studies in the Ancient History of Tonda - 
mandalam. Madras, 1944. 

The Early Pallavas. Lahore, 1935. 

The Successors of the Sdtavdhanas in the 
Lower Deccan. Calcutta, 1939. 

CHAPTER XIV 
CEYLON 
Original Sources 
(i) Pali 

and Mahavamsa in General Bibliography) 

Ed. and trans. by B. C. Law. Lahore, 1925. 
Ed. by James d’Alwis. 

(ii) Simhalese 

Ed. by M. Kumaranatunga. Colombo, B. E. 
2466. 

Ed. by K. M. Perera. Colombo, 1893. 

Ed. by E. S. Rajasekhara. Colombo, 1920, 

Ed. by D. M. de Z. Wickramasinghe. Colombo, 
1890. Trans, by C. M. Fernando with an intr. 
by W. F. Gunawardhana. Colombo, 1908. 
Ed. by M. Medhahkara Thera. Eng. trans. by 
B. Gunasekara (A Contribution to the His¬ 
tory of Ceylon ). Colombo, 1895. 

Ed. by Simon de Silva. Colombo, 1907. 

Ed. by B. Gunasekara. Colombo, 1911. Eng. 
trans. by the same. Colombo, 1900. 

Modern Works 

(See Sastri in Ch. XIII) 

History of Ceylon. London, 1926. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. London, 
1927. 

The Pallavas of Kanchi .• Madras, 1928. 
“Contributions to Singhalese Chronology.” 

JRAS. 1913, pp. 517 ff. 

Early History of Ceylon. Calcutta, 1988. 
History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. 2nd 
Ed. Revised by K. deB. Codrington. Oxford.. 
1930. 

An Epitome of the History of Ceylon. 1836. 
Archaeological Survey of Ceylon. Vol. I. 


691 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Wijesinmha, L. C. Mahavamsa. Part I (to which is prefixed the 

translation of the first part, published in 
1837, by G. Tumour.) Colombo, 1909. 


CHAPTER XV 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 
(A) SANSKRIT AND PRAKRIT 


(Note: A select list of important texts in Sanskrit, Pali and 
ArdhamagadhI is given in General Bibliography. Further 
accounts of individual texts and full bibliographical material 
will be found in Das Gupta and De, Keith, Krishna- 
machariar, Winternitz and others mentioned under 
“Histories of Literature” in General Bibliography above). 


Alsdorf, A. 
Belvalkar, S. K. 
(Ed.). 

Belvalkar, 3. K. 

B HAND ARK AR, D. R. 

& Others (Ed.). 
Bhandarkar, R. G. 


Apabhramsa-Studien. Leipzig, 1937. 

Jha Commemoration Volume. Poona, 1937. 
Pathak Commemoration Volume. Poona, 1934. 
Systems of Sanskrit Grammar. Poona, 1915. 
B. C. Law Volume. Parts 1 and 2. Calcutta, 
1945; Poona, 1946. 

Collected Works. Vol. I-IV. Poona, 1927- 
1933. 


Chitrav, S. V. 

Das Gupta, S. N. 

(Ed.). 

De, S. K. 

Deyesthali, G. V. 
Diksiiit, S. B. 


Madhyayuglna Charita Kosa (Dictionary of 
Biography in Medieval India) (in Marathi) 
Poona, 1937. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. Vol. I. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1947. 

History of Sanskrit Poetics. 2 vols. London, 
1923, 1925. 

Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit and Prakrit 
Manuscripts in the Library of the Univer¬ 
sity of Bombay. Bombay, 1944. 

Bharatiya Jyotisha Stastra (History of Indian 
Astronomy) (in Marathi). 2nd Ed. Poona, 
1931. 


Dikshitar, V. R. R. 

Dutta, B. B. and 
Singh, A. N. 
Filliozat, J. 


Gaudapada 


Gupta, Chandra 
Bhan 


The Purdna Index. 2 Vols. Madras, 1951, 
1952. 

History of Hindu Mathematics. Lahore, 1935. 

La Doctrine Classique de la Medecine Indien- 
ne - Ses Origines et ses Par alleles Grecs. 
Paris, 1949. 

Agamasastra. Edited, translated and annotat¬ 
ed by Vidhushekhara Bhattacharya. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1943. 

The Indian Theatre , 1954. 


Haas, G. 

IIazra, R. C. 

Hoernle, A. F. R. 


Dasarupaka. New York, 1912. 

Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites 
and Customs. Dacca, 1940. 

Bower Manuscript. Calcutta, 1893-1912. 
Studies in the Medicine of Ancient India. 
Oxford, 1907. 


692 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Jolly. J. 


Kane, P. V. 


Kaye, G. R. 

Kesava 

Konow, Sten. 

Levy, S. 
Peterson, P. 

Pravarasena 

Rajasekiiara 
Ray, P. C. 
Schuyler, M. 
Tiiibaut, G. 
Velankar, II. D. 


Medicin. Strassburg, 1901 (Eng. trans. 
“Indian Medicine”, by C. G. Kashikar. 
Poona, 1951). 

History of Alamkara Literature (Introduction 
to Sahityaddrpana, 2nd Edition). Bombay, 
1923; History of Sanskrit Poetics (Intr. to 
Sdhityadarpana, 3rd Edition). Bombay, 
1951. 

History of Dharmasastra , Vol. I. Poona, 1930. 
Bakhshali Manuscript. Calcutta, 1927. 

Hindu Astronomy. Calcutta, 1924. 

Hindu Mathematics. Lahore, 1889. 
Kalpadrukosa. Edited by Ramavatara Sarma. 
Baroda, 1928. 

Das Indische Drama. Berlin und Leipzig, 
1920. 

Le theatre indien. Paris, 1890. 

A Fourth Report of Operations in search of 
Sanskrit Mss in the Bombay Circle, April 
1886—March 1892. Bombay, 1894 (=JBB- 
RAS, XVIII, Extra No.). 

Setubandha. Ed. with a Sanskrit comm, by 
Sriramadasa Bhupati by Pt. Sivadatta and 
K. P. Parab. 2nd Ed. Bombay 1935. 
Kdvyamimdmsd. Edited by C. D. Dalai. 3rd 
Ed. Baroda, 1924. 

History of Hindu Chemistry, etc. Calcutta. 
1887. 

Bibliography of the Sanskrit Drama. New 
York, 1906. 

Astrohomie, Astrologie und Mathematic. 
Strassburg, 1889. 

dinar atnakosa (An Alphabetical Register of 
Jain Works and Authors). Vol. I. Poona, 
1944. 


Aiyangar ( Iyengar ) 
M. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar, S. 

Kristmaswami 
Aiyangar, P. T. S. 

Ayyar, C. V. Nara- 
yana 

Dikshitar, V. R. R. 

Hooper, J. S. M. 
Kingsbury and 
Phillips 


NAMMALVAR 


(B) TAMIL 

Tamil Studies. Madras, 1914. 

J^ncient India and South Indian History . Vol. 
II. Poona, 1941. 

History of the Tamils from the earliest times 
to 600 A.D. 1929. 

Origin and Early History of Saivism in South 
India. Madras, 1936. 

Studies in Tamil Literature and History. 2nd 
Edition. Madras, 1936. 

Hymns of the Alvars. Calcutta, 1929. 

Appar-Hymns (Eng. trans.) 

Hymns of the Tamil Saiva Saints. Calcutta, 
1920. 

Nana-Sambadhar-Hymns. Eng. trans. 

A Sketch of his Life and Teachings (NatesanL 


693 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


The Chronology of Early Tamils. Madras, 1932. 

Tamil Literature. Tinnevelly, 1929. 

Saint Appar. Madras, 1910. 

Siva Jhdna Bodham. Madras, 1895. 

Studies in Saiva Siddhdnta. Madras, 1911. 

Some Milestones in Tamil Literature. 

The Tiruvasagam or u Sacred Utterances’’ 
Oxford, 1900. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 

Original Sources 

(i) Literary 

(See Harsha-charita by Bana, and Nitisdra by Kamandaka, Fahien’s 
Travels, Watters’ On Yuan Chwang, Life of Huan Tsang in General 
Bibliography. See also General Bibliography under Dharma-sutras, 
Pur§nas, Polity, Historical Works, Belles-Lettres) 

Kdtydyana-smriti Edited by N. C. Bandopadhyaya. Calcutta, 1927. 
Kdtydyana-smriti-saroddhara 
(or Katyayana-Smriti 

on Vyavahara) Edited by P. V. Kane, Bombay, 1933. 

(ii) Inscriptions 
See under II (1) 

(iii) Coins. See under II. (2) 

Modern Works 

(See General Bibliography under Modern Works and 

Histories of the period) 

Some Aspects of Ancient Indian Polity, 2nd 
Ed. Madras, 1935. 

State and Government in Ancient India, 2nd 
Ed., Varanasi. 

The State in A.ncienf India. Allahabad, 1928. 
Theory of Government in Ancient India. 
Allahabad, 1927. 

Hindu Administrative Institutions. Madras, 
1929. 

Gupta Polity, Madras. 1952. 

A History of Indian Political Ideas. Bombay, 
1959. 

Hindu Polity. Calcutta, 1924; 3rd Ed. Banga¬ 
lore, 1955. 

History of Kanauj, Benaras, 1937. 

Indian Culture through the Ages. Vol. II, 
Mysore, 1932. 


Aiyangar, K. V. R. 
Altekar, A. S. 

Beni Prasad 

Dikshitar, V. R. R. 

G HOSHAL, U. N. 
Jayaswal, K. P. 
Tripathi, R. S. 

V ENKATESWARA, S. V. 


Pillai, K. N. Siva- 
raja 

Pillai, M. S Purna- 
lingam 

Pill a i, Nallaswami 


Pillal, Sundaram 
Pope, G-. U. 


694 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER XVII 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 
Original Sources 
Literary 

(See Dharma-sastra and Polity in General Bibliography; Kdtytiyana- 

smriti in Ch. XVI supra.) 

Additional Verses of Katyayana on Vyavahara 

By K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar. Festschrift 
Kane, pp. 7-17. 

Asahaya Commentary on Ndrada-smriti. BI. Calcutta, 

1885. 

Vydsa-smriti (Vyavahara chapter) 

Edited by B. K. Ghosh. IC, IX, pp. 65-98. 
Modern Works 

Manu and Yajhavalkya: a comparison and a 
contrast. Calcutta, 1930. 

Recht und Sitte. Strassburg, 1896. (Eng. trans. 
by B. K. Ghosh, Hindu Law and Custom , 
Calcutta, 1928.) 

History of Dharma\sdstra. Vols. II-III. Poona, 
1941, 1946. 

CHAPTER XVIII 
RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Jayaswal, K. P. 
Jolly, J. 

Kane, P. V. 


Original Sources 

(See Epics, Puranas, Philosophy, Dharma-sastra, Buddhist, Jain 
Chinese under Original Sources and Religion and Philosophy under 

Modem Works in General Bibliography) 


(A) GENERAL 


Modern Works 


Barnett, L. D. Hindu Gods and Heroes. London, 1923. 

Barth, A. The Religions of India (Authorised Eng. trans. 

by J. Wood. London, 1882). 

Bhandarkar, R. G. Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 

Systems. Strassburg, 1913; Indian Edition, 
Poona, 1928. 

Cultural Heritage of India 

Published by the Ramakrishna Mission Insti¬ 
tute of Culture, Calcutta 1937, 1953 etc. 

Elliot, Sir Charles Hinduism and Buddhism. 3 Vols. London, 

1921. 


Farquilar, J. N. 
Hopkins, E. W. 
Goswami, K. G. 

I\ araiarkar, A. P. 


Outline of the Religious Literature of India. 
Oxford, 1920. 

Epic Mythology. Strassbury, 1915, 

The Religions of India. Boston, 1895. 
“Religious Toleration in the Gupta Period.*’ 
IHQ, XIII, pp. 323-8. 

The Religions of India. Lonavala, 1950. 


695 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Monier Williams, 
M. 

Tripathi, R. S. 


Religious Thought and Life in India. 4th Ech 
London, 1891. 

Hinduism. London, 1906. 

“Religious Toleration under the Imperial 
Guptas.” 1HQ, XV, pp. 1-12. 

(B) BUDDHISM 


Original Sources 

(See Buddhist and Chinese under Original Sources and Religion and 
Philosophy under Modem Works in General Bibliography. For Pali 
Literature see under Histories of Literature) 


S addharmap un da- 
rika 


Suvarnaprabhasa 


Edited by H. Kern and Bunyiu Nanjio. Biblio¬ 
theca Buddhica, X. St. Petersbourg, 1908 ff. 
Eng. trans. by H. Kern. SBE, XXI, Oxford, 
1884. 

Edited by S. C. Das and S. C. Sastri. Calcutta, 
1898. 

Ed. by Bunyiu Nanjio. Kyoto, 1931. 

J. Nobel. Leipzig, 1937. 

Modern Works 


COOMARASWAMY, A. 

5 - 


Daiilke, P. 

* 

David-Neal, Ale¬ 
xandra 


Dutt, N. 


Keith, A. B. 

t 

Kern, II. 


Law, B. C. 


McGovern, W. M. 

Obermiller. E. 

Rhys Davids, Mrs. 

C. A. F. 

Rhys Davids, T. W. 


Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism. London, 
1928. 

Living Thoughts of Gotama the Buddha. 
London, 1948. 

Buddhism and its Place in the Mental Life of 
Mankind London, 1927. 

Le Buddhisme, ses Doctrines et ses Methodes. 
Eng. trans. Buddhism , its doctrines and 
rpethods, by H. N. M. Hardy and Bernard 
Miall. London, 1939. 

Aspects of Mahdydna Buddhism and Its Rela¬ 
tion to Hinaydna. London, 1930. 

Early Monastic Buddhism. 2 Vols. Calcutta. 

Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon. 
Oxford, 1923. 

Manual of Indian Buddhism. Strassburg, 
1896. 

Histoire du Bouddhisme dans LTnde. Paris, 
1901. 

On the Pali Chronicles of Ceylon. Calcutta, 
1947. 

Buddhaghosa. Bombay, 1946. 

A Manual of Buddhist Philosophy. London, 
1923. 

History of Buddhism. Heidelburg. 1931. 

Buddhism: Its Birth and Dispersal. London, 
1934. 

History of Indian Buddhism,. London, 1897. 

Ectrly Buddhism. London, 1908. 

Buddhism: Its History and Literature. New 
Ed. London, 1926. 


C>96 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Suzuki, B. L. 


Takakusu, J 


Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism. London, 
1907. 

Mahayana Buddhism. London, 1938. 

Essentials of Buddhist Philosophy. Honolulu, 

1947. 

[Cf. Bibliographie Bouddhique published by Adrien 
Maisonneuve. Paris, 1937]. 


(C) JAINISM 
Original Sources 

(See Jain and Chinese under Original Sources and Religion and 
Philosophy under Modern Works in General Bibliography) 

Modern Works 

Studies in South Indian Jainism. Madras, 
1922. 


Ayyangar, M. S. 
Ramaswami and 
Rao, B. Seshgiri 
Bakodia, U. D. 


Buiilgk G. 


Guasenapp, II. 
Guerinot, A. 


IIayavadanarao, C. 
Jagan Nath 

Jaini, J. L. 

Kapadia, II. R. 

Narasimiiac jiarya , 
R. 

SciIUBRKsG, W. 

Sen, A. C. 

Stiaii, C. P. 
Smyth, II. W. 

Stevenson, Mrs. S. 


History and, Literature of Jainism. Bombay, 
1909. 

Uber die indische Secte der Jainas. Vienna, 
1887. Eng. Trans, by J. Burgess, The Indian 
Sect of the Jainas. London, 1903. 

Der Jainismus. Berlin, 1928. 

Essai de Bibliographie Jaina. Paris, 1906. 
“Notes de Bibliographie Jaina.” JA, XIV, 
pp. 48-148. 

Repertoire d’Epigraphie Jaina. Paris, 1908. 
La religion DjoAna. Paris, 1926. 

Mysore Gazetteer. Vol. II. 

“Jainism in the Gupta Age.” Jaina Vidyd , 
Vol. I, No. 1. 

Outlines of Jainism. Ed. by F. W. Thomas. 
Cambridge, 1916. 

Jaina Religion and Literature. Vol. I, Part 1. 
Lahore, 1944. 

Epigraphia Carnatica, II, Introduction. 

Die Lehre der Jainas . Leipzig, 1935. 

Die Jainas. Tubingen, 1927. 

Schools and Sects in Jain Literature. Calcutta, 
1931. 

Jainism in Northern India. Bombay, 1932. 
“Weber’s Sacred Literature of the Jainas.” 
I A, XVII-XXI. 

The Heart cf Jainism. Oxford, 1915. 


(D) VAISHNAVISM 
Original Sources 

(See Epics and Puranas under Original Sources and Religion and 
Philosophy under Modern Works in General Bibliography) 

Modern Works 

Aiyangar, S. K. Early History of Vaishnavism in South India 

London, 1920. 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Chanda, R. P. Archaeology and Vaishnava Tradition . MASI. 

Calcutta, 1920. 

Rao, T. A. G. History of Sri Vaishiiavas, Madras, 1923. 

Raychaudhuri, H. C. Materials for the Study of the Early History 

of the Vaishnava Sect. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 
1936. 

(E) SAIVISM 


Lihga Purdna 

Kingsbury, P. and 
Phillips, G. E. 
Pope, G. U. 

Aiyangar, S. K. 

Ayyar, C. V. 
Narayana 

Pillai, S. Satchida- 
nanda 

Sastri K. A. N. 


Original Sources 
(As in Vaishnavism above) 

Ed. J. Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1885. 

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints. Calcutta, 
1921. 

The Tiruvdgagam. Oxford, 1900. 

Modern Works 

Contribution of South India to Indian Culture. 
Calcutta, 1923. 

Origin and Early History of Saivism in South 
India. Madras, 1936. 

“The Saiva Saints of Southern India.” Cult. 
Her. II, pp. 235-247. 

“A Historical Sketch of Saivism.” Cult. Her., 


SlVAPADASUNDARAM, 

S. 

Subram anian, K. R. 


II, pp. 18-34. 

The Saiva School of Hinduism. London, 1934. 


Origin of Saivism and its History in the Tamil 
Land. Madras, 1941. 

(F) MINOR RELIGIOUS SECTS 


Original Sources 


(See Epics and Puranas under Original Sources and Religion and 
Philosophy under Modern Works in General Bibliography) 
Kiirma j Purdna Ed. by N. Mukhopadhyaya. BI. Calcutta, 1890. 

Vishnu-dharmottara Bombay, 1912. 

Purdna 


B HAND ARK AR, R. G. 

Farquhar, J. N. 

Macnicol, Nichol 
Payne, E. A. 
Woodroffe, Sir J. 


Modern Works 

Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
Sects. Strassburg, 1913; Poona, 1928. 
Outline of the Religious Literature of India. 
Oxford, 1920. 

Indian Theism. London, 1915. 

The Saktas. Calcutta, 1933. 

Shakti and Shakta. Madras, 1929. 

(G) PHILOSOPHY 


Original Sources 

(See Epics, Puranas and Philosophy under Original Sources and 
Religion and Philosophy under Modern Works in General 

Bibliography) 

Modern Works 

Das Gupta, S. N. History of Indian Philosophy. 4 Vols. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1932 ff. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Garbe, R. 

Grousset, Rene 
Jha, G. 

Masson-Oursel, P. 
Max Muller, i\ 

Radhakrishnan. S. 

Strauss, Otto. 


Banerjea, J. N. 
Bhattacharya, B. C. 

Bhattacharya, B. 
COOMARASWAMY, A. 

K. 

Rougher, A. 

Johnston, E. H. 

J ouveau-Dubreuil, 

G. 

Rao, T. A. Gopinatlia 
Shastri, B. 0. 


Vats, M. S. 


Agrawala, V. S. 
Banerji, R. D. 
Brown, Percy 

Burgess, J. 

Coomaraswamy, A. 

K. 


Cousens, Henry 


Philosophy of Ancient India. Chicago, 1897. 
Le Philosophic Indiennes. Paris, 1931. 

Purva Mlmdmsd in its sources. Benares, 1942. 
Le Philosophic en Orient. Paris, 1938. 

Six Syste7ns of Indian Philosophy. London, 
1889. 

Indian Philosophy. 2 Vols. London, 1923, 
1927. 

Indische Philosophic . Munchen, 1925. 

(H) ICONOGRAPHY 
Modern Works 

Development of Hindu Iconography. Calcutta, 
1941. 

Indian Images: Vol. I. Brahmanic Icono¬ 
graphy. Calcutta, 1931; Vol. II. Jain Icono¬ 
graphy. Lahore, 1939. 

Indian Buddhist Iconography. Oxford, 1924. 
Elements of Buddhist Iconography. Harvard, 
1935. 

L’ Icoriographie bouddhique de V hide. 2 Vols. 
Paris. 1900, 1905. 

“Two Buddhist Scenes at Bhaja”. J1SOA, VII, 
pp. 1-7. 

Iconography of Southern India (Trans, from 
the French by A. C. Martin). Paris, 1937. 
Eleinents of Hindu Iconography. 2 Vols. 
Madras, 1914, 1916. 

“Identification of a Relief belonging to the 
Gupta Temple at Deogarh”. AO, XII, pp. 
117-125. 

The Gupta Temple at Deogarh. MASI. No. 
70. Delhi, 1952. 

CHAPTER XIX 
ART 

(A) ARCHITECTURE 

Modern Works 

Gupta Art. Lucknow, 1947. 

Age of the Imperial Guptas. Benares, 1933. 
Indian Architecture (Buddhist and Hindu). 

2nd Edition. Bombay, 1949. 

Ancieiit Monuments, Temples and Sculptures 
of India. 2 Vols. London, 1897. 

History of Indian and Indoiiesian Art. London, 
192 7. 

“Early Indian Architecture: I. Cities, City- 
gates, etc.” Eastern Art, II, pp. 209-25. 
“Early Indian Architecture: III. Palaces”. 

Easteim Art, III, pp. 181-217. 

“Ancient Temples of Aihole” (ASI, 1907-8). 


699 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 




Cousens, Henry 
Cunningham, Sir A. 
Dey, M. C. 
Febgusson, James 


Fergusson, James 
and Burgess, James 
Haldar, A. K. 

Havell, E. B. 

Jouveau-Dubreuil, 

G. 

Longhurst, A. II. 
Luard, C. E. 

Rea, x\. 

Saras'wati, S. K. 

Sastri, Hirananda 
Vogel, J. Ph. 
Wauchope, R. S. 

Yazdani, G. 


(B) 


Chalukyan Architecture of the Kandrese dis¬ 
tricts. Calcutta, 1926. 

Archaeological Survey Reports, Vols. IX, X, 
XI and XXL 

My pilgrimage to Ajanta and Bagh. London, 
1925. 

History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. 
2nd Ed. Revised and Edited by J. Burgess 
and R. P. Spiers. 2 Vol. London, 1910. 
Cave Temples of India. London, 1880. 

“Buddhist Caves of Bagh.” Burlington Maga¬ 
zine, 1910-11. 

Ancient and Medieval Architecture of India. 
London, 1915. 

Archeologie du Sud de ITnde. Paris, 1914. 

Pallava i Architecture. MASI, Nos. 17 and 33, 
1924, 1928. 

“Buddhist Caves of Central India: Bagh.” 
IA, 1910. 

Pallava Architecture. Madras, 1909. 

“Temple Architecture in the Gupta Age.” 

JISOA, VIII, pp. 146-158. 

Guide to Elephanta. Delhi, 1934. 

“Temple of Bhitargaon.” (ASI, 1908-9). 
Buddhist Cave Temvles of India. Calcutta. 
1933. 

Ajanta. 3 pts. London, 1930, 33, 46. 
“Rock-hewn Temples of Aurangabad.” ML. 
XI, 1937. 

SCULPTURE AND OTHER ARTS 


(Catalogues and Guides to Museums at Calcutta, Delhi, Gwalior, 
Lahore, Lucknow, Madras, Mathura, Patna, Peshawar, Sanchi and 
Sarnath. For terracottas of Northern India of the period under 
review, see ASI, 1908-09, 1909-10, p. 80, pi. XXXVIII; 1910-11, 
pis. m, XXXIV; 1917-18, pis. XII-XIII; 1918-19, pi. XI; 1924-25, 
pi. XXXII; Cunningham’s Report, XI, pis. XIV-XVIII) 

Agrawala, V. S. “Art in the Gupta Period.” NHIP, VI, pp. 

446-71. 

Gupta Art. Lucknow. 1947. 

„ “Rajghat Terracottas.” JISOA, IX, pp. 7 ff. 

“Rajghat Terracottas.” JUPHS, July 1941, 

pp. 1-8. 

Banerji, R. D. The Age of the Imperial Guptas. Benares. 

1933. Ch. V, and Pis. XV-XLI. 

The Temples of Siva at Bhumara. MASI, 
No. 16. 1924. 

“Some Sculpture from Kosam” (ASL 1913-14). 
“Four Sculptures from Chandimau (RajaonaU 
(ASI, 1911-12). 

Bas-reliefs from Badami. MASI, No. 25. 1928 


700 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bakerji, R. D. 
Chanda, R. P. 
Chaudhury, P. D. 
Cohn, W. 

Codrikgton, K. de B. 

C 00 MAR AS WAMY, A. 

K. 


Cor sens, PI. 

Dey, M. C. 

Dikshit, K. N. 

For cher, A. 

Garde, M. B. 

Ghosh, A, and Pani- 
graht, K. C. 
Goloubew, V. 

Griffiths, J, 

Groussets, R. 

IIaldar, A. K. 

Hargreaves. H. 

Ha yell, E. B. 


“Three Sculptures in the Lucknow Museum” 
(ASI, 1909-10). 

“The Mathura School of Sculpture” (ASI, 
1922-23). 

“Early Sculpture of Assam.” JARS, XI, pp. 
32-40. 

Indische Plastik. Berlin, 1921. 

Ancient Indian. London, 1926. 

Visvakarma. London, 1914 (for plates only). 
Catalogue of Indian Collections in the Museum 
of Fine Arts, Boston. No. 2, Sculpture. 
1923. 

“Chitralakshana.” AMV, I, pp. 49-61. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. London, 
1927. 

“An Early Passage on Indian Painting.” 

Eastern Art, III, pp. 218 ft’. 

“Abhasa.” J AOS, 52, pp. 210 ft. 

The Mirror of Gesture (with Duggiral, G. K.) 

Cambridge, Mass., 1917. 

Transformation of Nature in Art. Harvard, 
1934. 

“The Ancient Temples at Aihole” {ASI, 1907- 
OS). 

Mahabodhi, or the Great Buddhist Temple at 
Bod.hgaya. London, 1892. 

My Pilgrimage to Ajanta and Bagh. London, 
1925. 

“Archaeological Remains of the Gupta Period.” 
NHIP, VI, pp. 423-441. 

“Excavations at Paharpur. MASI, No. 55. 
Delhi, 1938. 

“Preliminary Report on the Interpretation of 
the Paintings and Sculptures of Ajanta.” 
Journal of the Hyderabad Archaeological 
Society, 5, 1919-20. 

“Lettre d’Ajanta.” JA, 11th series. 

“The Site of Padumavati” (ASI, 1914-15). 
Archaeology in Gwalior. Gwalior, 1934. 
“Pottery of Ahichchhatra.” Ancient India, 
No. 1, Jan. 1946, pp. 37 ft. 

“La descente de la Ganga sur Terre.” Ars 
Asiatica. Ill (Paris, 1921) .. 

The Paintings in the Buddhist Cave Temples 
of Ajomta. London, 1896-97. 

Civilisation of the East, 2nd Edition. Vol. II. 
India. London, 1932. 

“The Paintings of the Bagh Caves”. Rupam, 
No. 8, 1921. 

“The Buddhist Caves of Bagh.” Burlington 
Magazine, 1910-11. 

“Excavations at Sarnatli” (ASI, 1914-15V 
Indian Sculpture and Painting. London, 1908. 


701 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Herringham, Lady 
India Society 
Jayaswal, K. P. 

Jouveau-Dubreuil, 

Gr. 


Kak, Er. C. 

Kar, C. 

Kramrisch, Stella 


Longhurst, A. II. 


Marshall, Sir J. T. 


Marshall, Sir J. II. 

and Konow, Sten 
Marshall, Sir J. T. 

and Sahni, D. R. 
Paramasivam, S. 

Ramach andean, T.N. 


Rodin, A;., Coomara- 
swamy, A.. ITAVELL, 
E. R., et G-oloubew 
Raghavan, V. 


Ajanta Frescoes. London, 1915. 

The Bagh Caves. London, 1927. 

“Note on a terracotta Ramayana panel. - ’ 

Modern Review, 1932, p. 148. 

“La Descent de Ganga.” Etudes d'Oriental- 
isme, II. 

“Pallava Painting.” IA, LII, pp. 45-47. 

Les Antiquities de VEpoque Pallava. Pondi¬ 
cherry, 1916. 

The Pallava Painting. Pudukottai, 1920. 
Ancient Monuments of Kashmir (Pis. XVI- 
XLVII). London, 1933. 

Classical Indian Sculpture. London, 1950. 
Indian Sculpture. Calcutta, 1933. 

A Survey of Paintings in the Dekkan. London, 
1937. 

Grundzuqe der indischen Kunst. Hellarau, 
1924. 

Vishnudharmottaram, pt. Ill (a treatise on 
Indian painting). Calcutta, 1924. 

“Die Figure plastik der Gupta zeit.” Wiener 
Beitrage zur Kunst und Kulturgeschichte 
Asiens. V. 

“Indian Terracottas.” J1SOA , VII, pp. 89 ft. 
“Paintings at Badami.” JISOA , IV. pp. 57 ff. 
“Dakshina-Chitra.” JISOA. V, pp. 218-237. 
“Notes.” JISOA, VI, pp. 200 ff. 

Pallava Architecture. MASI, Nos. 17 and 33. 
1924, 1928. 

Mahabalipuram Sculptures. MASI, No. 40. 
1930. 

“The Sirigiriva Frescoes.” JISOA. V, pp. 
177 ff. 

“Excavations at Saheth Maheth” (ASI. 1910- 

11 ). 

“Excavations at Bhita” (ASI, 1911-12). 

Guide to Sandhi. 2nd Ed. Delhi, 1936. 

Guide to Taxila. 3rd Ed. Delhi, 1936. 
“Excavations at Sarnath” (ASI, 1907-08). 

“Excavations at Mandor” (ASI, 1909-10). 

“An Investigation into the Methods of Mural 
Paintings.” JISOA. VII, pp. 18 ff. 

“Cave Temples near Tirummalaipuram and 
their Paintings.” JISOA, IV, pp. 65-71. 
“Pallava Painting.” Ojha Comm. Vol. 
“Archaeological Finds at Mayanamati.” B. C. 

Law Volume, II, pp. 213-231. 

Sculptures Civaites. Paris and Brussels, 1921. 


“Dakshina-Chitra.” JISOA , VI, pp. 195-196. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


SlVABAMAMURTI, C. 


Smith, V. A. 


Spooner, D. B. 
Vogel, J. Ph. 


Vogel, J. Ph. and 
Sahni, D. R. 
Yazdani, G. 

Zimmer, H. 


“Note on Paintings at Tirumalaipuram.’ 1 
JlSOA, IV, pp. 7z-4 and plate. 

“South Indian Art.” NH1P, VI, pp. 442*6. 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. 2nd 
Ed. Oxford, 1930. 

Catalogue of Coins in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta. Vol. I. Oxford, 1906. 

Indian Sculpture of the Gupta Period ( Ostasia - 
tische Zeitschrift, III. 1915). 

“Excavations at Basarh” (ASI, 1913-14). 

Antiquities of Chamba. Calcutta, 1911. 

Catalogue of the Archaeological Museum at 
Mathura. Allahabad, 1910. 

“The Temple at Bhitargaon” (ASI, 1908-09). 

“Excavations at Saheth Maheth” (ASI, 1907- 
OS). 

“The Mathura School of Sculpture” (ASI, 
1906-07 and 1909-10). 

“Notes on Excavations at Kasia” (ASI, 1904-05 
and 1905-06). 

“Buddhist Sculptures from Benares” (ASI, 
1903-04). 

Le sculpture de Mathiira. Paris and Brussels, 
1930. 

“The Discovery of Frescoes in South Indian 
Temples.” Annual Bibliography of Indian 
Archaeology, 1931, pp. 16 ff. 

Catalogue of the Museum of Archaeology at 
Sarnath. Calcutta, 1914. 

Aianta, Text and Plaites. 3 Parts. London, 
1930, 33, 46. 

Kunstform und Yoga in indischen Kunstbild. 
Berlin, 1926. 


CHAPTERS XX-XXI-XXII 


SOCIAL CONDITION, EDUCATION, AND 
ECONOMIC CONDITION 


Original Sources 
Literary 
(i) Indian 


(See under Epics, Puranas, Kamasdstra, Belles-Lettres, Buddhist, 
Jain and Muslim in General Bibliography) 


Dharmakosa, 

Vyavaharakandm 
Lankavatara-sutra 
Rashtrapala Pari- 
prichchha 
Samadhira j a-seitra 
Siksha-samuch- 
chaya 


Vol. I. Pts. I-III. Wai, 1937-39. 

Ed. Bunyiu Nanjio. Kyoto, 1923. 

Ed. L. Finot. St. Petersburg, 1901. 

Gilgit MSS, Vol. II. Calcutta, 1941. 

Ed. by C. Bendall. St. Petersburg, 1902. 

Eng. trans. by C. Bendall and W. H. D. Rouse. 
London, 1922. 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


(ii) Non-Indian 

(See under Chinese and Tibetan in General Bibliography) 
Amiiianus Marcel- Res Gestae. (Text and trans. in the Lub 
L ix US Classical Library, Nos. 1-3). Cambridge 

Mass., 1935, 1937, 1939. 

Cosjias Ixdicoplec- Christian Topography (Eng. trans. by J. W. 
SXES Me Crindie, Ancient India as described in 

Classical Literature , Westminster, 1901). 

Archaeological 

(See “Inscriptions” in General Bibliography) 

AS1, 1903-04 Excavations at Basarh. 

ASL 1911-12 Excavations at Bhita. 

JISOA, 1941; Terracottas of Rajghat. 

JUPHS, 1941 

Modern Works 


Aiyaxgar, Iv. V. Rain- 
gaswami 

Aiyar, S. 

Alterar, A. S. 

Baxerjee, G. 

C IT AHEAD AR, H. C. 

Das, S. K. 

I-Iophixs, E. "NV. 
Ixdra 

Ghosiial, TJ. 

Jaix, -T. C. 

Jiia, Ganganatlia 
Ivaxe, P. V. 
Mackenzie, J. - 
Majumdar, P. C. 
Mookerji, P. Tv. 

?.IuxftHi, K. Yl. 


Aspects of Ancient Indian Economic Thought. 
Benares, 1934. 

Evolution of Hindu Moral Ideals. Cal. Univ. 
1935. 

Education in Ancient India. 4th Ed. Banaras. 
1951. 

Position of Women in Hindu Civilisation. 
Benares, 1938. 

Hindu Law of Marriage and Stridhana. Tagore 
Law Lectures. Calcutta, 1896. 

Social Life in Ancient India. Calcutta, 1929. 
Educational System of the Ancient Hindus. 
Calcutta, 1930. 

Economic History of Ancient India. Calcutta, 
1925. 

Ethics of India. London, 1925. 

The Status of Women in Ancient India. 
Lahore, 1940. 

Contributions to the History of the Hindu 
Revenue System. Calcutta, 1929. 

The Agrarian System in Ancient India. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1930. 

Life in Ancient India as depicted in the Jain 
Canons. Bombay. 1947. 

Hindu Law in its Sources. Vol. I. Allahabad, 
1930. 

History of Dharmasdstra. Vols. II, Parts 1 
and 2, and Vol. III. Poona, 1941, 1946. 
Hindu Ethics. (Religious Quest of India Series. 

Oxford University). London, 1922. 
Corporate Life in Ancient India. 2nd Ed. 
Calcutta, 1922. , 

Local Government in Ancient India. Oxford. 
1919. 

Ancient Indian Education. London. 1947. 
“Golden Age of the Imperial Guptas.” BV, 
III, pp. 113-125. 


rot 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Patil, D. R. 

Pran Nath 

Saletore, R. N. 
Sanealia, H. D. 
SlDHANTA, N. K. 
Vaidya, C. V. 
Venkateswara, S. Y. 

SuBBA RAO, N. S. 

Warmington, E. II. 

Ragchi, P. C. 


Cultural History from the Vdyu Parana. 
Poona, 1946. 

A Study in the Economic Condition of Ancient 
India. London, 1929, 

Life in the Gupta Age. Bombay, 1943. 

The University of Ndlanda. Madras, 1934. 

The Heroic Age of India. London, 1929. 

Epic India. Bombay, 1907. 

Indian Culture through the Ages. 2 Vois. 
London, 1928, 1932. 

Economic and Political Conditions in Ancient 
India. Mysore, 1911. 

The Commerce between the Roman Empire 
and India. Cambridge, 1928. 

Le Canon Bouddhique en Chine. 2 Vols. Paris. 
1927, 1938, 

India and China. Calcutta, 1944; 2nd Ed. 
Bombay, 1950. 


CHAPTER XXIII 

INTERCOURSE WITH THE OUTSIDE WORLD 


Bagchi, P. 


Banerjee, G. N. 


Benjamin, R. 

Cary and Warming- 
ton 

Charlesworth, M.P. 
Das, S. C. 


Francke, A. H. 
IIourani, G. F. 


Kennedy, J. 

Levi, S. 

Oakeshott, W. F. 
O’Leary de Lacy 
Petech, L. 


Modern Works 

India and China. Calcutta, 1944; 2nd Ed. 
Bombay, 1950, 

“Ki-pin and Kashmir.” SIS, II, pp. 42-53. 

Hellenism in Ancient India. Calcutta, 1920. 

India as known to the Ancient World. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1921. 

The Wall-paintings of India, Central Asia and 
Ceylon—a Comparative Study. Boston, 1938. 

The Ancient Explorers. 

Trade-route and Commerce of the Roman 
Empire. Cambridge, 1921. 

Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow. Ed. by 
N. C. Das. Calcutta, 1893. 

“Contributions on the Religion, History, &c. 
of Tibet.” JASB, 1881, pp. 187 ff; 1882, 
pp. 1 ff; 87 ff. 

Antiquities of Indian Tibet. Calcutta, 1914-26. 

Arab Seafaring in the Indian Ocean in ancient 
and early Medieval Times (Princeton Univ. 
Press, 1951). 

“Early Commerce with Babylon.” JRAS , 
1898, pp. 250 ff. 

Le Nepal. Vol. II, pp. 147, 153 f. 

Commerce and Society. Oxford, 1936. 

Arabia before Muhammad. 

A Study of the Chronicles of Ladakh (Suppl. 
to IHQ, XIII-XIV). Calcutta, 1939. 

Northern India according to the Shui-Ching- 
Chu. Rome, 1950. 


'05 


C'.A.—45 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


POCOCKE, E. 

Priaulx, Osmond do 
Beauvior 

Rawlinson, H. G. 


Sastri, K. A. N. 
Smith, V. A. 

Tarn, W. W. 
Thomas, F. W. 


Warmingtox, E. H. 


India in Greece . London, 1852. 

Indian Travels of Apollonius of Tyna and the 
Indian Embassies to Rome . London, 1873. 

“Foreign Influence in the Civilisation of 
Ancient India.” JBBRAS , XXIII, pp. 217 ff. 

Intercourse between India and the Western 
World . Cambridge, 1916. 

Foreign Notices of South India. Madras, 1939. 

“Graeco-Roman Influence on the Civilisation 
of Ancient India.” JASB. LVIII-, pp. 107 ff. 

Hellenistic Civilization. London, 1930. 

Tibetan Literary Texts and Documents con¬ 
cerning Chinese Turketan. Vol. I. London, 
1935. * 

The Commerce between the Roman Empire 
and India. Cambridge, 1928. 


CHAPTER XXIV 

COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION IN SOUTH-EAST ASIA 


Bose, P. 

Chatterji, B. R. 
COEDES, G. 
Majumdar, R. C. 


May, R. Le 
Mukher.ji, P. K. 
Parmentier, II. 
Phii lips, C. A. 

Sastri, K. A. N. 

Vogel, J. Ph. 
Wales, H. G. Q. 


The Indian Colony of Champa. Adyar, 1926. 
The Hindu Colony of Cambodia. Adyar, 1927. 
Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1928. 

India and Java . Calcutta, 1933. 

Les Mats Hindouises DTndochine et D’lndo- 
nesie. Paris, 1948. 

Inscriptions du Cambodge. Vols. I-V. Paris. 
Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East. Vol. 
I: Champa. Lahore, 1927; Vol. Ill: Suvarna- 
dvipa. Parts 1 and 2. Dacca, 1937, 38. 
Kambujadesa. Madras, 1944. 

Hindu Colonies in the Far East. Calcutta, 
1944. 

Inscriptions of Kambuja (As. Soc. Monograph). 
Calcutta, 1953. 

A Chinese History of Buddhist Art in Siam. 
Cambridge, 1938, 

Indian Literature in China and the Far East. 
Calcutta, 1931. 

L'Art Architectural Hindou Dans L’lnde Et 
En Extreme-Orient. Paris, 1948. 

[Eng. Transl. of Rene GroussePs Book]. 

The Civilisations of the East- — India. London, 
1932. 

South Indian Influences in the Far East. 
Bombay, 1949. 

History of Srivijaya. Madras, 1949. 

Buddhist Art in India, Ceylon and Java. 
Oxford, 1936. 

The Making of Greater India. London, 1951. 


706 


CHRONOLOGY 


A.D. 
c. 140 
221-63 
224-41 
230 


241-72 

248-49 

276-93 

283 


302-09 

c. 304 (or 305) 


305-32 


306 (or 307) 

309- 79 

310- 11 
317-420 

320 (Feb. 26) 
325 
334-62 
336 


337-61 
c. 340-70 
347 

c. 348 

349 

349-413 

c. 350 (or earlier) 


350 

c. 350-75 
c. 350-400 

c. 352-79 
357 


Ptolemy’s Geography (pp. 204, 275) 

Second Han Dynasty (p. 50) 

Ardashir (p. 54) 

Po-tiao (? Vasudeva), the great Kushana king, 
sends an embassy to the Chinese court 
(p. 54) 

Shapur I (p. 51) 

Initial year of the Traikutaka era (p. 192) 
Vahram II (p. 52) 

Hormazd rebels against his brother Vahram II 
(pp. 52, 54) 

Hormizd (p. 55) 

Rudrasrrhha II occupies the throne of Western 
Kshatrapas after ousting the legitimate heir 
(p. 46) 

Rudrasimha II and his son Yasodaman II 
(p. 46) 

Srldharavarma sets 1 up an independent king¬ 
dom (p. 47). 

Shapur II (p. 55) 

Persepolis inscription (p. 55) 

Eastern Tsin dynasty of China (p. 615) 
Commencement of the Gupta era (p. 4) 
Council of Nicaea (p. 463) 

Mahasena, of Ceylon (p. 284) 

Fan Wen, the general of Fan-yi. usurps the 
throne of Champa on the latter’s death 
(p. 645) 

Constantius II (p. 637) 

Mayurasarman, Kadamba (p. 272) 

Fan Wen conquers the Chinese province of 
Nhut-Nam (p. 645) 

Accession of Mahakshatrapa Svami Rudrasena 
III (p. 47) 

Death of Fan Wen (p. 645) 

Protracted war between Champa and China 
(p. 645) 

Accession of Pushyavarman of Kamarupa 
(p. 89) 

Shapur II moves towards his eastern frontier 
as the result of tribal movement (p. 57) 
Vislinugopa, Pailava (p. 258) 

Konguni-varman (Madhava I), Western Ganga 
(p. 269) 

Meghavama, of Ceylon (p. 11) 

Chan-tan (Chandana or Chandra), king of 
Fu-nan, sends an embassy to China (p. 643) 


707 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


353 

387- 68 

c. 362 
364-75 
370-S5 

376-414 

379-83 

379-95 

381-84 

383 

383- 88 

384- 97 
386-407 
386-556 
c. 388 

388- 99 
395-408 
395-423 

c 395-420 
393 
c. 400 
c. 400-11 
c. 400-24 
c. 400-35 
401 

401-04 

404 

404 

c. 405-35 

406-13 
408-50 
403-31 
c. 411-12 
414 

414- 32 

415- 55 
420 

c. 420-30 
420-79 
c. 420-500 

423 

424-42 


Shapur concludes treaty with Kushanas and 
Chionites (p. 57) 

Kushanas defeat Shapur, according to Faustos 
(p. 57) 

Death of Mahasena of Ceylon (p. 407) 
Vaientinian (p. 637) 

Kanga-varman (or Skanda-varman), Kadamba 
(p. 272) 

Chandra-gupta II (p. 179, n. 1) 

Ardashir II (p. 58) 

Theodosius I (p. 637) 

Sanghabhuti, a Buddhist monk of Kashmir, in 
China (p. 609) 

Chinese general takes Kumarajlva to China 

(p. 608) 

Shapur III (p. 58) 

Gautama Sahghadeva in China (p. 609) 

Wu-ti of the Wei dynasty (p. 615) 

Wei dynasty (p. 55) 

Satyasimha, Western Kshatrapa (p. 258) 
Vahram IV (p. 58) 

Arcadius, Emperor of the East (p. 637) 
Honorius, Emperor of the West (p. 637) 
Bhagiratha, Kadamba (p. 272) 

Fa-hien starts for India (p. 613) 

Death of Rudrasena, Vakataka (p. 180) 
Fa-hien travels all over India (p. 22) 
Dharmayasa in China (p. 609) 

Madhava II, Western Gahga (p. 269) 
Kumarajlva proceeds to the Chinese capital 

(p. 608) 

Eudoxia (p. 637) 

Punyatrata goes to China (p. 609) 

Che-mong starts with a group of fifteen monks 
for India (p. 614) 

Kakutsthavarman, Kadamba (p. 183; see 

p. 272) 

Vimalaksha in China (p. 809) 

Theodosius II (p. 637) 

Mahanaman, of Ceylon (pp. 285, 400) 

Fa-hien stays in Ce;ylon (p. 285) 

Fa-hien lands in China (p. 614) 

Dharmakshema translates Buddhist texts in 
Western China (p. 611) 

Kumara-gupta I (pp. 23, 431) 

Accession of Fan Yang Mai in Champa and 
founding of a new dynasty (p. 646) 

Raghu, Kadamba (p. 272) 

Song dynasty of China (p. 616) 

Period of Vasubandhu, according to Takakusu 
(p. 14, n. 2) 

Buddhajlva goes to China (p. 609) 

Dharmamitra in China (p. 609) 


708 


CHRONOLOGY 


428 

428 


c. 430-50 

431 

433 

433-60 

435- 68 
436 

436 

436- 58 

437- 38 

440-60 

445 

446 


446 

c. 450-60 
c. 450-75 
453 
455 
455 


c. 455 
455-56 


455-67 

457-74 

458 


c. 460 

c. 460 

460-78 
460-80 
c. 460-500 
c. 460-500 
c. 465-75 
c. 467 
c. 470 

473 

474 


King of Ka-pi-li (? pavaka) sends an embassy 
to China (p. 90) 

Mahanaman of Ceylon sends a letter to the 
Chinese imperial court, according to Chinese 
sources (p. 285) 

Kakutsthavarman, Kadamba (p. 272; see 

p. 183) 

Gunavarman reaches Nanking (p. 610) 
Dharmakshema murdered by the ruler of 
Western China (p. 611) 

Pandya and his five Damila successors on the 
throne of Ceylon (p. 285) 

Gunabhadra, Buddhist missionary, in China 

(p. 610) 

Accession of Simhavarman I, Pallava (pp. 258, 
269) 

King Rudradasa of the Anupa region (p. 194) 
Simhavarman, Pallava (pp. 278, 282) 

Guild of silk-weavers build a temple at 
Dasapura (p. 442) 

Madhavavarman I, Vishnukundin (p. 223) 
Tu-yu-hun conquer Khotan (p. 628) 

Chinese invade Champa, defeat Fan Yang 
Mai II, who flees, and sack the capital 
(p. 646) 

Death of Yang Mai II (p. 646) 

Hari-varman, Western Gahga (p. 269) 
Santi-vamian, Kadamba (p. 272) 

Death of Attila, the Huna leader (p. 27) 
Bursting of the Sudarsana lake (p. 61) 
Amraka grant of Dahrasena, Traikutaka 
(p. 193) 

Death of Kumara-gupta (p. 25) 

Pamadatta appointed Governor of Surashtra 

(p. 61) 

Skanda-gupta (pp. 25, 28) 

Leo (p, 637) 

Sarva nan din writes his Prakrit work Loka- 
vibhdqa (p. 413) 

White Hunas set up an independent kingdom 
in Gandhara (p. 59) 

Skanda-gupta inflicts a crushing defeat on the 
White Hunas (p. 35) 

Dhatusena, of Ceylon (p. 285) 
Vikramendravarman I, Vishnukundin (p. 223) 
Madhava III, Western Gahga (p. 269) 
Manadeva of Nepal (p. 83) 

Bhatarka, of the Maitrakas (p. 61) 

Death of Skanda-gunta (p. 28) 

Juan Juan conquer Khotan (p. 628) 

Guild of silk weavers restore the sun temple 
at Dasapura fp. 442) 

Kumara-gupta II (p. 29) 


TOO 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


474-91 
c. 475 


c. 475-85 
c. 475-90 
c. 475-95 
475-517 

478- 96 

479- 502 

480- 515 

484 

484 


c. 485-97 
489 

c. 490-97 

491-518 

493-96 

496 (or between \ 
496-98) / 

496-513 
496-535 
c. 497-537 
c. 497-540 
c. 500 
c. 500 
c. 500-40 
c. 500-50 
500-56 
c. 500-80 


502 

502-57 

507 

510 

513 

513-22 

515 


c. 515-30 

515- 35 

516- 43 

517- 39 
518 


Zeno (p. 637) 

Kumar a-varman (Kadamba) rules over 
Uchchangi (p. 273) 

Krishna-varman, Younger Kadamba (p. 273) 
Mrigesa-varman, Kadamba (p. 272) 
Budha-gupta (pp. 30, 32) 

Maharaja Hastin, Parivrajaka (p. 30) 

Kasyapa, of Ceylon (p. 285) 

Ts’i dynasty of China (p. 616) 

Indra (bhattaraka), Vishnukimdin (p. 223; see 

p. 210) 

Hunas defeat and kill the Persian king (p. 35) 
Jayavarman sends Nagasena to the imperial 
court of China seeking help against the 
Champa king (p. 643) 

Vishnu-varman, Younger Kadamba (p. 273) 
Maharaja Vyaghrasena, Traikutaka (p. 198) 
Mandhatri-varman, Kadamba (p. 273) - 
Anastatius (p. 637) 

King Jayanatha of Uchchakaipa (p. 30) 

Initial year of the .Gahga era (p. 215) 

Maudgalyavana, of Ceylon (p. 286) 
Indra-varman, E, Gahga (p. 215) 
Ravi-varman, Kadamba (p. 273) 
Simha-varman, Younger Kadamba (p, 273) 
Death of Budha-gupta (p. 32) 

Vikramahendra, Vishnukimdin (p. 207) 
Avimta, W. Gahga (p. 269) 
Narasirhha-gupta,and his two successors (p. 33) 
Hephthalites conquer Khotan (p. 628) 

First three kings of Thaneswar, —Nara- 
vardhana, Raj y a-vardhana and Aditya- 

vardhana (p. 97) 

Earliest land-grant of the Maitrakas issued by 
Maharaja Dronasimha (p. 61) 

Leang dynasty (pp. 616, 653) 

Tippera grant of Vainya-gupta (p. 33) 

Eran inscription of Bhanu-gupta (p. 33) 
Land-grant of Vasantasena of Nepal (p. 84) 
Kumaradasa, of Ceylon (p. 286) 

Bhagadato (? Bhagadatta) of Malay Peninsula 
sends an envoy to the emperor of China 
(p. 649) 

Mihirakula (p. 35) 

Vikramendravarman IlpVishnukundin (p. 223) 
Prajharuchi, a Buddhist monk of Banaras, in 
China (p, 610) 

Rudravarman of Fu-nan sends six embassies 
to China (p. 644) 

Empress Dowager of the Great Wei dynasty 
sends Sung Yun as ambassador to western 
countries to obtain Buddhist books (p. 615) 


710 


CHRONOLOGY 


518 
522-24 
524-37 
c. 525-45 
c. 525-75 

526-527 


530 

530- 40 

531- 79 
535-47 

535-56 
c. 535-66 
535-70 
c. 535-85 

c. 537-47 
537-56 
c, 540-65 
c. 540-600 
543 
546 

c. 550 
c. 550-75 
c. 550-76 

550- 77 

c. 550-640 

551- 52 


553 

556-5Q 

556 (or 559)-67 

556-616 

559 


559-92 

563-67 


c. 565-606 

565-631 

567-97 

569 

571-90 

572 

574 


King of Bali sends an envoy to China (p. 653) 
Upatishya, of Ceylon (p. 286) 

Silakala, of Ceylon (p. 286) 

Dhruvasena I of Valabhi (p. 62) 

Gopachandra of Bengal, and his three succes¬ 
sors (p. 77) 

Vijayavarman, the last king of the Yang Mai 
dynasty, sends two embassies to China 
(p. 646) 

Rudra-varman of Champa receives investiture 
from China on payment of tribute (p. 646) 
Rise and fall of Yasodharman (p. 40) 
Anushirvan, Sassanid king (p. 640) 

Christian Topography composed by Cosmas 
(p. 36) 

Govindavarman, Vishnukundin (p. 223) 
Pulakesin I, Chalukya (p. 231) 

Kumara-gupta III, and Vishnu-gupta (p. 43) 
Madhava-varman I, Vishnukundin (pp, 220, 
252). 

Hari-varman, Kadamba (p. 273) 
Maudgalyayana II, of Ceylon p. 287) 

Krishna-varman II, Younger Kadamba (p. 273) 
Durvinita, W. Gahga (p, 269) 

Badami inscription of Pulakesin I (p. 231) 
Paramartha from Pataliputra reaches China 
(p. 611) 

Ranabhita, ^ailodfohava (p. 145) 

Sirhhavarman, Pallava (p. 283) 

Isana-varman, Maukhari (p. 70) 

Northern Ts’i dynasty (p. 616) 

Harichandra and his three successors (p. 65) 
Land-grant . of Nandana in Gaya District 
(p. 44) 

Maukhari prince Surya-varman (p. 220) 
Mahanaga, of Ceylon (p. 287) 

Known dates of Guhasena of Valabhi (p. 62) 
Madhavavarman III, Vishnukundin (p. 223) 
Jinagupta and his teachers Jhanabhadra and 
Jinayasas reach Ch’ang-ngan (p. 611) 
Agrabodhi, of Ceylon (p. 287) 

Combined forces of Turks and Persians give 
a crushing blow to the central authority of 
the Hunas on the Qxus (p. 39) 

Aia-varman, Younger Kadamba (p. 273) 
Western Turks conquer Khotan (p. 628) 
Kirti-varman I, Chalukya (nu. 73, 189) 

Death of Paramartha (p. 611) 

Known dates of Dharasena II, Valabhi (p. 62) 
Jinagupta and his teachers forced to leave 
China owing to political trouble (p. 611) 
Grant bv Simhaditya, a feudatory of Dhara¬ 
sena II, Valabhi (p. 62) 


7U 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


c. 575-600 
c. 576-80 
c. 580 
c. 580-600 
580-600 
580-603 
580-606 
581 

581 


581-95 

582 

583-87 

585 
c. 587 
589-618 
590 

c. 590-620 


c. 590-620 
590-628 
592-602 
595 

595 


595 


597-98 to 610-11 
600 
c. 600 
c. 600 

600 

c. 600-30 
602 


602-08 

605 

605- 17 

c. 606-10 

606- 12 
606-47 


Sainyabhita I Madhavaraja I, Sailodbhava 
(p. 145) 

Siriihavishnu, Paliava (p. 283) 

Sarva-varman, Maukhari (p. 70) 

Accession of Prabhakara-vardhana (p. 95) 
Avanti-varman, Maukhari (p. 70) 
Gnam-ri-sron-btsan of Tibet (p. 86) 
Sambhuyasas rules over Orissa pp. 78, 93) 
Prabhakara-vardhana of Thaneswar (p. 97) 
Musical party goes direct from India to China 
(p. 626) 

Jinagupta stays in the country of the Turks 
doing missionary work and translating 
Buddhist texts (p. 611) 

Emperor Kaotsu (p. 626) 

Vinitaruchi, a Brahmana of South India, 
reaches the Chinese capital (p. 612) 

Known dates of Indra-varman II, E. Ganga 

(p. 216) 

Jinagupta returns to China (p. 611) 

Death of Varahamihira (p. 317) 

Sui Period (p. 652) 

Dharmagupta, a Buddhist monk, reaches 
Ch’ang-ngan (p. 612) 

Indra (bhattaraka)-varman. Vishnukundin 
(p. 210; see p. 223) 

Kaduhgon Pandya (pp. 266, 267) 

Khusru, Persian king (p. 638) 

Agrabodhi II, of Ceylon (p. 287) 
Commencement of a Tibetan era, according to 
Levi (p. 86) 

Sahkaragana, the Kalachuri king, in possession 
of Uj jay ini (pp. 74, 195) 

Sambhu-varman of Champa sends tribute to 
the Chinese emperor (p. 646) 

Death of Klrti-varman I, Chalukya (p. 233) 
Mangalesa, Chalukya (pp. 196, 233, 251) 
Death of Jinagupta (p. 611) 

Ayasobhlta I, Sailodbhava (p. 145) 

Brihati, a commentary on Sabarabbashya, by 
Prabhakara (p. 301) 

Birth of Hiuen Tsang (p. 618) 
Mahendra-varman I Vichitrachitta, Paliava 
(pp. 238, 259, 283, 432) 

Accession of Chach on the Sindh throne, 
according to Chach-nama (p. 166) 
Maudgalyayana III, of Ceylon (p. 287) 
Chinese army invades Champa (p. 647) 
Emperor Yang of the Sui dynasty (p. 615) 
Bhogi-varman, Younger Kadamba (p. 273) 
Known dates of Siladitya I, Valabhl (p. 62) 
Harsha-vardhana (pp. 95, 113, 119) 


712 


CHRONOLOGY 


608 

608-17 

609 

610-11 

610-11 — 642 
c. 615-19 

615-33, 624-41, 
633-50 
616 
616 


617- 32 

618- 907 
619 

619- 750 
c. 620-31 

620- 45 

623 

624 
624 

825-26 


627 

c. 627 

628 

c. 628 

627 

629 

629- 41 
c. 630 

630- 44 

c. 630-68 

631 


632 

632 


Vadner grant of Buddharaja, Kalachuri 
(p. 196) 

Silamegha varna, of Ceylon (p. 287) 

Palm leaf MS at the Horiuzi monastery 
brought to Japan (p. 637) 

Goa grant of Satyasraya-Dhruvaraja-Xndra- 
varman of HevatidVIpa (pp. 234, 251) 
Pulakesin II, Chalukya (p. 234) 

Sainyabhlta II Miadhavaraja II, Sailodbhava 
(p.' 145) 

\ Vishnu-vardhana, E. Chalukya, according to 
j different theories (p. 251) 

Kharagraha of Valabhl (p. 103) 

Ganjam grant of Jaya-varman, Gahga king of 
Svetaka Cp- 217) 

Agrabodhi III, of Ceylon (p. 288) 

T'ang dynasty (p. 617) 

Last known date of Sasahka (p. 107) 

Six embassies from Ki-pin to China (p. 623) 
Vikramendra-varman III, Vishnukundin (p. 
210 ) 

Mara-varman Avanisulamani, Pandya (p. 267) 
Dharasena III of Valabhl (p. 163) 
Indra-varman, E. Gahga (p. 210) 

Foundation of the Eastern Chalukya dynasty, 
according to some scholars (p. 252) 

Khusru, king of Persia, receives an embassy 
from Pulakesin II (?), according to Tabari 
(p. 240) 

Prabhakaramitra from Nalanda reaches China 

(p. 620) 

Accession of Durlabha-vardhana, founder of 
the Karkota dynasty in Kashmir (p. 132) 
Chapa king Vyaghramukha, patron of 
Brahmagupta (p. 161) 

Date of composition of Brahmasiddhdnta 
(p. 323) 

Hiuen Tsang starts for India (p. 618) 
Kandarpadharrna succeeds his father Sambhu- 
varman (Champa) (p. 647) 

Dadda II, Prasantaraga, Guriara (pp. 68, 238) 
Isanasena (or Isana-varman) of Kambuja 
conquers Fu-nan (p. 644) 

Hiuen Tsang travels in India (p. 100) 
Narasimha-varman I, Mahamalla, Pallava 
(p. 260) 

PrithivI Yu vara j a (Vishnu-vardhana), E. 
Chalukya, appointed viceroy by Pulakesin II 
(pp. 235, 237) 

Death of Muhammad, the Prophet (p. 166) 
Vijitasamgrama, of Khotan, sends an envoy 
to the Chinese court (p. 628) 

Kasyapa IT, of Ceylon (p. 288) 


632-41 


713 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


633 

633 

c. 633-63 
634-35 
634-44 
c. 635 
637 

637 

638 
638-51 
640 

c. 640 


640-709 


640-720 

641 

641 


641, 42 
641-50 
c. 842 


643 

643 

643 

643 
c. 643 
c. 643 
c. 644 

645 

645- 70 

646 

e. 646-47 

646- 50 

647- 48 
c. 648 

648 


Earliest grant of Indravarman IV, E. Ganga, 
according to Hultzsch (p. 216) 

Death of Prabhakaramitra, monk from 
Nalanda (p. 621) 

Jayasimha h E. Chalukya (pp. 208, 252) 
Aihole pro Misti of Pulakesin II (pp. 235, 237) 
Caliphate of ‘Umar (pp. 167, 245) 

Death of Isana-varman of Kambuja (p. 645) 
Battle of Cadesia in which the Mahomedans 
laid low the Persian empire (p. 167) 

First Arabic naval expedition against India 
(Thalia) (p. 167) 

Two Korean monks set out for India (p. 636) 
Amsu-varman, of Nepal (p. 85) 

Dhruvasena II, of Valabhl (p. 63) 

Flight of the Simhalese prince Manavarma to 
Kanchl (p. 261) 

Northern Africa conquered by Mahomedans 
(p. 167) 

King Tata, of Gurjaras, and his three succes¬ 
sors (p. 154) 

Harsha sends an envoy to the Chinese Empe¬ 
ror, who in turn sends his envoy (p. 120) 
Slladitya assumes the title of “king of 
Magadha”, according to Ma-twan-lin 
(p. 107) 

Harsha conquers Magadha, Orissa, and 
Kongoda (p. 110) 

Hastadamshtra (or Damshtropatishya II), of 
Ceylon (pp. 288, 289) 

Pallavas defeat Pulakesin II. and occupy 
Bad.ami Death of Pulakesin II (pp. 240, 

252, 260) 

Kaira grant of Vijayaraja, Chalukya (p. 236) 
Harsha convokes the Buddhist Assembly 
(p. 103) 

Chinese embassy to Nepal finds king Narendra- 
deva on the throne (pp. 85, 137) 

Second Chinese embassy to Magadha (p. 120) 
Harsha conquers Utkala and Kongoda (p. 95) 
First Arab invasion of Sindh (p, 169) 
Accession of Dharasena IV, Valabhl (p. 147) 
Hiuen Tsang returns to China (pp. 121, 618) 
Sendan, Pandya (p. 287) 

Third Chinese embassy to India, under Wang- 
hiuen-tse (p. 121) 

Death of Harsha (p. 121) 

Known dates of Dharasena IV, Valabhl (p. 103) 
Wang-hiuen-tse’s mission to India (p. 137) 
Kings of Valabhl conquer the Gurjara king¬ 
dom of Nandipurl (p. 147) 

Vijitasimha of Khotan sends his son to the 
Chinese court (p. 628) 


714 


CHRONOLOGY 


648 

650 

650 

c. 650 

c. 650 

650 

c. 650 

650- 66 

651 

651- 53 

655 

655-81 

656 

657 

657 

e. 660 
661-80 
662-84 
663 


c. 663 
c. 663-72 
664 

664 

666-68 

668 

c. 668-70 

668-703 

670-92 

c. 670-95 

670-710 

670-713 

670-741 


671-95 

671 

c. 672-96 
c. 675-700 
676 


676 


Wang-hiuen-tse returns to China (p. 125) 
Northern frontiers of the Arabian empire 
advance to the Oxus (p. 167) 

Sarvajhadeva, a Korean monk, comes to India 
through Tibet and Nepal (p. 636) 
Gunasagara, Governor of Banavasi, under the 
Chalukyas (p. 274) 

Death of Sroh-btsan-sgam-po Tibet (p. 635) 
Latest known date of Indra-varman IV, E. 

Gahga (p. 216) 

KcLsika-vritti (pp. 311, 319 ) 

Agrabodhi IV, of Ceylon (p. 288) 
Narendradeva, of Nepal, sends a mission to 
the imperial court in China (p. 137) 
Dhruvasena III, of Valabhi (p. 148) 

Bagumra grant of Prithvlvallabha Nikum- 
bhallasakti, Sendraka chief (p. 236) 
Vikramaditya I, Chaiukya (p. 241) 

Kharagraha II Dharmaditya, of Valabhi 
(p. 148) 

Accession of Prakasadharma (Vikranta- 
varman) of Champa (p. 847) 
Wang-hiuen-tse’s third embassy to India 

(p. 621) 

Great'Arab expedition against India (p. 169) 
Caliphate of Muawiyah (p, 187) 

Siladitya III, of Valabhi (pp. 148, 245) 

People of Kikan (Sindh) rout the Muslim 
army, and kill most of the Muslim host 
including their leader (p. 169) 

Indra-varman, E. Chaiukya (p. 252) 
Vishnuvardhana II, E. Chaiukya (p. 253) 
Fourth embassy of Wang-hiuen-tse to India 

(p. 622) 

Death of Hiuen Tsang (p. 620) 

Datta, of Ceylon (p. 289) 

Hastadamshtra II, of Cevlon (p. 289) 
Mahendra-varman II, Pallava (p, 261) 
Manavarman, of Ceylon (p. 289) 

Yuvaraja Sryasraya Siladitya (p. 245) 
Paramesvara-varman I, Pallava (p. 261) 
Arikesari Maravarman, Pandya (p. 287) 
Sivamara I, W. Gahga (p. 270) 

Sri-Vijaya sends several embassies to China 
(p. 651) 

I-tsing’s travels in India (p. 2) 

I-tsing leaves for India by sea route (p. 820; 
Mangi Yuvaraja, E. Chaiukya (p. 253) 
Chitravahana I, of Alupas (p. 274) 

Grant of Siladitya III, Valabhi (p. 148) 
Accession of Manavarman, according to Geiger 
(p. 284, n. 1) 


715 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 


679-91 

681 

681 

681-96 

683 

684 

684 

685 
685 


690-735 

693 


c. 695 


695 

c. 695-722 


c. 696-709 

696-733 

699 


700 

700-40 

702 

703-09 

705-55 

709 

709 

709- 18 

c. 709-46 

710 

710 

710- 40 

712 

713 
713 

713 

714 


Known dates of Devendra-varman, of Kalinga 
(p. 216) 

Death of Vikramaditya I, Chalukya (p. 245) 
Chidivalasa grant of Samanta-varman, Ganga 
king of Svetaka (p. 217) 

Vinayaditya, Chalukya (pp. 197, 245) 

Kabul revolts against Arabs (p. 167) 

Sri Jayanasa (Jayanaga) rules over Sumatra 
(p. 651) 

Chatsu inscription of Dhanika, Guhilot 
(p. 160) 

Kings of Valabhl conquer Gurjara kingdom 
of Nandipuri (p. 149) 

Arabs kill the king of Zabul in war and rout 
his army (p. 168) 

Rashtrakuta Nanna of Achalapura (p. 202) 
Bodhiruchi, an Indian scholar, goes to China 
(p. 621) 

Battle of Chalukya Vinayaditya with the 
“Lord of the North” (? Yasovarman) 
(p. 130) 

A1 Hajjaj becomes governor of Iraq (p, 168) 
Narasimha-varman II Rajasimha, Pallava 

(pp. 262, 281) 

Jayasiihha II, E. Chalukya (p. 253) 

Vijayaditva, Chalukya (p. 246) 

Abd-ar-Rahman marches against Zabul, 
defeats the king and ravages the land 

(p. 168) 

Parlakimedi grant of Ananta-varman, E. 
Ganga (p. 217) 

Yasovarman, of Kanauj (p, 131) 

Nepal revolts against Tibet (p. 138) 

Agrabodhi V, of Ceylon (p. 289) 

Mes’ag-tshoms of Tibet ip. 635) 

Multai grant of Nannaraja Rashtrakuta 
(p. 201) 

Anjaneri grant of Prithivlchandra Bhogasakti 
(p. 195) 

Kasyapa III, of Ceylon (p. 289) 
Vishnuvardhana III, E. Chalukya (p. 253) 
Narasimha-varman Pallava sends an embassy 
to China (p. 623) 

King of Kapisa sends an embassy to China 
^ (p. 622) 

Kochchadaiyan Ranadhlra. Pandya (p. 267) 
Conquest of Sindh by Muhammad-ibn-Qasim 
(p. 457) 

Inscription of Mana, king of Chitor (p. 162) 
Spain subjugated by Muhammadans (p. 167) 
Chandrapida of Kashmir sends an envoy to the 
Chinese emperor (p. 132) 

Sivadeva, of Nepal (p. 138) 

716 


CHRONOLOGY 


714 

716- 19 
717 

717- 20 
719-59 
720 
720 


c. 722-30 
724-38 


724- 43 

c. 724-60 
c. 725 

725- 35 

725-88 

727 


728 (or 734) 
730—c. 800 

731 

732 

733 

733-34—46 
735 

735 

736 
736 
736 


c. 740 

740-65 
c. 742-57 
744.45._57 

746 


746-64 

746- 71 

747- 50 
749 


Death of A1 Hajjaj (p. 172) 

Mahendra, of Ceylon (p. 289) 

Santa Bommali grant of Nanda-varman, E. 
Gahga (p. 217) 

Caliphate of ‘Umar II (pp. 172, 460) 
Agrabodhi VI, of Ceylon (p. 290) 

Vajrabodhi, of Nalanda, reaches China (p. 621) 
Exchange of embassies between Pallava 
Narasirhha-varman and the Chinese emperor 
(pp. 280, 623) 

Paramesvara-varman II, Pallava (pp. 262, 
281) 

Arab raids in Sindh, Rajputana, Gujarat and 
Kathiawad (p. 173) 

Caliphate of Hisham (p. 172) 

Lalitaditya Muktapida (p. 133) 

Chalukyas occupy temporarily Khetaka in 
Gujarat (p, 157) 

Yasovarman conauers W. and E. Bengal (p. 
143) 

Sripurusha, W. Gahga (pp. 270, 281) 

Death of Bodhiruehi, the Indian scholar (p. 
621) 

Bappa occupies Chitor (p. 158) 

Nandi-varman II Pallavamalla (p. 262) 
Lcha-fan-mo (? Yasovarman) sends an ambas¬ 
sador Sanghabhadra to China (p. 130) 
Death of Vajrabodhi (p. 621) 

Bodhisena from India and Buttetsu from 
Champa arrive in China (p. 636) 
Vikramaditya II, Chalukya (p. 197) 

Jayabhata IV, the last king of the Gurjara 
family of Nandipuri (p. 157) 

First colony of Parsee emigrants said to, have 
settled at Sanjan (p. 245, n. 3) 

Lalitaditya sends an embassy to China (p. 130) 
Bodhisena and Buttetsu reach Japan (p. 636) 
Amoghavajra, disciple of Vajrabodhi, returns 
to Ceylon (p. 621) 

Vikramaditya II, Chalukya, captures Kahchl 
(p. 263) 

Maravarman Rajasimha, Pandya (p. 267) 
Dantidurga, Rashtrakuta (p. 235) 

Kirtivarman II, Chalukya (p. 248) 

Chapotkata king Vanaraja founds Anahila 
Pataka, according to Gujarat chronicles (n. 

16i) 

Vijayaditya I, E. Chalukya (p. 254) 
Amoghavajra translates 77 texts (p. 621) 
Devendra-varman, E. Gahga (p. 217) 
Rudravarman II of Champa sends tribute to 
China (p. 647) 



THE CLASSICAL AGE 


749 

750 

c. 750 

751 


753 (or 764) 
755-72 


'757 

757 

758 


c. 760 
760 

c. 765-815 
766-67 
774 
783 

c. 794-814 

838-923 

945-70 


A colossal image of Buddha Vairochana instal¬ 
led in Japan (p. 636) 

Bodhisena appointed head of the Buddhist 
order in Japan (p. 636) 

King of Kapisa sends embassy to China (p. 
622) 

Chinese emperor sends a mission under Wu- 
K’ong to escort back the Indian ambassador 
from Kapisa (p. 622) 

Bappa abdicates throne (p. 158) 

Vijayaditya I, according to B. V. K. Rao (p, 
254, n. 2) 

Vakkaleti grant of Kirtivarman II, Chalukya 
(p. 249) 

Death of Rudravarman II of Champa (p. 647) 
Caliph Mansur sends Amru-bin-Jamal with a 
fleet to Barada hills (p. 152) 

Death of Lalitaditya (p. 135) 

Death of Bodhisena (p. 636) 

Nedunjadaiyan, Bandy a (p. 265) 

Siladitya VII, of Vaiabhi (p. 150) 

Death of Amoghavajra (p. 621) 

Varaha (or Jayavaraha), ruler of Saurashtra 
(p. 151) 

Govinda III, Rashtrakuta (p. 221) 

Tabari, the Persian historian (p. 638) 

Amma II, Rajamahendra (p. 251) 


7 IS 


GENEALOGY 


1. IMPERIAL GUPTAS 

Srigupta 

I 

Ghatotkacha-gupta 

I 

Chandra-gupta I^Kumaradevl 

i 

Samudra-gupta=DattadevI 


(? Rama-gupta) Chandra-gupta II=Dhruvadevi; Kuveranaga 


Kumara-gupta I—AnantadevI Prabhavatl-gupta 

(Mahendradity a) 


Skanda-gupta Puru-gupta=Chandradevl 


(? Kumara-gupta II) j | 

Budha-gupta Narasirhha-gupta^Mitradevi 

(Baladitya) 

i 

Kumara-gupta III 
(Kramaditya) 

Vishnu-gupta 

(Chandraditya) 

2. LATER GUPTAS 

1. Krishna-gupta 

i 

2. Harsha-gupta 

i 

3. Jivita-gupta 

i 

4. Kumara-gupta 

i 

5. Damodara-gupta 

i 

6. Mahasena-gunta 

I _ __ 

i ' ~~ I 

7. Madhava-gupta Kumara-gupta 

8. Adityasena 

I 

9. Deva-gupta 

I 

10. Vishnu-gupta 

11. Jivita-gupta 


719 

















THE CLASSICAL AGE 


O 


O. 


MAUKHARIS 


(A) 

1. Yajna-varman 

I 

i 

2. Sarduia-varman 

! 

3. Ananta-varman 

(B) 

1. Maharaja Hari-varman 

i 

2. „ Aditya-varman 

i 

3. „ Isvara-varman 

j 

4. M ahardjadhirdja Isana-varman 

i 

! 

5. „ Sarva-varman 

6. ,, Avanti-varman 

i 

Graha-varman 


4. BENGAL 

1. Gopachandra 

2. Dharmaditya 

3. Samacharadeva 

(N arendraditya) 

KHADGA DYNASTY OF BENGAL 

1. Khadgodyama 

I 
• 

2. Jatakhadga 

i 

3. Devakhadga 


5, 


6. 


4. Rajarajabhata 

LICHCHHAVIS OF NEPAL 

Vrishadeva 

i 

Sankaradeva 


Dharmadeva 


Manadeva 


Mahldeva 


Vasantasena (Vasantadeva) 


Sivadeva I 
720 


Suva (?) 





GENEALOGY 


Amsuvarman 

Jishnugupta 


Narendradeva 

i 

Sivadeva II 
Jayadeva 


7. 


8 . 


KAMARUPA 

1. 

2 . 

3. 

* 4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 
9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

&AILGDBHAVA 


Pushva-varman 

i 

Samudra-varman 

i 

Bala-varman 

! 

Kalyana-varman 

i 

Ganapati-varman 

i 

! 

Mahendra-varman 

! 

Narayana-varman 

r 

Bhuti (Mahabhiiti A varman 

! 

Chandramukha-varman 

i 

Sthit a (Sthiti )■-varman 
SusthitaC Susthira)-varman 

i 

i " j 

Supratishthita-varman 

13. B has k a ra-varman 

KINGS 

Kanabhita 

'! 

Sainyabhlta I Madhavaraja I 

i 

Ayasobhlta I 

i 

Sainyabhlta II Madhavaraja II 


Ayasobhlta II 

i 

Sainyabhlta III Madhavavarman (Srinivasa) 


C* A.—46 


721 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 
Ayasobhlta III Madhyamaraja I 


Manabhita Dharmaraja x 

i 

i 

Madhyamaraja II Hanakshobha Alia vara j a 

I 

Madhyamaraja III 


9. PUSHFABHUTIS 


Maharaja Nara-vardhana 


Maharaja Rajya-vardhana 


Maharaja Aditya-vardhana 


Paramahhattdraka Mahdrdjddhirdja 

Prabhakara-vardhana 


i 


Paramahhattdraka Mhdh. 

Rajya-vardhana Paramahhattdraka Mhdh. 

Harsha-vardhana 


10. KARKOTAS 

Durlabha-vardhana 

i 

i 

| 

Durlabhaka 


Chandrapida Tarapida | 

Lalitaditya Muktapida 

x 

I 

i 

Jayaplda 

722 
















GENEALOGY 


11. MAITRAKAS OF VALABHI 

Senapati Bhatarka 


Senapati Dharasena I Maharaja Maharaja Maharaja 

Dronasimha Dhruvasena I Dharapatta 

i 

Maharaja Guhasena 

i 

Mahddhirdja Dharasena II 

__L 

1 - i 

Maharaja Slladitya I Kharagraha I 

(Dharmaditya) | 

Derabhata Dharasena III Dhruvasena II 

• • 

! I 

Dharasena IV 

_!__ __ 

.1 I I 

Slladitya. II Kharagraha II Dhruvasena III 

| (Dharmaditya) 

Slladitya III 

12. GURJARAS OF RAJAPUTANA 

Harichandra 

_i___ 

i r i ■ i 

Bhogabhata Kakka Rajjila Dadda 

i 

Narabhata 

i 

Nagabhata 

13. GURJARAS OF NANDIPURI 

Dadda I 

i 

Jayabhata I Vataraga 
Dadda II Prasantaraga 

i 

Jayabhata II 

i' 

Dadda III Bahusahaya 

i 

Jayabhata III 

'I 

Ahirola 

I 

Jayabhata IV 


723 


















THE CLASSICAL AGE 


14. SINDH 

Sahasi Rai 

i 

Sahiras 

i 

Rai Sahasi II 


! 

Chach 

1 

i 


! 

t 

Chandar 

1 

Daharsiah 

! 

Dahar 

i 

Jaisixhha 

1 

t 

Duraj 

VAKATAKAS: 

• 

1. 

MAIN BRANCH 
Vindhyasakti 
! 

Pravarasena I 

i 


2. 



3. 

Ga utamlputra 

i 

Rudrasena I 

i 

! 

i 

Sarvasena 
(founder of the Vatsagulma 

branch) 

4. 

! 

Prithivishena I 
• • 



5. 

l 

Rudrasena H—Prabhavati-gunta 

i 


! 

Divakarasena 

7.Damodarasena 

i 

8. Pravarasena II 


9. Narendrasena 

i 

10. Prithivishena II 
• • 

16. VAKATAKAS OF VATSAGULMA 

Vindyasakti 

! 

Pravarasena I 

1. Sarvasena (founder of the branch) 

! 

2. Vindhyasakti II 

i 

3. Pravarasena II 

! 

4. (name unknown) 

i 

5. Devasena 

! 

6. Harishena 


724 













GENEALOGY 


17. NALAS 

Bhavatta (? Bhavadatta)-varman 

! 

? Skanda-varman 
Arthapati. 

JL 

18. TRAIKUTAKAS 

Indradatta 

Dahrasena 

Vyaghrasena 

19. KALACHURIS 

Krishna raj a 

.' i 

Sahkaragana 

Buddharaja 

20. RASHTRAKUTAS OF MANAPURA 

• «» 

1. Manahka 

i 

2. Devaraja 

i. . i 

3. Bhavishya Avidheya 

! 

4. Abhimanyu 

21. RASHTRAKUTAS OF ACHALAPURA 

Durgaraja 

Govindaraja 

s 4‘ t,rii “ 

Nannaraja Yuddhasura 

22. VASISHTHAS 

Guna-varman 

'I 

Prabhayxj ana-varman 
Ananta-varman 


725 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


23. SALANKAYANAS 

Hasti-varman I 

i 

Nandi-varman I 


i i 

Hasti-varman II Chanda-varman 

i . i 

Skanda-varman Nandi-varman II 

24. PITRIBHAKTAS 

Uma-varman 

Chanda-varman 

Nanda Prabhanjana-varman 

25. RULERS OF PISHTAPURA 

Ranaduriaya 

\ 

i 

Vikramendra 


Prithvl-Maharaj a 

26. VISHNUKUNDINS 
* • *» 

1. Vikramahendra (Vikramendra-varman) I 

2. Govinda-varman Vikramasraya 

i 

3. Madhava-varman I Janasraya 


j Manchyanna-bhattaraka 

4. Vikramendra-varman II i 

| Deva-varman 

5. Indra(-bhattaraka)-varman 

| Madhava-varman II 

6. Vikramendra-varman III 

(For an alternative view, cf. p. 223) 

27. EASTERN GANGAS 

7 

1. Indra-varman I 

2. Hasti-varman, Rajasirhha, Ranabhlta 

3. indra-varman II, Rajasimha 

4. Indra-varman III 

Danarnava 

r 

i 

5. Indra-varman IV 

i 

Gunarnava 

•» * 

6. Devendra-varman 

i 

* 

7. Ananta-varman 


8. Nanda-varman (Indra-varman) 9. Devendra-varman II 


726 










GENEALOGY 


28. DAKSHINA KOSALA (Northern Part) 

1. Sura 

2. Davita I 

I 

i 

3. Vibhishana 

i 

4. Bhimasena I 

5. Dayitavarman II 

| 

6. Bhimasena II 

29. MATHARAS 

Sankara varman 

i 

Saktivarman 
Prabhahj ana varman 
Ananta-Saktivarman 

30. SARABHAPURlYAS 

1. Sarabha 

| 

I 

2. Narendra 

3. Prasanna(matra) 

f | 

! _ i 

4. Jayaraja 5. Manamatra-Durgaraja 

r~ .i 

6. Sudevaraja 7. Pravararaja 

31. PANDUVAMSiS OF SOUTH KOSALA 

1. Udayana 

i 

j 

2. Indrabala 

i 

_i_ 

I I * 

I ! 

3. Nanna Isanadeva Bhavadeva 

! _ 

! ~ I 

4. Tivara 5. Chandragupta 

i 

6. Harshagupta 

i 

i 

7. Balarjuna-Sivagupta 


727 













THE CLASSICAL AGE 


32. PANDUVAMsIS OF MERALA 

Jayabala 

‘ i 

Vatsaraja 

I 

Nagabala 

Bharatabala (Indrabala) 

33. CHALUKYAS OF BADAMI 

1. Jayasimha 

! 

2. Ranaraga 

r 

3. Pulakesm I 

_ _ i__ 

i . 

4. KIrtivarman I 

!_ 

i ".~ 

6. Pulakesin II 

7. Vikramaditya I 

! 

8. Vinayaditya 

i 

9. Vijayaditya 

’ ! 

10. Vikramaditya II 

1 

11. KIrtivarman II 

34. EASTERN CHALUKYAS 

1. Kubja Vishnuvardhana I 

_l_'_ ;_ 

2. Jayasimha I 3, Indravarman (Indrabhattaraka) 

I 

I ' “ I 

Indravarman (?) 4. Vishnu vardhana II 

l 

i 

5. Mahgi Yu vara j a I 

6. Jayasimha II Vinayaditvavarman j 

i i 

Kokilivarman 

I 

7. Kokuli Vikramaditya 

i 

Mahgi Yu vara j a II 


5. Mahgalesa 


Kubja Vishnu vardhana 
(founder of the Eastern 
Chalukyas) 


728 


8. Vishnuvardhana III 

I 

9. Vijayaditya I 


















GENEALOGY 


35. CHOLAS OF RENANDU 

ft • V 

Nandi'varman 


Sirhhavishnu Sundarananda Dhanahjaya varman 

' i 

Mahendravikramavarman 


Gunamudita Punvakumara 

36. PANDYAS 

Kadungon 

Mara varman Avanisulamani 

o o « 

Sendan 

Arikesari Mara varman 
Kochchadaiyan Ranadhira 
Maravarman Rajasixhha I 
N edunj adai y a n 

37. WESTERN GANG AS 

1. Kongunivarman (Madhava I) 

2. Madhava II 

3. Ha.riva.rm an 
3A. Vishnugopa 

4. Madhava III 

5. Avinita 

6. Durvimta 

7. Moshkara 

8. Srivikrama 

9. Bhuvikrama 

10. Sivamara I 

11. (name unknown) 

12. Sripurusha 

(For a different view, cf. Early Gangas of Talahdd 

by S. S. Sastri, n. 22) 

38. KADAMRAS (ELDER BRANCH) 

1. May u r asarman 

I 

2. Kahgavarman (or Skand a varman) 


3. Bhagiratba 



4. Raghu 5. Kakutsthavarman 


6. Santivarman 

i 

7. Mrigesa varman 

f 

l 

9. Ravivarman 


Kumara varman Krishna varman 
| (founder of 
the younger 
branch) 


10. Hari varman. 


8. 


729 


Mandhatrivarman 

















THE CLASSICAL AGE 


39. KADAMRAS (YOUNGER BRANCH) 

1. Krishnavarman I 

'I 

2. Vishnu varman 

' i 

3. Simhavarman 

| 

l 

4. Krishnavarman II 

i 

5. Ajavarman 

i 

6. Bhogivarman 

40. PALLAVAS (See pp. 282-3) 

41. CEYLON 

1. Mahasena 

l 

s 

2. Srimeghavarna 

3. Jveshthatishya II (Br. or Brs S. of 2) 

r 

4. Buddhadasa 

( 

I 

5. Upatishya I 

6. Mahianaman (Br. of 5) 

7. Mitrasena 

8—13. Pandya and five Damila successors 

14. Dhatusena 

I 

i 

15. Kasyapa I 

16. Maudgalyayana I (Br. of 15) 

17. Kumaradasa 

i 

18. Kirtisena 

19. Siva (maternal uncle of 18) 

20. Upatishya II (husband of the sister of 16) 

» 

21. Siiakala 

22. Damshtraprabhuti 

23. Maudgalyayana II (son of 21) 

i 

24. Klrtisrlmegha 

25. Mahanaga 


730 


GENEALOGY 


26. Agrabodhi I (sister’s son of 25) 

27. Agrabodhi II (sister’s son of 26) 

28. Sanghatishya (? Br. of 27) 

29. Maudgalyayana III 

30. Silameghavarna 

31. Agrabodhi III, Srisahghabodhi 

32. Jyeshthatishya III (son of 28) 

33. Agrabodhi III (again) 

34. Damshtropatishya I 

35. Kasyapa II (Br. of 31) 

36. Dappula (sister’s husband of 35) 

37. Hastadariishtra I or Damshtropatishya II (sister’s son of 34 

38. Agrabodhi IV (Br. of 37) 

39. Datta 

40. Hastadariishtra II 

41. Mana or Manavarman (son of 35) 

i 

I 

42. Agrabodhi V 

43. Kasyapa III (Br. of 42) 

44. Mahendra (Br. of 43) 

i 

45. Agrabodhi VI 


731 
















•H 































. 
































■ 

































' 





















































































INDEX 


Abbasids, 174. 

Abd-ar-Rahman, 167, 168. 

Abhayadatta, 353. 

Ahhidharmakosa, 342, 383, 390. 
Abhidharmasamuchchaya , 389, 380. 
Abhijna, 606. 

Abhimanyu, 200, 229. 

Abhinavagupta, 310, 311. 

Abhiras, 9, 52, 81, 84, 85, 136, 186, 192, 
193, 272. 

Abhisamayalankarakdrikd, 389. 

Abu, See Arbuda Mt. 

Achdrya, 606. 

Achchutavikranta, 263, 265, 266. 
Achyuta, 8. 

Adhi, 602. 

Adhikarana. 357. 

Adhikdrapurushas, 360. 

Adhikritas, 360. 

Adhishthdnddhikarana, 350. 

Adhyagni, 366. 

Adhyakshas, 360, 604. 
Adhydtma-Rdmayana, 295. 
Adhyavahanika, 366. 

Adi Purana, See Brahma Parana. 
Adisimha, 93. 

Adisura, 310. 

Aditya-sena, 72, 75, 126, 127, 137, 358, 
419. 

Aditya-vardhana, 96, 97. 
Aditya-varman, 67, 242. 

Administrative Organisation, 

Northern India, 348-358. 

Southern India, 358-361. 

Adule, 598. 

A-fan-tu, 112, 382. 

Afghanistan, 10, 44, 53, 57, 111, 116, 382, 
599, 601, 620-622. 

Africa, 167. 

Agama, 325, 343. 

Agamasdstra, 301n. 

Aghata, 158. 

Agnidesa, 612-627. 

Agni Purana, 292, 293, 294, 295, 236, 

319 

Agrabodhi I, 287. 

„ II, 287. 

„ III, 288. 

„ IV, 288, 289. 

„ V, 289. 

„ VI, Silamegha varna, 284n, 

290. 

Agrawala, V. S., 429n. 

Agriculture, 590-593. 

Ahapporul, 340. 

Ahar, See Aghata. 

360 

Achichchhatra, 8, 382, 553, 554, 556, 557, 
558. 


Ahirawara, 9. 

Ahirbudhnya Samhitd, 421, 424. 

Ahirola, 156. 

Aihole. 

Ins, 104, 105, 109, 211, 222, 228, 231, 
232, 233, 235, 236, 238, 259, 273, 303, 
311, 412. 

cave architecture, 498. 

Temple, 503, 507, 511, 513. 
sculpture, 529. 

Airikina, 353. 

Aiyan-aritanar, 340. 

Aiyangar, K. V. Rangaswami, 361n, 
363n. - 

Aiyangar, S. K., 8n, 45, 256, 333, 340. 
Ajanta Ins., 185, 186n, 188, 225. 
cave architecture, 471, 472, 473, 474, 
475, 477, 482, 484, 485. 
sculpture, 529, 536. 
painting, 543, 544, 545, 546, 547-550, 
551, 552, 553, 559, 593, 5S5, 638. 
Ajatas^tru, 82. 

Aja-varman, 273. 

Ajita-mana, 93. 

Ajnasatam-prdpayitd, 357. 

Akalanka, 301, 41.8. 

Akasavapra 411. 

Akola, 177, 185. 

Akshapaiala, 355. 

A-la-na-shuen, 124, 125, 126. 

Alberuni, 115, 151, 152, 295, 298. 
Al-Hajjaj, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172. 

‘Ali, Caliph, 169. 

Allahabad, See Prayaga. 

Allan, J., 3, 8n, 31n, 45, 348n. 349n. 
Allavaraja, 146. 

Alor, 165, 171, 172. 

Alsdorff, A., 325. 

Altekar, A. S., 18n, 226, 283. 

Alupas, 235, 245, 274. 

Alvars, 327-328, 332-340, 414. 
Amalanddippirdn, 338. 

Amara, 291, 314, 318. 

Amarkosa, 314n, 318, 319, 423, 568, 572, 
57G, 577, 591, 593, 594, 595, 596, 597, 
599, 600, 604. 

Amaravafi, 383, 395, 607. 

sculpture, 521, 522. 

Amaru (Amaruka), 313. 

Amaru-sataka, 313. 

Arruityas, 350, 360, 

Amida, 56. 

Amma II, 251. 

Ammianus, 56, 638. 

Amoghavajra, 621. 

Amraka, 193, 194. 

Amralcardrava, 19, 20. 

Amru-bin-Jamal, 1'2. 


733 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Arhsuka, 593. 

Amsu-varman, 84n, 85n, 86, 101, 124, 
127, 136, 137. 

Andgatavamsa, 405-406. 

Anahilapataka, 161. 

Anahillapura, 411. 

Ananda, 404. 

Anandapura, 112, 158n, 382. 

Anandas, 202-204. 

Anandavardhana, 308, 310. 
Anangaharsha Matraraja, 311. 
AnantadevI, 29. 

Ananta-Sakti-varman, 213. 
Anantavarman, 67. 

Ananta-varman, 213, 214, 216, 217. 
Anaya , 347. 

Andal (Sri), 328, 332, 333, 336-338. 
Andarab, 383, 631. 

Andhra, 202-211, 224, 225, 238, 250, 
252n, 537, 538. 

Andhras, 68, 186. 
Anekdrtha-samuchchaya, 319. 

Anga, 73, 106f, 138. 

Ahgas, 416. 

Anirjita-varman, 192n. 

Aniruddhapura, 193. 

Annals of the T’ang Dynasty, 599, 800. 
Anuloma, 561, 565. 

Anutpannaddna-samudgrd hak as, 354. 
Anuyogadvdra Sutra, 325, 417. 
Anvddheya, 367. 

Aparajita, 157. 

Aparanta, 192, 193. 

Apastamba, 366. 

Aphsad, 72, 73, 75. 126, 424. 

Appar, 327, 328, 329, 331, 333, 

414, 434, 435, 436, 437. 

Appayika, 235, 237. 

Apsaro-devi, 9€. 

Arabia (Arabs), 130, 132, 134, 150, 151, 
152, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 
162, 166, 245n, 248, 280, 598, 599, 638. 
Arab Invasion, 166-175. 
Arakshadhikritas, 360. 

Arammi, 182. 

Aranabblta, See Ranabhlta. 
Aravamuthan, T. G., 69n. 

Arbuda, Mt., 154. 

Architecture, 471-521. 

Cave Architecture, 471-498. 

Structural Buildings, 499-521. 
Ardashir, 51, 54. 

Ardha-Magadhi Prakrit, 325, 340. 
Arikesari Maravarman, 267, 414. 
Arjuna, See A-la-na-shuen. 

Arjuna avatdra, 421. 

Arjunayanas, 9. 

Artabanus V, 51. 

Artha , 346, 347. 

Arthapati Bh attar aka, 188, 189. 
Arthasdstra , See also Kautilya, 299, 
300, 346, 348, 349, 350, 355, 561, 591, 
596. 

Arunasva, See A-la-na-shuen. 
Aruvanadu (Arouarnoi), 275. 


Aryabhata, 291, 322n. 

Aryahhatlya, 322. 

Aryadeva, 341, 346, 385, 386, 387. 
Aryans, 343, 347. 

Aryashtasata, 322. 

Aryasura, 341, 346. 

Asahaya, 299, 362. 

Asahga, 389, 390, 391. 

Asankita, 191, 192n. 

Asedha, 364. 

Ashtddhydyi, 312, 318, 320, 325. 
Ashtakulddhikarana , 351. 
Ashtdnga-hr'idaya-samhitd, 320, 321. 
Ashtdnga-sangraha, 320. 

Asirgadh, 69. 

Asiila, 367. 

Asmaka, 187f. 

Asoka, 350, 352. 

Asokaraja, 107. 

Asoka-varman, 258. 

Assam, 8, 60, 73, 86, 88, 90, 138, 141, 634. 
Assum, 598. 

Astrology, 323, 324, 585. 

Astronomy, 291, 321-324. 
Asuhha-hhdvand, 376. 

Asuras, 420. 

Asvaghosha, 291, 303, 383, 385, 389. 
Aivamedha, 14, 15, 23, 90, 81, 127, 146, 
205, 206, 208, 224, 231, 255, 257, 
263, 358. 

Asvapati, 67. 

Asvasdstra, 321. 

Asvatthaman, 275, 348. 

Atavi-rajyas, 9. 

Atharvaveda-samhitd, 579. 

Atpur Ins., 157, 158. 

Atthasalinx, 401, 402. 

Attila, 27. 

Attivarman, 202, 203, 204. 
Auchityavichdracharcha, 182. 

Aufrecht, Th., 294. 

Aulikaras, 195. 

Aurangabdd, 185, 186n. 
cave architecture, 471, 484, 485, 494, 
495, 496. 

sculpture, 533, 534, 536, 542. 
painting, 545. 

Avaddnas, 375. 

Avalokitesvarasadhanasataka, 393. 
Avamukta, 10. 

Avanijanasraya-Pulakesiraja, 155, 156, 
173, 248. 

Avanti, 52, 66, 134, 150, 154, 155, 156, 
157, 186. 

Avantisundarl-katha, 315. 
Avanti-varman, 68, 69, 70, 71, 101. 
Avimtakongani, 235, 269, 411, 412. 
Ayasobhita I, 94, 144, 145. 

„ II, 145, 146. 

Ayodhya, 93, 129, 198, 230, 356, 389, 597. 
Ayuktas ( Ayuktakas ), 350, 354, 355, 360. 
Ayyana-mahadevI, 251, 253. 
Ayya-varman, 90n. 

Ayyangar and Rao, 413n. 

Ayyar, C. V. Narayana, 328, 310. 470. 


734 










INDEX 


Bacharna, 53. 

Bactria, 599. 

Badakhshan, 612. 

Badami, 177, 192n, 194, 198, 227-249, 
250, 251, 252, 254, 260, 273, 280, 
359, 412, 413. 

cave architecture, 491, 492, 498, 511. 
sculpture, 528, 529, 530, 531, 533, 534, 
535, 536, 538, 541. 
painting, 543, 545, 550, 551, 552. 

Badara, 593. 

Bagehi, P. C., 120n, 124n, 130n, 133n, 
603n, 612n, 617n, 622n. 

Bagdat (Bhagdatta), 52. 

Bag, cave architecture, 471, 482, 527. 
painting, 543, 545, 550, 551, 552. 

Baghelkhand, 351. 

Bahllka, 599. 

Bahman, 165, 171, 172. 

Banigram, 507. 

Bailaman, See Vallamandala. 

Bairat, See Pariyatra. 

Balaba, See Valabhi. 

Baladeva, See Rama Haladhara. 

Baladkikrita, 349. 

Baladitya, 34, 37, 38, 88n, 89. 91, 92, 
99, 100, 106, 107, 108, 114, 118, 125, 
126, 139, 140, 141, 142, 394, 618. 

Balaghiit, 181, 184. 

Balardmdyana. 310. 

Balarjuna, 221, 222n. 

Ralavarman, 8, 151. 

Bala-varman, 89, 141. 

Bali, 653. 

Balkh (Bactria), 20n, 35, 51, 52, 54, 
55, 56, 57, 382, 630. 

Bamian, 382, 632. 

Ranabhatta, 69, 70n, 71, 78, 79, 80, 96, 
' 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 106, 

107, 108, 110, 113n, 116n, 121, 122, 
123, 139, 182, 291, 299, 309, 311, 
313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 324, 341, 346, 
347, 356, 410, 544, 546, 554. 577, 583, 
584, 592, 593. 

Banaras, 79, 296, 358, 382, 593. 
sculpture, 525, 527, 540. 

Banas, 259, 269, 270, 271, 273-274. 

Banavasi, 183, 185, 233, 235, 270, 271, 
272, 273, 274, 412. 

Banerjea, J. N., 430n, 438n. 

Banerjee, A. C., 158n, 159n, 176. 

Banerji, R. D., 18n, 45, 47n, 53n, 57n, 
145n, 504n, 507n, 511, 513n, 515n. 

Bannu, See Fa-la-na. 

Bappadeva, 182. 

Bappa Rawal, 157, 158, 159, 160, 162, 
163. 

Barada, 152. 

Barwas, 167, 172. 

Basak, R. G., 45, 71, 73n, 83n, 86n, 
88, 102. 138n, 142n, 145n, 176. 

Basarh, 76, 554, 558, 596, 605. 

Basaronaga, 275. 

Basim, 179n, 185. 

Basra, 167, 168. 


Baudhayana, 366. 

Beal, S., 2n, 106n, 108n, 115n, 117n, 123. 
Beas, 594. 

Bedas, 106n, 245. 

Bedsa, 545. 

Belvalkar, S. K., 319n. 

Bembara (Bembal), 184. 

Bendall, C., 87, 88. 

Bengal 60, 73n, 74, 76-81, 107, 108, 113, 
129, 135, 139, 140, 141, 142-144, 

348, 349, 350, 351, 353, 357, 410, 532, 
533, 599. 

Berar, 182, 183f, 185, 187, 191, 358, 382. 
Besnagar, 526, 527, 540. 

Bhadra, 53. 

Bhadra, 65. 

Bhadracharyd, 376. 

Bhagadatta, 52, 88, 91, 138, 141n, 144n. 
Bhagalpur, 127, 528, 532. 595. 
Bhagavata Purdna, 292, 293, 298, 345n, 
421: 

Bhagavatism, 423, 424. 

Bhaglratha, 272. 

Bhairavakonda, 492. 

Bhaja, 533, 535, 537. 

Bhaktamara-stotra, 313. 

Bhamaha, 291, 312, 314, 317n. 
Bhambhor, See Debal 
Bhandagaradhikrita, 357. 

Bhandak, 189n, 221. 

Bhandarkar, D. R., 18n,. 23n, 158n, 159n, 
160n, 176, 294n. 

Bhandi, 100, 355. 

Bhanudatta, 94. 

Bhanu-gupta. 33, 34, 37, 43n, 219. 
Bharasiva Nagas, 178. 

Bharata (Bharatabala), 31, 222, 223. 
Bharatacharita, 182. 

Bharata-Kaumudi, 160n. 

Bharavi, 251, 259, 269, 270, 291, 311, 
312, 324. 

Bharhut, 521. 

Bhartrihari, 291, 302, 312, 313, 317, 319 
320, 588. 

Bhartripatta, 160. 

Bhartrivaddha H, 1C2, 163. 

Bhasa (King), 57. 

Bhasa (Poet), 291, 315, 396n, 544. 
Bhaskara-varman, 89, 91, 92, 99, 100, 
106, 107, 108, 114, 118, 125, 126, 139, 
140, 141, 142, 356. 

Bhaskara-varman, See Baladitya. 
Bhasvan, 59. 

Bioatamanushyas, 360. 

Bhatarka, 30, 60, 61n, 62. 

Bhatasvapati, 349. 

Bhatta Narayana, 310-311. 

Bhattacharya, B. C., 419n. 
Bhattacharya, B. T., 398n. 
Bhattacharya, V., 301n. 

Bhattasali, N. K., 91n. 

Bhalti, 148, 312, 317. 

Bhatti, Clan, 154. 

Bhattikavya, 312. 

Bhattisura, 62. 


735 





THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Bhaumaka, 312. 

Bhautta, See Tibet. 

Bhavabhuti, .131, 291, 299, 398, 3U9, 310. 
311, 326. 

Bhavadattavarman, 184, 1 SB, 189, 190. 
Bhavadeva, 221. 

Bhavanaga, 178. 

Bhavanatha, 302. 

Bhavaviveka, 387, 390, 391. 

Bhavishya Purdna, 292, 294, 442. 
Bhillamala (Bhinmal, Balmer), 153, 
154, 161. 

Bbillamalakaeliarya, 154. 

Bhilsa, See Vidisa. 

Bhima, 247. 

Bhimadama, 163. 

Bhlmasena 1, 218. 

„ li, 218. 

Bhima-varman, 263. 

Bhita, 553, 554, 555, 558, 594, 596, 597, 
605. 

Bhitargaon, 513, 515, 517, 518, 513, 554. 
Bhoga, 153. 

Bhogabhata, 65. 

Bhogapati, 355, 

Bhoga-varman, 101, 127, 137. 

Bhogavatl, 89. 

Rhogi-varman, 273. 

Bhoja (deva). 163, 182, 183. 

Bhoja (Poet),' 300, 315, 319. 

Bhojakata, 182. 

Bhojas, 190-18211. 

Bhrigu-samhitd, 323. 

Bhrita , 346= 

Bhuktis, 350, 354, 355, 358. 

Bhulunda, 194. 

Bhumara, 506, 507, 511, 526. 

Bhurnilika (Bhumli), 150, 152. 
Bhutahali, 416, 41.8. 

Rhuti-varman, 89, 91. 

Bhutattar, 332, 333, 334. 

Bhuvanesvara, 418, 423. 

Bhuvikrama. 270. 

Bihar, 73, 107, 112, 126, 351, 410. 
Biharail, 528. 

Bikaner, 154, 554. 

Bilhana, 228. 

Birmingham, 595. 

Blau, 297n. 

Boar incarnation. See Varaha avatara. 
Bodh-Gaya, 11, 382, 597. 
temple, 513, 517, 518. 
sculpture, 523. 

Bodhicharydvatara, 375, 376, 388. 
Bodhi-chitta, 374, 377. 

Bodhidharma, 612. 

Bodhi-prasthdna, 375. 

Bodhiruchi, 621, 623. 

Bodhisattva, 100, 101, 117, 375, 376, 377. 
Bodhisattva-bhumi, 389. 

Bodhisena, 636, 637. 

Boian Pass, 169, 174. 

Borneo, 652-653. 

Brahma, 342, 370, 371, 373, 424, 425. 
Brahmagupta, 154, 161, 291, 322, 323. 


] Brahmanabad, 165, 171, 172, 554, 557. 
Brahmdnr'a Purdna, 292, 294, 295, 296, 
288, 341, 342. 

Brahmanism, 395-396, 560. 

Brarima Purdna, 292, 298. 

Brahmaputra, 39, 73, 75, 76, 88, 92. 

Brahmasidd bania, 323. 
Brahmasphuta-siddhdnta, 154. 

Brahman awarta Purdna, 292, 294. 
Brahmor, 533. 

Brihad-Dharma Purdna. 294, 295. 
Brihadvivahapataia, 323. 

Brihaj-J&iaka, 317, 323, 579. 

Brihaspati, 341, 342. 343, 344. 344n, 345n, 
362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 601, 
602, 603, 604, 605, 606. 
i Brihati , 301. 

Brihatkathd, 270, 314, 325. 
Brihat-katim-manjarl, 314. 
Brihatphalayana, 360. 

Brihat-samhitd, 317, 318, 323, 513n, 

518n, 561, 570. 571, 575, 576, 577. 
578, 579, 590, 591, 535, 596. 

Broach (Barwas, Boraspicin, Rharu- 
kaehchha), 66, 104, 105, 106, 112, 
147, 148, 150, 151, 157, 162, 163, 
167, 172, 174, 194, 196. 

Brown, P.. 504n, 515n. 

Budaii, 170. 

Buddha, See also under Buddhism, 233. 
373, 375, 376, 595, 599. 
avatara, 421. 

Buddhabala, 57. 

Buddhadasa, 284, 285n, 395. 

Buddhadatta, 264, 403, 404. 
Buddhaghosha, 285, 312, 326, 341, 342, 
400-403, 407, 408, 544. 

Buddhajlva, 603. 

Buddhapaksha, 394. 

Buddhapalita, 38 7 , 388, 393. 

Buddharaja, 66, 75, 195, 196. 
Buddhasena, 130. 

Buddha-varman, 258, 276, 277, 278. 
Buddhayasa, 609, 810. 

Buddhism, 170, 171, 175, 347, 372, 373- 
408, 601, 604. 

Hinayana, 373-374. 

Mahayana, 374-380. 

Forms of worship, 380-381. 
Four-Schools, 383-393. 

Geographical distribution, 381-383. 
Historical survey, 393-397. 
Iconography, 397-398. 

Non-canonical Literature, 346, 398- 

m. 

Budhagupta, 394. 

Budha-gupta, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 39. 
86, 422. 

Buhler, G., 87, 150, 306n. 

Bundelknand, 106, 112, 177, 178, 179n. 
Burgess, J., 515n. 

Burlingame, 402, 403n. 

Burma, 381, 647-648. 


786 






INDEX 


Bust, 167. 

Buttetsu, 63G, 637. 

Byzantium, 57, 594, 598. 

Cadesia, 167. 

Cambodia, 599, 643-645. 

Capital, 601-602. 

Carpentry, 559. 

Cave architecture, 471-499. 

Chaitya Hall, 471-474, 501, 503. 
Sahgharama, 474-488. 

Brahmanical Caves, 488-498. 

Jain Caves, 498-499. 

Ceylon, 11, 12, 169, 245, 261, 284-290, 
381, 382, 386, 393, 413, 596, 598, 599. 
600, 610, 613, 621, 642. 

Central Asia, 382, 599, 600, 627-631. 
Chach, 165, 166, 169. 

Chach-nama , 164, 165, 166, 169, 171. 172, 
173, 457, '458, 459. 

Chahamana (Chauhan), 151, 153, 157, 
162, 163. 

Chakrapalita, 27, 352. 

Chakravarti, N. P., 71n, 145n. 
Chalukyas, 67. 73, 75, 77, 103, 105, 106, 
115, 129, 130, 131, 148, 149, 150, 151. 
155, 156, 157, 161, 173, 175, 177, 187, 
189, 192n, 194, 195, 196, 1S7, 208, 211, 
214, 215, 222, 223, 224n, 226, 227-254, 
259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 
266, 268, 269, 270, 273, 274, 287, 
423 425. 

of Badimi, 227-249, 250, 273, 359, 
412. 

Origin and early history, 227-231. 
The end of their Badami Kingdom, 
248-249. 

The Eastern, 250-254. 

Chamba, 533. 

Champa, 395, 643, 645-647. 

Chanda, 325. 

Chanda, 184, 189. 

Chan^adanda, 278, 279. 

Chandar, 166. 

Chandavarrnan, 204, 212, 215. 
Chandellas, 65. 

Chandimati, 528, 529. 

Chandisataka, 299, 317. 

Chandra (Grammarian), 291, 319, 320. 
Chandra (Philosopher), 301. 
ChandradevI, 30. 

Chandraditya (Pallava), 242. 
Chandraditya, See Vishnnu-gupta. 
Chandragomin, 388, 392, 393. 
Chandragupta, 221, 225. 

Chandra-gupta I, 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 84. 

„ II, 17-23, 49, 50, 179n, 

197, 272, 273, 303. 318, 348, 352, 419, 
422, 488, 590, 595. 
conquests of, 19, 20, 21. 

Marriages of, 21. 

Coins of, 21, 22. 

Personality of, 21, 22. 

Life of people in the reign of, 22. 
Chandrakirti, 387, 388, 393. 
Chandramukha-varman, 89. 


Chandraplda, 132, 133. 

Chandrapura (Chandor), 191. 
Chandravalli, 186, 192, 271, 272. 
Chandravarman, 8. 

Chandra-varman, 191, 192. 

Chandravati, See Prabhavatl-gupta. 
Chandra-vyakarana, 393. 

Chapotkatas (Chapas, Chavotakas, 
Chavadas, Chaura, Chavara), 151, 
153, 154, 161, 173. 

Cha-puo-ho-lo, See Davaka. 

Charaka, 320, 321, 590n. 

Charitra, 362. 

Charitra, 597. 

Charles Martel, 167. 

Charpentier, J., 415n. 

Chdrudatta, 315, 396n. 

Chashtana, 46. 

Chatsu, 160. 

Chatterjee, B. R., 655. 

Chattopadhyaya, K. C., 72n. 
Chauroddharanikas, 354. 

Chavannes, E., 34n, 58n, 130n, 133n, 
622n. 

Chavotakas, See Chapotkatas. 
Che-mong, 614. 

Cheras, 267, 333. 

Chezarla, 203n, 204, 503, 512. 

Chhabra, B. Ch., 3n, 7n, 653n. 
Chhandovichiti, 315. 

China. 34. 54, 86, 120, 121, 130, 132, 
133n, 136, 137n, 173, 262, 280, 285, 
286, 290, 381, 383, 384, 394, 395, 597, 
598, 599, 600, 608-627, 643, 644, 645, 
646, 647. 

Chi-na-puh-ti, 111. 

Chinese Raid, 124-126. 

Chintadurga, See Bhavadeva. 

Chionites, 56, 57. 

Chiplun, 232. 

Chitrakuta (Chitor), (Chitorgadh), 
158, i.59, 161, 162, 163. 

Chitral, 141n. 

Chitramaya, 262, 263. 

Chitrapata, 594. 

Chitravahana I, 274. 

Chitravarman, 182. 

Chola, 106n, 127, 259, 333, 395, 607. 
Christian Settlements, 462. 

Christian Topography, 36, 275, 462. 
Chulavamsa, 284n, 285n, 406. 
Chullaniruttigandha, 408. 

Chutus, 270. 

Cochin China, 381. 

Codrington, H. W., 290. 

Coedes, G., 644n, 645n, 647n, 649n, 655. 
Coins and Seals, 558-559. 

Collins, 315n. 

Conjeevaram, See Kanchl. 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., 543n. 
Coromandel, 599. 

Cosmas, 36, 37, 597, 598, 599, 600. 
Courtesan, 562, 573. 

Cousens, H., 503n, 507n, 513n. 


737 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Cowell and Thomas, 69n, 70n, 71n, 
73n. 89n, 97n, 123, 139n, 355n. 
Criminal Law, 364-366. 

Cunningham, A., 53n, 57n, 135rg 506, 
523n. 

Dadda 1, 65, 66, 67, 155, 195n. 197. 

„ II. Prasantaraga, 66, 104, 105, 
106, 109, 110, 147, 155, 236, 237, 411. 
„ III Bahusahaya, 156. 

Dadda, Queen, 197. 

Dahar, 166, 169, 170, 171, 172, 174, 175. 
Daharsiah, 166. 

Dahnaz, 172. 

Dahrasena, 193n. 

Damana. 10, 211. 

Damilas, 285, 287, 288, 289. 
Damodara-gupta, 68, 72, 73n, 309, 311. 
Damodarasena, 180, 181. 
Damodaravarman, 202, 203, 204. 
Damodarpur, 422, 423. 
Damshtraprabhuti, 286. 
Damshtropatishya I, 288, 

' II, 288. 

Dana, 375. 

Danarnava, 218. 

Dandabbukti, 78, 94. 

Dandandyahas, 349. 

Dandaparushya , 368. 

Dandapdsikas, 354. 

Bandekar, R. N., 45. 

Danddin, 187, 262, 291, 314, 315, 316, 
317f, 324, 410. 

Dantapura, 217, 387. 

Daiitidurga (Dantivarman II), 157, 248, 
249, 263. 

Dantivarman Pallava, 263. 

Dappula, 288, 

Darada, 382. 

Dards, 133, 134. 

Dare!, 592, 594. 

Dasabhumika-sutra, 389, 393. 
Dasagltxkasutra, 322. 
Dasakumdra-charita, 315, 316, 317, 410, 
561 % 570, 573, 597. 
Dasapaddrtha-sdstra, 301. 

Dasarupaka, 310. 

Dasdvaidra-charita, 421. 

Das Gupta, N„ N., 18n, 29n. 

Das Gupta, S. N., 317n. 

Das, S. C., 641. 

Datta, 289. 

Datta, B. and Singh, A., 322n. 
DattadevI, 18, 89, 90. 

Dattatreya avtdra, 421. 

Davaka, 8, 90, 91, 124n, 125 
Dayita I, 218. 

Dayitavarman II, 218. 

De, S. K., 304n, 310n, 315n, 317n. 

Debal, 167, 169, 170, 174. 

Deccan (Dakshinanatha), 34, 177-226, 
357, 533, 534, 535, 536, 537, 539, 590. 
Jainism in, 408, 409, 411-413. 
Dynasties of, 358-360. 

Delhi, 595. 


Deoghar, 127, 513n, 515, 517, 519, 526, 
527, 530. 

Deoli, 181n. 

Deotek, 178n. 

Derabhata, 148. 

Desddhikritas, 360. 

Desadhipatis , 353, 360. 

Desai, P. B., 192n. 

Deva-gupta (Later Gupta), 74, 75n, 79, 
80, 98, 121, 122, 126, 127, 196. 
Deva-gupta, Deva-raja, Deva-srI, See 
Chandra-gupta II. 

DevakI, 25. 

Devala, 299. 

Devanandin, See Pujyapada. 
Devaputra-shahi-shahanushahi, 10, 57. 
Devaraja (Bhoja), 191, 192. 

Devaraja (of the Bhatti Clan), 154. 
Devarashtra, lOn. 211. 213. 

Devardhigani, 415. 

Devasena, 186n, 224, 414. 

Devavarman, 205, 223, 224. 

Devavatl, 89. 

Devendra-varman I, 216. 

„ II, 217 

Devi-Chandra-gupta, 17. 
Devl-mdhdtmya, 299. 

Devi-sdtaka, 313. 

Dhammapada. 404-405. 
Dhamrnapaddtthakathd, 402. 
Dhammasiri, 406. 

Dhanakataka, See Amaravatl. 
Dhananjaya, 10, 

Dhanahjaya-varman, 265. 

Dhanika (Guhilaputra), 160n. 162. 
Dhanvantari, 318, 319. 

Dhangavishnu, 353. 

Dhar, S. M.,'l76. 

Dharanlvaraha, 151, 161. 

Dharapatta, 62. 

Dharasena I, 30, 61, 416. 

II, 62, 63, 148. 

„ III, 103, 104, 148. 

„ IV, 103, 104, 110, 147, 148, 
312. 

Dharasraya Jaysiriiha- varman, 149, 244, 
245, 246. 

Dharma, 341, 342, 343, 346, 347. 
Dharmadasa, 325, 391. 

Dharmadeva, 82, 84. 

Dharmddhikarana, 362. 

Dharmaditya, 63, 76, 77. 

Dharma-gupta, 612. 

Dharmaklrti, 300, 301, 391, 392. 
Dharmakshema, 611. 

Dharmamahdrdja , 358, 360, 361. 
Dharmamitra, 609. 

Dharrnapala, 261, 388, 391, 392. 
Dharmaraja, 92, 146. 

Dharmasaslras, 297, 298, 299. 
Dharmasthana, 362. 

Dharmayasa, 609. 

Dharmottara, 301. 

' Dhatusena, 285. 


788 




INDEX 


Dhatuvada, 595. 

Dhavagarti (Dhor), 160. 

Dhavaka, 309. 

Dhavala. 160, 162. 

Dhavala, 325. 

Dhlranaga, 309. 

Dhrubhata (Dhruvabhata), See £ila- 
ditya, VII. 

Dhruvadeva, 136. 

Dhruva-devI, 17, 18, 23, 50. 
Dhruvalakshmi, See Syamadevl. 
Dhruvadhikaranikas, 354. 

Dhruvasena I, 61, 62, 63, 415. 

„ II, Baladitya, 103, 104, 106, 
109, 148. 236, 237. 

„ III, 148. 

Dhvanyaloka, 310. 

Dhydna, 375. 

Dhyanagraha, 323. 

Digambara Jains, 395, 396, 409, 410, 412, 
413, 416, 418. 

Dlgha Nikdya, 342n. 

Dikshit, K. N., 532n. 

Dikshit, S. B., 322n, 323n. 

Dinnaga, 300, 301, 387, 390, 391, 392. 
Dipavamsa, 406-407, 408. 

Divakara, 301n, 309, 313. 

Divakarar, 340. 

Divakarasena, 180, 181, 187. 

Divekar, H. R., 24n. 

'Divyavaddna, 588, 593. 

Drama, 309-311. 

Drahgikas, 354. 

Dravida, 519, 596. 

Dronasimha, 30, 61. 

Dukula, 593. 

Duraj, 166. 

Durgagan, Raja, 162n. 

Durgaraja, See Manamatra. 
DurlabhadevI, 231. 

Durlabhaka, 132. 

Durlabha-vardhana, 132. 

Durvinlta Kohganivriddha, 235, 241 

242n, 250, 269, 270, 412. 

Dutaka, 355. 

Dutas, 358. 

Dutt, N., 317n, 383n, 389n. 

Dutt, S., 176. 

Dvadasdnupreksha, 418. 

Dvapara Age, 343. 

Dvaraka, 62, 134. 

Dviscindhana-kavya, 315. 

Dwarf incarnation, See Vamana 
avatar a. 

East Indies, 650-655. 

Economic conditions, 590-607. 

Edenga, 189. 

Education, 584-589. 
centres of learning, 585-586. 
curriculum of studies, 586-589. 
female education, 587-588. 
teachers and pupils, 584-585. 

Egypt, 167. 

Ekanamsa, 423. 


Elephanta, 

cave architecture, 495, 496, 498. 
sculpture, 528, 533, 535, 536, 541. 
Ellora, 

cave architecture. 471, 473, 474, 484, 
485, 486, 488, 494n, 495, 496. 497, 
498, 499. 

painting, 545, 546. 

Elphinstone, 175. 

Ephthalites, See Henhthalites. 

Eran, 9, 31, 33, 34, 35, 37, 47, 179n, 219, 
422, 425. 

temple, 504, 506. 

Erandapalla, lOn, 211. 

Ethiopia, 598, 600. 

Ettinghausen, 107n, 112 113n, 120, 123. 
Fables, 313-317. 

Fa-hien, 22, 111, 285, 352, 353, 356, 357, 
380, 381, 382, 383, 393, 394, 409, 562, 
579, 583n, 598. 599, 607, 611. 613, 
614, 627, 628. 630, 631, 632, 642, 643. 
Fa-la-na, 111, 382. 

Fang-chih, 102. 

Faustos, 57. 

Fergusson, 473. 

Filiiozat, 320n. 

Fleet, J. F., 8n, lOn, 45, 60n, 72n, 88, 
108, 109, 283, 407n. 

Food and Drink, 578, 579. 

France, 167. 

Francke, A. H., 633n, 635n. 641. 

Fu-Nan, 599, 600. 

Gadahara (Gadakhara), 54, 56n, 57. 
Gaddemane, 106n, 149, 245. 

Gambhlra Yaksha, 394. 

Gana, 363. 

Ganapati-naga, 8. 

Ganapati-varman, 89. 
Ganaratnamahodadhi, 319. 

Ganaddsa, 346. 

Gandhara, 26, 35, 36, 38, 53, 56, 57, 58, 
59, 97, 98. Ill, 164, 357, 358, 382, 
383, 384, 395, 398, 599, 607, 622, 623. 
Gandharvavatl, 89. 

Ganga, 80, 98, 100, 102, 106, 130, 140, 
155, 356, 590, 597. 

Ganga-MahadevI, 242n. 

Gangas, Eastern, 214, 215-217, 225, 235, 
241, 242, 245, 268. 

Gangavamsa, 147. 

Ganguly, D. C., 74n, 176. 

Ganjam, 145, 179n, 597. 

Garhwa,526, 559. 

Garuda Pur ana, 292, 295. 

Garuiaka, 62. 

Gauda, 41, 68, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 
81, 92, 94, 99, 100, 103, 121, 127, 128, 
129, 134, 135, 138, 141, 143n, .44. 
Gaudapada, 291, 300, 301, 302. 

Gauda Upadhyaya, 319. 

Gauda-tantra, 142. 

Gaiida-vaho , 128, 129, 131, 143, 308, 326. 
Gauimikas, 360. 


739 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Gautama, 362. 

Gautamlputra, 177, 178, 180. 

Gaya, 44, 67, 78, 80, 93, 107, 284, 296, 
391, 393. 

Geiger, W., 284n, 285n, 289n, 290, 402, 
405, 407n, 470. 

Ghani, M. A., 176, 456n. 

Gharo, 170. 

Ghatakarpara Kavya, 312. 
Ghatotkachagupta, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 26n. 
Ghazipur, 358. 

Ghirshman, B., 34n, 50n. 

Ghose, B., 638n. 

Ghosh, A., 507n. 

Ghosh, B. K., 361n, 368n. 

Gilgit, 88. 

Giribhoja, 319. 

Girinagara, 27, 61, 346, 352, 416, 422, 
424, 590, 591. (Girnar), 

Gita, 420, 421. 

Gitagovinda, 421. 

Gnam-ri-sron-bstan, 86, 633. 

Goa, 191. 

Gode, P. K., 319n, 320n. 

Gollas, 36. 

Gomati, 127. 

Gonandas, 132. 

Gondophares, 53n. 

Gopachandra, 78, 77. 

Gopalas, 81. 

Goparaja, 33, 34, 47n, 219. 

Govichandra, 144. 

Govinda, 235, 237. 

„ ^ III, 221 
Govinda-gupta, 23n, 76. 

Govindaraja, 199, 201, 248. 
Govindavarman Vikramasraya, 207, 208, 
223, 225. 

Graha-varman, 70, 71n, 79, 80, 99, 101, 

102 , 121 , 122 . 

Grdmdkshapataiika, 355, 356. 
Grdmakuta, 359. 

Grdmika, 351. 

Grammar, 319-320, 324. 

Guerinot, 413n. 

Guhadatta (Guha), 157, 158, 159. 
Guhasena, 62, 63. 

Guhilots (Guhilas, Guhila-putras), 153, 
157-161, 162. 

Guilds, 603-606. 

Gujarat (Guijara), 64, 153-164, 196, 236, 
237, 244, 410, 411, 590. 

Gunadhara, 43. 

Gunadhya, 314, 325. 

Gunamati, 390. 

Guna-mudita, 265. 

Gunasagara, 274. 

Gunavarman, 610, 614. 

Guna-varman, 213. 

Guntur, 381. 

Gupta, 80, 122. 

Gupta Empire, 

Location, 2. 

Foundation, 7-12. 

Expansion, 17-28, 97, 


Decline, 30, 31, 32. 

Guptas, Imperial, 590, 594, 595, 596, 
597, 600, 605, 606. 

Administrative Organisation, 348-354, 
356, 357, 359, 373, 511, 513-518. 

Origin and early history, 1. 

Family dissensions. 34, 179n, 180, 

183, 184, 223, 272, 291, 298. 

Later, 72-76, 126, 128, 358. 

Gurjaras, 60, 65, 97, 98, 103n, 104, 105. 
106, 109, 112, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151. 
173, 193n, 194, 196, 227, 246, 411. 
of Rajputana, 63-65, 67, 104, 153-155. 
of Nandipurl, 66, 67, 155-157, 173. 
Gurjaratra, See Gujarat. 
Guruparamparai, 339. 

Habib, 172. 

Haddala, 161n. 

Haidarabad, See Nerun. 

Hajjaj, See Al-Hajjaj. 

Haider, R. R., 169n, 176. 

Hall, 309. 

Kami, 612. 

Hamsa avatar a, 420. 

Harhsavega, 99, 139. 

Handarike, 230. 

Han dynasty, 50. 

Hanumangarh, 554. 

Haraha, 227. 

Haravijaya, 187. 

Hardy, 405. 

Haribhadra, 301, 392, 411, 417. 
Harichand, 3Q6n. 

Harichandra, 65, 66, 98, 153, 154. 
Harigupta, 410. 

Haripala, 129. 

Hariraja, 193. 

Harishena, 7, 39, 184, 186n, 187, 225, 
472, 475. 

Harita, 365. 

Harita-rasi, 158. 

Haritlputras, 228, 230. 

Harivamsa, 151, 416. 

Hari-varman (Kadamba), 273. 

„ (Maukhari), 67. 

„ (W. Gangs), 258, 269, 

274, 278. 

Harsha-charita, 49, 69, 70, 73, 74, 75, 
89n, 91, 96, 97, 126, 182, 299, 314, 317, 
326, 355, 356, 410, 424, 563, 593, 594. 
Harshadeva, 141n, 144. 

Harshagupta, 67. 

(Maukhari). 

Harshagupta, 221. 

(Panduvamsi). 

Harsha-gupta, 72. 

(Later Gupta). 

Harsharaja, 160n. 

Harsha-vardhana, 70n, 71, 73n, 74, 75, 
'80, 85, 86, 89, 90, 95, 96-123, 124, 
125, 126, 128, 137, 139, 140, 141, 142, 
144, 146, 147, 148, 149, 153, 156, 164, 
I 165, 236, 237n, 240, 249, 354-358, 381, 


740 




INDEX 


594, 595, 618, 621, 623. 
accession, 98, 99, 101. 
army, 116. 
empire, 110-113. 
estimate of, 113-120. 

Kanauj, 99-102. 

literary activities. 116, 117, 309-310, 
311. 

military, „ , 102-110. 

religious „ , 118, 119, 120. 

373. 

relations with China, 120-1. 
zeal for Buddhism, 395. 
after his death, 124-126.' 

Hastadamshtra, See 

Damshtropatishya II. 

Hastibhoja, 186n. 

Hastin, 30. 

Hastivarman, 9, 204, 205. 

Hasti-varman, (Rajasirhha, Ranabhita), 
216. 

Hasrtydyurveda , 321. 

Hayagrivavadha, 312. 

Hayamukha, 382, 395. 

Hazara, 132. 

Hazra, R. C., 298. 

Helmand, R. 164, 167. 

Hemachandra, 318. 

Hephthalites, (Ye-tha, Ephthalites, 
White Huns), 26, 35, 36, 59. 

Herat, 167. 

Herzfeld, E, 51n, 52, 55n, 56n. 

Hillebrandt, 305n, 306n. 

Himalayas, 599, 600. 

Hlnavana, See under Buddhism. 

(Hinayanism) See also Mahayanism, 

Hindu Civilisation in South-East Asia, 
654-655. 

Hindu Kush, 35, 50, 54, 56, 164, 167. 

Hing-Tchoan . 284. 

Hiralal, 147. 

Hiranyaearbha, Mahadana, 203, 204, 

208, 224n, 225, 231, 268. 

Hiranya-varman, 262, 281. 

Hisham, Caliph, 172. 

Hitopadesa, 314, 

Hitti, P. K., 455n, 637n. 

Hiuen Tsang, 11, 22, 35, 37, 38, 42, 43n, 

44, 63, 70n, 77, 78, 80, 85, 94, 95, 99n, 
100. 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 

108, 109, 110, 111. 112, 114, 115, 116. 

117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 132, 

138, 139, 140, 142, 153, 154, 161, 162, 

164, 165, 166, 169, 236, 239n, 261, 167, 

354, 355, 356. 357, 358, 376, 380, 381, 

382, 383, 384, 385, 387, 391, 392, 393, 

394, 395, 396, 410, 414, 501, 513, 517, 

518, 560, 561, 563, 564, 572, 573, 574, 

575, 577, 578, 579, 583n, 584, 586, 587, 

588, 592, 593, 594, 595, 596, 597, 599, 

600, 607, 617, 618, 619, 623, 624, 625, 

627, 628, 629, 630, 631, 632. 

Hiung-nu, 56, 58. 

Hoernle, A. F. R., 176, 386n. 

Hounerite Country, 598. i 


Hooper, J. S. M., 336, 340. 

Hora, 323. 

Hormzad, 51, 52, 54, 55. 

Hultzsch, 6On, 290, 306n. 

Hunas, 26n, 27n, 28, 32, 33, 34n, 35, 36, 
37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 58, 59, 64, 
65, 69, 70n, 97, 98, 184, 194, ,303, 320, 
352, 353, 411, 607. 

Huvikhska, 53. 

Hyderabad, 177, 185. 

I$aikka<jlar, 339. 

Ikshvakus, 349. 

Indian Political Ideas, A History of, 
343n, 347n, 348n. 

Indo-China, 643-650. 

Indonesia, 597. 598, 600. 

Indore, 605. 

Indra, 344, 347. 

Indra I, 156. 

Indrabala, 220, 221. 

Indrabhattarika, 68. 

Indraji, 82n, 87, 138n. 

Indravarman (Indraraja, Induraja, 
Indrabhattaraka), 252, 253. 

Indra-varman (Vishnukundin), 207n, 

210n, 223. 

„ I, 215, 216, 224, 225. 

„ II, Rajasimha, 216. 

„ III, 216. 

„ IV, 216. 

Indradatta, 193. 

Indus, 596. 

Industries, 593-596. 

Influence of India on the West, 640-641. 
Interest, Law of, 602. 

Iraiyanar, 339, 340. 

Iran, 51, 165. 

Iraq, 168, 169, 172. 
isanadeva, 221. 

Isana-varman, 38, 39, 67, 68, 69, 70n, 72, 
73, 77, 79, 97, 209, 221. 

Islam, 166, 171, 172, 173, 174. 
Isvarakrislma, 300, 302. 
isvarasena, 392. 

Isvara-varman, 67. 

I-tsing, 2, 5, 117, 143, 309, 320, 321, 376, 
391, 392, 396n, 577, 578, 579, 584, 
585, 586n, 587, 588, 592, 597, 601, 
620, 631, 632, 638, 651. 
lyalpa, 333. 

Jackson, 297n. 

Jackson and Indraji, 161n. 
Jagadekamalla, 270. 

Jagan Nath, 2n, 23n. 

Jaikadeva, 150, 152. 

Jaimini, 301, 323. 

Jainendra Vyakarana, 320. 

Jainism, 372, 408-419. 

Canon, 415-418. 

Iconography, 418-419. 

Spread in North India, 408-411. 

„ South India, 413-415. 


741 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Jaipur, 169, 546. 

Jaisalmer, 154, 172. 

Jaisimha, 179, 171, 172. 

Janakiharana, 286, 312. 

Japan, 384, 635, 636, 637. 

Jdtakamala, 346, 346n, 347n. 

Jdtakas, 350, 375. 

Jdtaka-sutra, 323. 

Jdtakdtthavannand, 402. 

Jatakha$ga, 143. 

Jatilavarman, 267. 

Jatipatta, 594. 

Jats, 1.71, 174. 

Java, 381, 600, 610, 643, 651-652. 
Jayabala, 222, 223. 

Jayabhata I, 411. 

„ II, 156. 

„ HI, 156. 

„ IV, 150, 156, 157, 162, 173. 

Jayadeva, 82, 137, 138, 141, 144. 
Jayadeva (Madhyamika Teacher), 388. 
Jayadeva (Poet), 316, 421. 

Jayaditya, 320. 

Jayagupta, 395. 

Jayamangald, 324. 

Jayanaga, 142. 

Jayanandi-varman, 274. 

Jayanatha, 30, 354. 

Jayanta, 143. 

Jayapntra, 365. 

Jayaplda, 136, 143n. 

Jayapura, 31. 

Jayaraja, 219. 

Jayasekhara, 161. 

Jayasena, 117. 

Jayasirhha I, 208, 229, 230, 252, 253. 

„ II, 253. 

Jay asr ay a Mahgalaraja, 247, 248. 
Jayasvamini, 67. 

Jayaswal, K. P., 5n, 18n, 256. 
Jayaturigavarsha, 144. 

Jayavaraha, See Varaha, 
Jaya-vardhana I, 147. 

„ n, 147. 

Jayavarman, 217. 

Jaya-varman, 643, 644. 

Jelalabad (Jalalabad), See 
Nagarahara. 

Jethva, 152. 

Jewellery, 559. 

Jha, G., 468n. 

Jhalrapatan, 162. 

Jinabhadra, 316. 
Jinabhadrakshamairamana, 416. 
Jinadasa, 325, 417. 

Jinendra, 320. 

Jishnu-gupta, 136. 

JIvadharana, 144. 

Jwakachintdmani, 413, 

Jivita-gupta, 72, 77, 127, 128, 358. 
JndnaprasthdncLsutra, 383. 

Jodhpur, 63, 65n, 154, 155, 172. 

Jolly, J., 320n. 

Jouveau-Dubreuil, 256. 

Juan-Juans, 34, 55, 56, 57, 58n, 628. 


Judicial Procedure, 363-365. 

Junagarb, See Girin agar a. 

Junaid, 172, 173, 175. 

Junzah, 167. 

Jurz, 172. 

Justice, Courts of, 362-363. 

Justinian, 599, 600. 

Jyesththatishya I, 284, 285n. 

“ II, 287. 

„ III, 288. 

Jyotihpala, 287. 

Jyotishkarandaka, 225. 

Kabul, (Kao-fu), (Kabulista, Kapisa), 
51, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 111, 163, 164, 
165, 167, 168, 169, 174. 

Kacha, 7. 

Kachchdyana Vydkarana, 407. 

Kachcheila, 161, 173. 

Kachchha, 52. 

Ka-chi, 382. 

Kaa^amba Kula. 149n. 

Kddambari, 69, 314, 315n, 316, 317, 346, 
346n, 347, 347n, 563, 576. 

Kadambas, 21n, 183n, 184, 185, 186, 
187, 192, 228, 232, 233, 235, 237, 
259, 269. 270-273, 278, 361, 412, 423, 
424, 425. 

Kadungon Pandya, 265, 266, 267. 

Ka/jahgala, 106, 114, 140, 142. 

Kakas, 9. 

Kakka, 65. 

Kakubha, 410. 

Kakutsthavarman, 21, 183, 184, 270, 
272. 

Kalabhoja, 158, 

Kalabhras, 243, 245, 247, 258, 259, 264, 
265-267, 413. 

Kalachuris, 60, 65, 66, 73, 75, 98, 105, 
154, 187, 193, 194-197, 223, 245, 247, 
311. 

Kalarrj ar, 30, 220. 

Kalaparichchheda, 315. 

Raids, 595. 

Kalhana, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135n, 143n, 
308, 312. 

Kali Age, 343. 

Kali-varjya, 343, 343n. 

Kalidasa, 19, 182, 183, 191, 192, 272, 271, 
302-307, 309, 310, 311, 312, 321, 324, 
326, 341, 421, 553, 573, 577, 592, 690, 
601, 602. 

Kalinga, 42, 44, 60, 92, 93, 95, 134, 138, 
141, 147, 186, 211-217, 224, 238. 253, 
284, 287, 382, 395, 408, 607, 652. 

Kalihga-nagara, 215, 217, 268. 

Kalki avatar a, 421. 

Kalki Purdna, 295. 

Kalla, 151. 

Kallddam, 339. 

Kalladar, 339. 

Kalyan, 230. 

Kalyana, 599, 600. 

Kalyanabhatta, 35. 

Kalydnamandira-stotra , 313. 


742 




INDEX 


Kalyanamitra, 371. 

Kalyan-varman, 89. 

Kama, 347. 

Kdmadhenu , 319. 

Kamandaka, 300, 341, 345, 347, 348. 

Kamarupa. 8, 73, 76, 88-92, 106, 107, 
108, 111, 112, 114, 126, 138, 139-141, 

144, 356, 594, 599. 

Kdmasutra, 184, 185, 303, 324, 542, 564, 
565, 567, 568, 569, 570, 571, 573, 580, 
595, 609. 

Kamboja, 599. 

Kambojas, 133, 134. 

Kanada, 301. 

TC k nPTS a 7 

Kanauj, 69, 71, 79, 80, 99-102, 113, 114, 
115, 116, 118, 122, 127, 128, 129, 130, 

131, 133, 140, 165, 173, 174, 175, 208, 

236, 237, 355, 373, 382, 395, 612. 

Kahchi (Kanchlpuram), 10, 106n, 138, 
202, 238, 243, 244n, 245, 246, 247, 
248, 249, 250, 255-263, 269, 271, 275, 
276, 277-279, 381, 382, 390, 391, 413, 
534, 537, 539, 545, 551, 552, 612. 

Kandabil, 166. 

Kandara, 202, 203. 

Kane, P. V., 308, 317n. 

Kanga-varman, 272. 

Kangra (Kiraj, Kira), 134, 173. 

Kanheri, 193. 
sculpture, 529, 536. 
cave architecture, 485. 
painting 545. 

Kanishka, 50, 53, 54, 132. 

Kanyakubja, 80, 131, 358. 

Kao-fu, 50, 

Kapali-varman, 191. 

Kapilavastu, 358, 382, 393, 607. 

Kanisa (Kafiristan), 382, 612, 617, 618, 
' 622, 623, 632. 

Karakoram, 599. 

Karas, 94n, 141n, 146. 

Karikala Chola, 264, 265. 

Karkotaka, 59, 132. 

Karli, 533, 535, 

Karnasuvarna 358. 

Kamafca, 134. 

Karnataka, 149. 

Kartripura, 8. 

Karuna, 376. 

Kdrvachintaka, 604. 

Kashgar, 609, 612, 627, 628. 

Kashikar, C. G., 320n. 

Kashmir (Ki-pin), 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 
50n, 58, 59, 60, 81, 111, 112, 130n, 
131-136, 143, 165, 166, 173, 174, 175, 
295, 312, 314, 381, 382, 383, 388, 394, 
423, 554, 591, 592, 599, 608, 609, 610, 
613, 614, 617, 618, 622, 623. 

KasI, 143, 147. 

Kasia, 397, 517, 523, 554. 

Kdsikdvritti, 286, 311, 319, 320, 325, 413, 
587, 588. 

Kassapa, 405-406. 


Kasyapa, I, 285n, 286. 

„ II, 288, 289. 

, „ III, 289, 290. 

Kdsyaya-yarivarta, 389, 390. 
Katakabliukti (Cuttack), 145. 

Kdtantra Vydkarana, 325, 408. 
Kathasar^t-sagara , 314. 

Kathiawar, See Saurashtra. 

Katuka, 355. 

Katyayana, ?<*9, 318, 320, 325, 341, 344, 
344n, 345, 345n, 362, 363, 364. 365, 
366, 367, 368, 369, 383, 562, 563, 570, 
572, 574, 598, 601, 602, 603, 604, 605, 
606. 

Katydyanayrakarana, 325, 326. 
Kaumudl-Mahotsava, 5, 311. 

Kaurala, 10. 

Kausambi, 382. 

Kautilya, 82, 346, 347, 348, 349, 355, 561, 
591, 596. 

Kaverl, 134, 238, 591. 

Kavya, 311-313. 

Kdvyddarsci, 187, 314, 315n, 317. 
Kdvyalankara, 314n, 317. 
Kdvyamlmdmsd, 182. 

Kdvyaprakasa, 309. 

Kdyastha, 357. 

Kdyatrayavatara, 393. 

Keith, A. B., 270, 286, 300n, 306, 307n, 
311n, 312n, 314n, 315n, 317n, 318n, 
322n. 

Kerala, 274-275. 

Keralas, 238, 243, 244, 245, 247, 249. 
Kesariveda, 189. 

Kesava avatar a, 421. 

Khadgodyama, 143. 

Khallikote, 42, 92. 

Khandakhddya, 323. 

Kharagraha I, 103, 104, 148. 

„ II Dharmaditya, 148. 
Kharaparikas, 9. 

Khetaka -vishaya (Kaira), 147, 152, 156. 
Khoh, 525, 540^ 

Khomana (IGrummana I), See Bappa 
Rawai. 

Khorasan, 51, 52, 53, 55, 167, 245n. 
Kliotan, 382, 619, 627, 628, 629. 
Khurasan, 165. 

Khusru I, 639. 

Khusru II, 240, 638. 

Khyber Pass, 174. 

Kiaochi, 599, 600. 

Kidara, 56, 57, 58, 59. 

Kielhorn, F., 145n, 283, 306n. 
K’ien-t’o-v/ei, See Gandalci. 

Kikan (Kikanan), 169, i?4. 

Ki-pin, 36, 50, 617, 623. 

Kirada, 54. 

Kirdtarjuniya, 311. 

Kiratas, 81, 83. 

Kirkpatrick, 86, 87. 

Kirman, 165. 

KIrtisena, 286. 

KIrtisrImegha, 287. 


43 


C.A.— 47 




THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Kobhagraharaja, 193. 

Kochchadaiyan, 244, 267, 268. 

Kodai, See Andal. 

Kodumbalur, 266. 

Kokilivarman, 253. 

Koukli Vikramaditya, 253. 

Konadevi, 127. 

Kondaraja, 182. 

Kohgoda, 78, 94, 95, 103, 106, 107, 108, 
110, 112, 140, 144, 146, 567. 
Kongudesa, 268, 269, 270, 274-275. 
Konkan, 233, 235, 382. 

Kohkanas, 134. 

Konow, S,, 18n, 309n, 617. 

Korea, 635, 636. 

Kcsala, 9, 32, 138, 141, 184, 186, 189, 
190, 215, 217-218, 220, 221, 222, 223, 
225, 238. 

Kosam, 526, 527, 554, 555, 558. 

Kosambi, D., 400, 402n. 

Kotah, 162, 164. 

Kottura, lOn, 211. 

Kramrisch, S., 543n, 548. 

Krishna, 96. 

Krishna I, 249, 270. 

Krishna-gupta, 72, 76. 
Krishnamachariar, M., 312n, 315n, 

317n. 

Krishnaraja, 195, 196. 

Krishna-varman I, 272. 

II, 273. 

Krita Age, 343. 

Kritavlrya, 59, 194. 
Kriyasavgrahapanjika, 376. 

Kshdnti, 375. 

Kshatravidya, 347. 

Kshauma, 593, 594. 

Kshemendra, 182, 183, 421. 
Kshirasvamin, 318, 319. 

Kubja Vishnuvardhana, 238, 242, 250, 
251, 252n, 253. 

Ku-ehe-lo, See Gurjara. 

Kuchi, 382, 608, 609, 611, 612, 626, 628, 
629, 630. 

Kufa, 168. 

Kula, 363. 

Kulasekhara Alvar, 332, 338, 422. 

Kullu, 382. 

Kuluta, 111, 592, 594. 

Kumara, See Bhaskara-varman. 
Kumaradasa (Kumaradhatusena), 286. 
312. 

KumaradevI, 3, 4, 6, 7, 16n. 
Kumara-gupta I, See Mahendraditya. 

„ II, 29, 43n. 

„ III (Kramaditya), 43n. 

„ (Later Gupta) 68, 72, 73n, 

74, 75, 126. 

Kumarajlva, 387, 608, 609, 629. 
Kumaralabdha, 385. 

Kumdrdrnatyas, 350, 354. 
Kumdrasambhava, 305, 307. 

Kumara-varman, 273. 

Kumaravishnu I, 264, 276, 277, 278, 279, 
„ ' II, 277, 278. 


Kumarayana, 608. 

Kumarila (Bhatta), 291, 301, 308, 391, 
392. 

Kunala, 238. 

Kun Pandya, See Arikesari Mara- 
vairnan. 

Kuntala, 21, 106n, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 
187, 270, 271, 272, 276. 
Kuntesvaradautya (Kuntalesvaradau- 
tya),' 182, 20Qn. 

Rural, 413. 

Kurchakas, 412. 

Kurma avatdra, 420, 421. 

Kurma Puraria, 292, 295, 296. 
Kurukshetra, 129. 

Kusaia, 59. 

Kusala, 606. 

Kushanas, 1, 10, 11, 12, 20, 21, 23, 24, 
46,’ 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 
59, 65, 359. 

Kusinagara, 607. 

Kusthalapura, 10. 

Kutch, 112, 161, 382. 

Kuttanimata, 309, 311. 

Kutumbins, 351. 

Kuvalayamdld, 35n. 

Kuvalayamdldkahd, 410. 

Kuvera, 10, 211. 

Kuvera-naga, 18, 21, 179. 

Labour, 601-602 
Laghman, 111, 164. 

Laghu-Jdtaka, 323. 
Lakshardnusarasastra , 390. 

Lakshmana, (avatdra), 422. 

' (King), 31. 

Lakshmesvara, 412. 

LakshmT, 422, 424, 425. 

Lakshmivati, 67. 

Lalatantu, 593. 

Lalitachandra, 144. 

Lalitaditya, 130, 131, 134, 135, 143n, 
173, 174. 

Lamani Singana, 284n, 287n. 
Lambakairnas, 284. 

I^ampa, 382. 

Lanka, See Ceylon. 

Lankdvatara Sutra, 376, 389, 393, 578. 
Lan-o Laghman, Lampaka), 111, 
164. 

Lata, 233, 612. 

Latas, 97, 98, 104, 105, 106, 150, 154, 157, 
173, 186, 196, 236, 248. 

Later Guptas, 38, 40, 41, 44, 60, 68, 69, 
72-76, 77, 78, 79, 92, 97, 126-128, 152. 
Law, B. C., 400n, 401, 402, 403n, 470. 
Law and Legal Institutions, 362-369. 
Law, Civil and Criminal, 365-369. 
Learning, Advanced Centres of, 585-586. 
Legge, S., 58n. 

Levi, S., 18n, 73n, 83n, 84n, 85n, 86, 87, 
124n, 136, 137n, 138, 141n, 633n, 641. 
Levirate, 343. 

Lexicography, 318. 


744 









INDEX 


Liang-hoai-king, 120. 

Lichchhavis, 3, 4, 6, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 136. 
Life of the People, 574-583. 

Character, 574-575. 

Standard of Living, 575-577. 

Toilette, 577-578. ' 

Food and drink, 578-579. 

Popular superstitions, 579-580. 

Town Life, 580-583. 
Lingamdtratantras, 318. 

Linga Purdna, 292, 294. 

Li-y-piao, i.20n, 137. 

Loans, 602-603. 

Lob-nor, 382. 

Lokamahadevi, See MahadevI 
LokamahadevL 
Lokanatha, 144. 

Lokavibhaga, 413. 

Lokottaravadins, 382. 

Lomaharshana (Suta), 296. 

Lonad, 536. 

Longhurst, 491n. 

Lotus avatdra, 421. 

Macdonell, A. A., 306n. 

Madhava, 146. 

„ I (Kongunivarman), 269. 

„ II, 269. 

„ III, 269. 

Madhava-gupta, 72, 73n, 74, 75. 
Madhava-Simha-varman, 90n, 278. 
Madhava-varman I, Janasraya, 206n, 
207n, 208, 209, 220, 223, 224, 252, 360. 

„ II, 2Q7n, 208, 209. 223, 

224, 226. 

„ IH, 223, 225, 226. 

Madhurakavi, Alvar, 332, 333, 335, 335. 
Madhva, 390. 

Madhyamaraja II Ranakshobha, 146. 

„ III, 146. ‘ 
Mddhyamika-hridaya, 387. 
Madhyamikas, 385-388, 390. 
Madhydntavibhaga , 389, 390. 

Madhya Pradesh, 353. 

Madra, 67. 

Madrakas, 9. 

Madura, 414, 639. 

Magadha, 2, 4, 5, 40, 42, 43n, 44, 68, 73, 
75, 76, 78n, 79, 80, 93, 107, 110, 112, 
120, 121, 126, 128, 129, 134, 137n, 
168, 285, 353, 358, 381, 382, 394, 408, 
409, 592, 599, 607, 611, 623. 

Magha, 164, 291, 300, 311, 312, 320, 324. 
341, 347. 

Mahdbaladhikrita (Mahdsendpati), 349, 
355. 

Mahabalipuram, See Mamallapuram. 
Mahdbharata, 420, 421. 

Mahdbhashya, 320, 587, 588. 

Mahabhu.fi-varman, See Bhutivarman. 
Mahadandandyaka, 349, 360. 

Mahadeva, 319. 

MahadevI Lokamahadevl, 247, 248. 
Mahadharma-kathin, 285. 

Mahdjanas, 359. 


Mahakantara, 9. 

Mahakavyas, The five, 311, 312, 324. 
Mahdkshapataladhikaraiiddhikrita - 
samanta-mahdrdja, 355. 

! Mahdkshapatalika-sdmantamahdrdja, 

355. 

Mahakuta, 73, 196, 232, 233, 247. 
Mahamalla, See Narasimha-varman L 
MahanadI, 146, 213. 

| Mahanaga, 284n, 287. 

Mahanaman, 285. 

! Mahdniruttigandha, 408. 

Mahdpilupati, 349. 

| Mahdpramdtdra-mahdsdmanta, 355. 
i Mahapratlhara, 349, 355. 
i Mahdrdjddhiraja, 348, 353. 
j Mahdrdjaputra devabhattaraka, 350.. 
I/taharashtra, 607. 

Maharashtrl Prakrit, 325, 326. 
Mahasamanta-varman, 215. 

‘ Mahasami, 406. 

Mahdsandhivigrahddhikrita, 355. 
Mahdsandliivigrahdkshapatalddhivati > 
354. 

Mahdsandhivigrahika, 359. 
Mahasanghikas, 381, 382. 
i Mahasena, 284, 406. 

Mahasena-gupta, 72, 73n, 74. 75n. 
Mahasena-gupta-devI, 96, 97. 
Mahasivagupta Tivaradeva, See 
Trivara. 

Mahdsvapati, 349. 

Mahattarddhikdrins, 359. 

Mahattaras, 351, 359. 

Mdhdvamsa, 240:, 261, 284n, 400, 407, 
408, 413. 

Mahdviracharita, 308. 

Mahavana (Mahayanism), See also 
under Buddhism, 372, 398. 
conception of Bodhisattva, 379-380. 

„ „ Buddha, 378-379. 

Doctrines, 377-378. 

! Ethics, 374-375. 

Monastic Life, 375-377. 
j Mahdydnasangraha, 389. 

Mahendra, 9. 

Mahendra I, (Ceylon), 284n. 

„ II, 284n. 

„ (Ceylon), 289n, 290. 
Mahendraditya, 23, 24, 25, 29, 425. 
Mahendragiri, 9, 211, 215. 

Mahendra Mountains, 39, 79, 94. 
Mahendra-varman I, 89, 106n, 238, 240, 
243, 258-260, 278. 279-281, 311, 414, 
491, 492. 

„ II (Pallava), 106n, 

„ 149, 245, 261, 280. 

Mahendravikrama-varman, 265. 
Mahesvara, 319. 

Mahesvara (dama),, 163. 

Mahideva, 84. 

Mahisasakas, 381. 

Mahishmati (Mandhata, Maheshwar), 
31, 163. 


745 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Maitrakas, 30, 60-63, 74, 98, 151, 152, 
195, 245, 353, 354, 355, 373, 415. 
Maitreya, 389. 

Maitreyanatha, 388, 389. 

Maitrl , 376. 

Majumdar, N. G., 47n, 145n. 

Majumdar, R. C., 29n, 45, 88, 147n, 
211n, 655. 

Makran (Makuran), 51, 52, 54, 165, 
166, 169, 174, 175. 

Maid, 318 
Malabar, 597, 599. 

Malakuta, 395, 592, 600. 

Mdlatlmadhava, 299, 308, 567. 
Maialasekera. G. P., 402, 403n, 470. 
Malavas, 9, 32, 196, 236, 245. 
Mdlavikagnimitra, 304, 305, 309. 
Malaya, 147, 591, 592. 

Malayadipatti, 545, 553. 

Malayagiri, 325. 

Malay Peninsula, 648, 650. 

Mallas, 82, 83. 

Mallavadin, 301. 

Mallinatha, 305, 319. 

Malwa, (Malibah), 39. 40, 47, 52, 63, 66, 
73n, 74n, 75, 76. 79, 97, 98, 99, 100, 

104, 105, 106, 121, .126, 150, 154, 160, 

161, 163. 172, 180, 184, 186, 194, 197, 

223, 353, 382, 395, 408, 527, 528, 533, 

539, 590. 

Mamallapuram, 259. 260, 261. 262, 263, 
421, 553. 

cave architecture, 492, 493, 499, 511, 
512. 

sculpture, 534, 537-539, 541. 

Mammata, 309. 

Mammuni, 134 
Mana, 163. 

Manahhita Dharmaraja, 146 
Manadeva, 82, 83, 84, 136. 

Manamatra, (Maha-Durgaraja, Durga- 
raja), 219, 220. 

Mananka, 84, 187, 199, 200, 201, 219. 
Manapura, 200, 201, 229. 

Manas, 78, 84, 93, 94. 

Manatuhga, 418. 

Manavarman, 261, 2S0, 284n, 2S9. 
Mana-varman. 241, 245n. 
Manavya-gotra, 228, 230, 271. 
Manchyamia-bhattaraka, 207, 223, 226. 
Mandagapattu, 259. 

Mandal, 172. 

Mandara Mountains, 129. 

Mandar hill, 127, 

Mandasor, 32, 39, 195, 281, 303, 501 n, 
527, 540. 

Mandavyapura, (Mandor), 65. 

Mandhatri avatdra, 421. 
Mandhatri-varman, 273. 

Mandor, 526, 527. 
Mdndukyopanishat-kdrikd, 302. 
Manesvan, 84. 

Marigalesa, (Mahgalaraja, Mangallsa, 
Mangalls vara), 75, 196, 231, 232, 
233-234, 235, 251. 


Mahgi-yuvaraja, 253. 

Manikkavachakar, 328, 330, 434, 435. 
Manikyanandin, 301. 

Manimekhalai, 413. 
Manirdga-Kara-jndnam, 595. 
Manjusri-Mula-Kalpa, 71n, 80, 107, 

142, 209, 394. 

Mankani, 197. 

Mankuwar, 397, 525. 

Mansurah, 173, 175. 

Mansur, Caliph, 152. 

Mantaraja, 10. 

Mantri, 349. 

Manu, 341, 342, 343, 366, 368, 598, 601, 
602, 603. 

Manuraja, 158, 162. 

Manu-samhitd, 3, 82. 

Marahjadaiyan, 267. 

Maravarman Avanisulamani,. 267. 
Maravarman Rajasimha, 267, 268. 
Mdrkandeya Parana , 292, 293, 298, 299. 
Marrnad (Maru-Mara), See Jaiscilmer 
and Jodhpur. 

Marriage, 564-567. 

Marshall, J., 176, 504n. 

Marshall and Foucher, 194n. 

Martin, M. F. C., 50n, 53n, 55n, 56, 
57n, 58n, 59n. 

Marudesa, See Rajpulana. 
Marumkkiyar, See Appar. 

Mdshapariii, 599. 

Matanga Divakara (?Manatuhga), 313. 
Matharas, 212-213, 214. 

Mathematics, 291, 322, 324. 

Mathura, 8, 115, 190, 296, 382, 393, 397, 
398, 408, 409, 410, 415, 521, 522. 523, 
525, 526, 527, 540, 592, 594. 
Mathur.esa Vidyalaiiikara, 319. 

Matila, 8. 

Matipur, 395. 

Matricheta, 386. 

Matrigupta, 312. 

Matrivishnu, 353. 

Matsya avatdra, 420, 421. 

Mdtsyanyaya, 144. 

Matsya Parana, 292, 293, 294, 295. 296, 
298, 421, 513n, 570. 

Matsyendranatha, 136. 
Mattavildsa-prahasana , 258, 259, 200. 

261, 311, 396n. 

Ma-twan-lin, 50, 56. 58, 106, 107, 108, 
120 . 

Maudgalyayana I, 285n, 2S6. 

„ ' II, 286, 287. 

„ III, 287. 

Maukharis, 38. 39, 40. 41, 43, 44, 60, 
67-71, 72, 73, 77, 73n, 79, 97, 98, 101, 
102, 121, 127, 137, 209, 221, 357n. 
Mauryas, 158, 160n, 161, 1G2, 163, 173, 
187, 392n, 193, 194, 229, 232, 233, 
235, 237, 352. 

Maynamati, 556. 

Mayura, 106n, 116, 285, 309, 313. 
Mayuraja, See Anaxigaharsha 
Matraraja. 










INDEX 


Mayura-sarman, 186n, 192, 271, 272, 
274, 412. 

Mayura-sataka, 313. 

Medantaka (Merta), 65. 

Medhatithi, 299. 

Medicine, 320-321. 

Mediterranean, 600. 

Meghaduta, 183n, 305, 306, 307, 312, 422n. 
Meghavarna, 11, 284n. 

Meherauli, 595. 

Mekhala, 32, 184, 217-218, 222-223. 
Mendis, G. C., 290. 

Mentha, 312. 

Merv, 51. 

Mesopotamia, 56. 

Metrics, 317-318. 

Mewar (Medapata), 157, 158. 
Midnapore, See Dandabhukti. 
Mihirakula, 34, 35,' 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
42, 43n, 44, 59, 60n, 65, 132, 394. 
Mlmd/rhsas, the two, 468-470. 

Mimdmsd-sutra, 301. 

Minardja-jataka, 323. 

Mirashi, V. V., 18n, 31n, 47n, 178n. 

189n, 194n, 197n, 200n, 221n. 303n, 
305n. 

Mirnur Kiras. 519, 554. 

Misra, B., 226. 

Mitdkshard, 3G6n. 

Mithyottara , 363. 

Mitrasena (of Broach, Mitr-(Al)- 

asen), 52. 

„ (of Ceylon), 285. 

„ (monk), 395. 

Mlechchhas, 141, 173. 

Mokah, 171. 

Mo-la-po, 63, 104, 112. 

Mookerji, R. K., 14n, 105n, 123, 126n. 

Moraes, G. M., 149n. 

Moris, See Mauryas. 

Mo-ti-pu-lo, 111. 

Mrichchhakatika , 315, 562n, 564, 570, 
573, 576, 578, 582, 596. 

Mriganka, See Susthita-varman. 
Mrigesa-varman, 272, 273. 

Muawiyah, Caliph, 167, 168. 
Mudrdrukshasa , 346, 346n, 544. 
Mudukudumi Pandyan, 263. 
Muhammad, The Prophet, 166, 167. 
Muhammadans, (Muslims), 167, 168, 

169, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 455. 
Muhammad-ibn-Qasim, 132, 170. 171, 
172, 173, 457, 458, 459, 460, 462. 
Mukhyas , 604. 

Muktaplda, See Lalitaditya. 
Mukutatdditaka, 317. 

Mulachdra, 418. 

Mulamadhi/amakdrika., 385, 387, 388. 
Mularaja, 161. 

Mulasiitras, 416. 417. 

Multan, 111, 165, 172, 173, 175. 
Munshi, K. M., 64n, 176. 

Mushkara, 270. 

Muttaraiyar, 266. 

Mutuda, 361. 


Ndchchiydr Tirumoli, 337. 

Nachna, 179n. 

Nachna Kuthara, 506, 507, 511, 513, 518, 
519. 

Nddigrantha, 323. 

! Nagabala, 31, 222, 223. 

; Nagabhata, 65, 153, 154, 155, 173. 

Nagabhata, I, (Nagavaloka), 151, 157, 
162, 163. 

Nagadatta, 8. 

Nagahrada, 158. 

Nagamitra, 386. 

Ndgdnanda . 116, 309, 310, 311. 
Nagarahara, 111, 160, 164. 

N agar as, 359. 

Nagarasreshthl, 351, 

Nagara style of temple structure, 519. 
Nagari. 527. 

Nagarjuna, 300, 385, 386, 387, 388, 391, 
415. 

Nagarkot, 395. 

Nagas, 8, 21, 59, 67, 132, 164, 271, 275. 
Nagasena, 8. 643. 

Nagpur, 177, 178, 186. 

Naigama, 603. 604. 

Naiyogikas, 360. 

Nakkirar, 328. 

Nalachampu, 317. 

Nalanda, 43, 71, 77, 88n, 90, 101. 102, 

117, 129, 139, 140, 142, 261, 352, 356, 

381, 384, 385, 388, 390, 391, 392, 394, 

395, 585, 536, 588, 595, 617, 620. 

temples, 507, 518. 
sculpture, 528. 531, 532. 533. 

Naias, 1S4, 187, 188-190, 222, 229, 232, 

; 233. 

Ndldyira Prabandham, 328, 333, 335, 
339. 

| Nalodaya, 312, 

Ndmalingtinusasana, See Amarakosa, 

; Ndmamdtratantras , 318. 

Nambi-Andar-Nambi, 327, 328. 

; Namidasa, 182, 

Nammalvar, 328, 332, 333, 335-336, 338, 
339, 

] Nandagopa, 423. 

Nandana, 44. 

Nanda-Prabhahjana-varman, 212, 214. 
Nandas, 212.. 

Nanda-varman, 217. 

Nandi, 417. 

Nandlkata (Nander), 185. 

Nandin, 8. 

Nandipuri, 147, 154. 

Nandivardhana Nandlvardhana, 
Nagardhan, Nandardhan, 

Nandpur), 181n, 182, 

! Nandivarman I, 204, 205. 304, 360. 

,, II (Pallavamalla), 

204, 205, 247, 249, 253n, 262-263, 270, 
I 274, 277, 278, 281, 282. 

„ HI, 263, 265. 

Nanna, 189, 197, 220, 221. 

Narabhata, 65. 






THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Narada, 341, 344, 344n, 345, 345n, 362, 
363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 398, 
601, 602, 603, 604, 605. 

Narada Pur ana, 292, 293, 

Ndrada-Smriti, 344, 362. 

Naraka, 88, 141n. 

Narasimha-gupta, See also Baladitya, 
29, 33, 34, 38, 42, 43n, 44, 518. 
Narasimha-varman I, (Narasirhha- 
vishnu), 240, 243, 250, 258-260, 260- 
262, 265, 266, 278, 279, 280, 289. 482, 
492, 511. 

Narsiihha-gupta, II, 247, 262, 280, 281. 
Nara-vardhana, 96. 

Narayana avatdra , 421, 422, 423. 
Narayanasarman, 319. 

Narayana-varman, 89, 90. 

Narendra, 219. 

Narendradeva, 85, 136, 137, 138. 
Narendraditya, See Samacharadeva. 
Narendra-gupta, 78. 

Narendra-sena, 32, 184, 186, 223. 
Narmada, 24n, 31, 105, 106, 156, 163, 194, 
244, 296, 353. 

Narsih, 52. 

Nasik, Ins., 421. 
cave architecture, 475. 
sculpture, 536. 

Ndtaka-lakshana-ratna-kosa, 310. 
Nathamuni (Sri), 327. 

Ndtyadarpana, 310. 

Navasarika (Navsari), 156, 161, 173, 
244. 

Nay aka, 351. 

NayanadevI (Nayanasobha), 89. 

Nayanars, 332, 333, 414. 

Nayanmars, 327-328. 

Nedamari, 242. 

Nedumaran, See Arikesari 
Maravarman. 

Neduhjadaiyan Pandya, 263, 267, 268. 
Neo-Brahmanism, 541. 

Nepal (Nepala), 8, 60, 81-88, 101, 102, 
111, 112, 113n, 124, 126, 127, 136, 
137-139, 144, 382, 423, 594, 607, 634. 
culture and civilisation of, 138, 139, 
314. 

Nerun, 170, 174. 

Netra, *593. 

Niddna Kathd , 399. 

Nigama, 605. 

Nigantus , 318, 319. 

Nilakesi, 413. 

Nilaraja, 10. 

Nimikha, 81. 

Nimruz, 165. 

Ningondi, 213. 

Nirgranthas, 412, 413, 414. 

Nirihullaka, 196. 

Nirmand, 69f. 

Niryuktis, 417. 

Nishthura, 367. 

Nishthuraraja, 193. 

Nisltha Sutra, 325. I 

Nitisdra, 300, 341, 346n, 347, 348n. 


Nlti-sataka, 313. 

Niyoga, 343. 

Nobel, 3Q6n, 

Nrisimha avatdra, 420, 421, 

Nubia, 600. 

Nyuyabindu, 300, 301, 392. 
Nydyakaranika, 357. 

Nydyapravesa, 391. 
Nyayapravesa-tarkasdstra, 391. 
Nydyasutra, 300. 

Nydya-Vaiseshika, 465-466. 
Nyayavdrttika, 300. 

Nydydvatara, 301n, 313n. 
Nydyavinischaya, 301. 

O-cha-li, 164. 

Odra, 103, 138, 141, 592, 597. 

Gjha, G. H., 158, 159, 176. 

Gldenberg, H., 303n. 

Oman, 170. 

Orissa, 60, 68, 78, 80, 81, 92-95, 106, 107, 
108, 110, 112, 114, 141n, 144-147, 212, 
296, 382, 533. 

Oudh, See Saketa. 

Oxus, 26, 34, 35, 39, 55, 167. 

Padachandrikd, 319. 

Padalipta, 325. 

Paddrthadharmasangraha, 301. 
Padmakhoii, 92. 

Padmapura, 184. 

Padma Purdna, 292, 296, 441. 

P adma Tantra, 424. 

Padmavati (Padam Pawaya), 8, 410, 
527. 

Padya-chudamani, 312. 

Pahlavi Legend, 165. 

Paharpur, 532, 533, 556. 

Paikuii, 52, 53, 55. 

Painting, 542-553. 
scope and nature, 542-545. 
extant remains, 545, 547-553. 
Technique, 540-542, 545-547. 
Paitamaha Siddhanta, 321-322. 
Pakshilasvamin, Vatsyayana, 300. 
Palakka, 10. 

Palas, 81. 

Palestine, 639. 

Pali, 325, 342, 399. 
chronicles, 406-407. 
commentaries, 400-406. 

Grammar, 407. 

Pdlidhvaja , 130, 245, 246, 249. 

Pallavas, 110, 149, 202, 203, 204, 205, 
211, 238, 240, 241, 243, 244n, 245n, 
246, 247, 248, 249, 252, 255-263, 264, 
265, 266, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 
274, 275, 289, 329, 333, 360. 361, 413, 
414, 422, 482, 491, 537, 612. 

Origin, 255-257. 

Early History, 257-258. 

Genealogy and Chronology, 275-2S3. 
Rise of, 275, 276. 
of the Prakrit records, 276-277. 
of Kanchi, 277-279. 

Collateral line, 279. 


718 









INDEX 


Mahendravarman and his succes¬ 
sors, 279-281. 

Panchamukhi, R. S., 192n. 

Pahcharatra, 421, 423, 424. 

Panchasara, 161. 

Panchasiddhdntikd, 321, 323. 
Panchastikaya, 418. 

Panchatantra, 314, 317. 

Pandit, S. P., 128n, 136n, 175. 
Pandukabhaya, 413. 

Panduvamsa, 30, 184, 220. 

Panduvaihsis, of Mekala, 222, 223. 

„ „ of South Kosala, 

220 - 222 . 

Pandya, 592, 596, 600. 

Pandyas, 238, 243, 244, 245, 247, 249, 
263, 264, 265, 266, 267-268, 270, 275, 
285, 330, 333, 414. 

Panikkar, K. M., 112, 123. 

Panini, 67, 312, 318, 319, 320, 325, 408, 
580, 587. 

Pannalal, 29n. 

Pan-nu-tso, 111, 132. 

Paonar, 182. 

Pao-yun, 614. 

Paradan (Paradas), 52. 
Paramabhattdraka 5 Mahardjddhirdja, 
355. 

Paramabhattdrikd-Mahddevi, 358. 
Paramardjddhirdja, 348. 

Paramaras, 162. 

Paramartha, 384, 390, 611, 614. 
Paramdrthasaptati, 300. 

‘Paramesvara’, 105, 109, 115. 237, 240, 
242, 243, 249. 

Paramesvara, 359. 

Paramesvara-varman I, 243, 244n, 247, 
260-262, 280. 

„ II, 246, 247, 262, 

280, 281. 

Pdramitds, 374, 375. 

Parantaka, 267. 

Parasara, 342, 343, 362. 

Parasarl, 323. 

Parasikas, 129, 130. 

Parasurama, See Rama Bhargava. 
Parel, sculpture, 529, 530, 533, 534, 535. 
Pargiter, F. E., 294n, 296n, 297n. 
Parikshdmukhasutra , 301. 

Parivrajaka Maharajas, 30, 351, 352, 373. 
Pariyatra, 353, 592. 

Pariyatrika. 272. 

Parnadatta, 27. 28, 61. 

Parthasarathi Misra, 391. 

Parthia, 51. 

Partition and Inheritance, Law of, 366. 
Partnerships, 603-606. 

Pdrvati-parinaya, 317n. 

Pasana, 51n, 53. 

Paschdtkdra, 365. 

Pasupati, 82, 137, 138. 

Pataliputra, (Patna), 381, 382, 415, 554, 
‘ 611, 613. 

Patan, See Anahilapataka. 

Patafijali, 300, 320, 588. 


! Pathari, 513, 518. 

Pattadakal, 533, 534, 535, 536. 

Paulisa Siddhanta, 321-322. 

Paundra, 147. 

Pavvaiya, 35. 

Pawaya, 554. 

Pei-na, 588. 

Peraya, 54. 

Peri, M., 14n. 

Peria Tirumoli, 333. 

Periyalvar, 328, 332, 333, 336-338. 
Periyapurdnam, 332. 

Periyatiruvantadi, 335. 

Peroz, 51. 

Ppvqprin 11 q ij 

Persia (Pkrasika), 35, 39, 48, 165, 166, 
240, 245n, 381, 382, 394, 592, 596, 
598, 599, 638, 639. 

Perumals, 275. 

' Perumdl Tirumoli, 338. 

Perundevanar, 339. 

Peshawar, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 389. 
Pethas, 354. 

Petech, L., 617n, 633n. 

Peterson, P., 326. 

Pettani Satyahka, 106n, 149, 245. 
Peyalvar, 332, 333, 334. 

Phasika, 146. 

Philosophy, 300-302, 464-470. 
Pi-lo-mo-lo, See Bhillamala. 

Pingalar, 340. 

Pires, E., 352n, 357n. 

Piro, 56, 58. 

Piroch, 57. 

Pischei, 309, 315. 

Pishtapura, 9, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 
226, 238, 250, 251, 252. 

Pitalkhora, 545. 

Pitamaha, 299, 365, 

Pi-to-shih-lo, 112, 382. 

Pitribhaktas, 212, 213, 214. 

Pitridatta, 367. 

Podagadh, 189. 

Poetics, 317-318, 

Po-fa-to (Parvata), 111, 382. 

Pogilli, 246. 

Poh-lu-ka, 382. 

Polamuru, 206, 207n, 208, 224n, 225. 
Political Theory, 341-346. 

Po-lo, 55. 

Po-ni, 100, 101. 

Poona, 181. 

Poonch, 592. 

Pope, G. U., 330, 340, 470. 

Po-tiao, 54. 

Pottery, 556-558. 

Poykai Alvar, 332, 333, 334. 
j Prabhakara (Guru), 291, 301. 

| Prabhakaramitra, 620, 621. 

Prabhakara-vardhana (Pratapasila), 
70. 74, 75, 79, 96, 97, 98, 99, 104, 106. 
Prabhanjana-varman, 213, 214. 
PrabhavatT-gupta, 21, 179, 180n, 181n, 
358, 422. 

, Prddesikas, 350. 

49 






THE 'CLASSICAL AGE 


Pradiparnalti-sastra, 393. 

Prddvivdka 381, 368. 

Pradyumna, 322. 

Pragjyotisha, 90, 99, 134. 

Prajapati, 420. 

Projnd, 375. 

Prajnakaragupta, 392. 

Prajnd'pdramitd , 377, 389,' 393. 

Pr aj nap fir a m i td - p in d a r t h a, 391. 
Prajnapradipa, 387. 

Prakaranapanchikd, 301. 

Prakasa, 59. 

Prakataditya, 424. 

Praklrnakas, 416, 417. 

Prakrit, 324-325, 413, 417, 418. 

Prdkritalakshana, 325. 

Prdkritaprakdsa, 325. 

Prakritis, 359. 

Pralambha, 141n. 

Pramdnasamuchchaya, 391, 392, 
Pramdnavdrttika, 3S2. 

Prarnatris, 354, 355. 

Prarjunas, 9. 

Prasanna (Prasannarnatra), 219, 220. 
Prasannapadd, 388. 

Prasastapada, 30.1. 

Prathamakdyastha, 351. 

P rathamakuiika, 351. 

Pratibhu, 602. 

Pratlhara Bhcja I, 160n. 

Pratxhdras, 349. 

Pratlharas (Gurjara), 153-155, 156, 157, 
173, 175. 

Pratlliaras (Imperial), 64, 65, 66, 113, 
150, 151, 152, 160. 

Pratilorna, 344, 581, 565. 
Pratipalakapurushas, 355. 
Prodyantanripatis, 351. 

Pravachanasdra, 418. 

Pravarapura (Paonar), 135, 182. 
Pravararaja, 220. 

Pravarasena I, 48. 177, 17Sn, 180, 185, 
188, 312, 326, 358. 

„ II, 180n, 181, 182, 183, 184, 
186, 187, 326. 

Prayaga, 4, 57, 72, 90, 103, 115, 118, 140, 
179n, 211, 212. 291, 348, 356, 382, 
594, 605. 

Prithivi-maharaja, 226. 

Prithivlmalla -varman, 191, 192n. 
Prithivlshena I, 178, 179, 179n, 185. 

„ II, 179n, 184, 186, 189. 
Prithivl-vallabha, See Kirtivarman I. 
Prithivlvyaghra, 254n. 

Prithu, 345 . 

Prithu-vardhana, 147, 155, 

Frithuvlra, 77 
Prithuyasas, 323. 

Prlthviraja, 190. 

Prithvl-vigraha, 92, 93. 

Pritidatta, 366. 

Ptolemy, 595 
Puga, 603, 604. 

Priyadarsikd, 116, 309, 310. 

Pujyapada, 269, 320, 412, 414, 418. 


. Pulakabandha, 593. 

Pulakesin I, 231-233, 273, 412. 

Pulakesin II. 66, 103, 104, 105, 106n, 108, 
109, 110, 114, 130, 149, 153, 196, 211, 
222, 225, 226, 227n, 233, 234, 241, 
242, 245n, 250, 252, 259, 260, 273 , 274, 
280, 287, '289, 357, 412, 482, 511, 638, 
639. 

Pulastya, 289. 

Pulli, 266. 

Pundra (Pundravardhana), 107, 142, 143, 

' 358, 382,’ 395, 410, 592, 594, 599. 
Punjab, 35, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 98, 111, 1-2, 
132, 134, 154, 382, 554. 

Punyakumara, 265. 

I Punyatrata, 609. 

Puranas, 291-299, 341, 345, 370-o71, 
Purapporul-vetnbdmalcii, 340. 
Furnavarman, .107, 126, 162, 595. 
Puru-gupta 28, 29, 30. 

Pusalker, A. D., 206n. 

Pushkara, 298. 

Pushkar'i, 189. 

Pushpabhuti, 71, 79, 96, 121, 164. 
Pushpadanta, 416, 418. 

Pushpapatta, 593. 

Pushpapura, 82. 

Pushyamitra, 24. 

Pushyavarman, 88, 89, 90, 141. 
Pustakushtha, 289. 

Pu-ta-sin,* See Buddhasena. 

| 

Qara Shahr, Eee Agnidesa. 

Quraishi, M. PI. and Ghosh, A; 503n. 
Quzdar, See Turan. 

Radhakrishnan, S., 301n, 302n. 

Raghava, 312. 

; Ragholi, 146. 

Raghu, 272. 

Raghuvamsa, 191, 192, 305, 308. 307, 
‘ 422, 591, 597, 600. 

Rahasyadhikrita, 361. 

Rahulabhadra, 386. 

Rahulamitra, 386. 

Rai Sahasi II, 165. 

Raja, C. K., 303n. 

Rdjddhirdja, 348. 

Rdjddhirdjarshi, 348. 

Rdjaklyalekhya, 365. 

Rdjakumdras, 360. 

Rajamahendra, See Amma II. 
Rajamahendrapura, 251. 

Rdjamdna, 361. 

Rdjamdrtanda, 300. 

Rajan, 348. 

Hajaona, 540. 

Rajapura, 111, 132. 

Rdjapurusho.s, 360. 

Rajarajabhata (Rajabhata), 143. 

Rajarajddhiraj a, 348. 

Rajasa Puranas, 292 
Rajasdstra, 346. 

i Rajasekhajra, 182, 310, 312, 319, 545. 


750 









INDEX 


Rajasimha I Pandya, 263, 267, 270. 
Rdjasthaniyas, 354. 

Rdjatarangini, 35, 130n, 131, 135n, 143, 
308. 

Raj ghat, 553, 554, 555, 556, 557, 558. 
Rajgir, (Rajagriha), 503, 519, 527, 528, 
532. 

Rajim, 190. 

Rajjila, 65, 66, 163, 164. 

Rajputana, 35, 98, 150, 153-164, 172, 533, 
554. 

Minor states in, 163-164. 

Rajput clans, 157. 

Rdjyddhikrita, 359. 

Rajyamati 138, 141. 

RajyasrI, 70n, 71, 79, 80, 96, 99, 100. 121, 
122, 395, 544, 567, 593. 
Rajya-vardhana, 73n, 74, 75, 80, 81, *96, 
98, 99, 100, 121, 122, 123, 126, 355. 
Rajyavatl, 82. 

Rama Bhargava avatdra, 420, 421. 
Ramachandramurti, V. S., 207n. 

F tmachandran, 537n. 

Ramadasa, 182. 

■Rama Dasarathi avatdra, 420, 421, 422. 
Ramagiri, 422. 

Ramagrama, 607. 

Rama-gupta, 17-18, 49, 50. 

Rama Haladhara avatdra, 421, 422, 423, 
424. 

Ramal, 166. 

Ramanatha Vidyavachaspati, 319, 
Rdmasetupradipa, 182. 

Ramatha, 599. 

Ramtek, 181, 183n. 

Ranabhlta, 94, 145. 

Ranakesarin, See Bhavadeva. 

Ranaraga, 229, 231. 

Rangamati, See Kamasuvama. 

Rao, B. V. K., 224n, 225, 252n, 254n, 
255n, 258n. 

Rao, M. V. K., 270n. 

Rao, N. L., 192n, 653n. 

Rao, T. A. G., 429n, 431n, 441n, 449n. 
Raor, 171. 

Rapson, E. J., 46n, 48n, 49n, 165n, 191n. 
617. 

Rashtrakuta, Krshna III, 181n. 
Rashtrakutas, i48. 14-9, 150. 156, 157 
183n, 187, 190, 247, 248, 249, 254, 263. 
270. 

the early, 198-202. 
of Berar, 201-202. 
of Manapura, 199-201, 229. 

Origin, 198, 199. 

Rdshtrapdlapariprichclihd, 396n. 
Rdshtras, 361. 

Rdshtrikas, 360. 

Ratas,144. 

Ratnakuta-siitras, 390. 

Ratnapala, 141n. 

Ratnavali, 113, 309, 310. 

Ratnavatl, 89. 

Ratta, 134. 

Ravana, 422. 

Rdvandrjuniya, 312. 


j Rdvana-vadha, 317. 
i Ravenna, 27. 

j Raviklrti, 235, 412. 

Ravi-varman, 273, 278. 

Rawlinson, 637, 640n. 

Rayamukuta, 319. 

Ray, H. C,’ 175, 176. 

Ray, N. R., 176. 

Raychaudhuri, G. C., 176. 
Raychaudhuri, H. C., 4n, 8n, 43n, 74n. 
Religious Sects, Minor, 440-454. 
Brahma, 440-442. 

Sakti, 444-450. 

Surya, 442-444. 

Vaishnava Gods, 451-452. 
Miscellaneous Deities, 453-454. 
Revatidvipa, 233, 234, 251. 

Rhys Davids, 402, 406. 

Rice, B. L., 255, 270n, 274n. 

; Rijuvimald , 301. 

I Rithapur, 188. 
i Ritusamhdra, 306n. 

| Rohtasgarh, 78. 

Romaka Siddhanta, 321-322. 

! Romances, 313-317. 

Rome, 57, 637. 

Rowlandson, M. J., 456n. 
j Rudradasa, 194. 

Rudra-deva, 8n, 49n, 178. 

Rudrasena I, 178, 185. 

„ II, 21, 179, 180, 181. 

„ III, 47, 48, 49. 

Rudrasimha II, 46, 47. 

„ III, 19. 

Rudrata, 314, 316. 

Rudravarman, 599. 

; Rupa-ratna-panksha, 595. 

I 

I 

I Saba, 20. 

Sahara, 301. 

Sabddvatdra, 269, 270. 

Sabha, 362. 

Sabhyas, (Sabhasads), 363. 

Sachau. 151n. 

Sachivas, 353. 

Saddharmapundarika, 377. 

1 Saduktikarndmrita, 187. 

! Sdhasa, 368. 

Saheth-Maheth, 554. 
j Sahiras, 164, 165. 

Sdhitya-darpana. 310, 314n. 

Sahni, D. R., 521n. 

Sailavamsa, 147. 

Sailodbhavas, 78, 80, 93, 94, 95, 143, 144, 
146, 147, 155.' 

Saindhavas, 150, 173. 

! Sainyablta I Madhavaraja, 94, 144, 145. 

II „ , 94, 95, 144, 

145. 

„ III Madhavavarman 
(Srinivasa), 145. 

! Saiva Saints, See also under Saivism, 
328-332, 372, 396, 414, 431-440. 
Iconography, 438-440. 
in North India and Deccan, 431-432. 
I in South India, 432-438. 









THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Sakala (Sialkot), 9, 35, 111, 3S4. 
Sakambharl, (Sambliar), 163, 557. 
Sakas, 10, 11, 12, 19, 21, 23, 34, 45, 47n, 
48, 49, 52, 53, 54, 180, 303. 

Saketa, 4, 382. 

Sakraditya, 394. 

Saktikumam, 157. 

Sakti-varman, 212, 213. 

Sdkuntala, 303, 304, 554. 

Salank.ayanas, 9, 204-206. 223, 353, 360. 
361. 

Salastambha, 141n. 

Saietore, B. A., lOn, 411n. 

Salihotra, 321. 

Salikanatba, 301. 

Salonavira, 59. 

Salsette, 195, 496, 498. 

Samacharadeva, 76, 77. 

Samddhirdja, 377, 393. 

Samantabhadra, 413, 418. 
Samantabhadra, 388. 

Samanta Devadatta, 164. 
Samantapamdlkd, 400, 401. 

Samanta-varman, 217, 

Samatata, 8, 20, 49, 41, 73, 77, 78, 128, 
142, 143, 144, 382, 391, 395, 410, 424. 
Samayas , 343. 

Samayasdra , 418. 

Samayasydnapdkrama, 603. 

Sambandar, Saint, 268, 327, 328, 330, 331, 
414, 434, 437, 438. 

Sambhota, 634, 635. 

Sambhuya Samuthdna, 606. 
Sambhuyasas, 76, 93, 94. 
Samgamasirhha, 196. 

Sarhghadasa, 417. 

Samgharakshita, 386, 387. 

Sarhhita, 323. 

Samhitas, 294, 295, 423. 

Sammatitarka Sutra, 325. 

Sammitlyas, 374, 381, 382, 390, 395. 
Samrdt, 358. 

Samudra-gupta, 3, 16, 46, 57, 84, 89, 90, 
92, 178, 179n, 204, 205, 218, 258, 266, 
268, 271, 272, 275, 277, 284, 291. 348, 
349, 351, 419, 504, 590. 

Accession, 7. 

Conquests, 8-11. 

Empire, 12, 13. 

Personality, 13-16. 

Political relations with Ceylon, 11-12. 
Samudra-varman, 89, 90. 

Samuhas, 603. 

Samuhakitavddias, 604. 
Samvara-vimsaka, 393. 
Samvitoyatikrama, 603. 

Samvitpatras, 604, 605. 

Samvardhana, 147. 

Sanakanlkas, 9. 

Sanchdrantakas, 360. 

Sanchi, 19, 47, 179n, 504, 506, 521, 527, 
533n, 537, 547. 

Sandhinirmochana-sutra , 389. 
Sandhivigrahika, 349, 354, 359. 

Sangha, 601. 


Sanghabhuti, 609. 

Sahghadasa, 325. 

Sahghadeva (Gautama), 60S. 
Sanghdrdma, 43, 376, 471. 

Sahghatishya, 287, 288. 

Sankalia, H. D., 152n, 176. 

Sankara (Philosopher), 301, 302. 
Sankara, 122. 

Sahkaradeva, 82. 

Sahkaragadh, 513n. 

Sankaragana, 66, 74, 195, 196, 197, 233. 
Sankaras vamin, 391. 

Sankasya, 353, 382, 607. 

Sahkha, 366. 

Sdnkhya-kdrikg, 300, 302. 

Sahkhya system of Philosophy, 293, 
300, 392. 

Sdjikhya-Yoga, 466-468. 

Sankrityayana, R., 386n, 392n. 

Sanskrit, 291-325, 326, 341, 346, 417, 418. 
Sanskrit Works, Miscellaneous, 324. 
Santanapura, 193. 

Santarakshita, 392. 

Santideva, 388, 593. 

Santikara II, 94n. , 

Santi-varman, 272, 273. 

Sapardalakshan (Sapadalaksha?), 165. 
Saptadasahhumisdstra, 389. 

Sarabha, 219. 

Sarabhapura (Sambalpur, Sarangarh, 
Sarpagarh, Sirpur, Sripura), 219, 
220, 221, 222, 223, 424, 425. 
temple, 518, 519. 
Sarasvatika/nthdbharana, 182. 

Sarasvati, R., 18n. 

Sardula-varman, 67. 

Sarkar, J. N., 462n. 

Sarma, R., 319n. 

Sarnath, 424, 539, 540. 
stupa, 519. 

sculpture, 397, 523-525, 526. 527, 528, 
529, 530, 531, 532, 536. 

Sdrihavaha, 351. 

Sarvajnamitra, 388. 

Sarvananda, 318, 319. 

Sarvanandin, 413. 

Sarvasena, 177, 185, 187. 
Sarvastivadins, 374, 376, 381, 382. 
Sarva-varman, 39, 68, 69, 70. 
Sarvayasa, 59. 

SdsanasanchdriTis, 360. 

Sasanka, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 94, 
95, 99, 102, 103, 107n, 108, 114, 121, 
122, 123, 126, 139, 140, 142n, 144, 
156, 237n, 373. 

Sdsayita, 357. 

Sastri, H. P., 146n, 294. 

Sastri, K. A. N., 186n, 206n, 267n, 280n, 
283, 470, 617n, 623n, 635n, 638n, 
653n, 655. 

Sastri, P. P. S., 308n. 

Sastri, S. S., 269n. 

6asvata, 319. 

Satadru, 111. 

Patakas, 313. 


752 








INDEX 


£atapanchdsatkaimmastotra , 386. 
£atapatha Bruhmana, 420. 

Satavahanas, 204, 255, 256, 257, 270, 275, 
276, 349, 350, 360, 361. 

Sathianathaier, R., 8n, lOn, 271n. 
t^atrughnaraja, 182. 

Sattvika Puranas, 292. 

Satyasena, 276. 

Satyasraya-Dhnivara j a-Indravarman, 
234, 251. 

Sauddyika, 367. 

Saugor, 353. 

Saurasenl Prakrit, 325, 418. 

Saurashtra (Saurashtra), 52, 112, 138, 
150, 151, 161, 164,' 173, 180, 196, 352, 
388, 411, 415, 590. 

Sautrantikas, 384-385. 

Sayatha, 53. 

Sculpture, 521-541. 

Essential Characteristics, 521-523. 
Evolution, 523-525. 

General. 540-541. 

Schools, early, 525-531, 

„ later, 531-539. 

Vegetal etc. carvings, 439-540. 
Schyuler, 310n. 

Seistan. See Khorasan. 

Sekkilar, 332. 

Sena, 53. 

Sendpati, 349, 355, 359, 360, 361. 
Sendan, 267. 

Sendraka, 232, 236, 246. 

Seng-po-ta, 130n. 

Setubandha Kavya, 182, 183, 184, 187, 
303, 326. 

Sewell, 283. 

Shahi, 88. 

Shahi Tigin, 165. 

Shaka, 54, 56n. 

Shapur, I, 51, 52. 

„ II, 55, 56, 57. 

„ III, 58. 

Shapur Sakanshah, 55, 

Sharma, 412n. 

Shashti-t antra, 300. 

Shatkhandidgama, 325. 

Shatpanchasika, 323. 

Shatprdbhritas, 418. 

Shembavanekar, K. M., 303n. 

Shen-shen, 627. 

Shllada, 51n, 53, 54, 56n. 

Siam, 376, 636-637, 381, 641-642. 
Siddhasena, See also Divakara, 325, 417, 
418. 

Sigiri, 545. 

Sijistan, See Khorasan. 

£ikskaka, 606. 

Sikshasamuchchaya, 375, 388, 576, 593. 
£ila, 375. 

Siiabhadra, 77, 139, 142, 391, 395, 618. 
§Iladitya I Dharmaditya, 59n, 62, 63, 74', 
148. 

„ II, 148. 

„ III, 147, 148, 149, 245, 612. 


Siladitva IV, 149. 

„ V, 149, 150, 152. 

VI, 149. 

” VII Dhruvabhata, 149, 150, 

157, 395. 

^ilakala, 286. 

Silameghavarna, 287, 288. 
Silappadikaram, 413. 

Silhaka, 599. 

Silparatna, 542. 

Slluka, 154, 155. 

Slmakai'makaras , 358. 

Simapraddtd, 357. 

Simha, 322. 

Simhaditya, 62. 

Simhala, See Ceylon. 

Simhamana, 94n. 

Simhanandin, 269, 411. 

Simhapura, 111, 132, 395. 

Simhapuram (Singupuram), 212, 214. 
Sirhhavarman, 205. 

Sirhha-varman I, 90n, 258, 269, 276, 278, 
413. 

„ II, 258, 278. 

„ (Kadamba), 273. 

Sirhhavishnu, See Narasirhha-varman I. 
Sindh, 97, 98, 103, 106, 111, 112, 115, 130, 
150, 151, 152, 157, 164-166, 167, 169, 
170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 382, 600. 
Sindhia, 69n. 

Sindhu, 591, 594, 599. 

Sircar, D. C., 8n, 45, 48n, 104n, 223n, 
226, 283, 501n. 

Sirpur, See ^arabhapura. 

Sirur, 70n. 

Sishyalekhd, 393. 

Sisupdlavadha, 311, 320, 347n. 

Sita, 53. 

STta, 422. 

Sittannavasal, 543, 545, 551, 552. 

| Siva,'370, 371, 373. 

Siva, (of Ceylon), 286. 

Sivachandra, 410. 

Sivadeva, 83n, 84n, 85n, 101, 127, 137, 
138. 

Sivagupta, See Balarjuna. 
Sivakumaramahanaja, 413. 

Sivamara I, 270, 412. 

Siva Purdna, 292, 293. See also Vayu 
Purana. 

Sivaraia, 248. 

Sivaskanda-varman, 257, 278, 277, 360. 
Siwistan (Sehwan), 170, 171, 175. 
Si-yu-ki, 618, 619. ’ 

Skanda-gupta, 24, 25-28, 29, 35, 61n, 
320, 352, 422, 424, 590, 591, 605. 
Struggle against Invaders, 26n, 27n, 
35. 

Public utility works, 27, 28. 

Skanda Purdna, 272, 294. 

Skandasishya, 258, 276. 

Skandavarman, 189, 204. 

Skanda-varman I, (Pallava), 277, 279. 

„ II, 278, 279. 


753 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Skanda-varman III, 279. 

Slaves, 563-564. 

Slok, 55. 

Slokavarttika, 301. 

Smarta-Saivas, 298. 

Smarta-Vaishnavas, 298. 

Smith, V. A., 3, 4n, Sn, 14, 45, 51n, 53n, 
56n, 57n, 105, 112, 116n, 165n, 176, 
430, 504n. 

Smritichandrika, 343, 343n. 

Smritis, 291, 298, 299, 341, 342, 343, 344, 

346, 362, 363, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 

560, 561, 562, 563, 564, 565, 566, 568, 

569, 570, 571, 578, 588, 592, 598, 601, 

602, 603, 604, 605, 606. 

Smrityupasthdna , 376. 

Social divisions, 560-564. 

Varnas, the four, 560-562. 

Low Castes, 562-563. 

Aboriginal tribes, 563. 

Slaves, 563-564. 

Solankis, 227, 228, 255. 

Somadatta, 94. 

Somavamsls, 146, 222. 

South India, 114, 115, 134, 155, 255-283, 
423, 590, 598. 

Dynasties of the Telugu, Tamil, and 
Kannada countries, 360-361. 
Jainism, 413-415, 418. 

Spain, 167, 

SraddbM. 376. 

Sraddhoipddaszitra, 389. 

Sragdharastotra, 388. 

Sravastl, 358, 382, 395, 807. 

Srenl, 363, 603, 604, 605. 

Sri, See LakshmI. 

Sridharadasa, 187. 

Sridharana, 144. 

Srldharavarma, 47n. 

Srldhauta-mana, 93. 

Sri Dhavalappadeva, See Dhavala. 
Srigupta, 1, 2. 

Sri Harshadeva, 134. 

Srikantha, 96, 129, 592. 

Srllabha, 385. 

Srlmala, 410. 

Srimegha varna, 284, 285n. 
Sringdraprakasa, 382, 310, 315. 
Sringara-sataka , 313, 577. 

Sringdratilaka, 312. 

SHnivasan, K., 260n. 

Tripura, See Sarabhapura. 

Srlpurusha, 263, 269, 270, 281, 412. 
Srlsaila, 179n. 

Srisanghabodhi, See Agarbodhi III. 
SrI-vallabha Senananda, 232. 
Srivardhana I. 147. 

II, 147. 

Sri-vikrama, 270. 

Sron-bstan-sgam-po, 73, 77, 86, 124, 
141, 634, 635. 

Srughna, 382, 395. 

Sryasraya Slladitya, 106n, 149, 245, 246. 
State Law, 342-344. 

Stein, A., 34, 64n, 130n, 175. 


Steya, 368. 

Sthalis , See pethas, 

Sthandila, 415. 

Sthanisvara, See Thaneswar. 

Sthiramati, 387, 390, 392. 

Sthita-varman (Sthiti-varman), 89, 91. 
Sthitipatras, 604, 605. 

StravanI, 154. 

Stridhana, 366, 367. 

Strlrajya, 134. 

Structural Buildings, 499-521. 

Temples, 499-519. 

Monasteries and Stupas. 519-521. 
Studies, Curriculum of, 586-589. 
Subandhu, 31, 194, 291, 315, 316, 324. 
Subhadra, 423. 

Subhuti, 319n. 

Sudarsana Lake, 591. 

Sudevaraja, 219, 220. 

Sudhanyaditya, 77 

Su-fa-la-na-ku-ta-lo (suvarnagotra), 

111 . 

Sulaiman, 599. 

Sulikas (Sulkis), 68. 

&ulka, 366. 

Sultanganj, 528, 595. 

Sumandala, 42, 92. 

Sumatra, 381, 620, 650-651. 
Sundarananda, 265. 

Sundara Pandya, See Arikesari 
Maravarman. 

Sundarar, 327, 328, 331, 332, 434, 438. 
Sung-Yun, 36, 37. 

Superstitions, 579-580. 
Supratishthita-varman, 89, 92n. 
Supushpa, 82. 

Sura, 218. 

Suras, 193, 194n. 

Surasena, 101, 102. 

Surashtra, See Saurashtra. 
Suryaghosha, 221. 

Surya-sataka, See Mayura-sataka. 
Surya-Siddhdnta , 321-322. 
Surya-varman, 70n, 220. 

Susruta, 320, 321. 

Susthira-varman (Susthira-varman), 78 
89, 91, 92. 

Sutas, 296. 

Sutlej, 594. 

Sutras, 300, 588. 

Sutrasamuchchaya , 388. 

Suva, 68, 71n. 

Suvrata, 89. 

Svalpavivdhapatala, 323. 

Svamidasa, 194. 

Svamidatta, 10, 211. 

Svami JIvadaman, 46, 47n. 

Svamiraja, 233. 

Svami Rudrasena, IV, 49. 

„ Rudrasimha III, 49n, 50. 

„ Satyasimha, 49. 

„ Simhasena, 49. 

Svami Kartikeya, 418. 

Svatisena, 285. 

Svayambhu, 326. 


754 






INDEX 


Svetaka (Sveta, Svetka), 217. 
Svetamhara Jains, 395, 409, 410, 416. 

Canon, 325. 

Svetapatas, 412. 

Swat, lil. 

Sya, 53. 

SyamadevI, 89. 

Syria, 167, 170, 174. 

Szechuan, 86. 

Taban, See Stravanl. 

Tabari, 240, 638. 

Tairthikas, 360. 

Taittirlya Aranyaka, 420, 

Tajjikas, See Arabs, 

Takakusu, 14n, 387n, 389, 336n, 588n. 
Takan, 165. 

Takka, See Cheh-ka. 

Takshasila, 111, 132, 382. 385, 395, 410. 
Talaguntfa, 270, 271, 272, 275. 

Tamasa Puranas, 292. 

Tamasavana, 382. 

Tamil, 326-340. 

Tamin, 173. 

Tamralipti, 93, 142, 597, 598, 613, 614, 
620, 642. 

Tamraoami, 600. 

Tanah (Thana), 187, 174. 

Tantra, 323. 

Tantrdkhyayika, 314. 

T antravdrttika, 301. 

Tao-ngan, 612, 613, 814. 
Tdpasa-vatsardja, 311. 

Taralasvamin. 197. 

Taranatha, 144, 384, 386, 388, 394. 

T arangavatl-kathd, 325. 

Taraplda, 133. 

T&rasadhanasataka, 393. 

Tarika, 58. 

T&rkajvala , 302, 387. 

Tash Qurghan, 612. 

Tata, 153, 154. 

Tathagatagupta, 394. 

Ta’tsin, 599, 600. 

Tattvasangraha , 372. 

Tattvavaisdradi , 300. 

Tatvacharya, 411. 

Teachers and Pupils, 584-585. 

Tekkali, 146. 

Telugus 349. 

Tenki, 382. 

Ter, 503, 512. 

Terracotta, 553-558. 

Tevdram , 327, 328, 32S, 331, 437. 

Tezpur, 527, 528, 532. 

Thakuris, 84. 

Thaneswar, 60, 70n, 74, 79, 80, 96-99, 
100, 101, 113, 114, 116n, 121, 122, 
126, 129, 296, 354, 382, 592. 
Thathah, 170. 

Theravadins, 374, 376, 382. 

Thomas, F. W., 386n, 635n. 

Tibet, 73, 77, 86. 124, 128, 130, 133, 134, 
136n, 138, 141, 144, 280, 39Sn, 633- 
635. 

Tien-chu, 50. 


Tigawa, 504, 506. 

Tikdsarvasva, 319. 

Tiloyapannatti, 418. 

Tirabhukti, 124n. 

Tiraiyan, 266. 

j: Tirakumdrdrndlyddhikarana, 351. 
f Tirodg 181, 182. 

Tiru-isaippa, 328. 

Tirujhana-sambandar, See Sambandar. 
Tirumalaipuram, 545, 551, 552, 553. 
Tirumdlai, 339. 

Tirumalisai-Alvar, 328, 332, 333, 334, 
335. 

Tirumandiram , 328. 

Tirumahgai Alvar, 263, 328, 333, 338, 
339. 

Tirumoli, 333, 337. 

Tirumular, 328, 433-434. 

Tirumnrais, 327, 328, 332. 
Tirunavukkarasu Nayanar, See Appar. 
TiruppalUndu , 337. 

Tiruppaili Yeluchchi, 339. 

Tiruppan Alvar, 333, 338. 

Tiruppavai, 337. 

Tiruvdchakam , 328, 330, 331, 435. 
Tiruvadaviirar, See Manikkavachakar. 
Tiruvdsiriyam , 335. 

Tiruvaymoli , 333, 335. 

Tiruvildiyddal Purdnam, 330. 
Tiruviruttam, 335, 336. 

Tivaradeva (TIvara. Trivara, Trivara- 
deva), 220, 221, 225. 

Tivra, 367. 

Tod, 158, 182, 163, 176. 

Tolkdppiyam, 413. 

Ton^amandalam, See Kanehl. 
Tondaradippodi Alvar, 333, 338, 339. 
Tonkin, 599, 612n. 

Toramana, 34, 35, 37, 39, 44, 59, 60n, 
61n, 132, 352, 353, 394, 410, 411, 422. 
Tosall, 93, 94. 

Tousi, 595. 

Trade, 596-600. 

Traikutakas, 186, 192-194, 272. 
Trailokya-mahadevI, Rajhi, 247. 
Travancore, 637. 

Tretd Age, 343. 

Trikalihga, 215. 

Trikdnda , 318. 

Trikuia, 186, 192. 

Trirhsika, 390. 

Tsiang-Cheu-jenn, 121, 

Tukan, 165. 

Tuptikd, 301. 

Turan, 51, 52. 

Turfan, 612, 627. 

Turkey, 839. 

Turks (Tukharas), 39, 113n, 133. 134. 
Turushka, 599, 

Tvashtri, 163. 

‘Ubaidullah, 168, 170. 

Uchchakalpa, 30, 179n, 354. 

Uchchargi, 273. 

1 Udaipur, 159. 160, 162. 

755 







THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Uddttamghava , 311. 

Udayadeva, 136. 

Udayagiri, 19, 179n, 409, 410, 488, 491, 
506, 527, 528, 537, 540, 541. 
Udayamana, 93, 597. 

Udayana, 30, 220, 221, 223, 311. 
Udayavara, 274. 

Uddyotakara, 300, 391. 

Uddyotana, 410, 411. 

JJdghdtana, 318, 319. 

Udyana, 111, 377, 395, 592, 594, 610, 611, 
622, 623, 632. 

Ugrasena, 10. 

Ugrasravas, 296. 

UjjayinI (Ujjain), 74, 112, 150, 154, 155. 

172, 195, 381, 382, 390, 611. 

Ulchala, 246, 281n. 

XJmapati, 332. 

“Umar, Caliph, 167, 169. 

„ II, „ ,172, 245n. 

Uma-varman, 212. 

Umayyads, 173, 174. 

XJmbeka, 308. 

Undavalli, 492. 

Upadhye, A. N., 409n. 

Upagupta, 67 
Upangas, 416. 

Upapuranas, 295. 

Uparikas , 350. 

Upasena, 405. 

Upatishya I. 285n, 288. 

Urasa, 111, 132. 

Utgikar, N. B., 128n. 

‘Uthman, 169. 

Utkala, See Orissa. 

Utkhetayitd, 357. 

Utpdlinl , 318. 

Uttara-Kurus, 134. 

Uttarapatha, 98. 

17 ttarardma-charit a, 308, 310, 324. 

Vaehaspati, 300, 318. 

Vddahridaya, 390. 

Vddavidhdna, 390. 

Vddavidhi, 390. 

Vddavurar Puranam, 330. 

Vadhiar, 161. 

Vagbhata, 320, 321. 

„ (Vriddha), 320. 

Vahlika, See Balkh. 

Vahram II, 51, 52, 54. 

„ III, 52. 

„ IV, 58. 

Vaibhashikas, See Sarvastivadins. 
Vaidarbhl riti , 187. 

Vaidva, C. V., 159n, 176. 

Vaidya, P. L., 301n, 313n. 

Vaijayanti, See Banavasi. 

Vainya-gupta, 33, 34, 40, 77. 
Vairdgya--sataka, 313. 

Vaisaii~ 3, 81, 82, 351, 382, 395, 605. 

Vaisdlyddhishthdnddkikara-im, 351. 
Vai&eshikasutra, 301. 

Vaishnavism, 372, 419-431. 

Avatar as of Vishnu, 419-424. 


Iconography, 428-431. 

Lakshml, 424-425. 

Vaishnavism and other creeds, 426-427. 
Vishnu mythology, 425-426. 

„ worship, 427-428. 

Vdjapeya, 146, 231. 

Vajrabodhi, 621, 624, 638. 

Vajranandi; 414. 

Vajrata (Vajjada), 148, 149, 244, 249. 
Vajrayana, 372, 398. 

Vajrinl-devi, 96. 

Vakatakas, 2n, 21, 32, 39, 48, 177-188, 
189, 190, 191, 223, 224, 225, 272, 358, 
359, 422, 472, 475. 
main branch of, 178-184. 
of Vatsagulma, 185-188. 

Vdkpdrushya, 367. 

Vakpati, 128, 131. 

Vakpatiraja, 326. 

Vdkyapadiya, 302, 313, 319, 320, 588. 
Valabhl, 30, 42, 44, 60, 61, 62, 63, 74, 
103n, 104n, 105, 106, 109, 110, 112, 
115, 147-152, 153, 156, 157, 173, 236, 
237n, 245, 312, 325, 353, 355, 381, 382, 
384, 390, 395, 415, 416, 586, 588. 
Vallabha, See Kirtivarman I. 
Vallamandala, 154, 172. 

Vamana avatdra, 420, 421, 422. 

Vamana (Grammarian), 291, 320. 

„ Bhatta Bana, 317n. 
Vamanacliaryar, 340. 

Vamana Purdna, 292, 295, 296. 

Vamsavalis, 81, 82, 84, 86, 87, 136. 
Vanamala, 141n. 

Vanaraja, 161, 411. 

Vanavasi, See Banavasi. 

Vandand, 376. 

Vahga, See Samatata. 

Varaguna I, 267. 

„ ' IL 267. 

Var^ha, 151. 

Varaha avatdra, 420, 421, 422, 423. 
Varahadasa I, 82. 

„ IX, 62, 63. 

Varahadeva, 186n. , 

Varahamihira, 291, 317, 318, 321, 322, 
328, 423, 513n, 518, 561, 579, 590, 
591, 595. 

Varaha Purdna, 292, 294, 296. 

Varahran, 56, 58. 

Varanasi, See Banaras. 

Vararuchi, 318, 325. 

Vardhamana, 319. 

Vargas , 603. 

Varmalata, 183, 164, 311. 

V arnarhavarnastotra, 386. 

Varnasrama, 297, 298. 

Varo Shahi, 57. 

Vdrshaganya , 384. 

Vasantagadh (Vata), 163, 184. 
Vasantasena, 84. 

Vasavadattd, 3Ion. 

Vasishtha, 382. 

Vasishthas, 213. 

Vasishtha Siddhanta, 321-322. 


756 






INDEX 


Vasubandhu, 14, 300, 341, 342, 383, 284, 
385, 389, 390, 391. 

Vasudeva, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 165. 
Vasudevahmdi, 325. 

Vasudeva-Krishna avatar a, 420, 421, 
422, 423, 424'. 

Vasurata, 320. 

Vata Gohali, 410. 

Vatapi, See Badami. 

Vatesvara, 410, 411. 

Vats, M. S., 429n, 430n, 513n. 
Vatsabha$ti, 291, 312. 

Vatsadevl, 127, 137. 

Vatsagulma, 177, 184, 185-188. 
Vatsiputrlyas, See Sammitlyas. 
Vatsyayana, 300, 301, 303, 324, 542, 564, 
565, 568, 587, 568, 589, 570, 571, 572, 
573, 574, 580, 583, 595. 

Vattakera, 418. 

Vdyu Purana, 292, 293, 234, 296, 298, 
299 421. 

Vedanta, 301, 341. 342, 34:a. 

Vedas, 342, 343, 388, 370, 371. 

Veda vyas a avatdra, 421. 

Vegetal and Geometric Decorative 
Carvings, 539, 540. 

Vemabhupala, 317n. 

Vena, 345. 

Vexigi. 9, 204, 205. 206. 211, 215, 224n, 
226, 251, 259, 522, 526. 

Venisamhdra, 310. 

Venkataramanayya, N., 252n, 254n, 283. 
Venkayya, V., 255. 

Vetana, 345. 

Vibhdshd, 395. 

Vibhishana, 218. 

Vidarbha, See Berar. 

Vidisa, 8, 185, 198. 

Vijayabahu, 284n. 

Vijaya-bhattarika, 242, 311. 

Vijayaditya, 129, 243, 244n, 245-247, 254, 
270, 281n, 412. 

Vijayakirti, 263, 412. 

Vijayalaya, 264, 266. 

Vijayanandin, 322. 

Vijayasena, 77. 

Vijnanavatl, 89. 

Vijnaptimdtrasiddhi , 390. 

Vikramaditya, See Chandra-gupta II. 
Vikramaditya 1, 241-245, 249, 261, 266, 
412. 

„ II, 240, 247-248, 202, 263, 

266, 274, 281, 282. 

„ V. 229 

„ VI, 228. 

Vikramaditya (Sana), 274. 
Vikramahendra-varman, I, 207, 223, 224. 
. „ H, 207n, 223, 255. 

„ „ i HI, 207, 210, 211, 

238, 250. 

Vikram&nkadeva-charita, 228. 
Vikramarka, 161. 

Vikramasila, 381. 

Vikraraorvasrya, 302, 304, 305. 


I Vilas, 245. 

! Vilasatunga, 190. 

Vimalaksha, 609. 

Vinaya, 375, 376, 377. 

Vinayaditya, 130, 131, 197, 243, 244n, 
245-247, 412. 

Vinayadityavarman, 253. 

Vindhya, 80, 100, 122, 128, 143, 146, 147, 
353. 

Vindhyasakii, 177, 178, 179n, 185. 

„ II, See Vindhyasena. 
Vindhyasena, 179n, 185, 272. 

Vindhya vasa, 300, 

Vinltaprabha, 394, 395. 

Vinltaruchi, 612. 

Vipula, 410. 

Virabhadra, 411. 

Virahanka, 318. 

Virakiircha, 258, 275, 279. 

Virasena, 19, 325. 

Vira-varman, 279. 

Virupaksha, ISO. 

Vitya, 375. 

VIryasena, 395. 

Visakhadatta, 17, 341, 346, 544. 
Visakha-varman, 214. 

Viseshachurni, 825. 
Viseshavasyakabhdshya, 416. 
Vishayadhikarana , 350, 351. 
Vishayamahattaras , 360, 361. 
Vishayapatis , 350, 357, 359, 360. 
Vishayas , 350, 353, 354, 355, 357, 358, 
360, 361. 

| Vishnu, 344, 345, 346, 366, 370-371, 373. 
See also under Vaishnavism. 
Vishnudharmottara , 295, 372, 542, 543, 
545, 546. 

Vishnugopa, 10, 258, 263, 275, 277, 279. 
Vishnugopa-varrnan II, 279. 
Vishnu-gupta, 43n, 127, 611. 
Vishnukundins, 68, 208-211, 250, 252, 
265, 360. 

Genealogy and Chronology of the, 
223-226. 

Vishnu Purana , 292, 293, 296, 233, 341, 
345n, 564. 

Vishnuvardhana I, See Kubja Vishnu- 
vardhana. 

„ n, 252. 

IH, 253, 254, 353. 
Vishnu-varman, 273, 278. 
Vishvaksena-samhitd , 421, 424. 

Visoka, 382. 

Visuddhimagga, 342, 400, 401. 
Visvamitra, 343. 

Visvanatha, 314. 

Vitaraga Jayabhata I, 68. 

Vogel, 423m 533n.‘ 

Volga, 34. 

Vratya Kshatriyas, 82, 

Vrikshdyurveda , 591. 

Vrishadeva, 82. 

Vrittajdtisamuchchaya, 318. 


757 








THE CLASSICAL AGE 


Vya$i, 318. 

Vyaghradeva, 179n. 

Vyaghramukha, 154, 161 
Vyaghraraja, 9, 179n. 

Vyaghrasena, 193. 

Vyaprita, 361. 

Vyasa, 300, 362, 363, 364, 602, 

Vyasana, 347. 

Vyavahara, 341, 

Vyavastha , 343. 

Vyuha, 423, 424. 

Wages, law of, 601. 

Wakhan, 612. 

Walid, Caliph, 172. 

Walleser, 302. 

Walter, 306n. 

Wang-hiuen-lse, 120n, 121, 124, 125. 

126, 137, 141, 284, 621, 622, 

Weber, 316. 

‘Wei-shu’, 55, 58. 

Wema Kadphises, 50. 

Western Ghats, 591. 
Wiliman-Grabowska, 305. 

Wilson, 310. 

White Huns, See Hephthalites. 
Wintemitz, M., 18n, 295n, 296n, BOOn, 
308n, 31 On, 318n, 326n, 400n, 402, 
407n, 470n, 579n, 586n, 640n. 
Woman, Position of, 567-574. 

Female education, 567-568. 

The Wife, 568-571, 

The Widow, 571-573. 

The Courtesan, 573. 

Wright, D., 87, 

Wu, Emperor, 611, 612. 


Yajna-varman, 67. 

Yajhavalkya, 342, 366, 367, 598, 601, 602, 
603. 

Yajhavatl, 89. 

Yakshadatta, 410. 

Yamuna, 353. 

Yapaniyas, 409, 412. 

Yasodaman II, 46, 47. 

Yasodhara, 324, 542. 

Yasodharakdvya , 413. 

Yasodharman, 37, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 
81n, 85. 

Yasomatl-devI, 96n, 98. 

Yasovarman, 127, 128-131, 133, 134, 
143, 156, 173, 174, 246n, 308, 310, 311, 
326, 822. 

Yativrishabha, 418. 

Yaudheyas, 9. 

Yavanajataka, See MSnaraja-jataka. 
Yeotmal, 188. 

Ye-tha, See Hephthalites. 
Yi-sha-fu-mo, 130. 

Yogacharins, 383, 387, 388-393. 

Y ogasutra, 300. 

Yoqaydtra s 323. 

Yueh-chi, 34. 

Yu.Huan, 50. 

Yuktas, 350, 361. 

Yutas , 350. 

Yuvamahdmja , 360. 

Zabul, (Zabulistan), 164, 165, 167, 168, 
169, 174. 

Zimmer, 320n. 

Zuradian, See Saurashfra. 


758 








MAP 1 







































































































MAP 


2 































































































































MAP 3 














































































EQUATORIAL SCALE . 












































PLATE I 




Fig. 1. Ajanta, Cave XIX: Facade Fig. 2. Ajanta, Cave XXVI: Interior 














PLATE II 




Fig. 3. Ellora, Visvakarma cave: Facade Fig. 4. Ellora , Visvakarma cave: Interior 







PLATE III 



Fig. 5. 


Afanta, Cave XIX: 


Detail of Interior 



■ V V\' •: 




1S5 


Fig. 6. Ajantd, Cave I 


Interior 













Fig. 7. Ajantd , Cave 1: Facade Fig. 8. Ajanpa, Cave XXIV: Pillar 
























PLATE V 



Fig. 9. Aurangabad, Cave I: Interior 



Fig. 10 


Bdgh , Cave IV: Interior 














PLATE VI 



w - 


Fig. 11. 


Bdgh, Cave V: Interior 



§§ 1111 ® 


Fig. 12. 


Ellora, Cave 11: Interior 










PLATE VII 



mm 


Fig. 13. 


Ellora, Tin Thai cave: Facade 









Fig. 14. Ellora, Indra Sahka cave: Facade 






PLATE VIII 




Fig. 15. Badami, Cave III: Verandah Fig. 16. Ellora, Rdmesvara Cave: Pillar of Verandah 













PLATE IX 



Fig. 17. Ellora, Dhumar Lend Cave: Interior 



Fig. 18. Elephanta, Cave: Interior 






PLATE X 



Fig. 19. Rajgir, Maniydr Math: A segment of circular shrine 



Fig. 20. 


Sdnchi, Temple No. XVII: 


Near view 


I 








PLATE 


XI 



Fig. 21. Tigdwa, Kanktili Devi temple ; 


Front view 



! s 


Fig. 22. Nachna Kuthard , Porvati temple: Front view 










PLATE XII 





******* 


Fig. 23. Ndchna Kuthdra, Pdrvati temple: Doorway 



&$$$%&ife 






Fig. 24. Aihole, Lad Khcin temple: 


View from a side 

























PLATE XIII 



Fi 


rr 

C5 • 


25. 


Mdmallapuram, 


Rock-cut “rathas”: 


General view 



Fig. 26. Aihole, Meguti temple: View from a corner 








PLATE XIV 




Mdmallapuram, Dharmaraja “ratha”: Near view Fig. 28 . Deogarh, Dasavatara temple: Front view 












PLATE XV 


Fig. 29. Mirpur Khds, Stupa: View from south-west 



Fig. 30. 


Bhitargaon, Brick temple: 


Near view 












PLATE XVI 




Fig. 31. Bodh-Gayd, Mahabodhi temple: Fig. 32. Sirpur, Brick temple of Lakshmana : Near view 

General view 













PLATE XVII 




Fig. 33. Sarnath, Dhamekh Stupa: Near view Fig. 34. Sarnath , Dhamekh Stupa: Details of ornament 



















PLATE XVIII 





Fig. 35. Bodh-Gaya: Bodhisattva, dated year 64 Fig. 36. Mathura: Buddha Fig. 37. Sdrndth: Buddha in 

iC dharmachakrapravartana-mudrd 








PLATE XIX 



Fig. 40. 

Garhwti: Pillars 


Fig. 41. 

Garhwd: Pillars 


Fig_. 42. 

Garhwd: Pillars 


















PLATE XX 




CO 

txo 

• •H 


1 


Mankuwdr: Buddha Fig. 44 . Banaras, Bharat Kald Bhavan: Kartiikcya 












PLATE XXI 




Fig. 45. Gwalior: Apsara 


Fig. 4G. Sarndth: Siva head 



Fig. 47. Mandor: 
Govardhanaikara Krishna 


Fig. 48. Khoh: Mukhalihga 









PLATE XXII 



Fig. 49. Besnagar: Gang a 


Fig. 50. Deogarh: Anantasayi Vishnu 



Fig. 51 


Pathari: Nativity of Krishnaf?) 












PLATE XXIII 



Fig. 52. Deogarh, Dasavatara temple: Basement sculptures 




Fig. 53. Kosdm: Siva-Parvatl 


Fig. 54. 

Mirpur Khds: Brahma 














PLATE XXIV 














PLATE XXV 





Blhdrail: Buddha Fig. 58. Sultanganj: Buddha Fig. 59. Rajgir, Maniyar Math: Naginl 






PLATE XXVI 




Dali Parvatiya: River goddess Fig. 61. Mahdsthan ; Manjusri Fig. 62. Dah Parvatiya: River goddess 







PLATE XXVII 



Fig. 63. 


Aihole: Ananta-Vishnu relief 



Fig. 64. Kanheri: Avalokitesvara relief 














PLATE XXVIII 








PLATE XXIX 



Fig. 68. Badami: Frieze of sculptures 



Fig. 69. Badami: Frieze of sculptures 



Fig. 70. Badami: Narasimha 


Fig. 71. Badami: Mahishamardini 




















PLATE XXX 




Fig. 72. Pdharpur: Rddhakrishna (?) Fig. 73. Pdharpur: Monkey and Rakshasa fighting 













PLATE XXXI 





Fig. 74. Bhdgalpur: Lady with bird Fig. 75. Gwalior: Female bust Fig. 76. Central India: Lower part of 

a female figure 








PLATE XXXII 



Fig. 77. 


Sdnchl: Avalokitesvara 


Fig. 78. Fathpur (Kangra): 


Buddha 



Fig. 79. Ellora: Kalyanasundara 


















PLATE XXXIII 



Fig. 80. 


Ellora: Narasimha 



Fig. 81 


Aurangabad, Cave IX: Dancing scene 








PLATE XXXIV 




Fig. 82. Ellora: Ravananugraha Fig. 83 Marmtllapuram: Gangavatarana 










PLATE XXXV 



Fig. 84. 


Mdmallapuram: Mahishamardinl 



aw- 


Fig 85. Elephanta: Mahesamurti 














PLATE XXXVI 



Fig. 86. Bhitargaon: 


Terracotta plaque 


showing Vishnu on Ananta 



Fig. 87. Mdmallapuram: Sculptured 
panel on “ ratha ” 


Fig. 88. Mirpur Khas: Terracotta 
plaque showing a male figure 














PLATE XXXVII 



Fig. 89. Ajanta, Cave XVI: 


Dying Princess 



Fig. 90. Ajanta, Cave II: Palace Scene 







PLATE XL 



Fig. 93. 


Bdgh: Group of Musicians 



Fig. 94. Bad&mi, Cave III 


Siva and Pdrvati 














PLATE XLI 




Fig. 95. Ajanta, Cave I: A daughter of Mara Fig. 96. Sittannavdsal: Dancing Apsara 






PLATE XLII 



Fig. 97., Mahdsthdn: Terracotta medallion 
showing amatory couple 



Fig. 93. Ahichchhatra: Head of Parvati ( Terracotta) 












PLATE XLIII 




Fig. 100. Plaster of Paris cast 
from above 


Fig. 99. Rajghat: Copper seal 
matrix with the figure of a 
bull and inscription 



Fig. 101. Rajghat: Copper seal 
matrix with the figure of a 
lion and inscription 



Fig. 102. Plaster of Paris cast 
from above 



Fig. 103. 

Basarh: Inscribed clay 
sealing 


Fig. 104. 

Bhita: Inscribed clay 

sealing 


Fig. 105. 

Basarh: Inscribed clay 
sealing 


















































r 

• . • 



■ 








■ 

. 






































, k 





4 











THE 

HISTORY AND CULTURE OF THE 
INDIAN PEOPLE 


This is the first history of India, written 
exclusively by her own people, bringing to 
bear on the problems a detached and truly 
critical appreciation. A team of over sixty 
scholars of repute presents herein a compre¬ 
hensive and up-to-date account of the political, 
socio-economic and cultural history of the 
Indian people. 


VOLUME I 


THE VEDIC AGE 
(up to 600 b.c.) 

VOLUME II 

THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 
(600 b.c. to 320 a.d.) 


VOLUME HI 


THE CLASSICAL AGE 
(320-750 a.d.) 

VOLUME IV 

IPERIAL KANAUJ 
000 A.D.) 




'ME V 

i FOR EMPIRE 
300 A.D.) 


UME VI 


II SULTANATE 
J-1526 a.d.) 


/OLUME VII 


% 


IUGHAL EMPIRE 



1526-1707 a.d.) 


VOLUME VIII 


kRATHA SUPREMACY 
(1707-1818 a.d.) 


VOLUME IX 


BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 
RENAISSANCE (1818-1905 a.d.) PART I 


VOLUME X 


BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 
RENAISSANCE (1818-1905 a.d.) PART II 


VOLUME XI 


STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM (1905-1947) 

The work is fully illustrated with plates, maps 
and plans. Volumes I to VI and IX to XI are 
already out and the remaining volumes VII and 
VIII will follow at an interval of about a year. 




VOLUME I: THE VEDIC AGE 

. .This history unlike its predecessors is first and foremost a history of 
India and of her people rather than a history of those who have from time 

to time invaded her_The standard, in a word, is very high-” 

The Times Literary Supplement , London 

“.... Distinguished historians contribute and they are not only learned 
but also very readable... .It contains much new information....” 

The Manchester Guardian, Manchester 

VOLUME II : THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

“.... It is safe to say that these volumes will transform the study of Indian 
history in our times; their authors are not only writing history; they themselves 
are making history, a whole new history of knowledge and education....” 

The Illustrated Weekly of India , Bombay 

VOLUME III: THE CLASSICAL AGE 

“... .It maintains the leading trait of the series viz. to devote more atten¬ 
tion to the social and cultural aspects of the story than to the purely political 
side, and the narrative of dynastic struggles and wars.... The political history 
is generally complete and up-to-date and a great amount of authentic informa¬ 
tion on social and economic history has been culled and presented systemati¬ 
cally for the first time.... ” 

K. A. Nilakanta Sastri in Journal of Indian History 

VOLUME IV : THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

“_This is a magnificent piece of exact and unbiassed scholarship-Its 

pages are alive with the spirit of the modern Indian Renaissance; freedom has 
animated Indian learning and this is one of its finest achievements.... this new 
Indian history is not concerned merely, or even mainly, with war and politics. 

Two-thirds of the book deal with cultural and social matters-” 

The Statesman, Calcutta 

VOLUME V : THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

“... .Like all the preceding volumes its treatment... .is detailed and com¬ 
prehensive and is based upon the highest standards of scholarship. The con¬ 
tributors_have made the best use of all the available source material and 

the important previous works on the subject.... From every point of view it 
will be accepted as the standard and authoritative work on the history of India 
in the age of transition from ancient to medieval times....” 

The Hindustan Times, New Delhi 

VOLUME VI : THE DELHI SULTANATE 

“_Voluminous publication_piecing together all relevant material 

....easily stands out as one of the most outstanding and comprehensive 
treatises so far brought out on this period of Indian history... .surpasses them 

all... .being written_from an entirely new angle of vision-is indeed a 

significant contribution... .this comprehensive and detailed work is really a 

very valuable addition to the existing literature on the subject-” 

The Pioneer, Lucknow 

VOLUME IX : BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 

RENAISSANCE, PART I 

“_The volume is an exhaustive study of the British rule-its im¬ 

pact on the cultural, social and educational fife in the country.... This is 
an important publication for students of Indian History... 

The Hitavada, Nagpur 

VOLUME X ; BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 

RENAISSANCE 

“....This volume, like its predecessors, is a mine of information and 
brings to light numerous significant facts and developments in the last cen¬ 
tury _It maintains the high standards set by the earlier volumes_” 

Sunday Standard, Bombay 


