
i 

i 

I 

i 
i 
i 
i 
i 

i 

i 
& 

i 

I 
I 

I 

I 
§ 

I 

St 


BHAVAN’S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 

OF THE 

INDIAN PEOPLE 


THE AGE OF 

IMPERIAL 

KANAUJ 


BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 


MUMBAI 


Agartala * Ahmedabad * Allahabad * Amritsar * Andheri * Aurangabad 
Bagalkot * Bangalore * Baroda * Belgaum * Bellary * Bharuch * Bharwari 
Bhatpara * Bhimavaram * Bhopal * Bhubaneshwar * Bhusawal * Chandigarh 
Chatrapur (Bhatti Mines) * Chennai * Coimbatore * Dakor * Dehradun * Guntur 
Guruvayur * Guwahati * Haldia * Hazira * Hosur * Hubli-Dharwad * Hyderabad 
Indore * Irinjalakuda * Jabalpur * Jaipur * Jalgaon * Jammu Tawi * Jamnagar 
Jodhpur * Kakinada * Kammam * Kanchipuram * Kannur * Kanpur * Khor * Kochi 
Kodagu * Kodaikanal * Kodinar * Kodungallur * Kolhapur * Kolkata * Kollam 
Korba * Kosamba * Kota * Kottayam * Kozhikode * Kurkunta * Kutch * Lucknow 
Machilipatnam * Madurai * Malkhed * Mangalore * Mankapur * Modipuram 
Mukundgarh * MUMBAI H.O. * Mysore * Nadiad * Nagercoil * Nagpur * Nasik 
Noida * Navi Mumbai * New Delhi * Ottappalam * Palakkad * Panchkula * Patna 
Ponnani * Pune * Puthucode * Raipur * Ramachandrapuram * Ramanattukara 
Ratangarh * Reddipalayam * Renukoot * Roorkee * Rourkela * Salav * Satna 
Secunderabad * Serampore * Shimoga * Siliguri * Suchindram * Surat 
Tadepalligudam * Thaliparamba * Thirunavaya * Thiruvananthapuram * Thrissur 
Tirupati * Udipi-Manipal * Ujjain * Valanchery * Varanasi * Visakhapatnam 
Wadakkancherry * Wardha * Wayanad : Overseas Centres * London * New York 
Toronto * Mexico City Lisbon * Durban * Sydney * Singapore * Kuwait. 


§ 
i 

I 
$ 
I 
& 

$ 
$ 

i 

d 
$ 
$ 
$ 

$ 
I 

ifi 
















The history of the period covered by this 
volume revolves round the pivot of Kanauj — 
from which it derives its name. The Pratiharas, 
the Palas and the Rashtrakutas constitute the 
triangle of forces fighting for supremacy, with 
the imperial city as the trophy. Incidentally the 
theory that Harshavardhana was not the last 
empire-builder is further sustained by the larger, 
and the more stable empire of the Gurjara 
Pratiharas which receives detailed treatment. 
The Rashtrakutas emerge in brilliant colours 
against the background of ancient Deccan. The 
part played by Kabul and Zabul in resisting 
Muslim infiltration has for the first time been 
brought into proper perspective. 

On the cultural side we see Buddhism and 
Jainism eddying into regional backwaters, the 
pure founts of Brahmanism and Buddhism 
coloured by Tantrikism. At the same time an 
interpretative phase in the religious and secular 
spheres ushers. In an otherwise dull firmament 
we notice the stars Sankara and Medhatithi 
lighting the paths of religion and law. In 
Visakhadatta and Rajasekhara the literature of 
the period finds an ornate phase. Udbhata, 
Vamana and Abhinavagupta are names to 
conjure with in rhetorics. The Champu finds its 
orientation. Indian pathology and materia 
medica find their categorical enunciation in 
Madhavakara and Dhanvantari, The Nagara and 
Dravida types of architecture take definite 
shape. The monolith Kailasa temple at Ellora 
remains a unique achievement with no parallel 
in the history of Indian architecture. The volume 
ends up with a brilliant chapter on the trans¬ 
oceanic cultural activities of the period. A 
comprehensive index, exhaustive bibliography, 
chronology, genealogy and maps complete the 
uniqueness of the volume. 

The contributors to this volume include: A.S. 
Altekar, M.A., LL.B., D. Litt. R.C. Majumdar, 
M.A., Ph.D., (London); D.C. Sircar, M.A., Ph.D.; 
R. Sathianhathaier, M.A.L.T.; G.V. Devasthali, 
M.A.;B.T., Ph.D.;' H.D. Velankar, M.A.; A.D. 
Pusalker, M.A., LL.B., Ph.D.; H.L. Jain, M.A., 
LL.B., D. Litt.; K.R. Srinivasa Iyengar, M.A, 
D.Litt; U.N. Ghoshal, M.A., Ph.D.; Nalinaksha 
Dutt, M.A.,B.L.,P.R.S.,Ph.D; T.M.P. Mahadevan, 
M.A., Ph.D.; H.D. Bhattacharya, M.A.; I.J.S. 
Taraporewala, B.A., Ph.D., Bar-at-Law; and U.C. 
Bhattacharjee, M.A. 

Foreword by Dr. K.M. Munshi. 


Rs. 500/- 
























3TTTT^rr: 


Let noble thoughts come to us from every side 

— Rigveda, I-89-i 


BHAVAN S BOOK UNIVERSITY 

THE HISTORY AND CULTURE OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE 


THE AGE OF 

IMPERIAL 

KANAUJ 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
Public.Resource.Org 


https://archive.org/details/ageofimperialkan04bhar 



BHAVAN'S BOOK UNIVERSITY 


The History and Culture of the Indian People 

THE AGE OF 

IMPERIAL 

KANAUJ 

/ 

FOREWORD BY 

K. M. MUNSHI 

B.A., LL.B., D.LITT. LL.D. 

President, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

GENERAL EDITOR 

R. C. MAJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D., F.A.S., F.B.B.R.A.S. 

Ex. Vice-Chancellor and Professor of History 
Dacca University 

Hon. Head of the Department of History 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

ASSISTANT EDITORS 

A. D. PUSALKER 

M.A., LL.B., PH.D. 

Assistant Director and Head of the 
Department of Ancient Indian Culture 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

AND 

A. K. MAJUMDAR, m.a., d. phill 

Director, 

Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 
Delhi Kendra 



2009 

BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 

Kulapati K. M. Munshi Marg 
Mumbai-400 007 


All Rights reserved by the Publishers 


© Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 
Kulapati K. M. Munshi Marg, Mumbai - 400 007 


1st Edition 

1955 

2nd Edition 

1964 

3rd Edition 

1984 

4th Edition 

1993 

5th Edition 

2009 


Price Rs. 500.00 


PRINTED IN INDIA 

By Atul Goradia at Siddhi Printers, 13/14, Bhabha Building, 13th Khetwadi Lane, 
Mumbai - 400 004, and Published by P. V. Sankarankutty Additional Registrar (Publications), 
for Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Kulapati Munshi Marg, Mumbai - 400 007. 

E-Mail : bhavan@bhavans.info • Web-site : www.bhavans.info 



Contributors 

A. S. ALTEKAR 

M.A., LL.B., D.LIJT. 

Professor and Head of the Department of Ancient Indian History and CultlfiP& 

* in the Patna University 

R. C. MAJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D., F.A.S., F.BtB.R.A.S. 

D. C. GANGULY 

M.A., PH.D. (LONDON) 

Secretary, Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta 

<% 

D, C. SIRCAR 

M.A., PH.D. 

Superintendent for Epigraphy, Government of India, Ootacamund; 
formerly Lecturer in Ancient Indian History and Culture in the 

University of Calcutta 

R. SATHIANATHAIER 

M.A.,- L.T. 

Professor of History and Politics Jn the Annamalai University 

G. V. DEVASTHALI 

M.A., B.T., PH.D. 

Professor of Sanskrit in the H. P. T. College, Nosik 

H.° D. VELANKAR 
M.A. 

Joint Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan; formerly Professor of Sanskrit, 

Wilson College, Bombay 

A. D. PUSALKER 

M.A., LL.B., PH.D. 

Assistant Director and Head of the Department of Ancient Indian Culture, 

Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

H. L. JAIN 

M.A., LL.B., D.LITT. 

Head of the Department of Sanskrit, Pali andPrakrit in the Nagpur University 

K. R. SRINIVASA IYENGAR 

M.A., D.LITT. 

Professor and Head of the Department of English in the Andhra University, Walt air 

U. N. GHOSHAL 

M.A., PH.D. 

Formerly Professor of History in the Presidency College, Calcutta 

NALINAKSHA DUTT 

MA, B.L., P.R.S., PH.D., D.LITT. (London) 

Professor of Pali in the University of Calcutta 


J. N. BANERJEA 

M.A., PH.D. 

Carmichael Professor of Ancient Indian History and Culture in the 

University of Calcutta 

T. M. P. MAHADEVAN 

M.A., PH.D. 

Professor and Head of the Department of Philosophy in the University of Madras 

H. D. BHATTACHARYYA 

M.A. 

Formerly Head of the Department of Philosophy, Dacca University, and 
Honorary University Professor of Indian Philosophy and Religion, 

Banaras Hindu University 

I. J. S. TARAPOREWALA 

B.A., PH.D., Bar-at-Law 

Formerly Professor of Comparative Philology in the University of Calcutta, 
and Director, Deccan College Post-graduate and Research Institute, Poona 

U. G BHATTACHARJEE 

M.A. 

Formerly Professor of Philosophy in the Presidency College, Calcutta 


FOREWORD 

By Dr, K. M. Mxjnshi 

The Age of Imperial Kanauj, with which this Volume deals, 
deserves a more important place in Indian history than it has been 
given so far. I should, therefore, be forgiven if I gave in my own 
way a. picture as I see it.* * 

The Age begins with the repulse of the Arab invasions oh the 
mainland of India in the beginning of the eighth century and ends 
with the fateful year A.D. 997 when Afghanistan passed into the 
hands of the Turks. 

With this Age, ancient India came to*an end. At the turn of 
its last century, Sabuktigm and Mahmud came to power* in Ghazni. 
Their lust, which found expression in the following decades, was to 
shake the very foundations of life in India, releasing new forces. 
They gave bhrth to medieval India. Till the rise of the Hindu power 
in Maharashtra in the eighteenth century, India was to pass through 
a period of collective resistance. 

This Age of Imperial Kanauj, on the other hand, was an era 
of great strength and achievement for India. The Arabs who were 
on a march in three continents were repulsed. Throughout they 
were held on the frontiers- The Tibetan power was eliminated 
from Nepal. The South emerged effectively in the political life of 
the country, as it had emerged in the earlier age in its religious and 
cultural life. 

This Age saw the rise and fall of three great Empires in the 
country: of the Rashtrakutas, founded by Dantidurga (c. A.D. 733- 
757) and his successor, Krishna I (c. A.D. 757-773), which domi¬ 
nated the South till its collapse in the year A.D. 974; of the Palas 
in the East, which saw its zenith under Dharmap&la (c, A-D. 770- 
8l0), though it revived a little at the end of the tenth century; of 
the Pratiharas of the West and North, founded by Niagabhata I, 
which saw its zenith during the reigns of Mihira Bhoja (c. A.D. 
836-885) and Mahendrapala (c. A.D. 885-908), went under on account 
of the catastrophic blows dealt by the Bashfrakuta raids, but retain¬ 
ed a shadowy imperial dignity to the end. 

* I have incorporated without quotation marks several paragraphs from 
my study of the period in The Glory that was Gurjaradesa (2nd Ed. Revised and 
in part re-written), 

• 

VII 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


II 

It was the Age of Kanauj or, Kanyakubja, the imperial city of 
Isanavarman, which dominated Madhyadesa, the heartland of India. 
It was the coveted prize of the three imperial powers racing for all- 
India supremacy. Ultimately it passed into the hands of the Prati- 
bara Gurjaresvaras about A.D- 815; remained the metropolis of 
power till A.D. 950, and continued to be the most influential centre 
of culture till A.D. 1018 when it was destroyed by Mahmud of 
Ghazni. 

By inheritance Kanauj was the home of Indo-Aryan traditions. 
In the post-Vedic ages the region from Hard war to Unnao, near 
Lucknow, was known as Aryavarta. Later with the spread of Indo- 
Aryan culture, first, north India, and then the whole country, came 
to be called by that name. The original Aryavarta, then come to 
be known as Brahmavarta, with accretions, was called Madhyadesa 
during this age. 

When Hastinapura met with disaster due to floods, as the recent 
excavations at Hastinapura corroborative of the Puranic testimony 
show, Nichakshu, the descendant of Janamejaya Parlkshita led the 
Kurus to Kausambi. In the early sixth century when the Maga- 
dhan Age opened, it was the capital of a powerful Aryan kingdom; 
Vatsaraja, who could lure elephants by his music, was then its ruler- 
It remained such capital till the end of the sixth century of the Christ¬ 
ian Era. Then North India was overrun by the Hunas. Kausambi 
was destroyed. But with Isanavarman, the liberator v/ho drove out 
the Hunas, Kanauj came into prominence, as the centre of power in 
Madhyadesa, no longer a principality of the Gupta Empire. 

In the seventh century the kings of Bengal and Mialava destroy¬ 
ed the power of Kanauj, then in the hands of the descendants of 
Isanavarman. On the ruins of the Maukhari kingdom, Sri Harsha 
built his short-lived empire of Madhyadesa. During his forty-two 
years’ rule (A.D. 606-647), Kanauj grew into the foremost city of 
India. Sri Harsha, however, could not create a hierarchy pledged 
to support his imperial structure. He left no able successor. His 
empire was dissolved soon after he died- 

For more than half a century thereafter, the history of Kanauj 
is wrapt in obscurity. At the end of it, Yasovarman, a great con¬ 
queror and the patron of Bhavabhuti and Vakpati, is found ruling 
Kanauj. Both Yasovarman and Lalitaditya of Kashmir joined hands 
against the inroads of the Arabs and Tibetans. But the allies soon 
fell out and Lalitaditya destroyed the power of Yasovarman. 

The Classical Age of India closed with the reign of Yasovarman. 
This Age then opened with one Indrayudha on the throne of Kanauj, 

• • • 
vm 


V 


FOREWORD 


which had retained its metropolitan and symbolic importance as 
the capital of India. And the stage was set for the triangular strug¬ 
gle for it between the Rashtrakutas of the South, the Pratiharas of 
Gurjaradesa and the Palas of Bengal- 

Ill 

The first great conqueror to emerge on the scene, with the Age, 
was the Rashtrakuta Dantidurga. The son of Indra I by a Cha- 
iukyan princess of Gujarat, he began his Napoleonic career in 
c. A.D. 733, became the master of the whole of Maharashtra by 753, 
and destroyed the Chalukyan Empire to assume an imperial status. 
He was succeeded by his uncle Krishna I. the builder of the Kailasa 
temple of Eliora. In a reign of fifteen years, he added to the empire 
what are the modern states of Hyderabad and Mysore, 

About the same time, Gopala, elected to the position of a chief¬ 
tain, consolidated Bengal. His son Dharmapala (c. A.D. 770-810) 
led his conquering army through the whole valley of Gangfa; re¬ 
duced the ruler of Kanauj to a puppet; held courts at Kanauj and 
Pataliputra- For long he commanded the allegiance of most of the 
kings of the north. 

There was ferment also in the west. In A.D. 712 the Arabs 
conquered Sindh. About A.D. 725 Junaid, its governor, under the 
orders of Caliph Hasham of Baghdad, sent an army for the con¬ 
quest of India. It overran Saur&shtra, Bhillamala, the capital of 
Gurjara (the Abu Region), and reached Ujjayim. 

Then arose an unknown hero, Nagabhata by name; possibly he 
belonged to a branch of the royal Pratihara family of Bhillamala, 
the capital of Gurjaradesa. He rallied to his banner the warriors 
of the allied clans of Pratiharas, Chahamanas and also, perhaps, 
Guhilaputras, Chalukyas and Paramaras, all of whom had their 
home in the region of Mount Abu- Nagabhata fought the invading 
army, flung it back, destroyed it. 

This victory welded the clans of Gurjaradesa into a hierarchy. 
It gave them self-assurance and the will to conquer. With a leader 
and a destiny, they laid the foundations of a new power that was 
destined to play an important part in history. 

During Nagabbata’s time Dantidurga with his conquering army 
swept over the north, captured Ujjayim, where the Pratihara, his 
fortunes temporarily eclipsed, played the host to the conqueror. 

Vatsaraja, the son of a nephew of Nagabhata I, styled “the pre¬ 
eminent among valiant Kshatriyas”, waxed strong and entrenched 


IX 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


himself in a strong position in north India. The allied clans were 
now a well-knit hierarchy. He, however, suffered a disastrous de¬ 
feat at the hands of Rashtrakuta Dhruva and 'had to take refuge in 
some unaccessible region. 

Under the Pratiharas, Kanauj reached the zenith of power, 
learning and culture, between A.D. 815 and 940. Its rulers were 
called Gurjaresvaras; in a late inscription. Curj ara-Pratlbaras. One 
of them, as we know, was styled Maharajddhirdja of Aryiavarta. 
One of the last emperors of the line, when the empire was no more 
than a symbol, was referred to as the Raghukula^bhu-chakravarti, 
Universal Overlord of Raghu’s race; for these Pratiharas claimed 
their descent from Lakshmana, the brother of £ri Ramachandra of 
the Ikshvaku race. They were also called kings of Jurz or Gurjara 
by the Arab travellers, and their empire was called Gurjara. 

Undaunted by reverses, the next ruler, Nagabhata II, consoli¬ 
dated the territory which comprised Mar wad, M’alava and modern 
North Gujarat. Having secured a base, he entered the race for all- 
India supremacy with the Pala kings of Bengal and the Rashtrakutas 
of the South. 

Dharmapala marched on Kanauj, removed Indrayudha from 
the throne of Kanauj and installed Chakrayudha. Nagabhata II, 
in his turn, marched against Chakrayudha, overthrew him and made 
Kanauj his capital- Soon after Rashtrakuta Govinda III invaded 
Kanauj and inflicted a defeat on Nagabhata which, however, did not 
cripple his strength. Ultimately Kanauj passed into the hands of 
the Pratiharas. About A.D. 815 it became the capital of the Pratl- 
hara empire. 

In c. A.D. 834 Nagabhata II died. Ramabhadra, his son and suc¬ 
cessor, was in his turn, succeeded in c. A.D. 836 by Mihira Bhoja. 

The new ruler of Kanauj was called Mihira Bhoja as he was 
born by the favour of God Surya; Adi Varaha, because he uplifted 
the realm like the Divine Boar, the incarnation of Vishnu; Vriddha 
Bhoja by later writers to distinguish him from the later Bhoja the 
Paramara. The Arab travellers called him Bauura, possibly a cor¬ 
ruption of Varaha or Baraha; they also referred to him as the king 
of Jurz, an Arab corruption of the wdrd Gurjara. 

When he came to the throne, Mihira Bhoja, then a youth, was 
faced with a grave situation. Under the feeble rule of his father 
Ramabhadra, the power and prestige of the* empire had suffered. Its 
outlying parts had become independent. Even Gurjaradesa, the 
homeland, was in open revolt. The imperial possessions extended 


x 


FOREWORD 


no further than Kanauj and a small area surrounding it. Only a 
few of his father’s feudatories stood loyal to the new ruler. 

The first act of the young ruler was to restore his authority over 
his homeland; raise the morale of the allied clans of Gurjaradesa 
and make them into a compact and invulnerable hierarchy. He 
did this with such success that the tenacity and vigour of the hierar¬ 
chic dynasties survived more than a thousand years after the fall of 
the empire. Many of the Rajput rulers who surrendered power in 
the great integration of 1947-48 were descendants of the feudatories 
and generals of Mihira Bhoja. 

The career of Mihira Bhoja, pieced together from stray refe¬ 
rences by modern scholars, was a great factor in making Kanauj a 
radiating centre of political and cultural activities which made for 
the integration of life. 

In A.D. 836, Ral-pa-can, the Tibetan conqueror of Nepal, died. 
A civil war followed. Nepal shook off the foreign rule and became 
part of the political system of India. Sarasvat a-mandala in the Ne¬ 
pal Terai and other Himalayan areas were merged in the empire of 
Kanauj. 

Bihar was also annexed to the empire of Kanauj. By A.D. 876, 
Mihira Bhoja had burnt ‘the powerful people of Bengal in the fire 
of his rage’, obtained a decisive victory over Narayanapala and an¬ 
nexed considerable parts of the Pala dominions to his empire- In 
the time of the next ruler, Mahendrapala, the empire included parts 
of North Bengal. 

During the reign of Mihira Bhoja, the Rashfrakutas, the invete¬ 
rate enemies of Kanauj, were pre-occupied with troubled conditions 
in their own realm. And with occasional reverses, the armies of 
Bhoja and his allies pressed continually southwards till they domi¬ 
nated the whole of what is modem Gujarat. 

A Turkish Shahiya family ruled in Kabul for a long time. The 
last king of this dynasty, Lagaturman, was overthrown by his 
Brahmana minister, Kallar or Dalllya Shahi. He was possibly 
supported by Mihira Bhoja. Lalliya, however, lost Kabul to the 
$affarid Ya’qub ibn Layth in A.D. 870 and transferred his capital 
to Udabhanda, on Sindhu near Attock. 

The Arab conquest of Sindh was no more than ‘a mere episode 
in the history of India which affected only a fringe of that vast 
country’. Within a year of Bhoja’s accession, ‘Imran ibn-Musa, the 
Arab Governor of Sindh, tried to extend his hold over the adjoin- 


XI 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

ing territory. The Arabs, however, were driven out of Kutch bet¬ 
ween A.D. 833 and 842. A few years later, they lost the best part 
of Sindh. 

Two petty principalities only remained to the Arabs of which 
Multan and al-Mansurah were the capitals. The Hindus, who had 
been forcibly converted to Islam, went back to their ancestral fold. 
Baled hurl says that in the time of al-Hakim ibn-'Awanah. “the peo¬ 
ple of al-Hind apostatised with the exception of the inhabitants of 
Qas^ah. A place of refuge to which the Moslems might dee was not 
to be found, so he built on the further side of the lake, where it bor¬ 
ders on al-Hind, a city which he named al-Mahfuzah (the guarded), 
establishing it as a place of refuge for them, where they should be 
secure and making it a capital. 55 

Sulaiman who visited India in A\D. 851 refers to Bhoja in vivid 
terms. “Among them is the king of Jurz (Gurjara). This king 
maintains numerous forces and nOxother Indian prince has so fine 
a cavalry. He is unfriendly to the Arabs, still he acknowledges that 
the king of the Arabs is the greatest of kings. Among the princes 
of India there is no greater foe of the Muhammadan faith than he. 
His territories form a tongue of land (Saurashtra?). He has great 
riches, and his camels and horses are numerous. Exchanges are car¬ 
ried on in his state with silver (and gcldi in dust, and there are said 
to be mines (of these metals) in the country. There is no country in 
India more safe from robbers. 55 

In A.D. 916, Abu Zaid, while completing the Silsilat-ut Tawa- 
rikh of Sulaimsan, also attests to the excellent social conditions in 
India. “These observations”, he says, “are especially applicable to 
Kanauj, a large country forming the empire of Jurz.” 

AL-Mas’udl of Baghdad, who visited India more than once 
between A.D. 900 and 940, refers to the Bauiira as ‘the lord of the city 
of Kanauj’ and as ‘one of the kings of Sindh 5 . “He has large armies 
in garrisons on the north and on the south, on the east and on the 
west; for, he is surrounded on all sides by warlike kings. . . .Bauiira, 
who is the king of Kanauj, is an enemy of the Baiharia (Vallabha Raja, 
the title of Rashtrakuta emperors), the king of India.” He adds: 
Bauiira, the king of Kanauj, “has four armies, according to the four 
quarters of the wind. Each of them numbers 700,000 or 900,000 men. 
The army of the north was against the prince of Multan, and with 
the Musulmans, his subjects, on the frontier. The, army of the south 
fights against the Balhara, king of Mankir (Manyakheta).” Accord¬ 
ing to him, Balhara is at war with Jurz, “a king who is rich in horses 
and camels, and has a large army.” 

xii 


FOREWORD 


Sindh was evidently rescued by Mihira Bhoja. for, according to 
Mas’udI, the Indus ran right through one of the cities within the 
kingdom of Jurz (Gurjara). 

The last known date of Bhoja is A-D. 882; possibly, he died in 

A.XX 888. 

At the time of his death, the banner of the Ikshvaku Gurjares- 
varas flew over an empire larger than those of the Guptas and Sri 
Harsha. It comprised north India from the Himalayas to a little 
beyond the Narmada, from East Punjab and Sindh to Bengal. South 
was quiescent. The Balas were no longer a, power. The Arabs on 
the north-west frontier were kept at bay; Sindh had been wrested 
from them, Madhyadesa was at the height of its power. 

Bhoja, unlike ancient chakravartis, did not rest content by 
establishing an evanescent military supremacy. His empire was 
built on the strength of regularly paid standing armies, the loyalty 
of his hierarchs and, it appears, the support of popular enthusiasm. 
Considerable parts of his empire were governed directly from 
Kanauj. What he conquered he consolidated as well. 

IV . 

The Huna incursions had a devastating effect. The Classical 
Age lost its vitality. The tottering Gupta Empire was dissolved. 
Its hierarchs were left with little cohesion and less vigour. The 
race of the Kshatriyas of Madhyadesa, who formed its martial back¬ 
bone, lost their vigour; perhaps it paid a heavy price in blood during 
the last heroic efforts it put forward to drive out the Hunas. 

Vast social and cultural changes followed. Varndsra'nia--dharma > 
instead of being a social organisation of three higher castes more 
or less homogeneous in culture and traditions, became rigid. Inter¬ 
marriages between the castes came to he looked upon with disfavour. 
Instead of being associated with the masses as its natural leaders, the 
Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas became dominant minorities. 

In the South, the Brahman as, from the beginning, were a domin¬ 
ant minority. Their vast influence imposed the Smriti pattern of 
social life there but in a form different from North India. In the 
South the dialects were alien in structure and vocabulary to Sanskrit- 
Sanskrit, therefore, from the beginning, was the language of the learn¬ 
ed only influencing the development of the dialects. 

Naturally Sanskrit, though still a powerful integrating force, 
instead of being the language of the educated throughout the land, 
developed a learned character, removed still further from the spoken 
dialects even in the North. 

!•* 

Xlll 


4 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Dharma-sastras, as the source of the fundamental law in tne 
country, were looked upon as sacred and unifying factors. A new 
Saivism had, through its strength derived from its popular contacts 
and beliefs, become the symbol of national resurgence. Aryavarta 
consciousness, which related dharma to India as a whole, also con¬ 
tinued as an effective group sentiment, particularly in north India. 

\ 

The Age of Imperial Kanauj saw a vast religious and cultural 
resurgence in the country, of which the Puranas were the gospels. 
It harmonised beliefs and practices of most of the cults which accept¬ 
ed as the final source, also Buddhism. The temple architecture, which 
began with the majestic Kailasa of Ellora and developed into the 
exquisite beauty of Chandella Dhanga’s Siva temple at Khajuraho, 
was its symbol. The cult of tirthas as a fundamental institution of 
religio-social significance strengthened the unity of India, carrying 
forward the consciousness that Aryavarta was the inviolate land of 
dharma . The sweeping movement of the spirit was led by Sankara- 
charya, the prophet of the Age and the intellectual architect of ages 
to come. 

It was an age of catholicity. The different creeds join¬ 
ed hands to respect each other. The gods of differing cults were all 
worshipped; Siva was worshipped with his whole family, and so were 
the Trimurtis, the Panchayatana and the Matrikas. The kings 
generally patronised all religions and different rulers of the same 
dynasty are known to belong to different religious persuasions. Even 
the Arab traders were found happily settled in some parts of the 
country. 

Though the Pala Kings were great patrons of Buddhism, Bud¬ 
dhism was on the decline since the days of Harshavardhana. Its 
disappearance from India during this period was hastened by the 
growing unpopularity of the Tantrik practices which it had adopted; 
by the Puranic pantheon accepting Buddha as an avatar a of Vishnu 
and adopting several of its practices and beliefs; above all, by the 
evangelical triumphs of Sankarachiarya. 

The Pratlhara emperors formed the spearhead of this religio- 
cultural upsurge. Some of them, like Mihira Bhoja, worshipped 
Bhagavati as their guardian deity; others Vishnu and Siva. They 
were of the people and did not stand away from their hopes, aspira¬ 
tions and traditions. Like the Gupta Emperors, they received the 
full co-operation of the Bnahmanas, who, through their intellectual 
achievements and religious and social influence, could maintain a 
sense of identity between the dominant minorities and the people. 

xiv 


FOREWORD 


The ruling dynasties of Gurjaradesa also maintained the tradi¬ 
tion of being the protectors of dharma. They did not treat the old 
social order with contempt, nor did they deprive it of its inherent 
tenacity by imposing unfamiliar lines of development; in the result, 
they strengthened it. While they led the country to progress, they 
drew upon the social and spiritual energy of the people. 

The reciters of the Purainas became as powerful, if not more, as 
Brahmanas specialising in ritualism, philosophy, or literature. Par¬ 
ticularly the Brahmanas of Kanyakubja played a great role during 
this period. Even today after a thousand years, they are found all 
over Northern India. The Kulma Brahmanas of Bengal, for 
instance, and the Anavil Brahmanas of South Gujarat both claim 
their descent from the Brahmanas of Kanyakubja. 

An illustrati0n of the prevailing Puranic atmosphere in royal 
courts is furnished by the Gwalior -prasasti of Mihira Bhoja com¬ 
posed by the poet Baladitya on the occasion of the construction of 
a temple of Vishnu. The whole poem pulsates with the fervour of a 
living belief. Manu, Ikshvaku, Kakutstha and Prithu provide the 
background. The primeval Narayana is born twice, as Nagabhata I, 
and again as Nagabhata II, descended from Lakshmana the son of 
Dasaratha of the line. 

The prasasti begins with an invocation to Vishnu, to whom the 
temple is also dedicated, as the destroyer of the demon Naraka, the 
embodiment of evil. 

The Gurjaresvaras, if the prasasti tells the truth, were cultured. 
Each possessed a distinct personality. Nagabhata I was a warrior; 
Kakkuka had a keen sense of humour; Vatsaraja was compassionate, 
generous and of flawless conduct. Nagabhata II, short and modest, 
was of resistless energy. He was virtuous, and worked for the wel¬ 
fare of the people and performed many sacrifices. He possessed 
dtmavaibhava , true greatness of soul. Ramabhadra was brave and 
virtuous, a pure soul, opposed to worldliness and a defender of the 
faith. 

But Bhoja was the greatest of all. Famous as he was, he was 
always unperturbed. Though an adept in rooting out evil, and 
wooed by Lakshml, the guardian goddess of sovereignty, he was 
untainted by arrogance, and spotless in character. He was an 
ardent and unmatched administrator and a receptacle of pleasant 
and sweet words. When Brahma himself wanted to discover another 
such man, whom else could he find but Sri Ramachandra himself? 

So that his life may extend beyond the ordinary span everyone 
desired to serve him; the ascetics in return for his protection; the 

xv 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


preceptors from affection, the servants from devotion; his many 
foes out of policy; all men in the interest of their own well-being 
and livelihood. And he was as worthy a recipient of these offerings 
as the Creator Himself- " 

Men of intellect, of honesty and of virtuous deeds helped to in¬ 
crease his prosperity, while enemies were scorched by the flame of 
his anger. The oceans were guarded by his valour. Like unto 
Karttikeya, the god of war, he was of unbounded energy and the 
Earth waited upon him to hear her fate from his lips. 

Thus, Baladitya the poet sings of Bhojadeva with the vanity 
of the poet. He expresses the hope that his prasasti would last till 
the end of Creation. His prayer was granted. The prasasti will 
last till the end of time and through it Mihira Bhoja will live down 
the ages. 

Mihira Bhoja was not merely a Caesar, nor a pontiff, as were 
imperators of Rome and Byzantium. He was a conqueror and a 
great emperor. He was the protector of dharma. He was an Iksh- 
vaku, a family in which God Himself had chosen to be born- 

Aryavarta was thus a pyramid of culture. At its apex stood 
Vishnu Himself, the upholder of an evenly ordered realm, the pro¬ 
tector of happy and well-ordered governance. That is why Bhoja 
bore the epithet ( Adi Vardha’. 

V 

The Puranic Renaissance gave added sanctity to the Dharma- 
sastras. In this Age, learning tended more and more to live on the 
past, the commentators and the writers of digests took the place of 
the law-givers. Of them, the most outstanding was Medhatithi, who 
wrote a commentary on the Manu-smriti. 

The spirit of the Age found expression in relating Varndsrama- 
dharma which was dynamic to the virile concept of Aryavarta. 
Aryavarta, says Medhatithi, is not limited to geographical boun¬ 
daries; it is not confined to the four corners of India; it is so called 
because the mlechchhas, though they frequently invade the country, 
are not able to abide in it. 

If any prince of good character belonging to the Kshatriya or 
other castes subdues the mlechchhas and reduces them to the posi¬ 
tion of chandalas, as in Aryavarta, and introduces chcLtv!rvarnya in 
the conquered country, it would be fit for Vedic sacrifices to be per¬ 
formed. No sanctity attaches to Brahmavarta as such; it would 
be mlechchhadesa if the mlechchhas subjugated it and lived there. 

xvi 


FOREWORD 


Impurity does not attach to the land, but to the people. Va'nidsrama- 
dharma is a dynamic and expansive social organisation to be main¬ 
tained and spread- Arvavarta extended wherever the dharma is 
enforced and maintained. 

* ' - • 

This concept did not remain a mere theory; it was in active 

operation. The culture having come to dominate India was on a 
march to wider expansion. Indians crossed the fron liars and estab¬ 
lished kingdoms, carrying religious, literary and cultural traditions 
with them to. far-off lands. In this way came into existence the 
Sailendra Empire in Java, Sumatra and Malay Peninsula (c. A.D. 
778-13th century); the dynasty of Pandurahga (c. A.D. 757-860) and 
the Bhrigu dynasty (c. A-D. 860-985) in Champa, the dynasties of 
Jaya-varman II (A.D. 802-877) and Xndra-varman (e. A.D. 877-1001) 
in Kambuja, the dynasty of Sahjaya (c. A.D. 732-928) in Central 
Java, and the dynasty of Sin$ok (c. A.D- 929-1007) in Eastern Java. 

This dynamic outlook was followed in actual practice in India 
as would appear from the Arab chroniclers and the Devala-smriti, 
Even though converted to Islam, Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas 
and &udras; who had been forced to do forbidden or unclean things, 
could be reclaimed by .purification. A woman carried away by the 
mlechchhas could become pure by abstention from food and sexual 
intercourse for three nights. • 

A king, says Medhatithi, has responsibility to maintain dharma 
in the land. He is under a paramount duty to resist foreign inva¬ 
sion at all cost. There can be no compromise with the invader: if 
his realm is invaded and its people massacred, the king must die 
fighting. 

For a king, the law-giver says, fame should have no meaning; 
what matters is securing the submission of other kings. An enemy 
is an enemy; he should not be given time to prepare for war; his 
difficulties are no concern to a king. The best time for attack is 
when the king feels confident of his own strength; when the morale 
of his forces is high; when the crop in his country is plentiful; when 
the subjects of the enemy are in indifferent circumstances or are 
to be alienated. 

Once a war is declared, there should be no weakening; no con¬ 
sideration for the enemy’s weakness; no regard for consistency, for 
friend or foe- In pursuit of his aim he should, if necessary, dismiss 
or punish his minister. 

xvii 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Once an enemy is conquered, the form in which he submits is 
immaterial; what matters is effective surrender. A victorious king 
should take care to destroy his enemies, but he should penalise only 
the wicked and the treacherous. He should uproot the weeds, but 
spare, wherever possible, the inhabitants of the conquered realm. 

It is not easy to consolidate gains after victory, says the poli¬ 
tical sage. The learned and the pious of the conquered country 
should be honoured; restraints on the subjects should be removed; 
the poor and ailing should be treated with kindness; sports and re¬ 
joicings should be initiated. Justice and sound finance must be res¬ 
tored. Wise methods of governance should be introduced. Above 
all, a policy of non-interference in the life of the people should be 
adopted. 

Medhatithi lays stress on sound internal administration. Am¬ 
bassadors should guard against the lure of women. The king should 
not part with the portfolios of finance and home to anyone and in 
making war and peace his should be the final voice- Services —both 
civil and military—should be paid their salaries regularly. Irriga¬ 
tion and other works must be carried out to make people independ¬ 
ent of rains. On a small holding the taxes should be light; heavier 
taxes should be borne by larger profits. Then comes the dictum of 
a man who knows human nature well. “It is neither possible nor 
desirable to prohibit drinking, gambling or hunting absolutely”. 

The king owes his position to no divine sanction but to the 
wishes of the people. He is only an instrument of maintaining 
danda or sovereignty which is based on the fundamental law pro¬ 
pounded by the Dharma-^sastras. This law is above the king and is 
inalienable; nor should custom be permitted to override it. The 
king must submit to the ordinances of the Smritis. At the same time 
Dharma-sastras are not to be rigidly interpreted. Equity is an equal 
authority with the Vedas, Smritis and dchara for determining the 
right principle of law. “Satisfaction of the learned and the virtu¬ 
ous,” says Medhatithi, “is a vital test; it may find what appears to 
be dharma as adharma and what appears adharma as dharma. 
When those learned in the Vedas feel that a thing is pure, it is to be 
deemed as pure”. 

VI 

Varnasrama-dharma of Medhatithi is a dynamic world force and 
not a static social order. A Brahmana can marry the daughter of 
a iCshatriya or a Vaisya. An adopted son may be of a caste other 
than the father’s; a Brahmana can adopt even a Kshatriya boy. A 

xviii 


FOREWORD 


Kshatriya and a Vaisya have the right to recite the Gdyatri-mantra. 
Brahmanahood is not acquired by birth alone. 

A &udra has the right to offer oblations to the fire, or to per- 
form religious sacrifices, except the Vaivdhika fire at marriage. He 
may not be competent to pronounce judgment according to the 
Smritis } but he can be one of the sabhyas in a court of justice. If 
any Smriti, says Medhatithi, takes away the right of a &udra or 
lays down any prohibition, the injunction should be very strictly 
interpreted, and its scope is not to be enlarged by inferences from 
other texts. Those smritis, which are in favour of the Sudras, 
should, therefore, be enforced. But these dicta are more in the 
nature of a protest against the growing rigidity of the social order 
and cannot be read as reflecting universal practice. 

Medhatithi accords to women a position in refreshing contrast 
to some of the later authorities who wrote for the succeeding Era 
of Resistance. Women can perform all samskaras; only they should 
not recite Yedic mantras. At a partition an unmarried sister should 
be given one-fourth share of the dividing brothers. 

A wife is obtained from God, not secured like cattle or gold, 
in the market; a husband, therefore, has no ownership over his wife. 
Before the wife could be compelled by the husband to serve him, 
he must have the necessary qualifications, among others, a loving 
attitude towards her. Medhatithi condemns the dictum of Manu 
that one is to protect oneself even at the cost of one’s wife; even 
princes should not forsake their wives, says he. The practice of 
Sati, according to Medhatithi, is nothing but suicide, and as such, 
it is not permissible. 

The position which the women occupied during this age, is 
also evidenced by other contemporary sources. The general level 
of their culture was high. SilamahadevI, wife of the Rashtrakuta 
Emperor, Dhruva, described as paramesvari and paramabhattcirik'i, 
probably ruled jointly with her husband. She enjoyed the privilege 
of granting large gifts without her husband’s consent. Several queens 
of the Kara dynasty ruled in Orissa. Sugandha and Didda of Kashmir 
administered extensive kingdoms as dowager queens. There were 
learned women as well as women administrators. Avantisundarl, 
the wife of the poet Rajasekhara, was an exceptionally accomplished 
woman. The poet quotes her thrice in the Kdvyamtmdmsd. His 
Karpuramafijari was produced at her request and Hemachandra 
quotes three of her Prakrit stanzas. Ubhayabharati or Sarasvati, 
wife of Mandanamisra, who acted as an arbitrator in her husband’s 
disputations with gankaracbarya, was a learned scholar herself. 

xix 


f 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KAN ATIJ 

We have a glimpse of the social conditions of imperial Kanauj 
in the works of Rajasekhara, an ardent lover of Kanauj. Its women 
did not lag behind men in point of education. According to the poet, 
there were several poetesses in Kanauj. “Culture is connected with 
the soul and not with the sex” says the poet. The poet had met 
princesses and poetesses, daughters of prime ministers, courtesans 
and wives of court jestors who were well versed in science. 

The dress worn by the ladies of the capital was adorable. 
“Women of other countries”, says the poet, “should study the ways 
in which the ladies of Mahodaya dress and bedeck themselves, braid 
their hair and speak their words”. 

The women of Lata were noted for their beauty and elegance. 
At the same time, it would be untrue to accept the position of women 
as portrayed by Rajasekhara as reflecting the generally prevailing 
conditions under which women lived, for whatever it was, it was 
distinctly better than the position to which they were reduced under 
the painful pressure of the Era of Resistance. 

VII 

In the field of literature this Age cannot be compared with the 
Classical Age with its old masters like Kalidasa and Bhavabhuti. 
Under the influence of the rhetoricians external features of litera¬ 
ture rather than literary beauty came into fashion; scholarship re¬ 
placed poetic fancy; Sanskrit acquired a learned character. 

Even kings, as we find from some notable instances, were highly 
educated; several of them were accomplished poets. Most of them 
were patrons of learning as well as authors. All branches of litera¬ 
ture were assiduously cultivated. 

There were kavyas in plenty; epics, romances and champHs 
were composed in large numbers. Lexicography was cultivated; so 
were grammar, poetics, metrics and rhetorics. Anandavardhana 
wrote his famous Dhvanyaloka, propounding his famous theory of 
Dhvani . The favourite literary form of the Age was the Drama, 
though only one classical specimen survives in Visakhadatta’s 
Mudrdrdkshasa . 

. Literary activity in Sanskrit abounded even in the South. 
Rigarthadlpikd by Venkata Madhava, in the reign of the Chola king 
Parantaka I, is one of the earliest of its kind in Sanskrit literature. 


xx 


FOREWORD 


6aktibhadra contributed the drama A&charyachudnmani, the first 
Sanskrit, drama to be composed in the south, as known so far. 

Literature was also cultivated in Prakrit, Haribhadra being 
the greatest master of the period. There was a vast non-eanonical 
literature in Pali and in Apabhramsa in which the works of several 
eminent Jain writers like Dhanapala, Pushpadanta, Kanakamara, 
Padmaklrti and Svayambhu have survived. During this period, 
several works of great value were composed in Kannada and Tamil, 
forming landmarks in the development of these languages.' 

Philosophic literature was widely cultivated by the Bauddhas, 
the Jains and the Brahmanas. Of them all, gahkaracharya was the 
greatest. He provided a philosophic theory which undermined the 
barren ritualism of the Mlmarhsakas as well as the decadent Maha- 
yana Buddhism and Jainism. He stood for monism; preached the 
superiority of samnyasa over ritualism. He purged many religious 
beliefs of their grossness. He was also a practical reformer. His 
organizational work, which brought cults, practices and rituals under 
the direction of the four great Mathas which he founded and which 
stood for his Vedantic monism, restored the cultural unity of the 
land. He also reorganized the monastic orders and infused a nobler 
sense of mission in them. 

The Bhdgavata Parana was the culminating point of the strong 
theistic movement started by the Alvars and N&yahars in the 
South. It became the gospel of hhakti, the intense devotional ecstasy 
of the Alvars as well as the teachings of Bhagavadcfita. Its deep 
emotion and creative beauty saved the soul of India duing the fol¬ 
lowing Era of Resistance. 

The last literary phase of the Age is represented by Rajasekhara, 
who lived in the reign of Mihira Bhoja, for he was the court poet 
and teacher of Mahendrapala and Mahipala. 

Rajasekhara’s works give us a vivid glimpse of himself and the 
time. The poet was born in the family of YayaVaras, a family of 
poets. Though a B rah maria, he married into a Chahamana family 
and his wife, Avantisundari, was therefore a Kshatriya. 

His Bdlardmdyana was staged at the court of Mahendrapala at 
Kanauj. Bdlabhdrata was staged at Kanauj after Mahipala com¬ 
pleted his campaign against the Rashtrakuta emperor Indra III, in 
about A.D. 916. The poet thus describes his patron who was pre¬ 
sent in the audience— 

“In the family of Raghu, there was born a glorious Mahlpala- 

deva, who lowered the heads of the Muralas; who destroyed 

xxi 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

the Mekalas; who drove out the Kalingas; who destroyed Kun- 

talas as if with an axe; who forcibly seized the royalty of the 

Rama-fhas”. 

Rajasekhara’s Kdvya-mimdmsd is a work of great value and 
gives glimpses of the life and literature of the times. 

The poet was a much travelled man, and has some very inter¬ 
esting remarks to make about the manners and speech of the people 
of different parts of the country. The Magadhas and those living 
to the east of Banaras spoke Sanskrit well but Prakrit badly. A 
Gauda could not speak Prakrit properly; he should, therefore, either 
give up the attempt or improve his Prakrit. The Kamatakas recited 
poetry proudly with a twang at the end of each sentence irrespective 
of sentiment, style or quality. The Dravidas recited prose and 
poetry both in a musical way. The people of Saurashtra and Tra- 
vana spoke Sanskrit but mixed it with Apabhramsa to add beauty 
to their speech. Kashmirians were good poets but their recital 
sounded like a mouthful of gaduchL 

Rajasekhara had a partiality for Lata (South Gujarat). Accord¬ 
ing to him, it was the*‘crest of the earth’. Its people, however, 
hated Sanskrit, but spoke elegant Prakrit in a beautiful way. Its 
women were noted for their beauty and elegance of speech. Its 
poets possessed distinctive literary traits; and favoured the style 
called ‘Lati’. Humour was its speciality. 

The people of the region enclosed by the Ganga and the Yamuna, 
the centre of which was Kanauj, according to the poet, were the 
ornaments of the land. They liked new and elegant literary works. 
The composition of its poets was well constructed and their recita¬ 
tion was sweet like honey. To him the city was the centre of the 
universe; a sacred place; the home of the imperial Ikshvakus; a 
centre from where radiated power, fashion and culture. 

The whole country, therefore, in this period, had a unity of 
culture. Sanskrit was the language of the cultured, spoken and 
understood among the educated throughout the country, but was 
most prevalent to the east of Banaras. 

VIII 

Mihira Bhoja was succeeded by his son Mahendrapala, a fear¬ 
less military genius, who extended the empire of Mihira Bhoja add¬ 
ing to it the Kamal district in the Punjab, the Nepalese terrain and 
the Rajsbahi district of Bengal. In A.D. 910 he was succeeded by 
Mahipala who also, like his father, was educated by the poet Raja- 
iekhara. 

xxii 


FOREWORD 


Within a few years of Mahipala’s coming to the throne of 
Kanauj, however, Indra III, the Rashtrakuta emperor, marched to 
the north and occupied Kanauj. But he suddenly died, possibly 
in battle, and his army withdrew precipitately to the South. Though 
the Rashtrakuta empire was already disintegrating in A.D. 940, 
Krishna III again re-appeared in the north, overran Malava and 
Gurjaradesa, occupied Kalanjara and gave a shattering blow to the 
Pratihlara empire. 

The two raids of the Rashtrakutas had unfortunate results for 

• • 

the whole of India. Madhyadesa lay mauled and bleeding. The 
empire of the South tottered to a fall. The feudatories of both de¬ 
clared independence one after the other. The country was pros¬ 
trate and defenceless, and the Aryavarta Consciousness was sub¬ 
merged by parochial sovereignties. 

Out of the chaos, two powerful feudatories carved out inde¬ 
pendent kingdoms: the Paramaras of Malava and the Chandeilas of 
Jejakabhukti. Kanauj, however, continued to remain the metro¬ 
polis of culture, but its emperor was no more than a shadow of his 
former self. 

By about A.D. 974 the Empire of the Rashtrakutas was taken 
over by the Chalukya king, Taila II, a feudatory. A bitter and long 
drawn out war ensued between Taila II and Paramara Munja of 
Malava. Ultimately, Munja was captured and killed between .A.D. 
995-997. Taila followed him soon after in A.D. 997-998. 

In the fateful year A.D. 997 Abu-l-Qasim Mahmud, son of Sa- 
buktigfn, captured Ghazni, developed a marvellous striking power 
and turned his attention to India, 

Ancient India ended. Mediaeval India began. 

IX 

My thanks are due to Dr. R. C. Majumdar, the General Editor, 
and Dr. A. D. Pusalker, the Assistant Editor, for their indefatigable 
and conscientious labours, and to the scholars who have supplied their 
learned contributions for this volume. I am specially indebted to the 
Associated Advertisers & Printers Ltd., Bombay, who have, in such 
a short time, seen the volume through the Press, and to the staff of 
the Bhavan and the Press who looked after the preparation and print¬ 
ing Of this volume with care and zeal. It is difficult to express ade¬ 
quately the deep debt of gratitude to Shri G. D. Birla, the Chairman, 
and other members of the Board of the Krishnarpan Trust who have 
so liberally financed the preparation of these volumes. 

xxiii 




CONTENTS 


Foreword by Dr. K. M. Munshi 
Preface by the General Editor 
List of Maps 
Abbreviations 


Page 

vii 

xxxiii . 
xxxix 
xli 


Professor 

CHAPTER I 

THE RASHTRAKUTA EMPIRE 
• • 

By A. S. Altekar, m.a., ll.b., d.litt., 
and Head of the Department of Ancient Indian History 

1. 

and Culture in the Patna University 

Dantidurga 

1 

2. 

Krishna I . . . . . . . . . . 

3 

3. 

Govinda II and Dhrava 

3 

4. 

Govinda ni . . .. 

6 

5. 

6arva or Amoghavarsha 

8 

6. 

Krishna II . . . . . . ... 

11 

7. 

Xndra ni 

12 

8. 

Govinda IV and Amoghavarsha III 

13 

9. 

Krishna III . . . . .... 

14 

10. 

Khottiga and Karkka II . . 

15 

11. 

Retrospect and Review 

16 

CHAPTER II 

RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATIHARA EMPIRE 

By R. C. Majumdar, m.a., ph.d., f.a.s., f.b.b.r.a.s., 

1. Nagabhata I 

19 

2. 

Vatsaraja 

21 

3. 

Nagabhata II . . .. .. • • 

24 

4. 

Bhoja .. . . . . . • • - 

28 

5. 

Mahendrapala . . .. .. . 

33 

6. 

Mahipala 

33 

7. 

Mahipala’s Successors 

37 

8. 

The Pratlhara Empire—A General Review 

39 

1. 

CHAPTER III 

THE PALAS 

By R. C. Majumdar 

The Rise of the Pal as 

44 

2. 

Dharmapala (c. A.D. 770-810) .. 

45 

3. 

Devapala (c. A.D. 810-850) .. 

50 

4. 

Fall of the Fala Empire . . . . .... 

52 


XXV 








THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


CHAPTER IV 


EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 

By R. C. Majumdar 

I. Nepal 

II. Kamarupa .. •. . . . . 

Ill. Utkala (Orissa) . . 

1. The Karas . . . . . . 

2. The Bhanjas .. .. 

A. The Bhanjas of Khinjali 

B. The Bhanjas of Khijjinga 

3. The Minor Dynasties . . 


Page 

58 

60 

62 

63 

69 

70 
74 
76 


CHAPTER V 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 
By D. C. Ganguly, m.a., ph.d. (london), 

Secretary, Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta 

I. The Chandella Dynasty . . .. .. • • 83 

II. The Kalachuris * . . . . .. . . . . 87 

1. The Kalachuris of Tripuri . . . . . . 87 

2. The Kalachuris of Sarayupara - . . . . 93 

III. The Paramaras . * .. . , . . . . 94 

IV. The Minor Dynasties of Gujarat and Kathiawar . . 99 

1. The Saindhavas . . . . • • . . 99 

2. The Chalukyas . . . . . . . . . 101 

3. The Abhiras . . . . . . ' . . . . 102 

4. The Varahas (?) of Saurya-mandala .. 102 

5. The Chapas . . .. . . . , . . 102 

V. The Chaulukyas .. . . . . . . . . 104 

VI. The Chahamanas . . .. . . .. ... 106 

VH. The Guhilas .. .. . 109 

1. Guhilas of Mewar . . .. . . . . 109 

2. Guhilas of Dhod . . . . . . . . 110 

VIII. The Tomaras .. .. .. .. .. Ill 

IX. The Shahis (or Sbahiyas) . . . . . . .. 112 

X. Kashmir .. . . . . . . . . . . 115 

1. The Karkota Dynasty . . .. . . . . 115 

2. The Utpala Dynasty . . .. . . . . 117 

3. Dynasties of Yasaskara and Parvagupta .. • • 120 

XI. The Hill State of Chamba . . .. .. . . 121 

XII, Kumaun and Garhwal (By D. C. Sircar, M.A., Ph.D., 

Superintendent for Epigraphy, Government of 
India, Ootacamund) .. . . . . . . 123 

XIII. The Arabs in India (By R. C. Majumdar) . . . . 125 

1. Kabul and Zabul .. . . . . 125 

2. Sindh . . .. .. . . . . . . 126 


xxvi 










CONTENTS 


CHAPTER VI 
THE DECCAN 
By D. C Sircar, m.a., ph.d., 

Superintendent fdr Epigraphy, Government of India, 
Ootacamund; formerly Lecturer in Ancient Indian 
History and Culture in the University of Calcutta 

Page 

I. The Eastern Chalukyas .. .. .. .. 133 

II. The Eastern Gahgas (c, A.D. 750-1000) .. .. 140 

1. Later Members of the Early Ganga Family .. 140 

2. Rise of the Greater Gahgas .. .. . . 141 

3. Tlie Ganga House of Svetaka .. . . .. 144 

4. The Kadambas of Jayantyapura .. .. 145 

III. The Somavarhsis . . .. . . . . 146 

CHAPTER VII 

SOUTH INDIA 

By R. Sathianathaier, m.a., l.t.. 

Professor of History and Politics, Annamalai University. 

I. The Pailavas . . .. .. .. .. 151 

1. Danti-varman and Nandi-varman III .. .. -151 

2. Nripatuhga-varman and Aparajita .. .. 152 

II. The Cholas of Tanjore .. .. .. .. 153 

1. Vijayalaya and Aditya I ' .. .. .. 153 

2. Parantaka I ,. .. .. .. .. 154 

3. The Rashtrakuta Interregnum in Tondamandalam 155 

4. Gandaraditya, Parantaka II, and Uttam Chola .. 156 

III. The First Pandya Empire .. . . .. 157 

1. Nedunjadaiyan .. .. .. .. 157 

2. &rimara Srivallabha and his Successors . . 158 

IV. The Western Gahgas . . ,. .. . . 160 

1. Sivamara II to Prithvlpati II . . .. .. 160 

2. Butuga II to Rakkasa Ganga .. .. .. 161 

V. The Bianas . . . . .. . . . . . . 163 

VI. The Nojambas and the Vaidumbas .. .. . . 163 

VII. Aluvakheda, Kohgudesa and Kerala .. .. 164 

APPENDIX 

The Genealogy and Chronology of the Pailavas 

By D. C. Sircar 

1. Successors of Nandi-varman Pallavamalla .. 166 

2. Tentative Genealogy of the Later Pailavas . . 168 

CHAPTER VIII 

CEYLON 
By D. C. Sircar 

I. Political History •• •• .. 169 

II. Fine Arts . . • • • • • • • • • • 174 

xxvii 








THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

CHAPTER IX 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 
A. Sanskrit 

By G. V. Devasthali, m.a., b.t., ph.d.. 

Professor of Sanskrit in the H.P.T. College, Nasik 

Page 

I. Belles-Lettres . . . . . . . . • • 178 

1. Drama (Last paragraph by A. D. Pusalker) . . 178 

2. Kavya .. . . . . . . . . 182 

3. Romance .. .. . . .. .. 187 

4. Champu .. .. ... 188 

II. Scientific Literature .. .. .. .. 189 

1. Lexicography .. ' .. . . .. .. 189 

2. Grammar .. . . . . . . . . 190 

3. Poetics . . . . . . . . . . . 191 

4. Metrics (By H. D. Velankar, M.A., Joint 

Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay) .. 198 

5. Medicine ,. . . • • .. . . 199 

6. Mathematics, Astronomy, and Astrology . . 200 

7. General Review of Secular Literature . . 200 

III. Religious and Philosophical Literature 

(Introductory paragraph by Dr. R. C. Majumdar) 202 

1. Puranas .. ,. . . .. .. 202 

2. Dharmasastras or Smritis . . . . . . 203 

3. Philosophy .. .. . . . . . . 204 

B. Prakrit . . . . . . 207 

By H. D. Velankar, m.a.. 

Joint Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 

Bombay 

C. Non-canonical Pali Literature 
By A. D, Pusalker 

(i) Chulla Dhammapala . . . . . . 210 

(ii) Mahanama .. •. . . . . . . 211 

(iii) Khema . . . . .. . . . . 211 

(iv) Upatissa . . .. . . . . . . 211 

(v) Telakatahagath'a . . . . .. . . 212 

D. Apabhramsa Language and Literature 

By H. L. Jain, m.a., ll.b., d. litt., 

Head of the Department of Sanskrit, Pali and 
Prakrit, Nagpur University 

1. Origin of Apabhramsa . . . . . . 213 

2. Nature of Apabhramsa .. . . .. 214 

3. Apabhramsa in Sanskrit Dramas . . .. 215 

4. Apabhramsa Doha8 . . . . . . . 216 

5. Epic Poems . . . . . . . . . . 217 

6. Short Stories , . . . . . . . . . 219 

E. Dravidian Languages and Literature 
By K. R. Srinivasa Iyengar, m.a., d. litt.. 

Professor and Head of the Department of English 

in Andhra University 

I. Kannada Literature .. .. . . , . 220 

H. Tamil Literature . . . . . . . . . 227 

xxviii 


















CONTENTS 


CHAPTER X 

POLITICAL THEORY, ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION, 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

By U. N. Ghoshal, m.a., ph.d., 

Formerly Professor of History in the Presidency College, Calcutta 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 


I. 


II. 



I. 

H. 

III. 

IV. 
V. 

VI. 


Page 

Political Theory .. .. .. 232 

Administrative Organisation—North India . . 240 

Administrative Organisation—South India .. 245 

Law and Legal Institutions .. .. * . . 249 

1. Visavarupa .. .. .. .. .. 249 

2. Medhatithi .. .. .. .. .. 250 

3. The Smriti-samgraha .. .. .. .. 253 


CHAPTER XI 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

A. General Review .. .. 257 

By R. C. Majumdar 

B. Buddhism 

By Nalinaksha Durr, m.a., b.l., ph.d, d.litt.. 


Professor of Pali in the University of Calcutta 

Doctrinal Changes .. .. .. .. .. 259 

1. Emergence of Tantrikism .. .. .. 259 

2. Dharanis .. . . .. .. .. 261 

3. Avalokitesvara and Tara .. . . .. 262 

4. Early Tantrik Texts ... .. .. .. 263 

(i) The Mahjusrl-Miilakalpa .. . . 263 

(ii) The Guhyasamaja .. . . .. 265 

5. Two Schools of Tantrik Teachers .. .. 266 

6. Distinction between Tantrikism and Mahayanism 266 

Historical Review .. .. .. .. 267 

1. Traditional Account by Taranatha . . .. 267 

2. The Patronage of the Pala Kings .. .. 270 

(i) Gopala .. . . . . . . . . 270 

(ii) Dharmapala .. .. . . . . 271 

(iii) Devapala . . .. .. .. 274 

(iv) The Successors of Devapala .. .. 274 

Iconography (By J. N. Banerjea, M.A., Ph.D., 

Carmichael Professor of Ancient Indian History and 
' Culture in the University of Calcutta) .. . 275 


C. Jainism 
By A. p. Pusalker 


Introduction .... . . . . .. 288 

Jainism in the North .. .. .. .,. 289 

Jainism in the Deccan and South India .. . . 290 

Literature .. .. • • * • .. * .. 293 

General Observations .. ■; • • •. 294 

Iconography (By J. N. Banerjea) .. .. . . 296 


xxix 











THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


D. &aivism and Vaishnavism 

I. SAIVISM 


By T. M. P. Mahadevan, m.a., pH.d., 

Professor and Head of the Department of Philosophy 
in the University of Madras 

1. Growth and General Popularity 

2. Kashmir Saivism 

3. Sankariacharya 

4. Iconography (By J. N. Banerjea) 

II. VAISHNAVISM 
By D. C. Sircar 

1. The Acharyas 

2. Iconography (By J. N. Banerjea) . . - 

E. Tdntrik Religion 
By H. D. Bhattacharyya, m.a., 


Page 

300 

300 

304 

305 


311 

313 

315 


Formerly Head of the Department of Philosophy, Dacca University, 
and Honorary University Professor of Indian Philosophy and 

Religion, Banaras Hindu University 


F. Minor Religious Sects 
By H. D. Bhattacharyya 

I. Popular Brahmanical Religion 

1. Religious Syncretism 

2. Solar Cult 

3 . The &akti Cult and &aiva Deities 
II. Iconography (By J. N. Banerjea) 

1 t •# * • * a • * 

2. Ganesa .... 

3. Karttikeya 

4. Surya 

5. Navagrahas 


327 

327 

333 

337 

347" 

347 

348 
348 
350 
352 


G. The Parsis 

By I. J. S. Taraporewala, b.a., ph.d., bar-at-law, 


352 


Formerly Professor of Comparative Philology in the University of 
Calcutta, and Director, Deccan College Post-graduate and Research 

Institute, Poona. 


H. General Development of Philosophy 

By U. C. Bhattacharjee, m.a.. 

Formerly Professor of Philosophy in the Presidency 

College, Calcutta 

1. The Bhashyas .. . . .. .. .. 355 

2. Orthodox and Heterodox Schools . . . . 355 

3. Vedanta’s Bid for Supremacy .. .. .. 357 

4. The Philosophy of Sankara (c. A.D. 788-820) .. 359 


xxx 





CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XII 

SOCIAL CONDITIONS 
By U. N. Ghoshal 


» 


I. Education 

1. Courses of Study .. 

2. Student Life 

3. Female Education 

4. Some Educational Centres and Establishments 
II. Social Life 

1. Social Divisions and Sub-divisions 
Marriage Rules 
Law of Adultery 
The Position of Women 
Some Social Types 
Some Groups and Associations 
Standard of Living 
Popular Amusements 
Lawful Food and Drink 
Toilette and Personal Hygiene 
Beliefs and Superstitions 
Pious and Charitable Works 
General Estimate of Character 


2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8 . 
9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 


Page 

366 

367 

368 

368 

369 

369 

369 

374 

377 

378 

382 

383 

384 

386 

387 

389 

390 
392 
392 


CHAPTER XIII 


ECONOMIC LIFE 
By U. N. Ghoshal 


1. 

Agriculture, Industry, and Trade 

• « • « 

400 

2. 

Organisation of Industry and Trade 

* • • • 

405 

3. 

Interest and Wages 

• • • • 

407 

4. 

5. 

Influence of Canon Law upon 
Development 

General Economic Condition 

Economic 

» « • • 

• • 9 • 

408 

408 


CHAPTER XIV 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

By R. C. Majumdar 


I. 

The &ailendra Empire . . .. 

412 

II. 

Kambuja 

416 


1 . 

Jaya-varman II and III 

416 


2. 

Dynasty of Indra-varman 

419 


3. 

General Review . . 

421 

III. 

Champa 

423 


1 . 

The Dynasty of Panduranga (c. A.D. 757-860) . . 

423 


2. 

The Bhrigu Dynasty (c. A.D. 860-985) 

424 


3. 

The Annamese Invasions 

426 


xxxi 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


IV. 

V. 

VI. 


Jsvs .. .. ., . . .. 

1. The Kingdom of Matanam 

2. End of Hindu Civilisation in Central Java 

3. Eastern Java—Dynasty of Sindok 

Burma 


Civilisation in the Hindu 
Asia 

1. Society 

2. Religion .. .. 

3. Art .. 

(i) Indo-Javanese Art 

(ii) Art in Indo-China 

4. Literature 


Colonies 


n South-East 


VII. China 
VIII. Tibet 

IX. Western Countries 

/ / 

List of Bibliographies 
General Bibliography 
Chronology 
Genealogies 

Index . 


Page 

427 

427 

428 
430 

432 


434 

434 

435 
439 
439 

441 

442 

444 

446 

449 

454 

455 
506 
519 
539 


Maps 


at the end 


« a 


xxxu 









PREFACE 


By Dr. R. C. Majumdab 
General Editor 

The preceding volume closed with an account of the shortlived 
empires in Northern India founded by Harsha-vardhana, Yaso- 
varman, and Laiitaditya. But although they failed in their efforts 
to build up a stable empire, the imperial traditio^ handed down by 
them bore rich fruit during the period covered by this volume. The 
middle of the eighth century A.D., which marks its commencement, 
is a great landmark in Indian history. It saw the rise of three great 
dynasties which were destined to play the imperial role with far 
greater success than any of the three individual heroes mentioned 
above. 

Of these three great dynasties the Gurjara-Pratlharas were the 
earliest, and the foundation of their power in Western India, shortly 
before A.D.- 750, has been described in the preceding volume. 
The two other powers, which suddenly came into prominence about 
the same time, were the Palas of Eastern India and the Rashtrakutas 
of the Deccan. The rivalry and struggle between these three great 
powers forms the dominant theme of history dealt with in this 
volume. 

The city of Kanauj was raised to the dignity of an imperial 
capital by Harsha-vardhana. But though his empire collapsed with 
his death, the glamour of Kanauj was revived by Yasovarman. 
During the period-under review it formed the centre of attraction 
of all the three great powers, and they regarded its possession as a 
consummation to be devoutly wished for. It was finally chosen as 
the capital by the Gurjara-Pratlharas. Under them it rose to be the 
finest city in the whole of India, and continued as such till the end 
of the period covered by this volume. This circumstance has sug¬ 
gested the name of this volume, viz . The Age 6f Imperial Kanauj . 
It is hardly necessary to add that this nomenclature is only to be 
taken in a general sense, and is not intended to cover the entire 

V 

history dealt with in this volume. Indeed no title could be devised 
which fulfils this condition, and no apology is perhaps needed to 
name any particular volume after its dominant theme. 

The period covered by this volume witnessed the rise and fall 
of three empires. The Palas under Dharmapala and Devapa-la 
established a mighty empire, and they claimed allegiance of nearly 

xxxiii 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

the whole of Northern India. Then came the turn of the Pratlharas 
who, under Bhoja and Mahendrapala, brought under their direct 
administration a vast extent of territory, from the Kathiawad Penin¬ 
sula in the west to Northern Bengal in the east. No such empire 
flourished in North India after the Guptas. For there is no doubt 
that the Gurjara-Pratlhara Empire was more extensive, more 
durable, and had a more stable and organised administration than 
the empire of Harsha-vardhana. The detailed account of this empire 
in the present volume will show the erroneous, almost ludicrous, 
character of the notion that Harsha-vardhana was the last empire- 
builder in Northern India, to which reference has been made in the 
Preface to the preceding volume. 

Both the Palas and Pratlharas felt the full brunt of the Rash^ra- 
kuta power. Although the Rashtrakutas ruled over the Deccan, they 
were fired by the ambition of conquering Northern India. They de¬ 
feated the Pratlhara rulers Vatsaraja and Nagabhata and the Pala 
king Dharmapala. Under Dhruva and his son Govinda III they 
proved to be the greatest military power in India, and while the 
former carried his victorious campaign as far as the doab between 
the Ganga and the Yamuna, the latter overran the whole country 
up to the Himalayas. Even a century later, one of their successors 
sacked the imperial city of Kanauj, then at the heyday of its glory, 
and forced the Pratlhara Emperor to fly for his life. 

The Rashtrakutas also successfully fought with the Pallavas 
and other powers of the South Indian Peninsula, and advanced even 
as far as Ramesvaram. From the political point of view the Riashtra- 
kuta Empire constitutes the most brilliant episode in the history of 
the ancient Deccan. No other power, south of the Vindhyas, played 
such a dominant role in the history of North India, until the age of 
the Maratha Peshwas in the eighteenth century. 

The. Pratlharas, though never a match for the Rashtrakutas, 
played a dominant role in North Indian politics. They stood as 
bulwark against the Muslims of the Sindhu valley. It has been 
asserted by the Muslim writers that the Pratlharas were the greatest 
foes of the Muslims, and could easily defeat the latter; but when¬ 
ever the Pratlharas advanced, the Muslims threatened to destroy 
the famous image of the Sun-god in Multan, and the Pratlharas im¬ 
mediately retreated. The Muslims thus took advantage of the reli¬ 
gious feelings of the Hindu Pratlharas in order to save themselves 
from impending ruin. 

It appears that the danger of Muslim menace was not yet fully 
realised by the Pratlharas. Otherwise they should not lpave been 
deterred by religious scruples from exterminating Muslim rule in 


xx xiv 



PREFACE 


India*—a feat which was easily within ‘their power. The Rashtra- 
kutas went one step further. They befriended the Muslims and 
gave them all facilities for settling in their territory. They even 
allowed Muslim settlements to build mosques and to be ruled by 
their own governors. Whatever we might think of the political 
wisdom of the Rashtrakutas, their attitude is undoubtedly a mani¬ 
festation of that spirit of religious toleration, which characterised 
India but was rare in that age elsewhere in the world, and offered a 
strange contrast to the iconoclastic fury of the Muslims. 

To the west of the Pratiharas lay the kingdom of the Shahiyas. 
Originally ruled over* by the Turkish chiefs who claimed descent 
from Kanishka, it was usurped by a Rrahmana minister, and the 
new ruling family came to be known as the Hindu Shahiyas. They 
became very powerful and ruled over an extensive territory from 
the Hindu Kush to the East Punjab. 

Although the Muslims were checked in Sindh they never gave 
up the idea of pushing their conquests to India. The Caliphs made 
repeated attempts to conquer Kabul and Zabul. Zabul made a pro¬ 
longed and stubborn resistance against Arab aggression for more 
than two hundred years, and was not finally subdued till A.D, 870. 
Kabul, which was conquered at the same time, regained indepen¬ 
dence, and formed a part of the Shahr^a kingdom. The heroic 
resistance of these two states against the greatest military power 
in the world has not yet received the recognition it deserves, and 
has therefore been treated in some detail. 

Tre rise of Ghazni, towards the close of the period under review, 
was likely to be a great peril to India, and the Hindu Shahiyas, who 
guarded her frontiers, were engaged in deadly conflict with the 
rulers of this state. The struggle began towards the very end of the 
period covered by this volume, and continued beyond it. A detailed 
account of this conflict, which inflicted untold miseries upon India 
and paved the way for its final conquest by the Muslims, will there¬ 
fore be given in the form of a continuous narrative in the next 
volume. 

The end of the first millennium, with which this volume closes, 
was a turning point in the history of India. India was on the verge 
of a great political transformation to which the nearest precedent 
is furnished by the invasion of the Aryans about three thousand 
years earlier. But the external invasion was not the only factor of 
importance. The internal change was also a momentous one. The 
collapse of the Pratihiara Empire brought into prominence new 
powers, known later under the collective name of “Rajputs”, who 


XXXV 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

played a dominant part in Indian history throughout the Mediaeval 
period. They constituted a definite break with the old, and ushered 
in a new age both in political and cultural history of India. 

The close of the tenth century A.D. also saw the final exit of 
the two great powers, the Rashfrakutas and the Pallavas, from the 
arena of politics in the south. The Chiaiukyas re-established their 
power in the Deccan after more than two centuries, while the Cholas, 
one of the three ancient peoples in the Tamil land, once more emerg¬ 
ed as a great power after ousting the Pallavas. But the main acti¬ 
vities of both these dynasties really commence after the end of the 
period under review, and their history will be treated in the next 
volume. 

Generally speaking, the period is one of decline and decadence 
in all spheres of cultural activity. Buddhism and Jainism lost their 
dominant position, and became gradual^ confined to particular 
regions. The rise of Tantrik cults brought corruption both in Bud¬ 
dhism and Brahmanical religion. Literature became less creative 
and more artificial. The pursuits of science were less active. The 
age of original Smritis was passing away, ushering in the age of the 
commentaries. It was easily taken for granted that the era of 
authoritative creation, in the fields of religion, philosophy, law, 
manners, and morals, was now definitely closed, and all that remain¬ 
ed for the people was to understand the past and follow it as scrupu¬ 
lously as possible. Nevertheless Indian genius occasionally shone 
forth in a brilliant manner. In the fields of religion and philosophy 
the name of Sankaracharya occupies an honoured place. Although 
he wrote only commentaries to existing works, the views he pro¬ 
pounded through them entitle him to be ranked as one of the greatest 
philosophers of the world. Similarly Medhatithi, the commentator 
of Manu-samhiia , occupies a high place among the legal luminaries 
of India. 

In literature Visakhadatta and Bajasekhara are great names, 
though far inferior to Kalidasa and Bhavabhuti. But the period 
saw the highest development in one branch of literature, viz. theory 
of poetics. It was the age of the great rhetoricians like Ddbhafa, 
Vlmana, Rudrata, Ananda-vardhana, Abhinavagupta and Kuntaia. 
Tins period also witnessed the growth of a new type in Sanskrit 
literature viz.. Champu, i.e. Kdvya written both in prose and verse. 
It may also be mentioned that the general output of literature during 
this period was not inconsiderable. 

In medicine, Madhavakara brought to perfection the branch of 
pathology in his masterly work Rugvinischaya which, for the first 

xxxvi 


PREFACE 


time in the history of Indian medicine, treats of all diseases together 
in one volume. The treatise, now known as Charaka-samhita, was 
also the result of considerable revision and enlargement of the origi¬ 
nal work by Dridhabala during this period. Mention may also be 
made of Nighanfu of Dhanvantari, the oldest medico-botanical dic¬ 
tionary that we have at present. 

In the domain of art, there is a noticeable decline in sculpture 
and painting. But there is a great development in architecture. 
The two main types of temple architecture, known as Nagara (North 
Indian) and Dravida, definitely emerge during this period, but are 
not fully developed till the next. Further, it is not always easy to 
assign the temples and images belonging to the same style or school 
to the one or the other of these periods. We therefore thought that 
it would perhaps be more convenient to deal with the last phase of 
Hindu art, from A,D. 750 to 1300, in a single chapter in the next 
volume. This will enable the reader to follow the continuous deve¬ 
lopment of the temple architecture and get a comprehensive idea 
of the Mediaeval Indian sculpture in all its local varieties from be¬ 
ginning to end. The omission of the Chapter on art in this volume 
is a departure from the general plan, but was decided upon on the 
above grounds. The period under review is noted for some remark¬ 
able monuments such as the monolith Kailasa temple at Ellora cut 
out of a hill-side, a unique achievement without any parallel in the 
history of art. 

The colonial and cultural activities of the Indians outside India 
form a brilliant chapter of Indian history during the period under 
review. To complete the account in respect of China and Tibet, 
the activities in these regions have been traced down to the middle 
of the eleventh century A.D. 

The policy and principles of editing, referred to in the preced¬ 
ing volumes, remain unchanged. I take this opportunity of thanking 
the contributors for their sincere co-operation. Dr. Pusalker has, 
as usual, rendered most valuable services in preparing this volume, 
and I am deeply grateful to him. In conclusion I must place on 
record my thanks for the appreciative reviews of the preceding 
volumes in different journals. 


xxxvii 






















































































































LIST OF MAPS 

1. Rashtrakuta Empire 

2. Paid and Pratihdra Em,pires 

3. South India, A.D* 320-1000 



xxxix 


0 


Abb. Rat. 
ABORI. 

Apar. 

Ap. Dh. Su. 
AH. 

ARSIE. 

ASC. 

ASI. 

ASS. 

ASWI. 

AUS. 

Bala. 

BEFEO. 

BG. 

Bhav. 

Bh. List. 


BI. 

BKQ. 


BSOS. 

BSS. 

Bu-ston. 

BV. 

CCIM. 

CII. 

CP. 

CW. 

DHI. 

DHNI. 

DKA. 

DLP Series. 
DUS. 

Dyn. Kan. 
EC. 


ABBREVIATIONS 

Abhidhdnaratanarndld of Haldyudha. 

Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute , Poona. 

Apardrka. 

Apastamba Dharma-suira, 

Rdshtrakutas and their times, by A. S . Altekar. 
Annual Report of South Indian Epigraphy. 
Archaeological Survey of India, Reports by 
Sir Alexander Cunningham. 

Archaeological Survey of India, Annual 
Report. 

Anandd-srama Sanskrit Series 9 Poona . 
Archaeological Survey of Western India . 
Allahabad University Studies. 

Bdlardmdyana of Rdjasekhara. 

Bulletin de VEcole Franqaise d } Extreme-Orient,. 
Hanoi. 

Bombay Gazetteer, 

IBhavisayattakaha, of Dhanapala. 

' A List of Inscriptions of Northern India by 
D. R. Bhandarkar^ (Appendix to El , XJX- 
XXIII). 

Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta. 

Outline of the History of the Bhahja Kings of 
Orissa . by R. C. Majumdar (DUS, III. 2.137 - 
170). 

Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies , . 
London. 

Bombay Sanskrit Series. 

History of Buddhism , by Bu-ston. Eng. trans. 

by E . Obermiller. Heidelberg, 1932, 
Bharatiya Vidyd , Bombay. 

Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta . 

Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. 

Copper-plate. 

Collected Works of R. G Bhandarkar. 4 vols. 
Poona , 1927-33. 

Development of Hindu Iconography, by J. N. 

Banerjea. Calcutta , 1942. 

Dynastic History of Northern India , hy H. C. 

Ray, 2 vols . Calcutta , 1931, 1938. 

Dynasties of the-Kali Age, by F. E. Pargiter. 
Oxford , 1913. . “ • 

Sheth Devch(>nd Lalbhai Jaina Pustakoddhara 
Series, Bombay. 

Dacca University Studies. 

Dynasties of the* Kanarese Districts, by J. F 
Fleet. 

Epigraphia Carnatica. 
xli 


EEL 

EX 

EISMS. 

ERE. 

F errand. 


Gaut. 

GIL. 

GOB. 

GSAX. 

HAL. 

HER. 

HCSL. 

HIED. 

HXL. 


HXSI. 

Hir. Gr. Su. 
Hodivala. 

HOS. 

HSL. 

IA. 

* 1C. 

ID. 

IHQ. 

IS. 

JA. 

. JAHRS. 

JAGS. 

JASB. 

JAS,L. 

JBBRAS. 

JBHS. 

JBORS. 

JBHS. 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Elements of Hindu Iconography, by T. A. 
Gopinatha Rao. 2 vols. Madras, 1914-1916. 

Epigraphia Indica. 

Eastern Indian School of Medieval Sculpture, 
by R. D. Banerji , 

Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics. Ed. by 
J. Hastings. 

Relations de voyages et Textes Geographiques 
Arabes } Persons et Turks—Relatifs a V 
Extreme-Orient, du VHP au XVIIP siecles., 
2 vols. Paris, 1913-14. 

Gautama D harma -sastra. 

Geschichte der Indischen Literatur, by M, Win- 
ternitz. 3 vols. Leipzig , 1905, 1909, 1920 . 

Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, Baroda . 

Giornale della Societa Asiatica lialiana. 

History of Alamkdra Literature, by P . V. Kane, 
Bombay, 1923. 

History of Bengal . Vol. I. Edited by R. C. 
Majumdar. Dacca, 1943. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature, by M. 
Krishnamachariar. Madras, 1937. 

History of India as told by its own historians, 
Ed. by H . M. Elliot and John Dow-son, 

History of Indian Literature, by M. Winter- 
nitz. Eng. trans. by Mrs. S. Ketkar . Calcutta 
University Press. 

Historical Inscriptions of South India, by R. 
B. Sewell. 

Hiranyakesi Grihya-sutra. 

Studies in Indo-Muslim History, by S. H. 
Hodivala. 

Harvard , Oriental Series. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. 

Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

Indian Culture, Calcutta. 

Das indische Drama, by Sten Konow. Berlin, 
1920. 

Indian Historical Quarterly, Calcutta. 

Indische Studien. Ed. by A. Weber. 

Journal Asiatique, Paris. 

Journal of the Andhra Historical Research 
Society, Rajahmundry. 

Journal of the American Oriental Society . 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Cal¬ 
cutta. 

Journal of the Asiatic Society, Letters. Cal¬ 
cutta. •• 

Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, Bombay. 

Journal of the Bombay Historical Society. 

Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research 
Society, Patna. 

Journal of the Bihar Research Society, Patna. 
xVn 


ABBREVIATIONS 


JPL. 

JDPS. 

JGJRL 

JIH. 

JISOA. 

JKHRS. 


JOI. 

JOR, 

JPTS. 

JRAS. 

JRASB, L. 

JUB. 

Kar. 

Kav. 

KHDS. 

KM. 

KSS. 

Kutt. 

List. 

Manu. 

MAR. 

MASB. 

MASI. 
Mbh(B). 
Mbh(Cr. Ed). 


M. C.C. Magazine. 
MDJG. 

Mrichchh. 

NLA. 

NTS. 

NPP. 

N. S. or NS. 

NSP. 

NUJ. 

Num. Chron. 

OC. 

OHRJ. 

ORLI. 

Pag-sam-j on-zang. 
Par Madh. 


Journal of the Department of Letters, Calcutta 
University. 

Jaina Dharma Prasdraka Sabha, Bhavnagar. 

Journal of the Ganganath Jha Research Insti¬ 
tute, Allahabad. 

Journal of Indian History, Madras. 

Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art, 
Calcutta. 

Journal of the Kalinga Historical Research 
Society, Balangir . 

Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda. 

Journal of Oriental Research, Madras. 

Journal of the Pali Text Society. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland, London. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
Letters. Calcutta. 

Journal of the University of Bombay. 

Karpiiramahjari of Rdjasekhara. 

Kdvyamimamsa of Rdjasekhdra. 

History of Dharma-sastra, by P. V. Kane. 

Kavyamala. NSP., Bombay. 

Kdmarupa-sasandvali. 

Kuttanimatam of Ddmodaragupta. 

See “Bh. List” above. 

Manu-smriti. 

m 

Mysore Archaeological Report. 

Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. 

Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India. 

Mahdbhdrata, Bombay Edition. 

Mafudbhdrata, Critical Edition, published by 
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute , 
Poona. 

Madras Christian College Magazine. 

Mdnikachandra Digambara Jaina Grantha- 
mdla. 

Mrichchhakatika of Sudraka. 

New Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

New Imperial Series. 

Ndgari Prachdrini Patrikd (in Hindi), Banaras. 

New Series. 

Nirnaya-sagara Press, Bombay. 

Nagpur University Journal. 

Numismatic Chronicle. 

Transactions (Verhandlungen, Actes) of Inter¬ 
national Congress of Orientalists. 

Orissa Historical Research Journal, Bhuba¬ 
neswar. 

Outline of the Religious Literature of India, 
by J. N. Fdrquhar. 

Ed. S. C. Das, Calcutta, 1908. 

Parosara-Madhava (Comm, of Mddhavacharya 
on Partisara-smriti). 


PIHC. 

PLC. 

POC. 

P.S. 

PTQ 

QJMS, 


Raj at. 
Rati. 

RT. 

SBE. 

SBH. 

Schiefner. 

SD. 

SDar. 

Sel. Ins. 


SII. 
SIS. 
SJS. 
Sm. C. 
SSG. 


Taranatha. 

TAS. 

THK. 

TSS. 

Upamiti. 

Vid. 

Vish. 

VRS. 

VSS. 

Yaj. 

ZDMG. 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress. 
Pali Literature of Ceylon, by M. H. Bode 
London, 1909. 

Proceedings of the All-India Oriental Confer¬ 
ence. 

Prdkrita-sarvasva of Markendeya. 

Pali Text Society, London. 

Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society, Ban¬ 
galore. 

Rajatarahgini of Kalhana. 

Ratirahasya of Kokkoka. 

Rajatarahgini of Kalhana. 

Sacred Books of the East, Oxford. 

Sacred Books of the Hindus , Allahabad. 

Taranatha. Geschichte des Buddhismus in 

Indien. German trans. by A. Schiefner. 

Sanskrit Drama, by A. B. Keith. Oxford , 1924. 

Sdhitya-darpana of Visvanatha. 

Select Inscriptions hearing on Indian History 

ant Civilization. Vol. I. By D. C. Sircar . 

Calcutta, 1942. 

South Indian Inscriptions. 

Sino-lndian Studies, Calcutta. 

Singhi Jain Series. < 

Smriti-chandrika of Devannabhatta. 

Systems of Sanskrit Grammar, by S. K. Belval- 

kar. Poona , 1915. 

See “Schiefner” above. 

Travancore Archaeological Series. 

History of Kanauj , by R. S. Tripathi. 

N Trivandrum Sanskrit Series. 

Upamitibhavaprapahcha-katha of Siddharshi. 

Viddhasdlabhahjika of Rajasekhara. 

Vishnu-smriti. 

• • 

Varendra Research Society. 

VizianagaYam Sanskrit Series , Benares. 

Y ajhavalkya-smriti. 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft. 


xiiv 


CHAPTER I 


THE RASHTRAKUTA EMPIRE 

We have already seen 1 how the Chalukya emperor was over¬ 
thrown by one of his feudatories, Dantidurga, some time about 
A.D. 752. The family of the new ruler is known as Rash^rakuta. 
The origin of this name and the early history of the Rashtraku^as 
have been discussed above. 2 Dantidurga’s family originally be¬ 
longed to Laftalura situated in the Osmanabad District of the Hyde¬ 
rabad State, but it migrated to Eliichpur in Berar in c. A.D. 625, 
where it # carved out for itself a small principality 3 and ruled as a 
feudatory of the Chalukya empire for several generations. The 
fortunes of the faqiily began to rise during the reign of Dantidurga’s 
father Indra I, who had married a princess of the Chalukya family. 4 
Dantidurga, who is also sometimes referred to as Dantivarman. 
ascended the throne in c. A.D. 733. 6 He was able, ambitious, and 
sagacious; and managed to become the overlord of the Deccan in 
less than fifteen years. 

1. DANTIDURGA 

Two records of his reign, viz. the Samangad plates dated AJD. 
754° and the undated Daiavatara cave inscription of Ellora 7 give a 
grandiloquent description of the triumphaj. career of Dantidurga. 
He is said to have fought on the banks of the Mahi, Mahanadi and 
Reva. and won victories over - Kahchi, Kalifiga, Kosala, Sri-iSaila, 
Malava, La^a, and Tanka. He is also saicT to have made liberal re¬ 
wards to various rulers at Ujjayini and fixed his quarters in a Gur- 
jara palace in that city. A later record 8 probably elaborates this 
when it says that Dantidurga performed Hiranyagarbha (or the 
Great Gift) at Ujjayini in which “kings such as the Gurjara lord and 
others were made door-keepers”. But his crowning act of glory 
was the overthrow of the Chalukya king, described in several re¬ 
cords. According to contemporary records, he defeated with a small 
force the formidable Karnataka army and won victories over Valla- 
bba, the lord of all kings. In later records he is credited with hav¬ 
ing wrested the supreme sovereignty from the -Chalukyas 9 and 
“humbled the circle of proud kings from the Himalayas down to the 
limit of Setu” (i.e. Adam’s Bridge). 10 

While these statements leave no doubt that Dantidurga was the 
real founder of the greatness of the family, it is difficult to recon- 


1 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


struct his history by arranging his victories in chronological sequ¬ 
ence. It is probable that some of his victories were achieved while 
he was yet a feudatory of the Chalukyas, and on this basis we may 
provisionally reconstruct his history somewhat as follows:— 

His first exploits were performed during the campaign organis¬ 
ed by his feudal lord Vikramaditya II and the latter’s Gujarat feuda¬ 
tory Pulakesin to repulse the Arab invasion. A sanguinary battle 
was fought near Navsari in c. A.D. 738 in which the invaders were 
so completely overthrown that they never again dared to invade 
Gujarat. The brunt of the battle was naturally borne by Pulakesin 
and Dantidurga whose principalities lay in Gujarat and Berar. The 
Chalukya emperor appreciated the heroism of his feudatories by 
conferring the titles of Ch&lukyakuldlamkdra (the Ornament of the 
Chalukya family), Pfithvivallabha (the Lord of the Earth) and 
AvanijandSraya (the Asylum of the People of the World) on Pula- 
ke£in and those of Prithwvallabha and Khadgavaloka (one whose 
mere sight is as effective as sword) on Dantidurga. 11 

Dantidurga continued to be a loyal feudatory of Vikramaditya 
for some years more. He accompanied his Chalukya suzerain in his 
expedition against KahchS in c. A.D. 743 and shared the credit for 
the victory over the Pallavas. 12 

Dantidurga was ambitious; and he decided to take full advan¬ 
tage of the varied and valuable military experience he had gained 
in his campaigns in the north and south. When Vikramaditya II 
died in A.D. 747, he embarked upon a bold career of conquest, but 
took, care to see that his annexations were, as far as possible, not 
at the cost of the Chalukya empire. He wiped out the Gurjara 
kingdom of Nandipun (Nandod) and appointed his nephew Karkka 
to rule over the region. 124 Then he led an expedition into Malwa; 
and proclaimed its conquest by performing Hiranyagarbha-ddna. 
ceremony at its capital Ujjayini. Next he proceeded against eastern 
Madhya Pradesh and brought it under his political influence. By 
c. A.D. 750 he had thus become the master of Central and Southern 
Gujarat and the whole of Madhya Pradesh and Berar. 

Kirtivarman II, the Chalukya emperor, could now no longer 
ignore the rising power of his nominal feudatory and decided to 
challenge it. The armies of the two claimants to the overlordship 
of the Deccan probably met somewhere in Khandesh and Danti¬ 
durga was victorious. As a result of this victory, he became the 
master of the whole of Maharashtra by the end of A.D. 753. He 
now assumed full imperial titles Mdhardjddhiixija Paramesvara 
Paramabhatftiraka . He, however, did not survive his victory for 


THE RASHJRAKUTA EMPIRE 


long but died some time before A.D. 758. This is the earliest known 
date of his successor, his uncle Krishna I, who, we may presume, 
was a valued lieutenant of his ambitious nephew in his military 
conquests. 13 

2. KRISHNA I 
• • 

Dantidurga had defeated Kirtivarman, but had not extinguished 
his power. The Chalukya emperor retired to Karnatak and pro¬ 
ceeded to reorganise his forces for a further trial of strength. The 
challenge was so successfully met by the new Hash^rakuta ruler that 
the Chalukya empire was wiped out of existence by c. A.D. 760. 
Krishna then proceeded against the Gahgas ruling in Mysore and 
occupied their capital Manyapuram for some time. Later on he 
sent his son, the crown-prince Govinda, to invade the dominions 
of Vishnuvardhana IV, the Chalukya king of Vengl, who being a 
ruler of a Chalukya branch was naturally hostile to the new power 
that had swept away the Chalukya supremacy from Western Deccan. 
The expedition was successful and, as a consequence, the whole of 
the former Hyderabad State was incorporated in the Rashtrakuta 
empire in c. 772. Silabhattarika, a daughter of Vishnuvardhana IV, 
is known to have been a queen of Dhruva, a younger brother of 
Govinda. Probably her marriage followed the conclusion of the 
peace. 

Krishna I also defeated a king called Rahappa, whose identity 
is uncertain. He brought under his sway southern Konkan and 
placed it in charge of Sanaphulla, the founder of the Silahara family. 
The Bhandak plates prove that practically the whole of Marathi- 
speaking part of Madhya Pradesh was under Krishna. 

Krishna was great not only as conqueror but also as builder. 
The famous rock-cut Siva temple at Ellora, which is justly regarded 
as a marvel of architecture, was constructed at his orders, and bears 
an eloquent testimony to the high level of skill attained by India 
in the arts of sculpture and architecture under the Rashtrakuta 
patronage. Krishna had the titles Subhatunga and Akdla-varsha. 

3. GOVINDA II AND DHRUVA 14 

Krishna I died about A.D. 773 and was succeeded by his eldest 
son Govinda II, Prabhutavarsha Vikramdvaloka. He had been 
nominated as yuvardja by his father and had distinguished himself 
on the battlefield by defeating Vishnuvardhana IV of Vengi. He is 
also credited with some conquests after his accession; but he proved 
an utter failure as a ruler. Soon after his accession, he abandoned 
himself to a life of pleasure and debauchery and practically left the 
whole administration To his younger brother Dhruva. The latter 


3 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


took advantage of the situation to secure ail power for himself. 
Govinda realised this and immediately removed Dhruva from the 
administration. Evidently it led to some confusion including a re¬ 
bellion of feudatories and Dhruva made it an excuse for revolting 
openly against his brother. It has been stated in a record of the 
time of Dhruva that he proceeded to fight his brother, not so much 
to gain the throne for himself, as to prevent the danger of the 
Rasheraku|a family itself being ousted from the throne. Such ex¬ 
cuses, however, should not be taken at their face valu^. In any case 
Govinda II refused to abdicate without resistance as he was urged 
to do. He sought help from the rulers of Kahchl, Gangava^I, Vengl 
and Malwa. But Dhruva defeated his brother and usurped the 
throne before the other kings could come to Govinda’s aid. 

Dhruva must have ascended the throne before the end of A.D. 
780. He assumed the titles Nirupama Kali-Vallabha, Dharavarsha, 
and $?i-Vallabhd, and is sometimes referred to as Dhora, a Prakrit 
form of Dhruva. Shortly after his accession, he proceeded to punish 
the kings who had supported his brother. 

The Ganga king Srfpurusha Muttarasa was defeated, his crown- 
prince ^ivamara was taken prisoner, and the whole of Gangavatjl 
was annexed to the Rashtrakuta empire, whose southern boundary 
was thus pushed to- the Kaverl. The victor then proceeded against 
the Pallava ruler Dantivarman, who however conciliated him by 
offering an indemnity of elephants. The ruler of Vengl, Vish$u- 
vardhana IV, was also humbled and sued for peace. 

These victories made Dhruva the undisputed overlord of the 
entire Deccan, but he was not satisfied with this achievement. He 
wanted to be the overlord of Northern India as well, and decided to 
make a bold bid to attain that position. 15 

Since the days of Harsha, Kanauj enjoyed the status of the pre¬ 
mier city of Northern India, but Indrayudha, who was ruling there 
at this time, was a mere titular emperor like Shah Alam II ruling .at 
Delhi in the latter half of the eighteenth century. The Palas of 
Bengal and the Gurjara Pratiharas of Rajputana were rising to 
prominence, and seeking to establish their own hegemony over 
Northern India by conquering Kanauj and making its nominal 
emperor a creature of their own. Vatsaraja, the Gurjara Pratthara 
ruler, first marched upon Kanauj and succeeded in occupying it. 
He, however, permitted Indrayudha to rule as a puppet emperor 
under his protection as the Marthas did with Shah Alam II towards 
the end of the eighteenth century. The success of Vatsaraja roused 
the jealousy of his Pala rival Dharmapala who challenged his power 
and marched into the Dbab, only to be defeated by Vatsaraja. 


4 



THE RASHTRAKOTA EMPIRE 


Dharmapala, however, soon rallied his forces and proceeded to make a 
second bid for hegemony in the north. At this time when Dhruva 
had decided to try his luck as a third claimant to the kingdom of 
Kanauj in c. A.D. 786, the army of Dharmapala was heading towards 
the Doab and Vatsaraja was once again on the way to meet it. 

Dhruva planned his northern expedition with great skill. He 
collected a strong force on the banks of the Narmada and put. his 
able and energetic sons Govinda and Indra in charge of the different 
sections. He could cross the Narmada and occupy Malava without 
much opposition, as the main army of Vatsaraja was in the Doab. 
He then advanced towards Kanauj, and Vatsaraja had to withdraw 
his forces from the advanced position in the Doab to meet this new 
danger from the south. The two armies met somewhere near Jhansi, 
and the Deccan invader inflicted such a crushing defeat upon the 
forces of Vatsaraja that he had to fly to Rajputana to take shelter in 
its sandy deserts. Flushed with this sensational victory, Dhruva 
decided to measure his strength with Dharmapala as well, whose 
forces were hovering on the outskirts of the Doab. The Goddess 
of Victory once more smiled on the Deccan emperor, and Dharma¬ 
pala had to flee from the battlefield leaving behind his white imperial 
umbrellas. The victor spent some v*eeks on the banks of the holy 
Ganga and Yamuna and, as a memento of this sojourn, these famous 
rivers were incorporated in the Rashtrakufa Imperial banner. 

Dhruva could not press home his victories by marching upon 
and occupying Kanauj. He was too far away from his base; he was 
also getting old and had to settle the problem of succession. He 
therefore returned to the south in c. A.D. 790, laden with rich booty. 

At the close of Dhruva’s reign the Rashtrakuta power had 
reached its zenith. The Ganga crown-prince was in the Rashtrakuta 
prison, and the Pallava king could save himself only by surrender; 
Vatsaraja had fled, and Dharmapala had been overthrown. There 
was no power in the country to challenge the Rashtrakuta supremacy. 

Dhruva had several sons, the names of four of whom are known. 
The eldest Stambha (or Kambha) Ranavaloka was the viceroy of 
GangavadT, and the other sons were also capable administrators. 
In order to prevent a struggle for succession after his death, Dhruva 
chose the third son Govinda as his successor. The latter was for¬ 
mally appointed as yuvardja and invested with a kanthika or neck¬ 
lace which was the insignia of the heir-apparent. But as the old 
emperor still apprehended trouble, he proposed to abdicate in favour 
of the heir-apparent. Though Govinda is said to have opposed 
this proposal, some records state that he was invested with the royal 


5 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

state by his father at a formal coronation. Unless we take these 
expressions to refer to his installation as a yuvardja —though rdjddhi- 
rdja-parame$varatd would hardly bear that sense—we must conclude 
that in spite of Govinda’s real or pretended opposition, Dhruva 
actually abdicated in favour of his son Govinda III who assumed 
the-titles Jagattunga , Prabhutavarsha^&rivallabha, Janavallabha, 
Kiriihidrdyana and Tribhuvdnadhavala. 

According to an inscription of the time of Govinda III, Dhruva 
chose Govinda as his successor because he was the ablest and 
worthiest among his sons. Normally no great importance attaches 
to a statement like this, but the career of Govinda III fully justifies 
his father’s choice if it was based upon any such consideration. 

4. GOVINDA III 

Govinda III ascended the throne in A.D. 793 and, as was eject¬ 
ed, his accession did not go unchallenged. For a time Stambha 
kept quiet, but when he was assured of the support of a number of 
feudatories and neighbours, he brok£ out in open revolt against his 
brother. Govinda, however, quelled the rebellion of M twelve kings 
headed by Stambha” and took his brother prisoner. He, however, 
treated him leniently and, being convinced of his loyalty in future, 
Govinda took the magnanimous step of reinstating him in the Ganga 
viceroyalty. Throughout the rest of his life, Stambha remained 
loyal to his plighted word. 

Sivamara, the Gahga prince in the Rashtrakuta prison, had been 
released by Govinda soon after his accession, evidently to act as a 
check on Stambha’s ambitions. Sivamara, however, joined the side 
of Stambha, contrary to Govinda’s expectations. When the two 
brothers became reconciled, they jointly marched against Ganga- 
vad5, captured Sivamara, and once again put him into prison. Next 
came the turn of the Pallava king Dantiga, who also was compelled 
to submit. Vishnuvardhana IV of Vengi was the maternal grand¬ 
father of Govinda and so was not disposed to challenge his supre¬ 
macy. When Govinda III thus became the undisputed overlord of 
the Deccan in c. A.D. 795, he decided to intervene in the political 
tangle of Northern India. Subsequent to the retirement of his 
father from the Ganga valley in c. A.D. 790, considerable changes 
had taken place in the political situation. Dharmapala recovered 
from’ his defeat earlier than Vatsaraja, and eventually succeeded in 
putting his own nominee Chakrayudha on the Kanauj throne. 
Vatsaraja’s successor Nagabhata II, however, soon turned the tables 
and reoccupied Kanauj after defeating Chakrayudha and Dharma¬ 
pala. Such was the situation in the north on the eve of Govinda’s 
invasion. 


6 


THE RASHTRAKOTA EMPIRE 


The northern expedition of Govinda was skilfully planned and 
boldly executed. Indra, the younger brother and loyal supporter 
of Govinda, was the viceroy of Gujarat and Malava; he was entrust¬ 
ed with the task of keeping watch over the Vindhyan passes in order 
to prevent Nagabhata from bursting into the Deccan, when the main 
Rash{rakuta army was away in the North. A number of detach¬ 
ments were kept in Central India to keep the local rulers in check 
and secure the lines of communication. 

After taking these prudent precautions, Govinda marched into 
Northern India via Bhopal and Jhansi, Kanauj being his main objec¬ 
tive. Nagabhafa marched out to meet the invader. The two armies 
probably met in Bundelkhand. Victory once more favoured the 
southern army and Nagabhafa fled to Rajputana, leaving the Doab 
at the mercy of the conqueror. Chakrayudha, the puppet ruler of 
Kanauj, was quick to realise the futility of opposition and came for¬ 
ward with unconditional surrender. Govinda was satisfied and did 
not deem it necessary to march upon Kanauj. Dharmapala also 
offered submission, as he too thought it politic and prudent to do 

so. He knew that Govinda could not long remain in Northern India 
% 

and he was really grateful to him for having shattered the power 
of his mighty rival, Nagabhata II. Besides the powerful Gurjara- 
Pratlhara and Pala kings, other rulers of Northern India were also 
humbled by Govinda III. A detailed account of his conquests is 
given in the Sanjan plates of his son and successor which seem to 
describe the events in chronological order. Even at the risk of 
repetition, we may therefore sum up as follows the verses referring 
to the glorious conquests of Govinda III:— 

After defeating Nagabhata and Chandragupta, a king whose 
identity is not certain, Govinda III uprooted other kings but after¬ 
wards reinstated them in their dominions. He then proceeded as far 
as the Himalaya mountains, and it was presumably on the way that 
Dharmapala and Chakrayudha submitted to him. He returned and 
“following again the bank of the Narmada. .. .and acquiring the 
Malava country along with the Kosala, the Kalinga, the Vanga (or 
Vengi), the Dahala, and the Odraka, that Vikrama (i.e. Govinda III) 
made his servants enjoy them”. After having subjugated his enemies 
he returned to the banks of the Narmada and established himself in 
a befitting manner in a capital city at the foot of the Vindhyas, 
performing pious deeds by constructing temples. 

While he was encamped there, Maraiarva or Sarva, the ruler 
of a small principality with his capital at Snbhavana (modern Sar- 
bhon in Broach District), submitted and presented to Govinda III 
valuable* treasures which he had inherited from his ancestors. 16 

T 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Govinda III stayed for some time in his capital and there his son 
and successor Amoghavarsha was born. It is somewhat curious 
that most of these details of the northern campaign are not found 
in the records of Govinda’s reign and known only from an inscription 
recorded nearly 70 years later. But still, as they are substantially 
corroborated by contemporary records* we need not dismiss them as 
altogether fictitious though there may be some amount of exagge¬ 
ration. 

The date of the great northern campaign of Govinda III has 
been a subject of keen controversy among scholars. For a long time 
it was believed that it took place about A.D. #06 or 807. But it is 
now generally held that all these conquests were achieved before 
A.D. 802, most probably in A.D. 800. 17 

Vishnuvardhana IV of Vengfi died in A.D. 709 and was succeeded 
by his son Vijayaditya II. The new ruler challenged the Rashtra¬ 
kuta supremacy, but Govinda defeated him and put his-younger 
brother Bhfma Salukki on the Vehgi throne in c. A.D. 802. The new 
ruler naturally enough became a loyal henchman of Govinda. 

Taking advantage of Govinda’s absence in the north, the Pal- 
lava, Pan<jya, Kerala and Ganga rulers formed a confederacy against 
him. Govinda marched against them with lightning speed and 
scattered them all before the end of A.D. 802. The occupation of 
Kanchl by the Rashtrakuta forces created a tremor in the heart of 
Hie king of Ceylon, who tried to ingratiate himself into Govinda’s 
favour by presenting him two statues, one of himself and the other 
of his premier. Govinda installed one of them in the Siva temple 
at Kanchl to serve as a column of victory to proclaim to the subjects 
of his enemy his great power and might. 

Govinda III was undoubtedly the ablest of the Rashtrakuta 
emperors, unrivalled in courage, generalship, statesmanship, and mar¬ 
tial exploits. His invincible armies had conquered all the territories 
between Kanauj and Cape Comorin, and Banaras and Broach. 
Vengi was governed by a nominee of his; and the power of the 
Dravidian kings in the extreme south was completely broken. Even 
the ruler of Ceylon was terrified ipto submission. Never again did 
the prestige of the Rashtrakuta empire rise so high. 

5. 6ARVA OR AMOGHAVARSHA 

Govinda HI was succeeded by his son &arva, better known as 
Amoghavarsha, in A.D. 814. He assumed the titles Nripatunga, 
Maharajashxmda,'Vtra-N&rayana, and Atisaya-dhavala. The new em¬ 
peror was a boy of 13 or 14, and his father had arranged that Karkka, 


8 


THE RASHTRAKOJA EMPIRE 

who had succeeded his father Indra as the viceroy of Gujarat, should 
assume the reins of government during his minority. 

The arrangement worked satisfactorily for two or three, years, 
but a formidable revolt broke out in A.D. 817. It seems to have 
been led by the Vehgi ruler Vijayaditya II who, though ousted from 
the throne by Govinda III, had subsequently managed to regain it. 18 
A number of disgruntled officers, relations, and feudatories swelled 
the ranks of rebels; and they eventually gained the upper hand. The 
boy emperor had to flee and the Rashtrakuta power was for a 
time completely eclipsed ab.aut A.D. 818. Karkka, however, soon 
retrieved the situation and 7 reinstated his ward upon the imperial 
throne some time before A.D. 821. 

After spending five or six years in restoring order and authority 
in the different provinces of his empire, Amoghavarsha launched 
an attack on Vijayaditya of Vehgi and inflicted a severe defeat upon 
him in c. A.D. 830. It appears that the Rashtrakuta forces were in 
occupation of Vengi for about a dozen years thereafter. The city 
was recaptured by Panduranga, a general of Vijayaditya II, shortly 
before A D. 845. 

An almost continuous war was going on between the 
Rashtrakiitas and the Gangas during the first twenty years of the 
reign of Amoghavarsha. Eventually the latter were able to drive 
out the Rashfrakuta forces from the major part of their country. 
Amoghavarsha also did not make any serious effort to regain his 
ascendancy in that province. In c. A.D. 860 he married his daughter 
Chandrobalabbe to a Ganga prince named Butuga, which put an 
end to the hostility between the two houses and ushered in an era 
of co-operation between them. 

According to the Sirur plates the rulers of Anga, Vahga, Maga- 
dha, Malava, and Vengi paid homage to him. The reference to the 
last is easily intelligible. As regards Malava, it was a bone of con¬ 
tention between the Rashtrakutas and the Pratlharas and. in spite 
of casual victories on either side,'it ultimately passed into the hands 
of the latter. The first three countries in the list were included in 
the Pala dominions, and it is interesting to note that the Pala 
emperor Devapala claims to have defeated the Dravida king 
who is usually identified with Amoghavarsha. It is probable, 
therefore, that hostilities occasionally broke out between these two: 
and that first Devapala, and later Amoghavarsha had some success. 
It is difficult to believe that the latter actually invaded Anga and 
Vanga (Bengal and Bihar), though its possibility cannot be altogether 
ruled out. 


9 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Amoghavarsha built the city of Manyakhe^a and established 
his capital there. This city is now represented by Malkhed in the 
Hyderabad State, about 90 miles to the south-east of Sholapur. It 
is difficult to say where the capital was situated before this. Various 
suggestions have been made locating it at Mayurakhindi or Mor- 
khind (Nasik District), Nasik, Sooloobunjan near the Ellora caves, 
and Ellichpur. But there is no satisfactory evidence in support of 
any of these views. 

The later part of the reign of Amoghavarsha was also full of 
rebellions. Even the crown-prince Kjish^a appears to have been 
involved in them. Bahkeya, the great general of the king, who dis¬ 
tinguished himself in the wars against the Gahgas, succeeded in 
crushing these rebellions. But the most unfortunate, and in some 
N respects the most serious, rebellion was that of the Gujarat Branch 
of the Rashtrakutas founded by Indra. When Amoghavarsha attain¬ 
ed majority and assumed the reins of government in c. A.D. 821, his 
cousin Karkka, who was carrying on the regency administration, 
retired to Gujarat as viceroy. His relations with Amoghavarsha 
continued to be cordial till his death in c. A.D. 830. He was succeeded 
by his son Dhruva I. The friendly relations between the two Rash- 
trakuta families terminated soon after the accession of Dhruva. 
Either Amoghavarsha was ungrateful or Dhruva became too over¬ 
bearing, puffed up by the consciousness that it was his father who 
had won the throne for Amoghavarsha. Whatever the real cause, 
protracted hostilities raged between Amoghavarsha and his cousin 
which lasted for about 25 years. Dhruva I was eventually killed 
in this struggle and* was succeeded by his son Akalavarsha in c. A.D. 
845. The latter succeeded in winning back his throne, but the tables 
were soon turned against him when Bahkeya, the famous general 
of Amoghavarsha, assumed the command of the imperial army. 
Eventually peace was concluded between the warring houses when 
Akalavarsha was succeeded by his son Dhruva II. By this time the 
Gurjara-Pratihara ruler Bhoja I had become very powerful and 
cherished designs to avenge the defeat inflicted upon his grandfather 
Nagabhata II by Govinda III, the father of Amoghavarsha I. Dhruva II 
could never hope to meet the Pratlhara invasion single-handed, and 
Amoghavarsha had little chance to emerge victorious unless his vice¬ 
roy in Gujarat and Malava gave him wholehearted support. The 
tragic and long-drawn war, therefore, came to an end in c. A.D. 860. 
The threatened Pratlhara invasion did not materialise; there 
were only frontier skirmishes, and the Rashfrakulas were able to hold 
their own and confine the enemy to the other side of the Narmada. 

Amoghavarsha was no born military leader, but he was never¬ 
theless able not only to reconquer his kingdom and establish peace 


10 


THE RASHTRAKOTA EMPIRE 

and order but also to send an expedition against the Palasi The 
arts of peace attracted him more than feats of war. He was a libe¬ 
ral patron of literature and his court was adorned'by a number of 
famous Hindu and Jain writers such as Jinasena, the author of the 
Adipurdna, Mahaviracharya, the author of Ganitasdrasamgraha. 
and Sakatayana, the author of Amoghavritti. He was himself 
the author of Kavirajamdrga, the earliest Kanarese work on 
poetics. He treated all creeds with impartiality and his own life 
was a striking synthesis of what was best in. Hinduism and Jainism. 
He revered Mahavira as profoundly as Mahalakshml, and on one 
occasion proffered to the latter a finger of his own in the belief 
that such sacrifice would abate a severe epidemic. Kings rarely 
bleed for others; usually they make others bleed for themselves. 
Towards the evening of his life from c. A.D. 860, he used off and on 
to retire from the work of administration in order to devote him¬ 
self as much as possible to religious worship. Amoghavarsha’s name 
will endure as of a ruler who established peace and order in his king¬ 
dom, encouraged art and literature practised the principles he 
preached, and did not flinch even from offering a limb of his body 
by way of sacrifice, when he thought that public welfare demanded, 
it. 


6. KRISHNA II 
• • 

Amoghavarsha I died about A.D. 878 and was succeeded by 
his son Krishna II who, like bis illustrious namesake, assumed the 
titles Akdlavarsha and Subhatunga. He married the daughter of 
the Chedi ruler Kokkalla I and received substantial help from his 
wife’s relations in the arduous struggles of his reign. 

Several Rashtrakuta records 19 make a bold claim on behalf of 
Krishna II that he terrified the Gurjaras, destroyed the pride of UL\a , 
taught humility to the Gau^as, deprived the people on the sea- 
coast of their sleep, and that his command was obeyed by the Anga, 
the Kalinga, the Ganga, and the Magadha, waiting at his gate. 
Much of this is, no doubt, mere conventional praise based upon a 
kernel of historical truth. But there is no doubt that his reign 
was full of wars. 

The most arduous of his campaigns were those against the 
Pratiharas and the Eastern Chalukyas. Several records refer to 
his fight with the Gurjara-Pratihara ruler Bhoja 20 , and the 
Begumra plates, dated A.D. 914. state that even then old men 
remembered the great battle and talked of it. It is clear from the 
records of the Lata f Gujarat) Branch of the Rashtrakutas that they, 
particularly their chief Krishnaraja took a distinguished part in the 

n 


* 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

campaign against the Pratlharas. Although the advance of Bhoja 
was checked, the Lata Branch seems to have come to an end shortly 
after. Kpshnaraja is known to have been on the throne till at least 
A.D. 888, but no successor of his is so far known. Whether he died 
without leaving any issue, leading to the lapse of his kingdom, 
or whether there was a further war between the main dynasty and 
the Lata Branch which wiped out the existence of the latter, we do 
not know. 

The war with the Eastern Chalukyas was a more serious affair, 
and at one time even threatened .the very existence of the Rash- 
trakufa kingdom. The campaigns will be more fully described in 
connection with the Eastern Chalukyas in Chapter VI and a short 
summary here must suffice. 

Vijayaditya III, the contemporary of Krishna II on the Vehgi 
throne, had freed his kingdom from the Rash$rakuta yoke during 
the reign of Amoghavarsha; the advent of a new king on the 
Rashtrakuta throne emboldened him to take the offensive, and he 
was for a time successful. In the south he attacked the Nolambas 
and the Garigas, who were Rashtrakuta feudatories, and in the north 
his invading forces penetrated right into the heart of.Berar. For 
a time Krishna was defeated all along the line. But in a few years 
he reorganised his forces,, summoned the battalions of his feuda¬ 
tories, and hurled back the Chalukya invaders. His victory was 
decisive, and the Chalukya king Bhlma, who had succeeded his 
father, was taken prisoner. Eventually, Bhlma was released after 
a few years and permitted to rule his kingdom as a feudatory. In 
course of time, however, he once again challenged the Rashtrakuta 
overlordship, but was again defeated in a sanguinary battle, in which 
his crown-prince lost his life. 

Krishna II seems to have had political relations with the Cholas. 
One of his daughters was married to the Chola king Aditya I, and 
there was a son by this marriage named Kannara. On the death 
of Aditya, his other son Parantaka ascended the throne. There¬ 
upon Krishna II invaded the C!ho]a kingdom in order to secure the 
throne for his grandson, But he was decisively defeated at Vallala 
(modern Tiruvallam in North Arcot District). 

The wars of Krishna II thus generally ended in failure and 
sometimes in disaster in spite of his initial brilliant victories against 
the'Eastern Chalukyas. 


7. INDRA III 

Krishna II died towards the end of A.D. 914 after a reign of 
about 36 years. Like his father he had a leaning towards Jainism. 


12 


THE RASHJRAKOTA EMPIRE 


He was succeeded by his grandson Indra III, whose , father Jagat- 
tuhga predeceased Krishna. Indra assumed the titles Niiyavarshu, 
Raftakandarpa, Kirttindrayaiia, and Rajamdrtanda. 

Indra III was a youth of 30 at the time of his accession, and 
he had inherited the military dash and daring of Govinda III. Soon 
after his accession, he emulated his great ancestor by declaring War 
against the Gurjara-Pratihara emperor Mahlpala. It has been sug¬ 
gested by some writers that he did this in sympathy with his Chedi 
relations, 21 who had espoused the cause of Mahlpala’s rival and 
half-brother Bhoja II. There is, however, no positive evidence in 
support of this, and Indra’s expedition against the Gurjaras may be 
merely a phase of the long-standing hostility between the two 
powers. The southern army followed the Bhopal-Jhansi-Kalpi 
route, crossed the Yamuna at the last mentioned place, and march¬ 
ed upon Kanauj and occupied it. The capture of Kanauj, the 
imperial city of Northern India, was a sensational achievement 
and immensely enhanced the prestige of the Rashtrakuta arms. 
Mahlpala fled and Indra sent his own Chalukya feudatory, Nara- 
simha II of Vemulavada, in pursuit. This campaign has been dealt 
in detail in the next chapter. 

The war with the Vehgls continued in the reign of Indra also, 
but with no conspicuous success on either side. Inara died some 
time after A.D. 927 22 and was succeeded by his son Amogha- 
varsha II. The latter fell a prey to the foul play of his younger 
brother Govinda IV; his widow fled to Vehgl, and lived under the 
protection of its ruler A mm a I, as she did not feel that either her 
honour or her son would be safe anywhere within the empire over 
which her husband once ruled. Govinda naturally did not like 
this action of Amma I, and when the latter died in 925, he inter¬ 
vened in the war of succession for the Vengl throne that ensued, 
and eventually succeeded in putting his own nominee Tadapa upon 
it. 

8. GOVINDA IV AND AMOGHAVARSHA III 

Govinda was a youth of about 25 at the time of his accession, 
and soon gave himself up to a life of vicious pleasures. His ad¬ 
ministration became tyrannical and unpopular, and his ministers 
and feudatories felt that his removal was necessary in the interests 
of the empire. They therefore made overtures to Amoghavarsha, 
an uncle of Govinda, and requested him to displace Govinda. 
Amoghavarsha had a high reputation for character and integrity, 
and when he marched against Malkhed with the assistance of his 
Chedi relations, he was openly welcomed by the distressed people 
who had become disgusted with Govinda’s vices and excesses. 


18 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Amoghavarsha found no difficulty in overthrowing Govinda and 
ascending the throne in A.D. 936. 23 Whether Govinda was killed 
in battle or was put in prison, we do not know. 

Amoghavarsha III was aged about 50 at the time of his acces¬ 
sion, He was religious by temperament and did not take any active 
interest in administration. During his short reign of three years, 
therefore, the government was entirely carried on by his able and 
ambitious son Krishna. The latter sent an expedition into Gahga- 
va^I, and deposed its king Rajamalla with a view to enthrone the 
latter’s younger brother Butuga, who had married a sister of Kri¬ 
shna. As crown-prince, Krishna also led an expedition into Bun- 
delkhand and captured the important forts of Kalanjar and Chitra- 
kuta. During this expedition a misunderstanding and possibly a 
conflict arose between him and his Chedi relations, which put an 
end to the long-standing entente cordiale between the two royal 
families. 24 

9. KRISHNA HI 

Krishna III Akdlavarsha succeeded to the throne as the de jure 
emperor on his father’s death towards the end of A.D. 939. Soon 
af*ter his accession he planned an invasion of the Choja kingdom 
in collaboration with his brother-in-law Butuga, ruling in Gahga- 
vadi. The two brothers-in-law led a lightning expedition to the 
south and captured the important cities of Kanchi and Tanj ore 
some time in A.D. 943. Parantaka, the Choja king, soon rallied his 
forces and repulsed the invaders, who could retain effective posses¬ 
sion only of Tondamajjdalam, consisting of Arcot, Chingleput and 
Vellore Districts. In A.D. 949 the Chola army penetrated into Arcot 
District with a view to drive out the invader, but sustained a signal 
defeat at the battle of Takkolam, in which the Cho]a crown-prince 
Rajaditya, who was leading his forces, was killed in his howdah 
by Butuga. Krishna pressed home his victory by marching down 
to Rame£varam, where he set up a pillar of victory; then he came 
back to North Arcot and encamped for some years at Melpa<Ji. 
He built the temples of Krishnesvara and Gandamartandaditya at 
or near Ramesvaram to shine there ‘as resplendent hills of fame.’ 
Krishna eventually decided to annex only Tondamaijdalam which 
remained an integral part of his empire to the end of his reign. 

In recognition of the valuable help rendered by h'is brother-in- 
law, the Ganga king, Krishna bestowed upon him the governorship 
of Banavasi 12000, Belvola 300, Purigere- 300, Kinsukad ¥0, and 
B&genad 70. 


14 


THE RASHTRAKUTA EMPIRE 

In c. A.D. 963 Krishna led a second expedition into Northern 
India in which Marasimha, the successor of the Gahga ruler Butuga, 
offered valuable assistance. Krishna seems to have marched into 
Bundelkhand; but his objective is not definitely known. 24 * Later on 
he led an expedition into Malwa against the Paramara ruler Siyaka 
and occupied Ujjayinl. 

Krishna succeeded in bringing Vehgi effectively under his con¬ 
trol by championing the cause of Ba^apa against Amma II, and put¬ 
ting him on the Vehgi throne in A.D. 956. Though Ba^apa remain¬ 
ed a loyal Rashtrakuta feudatory till the end of his life, Amma II 
soon regained the throne and put an end to the Rashfrakuta influ¬ 
ence. 

Krishna III was one of the ablest monarchs of the Rashtrakuta 
dynasty. Possibly he was not as successful in his northern cam¬ 
paigns as Dhruva, Govinda III, or Indra III. But there is no doubt 
that, unlike any of his predecessors, he was the lord of the whole 
of Deccari ( Sakala-dakshhya-dicj-adhipatij in the full sense of the 
term. Govinda III conquered Kanchl, but could not penetrate to 
Ramesvaram and thus effectively break the power of the Dravi^a 
kings. Vengl was a source of trouble to him; duririg the latter half 
of Krishna’s reign, it was ruled by a submissive feudatory. Kri¬ 
shna was in effective possession of a large part of *the Chola king¬ 
dom and his temples of Kfishnesvara and Gan<Jamarta$daditya at 
or near Ramesvaram proclaimed his conquest of the extreme south 
of the Peninsula. No other Rashtrakuta king was the overlord of 
the entire Deccan in so complete a sense of the term as Krishna 
was in c. A.D. 965. 

10. KHOTTIGA AND KARKKA II 

* » . 

Krishna III apparently had no issue living at the time of his 
death, since he was succeeded by his younger brother Khottiga in 
A.D. 967. The new ruler was an old man at the time of his accession 
and seems to have lacked military capacity. At any rate he was 
unable to repulse the invasion of the Rashtrakuta dominions by the 
Paramara king Siyaka, who was keen on avenging his defeat by the 
previous Rashtrakuta emperor. Siyaka crossed the Narmada and 
advanced straight upon Malkhed. The Rashtrakuta capital was 
captured, and plundered in the spring of A.D. 972. The imperial 
treasury was completely sacked and the raider carried away even 
the office copies of copper-plate charters lodged in the record office. 
Khottiga died of a broken heart soon after this calamity, probably 
in September, A.D. 972. 

Khottiga was succeeded by his nephew Karkka II, son of 
Nirupama. The prestige of the empire had been already shattered 


15 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


by the sack of its capital, and matters were worsened by the mal¬ 
administration of the new emperor and his two vicious ministers. 
This naturally aroused imperial ambitions in the minds of the feu¬ 
datories, and one of them eventually deprived Karkka of his 
sovereignty over the Deccan within eighteen months of his acces¬ 
sion. 

This feudatory was Taila II of the Chalukya family. He was 
ruling over a small fief at Tarddava^i in Bijapur District as a sub¬ 
missive feudatory of the Rashtraku^as from the time of Krishna III 
down to A.D. 965. He, however, believed that he was a direct 
descendant of the Imperial Chalukya family of Badami, and his 
ability and military capacity urged him to make a bid for the impe¬ 
rial status snatched from his ancestors by the Rashtrakutas. He 
made elaborate but secret preparations, and by the end of A.D. 973 
openly revolted against the authority of Karkka. The latter march¬ 
ed against him, but was signally defeated in a sanguinary battle 
fought. somewhere in northern Karnataka. The notorious minis¬ 
ters of Karkka were killed in the battle, but Karkka himself escap¬ 
ed and managed to carve out a small principality for himself in 
Sorab taluk of Mysore State, where he continued to rule up to 
A.D. 991. Though Karkka gave up the task of restoring Rash- 
{rakuta supremacy as hopeless, it was attempted by the Ganga ruler 
Marasimha on behalf of his nephew Indra, a grandson of Krishna III. 
This effort also failed, as Taila succeeded in crushing his enemy’s 
forces in A.D. 974, Both Marasimha and Indra turned Jain monks 
and died by the Sallekhana vow, and Taila became the overlord of 
the Deccan by A.D. 975. His reign and the history of his family will 
be described in the next volume. 

11. RETROSPECT AND REVIEW 

The period of Rash^rakuta ascendancy in the Deccan from about 
A.D. 753 to 975 constitutes perhaps the most brilliant chapter in its 
history. No other ruling dynasty in the Deccan played such a domi¬ 
nant part in the history of India till the rise of the Marafhas as an 
imperial power in the eighteenth century. No less than three of its 
rulers, Dhruva, Govinda III, and Indra HI carried their victorious 
arms into the heart of North India, and by inflicting severe defeats 
upon its most powerful rulers changed the whole course of the history 
of that'region. Their success in the south was equally remarkable, 
and Krishna III literally advanced as far as Rameivara in course of 
his victorious career. All the great powers of India, the Pratiharas 
and the Palas in the north, and the Eastern Chalukyas and Cholas 
in the south, were subjugated by them at one time or another. They, 

16 



THE RASHTHAKOTA EMPIRE 


no doubt, suffered reverses at times but on the whole their military 
campaigns against powerful adversaries were repeatedly crowned 
with brilliant success. 

N. 

The Rashtraku^as also excelled in arts of peace. The Kailasa 
Temple at Ellora, to be described elsewhere, y/}\\ keep alive for 
ever the name of its builder Krishna I. Amoghavarsha, though not 
renowned like his father and grandfather as a conqueror, was a 
remarkable personality. By virtue of his literary accomplishments 
and religious temperament he occupied a unique position among 
contemporary sovereigns. The Arab writers who visited Western 
India for {rade or other purposes speak very highly of the Rash- 
{rakuta kings whom they refer to as Balhara, no doubt an abbrevia¬ 
tion of Ballaha-raya, a Prakrit form of Vallabha-raja, According 
to these foreigners the Balhara was recognised as the greatest king 
in India and homage was paid to him by all the other princes. It 
is further said: “He gives regular pay to his troops and has many 
horses and elephants and immense wealth”. On the other hand 
Mas’udi says: “His troops and* elephants are innumerable, but his 
troops are mostly infantry, because the seat of his government is 
among the mountains.” 26 Both the king and his subjects are des¬ 
cribed as being friendly to the Muslims, and according to some wri¬ 
ters Muslims were appointed even as governors of cities in the 
kingdom. 26 Mas’udi says: “There is none among the rulers of 
Sindh and Hind who in his territory respects the Muslims like Raja 
Balhara. In his kingdom Islam is honoured and protected. And 
for them mosques and congregational mosques, which are always 
full, have been built for offering prayers five timds.” 27 All these 
undoubtedly testify to the liberal and progressive views of the 
Rashtrakuta kings. 

1. Vol. in, pp. 248-9. 

2. Vol. Ill, pp. 198-202. In later times the Rashprakutas regarded themselves as 
having been descended from Yadu, and one record describes them as belonging 
to the Satyaki branch of Yaduvamsa. There is hardly any doubt that these 
Rashtrakupas were of Kannada origin; at least Kannada was their mother 
tongue. 

3. According to Mirashi, Dantidurga’s “ancestors were ruling, not over Vidarbha, 
but over the Aurangabad District (ancient Mulake) where the earliest inscrip¬ 
tions of the family have been found.” (POC. XV Summary of Papers, p. 98). 

4. It is said in the Sanjan Plates of Amoghavarsha that “Indraraja, in the (mar¬ 
riage) hall, namely Khetaka, seized in battle the daughter of the Chalukya king 
by the rakahasa form of marriage” (El, XVIII 252). This is also referred to in 
other records which give the name of the princess as Bhavagana. Khetaka is 
modem Kaira, where a battle must have taken place, though we do not know 
the cause of it. The princess probably belonged to the Gujarat branch of the 
Chalukyas. The eircumstances relating to the battle and the forced marriage 
are shrouded in obscurity. 

5. The Ellora plates of Dantidurga, the earlk ,c record of the family, arc dated in 
Sarii. 663. This has been referred to the Saka era, and the resulting date is 
A.D. 742 (El, XXI. 26). Prof. V. V. Mirashi, however, reads the date as 463 
and refers it to the Kalachuri era of A.D. 250-51 (POC. XV. Summary of 

17 

AIK.—2 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Papers pp. 97-8). The equivalent Christian date being AJD. 715, it pushes back 
the accession of Dantidurga by more than 25 years. If we accept this inter¬ 
pretation, Dantidurga must have had a long reign of more than 40 years, as his 
other known record, Samangad plates, is dated A.D. 754. 

6. I A, XI. 111. 

7. ASWf, V. 92. 

8. El, XVIH. 252. 

9. El, IV. 287. 

10. El, XVUI. 252. - , 

11. This para is based upon the inference suggested by the Navsari plates of Pula- 
kesin and Ellora plates of Danticjurga. 

12. Vol. HI, pp. 247-8, 263. 

12a. For a different view on this point, cf. next chapter (pp. 20-21. fn. 14). 

13. According to some records (/A, XII. 264) Dantidurga died without a son, and 
Kannara (i.e. Krishna) succeeded him. According to the Baroda plates of 
A.D. 812-13 (lA, XII. 158), Krishna I had replaced a relative who had gone 
astray. The view that Dantidurga was deposed by his uncle Krishna lot 
oppressing his subjects cannot be upheld. For a full discussion of the point, 
cf. Altekar, Rdshprakufas, pp. 41-2. 

14. For the reign of Govinda II, cf. Alas Plates (El, VI. 208), Daulatabad Plates (El, 
IX. 195), and Bhor State Museum Plates (El, XXH. 176). 

15. A large number of inscriptions refer to the conquests of Dhruva and Govinda III. 
Among them may be specially mentioned: 

(i) Radhanpur and Wani plates of Govinda HI (IA, XI. 157). 

(ii) Baroda Plates (IA, XII. 158). 

(iii) Nilgund, Sirur, and Sanjan plates of Amoghavarsha (El, VI. 98; VII. 

203; XVIH. 244). 

16. This deta^ is found in Radhanpur and other plates, but not in Sanjan plates 
which merely refer to Oie birth of his son in Sarva’s kingdom. 

17. The vexed problem of the chronology of the campaigns of Govinda. Ill was 
discussed by the author of this chapter and Mirashi, in D. R. Bhandarkar Volume, 
pp. 153 ff. and El, XXIH. pp. 214-7, 293-7. The views given above are slightly 
different from those held previously by the author. Cf. also El, XXXII, 159 (Ed.). 

18. This will be described more fully in Chapter' VI. 

19. Karhad PI. (El, IV. 287). 

20. This will be described more fully in Chapter II. 

21. Indra himself, his father Jagattunga, grandfather Krishna H, and son Amogha ¬ 
varsha II had all married princesses of the Chedl family of Tripuri, 

22. According to one view, he ruled till at least A.D. 927 and was succeeded by his 
elder son Amoghavarsha who was removed by Govinda TV in A.D. 930 (Ef, 
XXVI. 162-3). Some scholars believe that he ruled till the end of A.D. 928 (El, 
XXXII. 50). The date 922, for the death of Indra HI as given in the first edition 
(p. 13) by the late Dr. Altekar has been proved to be wrong by epigraphic re¬ 
cords and has been changed to 927 (Ed.). 

23. Some authorities place it in A.D. 934 (El, XXVI. 163-4). 

24. This is denied by Prof. K. A. N. Sastri (JOR, XVI. 155). 

24a. For a different view, cf. Ch. V, Section H. 

25. HIED, I. 3, 13, 21. 

26. A1 Istakhr! (ibid. 34) says: “There are Musalmans in its (land of Balhara) cities, 
and none but Musalmans rule over them on the part of the Balhara. There arc 
Jama Masjids in them (where Muhammadans assemble to pray).” The bracketed 
portion is added by Ibn Haukal (ibid) who repeats the rest. 

27. POC, X. 406. 


IS 


I 


CHAPTER II 

RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATIHARA EMPIRE 

The early history of the Gurjara-Pratlharas has been dealt with 
in the third volume. 1 We have seen how the Pratihara dynasty, 
founded by the Brahmana Harichandra, carved out a powerful king¬ 
dom in Rajputana, and various other Gurjara families, probably 
branches of the same dynasty, set up small principalities to the south 
and east. The southern branches ruled in La{a with its capital at 
Nandipuri, 2 but we have no definite information about the capital 
of the eastern branch or the exact locality and extent of its domi¬ 
nions. Some scholars hold the view that Bhillamala was the early 
capital of this family, as they identify it with the capital city of the 
Gurjara kingdom mentioned by Hiuen Tsang. But apart from their 
identification being doubtful, that kingdom was ruled, as has been 
shown already, 3 by the main branch. As a matter of fact, the east¬ 
ern branch did not come into prominence till about a century later, 
and as the main branch in Jodhpur continued to rule for 150 years 
more after that, there is no valid ground for taking Bhillamala as 
the original capital of the eastern branch. 4 The only clue to the 
original location of the family is furnished by the details available 
about the fourth king Vatsaraja. There are grounds to believe that 
he ruled over both Jalor and Avanti. But these are disputed points 
and will be treated more fully later, in connection with that ruler. 
For the present we may accept as a probable hypothesis, though 
not as a proved fact, that he and his ancestors ruled over Avanti 
and had their capital at Uj jay ini. 

1. NAGABHATA I 

The family came into prominence in the second quarter of the 
eighth century A.D. by the successful resistance it offered under 
Nagabha^a I to the Arabs. He is described in the Gwalior Inscrip¬ 
tion as “having crushed the large armies of the powerful Mlechchha 
king.” It has already been noted above 6 how he saved Western 
India from the Arabs and gradually brought under his sway a large 
number of states that had been overrun by them. In particular, he 
established his supremacy over the Gurjara kingdom of Nandi 
purl, and probably also over the Pratihara family of Jodhpur. A 
new feudatory family the Chahamanas—was set up in Broach, but 
the old dynasty of Harichandra. continued at Jodhpur. Siluka, 
whose history has been related above, 6 was'perhaps the last indepen- 


19 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


dent ruler of this family. His two successors Jhota and Bhilla- 
ditya are said to have proceeded respectively to the BhagirathI and 
Gangadvara, and no martial glory is ascribed to them. 7 This would 
indicate that the Jodhpur family was politically insignificant during 
the latter half of the eighth century A.D. It is obvious that 
Nagabhafa and his descendants now attained the supremacy and 
leadership of the Gurjara confederacy, so long enjoyed by the Jodh¬ 
pur chiefs. 

It is unfortunate that we know practically nothing of the ances¬ 
tors of Nagabhafa I. Very likely they had carved out a kingdom 
in Eastern Rajputana and Malwa about the same time as the other 
branch had conquered the region round Broach. Like the latter, 
- they too probably acknowledged the suzerainty of the Jodhpur 
Pratiharas until Nagabhafa established the independence of his king¬ 
dom on a firm footing in the wake of the political disruption that 
followed the disastrous Arab raids. 

The date of Nagabha^a’s accession is not definitely known, 
but since he successfully opposed the Arabs* he must have ruled 
in the second quarter of the eighth century A.D. Whether he de¬ 
feated Junaid or his successor Tamin 8 it is difficult to say, but in any 
case, he must have ascended the throne within a few years of A.D. 
730. He ruled probably till A.D, 756 as will be noted below. 

About the time when Nagabha^a was laying the foundations of 
the future greatness of his family, another powerful dynasty arose 
in the Deccan, immediately to the south of Malwa. These were the 
Rashfrakutas whose history has already been dealt with in the pre¬ 
ceding chapter. The Rashtrakufa king Dantidurga, who reigned 
between c. A.D. 733 and 758, is said to have defeated the Gurjara 
king and made him serve as a door-keeper ( pratihara ) when he per¬ 
formed the Hiranyagarbha-dana ceremony at Ujjain. 9 It has been 
suggested by some scholars 10 'that there is a pun on the word prati- 
hdra and an allusion to the Pratihara king of Avanti. Though this 
view is not accepted by all, 11 there is no doubt that a Gurjara king 
had to submit to Dantidurga, who went to the extent of occupying 
the palace of the vanquished ruler. 12 

Dantidurga also claims to have = conquered Lafa (Southern Guja¬ 
rat) and Sindh. Since Dantidurga died before A.D. 758, it is more 
or less certain that his Gurjara adversary could not have been any¬ 
body else but Nagabhaja I. But since the latter is acknowledged as 
suzerain by Bhartrivaddha, the Chahamana ruler of Broach, in A.D. 
756,^ it does not appear that Dantidurga’s military victory was 
followed by any permanent conquest. 14 Both Nagabhata I and 
Dantidurga fished in the troubled waters caused by the Arab raids. 


i 


20 


RISE AND FALL OF THE PR ATI HA R A EMPIRE 

Though Dantidurga gained some initial successes, he could not 
conquer permanently the territory north of the Kim river, i.e. the 
old Gurjara principality of Nandipuri. Perhaps the impending con¬ 
flict with his Chalukya overlord forced him to abandon his aggres¬ 
sive designs in the north. In any case there are good reasons to be¬ 
lieve that in spite of initial discomfiture Nagabhafa was able to leave 
to his successors a powerful principality comprising Malwa and' parts 
of Raj pu tan a and Gujarat. The Gwalior Inscription describes him 
as the image of Narayana, and there can be no doubt whatever that 
he achieved distinction as a great national hero by defeating the 
Arabs 


2. VATS A RAJA 

Nagabhafa I was succeeded by his brother's sons, Kakkuka 
and Devaraja, of whom nothing is known. Devaraja’s son Vatsa¬ 
raja was, however, a powerful ruler. The author of a Jain work, 
Kiivalayanuild, says that he composed the work in the year 700 
(— A.D. 778) at Javalipura (modern Jalor) which was at the time 
ruled by the Ranahastin (war-elephant) Vatsaraja. 16 This Vatsa¬ 
raja has been generally identified with the Pratlhara ruler. An¬ 
other Jain work, Jinasena’s Harivaihsa-purana , contains a reference 
to Vatsaraja and his kingdom, but unfortunately the interpretation 
of the passage is not free from difficulty, and has given rise to a 
keen controversy. 16 Jinasena gives the names of kings who flou¬ 
rished in different directions when he finished his work at Vardha- 
m’apapura in the year'705 (— A.D. 783). The first two lines of the 
verse tell us that in that year Indrayudha was ruling in the north, 
and Sri-Vallabha, son of king Krishna, in the south. The next two 
lines of the verse run as follows:— r 

Purvvam Srimad—Avanti-bhubkriti nripe Vatsadirdje=pardm 

Sauranam^adhimavidale(lara) jaya-yute vxre Vardhe=ivati | 

/ 

According to some scholars 17 it means that Vatsaraja, the ruler 
of Avanti, was the king in the east, while victorious Varaha (or 
Jaya-Varaha) was ruling over the Sauras in the west. Others, 18 
however, point out that Av anti-bhubhrit (king of Avanti) must be 
distinguished from Vatsaraja, as otherwise the v/ord nripa (king) 
is redundant. They accordingly infer from the passage that the 
ruler of Avanti was the king of the east and Vatsaraja of the west, 
while Varaha was ruling over the Sauras. This interpretation is, 
however, open to serious objections. In the first place, the name 
of the eastern king is omitted, while the names of all other kings 
are given. No purpose is served by saying that the ruler of Avanti 
was the eastern king, which would be almost tantamount to stating 
that the ruler of the eastern kingdom is the king of the east. Second- 


21 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


ly, it appears from the general tenor of the verse that the author 
proposes to name the four rulers in the four directions. The pro¬ 
posed translation adds a fifth without indicating its connection or 
relevancy to the context. It is urged by some that the fifth ruler 
has been named because he reigned over Vardhamanapura where 
the work was composed. But if we accept the identification of 
Vardhamana with Wadhwan in Kathiawar Peninsula, we can hardly 
regard Vatsaraja as a western ruler, even though his kingdom 
was in Rajputana, as is argued by scholars who do not accept the 
other translation locating, it in Avanti. To obviate this difficulty 
one scholar proposes to identify Vardhamana with Badnawar, ^about 
40 miles to the south-west of Ujjain. 19 But in that case, we cannot 
assign any reason why the fifth king should be mentioned at all. 
Thus there are difficulties in the second translation which are of a 
more serious nature than those of the first. For, as regards the 
redundance of the word tifipa, it should hardly surprise us if we 
remember such expression as Gurjaresvara-pati used with reference 
to the son of the same Vatsaraja, in a record dated A.D. 812, 20 i.e. 
less than thirty years after Jinasena wrote. On the whole, there¬ 
fore, it is a more reasonable view to regard Vatsaraja as the' king 
of Avanti in A.D. 783. This view is also corroborated by what has 
been said above regarding the Gurjara king defeated by Dantidurga. 

The two Jain works would thus prove that the Pratihara king 
Vatsaraja ascended the throne in or before A.D. 778, and his king¬ 
dom comprised both Malwa and eastern Raj pu tan a. That he ruled 
over Central Rajputana also is proved by two epigraphic records. 21 
Some idea of the extent of his kingdom may be gained from the^ 
fact that the northern king named by Jinasena as his contemporary 
was Indrayudha, who was probably king of Kanauj. 22 There is no 
doubt that Vatsaraja gradually extended liis dominions in the north. 
The Gwalior inscription of his great-grandson records that he forci¬ 
bly wrested the empire from the famous Bhantfi clan. This Bhan<Ji 
clan has been taken by some to refer to the ruling family founded 
by'Bhai^dif the maternal uncle of Harsha. 23 It would then follow 
that this clan wielded imperial power, probably with its seat of 
authority in Kanauj, though we have no independent evidence of 
this. But whatever we might think of these probabilities, there 
is no doubt that VfitsarSja was ambitious of establishing an empire 
in Northern India and attained a great deal of success. We learn 
from the Rashfrakuta records 24 that he defeated the Lord of Gau^a, 
who must be identified with a Pala king of Bengal, probably Dhar- 
mapala; and carried away his umbrellas of state. Vatsaraja was 
aided in this expedition by his feudatory chiefs, one of whom, the 
Chahamana Durlabharaja of SakambharT, is said to have overrun 


RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATlHARA EMPIRE 


the whole of Bengal up to the confluence of the Ganga and the 
sea, 26 But as this occurs in a poetical work composed about four 
centuries after the event described, it is difficult to take it as lite¬ 
rally true. As the kingdom of Gau<Ja at that time extended up 
to the Ganga-Yamuna Doab, it cannot be said definitely whether 
Vatsaraj a actually invaded Bengal, or met and defeated the lord 
of.Gau^a somewhere in the Doab. 26 Be that as it may, Vatsaraja 
must have established his supremacy over a large part of Northern 
India and laid the foundations of a mighty empire. He thus appears 
to have scored over Dharmapala who was equally ambitious of 
founding an empire. Unfortunately the imperial dreams of both 
were rudely shattered by the invasion of the Rashtrakuta king 
Dhruva. While Vatsaraj a and Dharmapala were fighting for the 
empire in the north, the Rashtrakuta king Dhruva seized the opportu¬ 
nity to emulate Dantidurga by renewing the attempt to conquer the 
north. The details of his campaign are not known, but, according 
to the Rashtrakuta records, 27 Dhruva inflicted a crushing defeat up¬ 
on Vatsaraja, who was forced to put the desert of Rajputana between 
him and the invading army. Dhruva next turned against Dharma¬ 
pala and defeated him somewhqre between the Ganga and the 
Yamuna. : 

Thus began that triangular struggle between the Gurjaras, the 
Palas and the Rashtrakutas for supremacy in Northern India which 
was destined to be an important factor in Indian politics for more 
than a century. The city of Kahauj, which was raised to the posi¬ 
tion of imperial dignity by Harsha-vardhana, seems to have been 
the prize coveted and won by each, with a varying degree of success. 
It is very likely, though not known with certainty, that Vatsaraja 
took possession of it before marching towards Gau<Ja. Dharma¬ 
pala, the king of Gau^a, was also proceeding towards the west With 
the same object, and thus ensued the fight between the two rival 
claimants, probably somewhere in the Doab. Although both 
Dharmapala and VatsarSja were defeated by Dhruva, the Pratlhara 
king seems to have fared worse. For Dharmapala, in spite of his 
successive defeats, was in possession of Kanauj not long afterwards, 
and held a durbar there in the presence of a host of rulers of north¬ 
ern states including Avanti, all of whom acknowledged his imperial 
position. 28 

As we have seen above, Indrayudha was the ruler of the north 
in A.D. 783. As Dharmapala is expressly said' to have conquered 
Kanauj by defeating Indraraja and others, it is generally held that 
Indraraja was the same as Indrayudha. If, as is presumed, Vatsa¬ 
raja had conquered Kanauj before Dharmapala, he, too, must have 
defeated Indrayudha and permitted him to rule as a vassal.' But 


28 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Dharmapala placed on the throne a new ruler Chakrayudha, whose 
name-ending shows that he was probably connected with the ruling 
family. 

3. NAGABHATA XI 

After his defeat at the hands of Dhruva/ Vatsaraja passes com¬ 
pletely out of our view. Nothing is known of him or of his king¬ 
dom during the palmy days of Bala imperialism under Dharma- 
pSla. It is probable that his power was confined to central Raj- 
putana. His son and successor Nagabhata II, however, retrieved 
the fortunes of his family. The Gwalior Inscription of his grand¬ 
son tells us that the rulers of Andhra, Saindhava, Vidarbha and 
Kalinga succumbed to him, that he defeated Chakrayudha and 
the lord of Vanga, and forcibly seized the hill-forts of the kings 
of Anartta, Malava, Kirata, Turushka, Vatsa, and Matsya. 29 The 
records ctf some of the families feudatory to him corroborate and 
supply details of these conquests. On the other hand, the Rash- 
trakuta records categorically assert that Nagabhata was defeated 
by Govinda III who overran his dominions and reached the 
Himalayas. . 

Although we thus know a great many details of the eventful 
career of Nagabhata II, it is not easy to arrange then chronologi¬ 
cally, and view his reign in a correct perspective. We do not know, 
for example, whether his discomfiture at the hands of the Rash- 
trakutas nreceded or followed his victories,—in other words, whe¬ 
ther his reign began in disaster and ended in glory, or whether the 
reverse was the case. No wonder, therefore, that different views 
have been adopted by different scholars about the life and career 
Of this great emperor, 30 The following reconstruction of his history 
may be regarded as merely provisional:— 

The forcible seizure of the hill-forts of Anartta, Malava, etc. 
is said to have begun even in his boyhood. It has been suggested 
that some of these events might actually have taken place in the 
reign of Vatsaraja. 31 But as the same record refers to the achieve¬ 
ments of Vatsaraja, and is silent about them, this view is not pro¬ 
bable. They may, therefore, be regarded as the earliest military 
exploits of Nagabhata II. The geographical position of the rulers 
shows that Nagabhata advanced towards North Gujarat (Anartta) 
and Malwa in the south and east, and this probably brought him 
into conflict with the Rashtrakufas, which is referred to in the re¬ 
cords of both the parties. Indra, the Rashtrakuta ruler of Lata, 
is said to have defeated the Gurjara king who fled to distant re¬ 
gions. 32 On the other hand Vabukadhavala, a feudatory chief of 
Nagabhata n, is said to have defeated the Karnatas, which apparent- 


24 


RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATIHARA EMPIRE 


ly refer to the Rashtraku^as (Inscription No. '3). 32ft It may be con¬ 
cluded, therefore, that no party gained a decisive victory, though 
Nagabhata probably retained some of the captured hill-forts. HU 
similar enterprises in the north (Matsya), east (Vatsa), and west 
(Turushkal were probably more successful, but we possess no de¬ 
tails of these campaigns. The Turushkas undoubtedly refer to the 
Muslim rulers of the west against whom he scored some success, 33 
and the Kiratas represent some primitive tribes, probably of the 

Himalayan region. 

% 

The initial successes of Nagabhata in these military raids em¬ 
boldened him to carry on further campaigns which resulted in the 
submission of the Saindhava chiefs, ruling in Western Kathi&war, 
and the rulers of Andhra, Kalihga and Vidarbha. It is difficult 
to believe that Nagabhata actually advanced as far as Andhra or 
even Kalihga country on the eastern coast of the Deccan. 34 It is 
not, therefore, unlikely that he entered into a confederacy with 
them, though, as usually happens in such cases of unequal alliance, 
they became, for all practical purposes, subordinate, rather than 
independent, allies. Although this view has been challenged, 36 
it seems to be true at least in the case of the Saindhavas of whom 
alone we possess any contemporary records. It appears from the 
contemporary copper-plate grants 30 of the Saindhava chiefs that 
while they were devoted and loyal to the PratTharas, they did not 
invoke their name as suzerains as was done by the Chapas and 
Chalukyas of the Kathiawar Peninsula—the other feudatories 
immediately to their east. 

Nagabhata’s- next move seems to have been to reconquer Kanauj. 
As already noted, its ruler Indrayudha had probably acknowledged 
Vatsaraja’s suzerainty and was, perhaps for that very reason, de¬ 
feated by Dharmapala, who put instead Chakrayudha on the throne. 
Nagabhata defeated Chakrayudha and conquered his kingdom. 37 
He probably occupied Kanauj which later became the permanent 
capital of the Pratiharas. It was a challenge to the power of 
Dharmapala, and both sides made preparations for the inevitable 
conflict. Nagabhata was joined by at least three of his feudatory 
chiefs in this momentous struggle for the empire. These were 
Kakka, of the Jodhpur Pratlhara family, Vahukadhavala, the Cha- 
lukya chief of Southern Kathiawar, and the Guhilot Sankaragana. 
The family records (Ins. 2-4) of these three refer to the first as 
having fought the Gaudas at Monghyr, the second as having defeat¬ 
ed king Dharma, and the third as having defeated Gau<Ja and made 
the whole world, gained by warfare, subservient to his overlord. 
All the three evidently refer to the great battle between Nagabhafa 
and the lord of Vanga, described in the Gwalior Inscription, in 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


which the latter, though possessed of “crowds of mighty elephants, 
horses, and chariots”, was vanquished by the former. There ifc 
no reference to this encounter in the Pala records, but the com¬ 
bined testimony of the four different records, coming from four 
different sources, and particularly the fact that the Pratlharas ad¬ 
vanced as far as Monghyr^ almost in the heart of the Pala dominions, 
leave no doubt that Nagabhata scored a great victory over his Pala 
rival Dharmapala. 

But Nagabhata’s success was not destined to be more perma¬ 
nent than that of his father. Once more the hereditary enemies 
from the south upset the grandiose imperial scheme of the Pratl¬ 
haras. Nagabhata, as noted above, had already come into conflict 
with the Rashtrakutas in the early part of his reign. This took 
place probably about A.D. 794-95, early in the reign of Govinda III, 
when the new king was engaged in the south in putting down 
the rebellion of his brother and fighting with the Gahga ruler. 
The brunt of the attack fell upon his viceroy of the north, Indra, 
who * alone' is said to have defeated the Gurjara lord. But, as 
noted above, the Pratlharas also claimed victory, and probably 
gained some hill forts in Malwa. The northern frontier was, however, 
guarded effectively by Indra and his son Karkka, who says in 
one of his records that the Rashtrakuta king had “caused his arm 
to become an excellent door-bar of the country of the lord of 
Gurjaras.” 38 

But the Rashtrakuta king Govinda III could not be content 
merely with a defensive policy against the Pratlharas. As soon as 
he was free from internal troubles, he made preparations to invade 
the north as his father Dhruva had done before. Like the latter 
he achieved phenomenal success, though probably more than one 
campaign was necessary for the purpose. He “destroyed the valour 
of Nagabhata”, who “in fear vanished nobody knew whither”, and 
then having “devastated his home” and overrun his dominions, 
proceeded up to the Himalayas. 39 Even making allowance for 
exaggerations, there can be hardly any doubt that govrftda 
inflicted 4 crushing blow on Nagabhata and shattered his dreams 
of founding an emipre. 

A Rashtrakuta record 40 informs us that Dharmapala and Cha- 
krayudha surrendered of their own accord to Govinda III. If we 
remember that both of them were defeated by Nagabhata II, it 
is difficult to avoid the conclusion that they had invited the Rash¬ 
trakuta king, or at least made common cause with him against 
Nagabhata II, their common foe. This would satisfactorily explain 
the triumphant march of Govinda III right up to the Himalayas and 
the complete discomfiture of the Pratlharas for some time to come. 


26 


RISE AND FALL.OF THE PRATIHARA EMPIRE 

If the success of Govinda III matched his father’s in brilliance, 
it was equally ephemeral. He was called to the Deccan on account 
of internal troubles that had broken out during his long absence 
in the north, and for nearly half a century the Rashfrakutas ceased 
to play any dominant part in north Indian politics. The field was 
thus left free to tfre two rival powers, the Palas and the Pratlharas. 
The reverses of Nagabhata II gave an opportunity to Dharmapala 
and his son Devapala to re-establish the power and supremacy of 
the Palas, and there was a decline in the Pratlhara power for the 
time being. t 

It is difficult to fix the date of the great victory of Govinda III 
over Nagabhata II, but it must have taken* place before A.D. 
809-10. 41 Although Nagabhafa’s imperial ambitions were curbed, 
his power was not destroyed. A record, 42 dated A.D. 815, found 
at Buchkala in Bilada District, Jodhpur, gives him all the imperial 
titles and describes the locality as sva-vishaya, or his dominions 
proper. In addition to the three feudatories who helped him in his 
wars against the Palas, we know of another, Guvaka I, the founder 
of the Chahamana dynasty of Sakambharl (near Ajmer), who was 
his vassal (Ins. 6). Whether they threw off their allegiance to him 
after his discomfiture we cannot say, but this does not appear very 
likely. For, though the record (Ins. 2) of Bauka, the Pratihara king 
of the Jodhpur dynasty, dated A.D. 837, would lend some colour 
to such a supposition, we should remember that Nagabha^a’s grand¬ 
son Bhoja was able to enlist the support of his feudatories within 
a few years of his grandfather’s death. On the whole we may con¬ 
clude that Nagabhafa II continued to exercise his sway over the 
greater part, if not the whole, of Rajputana and Kathiawar Penin¬ 
sula. In the east his sway extended up to Gwalior, 43 and probably 
further east so as to include Kanauj and Kfilanjara. 44 

We learn from a Jain book, Prabhavaka-charita , 46 that king 
Nagavaloka of Kanyakubja, the grandfather of Bhoja, died in 890 
V.S. (=A.D. 833). This Nagavaloka is undoubtedly Nagabhata H, 
and if we can rely on this passage, his death must have taken place 
in A.D. 833. It would also appear that Nagabhata II had fixed his 
capital at Kanauj. But although Kanauj was the capital of Bhoja, 
we have no independent evidence that it was the Pratlhara capital 
before his time. The reference to Kanyakubja in Prabhavaka- 
charita may be explained by the fact that Kanauj had been the well- 
known capital of the Pratlharas long before the thirteenth century 
A.D. when this book was composed. The reference to svavishaya 
in the Buchkala record, noted above, and the claims of Dharmapala 
and Devapala in the Pala records cannot be easily reconciled with 
the renewed imperialist ambition of Nagabhafa II as would be n'eces- 


* 


27 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


sarily indicated by his permanent transfer of capital to Kanauj. 
The admittedly inglorious reign of his son is also against such a 
supposition. The fact that the grandson of Nagabha^a II was on 
the throne within three years of the date of his death, as given in 
PrabhaVaka-cfiarita, throws doubt on the whole passage, but even 
if we accept as true, we can only presume that the capital was 
changed towards the very end of his reign. The same passage in 
Prabhavaka-tifiarita also tells us that Nagabhata II put an end to 
his life by immersion in the holy waters of the Ganga—a religious 
process adopted in later years by Ramapala of the Pala dynasty and 
Amoghavarsha, the Rashtrakuta king. This shows his religious 
temperament, which is also testified to by his performance of religious 
ceremonies enjoined by the Vedas. An active religious sentiment 
is further proved by the eclectic spirit of the royal family—for four 
generations of Pratlhara kings beginning from Devaraja were devo¬ 
tees respectively of Vishnu, Siva, Bhagavatl, and Surya. 4G 

In spite of doubts and uncertainties, due to the paucity of data, 
the reigns of Vatsaraja and Nagbbhata II occupy a prominent place 
in the contemporary history of India. Both of them were remark¬ 
able personalities and had a’high degree of military fckill; and the 
ultimate reverses at the hands of the Rashtrakufas cannot minimise 
the glory they had achieved by extensive military conquests from 
one end of north India to the other. They raised a provincial prin¬ 
cipality into a first-rate military and political power, and although 
their dreams of founding a stable empire were not actually realised, 
they laid its foundations so well that ere long king Bhoja succeeded 
in the great task even in the face of very strenuous opposition from 
his hereditary foes, the Palas and the Rashtrakutas. 

i 

Nagabhafa II was succeeded by his son Ramabhadra, who had 
a very short and inglorious reign of probably three years. His 
kingdom, which certainly extended up to Gwalior in the east, 47 but' 
probably no further, seems to have been overrun by hostile 
forces. 48 It is curious, as two copper-plate charters 49 record, that 
two grants, made by his father, had lapsed during his reign, and 
had to be confirmed by his successor. All this shows a period of 
weakness and trouble,, probably brought about by the aggressive 
policy of the Pala emperor Devapala as’ will be noted in the next 
chapter. 

4. BHOJA 

With the accession of Ramabhadra^ son and successor Bhoja, 
a new and glorious chapter begins in the history of the Pratlharas. 
The earliest record of the king is the Barah copper-plate 50 which 


28 


RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATIHARA EMPIRE 


he issued in A.D. 836 from his camp ( skandhdvdra ) at Mahodaya in 
order to confirm an endowment in the Kalanjara subdivision 
(mandala ) of the division ( bhukti) of Kanyakubja which had been 
obstructed during the reign of his father. It shows that Bhoja had 
ascended the throne in or before A.D. 836, and was already in 
possession of the region round Kalahjara (Banda District, U.P.). 
If Mahodaya denoted Kanauj, as is generally supposed, we must 
further presume that he was also in occupation of that city and 
probably had his capital there. It has been urged, however, against 
this view, that Mahodaya, in this record, was not identical with 
Kanyakubja which is mentioned separately as such, and that the 
epithet skandhdvdra or camp could not have been appropriate for 
a rdjadhdm (capital) like Kanauj. The latter objection may be 
easily ruled out, as even famous capital cities like Pafaliputra and 
Vikramapura have been referred to as skandhavara in the re* 
cords of the Pala and Sena kings. The other objection, though 
more valid, is also not decisive. For the older name might have 
been used for the big Division, while the city proper could be re¬ 
ferred to by the alternative name. On tljie whole it is likely, though 
not certain, that as early as A.D. 836, B^oja had fixed his capital at 
Kanauj, and obtained mastery of the region round it, which had been 
probably lost during his father’s reign. 

The Jodhpur Pratlharas, whose history has been dealt with 
above, 61 also came into prominence and probably regained indepen¬ 
dence during the inglorious reign of Ramabhadra. This seems to 
follow from the family records of both rthe branches. The Jodhpur 
Inscription, as noted above, 62 describes the two successors of Slluka 
as practising austerities, an unmistakable indication of the decline 
in their political and military authority. But the next king Kakka 
is described as a great fighter who, as noted above, accompanied 
Nagabhafa II in his expedition against the Pala king of Bengal. 
But although he acknowledged the suzerainty of Nagabhafa II at 
first, he seems to have practically behaved like an independent king 
in later years. In the Jodhpur Inscription dated A.D. 837 (Ins. 2), 
Kakka’s queen-consort is called a Mahdrajni, and the career of their 
son Bauka is described in terms which make him out to be an in¬ 
dependent king, at least de facto , if not de jure. This conclusion 
is corroborated by the Daulatpura copper-plate of Bhoja 63 which 
records that a piece of land in Gurjaratra, the home-territory of 
the Jodhpur Pratlharas, which was originally granted by Vatsaraja 
and continued by Nagabhafa II, fell into abeyance, and was renewed 
by Bhoja in A.D. 843. This indicates like the Barah copper-plate, 
that there was obstruction in the enjoyment of land during the reign 
of Ramabhadra, and this fits in well with the view that the Jodhpur 


29 


HIE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Pratiharas threw off the yoke of this king. The copper-plate further 
shows that by A.D. 843 Bhoja had reasserted his authority over 
Gurjaratra or Central and Eastern Rajputana. The success of Bhoja 
was undoubtedly due to the loyal devotion of some of his feudatories, 
one of whom, the Guhilot prince Harsharaja, son of Sahkaragana, 64 
is said to have overcome the kings in the north and presented' horses 
to Bhoja (Ins. 4). 

It is thus clear that Bhoja succeeded, within a few years of his 
accession, in re-establishing, to a considerable extent, the fortunes 
of his family. But soon he had to measure his strength with the 
Pala king Devapala. Bhoja was defeated, and his triumphant career 
was arrested, as will be related in the next chapter. He now turned 
his attention to the south, no doubt tempted by the distracted condi¬ 
tion of the Rashtrakutas. 13 Some time between A.D. 845 and 860 he 

• • 

seems to have invaded the Rashtrakuta dominions, but was defeated 
by Dhruva, the Rashtrakuta chief of the Gujarat branch. 6 * Thus the 
growing power of the Pratiharas was once more checked 
by their two hereditary enemies. Bhoja was also defeated 
by the Kalachuri king Kokkalla (c. 845-880). 67 It is interesting to 
note that • the Rashtrakuta inscription, which records the defeat 
of Bhoja, refers to him in very flattering terms, and describes 
him as “united to fortune and surrounded by crowds of noble 
kinsmen,” and having “conquered all the regions of the world.” 
This shows that Bhoja had already raised his kingdom to a posi¬ 
tion of eminence. But there Is no doubt that the defeat at the hands 
of the Palas, the Rashtrakutas, and the Kalachuris was a great 
blow to his rising power which perhaps declined to a considerable 
extent. 

An indication of this decline is seen in the renewed power of 
the Jodhpur Pratiharas. Bauka-’s step-brother and successor 
Kakkuka refers in two of his inscriptions, dated A.D. 861, 68 to 
Gurjaratra and other provinces as forming part of his own domi¬ 
nions. Thus Bhoja must have lost his hold over this part of Raj¬ 
putana some time between A.D. 843 and 861. It appears that after 
some initial successes Bhoja’s attempt to re-establish the glory of 
his family proved a failure. 

But Bhoja did not lose heart and bided his time. An inscrip¬ 
tion, 69 dated A.D. 876, refers to his resolve “to conquer the three 
worlds”, and there is no doubt that he renewed his aggressive career 
some time in the third quarter of the ninth century A.D. The death 
of Devapala removed a thorn in his side, for the next two kings 
of the Pala dynasty, who ruled during the second half of the ninth 


80 


RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATiHARA EMPIRE 


century A.D., were weak and peace-loving. Fortunately for him 
the Rashtrakuta king Amoghavarsha, who ruled from A.D. 814 to c. 
A.D. 878, was also of a religious disposition, and did not have the 
aggressive imperialism or military ambition of his two illustrious 
predecessors, Dhruva and Govinda III. Nevertheless Amoghavarsha 
came into conflict with the Pala rulers, and prpbably, after his 
conquest of Vengl, invaded the Pala dominions from the south 
and gained some successes. Perhaps taking advantage of the 
weakness of the Pala rulers and their distracted condition due to 
the Rashtrakuta raids, Bhoja planned a campaign against Bengal. 
The combined testimony of several records indicates that he was 
helped in this enterprise by Gunambhodhideva, the Chedi ruler 
of Gorakhpur, and the Guhilot chief Guhila II, son of Harsharaja. 60 
Assisted by these powerful chiefs Bhoja appears to have inflicted 
a crushing defeat upon the Pala king Narayanapala and conquered 
a considerable part of his western dominions. 

Bhoja was also engaged in a prolonged struggle with the Rash- 
trakutas. 61 Reference has already been made to his fight with 
Dhruva of Gujarat. It was renewed during the reign of Krishna II 
(c. A.D. 878-914). Bhoja probably took the offensive and gained 
considerable success. A Prailhara record 62 refers to the defeat of 
Krishna II, probably on the banks of the Narmada, and his retreat 
to the south of the river. After having thus occupied Malwa, 
Bhoja advanced towards Gujarat. The Rashtrakuta records admit 
that not only Khetaka (Kaira District) but also the region round it 
fell into his hands. They, however, assert that Krishna II recover¬ 
ed them, and there was a sanguinary battle between the two hosts 
at UjjayinI which made a deep impress even upon posterity. 63 It 
is generally held that Bhoja lost Malwa as a result of this defeat, 
which took place some time between A.D. 878 and 888. But this 
is by no means certain. An inscription 64 at Partabgarh, in South¬ 
ern Rajputana, refers to a local Chahamana dynasty which was a 
source of great pleasure to king Bhojadeva. It has been suggested, 
with a great degree of plausibility, that these Chahamanas helped 
their overlord Bhoja in his wars against the Rashtrakutas. This 
Chahamana dynasty acknowledged the suzerainty of the Pratlharas 
in the time of Mahendrapala II (A.D. 946), and asked for some 
favours from the representatives of their overlord at UjjayinI and 
Mantfapika (Mai^Ju) about the same time. It would thus appear 
that Malwa formed a part of the Pratlhara dominions even so late 
as A.D. 946, and as we know that it was conquered by Bhoja, it is 
more reasonable to suppose that it continued to be in the posses¬ 
sion of the Pratlharas rather than that it was reconquered by his 
successors all of whom, except his son Mahendrapala I, were too 


31 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

weak to be credited with any such hew acquisition. In any case, 
we may take for granted that the Partabgarh region formed a part 
of the dominions of Bhoja, and Malwa, even if lost, was reconquered 
by Mahendrapala I. 

Although Bhoja lost his hold upon Khetaka or Kaira District, 
he maintained supremacy over probably the whole, of Kathiawar 
Peninsula. 65 In the north-west his dominions extended to the Pun¬ 
jab. In the east the Kalachuris of Gorakhpur were his feudatories, 
and probably the whole of Awadh (Oudh) was included in his 
dominions. The Chandellas of Bundelkhand also acknowledged his 
overlordship. Bhoja' thus consolidated a mighty empire in 
Northern India for which Vatsaraja and Nagabhaja had fought in 
vain, and raised Kanauj, his capital, once more to the position of .an 
imperial city. 

Bhoja had a long reign of more than 46 years, two of his known 
dates being A.D. 836 and 882. 66 An Arab account of India, com¬ 
posed in A.D. 851 and generally attributed to Sulaiman, refers to 
the great power and resources of the king of Juzr. As Juzr un¬ 
doubtedly stands for Gurjara, the Arab account may be taken to 
refer to Bhoja. As such it is an interesting commentary upon his 
reign and personality and may be reproduced in full:— 

N 

‘‘This king maintains numerous forces and no other Indian prince 
has so fine a cavalry. He is unfriendly to the Arabs, still, he 
acknowledges that the king of the Arabs is the greatest of kings. 
Among the princes of India, there is no greater foe of the Muham¬ 
madan faith than . he. His territories form a longue of land. He 
has got riches, and his camels and horses are numerous. Exchanges 
are carried on in his states with silver (and gold) in dust, an.d there 
are said to be mines (of these metals) in the country. There is no 
country in India more safe from robbers.*’ 67 

It is thus evident that Bhoja had the reputation of a strong 
ruler, able to maintain peace in his kingdom and defend it against 
external dangers. He stood as a bulwark of defence against.Slus- 
lim aggression, and left this task as a sacred legacy to his successors. 

Bhoja was undoubtedly one of the outstanding political figures 
of India in the ninth century, and ranks with Dhruva and Dharma- 
pala as a great, general and empire»-builder. Unfortunately, we 
know very little of his personal history, 68 except that he ysras a de¬ 
votee of Bhagavatl and was known by various names such as Pra- 
bhasa, Adivaraha, and Mihira, in addition to Bhoja which was most 
commonly used. 


82 


RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATTHARA EMPIRE 


5. MAHENDEAFALA 

Bhoja probably died about A.D. 885, and was succeeded by his 
son Mahendrapala I, whose earliest known date is AD. 893 (Ins. 3). 
A verse in RdjatarangvnX, the meaning of which is obscure, seems 
to indicate that he lost some territory in the Punjab, gained by his 
father, to S&hkaravarman king of Kashmir. 69 But, with this doubt* 
ful exception, Mahendrapala not only maintained intact the vast 
empire inherited by him, but also further expanded it towards, the 
east. No less than seven of his records have been found in South 
Bihar and North Bengal with dates ranging from years 2' to 19. 
These indicate that shortly after his accession he conquered Maga- 
dha and pven a part of Northern Bengal, the home territory of his 
hereditaiQr enemy, the Balas. Mahendrapala’s records have also 
been found in Kathiawar Peninsula, Eastern Punjab, Jhansi Dis¬ 
trict and Awadh (Oudh), and we may say, without much exaggera¬ 
tion, that his empire extended from the Himalayas to the Vindhyas 
and from the Eastern to the Western ocean. 

The name of Mahendrapala is also written in slightly varying 
forms such as Mahindrapala and Mahendrayudha, and he was also 
known as Nirbhaya-narendra or Nirbhayaraja. 70 His guru, or 
spiritual preceptor, Rajaiekhara, is a famous personality in Indian 
literature. Although his writings do not throw any light on the 
career or personality of Mahendrapala, they refer*in unmistakable 
terms to the glory and grandeur of the imperial city of Kanauj. 

6. MAHIPALA 

Mahendrapaht’s last known date is AD. 907-8, 71 and he pro¬ 
bably died not long afterwards. The succession to the throne after 
him is a matter of dispute, as the available data lend themselves to 
various interpretations. He had at least two queens, Dehanaga- 
devi and MahTdevI (or Mahadevi). 72 The son of the former, Bhoja II, 
ascended the throne before Vinayakapala, the son of the latter, 
one of whose known dates is AD. 931 (Ins. 9). Mahipala, 73 a son 
of Mahendrapala, is known to have ruled in AD. 914 74 and AD. 917 
fins. 8), while a king Kshitipala is known to be the father of king 
Devapala ruling in AD. 948-9 (Ins. 7). There are good grounds to 
believe that the last two kings also belonged to the same family. 
A king Devapala, with the epithet Hayapati (lord of horses), son 
of Herambapala, is mentioned in another contemporary inscrip¬ 
tion, 76 and it is held by some that this Devapfila is identical with 
his namesake, ruling in A.D. 948-9. Thus his father would be 
Herambapala alias Kshitipala, and as these are synonymous respec¬ 
tively with Vinayakapala and Mahipala, the identity of all the four 

33 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

is generally presumed, and the genealogy is drawn up as follows 76 :— 
Dehanagadevl = Mahendrapala I = MahldevI (or MahadevI) 


Bhoja II Vinayakapala 

(alius MahlpSla 

V 

alias Kshitipala 
altos Herambapala) 

(A.D. 914, 917, 931) 

Some scholars, however, do not accept the identification of the two 
kings named Devapala, and therefore regard Vinayakapala as diffe¬ 
rent from Mahlpala alias Kshitipala. 77 Others again identify the 
latter.with Bhoja IL 78 It is impossible, with the insufficient data 
now available, to prove or disprove any of these hypotheses. So 
we may provisionally accept the genealogy drawn up above. 

It is significant that while the Grant of Vinayakapala, dated 
A.D. 931, refers to his elder brother Bhoja II as his predecessor, 
the earlier Grant, dated A.D. 917 , makes no reference to Bhoja II, 
and represents Mahlpala Us having succeeded Mahendrapala. It 
has been suggested that this omission may be due to short duration 
of Bhoja’s reign or to a struggle for succession between the two. 79 
But it may be easily explained by the not uncommon practice of 
tracing only the direct descent of the ruling king by omitting all 
references to collateral line. The short duration of reign is not a 
satisfactory explanation, and if we accept the identification of Mahl¬ 
pala and Vinayakapala, we can hardly explain the omission in one 
Grant and not in the other as due to rivalry. It has been urged 
that with the lapse of time the memory of the old rivalry faded 
away, and hence the reference to the reign of the elder brother 
was made in A.D. 931 but not in A.D. 917. But this is questionable. 

A struggle for succession to the throne has been inferred from 
the statement in the Kalachuri records that Kokkalladeva I ‘‘set up 
Bhojadeva” and “granted him freedom from fear.” These expres¬ 
sions have been taken to mean that Bhoja II invoked the aid of 
Kekkalla in the war of succession against his brother. 80 But apart 
from the fact that it is uncertain whether Bhoja here refers to the 
father or son of Mahendrapala, 81 we need not assume that any help 
that Kokkalla might have rendered to Bhoja II was neces¬ 
sarily against his brother. For a Rashtrakuta record seems to imply 
that Krishna II invaded the dominions of the Pratiharas and occupi¬ 
ed the Yamuna-Ganga Doab. The veracity of this claim has been 


84 




RISE AND FALL OF THE PEATtHAEA EMPIRE 

doubted by many scholars, but there may be some truth in it, 82 
and if Bhoja II sought the help of Kokkalla, it might have been on 
such an occasion. 

On the whole, we have no definite knowledge of the events 
that followed the death of M&hendrapala. The weakness of the 
empire, as revealed by the advance of the Rashtrakutas to the very 
gates of the imperial city and its destruction by them, not much 
later, about A.D. 916, undoubtedly lends colour to the theory of 
internal dissensions, but we must remember that the Rashtrakutas 
achieved similar successes even during the reigns of powerful kings 
like Vatsaraja and Nagabhata II. 

In any case there are no good grounds against the view that 
when Mahlpala ascended the throne, about A.D. 912, the empire 
enjoyed peace and prosperity. An inscription, dated A.D. 914, 
proves his suzerainty over the Kathiawar Peninsula. A1 Mas’udi,* 
a native of Baghdad, who visited India in the year. A.D. 915-16, 
refers to the great power and resources of the Pratihara king of 
Kanauj, and the' wide extent of his kingdom, which touched the 
Rashtrakuta kingdom in the south, and the Muslim principality of 
Multan in the west, with both of which he was at war. He was, 
we are told, rich in horses and camels, and maintained four armies 
in four directions, each numbering 700,000 or 900,000 men. 83 

The poet Rajasekhara, who graced the court of Mahlpala, as 
that of his father, refers to the former as “the pearl-jewel of the 
lineage of Raghu” and “the Maih&raj&dhiraja of Aryavarta”. He 
also describes the conquests of Mahlpala in a grandiloquent verse 
according to which the emperor defeated the Mural&s, Mekaias, 
Kalingas, Keralas, Kulutas, Kuntalas, and Ramathas. 84 This would 
mean the suzerainty not only of nearly the whole of Northern India, 
but also of a part of the Deccan where the Rashtrakutas ruled. Even 
making due allowance for the panegyrical exaggerations of the court- 
poet, it may be reasonably held that Mahlpala not only maintained 
intact the empire inherited by him, but probably even extended it 
in the early part of his reign. 88 

But once more the eternal enemies, the Rashtrakutas, were to 
prove the doom of the Pratihara empire. Leaving aside the boast 
of the Rashtrakuta king Krishna II that he advanced up to the 
Gahga, there is no doubt that his successor Indra III conducted a 
campaign against the Pratihara dominions some time between 
A.D. 915 and 918. According to a Rashtrakuta record, 86 Indra III 
advanced through Malwa, crossed the Yamuna, and completely de¬ 
vastated the city of Kanauj. According to a Kanarese poem, 
Pampabhdrata , Indra’s feudatory Narasimha (Chalukya) took a 


85 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

prominent part in inflicting a crushing defeat upon Mahipaia. It is 
said that “Mahipaia fled, as if struck by thunderbolts, staying nei¬ 
ther to eat, nor rest, nor pick himself up; while Narasimha, pursuing, 
bathed his horses at the junction of the Ganga/’ 87 

Thus according to the Rashtrakuta version Indra III had a com¬ 
plete victory. He occupied the capital city of his enemy and sacked 
it, while Mahipaia fled for his life, hotly pursued by the hostile forces 
as far as Allahabad. But, as on previous occasions, the Rashfra- 
k&tas did not stay long enough to consolidate their conquests in the 
north. 

It redounds to the credit of Mahipaia that he survived this 

terrible shock and re-established the fortunes of his family. This 

, • - • • 

was due mainly to the help of his powerful feudatories. According 
to a Chandella record, 08 king Harsha placed Kshitipala on the 
•throne. It refers most probably to the help rendered by the power¬ 
ful Chandella chief to Kshitipala or Mahipaia in regaining the throne 
after the Rashtrakuta debacle. 89 The Guhilot chief Bhatta, grand¬ 
son of Harsharaja, who helped Bhoja I, is said to have defeated in 
battle the king of the south, at the command of his paramount lord, 
at a time of great danger when the kingdom was invaded by foreign 
soldiers and everything was in confusion (Ins. 4). This also pro¬ 
bably alludes to the defeat inflicted upon the Rashtrakutas after 
they had overrun the Pratlhara dominions. The recovery of Malwa 
is hinted at by the vainglorious claim made by Bhamana, the feuda¬ 
tory Kalachuri chief of Gorakhpur, that he conquered Dhara 
(Ins. 5). 

Whether Mahipaia succeeded in recovering all the territories 
he had lost is diffleult to determine. But we have literary and epi- 
graphic records to show that in A.D. 931 the empire of Mahlpala- 
Vinayakapala extended up to Saurashtra (Kathiawar Peninsula) in 
the west** 5 and Banaras in the east (Ins. 9), and in A.D. 942-3 up 
to Chanderi (Narwar) in the south. 91 Even so late as A.D.-946, 
the Pratlhara empire included Malwa (Ins. 10). It would thus ap¬ 
pear that Mahipaia recovered at least a large part, if not the whole, 
of his dominions, but there can be no doubt that the prestige of 
the Imperial Pratlharas suffered a severe blow from which they 
never fully recovered. 92 The feudatory chiefs and provincial gov¬ 
ernors slowly. asserted independence, and new dynasties rose to 
power. This will be evident from the history of the Chandellas, 
Chedis, and Paramaras dealt with in a separate chapter. The dec¬ 
line and the process of disintegration of the Pratlhara empire offer 
a close parallel to the fate which overtook the Mughal empire in the 
eighteenth century- 


80 


RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATlHARA EMPIRE 


Towards the close of Mahipala’s reign the R&shtrakutas seem 
to have again invaded the north. It is said in a E5shtraku|a re¬ 
cord, 93 dated A.D. 940, that “on hearing of the conquest of all the 
strongholds (by Krishna III) in the southern regions simply by means 
of his angry glance, the hope about Kalahjara and Chitrakuta vanish¬ 
ed from the heart of the Gurjara.” It has been inferred from this 
that these two forts of the PratSbaras were occupied by the Rashfra- 
kuta army shortly before A.D. 940. 94 

7. MAHIPALA’S SUCCESSORS 

Vinayakapala ruled till at least A.D. 942, 96 and was succeeded 
by his son Mahendrapala II, 96 whose known date is A.D. 945-6 
(Ins. 10). During the next 15 years there is a succession of no less 
than four kings, viz . (1) Devapala (A.D. 948-9), son of Kshitipala 
(Ins. 7); (2) Vinayakapala II (A.D. 953-4); (3) MahipalaH (A.D. 
955); 9T and (4) Vijayapala (A.D. 960), successor of Kshitipala (Ins. 
11). Whether all these were distinct rulers or two or more of them 
were identical, it is difficult to say. Dr. Bhandarkar identifies 
Mahendrapala II with Devapala, and takes the kings Nos. 2 , 3 and 
the predecessor of No. 4 to be the same person. 98 Dr. N. Ray 99 
takes No. 1 to be son of Bhoja II, whom he identifies with Mahl- 
pala alios Kshitipala, but distinguishes him from Vinayakapala. 
He also suggests that No. 2 was probably a son of Mahendrapala II, 
No. 3 a son of No. 1, and No. 4 a son of No. 3, who was also called 
Kshitipala. Dr. Tripathi 100 regards Nos. 1 and 2 respectively as a 
brother and a son of Mahendrapala II, and No. 4 as a brother or 
half-brother of No. 1. He argues that there is not sufficient ground 
to hold that No. 3 was a Pratihara emperor, and he might have 
been a vassal ruler who, as Raj or Inscription (Ins. 11) shows, often 
assumed imperial titles. 101 It is also doubtful whether No. 2 is 
a separate king ruling in A.D. 953-4, or is to be identified with Vina¬ 
yakapala I whose name appeared in a record long after his death. 102 

The different views are quoted above just to indicate the great 
uncertainty prevailing about the succession to the imperial throne 
between A.D. 945 and 960. There is, however, no doubt that there 
was a steady decline in the power and authority of the empire dur¬ 
ing this period. The Chahamanas of Partabgarh, in south-east Raj- 
putana, acknowledged Mahendrapala II as overlord, and the im¬ 
perial officers were posted at Ujjayim and Mandapika (Mandu) in - 
A.D. 945-6 (Ins. 10). But in a record dated A.D. 954, we find the 
Chandellas taking credit for defeating the Gurjaras and forcibly 
taking possession of^fhe famous fort of Kalanjara, though they still 
refer to Vinayakapala as protecting the earth. 103 An inscription 
dated A.D. 960 (Ins. 11), found at Rajorgarh, about 28 miles south¬ 
west of the town of Aiwa r, records an order issued by the Maha- 


87 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

rajadhiraja, Parameivara , the illustrious Mathanadeva of the Gur- 
jara-Pratihara lineage, residing at Rajyapura (i.e. Rajor), to his 
officials. This record leaves no doubt that although, like the Chan- 
dellas, he invoked the name of the Pratihara Emperor Vijayapala- 
deva as his suzerain, yet he ruled as a de facto independent king. 

Most probably the Rashtrakiita king Krishna in led a second 
expedition to Northern India about A.D. 963. His feudatory, Gahga 
chief Marasimha, distinguished himself so much in this northern 
campaign that he came to be known as the king of the Gurjaras. 
This proves that the main brunt of the attack fell upon the Prati¬ 
haras. The great success of the Bashfrakuta king is proved by his 
Kanarese record incised on a stone slab found at Jura, 12 miles 
from Maihar Railway Station in Bundelkhand. 104 

Although the Rashprakutas could not achieve any permanent 
success they probably gave the final blow to the Pratihara domi¬ 
nation in Central India. The Chandella ruler Dhanga (A.D. 950- 
1000) claims to have attained “supreme lordship after indicting a 
defeat over the king of Kanyakubja.” Even Gwalior, which was a 
stronghold of the Pratiharas ever since the time of Ramabhadra, 
if not earlier still, fell into the hands of . the Chandellas. A few 
years later the Kachchhapaghata chief Vajradaman conquered it 
after^ defeating the Pratihara Emperor. 106 

The Chahamanas of &akambhan, many of whose chiefs helped 
their Pratihara overlords as noted above, 106 asserted their indepen¬ 
dence, and so did also the Guhilas 107 and perhaps some other vas¬ 
sals. While the feudatories were gradually defying the imperial 
authority, there arose new powers like the Kalachuris in Central 
India, the Paramaras in Maiwa, and the Chaulukyas in Gujarat to 
weaken still further the declining authority of the Pratiharas. 

The history of these powers, which is related in detail in a 
subsequent chapter, leaves no doubt that about the middle of the 
tenth century A.D. the Pratihara empire disintegrated and was 
gradually reduced to the territory round about Kanauj. We do not 
possess any record of the Pratihara emperors for nearly half a 
century after Vijayapala, who was on the throne early in A.D. 960. 
When the curtain rises again in A.D. 1019, the Pratihara empire 
had vanished and. North India presented the same political features 
as inevitably followed the disruption of an empire. Rajyapala, the 
successor of Vijayapala, ruled over the small kingdom of Kanauj, 
but the old imperial name and fame still lingered for a decade, to 
be finally swept away by the invasions of Sultan Mahmud. Trilo- 
chanapala, 108 the successor of Rajyapala, ruling in A.D. 1027, is 
the last of the Imperial Pratiharas known to us. 


38 


RISE AND FALL OF THE FBATlHABA EMPIRE 

Attention may be drawn to the fact that three of the powerful 
succession states that arose out of the ruins of the Fratthara empire 
were those of the Chahamanas (Chauhans) in Rajputana, Chaulu- 
kyas (Solankis) in Gujarat, and the Faramaras (Pawars) in Malwa. 
It is interesting to note that these three, along with the Pariharas 
(Pratiharas), are described in bardic traditions as Agnikula, origi¬ 
nating from a sacrificial fire-pit {agnikun^M) on Mount Abu. What¬ 
ever we might think of this mythical legend, it is not unlikely that 
these four tribes were connected by ethnic ties or some other close 
association, and we may therefore hold that a considerable part of 
the empire of the Pratiharas, specially their home-territory and 
original dominions, passed into the hands of kindred peoples who 
had hitherto accepted their suzerainty. 

8. THE PBATiHARA EMPIRE—A GENERAL REVIEW 

The Pratlhara empire, which continued in full glory for nearly 
a century, was the last great empire in Northern India before the 
Muslim conquest. This honour is accorded to the empire of Harsha 
by many historians of repute, but without any real justification; for 
the PratlMra empire was prdbabiy larger; certainly not less in 
extent, and its duration was much longer. It recalled, and to a cer¬ 
tain extent rivalled, the Gupta empire, and brought political ‘Unity 
and its attendant blessings upon a large part of Northern India. 
But its chief credit lies in its successful resistance to the foreign 
invasions from the west. From the days of Junaid (c. A.D. 725) 
to those of Mahmud of Ghazni, the Pratiharas stood as the bulwark 
of India’s defence against the aggression of the Muslims, This was 
frankly recognised by the Arab writers themselves. Historians of 
India, since the days of Elphinstone, have wondered at the slow 
progress of Muslim invaders in India, compared to their rapid adr 
vance in other parts of the world. Arguments of doubtful vali¬ 
dity have often been put forward to explain this unique phenome¬ 
non. But now there can be little doubt that it was fhe power of 
the Pratlhara arms that effectively barred the progress of the Mus-. 
lims beyond the confines of Sindh, their first conquest, for nearly 
three hundred years. In the light of later events this must be re¬ 
garded as the chief contribution of the Pratiharas to the history 
of India. 

The Pratlhara empire was the logical end of the tripartite 
struggle for power that characterised the history of India for nearly 
a century (A.D. 750-850). Dhruva and Govinda III, as well as 
Dharmapala and Devapala, played the imperial role, and then came 
the turn of the Pratiharas under Bhoja and Mahendrapala. Though 
in each case the empire, like waves of the sea, rose to the highest 


89 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


point only to break down, the Pratiharas had a longer spell of suc¬ 
cess than either of their rivals. 

The Pratlhara line was distinguished for its long succession of 
able rulers. Apart from the hero who founded the royal dynasty, 
four such remarkable personalities as Vatsaraja, Nagabhata II, 
Bhoja, and Mahendrapala, ruled almost uninterruptedly for a cen¬ 
tury and a half with a short break of three years. They created the 
tradition of an imperial glory which long endured and survived 
many rude shocks. It is reflected in the literary works of Raja- 
sekhara, the last Indian poet who could, with justifiable pride, refer 
to his royal patron as “the Mahdmjddhirdja of Aryavarta” (King- 
Emperor of Northern India). But the best testimony to the power 
and glory of the Pratiharas is the eloquent tribute paid to their 
wealth and resources by their inveterate enemies, the Arabs. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

1. R. C. Majumdar, Hie Gurjara-Pratiharas. JDL. X. 1-76 (abbreviated as GP). 

2. R. S. Tripathi, History of Kanauj (abbreviated as THK). 

3. A. S. Altekar, The Rashprdkufas and their times (abbreviated as AR). 

4. D. Sharrna, The Imperial Pratiharas—a revised study. (JIH, XXIL 93). 

5. N Ray, A note on the chronology of the Later Pratiharas. (I A, LVU. 230). 

IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS (Referred to in the text by the serial No.) 

1. Gwalior Stone Inscription of Bhoja, El, XVUI. 99. 

2. Jodhpur Inscription of Bauka, El, XVIII. 87. 

3. Two Grants of Chahikya Chiefs of the Time of Mahendrapala, El, IX. 1. 

4. Chatsu Inscription of the Guhilot chief Baladitya, El, XII. 13. 

5. Kahla Plate of Xalachuri Sodhadeva, El, VII. 88. 

6. Harsha or Haras Stone Inscription of the Chahamana Vigraharaja, El, II. 119 ff; 
IA, XLU. 60 ff. 

7. Siyadoni Inscription, El, I. 162. 

8. Asm Inscription of Mahlpala (A.D. 917), IA, XVI. 173. 

9. Bengal Asiatic Society’s CP of Vinayakapaia (A.D. 931), IA, XV. 138. 

10. Partabgarh Inscription of Mahendrap&la U (A.D. 946), El , XIV. 176. 

11. Rajorgarh Inscription of Vijayapala (A.D. 960), El, HI. 263. 

12. Barah CP of Bhoja, El, XIX. 15; XXIII. 242. 

13. Dauiatpura CP of Bhoja, El, V. 208; JBBRAS, XXI. 410. 

14. Gwalior Ins. of Bhoja, dated V. 932. El. 1.154. 

1. Ch. X, pp. 153 ff. 

2. Cf. Vol. Eft, p. 155. 

3. Cf. VoL m, p. 153. 

4. Cf. JDL, X. 10 and the authorities referred to therein. 

5. Vol. m, pp. 155, 173. 

6. Vol. m. p. 154. 

7. Cf. Ins. No. 2, given above. 

8. Vol. HI, p. 173. 

9. Sanjan CP. El, XVffl. 235. 

10. JDL, X. 25; El, XVIII. 239; THK. 226-7; AR. 40 (fn. 32). 

11. IHQ, VI. 753; ABORI , XVUI. 396; IC, XI. 161. 

12. Curiously enough this fact, mentioned in the Ellora Ihs. ( ASWI , V. 87), is not 
referred to by any of those who oppose the view that Vatsaraja ruled in Malwa. 

13. Cf. Hansof PI. H, XU. 197. The name of the suzerian king is given as Naga- 
valoka, but he is generally identified with Nagabhata I (ibid, 200). The grant 
was issued from Broach and records the gift of a village in Akruresvara-vishaya 
which has been identified with Anklesvar taluk on the left bank of the Narmada. 
We may, therefore, regard the Chahamana principality as extending up to the 
Kim nver and thus corresponding to the old Gurjara kingdom of NandlpurT. 

40 




RISE AND FALL OF THE PRAT1HARA EMPIRE 


14. It has been urged (JIH, XXIL 94) that according to Antroli-Chharoli pi. 
(JBBRAS , XVI. 105), dated A.D. 757, “Karka II, a feudatory Rashfi-akuta chief 
of Gujarat, gave away villages from practically the same region, showing there¬ 
by that sometime between AJ3. 756 and 757 the Rashtrakuta ruler Dantidurga 
had succeeded in defeating the Pra$Iharas and ending their supremacy in 
Lata.” But the villages granted lay to the south of the Kim river. Dr. Altekar 
argues ( AR . 11) that “since the donee hailed from Jambusara in the Broach 
District” this region was included in the dominions of Karka II. But this 
assumption can hardly be justified. On the whole, there is nothing to indicate 
that Nagabhata lost his supremacy over the feudatory principality of Broach 
which extended up to the Kim river in the south (see preceding note). 

15. ABORT, XVHL 397-8. 

16. For various opinions, cf. JDL, X. 23-25. Also, 1C, XI. 161 ft. 

17. Fleet (El, VI. 195); Bhandarkar (El, XVIII. 238-9); Altekar (AM. 39); Tripathi 
(THK. 225-6). 

18. J. C. Ghosh ( IHQ , VI. 755); Dasaratha Sarma (ABORT, XVIII. 396; JIH XXHL 
43); H. L. Jain (1C, XI. 161). 

19. H. L. Jain, op. tit. But in the map on p. 165, Badnawar is placed to the north¬ 
west of TJjjain. 

20. Baroda PL Of Karkaraja, 1A, XII, 163. 

21. Daulafcpura CP. (El, V. 208); Osia Ins. (AST, 1908-9, p. 108; JRAS, 1907, p. 1010). 

22. THK. 213. 

23. I proposed the identification-of die Bhandis with the Bhaffis (JDL, X. 28), and 
this view was accepted by Tripathi (THK. 229). Their identification with 
Bha$#i*s family was proposed by Ojha and is accepted by many. BharkU is 
referred to in Harsha-charita, but we do not know anything about him dr his 
successor, not even whether he was a ruling chief. 

24. Radhanpur and Wand Grant of Govinda III (El, VI. 248; I A, XI. 157). 

25. IHQ , XIV. 844. 

28. Cf. HBR. 105, in. 1, 2 and also Ch. HI. §2, below. 

27. Cf. in. 24. 

28. Vide infra, Ch. HI, § 2. 

29. Hie identification of these places has been discussed in JRAS, 1909, pp. 257-8. 
Anartta is northern part of Kathiawar Peninsula, and Vatsa probably represents 
the region round Kausambl, or Rewa country, further to the south, which is 
associated with the name of Vatsa. 

30. Cf. JIH , XXEL 99 ft, PIHC, XL 141. 

31. JIH, XXH. 103. 

32. Baroda PI. 1A, XU, 163; Sisavai Grant, v. 15; El, XXIH, 209. 

32a. References are to the list of “Important Inscriptions” given at the end of this 

Chapter. 

33. Vide infra, Ch. V, I VI. 

34. For a possible conflict or alliance between Nagabh&ta II and the E. Chalukya 
long Vijayaditya n, cf. Ch. VI. 

35. JIH, XXIL 102-3. 

36. El, XXVL 185. 

37. The Barah CP (EX, XIX. 15) shows that the KiUonjara-mandala in the Kanya- 
kubja-bhulcti was included in the dominions of Nagabhata II. 

38. Baroda PI. 1A, X33, 163. 

39. The victory of Govinda HI is referred to in many Rashtrakuta records of the 
main and Gurjara branches. Nagabhata is mentioned by name in Sanjan CP. 
(El, XVm. 235) which also refers to Govinda’s advance up to the Himalayas. 
The Pathari Pillar Ins. (El, IX. 255) refers to file hasty retreat* an# ‘devastated 
home* of Ntitg&valoka, who has been identified with Nigabhata H, Karkka, 
to whom the credit for this achievement is given, probably accompanied the 
Ra&trak&fe king Govinda HI ( IA , 1911, 239). 

40. Sanjfcn CP. v. 23 (El. XVXXL 245). 

41. Dr. Altekar has shown good grounds for the belief that Govinda QI led more 
than one expedition to Northern India, and has given a revised chronology of 
his campaigns (D. K. Bhandarkar Vol. 153). But he has somewhat changed his 
views in the preceding chapter. 

42. El, IS. 198. 

43. SI, L 156-7. 

44. El, TOX. 15. 

45. THK . 236; JIH, XXU. 104. 


41 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

46. This appears from the epithets given to the various kings in the official genea¬ 
logy contained in the royal charters. 

47. El, I. 154. 

48. This seems to be hinted at in v. 12 of the Gwalior Ins. (No. 1). 

49. El, XIX. 15; v. 208. 

50. El, XIX. 15; XX3U. 242. 

51. Vol. HI. pp. 153 ff. 

52. See p. 20. 

53. El, V. 208. 

54. See above p. 25. 

55. S£e above, p. 10. 

56. Begumra PI. 1A, XII. 179. 

57. See later, Ch. V. §11. 

58. JRAS, 1895. 513; El, IX. 277. 

59. El, I. 156. 

60. Tripathi thinks that Guhila II accompanied Mahendrapala I in his expedition 
against Bengal ( THK . 250-255; cf. also Ch. V. §VH. 2). Hie question cannot 
be definitely decided one way or the other. 

61. For a detailed account, cf. PIHC, VI. 166. 

62. EJ, XIX. 174. 

63. Begumra Grant of Krishna (IA, XIH. 66); Begumra Grant of Indra III, No. I, 
v. 15, El, IX. 31. 

64. El, XIV. 176. 

65. This follows from the description of Arab writer Sulaiman that Bhoja’s territory 
formed a tongue of land. It is also confirmed by a tradition in the Skanda 
Purdna to which Dr. Raychaudhuri drew attention ( 1HQ . V. 129-133). 

66. Pehoa Ins. (El, I. 184). 

67. HIED, I. 4. 

68. According to the story in the Skanda Purdna, referred to in fn. 65 above, Bhoja, 
king of K&nyakubja, abdicated his throne and went on a pilgrimage to the holy 
sites of Saurashtra. But this story, mixed up with myths and fables, can hardly 
be regarded as historical. Dr. Raychaudhuri has sought to prove the abdication 
by reference to epigraphic data, but without success (cf. THK. 245). 

69. For full discussion on this point, cf. JDL, X. 55. 

70. The name read by Fleet as Mahlahapala in the Asni CP. (IA, XVI. 173) is 
obviously a misreading for Mahlndrapala. 

71. Siyadoni Ins. (El, I. 162). 

72. This form occurs in Partabgarh Ins. (El, XIV. 182). 

73. Tripathi is wrong in’his statement that according to Asni Ins. Mahlpala was 
bom of Mahldevi (THK. 254). This (or any other) inscription does not give 
the name of Mahlpala's mother. 

74. Haddala CP. 1A, XU. 190; XVUI. 90. 

75. Khajuraho Ins. El, I. 122. 

76. JDL, X. 58-63; THK. 257. 

77. El, XIV. 180. 

78. I A, LVII. 230. 

79. THK. 255. 

80. Ibid. 

81. See later, Ch. V, §H. 

82. PIHC, VL 169. 

83. HIED. X. a. 

84. For full discussion, cf. JDL. X. 63; THK. 263. 

85. As RSjaiekhara was the guru of Mahendrapala also, it is likely that he wrote 
his. poems in the early part of Mahlpala’s reign. 

86. El, m 38. 

87. AR . 101-2; THK. 260; JDL, X. 66. 

88. Khajuraho Ins. ET, I. 121. 

89. Some scholars hold that the incident refers to the help that Mahlpala received 
in his struggle against his brother (THK. 256). But, as already noted above, 
we have no evidence of any such struggle for the throne. 

90. Harisena associates Vinayadikapala, in AD. 931, with Vardhamanapura, usuallv 
identified with Wadhwan (above, p. 22). Cf. IC, XI. 162. 

91. AS1, 1924-25, p. 168. 

92. This is strtragly denied by Tripathi (THK. 262, 270). He, however, observes 
that the Chandella ruler Ya&ovarman gave 'a great blow to the prestige of the 
PratftriLras’ (ibid. 272). 


42 


RISE AND FALL OF THE PRATIHARA EMPIRE 


93. Deoli PI. (v. 25). El, V. 188. 

94. THK. 267-8; AR . 113. But this does not seem very likely. Possibly the two 
forts were conquered by a third power (Kalachuris or Chandellas) allied to 
the Rashtrakutas, and the Gurjara-Pratihiras gave up all hopes of recovering 
them (cf. JOR. XVI. 155-58). For a critical discUSfeiorv’of Mahlpala’s reign cf. 
J/H, XXXVIII, 611-26. 

95. ASI, 1924-25, p. 168. 

96. Bhandarkar infers from Ins. 10 that Vidagdha was an epithet of Mahendra- 
pala II (List No. 61. fn. 3). 

97. Bayna Ins. (E/, XXII. 122). 

98. List of Ins. p. 400. 

99. 1A, LVH. 234. 

100. THK. 271-4. 

101. Ibid. 275. 

102. The Khajuraho Ins. of Dhahga, dated A.D. 954 (El, I. 122), mentions, in the 
last line, Vinayakapaladeva as protecting the earth. There is no doubt that 
he was the Pratihara ruler of Kanauj to whom the Chandellas still paid at least 
nominal allegiance. He was formerly identified with VinayakapwLla I whose 
last known date is AD. 942. But as he must have died before AD. 946, the 
known date of his son and successor Mahendrapala II (ins. 10), it was held that 
the inscription, though originally drafted earlier than AD. 946, was actually 
set up in AD. 954, without any modification of the suzerain’s name. But this 
explanation is not accepted by some scholars who regard him as a different 
ruler Vmayakapala H (THK. 273; I A, LVII. 232). 

103. See preceding note. If, as noted above, the fort of K&lanjara had been seized 
by the R$shtrakutas, the Chandellas probably recovered it from them. But 
even then they conquered it on their own account and not on behalf of their 
Gurjar a-Pr atlhara overlord. It is possible that the successful reconquest of 
this region from the Rashtrakutas made the Chandellas virtually an indepen¬ 
dent power. 

104. El, XIX 287. Altekar takes quite a different view of the expedition (AR. 121), 
but does not meet the argument of Mr. N. L. Rao (El, XIX. 289) that the 
northern campaign of Krishna HI took place in AD. 963-4. The reference to 
the Gurjaras makes it unlikely that the campaign was directed against a 
Paramara king, as Altekar thinks. Evidently Altekar has changed his view; 
cf. above p. 14. 

105. I A, XV. 36. This must have taken place before AD. 977 when Vajradaman 
was already in possession of Gwalior (JASB,. XXXI. 393). 

106. See pp. 22, 27, 31. 

107. Vide infra, the history of the Guhilas and Chahamanas in Ch. V. 

108. Jhusi CP. 1A, XVTH. 33. Another king Yas&hpala is known from Kara Ins. 
(JRAS, 1927, p. 692), but it is not definitely blown whether he belonged to 
the Imperial Pratihara family. 


/ 


48 



CHAPTER III 


THE PALAS 

1. THE RISE OF THE PALAS 

Reference has been made above 1 to the political disintegration 
of Bengal resulting in anarchy and confusion for more than a cen¬ 
tury after the death of &a£ahka. But about the middle of the eighth 
century A.D. a heroic and laudable effort was made to remedy the 
miserable state of things. The people at last realized that all their 
troubles were due to the absence of a strong central authority and 
that this could be set up only by the voluntary surrender of powers 
to one popular leader by the numerous chiefs exercising sovereignty 
in different parts of the country. It reflects no small credit upon 
the political sagacity and the spirit of sacrifice of the leading men 
of Bengal that they rose to the occasion and selected one among 
themselves to be the sole ruler of Bengal to whom they all paid 
willing allegiance. 2 It is not every age, it is not every nation, 
that can show such a noble example of subordinating private in¬ 
terests to public welfare. The nearest parallel is the great political 
change that took place in Japan in' A.D. 1870. The result was 
almost equally glorious and the great bloodless revolution ushered 
in an era of glory and prosperity such as Bengal has never enjoyed 
before or since. 

Tie hero who was thus called to the throne by the popular 
voice was named Gopala. We do not know anything of his early 
history, but may very well presume that he was a leading chief 
who had already made his mark as a ruler and a general. 3 His 
father Vapyafa is said to have destroyed his enemies, and was per¬ 
haps a military chief of renown, but we cannot say whether he 
was a ruling chief. Dayitavishnu, the grandfather of Gopala, is 
only described as a learned man and evidently had no military 
achievements to his credit. Gopala was thus the real founder of 
the ruling dynasty which came to be known as Bala, from the last 
part of his name which formed the name-ending of all his successors 

•n, 

•—affording an almost exact parallel to the Gupta dynasty. Gopala 
was a Kshatriya, or at least came to be regarded as such, and it 
was only at a very late age that his family claimed any mythical 
pedigree such as descent from the Sun or the Ocean. Gopala was 
a Buddhist and so were all his successors. According to Tibetan 
tradition, Gopala founded a monastery at Nalanda. 


44 


THE 3PAIAS 


In a poetical work Rdmacharita 4 , written by a court-poet of a 
later Bala king, Varendri or North Bengal is said to be-the father- 
land ( janakabhu ) of the Palas. At the same time, there are good 
grounds to believe that Gopala’s original kingdom was in Vahga or 
East Bengal. We may, therefore, readily accept Taranatha’s 
account according to which Gopala was born of a Kshatriya family 
near Pundravardhana (Bogra District), but was subsequently elected 
ruler of Bhahgala, which was undoubtedly a corrupt form of Vangala 
or Vahga. Taranatha seems to imply that the election was only 
in respect of this kingdom which formed a part of Bengal. But 
the Khalimpur copper-plate (No. l) 4a of Gopala’s son Dharmapala 
speaks of his having been elected without any such geographical 
limitations. But whatever might have been the original limits of 
his kingdom, it is probable that before his death he consolidated 
his rule over the whole of Bengal. 6 His reign-period is not definite¬ 
ly known but probably extended from A.D. 750 to 770. 6 

2. DHARMAPALA (c. A.D. 770-810) 

When Dharmapala ascended the throne of Bengal, the political 
horizon was gloomy in the extreme. The Pratiharas, who had esta¬ 
blished their power in Malwa and Hajputana, were gradually ex¬ 
tending their territories in the east, and the newly established 
Rashtrakufa power in the Deccan also cast covetous eyes on the 
rich fertile plains of the north. 7 Dharmapala was shortly involved 
in a struggle with these two powers—whether deliberately out of 
imperial designs, or as a means of defence against aggressive ene¬ 
mies, we cannot say. The course of events in this long-drawn 
struggle cannot be definitely traced in chronological order, but some 
of the main incidents can be broadly noted. The first encounter 
took place between the Pratihara ruler Vatsaraja and Dharmapala, 
probably somewhere in the Gangetic Doab, 8 in which the former 
gained a complete victory. He is said to have 11 ‘appropriated with 
ease the fortune of royalty of the Gauda” and “carried away Gauda’s 
umbrellas of state.** But before Vatsaraja could collect the spoils 
of his victory, he was defeated by the Rashtrakuta king Dhruva and 
forced to take refuge in the deserts of Raj putana. Dhruva then 
advanced to the Doab 9 and defeated Dharmapala, but shortly after 
his victory he retreated to the Deccan. 

It would appear that Dharmapala gained more than he had 
lost by the incursions of the Rashtrakutas. For while Vatsaraja’s 
power was effectively destroyed, Dharmapala did not suffer much 
either in power or prestige. The Rashtrakutas not only freed him 
from the Pratihara menace, but left in the harried and devastated 
Northern India a free field for his military ambitions. He was 


45 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

not slow to take full advantage of the situation, and by a series of 
victorious campaigns, made himself the suzerain of nearly the whole 
of Northern India. 

Although the details and chronology of Dharmapala’s campaigns 
are not known to us, we can form some idea of their nature and 
extent from the description of the durbar which he held at Kanauj. 
His main object in convoking the great assembly was to proclaim 
himself as the suzerain and install Chakrayudha on the throne of 
Kanauj in place of Indrayudha whom he had defeated. 10 The 
durbar was attended by a number of vassal chiefs among whom are 
mentioned the rulers of Bhoja, Matsya, Madra, Kuru, Yadu, Yavana, 
Avanti, Gandhara and Kira, who uttered acclamations of approval, 
“bowing down respectfully with their diadems trembling.” This 
categorical and specific statement, occurring in a contemporary 
record, cannot be lightly brushed aside, 11 and we must hold that 
Dharmapala must have enjoyed, at least for some time, the unique 
position of a paramount lord in Northern India. This view is sup¬ 
ported by the fact that even in a poetical work composed by a 
Gujarati poet 12 in the eleventh century A.D., Dharmapala is 
referred to as the “Lord of Northern India” ( Uttardpathasvdmin ). 13 

We know very little of the different states, mentioned above, 
which acknowledged the suzerainty of Dharmapala, but most of 
them are well-known names. Gandhara represents the Western 
Punjab and the lower Kabul valley. Madra was in the Central Punjab, 
while Kira, Kuru, and Matsya correspond respectively to Kangra, 
Thaneswar and Jaipur regions. Avanti denotes the whole or a part 
of Malwa, and the Yavana must be taken to refer to a Muslim 
principality in the Sindhu valley. The location of Yadu and Bhoja, 
though these are very well-known in ancient Indian history, offers 
some difficulty. The Yadus or Yadavas had various settlements 
such as Simhapura (Punjab), Mathura, and Dvaraka (Kathiawar 
Peninsula), and probably the first is meant here. The Bhojas pro¬ 
bably ruled over Berar or a part of it. 

These states were not annexed by Dharmapala, but their rulers 
acknowledged his suzerainty, and were evidently left undisturbed 
so long as they paid homage and fulfilled the other conditions im¬ 
posed on them. 14 The kingdom of Kanauj was, however, on a diffe¬ 
rent footing. Its ruler Indrayudha, who was probably a vassal of 
Vatsaraja, 15 was defeated and dethroned, and another ruler, Cha¬ 
krayudha, probably a member of the same royal family, was placed 
on the throne by Dharmapala. It was the visible symbol of the 
most significant change in the political situation of the time, viz, 
the transfer of supreme power in Northern India from the Prataharas 




46 


THE PALAS 


to the Palas and the formal assumption of imperial authority by 
the latter. Kanauj thus became once more ^ the seat and symbol 
of imperialism, 16 though it was ruled directly not by Dharmapala, 
but by his nominee Chakrayudha. 

The empire of Dharmapala may thus be broadly divided into 
three distinct parts. Bengal and Bihar, which formed its nucleus, 
were directly ruled by him. Beyond this, the kingdom of Kanauj, 
roughly corresponding to modem U.P., was a close dependency, 
whose ruler was nominated by, and directly subordinate to, him. 
Further to the west and south, in the Punjab, Western Hill States, 
Rajputana, Malwa and Berar, were a number of vassal states which 
did not form an integral part of the dominions ruled over by Dhar¬ 
mapala, but whose rulers acknowledged him as their overlord and 
paid him homage and obedience. According to a tradition pre¬ 
served in the Svayambhu-Purana , Nepal was also a vassal state of 
Dharmapala. 17 

The position of supremacy attained by Dharmapala must have 
been the result of a series of victorious military campaigns. We are 
told that, in the course of these, Dharmapala *s army visited such 
holy places .as Kedara and Gokarna. The former is even now a 
famous place of pilgrimage on the Himalayas in Garhwal and may 
be regarded as a landmark in the northern campaign of Dharmapala 
in course of which he subdued Kuru, Madra, Kira and probably 
other neighbouring states. The location of Gokarna is somewhat 
uncertain. It has been identified with a holy place of that name 
in the North Kanara District of the Bombay State, 18 as well as 
with a sacred site in Nepal 19 on the bank of the Bagmati river. 
The latter view is more probable. If we accept the other, we have 
to presume that Dharmapala marched over the whole of the Deccan 
right across the entire length of the Rashtrakuta dominions. We 
have no independent evidence of such a brilliant military campaign, 
and if there was any basis for it, it would surely have been pro¬ 
minently mentioned in the Pala records. 

Dharmapala’s triumphant career did not remain unchallenged 
for long. Nagabhata II, the son and successor of Vatsaraja, revived 
the fortunes of his family and adopted an aggressive imperialist 
policy like his father. He achieved great success and even con¬ 
quered Kanauj and drove away Chakrayudha. This was really a 
challenge to Dharmapala whose protege Chakrayudha was. A 
struggle for supremacy between the two rivals was inevitable, and 
Nagabhata made extensive preparations. 20 According to the Pratl- 
hara records, a pitched battle was fought, probably near Monghyr, in 
which Nagabhata defeated the mighty lord of Vanga “who appeared 

47 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


like a mass of dark, dense cloud in consequence of the crowd of 
mighty elephants, horses, and chariots”. 21 

The Pala records make no reference to this struggle, but the 
very fact that the Pratiharas advanced up to Monghyr supports 
their claim to a great victory. Unfortunately, Nagabhata II had to 
suffer the same fate as his father. Once more it was the Rashtra- 
kutas who decided the political issue in Northern India, Govinda III 
completely defeated Nagabhata II and forced him to give up the 
dream of founding an empire in India. 22 

The Bashtrakufa records tell us that both Dharmapala and 
Chakrayudha submitted of their own accord to Govinda III. 23 
Considering the great advantages which these two had derived from 
the timely intervention of the Rashtrakuta king, this is by no means 
surprising or improbable. Indeed it is even possible that they ap¬ 
pealed to Govinda III for aid to save themselves from Nagabh£t&*s 
domineering power, and secured it by a formal acknowledgment 
of his suzerainty. But in reality this meant nothing, for, as they 
could have easily anticipated, Govmda III soon left for the Deccan 
and Dharmapala was once more free to pursue unchecked his im¬ 
perial ambitions. 

On the whole there are good grounds to believe that the great 
success of Nagabhata II was a passing phase that ended with the ' 
Rashtrakqta invasion, and Dharmapala continued to rule as a mighty 
emperor till the end of his life. When he died at an advanced 
age, after a reign of 32 years or more, he left intact 24 his extensive 
dominions to his son Devapala. 

Although we know so little of the personal history of Dharma¬ 
pala, there is enough to indicate that his career was a remarkable 
one. He was the hero of a hundred fights and passed through many 
crises, when not only his own fortunes, but the fate of Bengal hung 
in the balance. But he never faltered; he overcame all difficulties, 
and in the end achieved phenomenal success. His triumph in the 
political field seems almost miraculous. Bengal, which had lost all 
political homogeneity and had almost been eliminated as a factor 
in Indian politics, suddenly emerged under him as the most power¬ 
ful state in Northern India. The country, which was hopelessly 
divided by internal dissensions and trampled upon by a succession 
of foreign invaders for more than a century, was raised by him to 
the position of a strong integrated state exercising impe^al sway 
over a considerable part of Northern India. £a&anka’s dream of 
founding a great Gau^a empire was at last fulfilled. The new im¬ 
perial status attained by Bengal is reflected in the records of Dharma¬ 
pala. He assumed full imperial titles Parame£vara, Paramabhattaraka, 


AS 



THE PALAS 


Mahdvdjddhiraja. Reference has been made above to the great 
imperial durbar which he held at Kanauj. A grandiloquent descrip¬ 
tion is also given (Ins. No. 1)' of the pomp and splendour of the 
court which he held at the other imperial city Pa^aliputra, “where 
the bed of the Ganga was covered by his mighty fleet and the day¬ 
light was darkened by the crowd of his mighty elephants and the 
dust raised by the hoofs of numberless horses presented by the kings 
of the north, some of whom also attended in person with their innu¬ 
merable infantry.” These are no doubt poetic embellishments, but 
they reflect the new spirit of the people. 

The credit for this great transformation of Bengal is no doubt 
mainly due to the spirit of self-sacrifice and the sense of political 
wisdom displayed by her people and leading chiefs when they volun- 
• tarily surrendered their power and authority to their elected chief, 
Gopala. Verily a remarkable act produced a remarkable result, 
of which there are few parallels in the history of India. But king 
Dharmapala is also entitled to a large share of the credit. He per¬ 
sonified the new energy and vision of the people, and led them to 
the Promised Land. His grateful subjects fully realized what they 
owed to* him, and his name and fame were sung all over the coun¬ 
try. It is a strange irony of fate that he should have been for¬ 
gotten in the land of Ills birth but his memory should be kept green 
in Tibet. According to Tibetan tradition, 25 he was a great patron 
of Buddhism and founded the famous Vikramasila monastery which 
developed into a great centre of Buddhist learning and culture, 26 
second only to that of Nalanda. It was located at the top of a hill, 
on the banks of the Ganga in Magadha, and most probably the hill at 
Patharghata near Bhagalpur represents the site of this great univer¬ 
sity. It was named after the great emperor who had a second name 
Vikramasila. Dharmapala also founded a great vihara at Somapuri 
in Varendra, the ruins of which have been recently excavated at 
Paharpur in the Rajshahi District. 27 According to Tibetan authority, 
Dharmapala also founded a big and splendid monastery at Odanta- 
purl in Bihar, but others give the credit for this achievement to 
Devapala or Gopala. Dharmapala was the patron of the great 
Buddhist author Haribhadra and. according to Taranatha, founded 
fifty religious schools. He thus distinguished himself also in the 
peaceful pursuits of life in.spite of his untiring activities in the field 
of war and politics. 

Dharmapala married Kannadevi, the daughter of the Rashtra- 
kuta king Parabola. A Rashtrakuta king of this name is known to 
have ruled in Central India in A.D. 861. 28 Although he is usually 
regarded as the father-in-law of Dharmapala. it seems very doubtful 
in view of the fact that Dharmapala must have died more than half 

49 

A. I *K.—-4. 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

a century before this date. It is not, of course, beyond the range of 
possibility that out of political considerations Dharmapala married 
at a fairly advanced age a young lady of the Bashtrakuta royal 
family. The issue of this marriage was Devapala who succeeded his 
father about A.D. 810. The last known date of Dharmapala is his 
32nd regnal year (Ins. No. 1). According to Taranatha he ruled for 
64 years; but such a long reign is not supported by any other posi¬ 
tive evidence. We may, therefore regard Dharmapala as having 
ruled from c. A.D. 770-810. 

3 DEVAPALA (c. A.D. 810-850) 

Devapala was a worthy son of a worthy father. Not only did 
he maintain intact the great empire inherited by him, but he even 
appears to have extended its boundaries. He is said to have exacted 
tributes from the whole of Northern India from the Himalayas to 
the Vindhyas and from the eastern to the western ocean. 29 More 
specifically we are told that his victorious campaigns led him as far 
as Kamboja in the west and Vindhyas in the south, 30 and that he 
exterminated the Utkalas, conquered Pragjyotisha (Assam), curbed 
the pride of the Hunas, and destroyed the haughtiness of the lords 
of the Dravidas and Gurjaras. In these victories he was consider¬ 
ably helped by the diplomacy and wise counsels of his ministers, 
Darbhapani and his grandson Kedaramisra, and the bravery and 
military skill of his cousin, Jayapala. 31 

It would appear from these statements that Devapala, like his 
father, followed an aggressive imperialist policy and spent a great 
part of his life in military activities. He was materially helped by 
his cousin Jayapala, son of Dharmapala’s younger brother Vakpala. 
Jayapala was the commander of the army, and we are told that on 
his approach the king of Pragjyotisha (Assam) submitted without 
any fight and the king of Utkala fled from his capital city. 32 It is 
likely that both the kingdoms acknowledged the suzerainty of the 
Pala empire but, as will be shown below, threw off the yoke within 
a short time. 

On the opposite extremity of the empire lay the Hunas. They 
had several principalities, one of which was situated in Uttarapatha 
near the Himalayas. This was probably subjugated by Devapala, 
who then proceeded to the Kamboja territory which lay still further 
to the west in the North-West Frontier Province. Unfortunately, 
we do not know the details of his campaign or the extent of his 
success. 

The Gurjara lords against whom Devapala fought must have 
been the Pratlhara rulers. It is possible that Nagabhata n tried 


50 


THE PALAS 


to assert his power after the death of Dharmapala and if, as some 
scholars believe, he transferred his capital to Kanauj, he must have 
achieved some success. But Devapala soon re-established the Pala 
supremacy, and it was possibly after his successful campaign against 
the Pratiharas that he advanced to the Huna and Kamboja princi¬ 
palities. Nagabhata’s son, Ramabhadra, probably also had his king¬ 
dom invaded by Devapala. The next Pratihara king Bhoja also, in 
spite of his initial success, suffered reverses at the hands of Devapala, 
and could not restore the fortunes of his family so long as the Pala 
emperor was alive. Thus Devapala successfully fought with three 
generations of Pratihara rulers, 33 and maintained the Pala supre¬ 
macy in Northern India. 

The Dravida king defeated by Devapala is generally supposed 
to be the Rashtrakuta ruler Amoghavarsha. This view is not unlikely 
in view of the part played by Dhruva and Govinda III in Northern 
India, and the weakness and pacific disposition of Amoghavarsha. 
But Dravida, it should be remembered, normally denotes the land 
of the Tamils in the south and not the Deccan, the territory of the 
Rashtrakutas. From this point of view, it has been suggested that 
the Dravida king defeated by Devapala was most probably his con¬ 
temporary Pandya king Sri-Mara &rI-Vallabha who claims in an 
inscription to have defeated a hostile confederation consisting of the 
Gangas, Pallavas, Cholas, Kalihgas, Magadhas and others. 34 The 
Magadhas in this list obviously refer to the Pala forces, and it is 
not unlikely that the conquest of Utkala brought Devapala into con¬ 
tact with the southern powers. As the Rashtrakutas were common 
enemies of these powers and the Palas, an alliance between them 
might have been dictated by political exigencies. Unfortunately, 
we know little of this phase of Pala diplomacy, and cannot say any¬ 
thing definite about the expedition of Devapala to the far south. But 
some victorious campaign in this’region may be the basis of the claim 
put forward in the Monghyr copper-plate (No. 2) that the empire of 
Devapala extended from the Himalayas in the north to Ramesyara 
Setubandha in the south. 

But whatever we might think of Devapala’s victory in the ex¬ 
treme south, there cannot be any doubt that he occupied the position 
of a paramount ruler in North India. It does not appear that his 
direct rule extended beyond Bengal and Bihar, but as his victorious 
arms, reached the frontier both in the east and the west, there is 
no reason to doubt that he effectively maintained the suzerainty 
which he had inherited from his father. His great rivals, the Praii- 
hiiras, in spite of some initial successes, could not re-establish theii 
power till after his death. The Rash^rakOtas left North India alone 


51 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


during his reign, and Devapala probably carried the fight to their 
dominions. He certainly led his army as far as the Sindhu and 
claimed an imperial position in North India, a feat to which no other 
ruler of Bengal could lay claim during the next thousand years. 

Devapala had a long reign of about forty years. 35 He was a 
great patron of Buddhism like his father, and his fame spread to 
many Buddhist countries outside India. About this time a powerful 
Buddhist dynasty, the Sailendras, ruled over an extensive empire 
in the East Indies, 56 Balaputradeva, a king of this dynasty, sent an 
ambassador to Devapala, asking for a grant of five villages in order 
to endow a monastery at Nalanda. Devapala granted the request. 37 
Another record informs us that a learned Buddhist priest, hailing 
from Nagarahara (Jelalabad), received high honours from Devapala 
and was appointed the head of Nalanda monastery. 38 

The reigns of Dharmapala and Devapala constitute the most 
brilliant chapter in the history of Bengal. Never before, or since, 
till the advent of the British, did Bengal play such an important 
role in Indian politics. A brief but interesting account of the Pala 
empire at the height of its glory is given by the Arab merchant 
Suiaiman who visited India and wrote his account in A.D. 851. 39 
He refers to the Pala kingdom as Ruhmi, 40 a name which cannot be 
satisfactorily explained. According to him the Pala ruler was at 
war with his neighbours, the Gurjaras and the Rashtrakutas, but 
his troops were more numerous than those of his adversaries. "We 
are told that the Pala king took 50,000 elephants in his military 
campaigns, and ten to fifteen thousand men in his army were “em¬ 
ployed in fulling and washing cloths.” 

The Tibetan records claim that some of their rulers, who were 
contemporaries of Dharmapala and Devapala, conquered the domi¬ 
nions of the Palas, and specifically refer to Dharmapala as submitting 
to Tibetan supremacy. This is not, however, corroborated by any 
independent evidence, and we cannot say how far the claims can 
be regarded as historically true. It is not unlikely that Tibet exer¬ 
cised some political influence in Eastern India during the period 
A.D. 750-850, and the occasional reverses of the Pala rulers at the 
hands of the Pratiharas and the Rashtrakutas may be partly due to 
Tibetan aggression. 41 

4. FALL OF THE PALA EMPIRE 

Devapala was succeeded by Vigrahapala. He was most proba¬ 
bly a nephew, descended from Vakpala, the younger brother of 
Dharmapala, but some scholars regard him as a son of Devapala. 42 
After a short reign of probably three or four years he abdicated the 


52 


THE PALAS 


throne and retired to an ascetic life. His son and successor Narayana- 
pala, who ruled for more than half a century, 43 was also of a pacific 
and religious disposition. During the «reigns of these two unmartial 
kings the Pala empire fell to pieces. Some time after A.D. 860 the 
Rashtrakutas defeated the Pala rulers.^ 4 The Pratiharas took 
advantage of the distress and weakness of their rivals; and their 
rulers Bhcja and Mahendrapala gradually extended their power to 
the east. Narayanapala not only lost Magadha (South Bihar), but 
for a time even North Bengal/the homeland of the Paias, passed into 
the hands of the Pratihara king Mahendrapala. 45 

The triumph of the Pratiharas encouraged the subordinate chiefs 
to throw off the yoke of the Paias. King Harjara of Assam assumed 
imperial titles and is credited with many victories; and the Sailod- 
bhnvas established their power on a firm footing in Orissa. 45 

The disintegration of the Pala empire was thus almost complete, 
and for a time the rule of Narayanapala was probably confined to a 
part of Bengal. He. however, recovered North Bengal and South 
Bihar from the Pratiharas some time before the year 54 of his 
reign, 47 which probably corresponds to about A.D. 908. This was 
probably due to the Rashtrakuta invasion of the Pratihara dominions 
—the factor which had saved the Paias more than once in the past. 
The Rashtrakuta king Krishna II, who defeated the Pratiharas, how¬ 
ever, also claims success against the Gaudas and it is not unlikely 
that Narayanapala was defeated by him. 48 But peace was estab-, 
lished and |probably cemented by a marriage alliance. For the' 
Rashtrakuta Tunga, whose daughter was married to Narayanapala’s 
son Rajyapala (Ins. No. 5), is most probably to be identified w^th 
Jagattunga, 49 the son of Krishna II. In any case. Narayanapala re¬ 
established the Pala supremacy in Bengal and Bihar before his death 
which took place about A.D. 908. He was succeeded by his son 
Blajyapala. ' 

The Pala kingdom steadily declined during the reigns of Rajya¬ 
pala and his two successors, Gopala II and Vigrahapala II, which 
covered a period of about eighty years 60 The collapse of the Prati¬ 
hara empire might have offered some respite to the Paias, but they 
suffered equally from the new powers that arose out of the ruins 
of that empire. The records of both the Chandellas and the Kala- 
churis 51 refer to the defeat inflicted by their rulers upon Gauda. 
Radha, Anga, and Vangala. The mention of these separate units 5 -’ 
indicates a disintegration of the Pala kingdom into a number of in¬ 
dependent or semi-independent principalities. And we definitely 
know the existence of at least two such states within the boundaries 
of Bengal. 


58 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The first is a kingdom in West Bengal ruled by a Kamboja 
family. We know the names of three rulers of this family, viz. 
Raj yap ala and his two sons Karayaoapala and Nayap&la. In a char¬ 
ter 53 issued by Nayapala in which both he and his father are given 
imperial titles, Paramesvara, Paramabhaffaraka and Mahdrdjddhiraja, 
lands are granted in the Vardhamana-b hukti, i.e. Burdwan division 
in West Bengal. The Kamboja rule in North Bengal is testified to 
by an inscribed pillar found in Dinajpur District which mentions a 
lord of Gauda belonging to the Kamboja family. 64 The date of this 
record has been interpreted as 888 (Saka), though this is doubtful. 
But there is no doubt that both the records belong to the latter half 
of the tenth century A.D. and-probably refer to the same family. 
The names of the three kings who thus ruled over both North and 
West Bengal were all borne by the Pala kings of Bengal and, what 
is curious, Raj yapa la’s queen is named BhagyadevI, as is also the 
case with the Pala king Rajyapala. Nevertheless we cannot identify 
the two without more evidence. It is held by some scholars that 
the K&mbojas, a hill tribe from Tibet or other regions, conquered 
Bengal. But it is more likely that some high official of the PSlas, 
belonging to the Kamboja family or tribe, took advantage of the 
weakness of the Pala kings and set up an independent kingdom. Its 
capital was Priyangu which cannot be identified. 

A copper-plate found at Chittagong 65 mentions a Buddhist king 
of Harikela named Mahdrdjddhirnja Kantideva. Harikela primarily 
denotes Eastern Bengal, or a part of it comprising the Sylhet and 
portions of neighbouring districts, though it was sometimes used in 
a wider sense, as a synonym of Vahga (East and South Bengal). 66 
The capital of KSntideva was Vardhamanapura. If it denotes the 
modem city of Burdwan then his kingdom must have comprised a 
portion of West Bengal also, but this is very doubtful. The date of 
Kantideva is not definitely known, but he probably reigned during 
the century following the death of Devapala. 

Kings with natnes ending in - chandra also ruled in East Bengal 
as independent kings after Kantideva. One of them is Layahachan- 
dra 57 whose record dated in his 18th ‘ regnal year has been found 
near Comilla. Two Buddhist kings, Trailokyachandra and his son 
&richandra, ruled over Harikela and Chandradvlpa (Bakarganj 
District). Srlchandra, who ruled for no less than 46 years, 58 pro* 
bably flourished towards the close of the tenth and the beginning of 
the eleventh century A.D. Later, this dynasty extended its power 
to South Bengal. The original home of this dynasty was Rohitagiri 
which has been identified by some with Rohtasgadh, and by others 
with Lalmai or Mainamati hills near Comilla in Bengal. 


54 


THE PALAS 


Gopala II is known to have ruled in East Bengal in the first, and 
North Bengal in the sixth year of his reign. 50 But gradually he or his 
son and successor Vigrahapala II lost hold of nearly the whole of 
Bengal and ruled only in Bihar. The Pala kingdom had thus reached 
the very nadir when Mahipala I, the son of Vigrahapala II, ascended 
the throne about A.D. 988. The new king was, however, made of 
sterner stuff, and succeeded to a large extent in recovering the old 
glory of his family. A full account of his reign will be given in the 
next volume, and it will suffice here to state that before he had 
reigned for three years he had reconquered nearly the whole of 
North and East Bengal “after defeating the usurpers who had seized 
his ancestral kingdom” fins. No. 5). Thus by the year A.D. 1000, 
with which this volume closes, the Palas had once more become a 
powerful ruling family in Eastern India.' Mahipala. who is justly 
described as the second founder of the Pala kingdom, gave it a new 
lease of life which continued, with strange vicissitudes, for nearly 
another century and a half. 

GENERAL REFERENCE 

1. HBR. Ch. VI. (It contains a full reference to authorities for topics discussed 
in this chapter). 


IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 

1. Khalimpur OP of Dharmapala, year 32. El, IV. 243. 

2. Monghyr CP of Devap§la, year 83. El. XVIII. 304. 

3. Bhagalpur CP Nar^yanapala, year 17. I A, XV. 304. 

4. Badal Pillar Inscription. El. II 160. 

5. Bangadh Grant of Mahipala. El. XIV. 324. 

(All the above inscriptions arc edited in Gaitdalekluniialn a Bengali work, hv 
Akshaya Kumar Maitreya). 

1. Vol. Ill, pp. 142 ff. 

2. The election of a ruler by the prakritis or people of Bengal in order to remove 
misrule and anarchy is referred to in Ins. No. 1. and also described by the 
Tibetan historian L^rna Taranatha (History of Buddhism in India. Tr. by A. 
Schiefner). Taranatha's work v/as written in AD. 1608, but he had evidently 
access to old traditions and records now lost. His statements about the Pala 
kings, though interesting and informative, should not be accepted r.s historical 
unless corroborated by independent evidence. 

The common meaning of the word prakrili is 'subject*. and hcp.ee it is 
generally held that Gopala was elected king by the general body of the people. 
But we cannot think of a general election in the modern sense. The choice was 
evidently made by the leading chiefs and endorsed by the. people. 

3. Military skill and administrative capacity must have been the indispensable 
qualifications of a leader in those troublous times. 

4. A fuller account of this work .will be given in connection with the history of 
Ramapala in the next volume. 

4a. References are to the list of ‘‘Important Inscriptions” given above. 

5. It is said in Ins. No. 2 (v. 3) that his conquests extended up to the sea. 

G. The chronology of the Pala kings is not yet definitely settled. The view adopted 
here is based on HBR (Ch. VI, App. II, p. 176). 

7. The history of the Rashtrakutas and the Pratiharas has been dealt with in 
Chapters I and II. 

8. Some scholars take the view that Vatsaroja advanced as far os Bengal and 
actually conquered it up to the sea. This docs not seem likely, and the only 
evidence in support of il »s a. casual verse in a poetical work composed four 
centuries after thus event. 


55 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


9. It is definitely said in the Bashtrakuta records that Dhruva met the king of 
Gauda between the Ganga and the Yamuna and carried off his umbrellas of 
stab# (Sanjan CP. v. 14; El, XVffl. 244). It has been recently urged by a scholar 
(/HQ, XX. 84) that Dhruva did not defeat the king of Gautfa, but really got 
his state umbrellas from Vatsaraja when the latter was returning from hi* 
expedition to Bengal. In his opinion, it was Vatsarija whom he met and 
defeated between the Gangs and the Yamuna, but the writer of the Bashprakuta 
records, who knew that Dhruva captured the white umbrellas belonging to the 
Gauda king, naturally, but erroneously, thought that the Gaud& king was 
defeated by Dhruva. This theory is no doubt ingenious and even plausible, 
but cannot be accepted in view of the categorical statement in Sanjan CP, so 
long at least as we have no evidence in support of it. 

10. The full significance of v. 12 of Ins. No. 1 which contains an account of this 
assembly has been discussed in HBR, 107. 

11. Cf. e.g. THK. 216, 230. 

12. The IJdayanasundari-kathd Jay Scddhala (G. O. S. edition), pp. 4-6. 

13. Uttarapatha technically means the western part of North India, but applied to 
Dharmapala, ruler of Bengal and Bihar, it evidently means the overlordship of 
North India. 

14. This is clearly indicated by Ins. No. 2, v. 8. 

15. Cf. Ch. II, p. 23 above. 

16. It is significant that all three contending powers, the Palas, the Pratlharas, 
and the Rashtrakutas, had their eyes fixed upon Kanauj. The Pratlharas finally 
transferred their capital to this city. The Rashpraku(a king Dhruva and 
Govinda IH overran this region, and one of their successors, Indra III, captured 
and ruthlessly sacked this city which was then the imperial capital of the 
Pratlharas. 

17. /C, IV. 266. 

18. 1A, 2892, p. 257, fn. 6. 

29. 1C, TV. 266. The capital of the Kiratas was situated in the jungles of Gokarna 
to the north-east of Pasupati (Levi, Le Nepal. II. 83)^ 

20. For Nagabhata’s history and military campaigns, cf. Ch. H, pp. 24 ff. 

21. Gwalior Ins. of Bhoja, v. 10 {El, XVIII. 112). The description shows the strength 
. of the Pala army and may be contrasted with the ‘easy victory’ obtained by 

Vatsaraja against the king of Gau^a referred to above. 

22. Cf. Chapters I and II. 

23. According to Sanjan CP, “Dharma and Chakrayudha surrendered of themselves” 
to Govinda III (El, XVIII. 253). There is no evidence in support of the view 
that Dharmapala was defeated in a battle by Govinda 1H ( JBORS. XII. 362). 

24. Iris. No. 2, v. 12. 

25. For authorities, cf. HBR. 115. 

26. It consisted of a central temple surrounded by 107 others—all enclosed by a 
boundary wail. It provided for 114 teachers in different subjects ( JASB, N. S. 
V (1909), pp. 1 ff.). 

27. For detailed description, see Vol. V, Ch. XVI. 

28. El, IX. 248. 

29. Ins. No. 4, v. 5. 

30. Ins. No. 2, v. 13. 

31. Ins. No. 4, v. 13; No. 3. v. 6. Darbhapani’s father Garga was a minister of Dharma¬ 
pala. 

32. Ins. No. 3, v. 6. 

33. For details see<2h. II. 

34. For a full discussion of this point, cf. ROC, VIII. 537; S. K. Aiyangar Com. Vol. 
197; HBR. 120-21. But K. A. N. Sastri opposes this view ( India Antique, 254). 

35. The last known date of Dev&pala depends upon the reading of the figure for 
his regnal year in the Nalanda CP. It is usually read as 39 (El, XVII. 318), but 
seems to-be really 35 ( JRASBL. VII. 215). 

36. Vide infra, Ch. XV. 

37. Nalanda CP. (El, XVII. 318). 

38. Goshrawa Stone Ins. (1A, XVII. 307). 

39. HIED, I. 5, 25. But some scholars doubt whether the account was really written 
by Sulaiman (cf. Arab Geographers ’ Knowledge of Southern India by S. M H 
Nainar, pp. 7 ff). 

40. IHQ , XVI. 232. 

41. HBR. 124. Cf. also Ch. IV, 81. 


•THE PALAS 


42. The whole question has been fully discussed in HBR: 188. 

43. His latest known date is year 54 (1A, XLVII. 110). 

44. According to Sirur Ins. dated A.D. 866 (l A, XII. 218), Ahga, Vahga and Magadha 
paid homage to king Amoghavarsha, who could not possibly have undertaken 
an expedition against the Palas before his conquest of Vengi which took place 
about A.D. 860. 

45. Several inscriptions of Mahcndrapala have been found in South Bihar (Palas of 
Bengal. 64) and one in Paharpur (North Bengal) (MASI, 55. 75). 

46. See next Chapter. 

47. This is proved by an image found in Bihar with an ins. dated in the year 54 
(IA, XLVII. 110). Inscription No. 3 shows that Narayanapala was in possession 
of Bihar in the year 17. So the Pratiharas conquered it propably during the 
interval between these years (c. A.D. 870-908). As Mahendrapala did not ascend 
tlie throne till after A_D. §82, his conquest of Bihar and North Bengal may be 
placed between A.D. 890 apd 900. 

48. According to v. 5 of the Dcoli CP, Krishna II was the preceptor “charging the 
Gaudas with the vow of humility” and that *‘his command was obeyed by Ahga, 
Kalihga, Gahga and Magadha” (El, V. 193). The Rashtrakufa king was probably 
accompanied by Malta, p chief of Velanandu (in Krishna District), for the latter 
claims to have subdued the Vangas, Maghdhas and the Gaudas (Pithapuram 
Ins. v. 11; El, TV. 40). 

49. For other views, cf. HBR, I. 131, £n. 4. 

50. The Pala records have nothing to say about them except that Rajyapala dug 
tanks deep, like the sea and constructed temples high as the mountains (cf. Ins. 
No. 5, vv. 7-10). In a verse applied to Gopala II and Vigrahapala II in two 
different records (No. 5 and Jajilpara CP of Gopala II. JASL, XVII. 137) their 
elephant forces are said to have wandered in the eastern regions, western 
deserts, Malaya mountains in the south and the Himalaya in the north. These 
aimless wanderings were formerly regarded by some scholars as a coveil allusion 
to the loss of ancestral kingdom by Vigrahapala, but as the same verse is now 
known to apply to the earlier king Gopala II also, this interpretation is doubtful 
(cf. HBR. 136). But the verse may indicate the hopelessly weak position of 
both the kings. 

51. For the history of these dynasties, cf. Ch. V. For the effect of Chandella invasions 
on Bengal, cf. IHQ. XXVIII. 177. 

52. As noted above, some of these units are separately mentioned also in the 
Rashtrakutta records (cf. fn. 44 and 48 above). 

53. Irda CP. El, XXII. 150; XXIV. 43. 

54. JASB, VII. 619. 

55. El. XXVI. 313. 

56. Cf. 1C. XII. 88. 

57. El, XVII. 349. 

58. HBR. Ch. VII. The year 46 is found in Madanpur Plates (El, XlXVIII. 51, 337). 

59. Cf. Mandhuk (Tippera District) Ins. of Gopala II year 1 (IHQ, XXVIII. 55) and 
Jajilpara CP. of the same king (JASL, XVII. 137). 


CHAPTER IV 


EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 

Having dealt with the history of the Palas who were the leading 
political power in Eastern India, we may now turn our attention to 
the several independent kingdoms which flourished in Nepal, Kama- 
rupa (Assam) and Utkala (Orissa). 

I. NEPAL 

The history of Nepal, during the two centuries following the 
death of Jayadeva II, 1 is very obscure, as the Vaihiavalis (chronicles 
are hopelessly confused and there are no epigraphic records to help 
us. One strange episode at the beginning of this period has been 
preserved in R&jatarangim? It tells us how, in the course of his 
victorious campaign, Jayaplda, the grandson of Lalitaditya, 3 came 
to Nepal, was captured by its king Araxnudi, effected his escape 
through the self-sacrifice of his minister, and conquered the king¬ 
dom. Like his other adventure concerning Jayanta, 4 this also reads 
more like a romance than real history, and Stein rejects it as 
mythical, L4vi has, however, pointed out that the name Aramudi is 
Tibetan, and as we know’from Tibetan sources that Nepal was at 
this time, under the political subjection of Tibet, and there was hosti¬ 
lity between this country and Kashmir, there may be some basis for 
the story. According to the Chronicles of Ladakh , the Tibetan 
king Khri-sron-lde-btsan (A.D. 755-97) carried his victorious arms 
to India. 6 According to another Tibetan text, composed in the ninth 
century A.D., his son conquered a large part of Jambudvlpa. 6 The 
next important king Ral-pa-can (A.D. 817-836) is said to have con¬ 
quered India as far as the confluence of the Gang a and the sea. 7 As 
noted above, 8 there is no independent evidence in support of these 
claims. But, according to some Nepalese chronicles, the Tibetan 
king Namoyati ruled over Nepal after the reign of Vasantadeva, 
and we may regard the Tibetans as having exercised a general 
supremacy over Nepal. This Namoyati may be identified with king 
Aramu<Ji who defeated and imprisoned JayapTda, as mentioned 
above. But it is very doubtful if Aramudi is a Tibetan name. 68 In 
addition to the Tibetans, the Palas also appear to have exercised some 
sort of supremacy over Nepal, 9 

These foreign conquests may explain the political confusion in 
Nepal which is reflected in its chronicles. The year A.D. 879, the 


58 


EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 


epoch oi‘ the Newarl era, which is current even now it) Nepal, pro¬ 
bably marks an important political event in its history. According 
to Prinsep and Cunningham the new era, dating from October 20, 
A.D. 879,. was inaugurated by king Raghavadeva. S. Levi, however, 
rejects this view, as this king does not occupy any prominent place 
in the local chronicles. He suggests that the new era was simply 
the Saka era with the omission of the eight hundred. In his opinion, 
after the end of the Saka year 800, the Nepalese, who had a supersti¬ 
tious dread for the figure 8, began to count the year afresh as 1, 2. 
etc. without any reference to the figure for hundred. This view 
gains additional strength from the fact that we have now good 
grounds to believe that of the two earlier Nepal: eras, the first one 
was rcallv the Saka era, and the second, the same era with the 
omission of 500. 70 It would thus appear that the Nt-palese adopted 
the Saka era before the end of its fourth century, and continued to 
use it ever since, dropping the hundredth figure, first after 500 
and then, again, after 800 years of that era. The last-named era pro¬ 
bably came into use during the reign of Raghavadeva. and hence he 
was regarded by posterity as the founder of that era. 

Raghavadeva is mentioned in two old Chronicles, which assign 
to him a reign-period respectively of 43 and 63 years. The names 
of his successors are also given differently in them. It is not unlikely 
that the two Chronicles refer to two different lines of kings ruling 
simultaneously over two regions. King Vikramadeva and his three 
successors are, however, common names in both the lists. Narendr 2 - 
deva. who succeeded Vikramadeva, is known from the colophon of 
a manuscript to have ruled in A.D. 999. Henceforth the royal lists 
in the Chronicles can be checked with the help of colophons and 
epigraphic records. Thus, we reach a firm ground in the history of 
Nepal only at the close of the period dealt with in this Volume. 71 

A great deal of uncertainty, however, prevails in respect of 
the chronological and genealogical position of king Gunakamadeva, 
who is mentioned in all the Chronicles as having played a great role 
in the history of Nepal. His name is placed in the two old Chronicles 
immediately after Narendradeva. These assign him a reign of 
85 years while the modern Chronicles give it as 51. All this is im¬ 
possible, for Gunakamadeva’s reign must have come to an end by 
A.D. 1000, as his successor is said to have ruled for 51 years, and 
the next king Nirbhaya is known ta have jointly ruled with Rudra 
in the year 128 ( — A.D. 1007). 12 Gunakamadeva was evidently a 
king of some eminence, and a great many traditions have gathered 
round his name. He probably extended the boundaries of his domi¬ 
nions beyond the valley towards the east. He is said to have been 
owner of fabulous wealth, and to have spent a large amount in rcli- 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

gious endowments, including many benefactions to the God Pasupati. 
He is the reputed founder of the capital city of Katmandu, where he 
instituted a religious festival in honour of Lokesvara Khasarpana. 
Levi thinks that Kantipura, the old name of this city, is derived 
from Gunakama, both kdma and kanti being derived from the same 
root. The other cities, Patan and Sanku, are also said to have been 
founded about the same time. The foundation of new cities pro-, 
bably indicates the growth of trade and commerce. Nepal was at first 
mainly an agricultural country, but its contact with Tibet and China 
made it a valuable highway for trade between India and these coun¬ 
tries. Whereas the epigraphic records of the earlier period refer 
only to villages and rural community, the Chinese History of the 
T’ang dynasty (A.D. 618-905) shows that merchants were numerous, 
and cultivators scarce, in Nepal. There was also a development of 
arts and crafts. This transformation from rural to industrial eco¬ 
nomy probably explains the great wealth of the king. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

1. Levi— Le Nepal, Vol. IT, 172-187. 

2. DHNI, I. Ch. IV. 

II. KAMABUPA 

King Harsha of Salastambha family 13 was followed by Balavar- 
man, and probably one or two others, 14 after whom we find a king 
Salambha on the throne of Kamafupa. He is referred to in several 
inscriptions as belonging to the dynasty of Salastambha, 15 . but at 
least one record 16 seems to imply that he restored the sovereignty 
of the Naraka dynasty, i.e. the family to which Bhaskara-varman 
belonged, though it draws prominent attention to the somewhat 
strange character of the name. Another record, however, omits the 
name of this king and clearly states that after many rulers of the. 
family of Salastambha had reigned, Harjara became king of Kama- 
rupa. 17 

It is, therefore, difficult to say definitely whether Salambha 
founded a new family, and if so, whether it was connected in any 
way with the earlier rulers of Kama rupa ending with Bhaskara- 
varman. We are not also quite sure about the name of the ruler, for 
another copper-plate gives the name as Pralambha. 18 He probably 
flourished about the end of the eighth or the beginning of the ninth 
century A.D. 19 It is, therefore, probable that the change in the royal 
dynasty of Kamarupa was caused by the successful invasion of the 
Palas referred to above, 90 for it is not unlikely that Devapala drove 
away or killed the king and put his own nominee on the throne. 
He might have selected a scion of the old ruling family in order to 
make the political change less unacceptable tfi the people. 


60 


EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PA LA PiiKJOU 


Nothing is known of Salambha, but his son or nephew 21 Hurjaru- 
varman was a king of some eminence. One of his records (No. i). 22 
dated in the year 510 of the Gupta era {— A.D. 829), gives him the fu)l 
imperial titles Maharajdclhirdja Paramesvara Paramabhaiulruka, It 
is also probably not without significance that in another record of 
IhU family (No. 4) the name of Salambha or Pralambha is omitted, 
and the royal line begins with Harjara. On the whole, it would be 
fair to conclude that Harjara-varman threw off the yoke of the 
Pa las and ruled as an independent king. It is not unlikely that as 
his predecessors had to acknowledge the suzerainty of the Paia's, 
their names were omitted in the records of later kings who did not 
like to recall those inglorious days of the family'. 

No particulars of the reign of Harjara are known. He was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Vanamala-varmaw who was probably associated 
in the government as yuvardja during his father’s rule. 23 Vanamala- 
varman is said to have had a long reign (No. 5). One record (No. 3) 
of his reign refers to a grant of land to the west of the Trisrota 
river. This is undoubtedly represented by the modern Tista, and 
wc must, therefore, conclude that the kingdom * of Kamarupa in¬ 
cluded a part of North Bengal. This supports the traditional account 
that the river Karatoya formed the western boundary of Prag- 
jyoti.sha or Kamarupa. / 

Vnnamala was succeeded by his son Jayamala, who assumed the 

name of Viravahu after his accession to the throne. 24 Nothing is 

known of him or of. his son and successor Bala-varman. But we 

• 

know from a later inscription 25 that when Tyagasirhha. the twenty- 
first king after Salastambha. died without any issue, the people 
chose Brahmapala, a kinsman of the deceased ruler, as king. Tyaga- 
simha was probably the last king of the dynasty of Silambha. 

The dynasty, of Salambha ruled from A.D. c. 800 to c. 1000. 
The kings were devotees of Siva, and their capital was Haruppesvara 
on the bank of Lauhitya or the Brahmaputra river. Although no 
detailed account of their reign is known, it may be presumed that 
under Harjara and his descendants Kamarupa flourished as a power¬ 
ful independent kingdom. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

). DHN1, I. Ch. V. 

2. KSS —All the inscriptions are edited in this work. 

LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 

1. Tczpur Rock Inscription of Hnrjara-varman, dated 510 G.E., JliOHS. Ill: 508. 

2. Haivungthal CP. of Harjara-varman (Noticed in IHQ, III. 838, 811, B4L Edited 
in KSS). 

3. Tczpur CP. Vnnamaln, JASB. IX. (1840), p. 76G. 

4. Parbatiya Plates of Vannmalavarmadeva, El. XXIX, 145. 

5. 4 Nowgong CP. of Baln-varman, JASB. LXVI. 121, 285; LXVIt. 103. 

6. Howraghat Plates of Bala-varman, El, XXXII. 283. 

. Cl 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 
III. UTKALA (ORISSA) 

We have already discussed 26 the history of the Sailodbhavas 
whose rule terminated probably about the middle of the eighth cen¬ 
tury A.D. or somewhat later. During the two centuries and a half 
that followed, we find several dynasties ruling in different parts of 
Orissa. Unfortunately, neither their chronology nor the boundaries 
of their kingdoms can be definitely ascertained, nor do we know 
anything of their exact status and mutual relations. The most 
powerful of them were the Karas, who ruled along the eastern sea¬ 
board, exercising authority in the districts of Balasore, Cuttack and 
Puri, and a part of the corresponding hinterland. The Bhanjas set 
up several states which covered a large part of what were till lately 
known as the feudatory Orissa States. In addition to these two, 
steveral minor dynasties ruled in these regions from time to time. 
Whether the Sailodbhavas continued to rule over Kongoda cannot 
be exactly determined, but this region, corresponding to the northern 
part of Ganjam, not only passed from time to time under the poli¬ 
tical authority of both the Karas and the Bhanjas, but we find there 
other dynasties such as the Gangas of Svetaka who occasionally 
acknowledged the supremacy of the Karas. Towards the middle of 
the tenth century A.D. the Somavam^l kings of South Kosala con- 
qnered Orissa and continued to rule it till the advent of the Eastern 
Gangas more than a century later. 

The history of Orissa during this period offers certain peculia¬ 
rities. An unusually large number of inscriptions have come to 
light, far exceeding those we have for a bigger province like Bengal 
during the corresponding period. But apart from royal names, they 
hardly eVer give any details of historical interest. Although many 
of them are dated, the years are more often regnal or refer to an 
era which is. unknown. Their palaeography, too, is often of no great 
help in determining their age, as the letters, even of the same time 
and locality, are sometimes written in different styles which give 
erroneous impressions about their antiquity. As a matter of fact, 
in the case of no other region in India do we notice such a wide dif¬ 
ference of opinion among scholars regarding the age of the records. 
To add to the difficulty, we have very often the same name borne 
by a mlmber of kings, and several alternate names borne by the 
same king which are indiscriminately used in official records. All 
this makes it almost impossible to arrive at any conclusion which 
would be generally acceptable, and all that we can do is to arrange 
the known facts under some system of chronology, which appears 
to be the most reasonable. With, these preliminary remarks we pro¬ 
ceed to give a short account of the different dynasties with the ex- 


62 



EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 

ception of the Somavamsis whose history will be dealt with in the 
next volume, 

1. The Karas 

About the time when the Palas established their power in 
Bengal we find a new dynasty ruling in Orissa. It was called bqth 
Bhauma and Kara. The former designation shows that the dynasty 
claimed descent from Bhumi or Earth, and the latter was no doubt 
derived from the fact that the names of all the kings of the family 
ended in ~kara , There is nothing to show that the Bhauma dynasty 
of Orissa was connected in any way with the dynasty of Kamarupa 2 '" 
to which Bhaskara-varman belonged, though that was also descend¬ 
ed from Naraka, the son of Bhumi (Earth), The Vishnu Puriina 
refers to Mahendra-Bhauma along with Kalihga and Mahishika as 
being protected (?) by Guha (or Quhas). 28 These Bhaumas living 
in Mahendra hill may be regarded as the ancestors of the Bhaumas 
of Orissa, and the conclusion is strengthened by the fact that the 
capital of the latter was called Guhadeva-pataka or Guhesvara- 
pataka, apparently named after Guha (or the Guhas) with whom 
the Bhaumas are associated in the Vishnu Purdna. It has been sug¬ 
gested that the Bhunas, now inhabiting the northern hill tracts of 
Orissa, are the representatives of the Bhaumas, and in this connec¬ 
tion attention has been drawn to the fact that a class of people, liv¬ 
ing to the south of the Mahanadi river, call themselves Mafi-vamsa 
or family sprung from the Earth. 29 

No less than seventeen records *of this family have so far come 
to light. They enable us to draw the following genealogy of the 
family. Many of these contain dates which, however, cannot all be 
read with certainty. These are put in brackets after the names. 
Most of the kings had one or more alternative names which are 
added after the name ending in Kara, though in some records these 
alternative names alone are used. The order of succession is shown 
by Homan figures. 

I. Kshemankaradeva 

i 

II Sivakaradeva I alias Unmatfasimha alias Bharasaha (20 or 50) 30 

III. Subhakaradeva I (54 ?) 31 

f -1— 1 —i 

IV. Sivakaradeva II (73 ?) V. Santikaradeva I = VIII. Tribhuvana- 
I alias Gaya$a I Mahadevi I (110) 

alias Lalitahara I (93) 

VI. Subhakaradeva II (100) 32 isf 

I 

VII. Subhakaradeva III ahas Simhaketu alias 

Kusumahara I (103) 


68 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


IX. Santikaradeva II alias Gaya^a II alias Lonabhara I 


X. Subhakaradeva IV alias XL Sivakaradeva III (149) alias 

Kusumahara II (145) Lalitahara II 

=:XII(a). Tribhuvana-MahadevI II 33 | 

L 

XII. Santikaradeva III XIII. Subhakara V = XIV. Gaurl 

alias Lavanabhara II = XVI. Vakula- 

= XVII. Dharma* Mahadevi 

Mahadevi 

XV. Dandl-Mahadevi (180, 187) 3 * 

As will be seen from the above table, there were five kings bear¬ 
ing the name Subhakara. The first king of that name is known from 
Neulpur plate, but as the characters of the newly discovered Khadi- 
pada (now Cuttack Museum) inscription of Subhakara seem to be 
older than those of the former, it has been suggested that there was 
an earlier king bearing that name. 36 On the other hand, it has been 
pointed out that the palaeographical differences between the two 
inscriptions are “not so great as to render the identification of these 
two Subhakaras impossible.” 36 The identity of these two kings has 
been assumed in the above table, but it is not unlikely that there was 
an earlier king of that name, who even preceded No. I. 

It has been stated in Hindol Plate that when kings like Lakshmi- 
kara and others of the Bhauma family “had gone to heaven,” there 
flourished in that family king Subhakara (No. III). It may be infer¬ 
red from this that there was a king called Lakshmlkara, who was 
either identical with No. I or his predecessor, immediate or remote. 
But there is nothing to justify the assumption that Lakshmlkara was 
the father of No. I. 3T 

The chronology of these kings has been a matter of dispute. 
At a time when the relation between these rulers was not definitely 
known, it was held on palaeographic grounds that the king -No. Ill 
flourished about eighth century A.D. 38 and the Queen No. XIV, as 
late even as thirteenth century A.D. 39 In spite of uncertainty in 
the reading of some figures, there is now no doubt that all the 
monarchs ruled in an unbroken line of succession, and as their 
known dates «te*id from 20 (or 50) to 187 of the same era, the 
rule of the entire dynasty must be placed within a period of two 
centuries, notwithstanding indications of palaeography to the con¬ 
trary. 


64 





EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 


Fortunately, there is some independent evidence in support of 
the conclusion, based on palaeography, that the first three kings 
flourished about the eighth century A.D. Professor Levi drew 
attention to the .fact that in the year A.D. 795 the Chinese Emperor 
Te-tsong received an autographed Buddhist manuscript from the 
king of Wu-ch’a (U^ra=:Orissa) whose name is translated as “the 
fortunate monarch who does what is pure, the lion.” Levi has shown 
that a name like Subhakara corresponds very well with the Chinese 
translation, and he accordingly identifies Subhakara (No. Ill) as the 
king who sent the manuscript. 40 It has been argued that the name 
is really Subhakara which means ‘the store of purity’ and that the 
emendation of the name to Subhakara “one who does what is pure’’ 
is unwarranted. 4 1 This difficulty can be avoided if we identify the 
king of U<Jra (Orjssa), who sent the manuscript in A.D. 795, not with 
Subhakara, but with his father Sivakaradeva,- as Siva and Subha 
mean the same thing. Besides, Sivakaradeva had another name 
Unmattasimha. and the last part of this means ‘the lion’, which forms 
a part of the name in the Chinese translation. It would thus follow 
that king No. II flourished in the latter half of the eighth century 
A.D. and the dynasty was evidently founded about the middle of 
that century. 

This view goes against the assumption that the dates of the 
Kara kings are to be referred to the Harsha era. 42 This theory is 
open to several objections. In the first place, the ruler of Orissa 
about A.D. 795 would be a queen (Nos. XIV-XVI) who was a Saiva 
and not a Buddhist. The Buddhist ruler of Orissa in A.D. 795, who, 
according to the Chinese source, “had a deep faith in the Sovereign 
Law’’, must be identified with one of the first three Kara kings 
who are called respectively ‘Paramopasafca’, ‘Paramatathagata* and 
*Paramasaugata’, and not with any of their successors who were 
devotees of Mahesvara. Secondly, according to Taranatha, there was 
political disintegration both in Bengal and Orissa shortly before 
the time when Gopala was elected to the throne. As his statement 
has proved to be true with regard to Bengal, we may give credit 
to it in respect of Orissa as well. It is more probable, therefore, 
that the Karas, who ruled for two centuries in an unbroken line of 
succession, established a powerful kingdom about the middle of the 
eighth rather than the seventh century A.D. Thirdly, if we refer 
the date of the Kara records to Harsha era, king No. Ill would 
flourish about the middle of the seventh century A.D., but the scripts 
of his plate are so distinctly later than the Ganjam plate of Sasanka 
that it has been assigned to the latter half of the eighth century 
A.D 43 Fourthly, if the date of king Unmattakesarl, recorded in 

Oj 

A.I.K.—3 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

the Ganjam grant, is really 20, we can hardly refer it to the Harsha 
era as Orissa had not yet been conquered by Harsha. 

On these and other grounds it is more reasonable to refer the 
foundation of the Kara dynasty to the middle of the eighth century 
A.D. In that case wc cannot refer the dates in their records to any 
known era, and must presume that it was a case of continuous 
reckoning of the regnal year of the first king by his successors which 
has given rise to so many local eras, including the Ganga era in 
Kalihga. 

Very little is known of the detailed history of the long line of 
rulers belonging to the Kara dynasty. As mentioned above, kings 
Nos. I-IIX were all devout Buddhists. The Neulpur plate, issued by 
No. Ill, refers to the first two as kings and gives the title Maharaja 
to the third. In a record of No. IV, however, both Nos. Ill and IV 
are given the higher imperial titles Paramabha{\draka Mahdrdjddhi- 
rdja Paramcsvara. These titles were borne by all their successors, 
whose charters have so far come to light, and these charters are also 
drawn in characteristic imperial style, the royal order being address¬ 
ed to Mahasamantas, Maharajas, t Rdjaputras and a host of high offi¬ 
cials. This shows that the kings were independent and powerful, but 
we have no reason to believe that their permanent authority extended 
beyond the boundaries of Orissa or even over the whole of it. 

The Talcher plate, dated 149, tells us that Unmay|asimha (No. II) 
defeated in battle the king of Ra$ha and carried away his daughter, 
while his son Subhakara X INo. Ill) subjugated the Kalihgas. It is 
somewhat singular that neither the Neulpur plate issued by £ubha- 
kara I himself nor any other record refers to any such exploits. 

But some corroboration about the conquests of the Kara kings 
at this time is obtained by the Ganjam Grant of Jayavarmadeva. 
This record indicates that Jayavarman of the £vctaka Branch 44 of 
the Gahgas, who ruled in the northern part of Ganjam District, 
acknowledged the supremacy of king Unmattakesari of Virajas. 
This Unmatt^kesari may be identified with the Kara king No. II. It 
would then follow that even in his time a part of Kohgoda was in¬ 
cluded within the dominions of the Karas, and the next king §ubha- 
kara had probably extended his conquests further south to Kalihga. 
But as Kohgoda formed a part of the dominions of the Gahgas of 
Kalihga, it is also not unlikely that Subhakara himself achieved a 
victory over them in his father's reign, and hence his name was 
associated with the conquest of Kalihga in later days. 

Although the dates of Subhukara I and his son Sivakara II. 
read respectively as 4 54 and 73, are somewhat doubtful, we may 

oc 


EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 

take as certain the date 93 of &antikaradeva L He therefore flourish¬ 
ed in the second quarter of the ninth century A.D, It was perhaps 
during his reign, or that of his brother and predecessor 2»ivakara~ 
deva II, that Devapala subjugated Utkala. 45 There is perhaps a 
covert allusion to it in the Dhenkanal Plate dated 110. It distinctly 
says that after the death of eminent Maharajas like Unmaftakes&ri 
(No. II) and Gaya^a (No. V), “the Kara family had to depend upon 
nothing but their past glory”, and “the kingdom looked like the sky 
bereft of refulgent stars and a female with distressful heart.” Tri- 
bhuvana-Mahadevi (No. VIII), the daughter of Rajamalla, a renown¬ 
ed Naga chief of the south, and the queen of Lalitahara (No. V), then 
ascended the throne being “entreated by a great circle of chiefs to be 
pleased to protect the fortunes of Kara kingdom,” as Devi GosvaminI 
did in old days. In the Talcher plate, dated 141, it is said that after 
the death of Kusumahara (No. VII) his mother Tribhuvana-MahadevI 
took up the burden of administration of the entire kingdom and 
abdicated in favour of her grandson Lonabhara when he had come 
of age. None of these plates mention king Subhakara II (No. VI) 
who evidently ruled during this period. All these would indicate 
that some time before A.D. 860 the Kara kingdom was visited by a 
great calamity and suffered much in power and prestige, but the 
situation was saved by the queen-mother, probably with the aid she 
received from her father Rajamalla. It is not unlikely that the 
invasion of the Pala ruler Devapala was the cause of the calamity, 
but then the boast of the Palas that the Utkalas were exterminated 
can only be regarded as the usual exaggeration of court poets, for 
the Kara dynasty soon re-established its power, and the kings con¬ 
tinued to use the imperial titles. Possibly the collapse of the Pala 
empire after Devapala gave Utkala the requisite opportunity. It 
is worthy of note that shortly before the Pala invasion the Kara kings 
gave up the Buddhist religion, and henceforth the sovereigns were 
mostly Saiva, though Tribhuvana-Mahadevi was a devotee of Vishnu. 
Whether this change of religion had any political significance in the 
relations between the Palas and the Karas, it is difficult to say. 

Nothing is known of the four successors of LonabhSra (Nos. X- 
XIII). The last of them, Subhakara V, was succeeded on his death 
by his queen, named Gauri. After her. her daughter Dan^I-Maha- 
devi ascended the throne. Two of her charters dated 180 and 187 
are known. According to the newly discovered Taltali plate 10 she 
was succeeded by her step-mother Vakula-Mahadevi. and the latter 
by Dharma-Mahadevi, queen of Lavanabhara. undoubtedly .a Sans- 
kritized'form of Lonabhara. As we know from.the Angul plate that 
Dharma-Mahadevi was the name of the queen of Santikaradeva, HI, 
we must presume that Lavanabhara was another name of Santikara- 


67 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


dcva III. It is no doubt very singular that there was a regular suc¬ 
cession of four queens on the throne, which passed after Dandi- 
MahadevI to two senior ladies of the royal family. All the three 
ruling queens of the family whose charters have so far come to light, 
viz. Tribhuvana-MahadevI (No. VIII), Dantfi-Mahadevi (No. XV) 
and Dharma-Mahadevi (No. XVII), assumed imperial titles Paramo.- 
bhattarika , and Maharajadhiraja-Paramesvari. 

It is interesting to note that Vakula-Mahadevi is described in 
a verse as “an ornament like a flag with insignia in the family of 
the Bhanja kings.’ , This verse is a verbatim copy of one applied to 
Dantfi-Mahadevi in the Kumurang plate, with the substitution of 
Bhanja for Kara. There is hardly any doubt that Vakula-Mahadevi 
belonged to the Bhanja family, and it is also not unlikely that her 
paternal relations played some part in the politics of the Kara 
kingdom at this period. The succession of four queens one after 
another probably indicates troublesome times for the Kara dynasty 
which led to its downfall at no distant date, and the Bhahjas might 
have played a prominent part in the final stage. 

Nothing is known of the Karas after Dharma-Mahadevi who 
probably flourished about the year 200 of the Kara era, i.e. about 
A.D. 950. Probably the family was ousted by the Somavamsis. who 
are known to have conquered Orissa about the middle of the tenth 
century A.D. 47 

Wc can get a fair idea of the dominions of the Karas from the 
names of villages mentioned in their land-grants. In addition to 
the coastal territories comprised in the modern districts of Balasore, 
Cuttack and Puri, their dominions included Angul, the did feuda¬ 
tory states of Hindol, Dhenkanal, Taleher, Pal Lahara, a part of 
Keonjhar, and the northern part of Ganjam District. These terri¬ 
tories are sometimes referred to as included in North and South 
Tosali, but the name Utkala also occurs in the records. 

The northern part of the Ganjam District is referred to as 
Kvngoda-mantfala in South Tosali. It »is definitely known from 
their land-grants that the rulers Nos. II, VII, and XV exercised 
authority in this region, but, as we shall see later, we find there 
also the records of the Bhanjas as well as of a branch of the Gangas 
of Kalinga. As noted above, one of the latter, Jayavarman, refers 
to Unmattavarman as his overlord, but neither the other rulers of 
this family nor the Bhanjas refer to the Kara overlord in their land- 
grants. There can be hardly any doubt that spme of these Bhanja 
and Gahga rulers were contemporaries of the Karas. Either, therc- 


08 


EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 


fore, this region must have frequently changed hands, or the feuda¬ 
tories issued land-grants without any reference to their Kara over- 
lords. 

All the land-grants of the family are issued from the same 
place, which is called Guhadeva-pataka in the earlier records and 
Guhesvara-pataka in the later ones. This town was evidently the 
capital of the family. A late tradition places the foundation of the 
Kara kingdom in Jajpur. The Gan jam grant also refers to the second 
king of the dynasty as king of Virajas, evidently a variant of Viraja, 
which is a well-known name of Jajpur. It may be presumed there¬ 
fore that this town represents the site of the ancient capital of the 
Karas. 48 


GENERAL REFERENCE 

Brnayak Misra —Orissa under the Bhauma Kings. 

- Section I of this book gives a list of Kara inscriptions, and either edits or 
contains a short account of them. The historical discussion in Section II is, 
however, not always helpful or reliable. Five new inscriptions have been dis¬ 
covered since the above work was published. They are referred to in the 
footnotes. 


2. The Bhanjas 

More than thirty records of kings with names ending in Bhahja 
have so far come to light. The task of arranging them in a genea-' 
logical or chronological order has proved a difficult one and scholars 
differ widely on the subject. But we can easily distinguish two 
important branches, one ruling at Khinjali, and the other at Khij- 
jinga. The latter is undoubtedly the same as Khiching in Mayur- 
bhanj whose ruins still testify to its great antiquity. Khinjali, which 
lay far to the south, cannot be definitely identified. The records 
refer to twb Khinjalis, and it has been suggested that one lay to 
the north and the other to the south of the Mahanadl. But there is 
no doubt that the kingdom of Khinjali corresponded, at first, to the 
old feudatory states of Baud and Sonpur in Orissa and its imme¬ 
diate neighbourhood, though later its boundaries extended further 
south to the northern part of the Ganjam District. 49 * 

Whether the Bhahja ruling chiefs of Khinjali and Khijjihga 
belonged to the same family, or were connected in any way, is not 
definitely known to us. Some scholars held this view and tried to 
draw up a genealogy of them all on this basis, 50 but the' result has 
been very unsatisfactory. On the whole, although it is quite pos¬ 
sible that the different Bhahja chiefs had a common ancestor, there 
is no evidence in support of it and the question must be left open. 


C9 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


A. The Bhanjas of Khinjali 

The rulers of this family, so far known from their records, are 
represented in the following genealogical table:— 

I. Yathasukha 

i 

. II. Mallagambhlra 

III. Silabhahja I (Ahgaddi) 

I 

IV. Satrubhanja iGandhata; Mahgalaraja) 

I 

V. Banabhanja 


VII. Digbhahja Disabhahja) 

fKalyanakalasa I) | 

VIII. Silabhahja II iTribhuvanakalasa) 

*> a 

i 

IX. Vidyadharabhanja (Amoghakalasa) 

i 

1 

X. Nettabhanja II iKalayanakalasa II) 

The first four rulers are known from the Tekkali plates of 
&alrubhahja, r ‘ The rulers Nos. IIX-X are known from other records. 
While there is no doubt about the genealogy of these rulers t III-X . 
doubts have been entertained regarding the identity of Silabhahja, 
and his son 6atrubhanja, mentioned in the Tekkali plates, with the 
rulers bearing the same names and the same relation in the other 
list.'^ Their identity has been challenged on the ground that the 
opening verses of the Tekkali plates resemble those of the later, and 
not earlier, Bbanja rulers of the family. But as Nos. Ill to X ruled 
in an unbroken line of succession, the four rulers mentioned in the 
Tekkali plates can only be regarded as collateral »?.(?. contemporary- 
or posterior, to No. X. The latter view is untenable as the characters 
of the Tekkali plates are undoubtedly much earlier than those of 
No. X. and there are not sufficient grounds fPr the former view. The 
identity of names of two generations naturally leads to the presump¬ 
tion of the identity of the persons, and the genealogy has accordingly 
been drawn on this basis. 

Even the identity of Banabhanja mentioned in the different re¬ 
cords has been challenged, and Ranaka Banabhanja and Maharaja 
Banabhanja have been held to be different persons."'' But here, again, 
there are not sufficient reasons to reject the normal presumption 
about their identity. 

A recently discovered plate, not yet published, adds the name 
of another Bhahjn kinrr. who-evidently flourished after No X. and 



EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PA LA PERIOD 


probably belonged to the same family. It was issued in the 13th 
regnal year of Ranaka Nettabhanja Tribhuvanakalasa, son of Raya- 
bhahja and grandson of Prithvibhanja. It has been surmised that 
the last named was not far removed from No. X and might have 
been his brother, son or grandson. 54 

There can be hardly any doubt that the name-ending Bhanja 
of No. Ill was adopted by his successors and gave rise to the name 
“Bhahja dynasty.” even as we find in the case of Guptas, Palas and 
Karas. It may be presumed, therefore, that Silabhanja was the real 
founder of the kingdom. A charter of the Somavarhil king Maha- 
sivagupta Yayati refers to a village called Silabhanja-pSti in the 
0<Jra country. 5 It has been reasonably inferred that the village was 
named after king Silabhahja who must, therefore, have been earlier 
than the Somavathsi king; 

The earliest known charter of the royal family is that issued 
by Satrubhanja.'" 5 He is called Ranaka, but the seal in his charter is 
referred to as Mahurajakiya mudrd. There is. therefore, no reason 
to doubt that both he and his father were at least de facto indepen¬ 
dent kings, whatever might have been the status of the first two 
rulers; The charter may be referred to the eighth or ninth cen¬ 
tury A.D. on palaeographic grounds. 

Ranabhanja. the son and successor of Satrubhanja, had a long 
reign of more than 58 years. His death marks the end of one epoch 
and the beginning of another in the history of this family. Both 
Ranabhanja and his father are styled in their charters * ‘Lord of 
Khihjali’. but this title is not applied to their successors. That this 
is no mere accidental omission, but denotes a ’great change, is indi¬ 
cated by the fact that whereas the charters of Ranabhanja and his 
father were issued from Bhritipura, those of his successors were 
issued from Vijaya-Vanjulvaka. Further, while all the villages 
granted by the former, so far as they have been identified, are situat¬ 
ed in the States of Sonpur and Baud, those granted by the latter arc 
situated in the Ganjam District or its immediate neighbourhood. All 
these seem to indicate that after the death of Ranabhanja his suc¬ 
cessors shifted to the south and changed their capital. Their kingdom 
seems to have been confined to the northern part of Gat^Sm District 
and the Nayagadb State. Reference may be made in this connection 
to a ruler named Neftabhanja. who is known from the Baud Grant 57 
to have ruled in the regibn corresponding to Angul and Athmallik 
States. The date of his charter has been read as 98. but it seems to 
be reslly 85. It may be referred to the era used bv the Kara kio^. 
and the date would then be equivalent 4o about A.D. 835, It is thus 
quite probable that he drove out the dynasty of Ranabhanja from 


71 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


the northern part of Khinjali. Nettabhahja is not given any royal 
title in his Grant, but issues commands to Samantas, Maharajas, and 
others without any reference to any overlord. He was thus a 
de facto independent ruler, but not unlikely a feudatory, either of 
the Karas or the Palas, who defeated the Bhanjas and set him up 
as their protege. He might have been related to Ranabhanja. 

We do not know what became of this kingdom during the period 
when the descendants of Ranabhanja (Nos. VI-X) were ruling in 
Ganjam. Some light is thrown by the Jurada charter 58 of Mahd- 
mandalesvara Nettabhahjadeva, son of Ranabhanja, and grandson of 
Mahdmandalesvara Nettabhahja, granting a village, within the juris¬ 
diction of Khihjali-mandaia. This village, as well as the place from 
which the charter was issued, has been located in the Ganjam Dis¬ 
trict. This region was not perhaps originally included in the Khih- 
jali kingdom, at least in the time of the immediate successors of 
Ranabhanja (No. V), for otherwise they would not have given up the 
title of Lord of Khinjali. It is highly probable, therefore, that 
the family of Nettabhahja, who ousted Ranabhanja’s family from 
Khinjali, ultimately conquered the;southern region also and includ¬ 
ed it within the bounds of the Khinjali kingdom. If this view be 
accepted we may identify Nettabhahja, the grandfather.of the donor 
of the‘Jurada charter, with the king of the same name who issued 
the Baud grant in the year 85. 59 Jn that case we must suppose that 
he and his two successors were ruling in Khinjali proper while the' 
five successors (Nos. VI-X) of Ranabhanja were ruling in the Ganjam 
District. The last of these was (defeated by Nettabhahja who issued 
the Jurada grant. 

Another Bhahja family of six kings is known from two copper¬ 
plates 60 issued by the last two rulers, Yasobhanja and x his brother 
Jayabhanja. No grants of the first four kings have come to light, but 
Devabhanja, the founder of the family, is called Rdjadhirdja , and 
Yasobhanja is described as the lord of the whole of Khinjali. As 
these rulers flourished after Nettabhahja of the Jurada grant, they 
probably obtained possession of the kingdom by defeating him or his 
family. 

The date of these Bhahja kings cannot be determined with cer¬ 
tainty. The date of the Tekkali plates of Satrubhanja, the earliest 
charter of the family, was read as Samvat 800 ( = A.D. 742) by 
R. D. Banerji, but this is very doubtful. 61 On palaeographic grounds 
this charter may be referred to the ninth century A.D., but Orissan 
epigraphs of this period, on account of the variety of scripts employ¬ 
ed even in contemporary records, cannot be relied upon as a very 
safe guide in matters of chronology. The only positive clue in this 


EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 

respect is furnished by the.fact that Vijya, the queen of Ranabhanja. 
was the daughter of Rdnaka Niyamama. This Niyarnama has been 
identified with the Kadamba chief Niyarnnava, grandfather of 
Rdnaka Dharmakhedi, who is mentioned in a charter dated in the 
year 520 of the Ganga Era. 62 The epoch of this era is not yet defi¬ 
nitely determined, but is generally placed at the end of the fifth 
century A.D. Dharmakhe^i may thus be taken to have lived in the 
early part of the eleventh century A.D., and his grandfather, about 
the middle of the tenth century A.D. If we accept the identification 
of the latter with the father-in-law of Ranabhanja, this Bhanja king 
may be placed in the second half of the tenth century A.D. 

In spite of some uncertainties this date may be provisionally 
accepted as a working hypothesis. Silabhanja I, who seems to have 
laid the foundations of an independent Bhanja kingdom, may there¬ 
fore be placed at the beginning of the tenth century A.D. 

Although Ranabhanja had a long reign of at least fifty-eight 
years, his five successors must have reigned for short periods as the 
same goldsmith served under all of them. 63 The reigns of the Bhanja 
kings of Khinjali, discussed above, some of whom might have been 
contemporaries, may thus be regarded as having covered the tenth 
and eleventh centuries A.D. The dynasty may be regarded as having 
risen to power on the decline of the Karas, and, as already noted 
above, 64 might have played an important part in the last stage of 
their history. 

' If the dates proposed above be accepted, we may regard the 
removal of the Bhanja capital from Dhritipura to Vanjulvaka, as 
due to the invasion of Orissa by the Somavariisis who forced them to 
take shelter in the south. 

It is quite probable that the Bhanjas continued to rule even' 
beyond A.D. 1100, either as independent or as feudatory chiefs. In 
any case, their rule in Khinjali can be traced down to the mediaeval, 
period. A copper-plate 65 found at Baud introduces us to a line of 
three kings, viz. Solanabhanja, his son Durjayabhanja, and the latter’s 
son Kanakabhanja, who ruled in the neighbourhood of the Tel river, 
i.e. in old Khinjali, about the fifteenth century A.D. There are still 
Bhanja families living in a place called Kinjili between Aska and 
Berhampore in the Gan jam District. 66 This Kinjili might be an 
echo of the old Khinjali. 

On the other hand there are good reasons to believe that many 
Bhanja chiefs flourished before those rulers whose history we have 
discussed above. A verse in the copper-plates of the early- Bhanja 
kings 67 says that many Bhanja kings, thousands in number, flourish¬ 
ed in the past, and in their family was born ^ilabhanja (No. Ill), 


78 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Even allowing for the obvious exaggerations, this verse may be taken 
to testify to the existence of one or more Bhahja ruling families long 
before the eighth century A.D. This theory is supported by a short 
record below a tempera-painting on a rock-shelter in the village of 
Sitabhinji, Keonjhar District. “The subject-matter of the painting 
is a procession relating to a king on elephant who is preceded by 
footmen, a horseman, and a dancing woman and followed by an 
attendant woman. A painted inscription below the king gives the 
name of the king as “Maharaja 6ri Disabhanja”. 

Mr. T. Ramachandran, from whose account the above description 

is quoted; refers the inscription to the fourth century A.D. and says 

that this date is “corroborated by an ensemble of evidence furnished 

by other associative antiquities.” 68 

% 

Dr. D. C Sircar, on the other hand, thinks that the characters 
of the epigraph belong to a much later date, between the eighth and 
eleventh centuries A.D. 69 

There is no doubt that the Orissan inscriptions, even of the 
same king, employ a variety of scripts, so that palaeography is a very 
uncertain factor in determining chronology. This is amply illustrat¬ 
ed by the widely differing views about the dates of Kara, Sailodbhava 
and Bhanja kings. Nevertheless, it has to be admitted that the 
characters of the short record at Sitabhinji can by no means be 
regarded as later than those of the charters of the early kings of 
Kalihga who have been unanimously referred to the fifth century 
A.D. 70 Dr. D. C. Sircar's proposed identification of Disabhanja 
of the Sitabhinji record with the king Digbhanja-Disabhanja 
(No. VII), mentioned above, cannot therefore be upheld, and until 
more definite evidence is available, Disabhanja of Sitabhinji may 
justly be regarded as the earliest Bhanja king who flourished in the 
fourth or fifth century A.D. The painted scene and the locality seem 
to indicate that he was a powerful ruler whose kingdom included the 
Keonjhar State. If we accept this view, we may well believe that 
the Bhanjas had been ruling in Orissa almost continuously since the 
fourth or fifth century A.D., though their power and status must 
have varied in different ages. The territory called Bhanjabhumi or 
Bhanjbhum, which includes the present Mayurbhanj,. was evidently 
named after the Bhanjas. 

B. The Bhanjas of Khijjihga 

The records of this dynasty closely resemble each other and 
are distinguished in some essential respects from those of other 
Bhafijas described above. They are issued from Khiijlhga and give 
a traditional account of the origin of the family. The Adi-Bhanja 


74 



EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 


or the first Bhanja, called Vlrabhadra Ganadan$a, is said to have 
come out of the egg of a pea-hen and to have been brought up by 
the sage Vasishtha. They refer next to Kottabhanja who may be 
regarded as the first historical ruler of the family. The names of the 
successors of Kottabhanja are, however, given differently in different 
records. But since all the kings ruled in Khijjihga it is probable that 
the differences are due mainly to the same king having different 
names as we find in the Kara dynasty. On this assumption we may 
tentatively draw the following gnealogy of the kings known to us. 71 


Vlrabhadra 


Kottabhanja 

Digbhanja alias Durjayabhanja I alias Vibhramatunga I 


Ranab 


rianja 


Narendrabhanja I 


Rajabhanja Vibhramatunga II Satrubhanja alias 

| Frithvibhanja 

i ' i 

Durjayabhanja II Narendrabhanja II 

(Yuvardja) Kottabhanja 

Vlrabhadra is described as ‘Chakravartisamah’ (like an emperor), 
and ^atrubhanja is called Mahdmarujia.i-ddhipati-Mahardjddhiraja- 
Paramesvara. Ranabhanja is called both Maharaja and Maharaja- 
dhirdja. These titles and the fact that they issued charters without 
reference to any overlord indicate that they were at least de -facto 
independent rulers. 

As regards chronology, we have two specific dates for Rana¬ 
bhanja, viz. 288 and 293. 72 These cannot be referred to the era used 
by the Karas, as the royal Kara dynasty is not known to have con¬ 
tinued beyond the year 200 of that era, and there is nothing to indi¬ 
cate that their era was in use after them. The other possibilities 
are the Harsha and the Gahga eras. Jf we assume the former, which 
appears more probable, Ranabhanja nourished towards the close of 
the ninth century A.D., and the dynasty must have ruled roughly 
between A.D. 850 and 1000. We may then assume that it rose to 
power out of the chaos and confusion in Orissa caused by the invasion 
of the Palas under Devapala, and took full advantage of the downfall 
of the Pala empire. 


Although we'know very little of the history of this dynasty, 
special interest attaches to it for more than one reason. In the first 
place, the ruins of temples and images at Khiching, the old capital 


75 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


of the dynasty, testify to a very high development of art and archi¬ 
tecture under the Bhanjas/ 3 Indeed some of the sculptures found 
here have been justly regarded as among the best products of 
mediaeval sculpture in India. This rich artistic treasure gives us a 
clear idea of the high culture and civilization of the people of Utkala 
under the Bhahjas.. It may also be noted that the art of Khiching 
shows close affinity with the art of the Palas rather than of Orissa, 
and this may be easily explained by its geographical position as well 
as the political influence of the Palas which was naturally more 
effective in this region than that lying further south. 

Secondly, there are good grounds to believe that the Bhahjas of 

Khijjinga are represented by the dynasty lately ruling at Mayurbhanj. 

This dynasty had its capital at Khiching until comparatively recent . 

times, and Us rulers all bore names ending in Bhahja. In a royal 

sanad. dated A.D, 1713-14, the ancestor of this family is described 

as having been born of the egg of a pea-hen and nursed by the sage 

Vasfshtha. This tradition, which we find in the old charters of the 
« 

family, is current even today with the result that their insignia is 
a pea-fowl, and the killing of this bird is prohibited throughout the 
state. According to a local tradition, recorded by Hunter, the chiefs 
ruled till 200 years ago over both Mayurbhanj and Keonjhar, the 
region where the Bhanjas of Khijjinga ruled about a thousand years 
ago. 71 

This striking agreement in respect of the family name and 
tradition, the capital, and extent of the kingdom leaves no doubt that 
the modern ruling chiefs of Mayurbhanj are linked up with the old 
Bhanja rulers of Khijjinga; and makes it highly probable that they 
form one continuous royal line which has ruled for more than a 
thousand years in an uninterrupted line of succession. Such a 
phenomenon is very rare in Indian history, and the case of Mayur¬ 
bhanj may be regarded as almost unique. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

1. K. D. Banerji—Omsa. 

2. I?, C. Majumdar, Outline of the History of the Bhanja Kings of Orisa (Dacca 
University Studies , Vol. HI, No. 2, pp. 337-70). It contains a complete list of the 
inscriptions of the dynasty with references. This aiticle is abbreviated as BKO, 

. Inscriptions discovered since then are referred to in the footnotes, and in 1HQ, 
XXVIII. 225 ft 

3. Binayak Misra, Dynasties of Mediaeval Orissa. 

3. The Minor Dynasties 

In addition to the Karas and Bhanjas several minor dynasties 
flourished in Orissa during the period under review. One of them, 
the Svetaka branch of the Gangas, has been dealt with in connection 
with Kalihga. Another is the Tunga dynasty 7r> comprising two 


70 





EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 


kings, Salanatunga and his son Gaya^atuhga, born in the line of Raja 
Jagattunga who came from Rohitagiri (Rohtasgarh in Shahabad 
District). Gayadatuhga, who is described as Samadhigata-pancha - 
make sab da and the ruler of Yamagarta, has been identified by some 
with king Gaya^a of the Kara dynasty, 70 but this is not very likely. 
Perhaps the dynasty was at first feudatory to the Karas and assum¬ 
ed independence after their decline. The Talcher Plate of Sivakara- 
deva, 77 dated 149 (=c. A.D. 900), records a grant of land in 
Purvarashtravishaya by the Kara king at the request of Ranaka 
Sri Vinltatuhga, This Ranaka is probably the same as is mentioned 
in the Bonai Grant 78 together with his son Khadgatunga and 
grandson Vimtatuhga II, ruler of Eighteen Gondamas including 
Yamagarta. Gayadatunga probably belongs to this family 79 which 
is also said to have migrated from Rohitasva and ruled in parts of 
Talcher, Pal Lahara and Keonjhar State. A ruler, Jayasimha, with 
feudatory titles, issued a Grant 80 from the banks of the Mandakini 
river. As the donated lands belonged to Yamagarta -mandala, he 
ruled in the same region as the Tuhgas. 

Another Bonai Grant refers to the Buddhist Mayura-vaihsa 
which originally came from the Chitrakuta mountain and ruled 
over Vanai -mandala, which is evidently the same as Bonai. It 
mentions Uditavaraha, his descendant Tejavaraha, and the latter’s 
son Udayavaraha with the titles Paramasaugata Samadhigaia - 
pancha-mahasabda Maharaja Ranaka. 6 1 This, too, was probably a 
feudatory line, assuming de facto independence. As the Grant of 
this family has some verses in common with those of the Tunga 
plates, the two families were probably closely connected and ruled 
over the same or neighbouring territories. 

More importance attaches to the Sulkis (called also Sulkikarhsa- 
family) who are probably identical with the “Sulikas with an army 
of countless horses” referred to in the Haraha Inscription of the 
Maukhari king Lsanavarman. 82 A number of records 63 give us the 
genealogy of the family, but there are some variations. It is not 
easy to reconcile them, and different views have been entertained 
by different scholars. The following genealogy may be tentatively 
offered as the most satisfactory:— 


Kanchana-stambha 

i 

Kalaha (or Kanada) -stambha alias Vikramaditya 
. Raoa-stambha alias Kula-stambha 84 

i • 

Jaya-stambha 

Nidaya-stambha 


77 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


It is probable that the second king was known as Kula-stambha. 
A Grant of Rana-stambha contains a date which has been interpret¬ 
ed as 103. It may be referred to the era of the Kara kings. Rana- 
stambha had the title Mahdrujadhiraja as well as Samadhigata - 
pancha-mahasabda. denoting a feudatory rank. 88 Like Vinltatunga II, 
Rana-stambha is described as lord of Gondama, and the Sulki family 
probably ruled in Talcher and Dhenkanal States. They might have 
acknowledged the suzerainty of the Karas, but were de facto inde¬ 
pendent rulers. The name Sulki has been regarded by some as 
variation of the name Chalukya or Solahki. Others have identified 
Sulkis with the modern Sulkis of Midnapore and the Saulika of the 
Brihat-samhitti and Markandeya Puruna , 86 

The Tonga kings, Jayasimfia, and the Sulkis all claim to have 
ruled over the whole of Gondama (or Gondrama) wrhich is some¬ 
times specifically referred to as Eighteen Gondamas. Gondama has 
been taken to mean the Gond tribe, but it probably denotes a terri¬ 
tory which cannot be exactly defined.* 7 It has been suggested that 
Gondama denoted the entire hilly tract extending from Bonai and 
Barnra in the north up to Jeypore in the Visakhapatnam District in 
the south, but this is very doubtful. 88 

Another dynasty, called the Nanda, ruled over the same region, 
Gondama, probably at a somewhat later' date. Four inscriptions 
supply us with the names of the following kings:-— 89 

Jayananda 

I 

Parananda / 

&ivananda 

! 

Devananda I 


Vilasatuhga * Vilasatuhga 

Dhruvananda Devananda II 

Dhruvananda is said to be Parama-saugaia (i.e. a Buddhist) 
while Devananda was a Parama-mahesvara (i.e. Saiva). 

The name or surname Vilasatuhga and the sovereignty over 
Gondama indicate some relationship with the Tun gas. The plates 
are issued from Jayapura which has been identified with Jaipur in 
the old Dhenkanal State, and mention the maiuiala of -Airavata, 
which has been located in the Cuttack' District. 90 The Taimul 
plates of, Dhruvananda contain a date which has been variously 
read 91 but the correct reading seems to be Samvat 383. It may he 
referred to the Ganga Era, though this is by no means certain. 


TS 



EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PA DA PERIOD 


A copper-plate Grant, now in the Madras Museum, gives us the 
name of a king named Narendra-dhavala, who is not known from 
any other source. Some internal evidence shows that he was either 
a contemporary of the Bhahja king Silabhahja I or ruled before his 
time, and his reign may be placed in the tenth century A.D. 

Kings with names ending in ‘dhavala’ are known to have ruled 
in Medieval Orissa, and even now the members of the Dompara Kaj 
family of the Cuttack District have similar name-endings. There 
was evidently a ‘Dhavala’ ruling family of whom the only ancient 
ruler so far known is Narendra-dhavala. The territory known as 
Dhavalabhumi or Dhalbhum may be presumed to have derived its 
name from this ruling family. 92 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

1. DHNI, I. Ch. VII. 

2, B. Misra, Dynasties of Mediaeval Orissa. 

FOOTNOTES 

1. Vo!. Ill, p. 138. 

2. IV. 529-80. 

3. Vol. Ill, p. 135. 

4. Vol. Ill, p. 143. 

5. Francke, Antiquities of Tibet, Part II, p. 87; Dr. Petech in IHQ, XV. Supple¬ 
ment, 65. The name of the king is written as K’ri-srofx-lde-btsan (by Petech) 
and Khri-Sroh Lde-Brtsan ( JRAS, 1952. p. 149). 

6. F. W. Thomas, Tibetan Literary Texts and Documents concerning Turkestan, 
p. 270. 

7. Francke, op. cit.. 89-90. According to Francke Ral-pa-can ruled from A.D. 804 
to 816, but Dr. Petech (op. cit. 81) gives the date A.D, 817-836. 

8. See p. 52. 

8a. Petech, Mediaeval History of Nepal, 29. 

9. See above p. 47. 

10. JAS, vol. I. No. r, 1959, p. 47. 

11. Petech, Mediaeval History of Nepal, 28-32. 

12. A Catalogue of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper Manuscripts belonging to the 
Drirhar Library of Nepal by H. P. Sastri, p. 21. 

13. Cf. Vol. Ill, p. 141. 

14. This is implied by the Haiyunglhal plate of Harjara-varman, though, on account 
of some lacunae, the meaning of the passage is not quite clear. 

15. Haiyungthal Plate and the Bargaon CP, of Ratnapala (v. 9). 

26. Tezpur GP. of Vanamala, w. 6-7. 

17. Now-gong CP. of Bala-varman, v. 10. 

18. According to the published reading of the Tezpur CP. of Vanamala the name 
is Pralamba. But as this reading goes as far back as 2840, and the original 
plates are lost, we have adopted die reading Salambha which is quite clear in 
the newly discovered Farhatiya Plate of Vananiala. (EL XXIX, 145). 

19. For, as noted below, his son or nephew was on the throne in A.D. 829. 

20. See p, 50. 

21. Harjara-varman has been hitherto regarded as the son of Pralambha. But the 
newly discovered Farbatiya plate of Vanamala, referred to in fn. 6 above, shows 
that Harjara was the son of Arathi, brother and successor of Salambha. This 
was first pointed out in P1HC, XII. 157-9 by Sri K. Dutta. 

22. References are to the “List of Important Inscriptions” given on p. 61. 

23. This is inferred from Ins. No. 2 which contains an order issued by Yuvardja 
Vanamala. 

24. Ins. No. 4, Hoemle took Jayamala and VIravahu to be separate kings, but 
Kielhom regards the two as identical. This view is also accepted in KSS 
(cf. DHNI , I. 246). 

25. Bargaon CP. of Ratnapala, JASB ( LX VII. 99. 


79 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


21 i 
27 . 


28 

29 

23 , 


31. 

32. 


33. 


31 . 


M CT 

« >0 , 

26 . 

37. 


38. 

3D. 

40. 


41 . 

42. 


43. 


44. 


45. 

46. 

47. 


Voi. in, pp. 141 n. 

Mr. R. D. Bunrrji thinks that “most probably they (the Karas) also claimed 
descent from Naraka, like the early kings of Kamantpa." (EL XV. 2.) Cf 
above, Vol. Ill, p. 88. 

DKA. 51. 

■'list a, op. rit. 80-82, 

For the date, ci. Ganjam Grant of Jayavarma-deva (1HQ, XII. 4S9). The date 
ef tLis inscription has been toad as 50 by Mr. Misra who edited the Plates, but 
the facsimile published by him shows that the symbol should be read as 20. 
Mr. Misra docs not seem to notice that the symbol is different from that m 
Nculpur Plate which he reads as 50 (o/>. c»c. 7; cf. also the chart facing p. 56). • 

The date has been read as 8 by Mr. R. D. Banetji {El, XV. 1), 54 by Misi.i 
(op. cit. 7), and 204 by Bhandarkar (List No. 1751). 

The name and date of this king are known from a newly discovered plate, now 
in tbe Utkal University, Cuttack. Dr. D. C. Sircar, while announcing this dis¬ 
covery ( JOR , XVIII. 49), considcrtu it possible, .though not veiy likely, that 
this king might be identical with No. VII. But later he seems to have excluded 
this possibility and definitely regarded the two as separate rulers ( JASL , XVII. 
p. 16, fn. 1). This seems to be the more reasonable view. 

An unpublished article of Dr. D. C. Sircar refers to the recently discovered Baud 
plates of Tribhuvana-Mahadevi II, dated in the year 158. According to'those, 
the kings Nos. X and XI having died without leaving any issue, the throne 
passed lo Tribhuvana-Mahadevi II. the queen of No. X. This statement is in 
conflict with the later records which vouch for the existence of two sons of 
No. XI (Nos. XII, XIII), who actually ascended the throne after XI. The only 
reasonable explanation seems to be that there was a party in the state who. 
for some reason or other, did not recognise Nos. XII and XIII to be legitimate 
sons of No. XI and set up Tnbhuvana-Mahadcvi II as a rival claimant to the 
throne after the death of No. XI. Evidently she was overthrown, probably after 
a short .reign, and No. XII obtained undisputed possession of the kingdom. For 
further discussion about her reign, cf. the section on Somavamsis. Cb. VI. III. 
The dates have been read as 280 anti 287 by Bhandarkar (Lists; Nos. 1413. 1416). 
The second date -was read as 387 by Panday (JBORS, V. 571). But ef. 
El, XXIX, 81. 

El, XXVI. 248. 

PIHC. XII. 69. 

Mr. Misra has made (his assumption;, cf. the genealogical table on p. 71 of his 
bock. 

El, XV. 1. 

El, VI. 136. 

El, XV. 36^ Mr, S. C. Do, who supports this view, even goes fm llicr and re¬ 
gards &bbhbkara as the king of Orissa who initiated Rahulabhadrn in Mantra- 
yana {PIHC, XII. 69). 

Misra, op. c it. 76. In the ^eulpur plate the dkdra is indistinct, but it is quite 
clear in the other inscriptions. There is no doubt that the name should be read 
as J§ubhakar@. 

Misra, op. cit. 72 IT. Misra’s statement that Kielhom took the ‘era of the Ganjam 
Plate of Dundi-Mahadevi as the Harsha era’ is wrong. Keilhom referred the 
plate dated 187 to the thirteenth century A.D. (El, VI, 136). Dr. D. C Sircar 
also refers the date of the Karas to Harsha Era ( JKHRS , II. 103-4). But he has 
recently informed me in a private letter that a newly discovered inscription in' 
Orissa ‘seems to suggest that the era used in the inscriptions of the Bhauma- 
Karas started from a date about the beginning of the 3th century AD.” 

Cf. R. D. Banerji’s view about the date of the Neulpur Plate (EL XV. 1). On 
the other hand, Mr. A. Ghosh thinks that the characters of the Khadipada in- 

mor L.°. r less similar to those of the Ganjam plates of Ssusahka” 
(El, XXVI. 247), This would support the theory of Harsha Era. 

There «an be hardly any doubt that Jayavarroan of the Ganjam Grant- (IHQ 
XII. 488) is to be identified with the king, one of whose copper-plates has been 
published in El, XXIII, 261. For the &vetakas, cf. VoL HI. plzii! 

See above, p. 50. 

IHQ, XXI. 218. ' 

P ; B t aner ieo points out the '‘striking similarity” between the scripts of the 
laltak Hate of Vakula-Mahadevl and those of the• Somavaj&il kings which can 
be dated about the middle of the tenth century A.p. (JASL, XVH. 247). 

SO 


EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PA LA PERIOD 


48. Misra. op cit. 87. Thisview is supported by Dr. D. C, Sircar who has discover¬ 
ed a fragmentary inscription of 6ubhakara I amid the ruins of the Hamsesvara 
temple at Sivadasapura, not far from the celebrated Viraja temple of Jajpur. 
This is the only record of the Karas so far found within the boundaries of 
modern Jajpur (JAS L, XVII. 15). 

49. JBORS, XVII. 105; XV. 83-4; BKO. 147. 

50. El, XVIII. 286. 

51. Edited by R. D. Banerji (JBORS, XVIII. 387) and S. Rajaguru ( JKHRS , I. 181), 
and commented upon by Dr. D. C. Sircar ( IHQ, XXVIII. 229). The name 
Yathasukha was read as Pathasukha by Rajaguru, and the name of Mallagambhlra 
as Paliagambhira by R.‘ D. Banerji. The date was read as 800 by Banerji, as 
1012 by Rajaguru, 17 by Dr. B. Misra (op. cit. 105.), and 14 by Dr. Sircar. The 
first figure may be easily read as 10, but the second one .is very unusual and 
cannot be read with certainty. In any case, the date seems' to be a regnal year 
and not one in Samvat or £aka era as held respectively by Banerji and Rajaguru. 

52. Dr. Sircar (op. cit.) regards the rulers, mentioned in the Tekkali plates, as 
belonging to a collateral line, ruling contemporaneously with the Bhanjas of 
Vanjulvaka. But his chronological ideas are not very clear. In one place 
(p. 229) he says that Satrubhanja flourished considerably after the reign of 
Ranabhanja (about the middle or the third quarter of tenth century). Brt on 
the very next page he remarks that “the use of the numerical symbols instead 
of decimal 'figures in the record of Satrubhanja Mangalaraja (i.e. Tekkali Plates) 
would, however, suggest that he flourished before the eleventh century.” 

53. ABORl, XVII. 393. 

54. IHQ, XXVIII. 228. 

55. JBORS, XV. 85. 

•56. Tekkali PI. cf. fn. 51 above. 

57. JBORS, XVII. 104. 

58. EL XXIV. 15. 

59. It is, however, possible to identify him also with king No. VI or X. In Hint case 
we shall have a new branch or a continuation of the old family. 

60. Antirigan CP. El, XVII. 282, 298. 

61. See above, fn. 51. 

62. This was originally suggested by B. Misra (op. cit. 104) and Dr. Bhandarkar 
(List No. 2053, fn. 2), and later by Dr. D. C. Sircar (PIHC, XII. 128). 

63. Cf. IHQ, XXVIII. 228. 

64. Sec above, p. 67. 

65. Baud Plate, JBORS, II. 356. 

G6. JAHRS, VII. 109. 

67. Cf. Sonpur CP. of Satrubhanja (El, XI. 99) and Chakradharpur (Daspalla) CP. 
of Ranabhanja (JBORS, VI. 269). 

68 . JAHRS, XIX. 191. 

69. IHQ, XXVIII. 227-8. 

70. Above, Vol. Ill, pp. 221 ff, 

71. For detailed discussion and alternate views, cf. BKO, 137 ff. 

72. JASB, XL (1871), 161; El, XXV. 147. 

73. ASI, 1922-3, p. 124; 1923-4, p. 85; 1924-5, p. 111. Generally speaking, the archi¬ 
tecture and sculpture of Orissa during this period show a far greater progress 
and development than we could reasonably expect from the petty principalities 
ruling there. We have, therefore, devoted more space to its history than would 
be justified by its political importance. 

74. It may be more than a thousand years if we regard Disabhanja of Sitabhinji 
ins. as flourishing in the fourth century A.D. (see fn. 68 above). 

75. For inscriptions, cf. JASB, V (1909). 347; XII. 291. 

76. DHNl, I. 420. 

77. Misra, Orissa under the Bhavvxa Kings , p. 41. 

78. JBORS, VI. 236. Bhandarkar thinks that the record refers only to Vinitatunga, 
the donor, and his son Khadgatunga. ( Bh. List No. 1747). 

79. There are striking resemblances between the wordings of the Bonai Grant and 
the Tonga charters. Both again refer to the king Vanaryasatru. 

80. JBORS. II. 417. The Editor reads the date of the Grant ns 99, but this is very 
doubtful. 

81. JBORS, VI. 241; XXXI 159. Bhandarkar thinks that the plate only mentions 
Uditavaraha or Udavavaraha and his son Tejavaraha (List No. 1754). 

82. Vol. Ill, p. 68. 


81 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


83. For the inscriptions of this dynasty, cf. El, XII. 156; JASB, LXIV (1895). 123 ff; 

JBORS, II. 168 if; 395 ff. All the plates are issued from Kodalaka or Kodaloka 
which has. been identified with Kualu in the Dhenkanal State (JBORS, XVI. 
453). •- 

84. H. P. Sastri takes Rana-stambha I as son of Kula-stamhha (JBORS, II., 460), 
but cf. El, XII. 1.58. 

85. According to MM. H. P. Sastri he made a land-grant in Ra$ha,-mandala or 
West Bengal. The village granted, named Jara, according to Sastri, still exists 
in tine Hooghly District, and a section of its inhabitants still call themselves 
Sukli (JBORS, H. 168-71). But as Dr. D. C. Sircar has shown, this view is 
erroneous and there is no reason to suppose that Rana-stambha conquered any 
part of West Bengal as Sastri supposed (JOR, XVIII. 45). 

86. El, XIV. 112; JASB, 1895, p. 124; 1911, pp. 443, 447; DHNJ, I. 439. 

87. The Bonai Grant refers to Yamagartla-mandakx as situated in the Vishaya of 
Eighteen Gondamas (JBORS, VI. 237, 239), 

88 . JBORS, XVI. 462-3. 

89. JBORS, v XV. 87; XVI. 457. El, XXVI. 74; Ancient India, No. 5, p. 50; Misra 
(op cit. 35) takes D hr u van an da (or Dhxivananda as read by him) as another 
name of Devananda. The relation between the last three kings is not Certain/ 
For ,the views adopted, cf. El, XXVI. p. 76, fn. 2. 

90. Ancient India, No. 5, p. 50. 

91. See references under footnote 89. Misra (op. cit.) reads the date as 193 on 
p. 35 and 183 in the plate facing p. 96. Dr. Bhandarkar reads the date as 293 
(List, No. 2643). Hie hundredth figure, however, seems to denote 300, as there 
are two distinct adjuncts, one above and one below the letter l which is usually 
read as 100. The decimal figure resembles the one used in the plate of 
Dandi-MahadevI, read as 80. If we read the date_as 183, the date may be re¬ 
ferred to the era used by the Kara kings, and we may assume that the family 
was feudatory to the Karas but assumed de facto independence towards the end 
of their rude. Bhandarkar refers the date 293 to the Harsha Era. 

92. FIHC, XII. 127. 


82 


CHAPTER ¥ 


' CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 

I. THE CHANDELLA DYNASTY 

- After the break-up of the Pratihara Empire a number of 
dynasties rose to power in Central and Western India. One of them, 
known as Chan dell a or Chaodratreya, held sway over the country 
now called Bundelkhand. 

The Chandelias trace their descent from the sage Ghandratreya, 
who was born of the Moon. Their social status was equal to that 
of the Chahamanas. The bards mention them as one of the thirty- 
six Rajput clans. The dynasty was founded by Nannuka in the first 
quarter of the ninth century A.D, Epigraphic records connect the 
early kings of the family with Kharjuravahaka, the modern village 
of Khajraho, in old Chhatarpur State, Bundelkhand. Nannuka 
appears to have ruled over the country around this place, which was 
the early capital of his family. At .this time the Pratihara Empire 
under Nagabha$a II extended up to Kalanj ava-mandala (Kalinjar) 
which is nearly forty miles north-east of Khajraho and is situated 
in the Banda District, in Uttar Pradesh. Deogarh, in the Jhansi 
District, Uttar Pradesh, was within the kingdom of the Pratlharas. 
Khajraho, which lies between Deogarh and Kalinjar, was^obviously 
under the supremacy of the Pratihara kings, and the early rulers 
of the Chandella dynasty may therefore be regarded as vassals of 
the Pratlharas of Kanauj. Nannuka was succeeded by his son 
Vakpati, who probably flourished in the second quarter of the ninth 
century. The Vindhya hill is said to have been the “pleasure 
ground” of Vakpati. It probably means that he fought battles in 
this region, for at this time the Vindhya hill was the target of attacks 
of £ number of kings, viz. the Pratihara Bhoja, the Pa la Devapala, 
and the Kalachuri Kokkalla I. Vakpati had two sons, Jayasakti and 
Vijayasakti. Jayaiakti, who was also known as Jejjaka and Jeja, suc¬ 
ceeded him on the throne. Henceforward the Country ruled by the 
Chandelias was called Jejakabhukti after his name. Jayasakti appears 
to have had a daughter named Nafta who was given in marriage to 
the Kalachuri Kokkalla I. Jayasakti was succeeded by his younger 
brother Vijayasakti, also known as Vijjaka. Both these brothers may 
be taken to have flourished in the third quarter of the ninth century. 
The Khajraho inscription states that Vijaya subdued the neighbour¬ 
ing countries, and “on his warlike expeditions reached even the 


83 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


southernmost point of India.” This has led Dr. R. C. Majumdar to 
suggest that Vijaya was probably an ally cf king Devapala of Bengal 
and accompanied him in his southern expedition. 1 Vijaya was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Kabila. There is a village named Rahilya, two 
miles south-west of Mahoba, in the Hamirpur District, Uttar Pradesh. 
A tank in this village, on the bank of which stands an old ruined 
temple, is known as Rahilyasagara, and tradition ascribes the 
foundation of both to Rahila-varma. If Rahila-varma is identical 
with the Chandella king of this name, Mahoba, the ancient Mahot- 
sava-nagara, must have been included in the Chandella kingdom 
during this period. After the death of Rahila, his son Harsha 
ascended the throne. 

Harsha ruled approximately from A.D. 900 to 925. . The Chan- 
dellas evidently exercised greater political power during the reign 
of this king. The Khajraho inscription reports that Harsha esta¬ 
blished king Kshitipaladeva on the throne. As has been mentioned 
above,' 2 it is generally held that Kshitipaladeva is identical with 
the Pratihara Mahipala I, and Harsha helped him to recover his throne 
of Kanauj after it was captured by the Rashtrakuta Indra III about 
A.D. 914. This valuable military service, rendered by Harsha, won 
for his family a high political status. 3 Harsha married a Chaha- 
mana lady named Kanchuka, who probably belonged to the Chaha- 
mana family ruling in the Malava region. 

After the close of Harsha’s reign (c. A.D. 925), his son Yaso- 
varman, also known as Lakshavarman, assumed the royal state, j^s 
noted above, the disintegration of the Pratihara Empire began about 
this time, and Mahendrapala II’s successor Devapala 1 was unable 
to keep in check the revolutionary forces. Yasovarman, who was 
a contemporary of Devapala, made use of this opportunity for 
enhancing his political power and defied the authority of the Prati- 
haras. The Khajraho inscription states that he was a scorching fire 
to the Gurjaras. He conquered Kalanjara, which had been in the 
possession of the Imperial Pratiharas. and pushed the northern 
boundary of his kingdom up to the banks of the Yamuna. He is said 
to have made the Yamuna and-the Gangs his pleasure lakes when 
he went out for the conquest of the regions. After consolidating 
his position in Bundelkhand, Yasovarman directed his army against 
his southern neighbours. About this time, the Kalachuri Yuvaraja I 
was ruling the Chcdi country from his capital Tripurl near Jubbul- 
pore, and the Piramara Slyaka II was governing the adjoining 
country of Malava as a vassal of the Rashtrakuta Krishna III. Yaso¬ 
varman fought successfully with both Yuvaraja I and Slyaka IT. and 
pushed the southern boundary of his kingdom up to the borders of 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


Chedi and Malava. In the course of these campaigns he seems also 
to have come into conflict with the SomavaihsI kings of Southern 
Kosala, who suffered defeat at his hands. He is also known to have 
led expeditions against distant countries. 

In the middle of the tenth century Bengal was passing through 
a period of stress and strain. The Kambojas deprived the Palas of 
their sovereignty of Gauda and established their supremacy over 
that country. The Pala king Gopala II was forced to take shelter 
in Magadha and Mithiia. During this period of turmoil Yasovarman 
invaded the territories of the Palas and the Kambojas. He is said 
to have conquered Gautfa and Mithiia. The Khajraho inscription 
states that Yasovarman “equalled 6 the forces of the Khasas, the 
Kasmiri warriors perished before him, and he was to the Kurus what 
a storm is to the trees.” Yasovarman’s contemporary kings of Kash¬ 
mir were Yasaskara, Samgtamadeva, and Parvagupta. Lohara, 
modern Lohrin, in Kashmir, was under the rule of the Khasa chiefs. 
About this time Chanduraja seems to have been on the throne of 
Lohara, and the Tomaras of Delhi were in possession of Kuru- 
kshetra. It does not seem likely that Yasovarman, in the course of 
conquest, went as far as Kashmir forcing his way through the 
Punjab. This statement may, therefore, be taken as a vain pane¬ 
gyric of the poet. 

Yasovarman was undoubtedly a general of high order. He 
appears to have come to terms with his overlord Devapala, whose 
nominal sway he continued to acknowledge. He received an image 
of Vishnu from Devapala, 'which in turn had been received by 
Devapala’s father Herambapala 6 from Sahi, king of Kira or Kangra 
Valley. Sahi obtained it from the lord of Bhota or Tibet. Yaio- 
varman erected a magnificent temple at Khajraho, which is now 
identified with the Chaturbhuja temple, and installed in it this 
image of Vishnu. He also dug a beautiful tank. He was succeeded 
by his son Dhahga. 

Dhahga and his successors took pride in calling themselves 
the lords of Kalanjara. Dhahga acknowledged the supremacy of 
Vinayakapala, the successor of the Pratlhara Devapala, at least up 
to A.D. 954. 7 At this time the Chandella kingdom extended “as far 
as Kalanjara and as far as Bhasvat, situated on the banks of the river 
of Malava; from here also to the river Kalindi, and from here also 
to the frontiers of the Chedi country and even as far as that moun¬ 
tain called Gopa.” Bhasvat is the modern Bhilsa on the Betwa river 
in old Gwalior State, Kalindi is the Yamuna, and Gopa is Gwalior. 
Thus in the early part of the reign of Dhahga, Gwalior, the Yamuna, 
Kalanjara. northern border of the Jubbulpore District, and Bhilsa 

85 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


were the extreme limits of his kingdom. He obviously inherited 
this kingdom from his father Yasovarman. He could not, however, 
retain Gwalior for a long time as some time before A.D. 977 Vajra- 
dainan, son of Lakshmana, of the Kachchhapaghata family, invaded 
Gwalior and forced Dhahga and his overlord, who seems~“to have 
been the Fratihara Vijayapala, to surrender it to him. It is claimed 
that Vajradaman conquered Gopagiri by defeating the king of 
Gadhinagara, i.e. Kanauj. A stone inscription of the reign of the 
Maharajtidhiraja Vajradaman, dated V. S. 1034 ( = A.D. 977) has 
been found at Gwalior. This discomfiture of the king of Kanauj 
seems to have encouraged Dhahga to rise against him. He invaded 
his kingdom and inflicted a crushing defeat on him. The eastern 
portion of the Fratihara kingdom to the north of the Yamuna now 
passed into the hands ofuthe Chandellas. In A.D. 998 Dhahga issued 
an inscription from Kasika (Banaras). Probably from the base at 
Banaras, Dhahga led a successful military campaign against Ahga 
or Bhagalpur, which was within the kingdom of the Palas, and 
Had ha or West Bengal. The Pa la kings Vigrahapala II and Mahl- 
pala I were his contemporaries. In the first quarter of the eleventh 
century Southern Ra$ha was under the rule of Ranasura of the 
£ura family. Ranasura’s predecessor probably had to bear the brunt 
of Dhanga’s attack. The SomavarhsI kings of Kosala had also to 
yield to his forces. During his southern campaigns he seems to have 
come into conflict with the kings of Andhra and Kuntala. ’ Andhra 
was under the rule of the Eastern Chalukyas. The "Rashfrakuta 
supremacy in Kuntala was put to an end by Taila II of the Chalukya 
dynasty in c. A.D. 972,\The king of Kuntala, who was an adversary 
of Dhahga, cannot be identified. The claim of the court-poet that 
Dhahga defeated the kings of Kratha, Simhala, and Kahchi seems 
to be a hyperbole. 

Firishta relates" that Jayapala, king of the Punjab, in order to 
save his kingdom from the attack of Arnir Sabukligin, sought help 
from the kings of Northern India, and the Raja of Kalinjar was one 
of those who responded to his call. The confederacy of the Hindu 
chiefs met Sabukligin near Larnghan and was badly defeated about 
A.D. 989. The Raja of Kalinjar was evidently Dhahga. The authen¬ 
ticity of the statement that the chiefs of Hindusthan joined in this 
battle has been called in question, as it does not find mention in the 
records'of earlier authorities. There is, however, definite evidence 
to prove that Dhahga came into conflict with the Muslims. An 
inscription from Mahoba states that he, :< by the strength of his arms, 
equalled even the powerful Harhvlra.” It Is obvious that Harhvlra 

refers to a Yaminl king of Ghazni, who bore the title Amir. So 

/ % 

Firishta's report may be accepted as historical. 


CENTRAL* AND WESTERN INDIA 

Dhahga was the first independent king of the Chandelia dynasty. 
He bore the title Mahamjadhimja, which indicates his independent 
sovereign status. A number of temples were erected at Khajr&ho 
during his reign. Frabhasa, bom in the lineage of Gautama Aksha- 
pada, who was competent to explain the Nyaya doctrine* was appoint® 
ed his chief minister. The dates of the inscriptions of Dhahga's reign 
range from A.D. 954 to 1002. He died shortly after A.D. 1002, at the 
age of one hundred, at Frayaga. He was succeeded by his son Gancja. 

II. THE KALACBURIS 
1. The Kaiachuris of Tripun 

The kingdom of the Chandellas was bordered on the south by 
that of the Kaiachuris of the Chedi country. The Kaiachuris, also 
known as the Haihayas, were an ancient race. 8 The Kaiachuris of 
Chedi are sometimes referred to as the kings of Pahaia-r/mn^Ia, the 
capital of which was Tripurl, now a village known as Tewar, six 
miles west of Jubbulpore, Madhya Pradesh. The earliest known king 
of this Kalachurl dynasty is Kokkalla I. 9 ^ahalA-man^ala was ruled 
by a king named Lakshmanaraja in A.D. 841-2. It is known from 
the San jin copper-plate of Amoghavarsha that the Rkshprakuta 
Govinda III (A.D. 794-814), after conquering the p&hala country, 
placed one of his servants there. This Bashprakuta officer, who was 
made the governor ©f J^ahaia, was probably Lakshmanaraja or his 
predecessor. Kokkalla I, whose relationship with La&himana t&ja is 
not known, ascended the throne of pahala shortly after A.D. 842. 10 
The date of his accession may be fixed approximately at A.D. 845. 
Kokkalla was one of the greatest generals of his age. Shortly after his 
accession he involved himself in a war with the Pratlh&ras of Kanauj 
and their feudatories. The Pratihara Bhoja I failed to check the in¬ 
vading Kalachuri army. The Kalachuri Sankaragana (of SarayupSra 
in U.P.) the Guhila Harshartja (of Dhavagarfa, i.e. Dhod in Me war) 
and the Chahamana Guvaka II of Sakambharl (near Ajmere), all of 
whom were vassals of Bhoja, yielded to the forces of Kokkalla, who 
is said to have carried away their treasures. Kokkalla granted 
Bhoja and his feudatories ‘freedom from fear’, which probably means 
an assurance that he would not lead any mpre aggressive campaign 
against their territories. 1 r In the course of his marauding excur¬ 
sions in Rajputana Kokkalla seems to have come into clash with the 
Turushkas, who were obviously Turkish soldiers in the service of 
the Arab governors of Sindh. The Turushkas had to acknowledge 
defeat at his hands. To the east Kokkalla is said to have reached 
Vanga or East Bengal in the course of his military campaign, and 
plundered the wealth of that country. The king of Vanga at this 


87 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


time was in all probability Kantideva, 12 who was in possession of 
Harikela, which is a synonym for Vahga. In the latter part of his 
reign Kokkalla was engaged in a war with the Rashtrakutas of the 
Deccan. Kokkalla vanquished the Rashtrakuta king Krishna II 
(A.D. 878-914) who was his son-in-law, and invaded Northern Kon- 
kan. Konkan was at this time ruled by a feudatory of the Rashtra¬ 
kutas named Kapardin II of the Silahara dynasty, who readily sub¬ 
mitted to the Kalachuri army. A treaty was ultimately concluded 
between the Kalachuris and the Rashtrakutas. 

All these conquests made by Kokkalla, though they did not 
enable him to acquire new territc ries, certainly raised the Kala¬ 
churi dynasty to the rank of the imperial ruling families of the age. 
Kokkallk married a Chandella princess, who seems to have been 
the daughter of King Jayaiakti. 13 He had eighteen sons, al] of whom, 
except the eldest, were made rulers of different man(lalas or Divi¬ 
sions. A descendant of one-of these younger sons of Kokkalla sub¬ 
sequently founded a kingdom in Dakshina-Kosala, the capital of 
which was Turnmana. Kokkalla had a daughter who.was given in 
marriage to the Rashtrakuta Krishna II during the reign of Amo- 
ghavarsha I. The names of only two sons of Kokkalla are know** 
Sankaragana and Arjuna. &aukaragana, also known as- Sahkila an 
£ahkuka, was evidently the eldest and succeeded him to the throne 
Kokkalla was a contemporary of tfye Rashtrakuta king Kristina T 
who ascended the throne in c. A".D>. 878. Sahkarngana was on the 
throne of Dahala when Gunaka-Yijayaditya III of the Eastern 
Chalukya dynasty, whose reign terminated in A.D. 888. was the king 
of the Andhra country. Hence Kokkalla must have been succeeded 
by §ankaragana some time between’A.D. 878 and 888. 

Sahkaragana assumed the titles Mugdhatuhga , Prasiddhadhavala , 
and Raa.vig.raha. He fought with a SomavarhsI king of Kosala. and 
conquered; from him Pali, twelve miles north-west of Ratanpur, in 
the Bilaspur District, Madhya Pradesh. He could not utilise his 
energies for further conquests as his help was sought by his'brother- 
in-law, the Rashtrakuta Krishna II, against the Eastern Chalukya 
king Vijayaditya III, who had invaded the Deccan. Sankaragana, 
at .the head‘of the Kalachuri army, joined Krishna II at Kiranapura! 
now a small town in the Balaghat District, Madhya Pradesh. A 
great battle was fought there with the Eastern Chalukvas in which 
both Sahkaragana and Krishna II were worsted. The Kalachuris 
and the Rashtrakutas were forced to retreat, and Kiranapura was 
burnt by the Chalukya general, Panduranga. The Maliyapundi 
grant of Amma .II states that Vijayaditya III “terrified Sankila. the 
lord of the excellent Dahala. who was joined by the fierce Vallabha. 

ss 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 

and burnt Kiranapura.” The Pithapuram inscription reports that 
Vijayaditya frightened Sahkila, residing in KiranapuVa and joined 
by Krishna. Thus Sahkaragana’s engagement with the Eastern 
Chalukyas resulted in his complete discomfiture. The claim of the 
Bilhari inscription that he raided the Malaya country does not seem 
to have any historical basis He had two sons, Balaharsha and Yuva- 
raja I, and a daughter named Lakshmi. Lakshml was married to 
Jagattunga, son of the Rashtrakuta Krishna II. Lakshmi gave birth 
to Indra III, who succeeded to the throne of his grandfather. Vijamba, 
the grand-daughter of Sankaragana’s younger brother Arjuna, was 
given, in marriage to Indra III. Sahkaragana died in the latter part 
of the ninth century and was followed on the throne by Balaharsha. 
Nothing particular is known about the reign of Balaharsha. He was 
succeeded by his younger brother Yuvaraja I, who assumed the title 
Keyuravarsha. 

Yuvaraja flourished in the second quarter of the tenth century. 
He inherited the military skill of his father and grandfather. In 
the course of his conquests, he reached the Gau$a country and 
defeated its king, who was either Rajyapala or his son Gopala II 
of the Pala dynasty. Kalinga, which was at that time ruled by tKe 
Garigas, had to bear the brunt of his attack. In the latter part of 
his reign he had, however, to suffer some military defeats. The 
Chandella Yasovarman. in his endeavour to push the boundary of 
his kingdom further south, came into conflict with him. Though the 
Chandellas claimed to have won a victory over him..they did not 
seem to have been able to acquire any part of the Kalachuri kingdom. 
At this time the. Rashtrakutas reduced him to a very critical situa¬ 
tion. He ga;ve his daughter Kundakadevi in marriage to the Rash¬ 
trakuta Amoghavarsha III Vaddiga, who ruled from A.D. 936 to 
939. Amoghavarsha’s son by this Kalachuri princess was Krishna III, 
who ascended the throne of the Deccan in A.D. 939-40. Krishna III 
led a successful expedition against Kalanjara during the reign of 
his father. Some time after his accession Krishna III invaded the 
kingdom of his maternal grandfather Yuvaraja I. The Kalachuris 
failed to rise equal to the occasion and suffered a heavy defeat with 
a disastrous result. The whole of Dahala-mandala was now at the 
mercy of Krishna III.. The Karhad inscription of this Rashtrakuta 
king, dated A.D. 959, states that he “conquered Sahasrarjuna (i.e. 
the Kalachuri king)» though he was an elderly relative of his mother 
and his wife.” A stone-inscription at Jura, in old Maihar State, 
Baghelkhand, proves that the Rashtrakuta Empire extended at least 
for some time up to Maihar during the reign of Krishna III. The 
Rashtrakutas could not, however, keep the kingdom of the Kalachuris 


89 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


under their subjugation for long, Yuvaraja I rallied his forces and 
succeeded in driving them out of Pahala. The Bilhari inscription 
mentions his victory over the Karnatas and the Latas. Lata or the 
Southern Gujarat formed part of the Rashtrakuta Empire. The 
great poet Rajasekhara evidently refers to this battle when he states 
that ‘‘Yuvaraja (I) won a victory over Vallabha, who formed a con¬ 
federacy with other chiefs.” This achievement of Yuvaraja was 
a memorable event in the history of the Kalachuris. To celebrate 
this victory Rajasekhara staged his drama Viddhasdlabhanjikd at 
the court of Yuvaraja. The authenticity of the statement in the 
Bilhari inscription that Yuvaraja I raided Kashmir and the Himalaya 
may well be doubted. It has been noticed above that the Khajraho 
inscription puts forward similar claims on behalf of the Chandella 
Yaiovarman, the northern adversary of Yuvaraja I. 

Yuvaraja 1 helped the Saiva ascetics in preaching their doctrine 
in his kingdom. There was a famous Saiva monastery known as 
Golaki-matha in the pahala-manduZa, which was founded by Dur- 
vasa. Sadbhavasambhu, a remote successor of Durvasa, and the 
high priest of the Golaki-ma|ha, received from Yuvaraja a large 
number of villages foj* the maintenance of that monastery. Yuvaraja I 
married Nohala, the daughter of the Chaulukya Avanivarman, who 
resided at the city of Mattamayura. There was a Saiva monastery 
in this city, which exercised tremendous influence over that part of 
the country during this period. Yuvaraja I invited Prabhavasiva of 
this monastery to his kingdom and entrusted to him the charge of 
a monastery, which was built at great cost, and which was richly 
endowed by the king. At Chandrehi, twenty-nine miles south of 
Rewa, Bagheikhand, there are remains of a temple of 2§iva and a 
monastery. This might have been the monastery over which Pra- 
bhavasiva had been placed in charge. Yuvaraja built a magnificent 
temple at Gurgi, twelve miles east of the Rewa town. The place 
is now in ruins. The queen Nohala erected a temple of Siva at 
Bilhari, in the Jubbulpore District, and granted seven villages for 
its maintenance. 

The poet Rajasekhara, who lived for some time at the court of 
the Pratlhara Mahendrapala and his son Mahipala of Kanauj, was 
also intimately connected with the Kalachuri kings of his time. The 
poet remarks that “of rivers the Mekalasuta (i.e. Narmada), of kings 
Ranavigraha, and of poets Surananda are the ornaments of the coun¬ 
try of Chedi.” This obviously refers to the poet’s association with 
the court of Tripuri during the reign of Sankaragana Ranavigraha, 
the father of Yuvaraja I. Rajasekhara says that he wrote the drama 
Viddhasdlabhanjikd to please Yuvarajadeva, and as already men- 


90 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 

tioned, it was staged in the court of the Kalachuris at the orders 
of the assembly of Yuvaraja (Y uvaraja-parishad ). He seems to be 
identical with the ‘wonder-struck poet Rajaiekhara,’ mentioned in 
the Bilbao inscription of the time of Yuvaraja II, grandson of Yuva¬ 
raja I. Bhakamiira was the chief minister of the king. Yuvaraja I 
was succeeded by his son Lakshmanaraja,’ who probably flourished 
in the third quarter of the tenth century, 

Lakshmanaraja pursued the traditional expansionist policy of 
his predecessors. His father, as has been noticed, plundered Gau^a; 
He raided the Vangala country or East Bengal* which was at this 
time probably ruled by Trailokya-chandra of the Chandra dynasty. 
It was apparently during this eastern campaign that he came in con¬ 
tact with the king of Odra or Orissa, and obtained from him an effigy 
of the serpent Kaliya, wrought in jewels and gold. About the same 
time Lakshmanaraja won laurels by inflicting a defeat on the king of 
Kosala, who may be identified with Mahabhavagupta, son of Siva - 
gupta, of the Soraavaihia. After finishing his eastern conquests, 
Lakshmanaraja invaded the western region with all his infantry, 
cavalry, elephant forces and feudatory chiefs. He humbled the chief 
of Lata, who seems to have been a feudatory of the Rashtraku^as of 
the Deccan, and won a victory over the king of Gurjara, who was 
evidently Mularaja I, the founder of the Chaulukya. dynasty in 
Anahilapa^aka, modern Patan in Northern Gujarat. Thereafter he 
reached Somanathapattana, probably defeating Graharipu of the 
Abhlra family, ruling in Junagadh, in his way, • On that occasion 
he dedicated the effigy of Kaliya, which he had received from the 
king of Odra, to the god Some£vara. The statement of the Gaharwa 
inscription of Karna that Lakshmanaraja conquered Kashmir and 
the Parity a country is obviously an exaggeration. 

Like his father Lakshmanaraja also extended his patronage to 
the Saiva teachers. He handed over the monastery of the holy 
Vaidvanatha, which was situated at Bilhari or in its neighbourhood, 
in the Jubbulpore District, to the iSaiva teacher Hfidayasiva of the 
Mattamayura sect. His minister Bhatta Some^vara Dikshita, son 
of Bhakamiira, prime-minister of Yuvaraja I, built a temple ,of 
Vishnu at Karitalai, in the Mudwara sub-division of the Jubbulpore 
District, Lakshmanaraja himself, his queen Rfiha<Ja, and his son 
Sankaragana made donations for its maintenance. The Lakshmana* 
sagar tank at Bilhari was probably dug by this king. Besides 
Sankaragana, he had another son named Yuvaraja II, and a daughter 
named BonthadevI, who was married to the Chfilukya Vikramft- 
ditya IV. Bonthadevi‘s son Taila II put an end to the rule of the 
Imperial Hashtrakutas, and re-established the sovereignly of the 


91 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Chalukyas in the Deccan. Lakshmanaraja was succeeded by his 
son Sankaragana, who was a great devotee of Vishnu (parama- 
Vaishnava). His reign was uneventful and he appears to have ruled 
for a very short period. He was succeeded by his younger brother 
Yuvaraja II. 

Yuvaraja II ruled in the last quarter of the tenth century. He 
reconstructed the city of Tripuri in order to enhance its beauty and 
grandeur. Both Yuvaraja II and his brother Sankaragana. lacked 
that military prowess which brought success to their predecessors. 
The enemies of the Kalachuris took advantage of this situation and 
declared war on them. Chalukya Taila II, the king of the Deccan, 
notwithstanding the fact that Yuvaraja II was his maternal uncle, 
attacked his kingdom and carried on raids in the Chedi country. 
Munja, the Paramara king of Malava, who made a bid for paramount 
position.in Central and Western India, also fell upon the Kalachuris. 
In vain did Yuvaiaja II try to defend his capital. Munja made a 
triumphal entry into the city of Tripuri and held it for some time. 
Some Kalachuri generals lost their lives in the battle, and Yuvaraja 
appears to have fled from his capital. After the withdrawal of the 

Paromaras from the Chedi country the chief ministers did not allow 

• < 

Yuvaraja II to assume royalty owing to the abject cowardice he 
had shown on the approach of the Paramaras, but placed his son 
Kokkalla II on the throne. 

Yuvaraja II is said to have made donations to the holy 
Somesvara. His reign appears to have come to a close before the 
death of Munja, which took place between A.D. 993 and 998. The 
Kalachuris regairted their power and prestige under the guidance 
of Kokkalla II. Kokkalla led an expedition against the Gurjara 
country, and defeated its king, who may be identified with the 
Chaulukya Mularaja or his son Chamundaraja. He also avenged 
the defeat inflicted by the Chalukya king Taila II on his father by 
a successful invasion of the Deccan. He is said to have forced the 
king of Kuntala to live in Vanavasa. About this time Kuntala 
(Deccan) .seems to have been ruled by the Chalukya Satyasraya. 
There seems to be a pun in the word Vanavasa, which may be re¬ 
ferring to Banavasi, modem Shimoga Taluq in Mysore, which was 
situated in the kingdom of tile Chalukyas of the Deccan. To the 
cast, Kokkalla advanced up to the Gauda country, which was then 
ruled by the Pala Mahlpala I. Kokkalla is said to have forced the 
Gauda king to take shelter in the watery fort of the sea. Thus 
Kokkalla succeeded in re-establishing the authority of his family, 
which had suffered an eclipse during the reign of his father. 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


2. Kalachuris of Sarayupara 

At the time when Kokkalla I and his successors were on the 
throne of Tripurl, a collateral branch of the Kalachuri family was 
ruling on the banks of the Sarayu, modem Gogra, which flows by 
the Bahraich and Gonda Districts, U.P. The territory over which 
it ruled was known as Sarayupara. The earliest king of the family 
is Rajaputra, who flourished in the latter part of the eighth century. 
Rajaputra captured the Turagapati Vahali, destroyed the fame of 
Kirtfin and other princes, and curbed the power of the kings of 
Prachl (east). Vahali and Kirilin cannot be identified. The leader 
of the kings of Prachl might have been Dharmapala of Bengal. 
Rajaputra probably defended his kingdom successfully when 
Dharmapala was making conquests in Uttar Pradesh, Rajaputra’s 
son and successor was Sivaraja I. Sivaraja I was succeeded by 
Sankaragana, who suffered a defeat at the hands of the Kalachuri 
Kokkalla Ij Sankaragana flourished in the middle of the ninth 
century. He was succeeded by his son Gunambhodhideva, also 
known as Gui^asagara I, who ruled in the second half of the ninth 
century. Gunambhodhideva defeated the king of Gautfa. It has 
been suggested that he joined the Pratlhara Bhoja when the latter 
invaded the kingdom of the Palas. 14 It might have been in recog- 
nition of this service that Bhoja granted some territories to this 
Kalachuri chief. 

To the east of the territory of the Kalachuris lay the kingdom 
of the Malayaketu dynasty. Two inscriptions of this family have 
been found in the Gorakhpur District, U.P. The capital of the 
dynasty was Vijayapura, which was situated in the Uttara-giri- 
kafaka. The city seems to have been situated at the foot of the 
Himalayas in the northern part of the Gorakhpur District. Three 
kings of this dynasty are known, viz. Maharajadhiraju Jayaditya I, 
his son Maharajadhiraja Dharmaditya, and the latter’s son Maha- 
rajddhiraja Jayaditya II. Jayaditya II was ruling in A.D. 870. Later 
members of the Kalachuris of Sarayupara are found ruling over 
the territories up to the banks of the Gandak, which included the 
Gorakhpur District. It is not unlikely that the Pratlhara Bhoja I, 
after putting an end to the rule of Jayaditya II, handed over the 
latter’s kingdom to Gunambhodhideva. After Gunambhodhideva’s 
death, his two sons Ullabha and Bhamanadeva successively occu¬ 
pied the throne. Bhamanadeva distinguished himself in a war with 
the king of Dhara, the capital of Malava, which was at this time 
ruled by the Paramara Vairisirhha II as a vassal under the Rashtra- 
kutas of the Deccau. In the second quarter of the tenth century 
Malava passed into the hands of the Pratlharas for some time. 


08 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Bhamanadeva seems to have helped the Pratihara Mahipala I 
in wresting Malava from the Paramaras. 1 - He was followed on 
the throne in succession by Sankaragana II Mugdhatunga, Guna- 
sagara II, Sivaraja II Bhamana, Sankaragana III, and Bhlma, each 
being the son of his predecessor. Bhlma, who flourished in the early 
part of the eleventh century, is said to have lost his kingdom by 
the decree of fate. The cause of his dethronement is not known, 
but probably he was worsted in a civil war. In A.D. 1031 Vyasa, 
son of Gunasagara II, was raised to the throne. Vyasa’s son and 
successor was the MaharcLjddhiraja Sodhadeva. who was ruling in 
A.D. 1079. So^hadeva’s kingdom extended from the Sarayu or 
Gogra to the Gandak, and comprised the Bahraich, Gonda, Basti, 
and Gorakhpur Districts, in U.P. Nothing is known of the dynasty 
after Sodhadeva. 


III. THE PARAMARAS 

The kingdom of the Paramaras of Malava was conterminous 
with that of the Kalachuris of Chedi. It is generally assumed that 
the original home of the Paramaras was Mount Abu, in the Sirohi 
State, Rajputana. This assumption is based on a story related by 
Padmagupta Pari mala in the latter part of the tenth century, and 
repeated in the later inscriptions of the Paramaras. According to 
this story the sage Vasishtha had a Kamadhenu (wish-granting cow) 
which was stolen by the sage Visvamitra. In order -to recover it. 
he made sorpe offerings to the sacrificial fire on Mount Abu with 
holy incantations. A hero sprang out of the fire, forcibly carried 
the cow from Visvamitra, and returned it to his creator. Vasishtha, 
in recognition of this service, gave him the name Paramara, which 
means ‘Slayer of the Enemy/ and made him king. In the lineage 
of this hero was born Upendra, who is the earliest known king of 
the Paramara dynasty. This story of the origin of the Paramaras 
is not mentioned iii the inscriptions of the family issued prior to 
the second quarter of the eleventh century. The earliest known 
>pigraphic record of the Paramaras, viz. the Harsola grant, which 
was issued nearly half a century before the time of Padmagupta, 
relates on the ofher hand, that the kings of the Paramara dynasty 
were bom in th$ family of the Rashtraku^as of the Deccan. 

Dhara, modern Dhar, in Madhya Bharat, was the capital of the 
main branch of the Paramaras. Since it is known that Vakpati- 
Munja, the seventh king of the dynasty, commenced his reign about 
A.D. 972, Upendra, who was also known as Krishnaraja, may be 
taken to have flourished in the first quarter of the ninth century. 
Shortly before A.D. 812 the Rashtrakuta Govinda III conquered 
Malava by defeating the Pratihara Nagabhata II and handed it over 


94 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


to one of his followers. As the early Paramara chiefs are known to 
have been vassals of the Rashfraku$as of the Deccan, the follower 
of Govinda III, who was made the ruler of Malava, was probably 
Upendra. Govinda III realised that Nagabha^a II would make an 
attempt to reconquer his home-territory of Malava. and Upendra 
would not be able to resist him. So he commissioned Karkkaraja, 
the chief of lA\a r to defend Malava against the incursion of the 
Pratiharas, Nagabha^a II could not reconquer Malava though he 
succeeded in capturing some of its outlying hill fortresses. 

Upendra had two sons, Vairlsiihha I and pambarasimha. 
Dambarasimha and his successors ruled in Vagada, corresponding 
to modern Banswara and Dungarpur, until the early part of the 
twelfth century, as vassals of the main branch at Dhara. Vairi- 
sirhha I ascended the throne of his father. He was succeeded by 
his son Sly aka I, whose son and successor was Vakpati I. Padma- 
gupta does not mention the names of Vairisimha and Siyaka I, but 
merely states that there ruled in the Paramara dynasty more than 
one king between Upendra and Vakpati I. The Rash^rakuta Arnogha- 
varsha I, who was a contemporary of Upendra, Vairisimha, and 
Siyaka I, claims that he was worshipped by the king of Malava. 
The Udepur Pra^asti mentions Vakpati I as the king of Avanti. It 
was probably during his reign that the Rash{rakufa Indra III halted 
at Ujjain while advancing with his army against the Pratlhara Mahl¬ 
pala I. It is not unlikely that Vakpati I accompanied Indra III in 
that expedition. The Udepur Praiasti mentions that he led his army 
up to the tanks of the Gahga. Vakpati’s son and successor was 
Vairisimha II, also known as Vajrata. The successors of Indra III 
were busy with their own affairs at home till the accession of 
Krishna HI in AJD. 939. Mahlpala I, who had suffered an igno¬ 
minious defeat at the hands of Indra III, took advantage of the 
situation and invaded the Rashtraku\a Empire. Vairisimha II could 
not resist the invading army. Mahlpala and his subordinate, the 
Kalachuri Bhamanadeva, the chief of the Gorakhpur Division, con¬ 
quered all the territories up to the banks of the Narmada including 
Uj jay ini and Dhara. A Pratlhara governor was posted at Uj jay ini. 
The Paramara sovereignty in Malava had ceased till after A.D. 946 
when Mahendrapala II, son of Mahlpala I, was on the throne of 
Kanauj. Shortly after this date Vairisimha II reconquered Malava, 
apparently with the help of the Rashtrakuta Krishna III. The Udepur 
Prasasti avers that Vairisimha proved by the strength of his sword 
that Dhara belonged to him. He was succeeded by his son Siyaka II, 
who was known also as Harsha. 

Siyaka IT owed allegiance to the Rashfrakuta Krishna III. He 
ascended the throne at a time when the Pratlhara Empire was 


95 


the Age of imperial kanauj 


gradually disintegrating. His kingdom extended on the west up to 
the Sabarmati river beyond which lay the kingdom of the Chau- 
lukya Mularaja I. The chief, of Khe^aka-man^aia, modern Kaira, 
in Gujarat, was his ally. Slyaka defeated a chief named Yogarajk 
and, while returning to his capital, encamped on the banks of the 
Mahi river. This vanquished chief may be identified with tho 
Chalukya Avanivarman Yogaraja II, the ruler of Saurashtra. To 
the north-west of Malava was situated Huna-raandaZa, which was 
ruled by a chief named Jajjapa in the second half of the ninth 
century. Slyaka II claims to have defeated a Huna chief, who was 
obviously one of the successors of Jajjapa. On the north-east, 
Siyaka II had to acknowledge defeat at the hands of the Chandella 
Yasovarman of Khajraho. Yasovarman pushed the boundary of 
his kingdom up to the Malava river, which is probably identical 
with the Vetravati, modern Betwa. 

In the latter part of his reign Siyaka II decided to throw off 
the yoke of the Rashtrakut>as, and the death of the Rashtrakuta 
Krishna III presented a favourable opportunity. He refused to avow 
allegiance to Khottiga, successor of Krishna III, and openly re¬ 
volted. Khottiga marched against the rebel, and was opposed by 
the latter at a place known as Kalighafta, on the banks of the 
Narmada. In this fateful battle Slyaka was assisted by the Para- 
mara Kamka, also known as Chachcha, the ruler of Vagada, and 
the successor of Dhanika, a descendant of Dambarasimha. Kamka 
died fighting bravely with the enemy. Slyaka succeeded after a 
hard fight in dispersing his adversaries. He pursued Khottiga up to 
Manyakheta, the capital of the Rashfrakutas, which for the first time 
experienced the invasion of a foreign army. The city was plundered 
by the Paramaras without encountering any opposition (A.D. 972). 
The encampment of the Emperor was, however, bravely defended 
by the Ganga Marasimha II. Siyaka had eventually to withdraw 
from the Deccan, but he pushed the southern boundary of his king¬ 
dom up to the Tapti. He deserves credit for achieving the independ¬ 
ence of his dynasty. On the north Siyaka’s kingdom was bounded 
by that of the Mahardjadhirdja Chamundaraja, who was ruling in 
old Jhalawar State in A.D. 971. 

Siyaka had two sons, Munja and Sindhuraja. Merutuhga relates 
that Munja was not the son of Slyaka. Slyaka was, we are told, 
without afiy issue for a long time. Once, while touring the country¬ 
side, he picked up a new-born child from a tuft of Munja grass. He 
gave him the name Munja and adopted him as his heir. Subse¬ 
quently a child was born to him who was named Sindhuraja. The 
birth of the child did not, however, lead Siyaka to lessen his affection 


96 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 

towards Munja. He arranged that he should be succeeded by Munja 
and Sindhuraja successively. In the latter part of his reign he 
adopted the life of an ascetic- and “clothed himself in the grass-robe 
of a royal sage.” Munja succeeded him to the throne some time 
between A.D. 972 and 974. 

Munja was also known as Utpala and Vakpatiraja II,. and 
assumed the titles Snvallabha, Pj-Uhvivallabha, and Amoghavarsha . 
He inherited a kingdom which extended on the north up' to the 
southern border of Jhalawar, on the east up to Bhilsa, on the south 
up to the Tapti and on the west up to the Sabarmati. He directed 
his energies towards its further expansion. On the east, he defeat¬ 
ed the Kalachuri Yuvaraja II and plundered his capital Tripurl, 
but could not annex any part of the Kalachuri kingdom. He led 
an extensive campaign against numerous states in Rajputana. The 
Hunas of Huna-mandala yielded to his sword. The Guhilas of 
Medapata were the next victims of. his attack. He^ destroyed the 
elephant forces of the king of the Guhilas, who was either Nara- 
vahana or his son Saktikumara, and plundered his capital Aghafa, 
modern Ahar, in Udaipur, Rajputana. The vanquished chief saved 
his life by taking shelter with the Rashtrakuta Dhavala of Hasti- 
kun<JI. This success brought Munja on the border of the kingdom 
of the Chah&manas of Na&lula, modern Nadol, in Jodhpur. He 
wrested from the Chahamana Baliraja Mount Abu and the southern 
part of Jodhpur up to Kiradu, sixteen miles north-west of Balmer. 
His attempt to conquer Nad^ula was, however, foiled by this Chaha¬ 
mana king. The conquered territories were divided between the 
princes of the Paramara dynasty for efficient administration. Munja’s 
sons Aranyaraja and Chandana were made the governors respec¬ 
tively of Mount Abu and Jabalipura, modern Jalor, in Jodhpur. 
His nephew Dusala, son of Sindhuraja, was placed in charge of 
Bhillamala or Srlmala, modem Bhinmal, in Jodhpur. Successors 
of -these princes ruled their respective territories for many years. 
Munja invaded the kingdoms of Anahilapataka and Lata on the 
west. Mu la raj a of the Chaulukya dynasty, king of Anahilapataka, 
being worsted, fled with his family to the desert - of Mar war. His 
army had at last to take shelter with the Rashtrakuta Dhavala of 
Hastikundi for safety. Munja’s adversary in Lata was the Chaulukya. 
Barappa, the general of the ; Chalukya Taila II of the Deccan. 
Taila II, who had established his authority over the Deccan after 
overthrowing the Rashtrakutas, considered himself the master of 
the whole of the Rashtrakuta Empire. In order to recover the terri¬ 
tories; which seceded from it, he sent his general, Barappa, to Lata 
and himself led ’successive campaigns against Malava. Munja 

97 

A.I.K.-7 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


defeated Barappa and repulsed Taila’s attacks six times. Then, v in 
order to get rid of this menace once for all by crushing the military 
power of his sworn enemy, he thought of an aggressive campaign. 
His veteran minister Budraditya did not approve of this, and tried 
to dissuade him from it. On being unsuccessful he requested the 
king not to cross the Godavari under any circumstances. Muhja 
led his army to the Deccan and crossed the Godavatf in pursuit of 
the enemy, totally disregarding the advice of his minister. On re¬ 
ceipt of this news Budmdifya, who had a premonition that a dire 
calamity would befall his master, committed suicide. The faithful 
minister preferred death to the shock of seeing the dismal fate of 
his master. Munja was soon entrapped in the country of his enemy 
and taken prisoner. Taila II took possession of the southern part 
of the Paramara kingdom, possibly up to the banks of the Narmada, 
and kept his adversary confined in the prison of his capital. Munja’s 
officers went there in disguise, and made a secret plan for his rescue. 
But the plan was detected and on the orders of Taila the captive 
king was executed. Such was the tragic end of a great king, who 
was not only a great general and a great poet, but also a great, 
patron of art and literature. The poets Dhananjaya, Bhafta Hala- 
yudha, Dhanika, Padmagupta, Amitagati and many others benefited 
from his munificence. He also dug many tanks and built a number 
of temples. 

The death of Munja took place between A.D. 993 and 998. He 
was succeeded by his younger brother Sindhuraja, who assumed the 
titles of Kumarandrdyana and Navaa&hasdnka. He defeated the 
Chalukya Satya^raya, king of the Deccan, and recovered the terri¬ 
tories which Munja had to surrender to Taila II. The poet Padma¬ 
gupta, who lived in his court also, composed a book Navasdhasdnka - 
charita or the life of Navasdhasdnka Sindhuraja. The book nar¬ 
rates how a king of the Naga dynasty, whose kingdom lay two 
hundred miles south of the Narmada, sought help from Sindhuraja 
against a neighbouring demon-king named Vajrahku£a. Sindhuraja, 
along with the Vi dyad haras, reached the country of the demons 
after crossing the Godavari and killed the demon-king in a battle. 
In gratitude the Naga king gave his daughter gaiiprabha in mar¬ 
riage to the victor. That the outline of this story, narrated by 
Padmagupta, is based on historical facts is admitted on all hands. 
It has been suggested that the Naga king was a chief of the Naga 
dynasty ruling in old Bastar State, and the demon-king was a chief 
of the Non-Aryan Mana tribe of Vajra, modem Wairagarh, in the 
Chanda District, Madhya Pradesh. The Vidyadharas were the 
Silaharas of Thana, whose ruler at that time was Aparajita. Sindhu- 


98 





CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


raja is known to have conquered Aparanta. It was probably during 
his campaign against Wairagarh that Sindhuraja plundered the 
territory of the SomavamsI kings of Kosala. On the north Sindhuraja 
scored a victory over the chief of the Huna-man^ala. The Paramara 
Chantfapa, son of Kaihka, ruler of Vaga<$a, tried to assert his inde¬ 
pendence, but was readily put down by Sindhuraja. Sindhuraja was 
also involved in wars with the Chaulukyas of Lata and Anahiiapafaka. 
Though he could easily subjugate Lata, which was then ruled by 
Barappa’s successor^Gohgiraja, his attempt to assert supremacy over 
northern Gujarat was frustrated by Chamuri^araja, son of Mularaja 
I. His reign came to an end about A.D. 1000 and he was succeeded by 
his son Bhoja. 

IV. THE MINOR DYNASTIES OF GUJARAT 

AND KATHIAWAR 

During the period under review, Saurashtra was ruled by a 
number of dynasties like the Saindhavas, the Chalukyas, the Chapas, 
and others, whose history may now be briefly related. 

1 . The Saindhavas^ 

The Saindhava dynasty, also known as the Jayadratha dynasty, 
ruled the Western Saurashtra ( apara-Saurdshfra-man^ala ) from its 
capital Bhutambilika, also mentioned as Bhumilika, modern Bhumili 
or Ghumli. in Kathiawar, twenty-five miles north-east of Porbandar, 
in a gorge of the Barda hills. The earliest known king (kshitipati) 
of the dynasty is Pushyadeva, who flourished in the second quarter of 
the eighth century. It was probably during the reign of this king, 
in or before A.D. 739, that the Arabs of Sindh invaded the kingdom 
of the Saindhavas. 17 Pushyadeva appears also to have suffered a 
defeat at the hands of the Rashtrakuta Dantidurga. He was succeed¬ 
ed by his son Krishnaraja, whose son and successor was the Maha- 
samanta Agguka I. Agguka ruled in the last quarter of the eighth 
century. During the reigns of these two chiefs the Arabs made fresh 
attempts by sea to establish their supremacy over Saurashtra. About 
A.D. 756 Hisham was appointed governor of Sindh, Hisham sent 
“Amru bin Jamal with a fleet of barks to the coast of Barada.” Barada 
obviously is the tract of the country along the Barda hills. The fact 
that the Saindhavas called themselves masters of the western sea 
(apara-samudrddhipati ) indicates that they had strong naval forces. 
As the Muslims do not claim any victory on this occasion they were 
certainly routed by the Saindhavas under the leadership of Krishna. 
Twenty years after this incident, about A.D. 776, the Arabs sent 
another naval expedition against Barada. It is stated that they cap- 


99 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


tured a city there but had to withdraw from the country because of 
the outbreak of an epidemic, which carried away a large number of 
their soldiers. After this disaster the Caliph Mahdl “gave up the 
project of conquering any part of India/’ The town which was con¬ 
quered by the Arabs may be identified with Ghumli. The real cause 
which forced the Arabs to withdraw from the shores of Barda was 
not, however, the outbreak of epidemic in their military camps. 
That was probably the report which the Arab generals sent to the 
Caliph to save their skin. There is evidence to prove that Agguka I 
inflicted a defeat on them and freed his country from their designs. 
An inscription states that Agguka I “showed the greatness of Varaha 
when he easily rescued his country, which was being drowned in 
an ocean of naval force sent by powerful enemies.” This obviously 
refers to Agguka’s victory over the Arabs. 

Agguka I was succeeded by his son Kanaka, who seems to have 
ruled in the first quarter of the ninth century. During this period 
the Partlhara Nagabhata II led an expedition against Saurashtra 
and won a victory over the Saindhavas. Kanaka had by his two 
queens two sons, K|*ishnaraja II and Jaika I. The king (raja) Krish¬ 
na raj a II succeeded his father to the throne. From this time there 
was a protracted war between the Saindhavas and the Chapas of 
Vardhamana. Krishna II fought successfully with the chief of the 
Chapas, who may be identified with Vikramarka. He is stated to 
have brought happiness to the inhabitants of Parvata, which pro¬ 
bably refers to the Barda hills. Krishna II died at an early age 
and was succeeded by his young son Agguka H. Jaika I, the step¬ 
brother of Krishna II, acted as a regent of this young prince. Jaika 
issued a charter as regent in A.D. 832 and professed that “though 
Kamala (Royal Fortune) was anxious to be united to him in pre¬ 
ference to Agguka, her rightful lord, he spurned her wily overtures 
and decided to be the disinterested guardian of his young and in¬ 
experienced nephew/' But later Jaika is found occupying the throne 
of Bhutambilika, and it is not unlikely that he deposed his nephew. 
He is credited with a victory over the Chapas of Vardhamanapura. 
He had two sons, Chamun^araja and Agguka III. Chamui?<Jaraja 
ascended the throne after his father, and was succeeded by his 
younger brother Agguka III, whose son was Ranaka II. It is stated 
that after being on the throne for a long time Agguka III decided to 
crown his son, noticing how “Lakshml, the goddess of Royal Fortune, 
had become eager to be united with his son Ranaka, who had become 
quite capable of bearing the burden of administration.” It appears 
that Agguka III abdicated in favour of his son Ranaka II in order 
to establish the right of the latter to the throne in supersession of 


100 



CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


the claim of his nephew Agguka IV, son of Chamun^araja. Ranaka 
IPs known date is A.D. 874. His son Jaika assumed the position 
of the Yuvardja, but after Ranaka II, Agguka IV is found occupying 
the throne. This suggests that he succeeded in overthrowing his 
cousin. He was ruling in A.D. 886. After his death his son Mahd - 
sdmantadhipaiti Jaika II came to the throne whose known dates are 
A.D. 904 and 915. He is the last known king of his family. His 
successors were probably overthrown by the Abhira chief, Graha- 
ripu. 

The Saindhavas ruled Western Saurashfra as feudatory chiefs, 
but we cannot definitely say who their suzerain lords were. It is 
not unlikely that they acknowledged the suzerainty of the Pratlhara 
Nagabhata II and his successors, whose Empire is known to have 
extended at least up to Junagadh, which bordered the kingdom of 
Bhutambilika on the west. 

2. The Chdlukyas 

A Chalukya dynasty ruled in some part of Saurashtra, possibly 
in Junagadh', contemporaneously with the Saindhavas. Their his¬ 
tory is based entirely on two copper-plate inscriptions 18 found in the 
town of Una, in Junagadh. The earliest known king ( mahipati ) of 
this dynasty is Kalla, who was succeeded by his brother Mahalla. 
These two royal brothers flourished in the latter part of the eighth 
century. The successor of Mahalla was Kalla’s son. This ruler, 
whose name cannot be deciphered from the inscription, was succeed¬ 
ed by his son Vahukadhavala. Vahukadhavala ruled in the first 
quarter of the ninth century. About this time the Chalukyas came 
under the sway of the Pratlharas of Kanauj, whose king Nagabhata II 
conquered all the territories up to Western Saurashtra. Vahuka¬ 
dhavala claims to have defeated Dharma, Karnata army, and -"rhany 
other imperial kings. Dharma was evidently Dharmapala of Beh-^ 
gal, and the Karnata army refers to the forces of the Rashtrakufas 
of the Deccan. It is obvious that Vahukadhavala fought these battles 
under the leadership of the Pratlhara Nagabhata II. Vahukadha- 
vala’s son and successor was Avanivarman I, who was succeeded 
by his son Mahasdmanta Balavarman. Balavarman acknowledged 
the supremacy of the Pratlhara Mahendrapala I, and was ruling in 
A.D. 893. He won a victory over Jajjapat of the Huna-man$ala to 
the north-west of Malava. After Balavarman, his son Avani¬ 
varman II, also known as Yoga, ascended the throne. Avanivarman 
was ruling in A.D. 899 as a vassal of the Pratlhara Mahendrapala I. 
He led an army against the Chapas of Vardhamanapura, and defeated 
their king Dharanlvaraha, who was a feudatory of the Pratlhara 
Mahipala I, son of Mahendrapala. This clash between the feuda- 


101 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


tones of the Pratiharas shows that about this time the latter had 
lost effective control over the outlying provinces of their Empire. 
Avanivarman had to acknowledge defeat at the hands of the Para- 
mar a Slyaka II in the latter part of his reign which extended up to 
the middle of the tenth century. The rule of the Chalukyas in 
Saurashtra was put an end to by the Abhlras in the third quarter 
of the tenth century. 


3. The Ahhiras 

The Abhlras established their supremacy over the Southern and 
Western Saurashtra under their king Graharipu in the second half 
of the tenth century. Their capital was Vamanasthali, modem 
Vanthali, nine miles west of Junagadh. Graharipu, who is described 
as a Mlechchha chief, carried on anti-Brahmanical activities. He 
ate beef, and plundered the pilgrims to Prabhasa tirtha (Somanatha). 
In order to end this menace, the Chaulukya Mularaja, king of 
Anahilapataka, marched with his army against Graharipu. Graha¬ 
ripu strengthened his position by securing assistance from Laksha, 
son of Phula, king of Kachchha-deic, also known as Jartra-deia, 
modern Kutch. A great battle was fought on the banks of the 
Jambumali river in which Laksha lost his life and Graharipu was 
taken prisoner. 19 

4. Vardhas (?) of Saurya-Mandala 

In the third quarter of the eighth century a king named Maha- 
varaha was: ruling somewhere in Saurashtra. He came into clash" 
with the Rashtrakuta Krishna I (c. A.D. 758-773) of the Deccan. The 
Baroda plate, dated A.D. 812, states that he attacked Krishna I, but 
was repulsed. 20 A fragmentary stone inscription, now deposited in 
the Barton Museum, Bhavnagar, states that Krishna was made to 
retreat along the banks of the Narmada by a king whose name ends 
in Varaha. Dr. Bhandarkar is inclined to restore the name as Maha- 
varaha, who, in his opinion, was identical with the chief, of this 
name, referred to above*: 21 The battle between Kpishna and Maha- 
varaha was indecisive. Mahavaraha seems to have been succeeded 
by Jayavaraha, who, as noted above, 22 is known to have been ruliqg 
in A.D. 783 in the territories of the Saury as to the west of Vardha- 
mana, modern Wadhwan, in Kathiawar. Nothing is known of this 
dynasty after Jayavaraha. 


5. The Chapas 

The Chapas were also known as Chava^as, Chavotkatas, and 
Chapis. There were two branches of the Chapa dynasty. One of 


102 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


them ruled from Vardhamana and the other from Anahilapataka, 
modern Patau, in Northern Gujarat, which was the capital of the 
Sarasvata-mau^aia. The first known king of the family at Vardha- 
man a is Vikramarka, who ruled in the first quarter of the ninth cen¬ 
tury. He had apparently to bear the brunt of an invasion by the 
Pratlhara Nagabhata II. He was succeeded by his son A<J<Jaka, after 
whom the country around Wadhwan, including Limbdi, came to be 
known as A<Jdanaka-de£a. A<J<Jaka*s son and successor was PulakeSi, 
who had two sons, Dhruvabhata and Dharanlvaraha. Dhruvabhata 
ascended the throne in the closing years of the ninth century. Dhru¬ 
vabhata and his predecessors fought a series of battles with the 
Saindhavas of Western Saurashfra. After Dhruvabhata, his younger 
brother Dharanlvaraha became king, Dharanlvaraha, who was 
ruling in A.D. 914 as a vassal of the Pratlhara Mahipala I, had to sub¬ 
mit to the forces of the Chalukya Avanivarman II Yogaraja. His 
kingdom was invaded by the Chaulukya Mularaja, who captured his 
throne and drove him out of SaurasKtra* In his distress, he saved 
his life by taking shelter with the Rashtrakuta Dhavala of Hasti- 
kundi. 23 Addanaka-deia was annexed to the kingdom of the Chau- 
lukyas. 

Vanaraja was the founder of the other branch of the Chapa 
dynasty ruling in Anahilapataka. It is stated that Vanaraja built 
this city and established there the supremacy of his family in 
A.D. 745. After him ruled Yogaraja, Ratnaditya, Kshemaraja, 
Akadadeva, and Bhuyadadeva or Bhuyaga<Jadeva, also known as 
Samantasimha. The story runs that once Samantasimha held a 
cavalry parade. It was attended by three brothers Raji, BTja, and 
Dan^aka, sons of Bhuvanaditya, king of Kalyana-kataka, in femauj, 
who halted at Anahilapataka in the guise of beggars on their way 
back to Kanauj from Somanatha. Raji, by his wise criticism of the 
cavalry movement, attracted the attention of the king who, taking 
him to be a member of a royal family, gave his sister Liladevi in 
marriage to him. Liladevi died while giving birth to her son, who 
was given the name Mularaja. Mularaja served his maternal uncle 
as a general for some time and then usurped his throne after putting 
him to death in A.D. 942. The authenticity of this story, narrated 
by the Gujarat chroniclers, may reasonably be doubted. But that 
Mularaja put an end to thet rule of the Chapas admits of no doubt. 
The Vadnagar Prasasti states that Mularaja carried away “the for¬ 
tune of the kingdom of the Chapotkata princes.’* The traditional 
date of the end of the rule of the Chapas and the accession of the 
Chaulukya Mularaja in A.D. 941-42 is corroborated by an epigraphic 
record. 


103 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


V. THE CHAULUKYAS 

It is generally assumed that the names Chalukya and Chaulukya 
are synonymous. But the traditional belief of the Chalukyas in 
regard to their origin is different from that of the families calling 
themselves Chaulukyas. The existence of at least three branches 
of the Chaulukya dynasty is known. The oldest of them ruled at 
Mattamayura, which was situated in Central India in the neighbour¬ 
hood of Malava and Chedi. The earliest known chief of this branch 
is Simhavarman, whose son and successor was Sadhanva. Sadhanva’s 
son and successor was Avanivarman, who ruled in the last quarter 
of the ninth century. Avanivarman gave his daughter in marriage 
to the Kalachuri Yuvaraja I. He was a patron of the Saiva ascetics 
residing in his kingdom. 

Mdlaraja I, as has already been noticed, was the founder of an¬ 
other branch of the Chaulukya dynasty, which in course of time rose 
to imperial eminence. He established his capital at Anahilapataka, 
which was also known as Anahilapura, Anahilanagara, Anahila- 
pattana, and Anahilavada. His inscription states that he conquered 
Sarasvata-manuala (i.e. the country on the banks of the Sarasvati 
river) with his own arms and resided in the city of Anahilapataka. 
He was an ambitious king, and chose Saurash^ra as the field of his 
first military excursion. He forced the Chapa Dharanivaraha to flee 
from his capital Vardhamana, and annexed his kingdom. He led 
successive invasions against Kachchha-desa, modem Cutch, but was 
repulsed, by its ruler Laksha or Lakh a. About this time the anti- 
Brahma nical activities of the AbhTra chief Graharipu of Vamanasthali 
prompted him to lead an army against him. In this religious war 
he is said to have been helped by contingents from the chiefs of 
Abu, Srlmala, Marava^a and other places. Lakha, king of Kachchha, 
came with his army to assist Graharipu. In the battle that followed 
Lakha lost his life and Graharipu was taken prisoner. Mularaja 
brought Kachchha-desa under his sway. 

Mularaja had to fight defensive wars in other directions. Once 
his kingdom was invaded on the north by the Chahamana Vigraha¬ 
raja, king of Sekambhan. To make the situation worse, the Chaulukya 
Batappa, the chief of Lata, and a general of the Chalukya Taila II, 
made an onslaught on the southern border of his kingdom. In this 
predicament he, on the advice of his ministers, retired to the fort of 
Kantha, modern Kanthakot, in Cutch, to bide his time, hoping that 
Vigraharaja would withdraw to his own country during the following 
rainy season. But contrary to his expectation Vigraharaja, dis¬ 
regarding the obstacles caused by the rains, overran SSrasvata- 
ynanddla and Lata and reached the banks of the Narmada. Being 


104 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


thus hard pressed, Mularaja concluded a treaty with the Chaha- 
manas. 24 After the departure of the Chahamana army he sent his 
son Chamun^araja against Barappa who was killed in the battle. 
Mularaja’s fight with the Paramara Munja proved disastrous for him. 
He, along with his family, had to withdraw to Marwar, and his army 
had to take shelter under the Rashtrakuta Dhavala. Though Mula¬ 
raja eventually succeeded in recovering his kingdom, he had to suffer 
another defeat at the hands of the Kalachuri Lakshmana. The his¬ 
torical value of the report of the Gujarat chroniclers that he fought 
successfully with Sindhuraja and the king of North Kosala cannot 
be ascertained. 

Mularaja’s kingdom extended on the north up to Sanchor in 
Jodhpur, and was bounded on the east and south by the Sabarmati 
river. He founded a temple at Man<Jali, modern Mandal, in the 
Viramgam Taluk, Ahmadabad District. He also built two temples 
at Anahilapataka. The dates of his reign, known from epigraphic 
sources, range between A.D. 942 and 994. Meratunga’s Vichdrasrem 
mentions V.S.1052 (=A.D. 995) as the date of the end of his reign. 
He abdicated his throne in favour of his son Chamun<Jaraja. 

Chamun^araja defended his kingdom against the incursion of 
the Paramara Sindhuraja, the brother of Munja. But he had to 
yield to the forces of the Kalachuri Kokkalla n, the son of Yuva- 
raja n. He committed a grave social crime and, being penitent, 
started for Banaras for expiation after handing over the charge of 
the government to his son Vallabharaja. While passing through 
Malava, he was forced to give up the insignia of royalty by the king 
of that country, who was evidently the Paramara Bhoja, son of Sin¬ 
dhuraja. On his return from Banaras he asked his son to punish the 
king of Malava for his impudence. Vallabharaja marched with an 
army against Malava, but died of small-pox on the way. Chamunqia- 
raja then handed over the sovereignty to his second son Durlabha- 
raja. According to the Gujarat chroniclers, Chamun<Jaraja’s reign 
ended in A.D. 1008. 

Barappa founded the supremacy of another line of the Chaulukya 
dynasty in Lata, the capital of which was Bhrigukachchha, modern 
Broach in Southern Gujarat. A collateral branch of the Rashtra¬ 
kuta dynasty ruled in Lata till the first half of the tenth century. 
In A.D. 948 Khetaka-mari^aZa, modem Kaira, was ruled by a feuda¬ 
tory of the Rashtrakutas, who was an ally of the Paramara Sly aka II. 
Barappa, who is described as a general of Taila II, king of the Deccan, 
established his supremacy over Lata by defeating the feudatories of 
the Rashtrakutas after the fall of Manyakheta. Barappa could not 

enjoy his throne peacefully. His kingdom was invaded by the Para- 

* \ 

105 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAXJJ 


raara Munja. He tried to gain some advantage over his northern 
neighbour, the Chaulukya Mularaja, when the latter’s kingdom was 
invaded by the Chahamana, Vigraharaja. Eventually he lost his life 
in an encounter with Yuvamja Chamundaraja, son of Mularaja. who 
took possession of his territory for some time. Barappa’s son and 
successor Gongiraja succeeded in recovering the territory from his 
northern rival, for he claims to have relieved his country, which had 
been seized by powerful enemies, 

VI. THE CHAHAMANAS 

There were several branches of the Chahamana dynasty. The 
earliest known branch ruled in La$a up to the middle of the eighth 
century. 26 Another branch established its supremacy in the £akam- 
bhari-pradesq, the capital of which was Sakambhari, modem Sam- 
bhar, in Jaipur, in the early years of the seventh century. The 
territory over which .this branch ruled was also known as Sapa- 
dalaksba country, Vasudeva was the founder of this line. In his 
lineage was bom Samanta, who was followed on the throne by 
Purnatalla, Jayaraja, and Vigraharaja I in succession. Vigraharaja’s 
son and successor was Ghandraraja who Nourished in the middle of 
the eighth century. After Ghandraraja, his younger brother Go pen- 
draraja ascended the throne. Gopendraraja’s successor .was his 
nephew Duriabhsraja I, son of Ghandraraja I, who ruled in the last 
quarter of the eighth century. About this time, the country of 
Sakambhari was included in the kingdom of the Prat'ihara Vatsarajp, 
which extended from Avanti to Didwana, in Jodhpur, Burlabha- 
raja is said to have defeated the king of Gauqa, and to have reached 
Ganga-sagara in the course of conquest. This seems to refer to his 
participation in the battle between his overlord Vatsaraja and Dinar- 
mapala of Bengal. Burlabharaja’s son and successor was Govinda- 
raja I, also known as Guvaka I, who is said to have attained pre¬ 
eminence in the court of Nagavaloka, ie. the PratShara Nagabhata II. 
The Prabandhakosa , a work of a later period, mentions that the 
Chahamana Govindaraja repulsed an attack of the Sultan Vega 
Varisa. Vega Varisa is identified with Bashar, son of Da’ud, who was 
the governor of Sindh under the Caliph Al-Ma’mun (A.D. 8f3-833). 
It Is also known from Khurarndma-Rdso that the Guhila Khommana II, 
along with many other Indian chiefs, resisted the onslaught of the 
Arabs under the Caliph Al-Ma’mun. The Pratlhara Nagabhata II, 
as has already been noticed, came into conflict with the Muslims. 
It seems that Bashar, the Arab governor of Sindh, during the Cali¬ 
phate of Al-MaTnun, attacked the western part of the Pratlhara 
Empire, but Nagabhata II with the help of his feudatories, Govinda- 
rija I and Khommana IT, succeeded in repulsing him. After the 


106 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


close of Govindaraja’s reign, his son Chandraraja II, also known as 
Jsasinripa, ascended the throne, Chandraraja had a son named 
Guvaka II and a daughter named Kalavatf. Guvaka II, after his 
accession to the throne, gave his sister in marriage to the king of 
Kanauj, who seems to have been the PratHiara Bhoja I. The king 
of Sakambhari, who was worsted by the Kalachuri Kokkalla I, 26 
seems to have been Guvaka II. Guvaka ITs son and successor Chan- 
dana killed in battle Kudrena, a king of the Tomara dynasty. 
Chandana’s queen laid the foundation of some religious buildings 
at Pushkara-tlrthu. His son and successor was Vakpati-raja, who 
ruled in the first quarter of the tenth century, Yakpatiraja I is 
stated to have harassed Tantrapala, who was on his way to Atlanta- 
gochara with a message from his overlord. The overlord of Yak- 
pa tiraj a I was apparently the Pratihara MahTpala I. Anantagochara 
seems to have been the name of the country round Sikar. The above 
statement makes it clear that about this time the Chahamanas had 
acquired enough power to defy the authority of the Fratiharas. 
Vakpatiraja built a temple of 5§iva at Pushkara. He had three sons, 
Simharaja, Vatsaraja, and Lakshmana, Lakshmana founded a king¬ 
dom at Naddula, in Southern Marwar, where his successors ruled for 
several centuries. Simharaja ascended the throne after Vakpati¬ 
raja. 27 He defeated a Tomara leader named Salavana, and put into 
prison a number of princes, who were feudatories of the Fratiharas 
of Kanauj. In order to liberate them, the king of the Pratihara 
dynasty, who was one of the successors of Mahipala I, possibly Deva- 
pala, came to his house in person. Subsequently Simharaja freed 
his territory from the suzerainty of the Fratiharas, who had about 
this time lost their imperial position. He is the first among the 
Chahamana kings of Aakambharf to assume the title Mahdrdjddhi - 
raja. He granted a number of villages to the temple of Harsha- 
natha, which was constructed in A.D. 956, and lies near the village 
of Harshanath, about seven miles south of Sikar, in the Shaikh a wati 
Province of Jaipur, He was succeeded by his son Vigraharaja II. 
who was ruling in A.D. 973. Vigraharaja invaded Gujarat, forced 
the Chaulukya Mularaja to take shelter in the fort of Kanthakot, 
in the Kachehha-dcsa, and led his victorious army up to. the banks 
of the Narmada. He built a temple of the Goddess Asapuri at Blrri- 
gukachchha on the bank of the Narmada. Subsequently Mularaja 
came to terms with him and regained his kingdom. After Vigraha¬ 
raja II, his younger brother Durlabhariaja, also knowil as Durian- 
ghyameru, came to the throne. He was ruling in A.D. ■ 999, and hia 
kingdom extended up to Farbatsar, in Jodhpur,, on the west. He 
conquered Hasosittana--rmrndala ? which cannot be identified, He also 
invaded the territory of the Chahamana Mahendra, king of Naddula, 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Mahendra failed to stand up to his adversary and sought protection 
under the Rashtrakuta Dhavala of Hastikun^jS. 

In the closing years of the tenth century, the kingdom of the 
Chahamanas of Sakambharl extended at least up to Sikar on the 
north, the town of Jaipur on the east, Pushkar near Ajmere on the 
south, and Parbatsar, in Jodhpur, on the west. 

It has been noticed above that Lakshmana, the youngest son of 
the Chahamana Vakpatiraja I of Sakambharl, founded a kingdom at 
Na&lula, modern Nadol, in Jodhpur. Lakshmana was succeeded by 
his son Sobhita, who annexed Mt. Abu in Sirohi to his kingdom. His 
son and successor was Baliraja, who had to surrender Mt. Abu and 
the adjoining territory to the Paramfira Muhja. Muhja, as has al¬ 
ready been noticed, established the princes of his family to rule 
over Mt. Abu, Jalor and Bhinmal, which lay to the southern border 
of the Chahamana kingdom of Nadol. After Baliraja’s death his 
cousin Mahendra, also known as Mahendu, son of Sobhita’s brother 
Vigrahapala, ascended the throne. During this time the Chaha¬ 
manas of Sakambhari became hostile to their kith and kin at Nadol. 
It has been mentioned above that when king Durlabha of Sakambharf 
overran the kingdom of Nadol, Mahendra saved his life by taking 
shelter under the Rashtrakuta Dhavala. Mahendra, however, re¬ 
gained his position within a short time. He had two sons, AJvapala 
and Anahilla, and was succeeded by the former. 

A branch of the Chahamana family ruled in Dholpur in the 
ninth century, apparently as a feudatory of the Imperial Pratlharas 
of Kanauj. Three chiefs of this family are known. They were 
Isuka, his son Mahisharama, and the latter’s son Chantfamahasena. 
Chan<3amahasena was ruling in Dhavalapuri, modem Dholpur, in 
A.D. 842. He claims to have been served by the Mlechchha lords, 
who settled on the banks of the Charmanvati, i.e. the Chambal river. 
These Mlechchha lords cannot be identified. Chamjamahasena built 
a temple at Dhavalapuri. Nothing is known of his successors. 

Another branch of the Chahamana family ruled in Partabgarh 
as a feudatory of the Imperial Pratlharas. 28 The first known chief 
of this family is Govindaraja, one of whose predecessors is said to 
have been a source of great pleasure to the Pratihara Bhoja, After 
Govindaraja, his son Durlabharaja occupied the throne.. Durlabha- 
raja’s son and successor was the Mahastimanta Indraraja. Some¬ 
time before A.D. 942 Indraraja built a temple of the Sun-god in 
the village of Ghont&varshika, in the Western Pathaka of Dasapura. 
The village is identified with Ghotarsi, seven miles east of Partab¬ 
garh. It is not known how the rule of this family came to an end. 


108 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


VII. THE GUHXLAS 
1. Guhilas of Mewdr 

Adjoining the kingdom of the Chahamanas of Na^ula to the 
south-east lay that of the Guhilas of Medapa^a or Mewar, whose early 
history up to the reign of Bappa has been discussed in the third 
volume. 29 Bappa is said to have abdicated the throne in A.D. 753, 
and this date may be regarded as approximately correct. As noted 
above, Bappa’s name does not occur in the genealogical list given 
in the epigraphic records of the dynasty, but he may be regarded 
as identical with either Kalabhoja or Khommana of that list. After 
the close of Khommana I’s reign, Mattata, Bhartppatta I, Simha, and 
Khommana II occupied the throne one after another. It has been 
noticed above that Khommana II joined hands with the Pratlhara 
Nagabhata II and the Chahamana Guvaka I in a battle with Bashar, 
the Arab governor of Sindh. Khommana II was followed in succession 
by Mahay aka, Khommana III, and Bhartjripatta II. Bhaptfip a tta is 
given the title Mahdrajadhirdja, which signifies that he enjoyed inde¬ 
pendent position. A stone inscription of his reign, bearing the date 
A.D. 943, has been found in Ahar, ancient Aghata, a few miles north 
of Udaipur. From this time, Aghata is known to have been the capital 
of Medapata. In A.D. 942 the Mahdrdjddhirdja Bhartripatta granted 
a field in the village Palasakupika to the temple of the Sun-god 
Indradityadeva, founded by the Chahamana Indraraja- in Ghonta- 
varshika, modern Ghotarsi, seven miles east of Partabgarh. His 
kingdom, therefore, seems to have extended on the south-east up 
to the border of Partabgarh. 30 His son and successor was Allata, 
whose known dates are A.D. 951 and 953. Allata killed Devapala 
in battle. This adversary of the Guhilas might have been the Pratl¬ 
hara king of this name ruling in Kanauj, whose known date is 
A.D. 948, and whose reign ended before A.D. 954. About this time 
a Pratlhara king of Kanauj, who was apparently Devapala, came to 
Sakambharf to liberate his feudatories, who were imprisoned by the 
Chahamana Simharaja. On that occasion Devapala seems to have 
come into conflict with Allata and lost his life in the encounter. 
Allata married a Huna lady named HariyadevT. During this time 
Aghata became a great centre of trade frequented by merchants 
from Karnata, Lata, Madhyade£a, and Takka. After Allata, his son 
Naravahana ascended the throne and ruled till at least A.D. 971. 
His queen belonged to the Chahamana family. He was succeeded 
by his son Salivahana, whose son and 'successor was Saktikumara. 
Three stone inscriptions of ^aktikumara’s reign have been found at 
Ahar. One of these bears the date V.S. 1034 (r=A.D. 977). It was 
probably during the reign of Saktikumara that the Paramara Munja 


109 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


. destroyed Agha$a, the pride of Medapafa. ^aktikumara had five 
sons, Ambaprasada, Suchivarman, Naravarman, Anantavarman, and 
Kirttivarman. He ruled up to the close of the tenth century. It 
appears from the inscriptions of ^aktikumara and his predecessors 
that Samoli, in the Bhumat District, Ahar, and Ekalingaji, north of 
Udaipur, were included in the kingdom of the Guhilas which ex¬ 
tended up to the border of Partabgarh on the south-east. Chiira- 
ku|a, modern Chi tor, nearly sixty miles north-east of Ahar, is not 
known to have been included in the kingdom of this branch of the 
Guhilas at least up to the tenth century. 

2. Guhilas of Dhod 

Reference has been made above 31 to another branch of the 
Guhila dynasty ruling in the north-eastern part of Udaipur and to 
its ruler Dhanika with his capital at Dhavagarta, modern Dho4 in 
the Jahazpur District, Udaipur. After Dhanika, his son Auka and 
his grandson Krishna ruled one after the other. Krishna, who 
flourished in the last quarter of the eighth century, seems to have 
acknowledged the supremacy of the Pratlhara Vatsaraja, whose king¬ 
dom extended from Malava to Jodhpur. Krishna’s son and succes¬ 
sor was £»ahkaragana, who defeated a general of the Gaupa king, 
and presented the latter’s kingdom to his overlord. The Qau^a king 
was' Dharmapala, and the king, who was Sahkaragana’s overlord, 
was apparently the Pratlhara Nagabhata II. S§ankaragana obviously 
helped Nagabhata II in wresting the kingdom of Kanauj from Dhar- 
mapala. ^ankaragana was succeeded by his son Harsha, who was 
a feudatory of the Pratlhara Bhoja. Harsha claims to have con¬ 
quered the kings of Udlchya, i.e. Uttarapatha, and presented to 
Bhoja horses, which were expert in traversing the Sindhu. This 
seems to refer to Harsha rendering assistance to Bhoja in conquering 
the Eastern Punjab. Harsha had to suffer defeat at the hand of 
the Kalachuri Kokkalla I. If Chitrakuta -bhup&la, mentioned in the 
Banaras copper-plate of the Kalachuri Karna, really refers to Harsha, 
Chitrakuta or Chitor is to be taken to have been the capital of this 
branch of the Guhila dynasty. 

As regards the history of Chitrakuta during, this period, it is 
known that it was in the possession of the Gurjaras during the 
reign of the Rashtrakuta Govinda III. The place was also under 
the sway of the Gurjaras when it was invaded by the Rashfra- 
kufa Krishna III shortly before A.D. 939. As there is no evid¬ 
ence to prove that the early Guhila kings of Medapafa were 
in any way connected with Chitor, there is nothing against the 
view that Harsha was the ruler of Chitrakuta. Harsha is mentioned 


110 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


in the inscription of his great-grandson as a dvija, i.e. Brahmana, 
He was succeeded bv his son Guhila II, who is said to have con- 
quered the king of Gauda and levied tribute from the princes of 
the east. He seems to have joined Bhoja 32 or helped Mahendra- 
pala in conquering the Gau<Ja country by defeating king Naravana- 
pala of the Pala dynasty. Some silver coins, discovered at Agra, 
bearing the legend ^ri-Gu.hila, are ascribed to him. He married a 
Paramara princess, who gave birth to a son named Bhatta. Bhafta. 
who succeeded his father, seems to have been a contemporary of the 
Pratlhara Mahipala I. He defeated the king of the Deccan at the 
behest of his master. He apparently joined hands with the Chandella 
Harsha to help Mahipala in his war against the Rashtrakuta Indra III. 
Bhafta’s son and successor was Baladitya, who married a Chahamana 
princess, the daughter of king &ivaraja, Baladitya erected a femple 
of Vishnu at Chatsu, in Jaipur, where an inscription of his reign has 
been found. The history of the predecessors of Baladitya is known 
mainly from this epigraph. He is the last known king of his family, 
and although he had three sons, nothing is known about his 
successors. 


VIII. THE TOMABAS 

The kingdom of the Chahamanas of &akambharl seems to have 
been bordered on the north-east by that of the Torharas. Tomaras are 
included in the thirty-six Rajput clans by the bards. They ruled 
the Hariyana country from their capital Dhillika, modern Delhi. 
The tradition runs that the Tuars, a contraction of Tomaras. founded 
Delhi in A.D. 736. The earliest reference to the Tomara r is found 
in an inscription at Pehowa, ancient Prithudaka, in Karnal District, 
Punjab, of the reign of the Pratlhara MahendrapaJa I. It states that 
there was the king (raja) Jaula of the Tomara dynasty, who “obtain¬ 
ed prosperity by looking after the affairs of a king.” He was ap¬ 
parently in the service of an unknown king in the early years of 
his life, and subsequently attained royal position. In the lineage of 
Jaula was bom Vajrata, who seems to have flourished in the middle 
of the ninth century. About this time the Tomaras of Delhi must 
have acknowledged the supremacy of the Pratlhara Bhoja, whose 
kingdom extended up to Sirsa and Karnal Districts in the Punjab. 
Vajrafa’s son and successor was Jajjuka, who was again succeeded 
by his son Gogga. Gogga, who is known to have been a feudatory of 
the Pratlhara Mahendrapala I, is described as bhundtha or the lord 
of the earth. Gogga and his two step-brothers Purnaraja and Deva- 
raja, built at Prithxldaka, on the banks of the Sarasvatl, three temples 
of Vishnu, during the reign of Mahendrapala I. Kielhorn remarks 
that these three Tomara princes were probably connected with Delhi, 


III 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

and they might not have any political connection with Pehowa, a 
place of pilgrimage, where they, like many others from different 
parts of India, founded religious establishments. According to 
Firishta Thaneswar, about 20 miles east of Pehowa, was within the 
kingdom of Delhi in the early part of the eleventh century. In the 
tenth century the Tomaras came into conflict with the Chahamanas 
of Sakambhari. A Tomara chief named Budrena (Rudra?), who was 
probably a descendant of Gogga, lost his life in a battle with the 
Chahamana Chandana, son of Guvaka II. Chandana’s grandson 
Simharaja, who flourished in the third quarter of the tenth cen¬ 
tury, won a victory over the Tomara leader (nayaka) Salavana, and 
captured a large number of his soldiers. The Tomaras continued to 
rule the Hariyana country till the middle of the twelfth century when 
they were overthrown by the Chahamana Vigraharaja III Visaladeva. 

IX. THE SHAHIS (OR SHAHIYAS) 

It has been noticed in a previous chapter that the Eastern Punjab, 
up to Sirsa, if not up to the Sutlej, was within the Pratihara Empire 
in the second half of the ninth century. In the early years of the 
tenth century, Sankaravarman, king of Kashmir, deprived the Prati¬ 
hara Mahendrapala of his territories in the Punjab and handed them 
over to one of his officers, who belonged to the Thakkiya family. 33 
In the latter part of this century a king (raja) named Satrughnadeva 
is found ruling from Tribhandapura, modern Bhatinda, in Patiala, 
where a stone inscription of his reign has been discovered. 

A Turkish Shahiya family ruled the Kabul Valley and the 
Gandhara country for a long time. Kallar, a Brahmana minister of 
king Lagaturman of this dynasty, overthrew his master and occupied 
the throne. Kallar, who thus founded the Hindu Shahi dynasty in 
the second half of the ninth century A.D., is identified with Lalliya 
Shahi referred to in the Rajatarangini. Lalliya could not keep Kabul 
under his control for a long time. It was taken possession of by the 
§affarid Ya’qub ibn Layth in A.D.* 870. Lalliya then fixed his capital 
at Udabhanda, modern village of Und, on the right- bank of the 
Sindhu, fifteen miles above Attock, in Rawalpindi District. Lalliya’s 
kingdom is stated to have been situated between those of the 
Turushkas (Kabul valley) and the Darads (Kishanganga valley in 
Kashmir). Alakhana, the king of Gurjara, who ruled the “upper 
portion of the flat Doab between the Jhelum and the Chenab rivers, 
south of Darvabhisara, and probably also a part of the Punjab plain 
further east,” was his protege. King Sahkaravarman (A.D. 883- 
902) of the Utpala dynasty of Kashmir invaded the kingdom of Ala¬ 
khana and wrested from him Takka-land, which was the country ad¬ 
joining the lower hills east of the Chenab. Next the Kashmir king 


112 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


invaded the territory of Lalliya but failed to gain any advantage. 
Kalhana highly praises the valour and achievements of Lalliya, and 
states that Lalliya’s glory outshone that of all the rulers in the north, 
and many kings found safety in his town Udabhan^a. Lalliya had a 
son named Tor a man a. After his death, his throne was usurped by a 
scion of the Shahi family named Samanta. Some.coins, found in 
Afghanistan, bearing the legend Srl-Samanta, are ascribed to him. 
Prabhakara, a minister of 6ankaravarman’s son and successor Gopala- 
varman, plundered Udabhantfa, dethroned the rebellious Shahi, and 
placed Toramana on the throne of that country: 34 He gave Toramana 
a new name Kamaluka. Kamaluka is mentioned by Al-Blrunl as 
Kamalu, and is called Kala(Kamala)varman in an inscription of his 
successor. Muhammad ‘Aufi (c. A.D. 1211) mentions him as the Rai 
of Hindustan. Fardaghan, the governor of Zabulistan (region round 
Ghazni) under ‘Amr ibn Layth (A.D. 879-900), the brother and suc¬ 
cessor of Saffarid Ya’qub ibn Layth, plundered Sakawand, a place of 
Hindu pilgrimage, which was within the kingdom of the Shahis. 
Kamaluka organised a large army against the Muslims in retaliation. 
But he abandoned the project on receipt of the news that the Muslims 
had collected a strong force to oppose him. Baihaki (A.D. 1059) 
mentions Sakawand as a pass to Kabul from India. It was situated 
at or near Jalalabad. 

After the death of Kamaluka his son Bhlma ascended the throne. 
A stone inscription of the reign of Mahardjddhirdja Paramesvara 
Shahi Sri-Bhimadeva has been discovered at Dewai, Gadun terri¬ 
tory. 35 Bhlma gave his daughter in marriage to Simharaja, king of 
Lohara, identified with the valley of Lohrin, comprising the moun¬ 
tain Districts, south-west of Kashmir, in the hill state of Punch. 
Didda, the queen of Kshemagupta (A.D. 950-958) of Kashmir, was the 
daughter of Simharaja and daughter’s daughter of Bhlma. On account 
of this relationship it was possible for Bhlma to exercise influence 
over the royal court of Kashmir. He built a magnificent temple of 
Vishnu, richly endowed it and called it the shrine of Bhlmakesava. 
It is identified with an old temple at Bumzu, near the sacred springs 
of Martantfa (Bavan), which has now been converted into a Muslim 
Ziarat. The temple possessed valuable treasures even during the 
reign of Harsha (A.D. 1080-1101). Some silver coins bearing the 
legend SrT-Bhlmadeva, found in Kabulistan, are assumed to have 
been issued by the Shahi Bhlma. 

The fact that Bhlma’s grand-daughter (daughter’s daughter) 
Didda was married to Kshemagupta, who ruled from A.D. 950 to 
958, shows that Bhlma must have been born not later than A.D. 900. 
It is also clear from the Kashmir Chronicle that he was on the throne 

113 

A.I.K.—8 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

at least during a part of the reign of Kshemagupta. But the dates 
of his accession and death are not definitely known. 

The Muslim chroniclers refer to Jaipal or Jayapala as the next 
king. But the Rdjaiaranginl is silent about him, though it mentions 
another Shahi king named Thakkana in the reign of Abhimanyu 
(A.D. 958-72), the son of Didda. Some scholars take the name¬ 
ending of Jayapala as indicating a change of dynasty, but this view 
is refuted by well-known examples of similar changes in royal 
names in the same family. The fact, however, that Firishta 
describes Jaipal as the son "of Ishtpal (probably Ishtapala) may be 
taken to indicate that Jayapala was not the son of Bhlmapala and 
there might have been one or more kings between the two; Jayapala 
probably ascended the throne in the last quarter of the tenth century 
A.D. 

A fragmentary stone inscription of the reign of Paramabhafoa- 
raka Mahardjadhiraja 6rI-Jayapaladeva has been found on a hill 
north of Bari Kot, in Upper Swat, 36 It records that some persons 
founded something at Vajirasthana. Rai B'ahadur Daya Ram Sahni 
identified the king, mentioned above, with the Shahi Jayapala, and 
Vajirasthana with Waziristan. Vajirasthana seems to have been 
the country round Bari Kot, where the stone inscription has been 
found. This proves that the Shahi kingdom during this period ex¬ 
tended up to the Swat valley. 

The Adah ul Muluk wa Kij&yat ul Mamluk , composed by 
Muhammad bin Mansur during the reign of the Sultan Xltutmish 
(A.D. 1210-1236), gives an account of Jayapala’s war with the chiefs 
of Lahore. It relates that Hah, son of Bhadra, founded the town of 
Lohur, and ruled there for seventy-five years. He was overthrown 
by his son Bharat, who imprisoned him in the fort of Kahlur. 
Bharat built a fort at Lohur, and founded a village on the bank of 
the river Biyah. He made an audacious bid to conquer the salt mines 
of Nanduna, the district of Jhelum, and Takeshar, which were in the 
possession of Jayapala. He crossed the Chandrahah river with his 
army and attacked Takeshar where he was opposed by Jayapala’s 
son, Anandapala. After a short engagement, Bharat was defeated 
and made a prisoner. Anandapala marched towards Lohur and cap¬ 
tured the town. On receipt of a large sum of money, he allowed 
Bharat to rule his territory as a feudatory. After the departure of 
Anandapala, Bharat was dethroned by his son Handrat, who usurped 
the throne. Jayapala sent Anandapala with an army to chastise 
Handrat, Handrat was defeated and imprisoned and his sons took 
refuge with Sam ah Kora Rav of Jalandar. Jayapala annexed the 
kingdom of Lohur in A.H. 389 ( = A.D. 999 ). 37 


114 


CENTRAL. AND WESTERN INDIA 


Jayapala thus ruled over a large kingdom extending from Sir- 
hind to Lamghan (or Laghman) and from the borders of Kashmir to 
Multan, Roughly speaking it included the Western Punjab, N.W.F. 
Province and Eastern Afghanistan. Unfortunately for him a power¬ 
ful Muslim kingdom was establised about this time in the imme¬ 
diate vicinity with Ghazni as capital. The history of Jayapala and 
his successors is, practically speaking, the history of a long-drawn 
struggle with this kingdom. They fought with valour and tenacity 
for nearly half a century, but in vain, and the great Shahi kingdom 
ultimately collapsed before the repeated onslaughts of Sultan Mah¬ 
mud of Ghazni. That story will be told in the next volume. 

X. KASHMIR 
1. Karkota Dynasty 

Lalitaditya Muktapl^a of the Karkota dynasty, whose career has 
been described above, 38 was followed on the throne of Kashmir by 
his tw f o sons Kuvalayapida and Vajraditya Bappiyaka one after the 
other. Vajraditya, who ruled from c. A.D. 782, is said to have sold 
many men to the Mlechchhas and introduced into his kingdom prac¬ 
tices which befitted only the Mlechchhas. These Mlechchhas seem 
to have been the Arabs of Sindh. It is known that Hisham ibn J Amr 
at-Taghlibl, the governor of Sindh (A.D. 768^-772), raided Kashmir 
and secured many prisoners and slaves. This invasion is likely to 
have taken place during the reign of Vajraditya, who thus came in 
contact with the Mlechchhas. Vajraditya had three sons: Ppithivya- 
pl$a, Saihgramapl^a I, and Jayapida. Ppthivyapl^a, who ascended the. 
throne after the death of his father, was overthrown by his step¬ 
brother Samgramaplda. S am g ramapRi a died seven days after his 
accession, and the sovereignty was then assumed by Jayapida. 
Jayapida, who was also known as Vinayaditya, was a valiant gene¬ 
ral like his grandfather Lalitaditya. In the early part of his reign 
he launched an expedition against the eastern countries. Kalhana 
narrates that during Jayaplda’s absence from Kashmir, his brother- 
in-law named Jajja usurped his throne. The soldiers who.accom¬ 
panied him gradually deserted his camp in large numbers and re¬ 
turned to Kashmir. At Prayaga he left the remainder of his troops 
who were still with him, and began to travel incognito from country 
to country. Once, while residing ip the city of Pundravardhana, he 
earned the good grace of its king named Jayanta by killing a big 
lion. Jayanta, who soon discovered his identity, gave his daughter 
in marriage to him. Jayapida defeated the five chiefs of Gauda 
and honoured his father-in-law by making him their sovereign. 
Kalhana’s narrative of Jayapltja’s adventure in Gauda contains obvi- 


115 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


ously a touch of romance. The report that the king won victories 
over some chiefs of that country, however, seems to have a historical 
foundation. From Gautfa he is said to have gone back to Prayaga 
to meet his troops and thence started for Kashmir. On his way he 
defeated the king of Kanyakubja, who seems to have been Indraraja. 
As soon as he reached the Kashmir valley he was opposed by the 
usurper Jajja, who was easily defeated and slain. After a period of 
three years’ absence from his country, he made a triumphant entry 
into his capital. 

Kalhana states that some time afterwards Jayapida again went 
out for conquests. He invaded the kingdoms of Bhimasena of the 
eastern region and Aramutfi of Nepala. On these occasions he fell 
a captive into the hands of his adversaries, though he eventually 
succeeded in effecting his escape. His last expedition was against 
the ‘Stri-rajya’. The authenticity of this report of Jayapida’s mili¬ 
tary excursions may be doubted, for the existence of a king named 
Bhimasena in the eastern region or of a king named Aramudi in 
Nepal is not known from any other source. 39 Jayapi^a’s court was 
graced by learned scholars like Kshira, Bhatta, Udbhata, Damodara- 
gupta, and others. In the later years of his life, he is said to have 
incurred unpopularity by oppressive taxes. A conspiracy of the 
Brahmanas brought about his end in the thirty-first year of his reign. 
He ruled from c. A.D. 770 up to the closing years of the eighth cen¬ 
tury. Thereafter his sons LalitapI<Ja and Sarhgramapida II occupied 
the throne in succession. After the death of Sarhgramapida, who bore 
another name Prithivyapi<Ja, Lalitaditya’s son Chippatajayapltfa, 
born of a concubine named JayadevI, became king. Chippatajaya- 
pi^la, who was also called Brihaspati, was very young at the time of 
his accession. 'Important offices of the State were held by his mater¬ 
nal uncles, Utpalaka and four others, who were sons of a spirit-distil¬ 
ler. Chippatajayapida was killed in c. A.D. 813 through the intrigue 
of his maternal uncles, who then began to fight among themselves for 
power. They ruled Kashmir without hindrance by setting up pup¬ 
pet kings for nearly forty years. Thus Utpalaka placed Ajitaphja, 
grandson of Vajraditya Bappiyaka, on the throne by force of arms. 
Ajitaplda was overthrown by a rival faction, which set up Anahga- 
pltfa, son of Sarhgramapida II, as king. Sukhavarman, son 
of Utpalaka, removed Anahgaplda and placed Utpalapltfa, son 
of Ajitaplda, on the throne* During this time the merchant 
Nara of the Khaia tribe established his authority over Darvabhisara 
and the neighbouring territories. Sukhavarman, who became the 
de facto ruler, was killed by his own relative. The minister &ura 
thereupon dethroned Utpalapitfa and declared Avanti-varman, son of 


116 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


Sukhavarman, as king in A.D. 855-56. Thus the rule of the Karkota 
dynasty came to an end. 

2. The Utpala Dynasty 

Avanti-varman was the founder of the Utpala dynasty. He 
devoted his energies to the amelioration of the economic condition 
of his subjects, who had suffered badly during the last few decades. 
The overflowing water of the Mahapadma (modem Vulur) lake caused 
frequent floods, damaging crops in the neighbourhood. Lalitaditya 
had tried to get over this difficulty by draining off the surplus water, 
but his successors did not take any interest in the matter. Avanti- 
varman engaged his able minister Suyya to remove this danger per¬ 
manently. Suyya undertook the work in right earnest, and removed 
the boulders which had rolled down from the mountains into the bed 
of the Vitasta, obstructing the normal flow of the water. Stone em¬ 
bankments were built along the banks of the river to prevent further 
landslides from the mountains. He shifted the place of the con¬ 
fluence of the Vitasta (Jhelum) with its tributary the Sindhu by 
diverting their courses, and thereby made the extensive lands in 
the neighbourhood fit for cultivation. As a result of these engineer¬ 
ing operations the annual output of grains increased to an enormous 
extent, and their prices correspondingly fell. 

The prime minister Sura exercised great influence over the king. 
He killed a powerful Damara (a feudal land-owner) named Dhanva 
for misappropriating temple funds in the Lahara District. The king 
extended his patronage to men of learning like Muktakana, Sivasva- 
min, Anandavardhana, and Ratnakara. His death in A.D. 883 was 
followed by a civil war between a number of the descendants of 
Utpala. The’chamberlain Ratnavardhana declared Avanti-varman’s 
son Sankara-varman as king. Karnapa, a councillor, set up Sukha¬ 
varman, a nephew of Avanti-varman. as Yuvaraja. Sankara-varman, 
after a strenuous fight, put down Sukha-varman and other rivals 
and made himself the absolute ruler of the country. 

£ankara-varman made- an > attempt to restore Kashmir to its 
former position as a great political power by launching expeditions 
against the neighbouring chiefs in the south. He subjugated Darva- 
bhisara, the territory between the Jhelum and the Chenab to the 
north of Gujrat, in the Punjab. Its king Naravahana, son of the 
Kha£a Nara. wa^ allowed to rule for some time, but was subsequently 
killed together w^jth his followers by £ankara-varman, who suspected 
him of treachery. After being deprived of his sovereignty, Nara- 
vahana’s son Phulla founded a kingdom in Lohara, where he was 
followed in succession by Satavahana, Chanda, Chanduraja, Gopala 


117 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


and Simharaja. About this time Ppthivfchandra, the king of Tri- 
garta, modern Kangra, acknowledged Sankara* varman’s supremacy 
without opposition, &ahkara-varman next invaded the Gurjara 
country, modern Gujrat in the Punjab, and forced its king Alakhana 
to surrender to him the fakkadand which was to the east of the 
Chenab. His military operation against Lalliya Shahi of Udafehan$a, 
who lent his support to Alakhana against him., did not meet with 
success. The Pratihara Mahendrapala also had to cede his territories 
in the Punjab to Sankara-varman who handed them over to a mem¬ 
ber-of the Thakkiya family. After finishing his conquests, Sankara - 
varman returned to his capital with glory. However, he was addict¬ 
ed to vices and did not prove an efficient administrator. He oppres¬ 
sed his subjects by numerous exactions. His son Gopalavarman tried 
to save the people from his father’s greed, but failed. Taking advan¬ 
tage of the disturbed,state of things, the Kayasthas appropriated a 
large slice of territory. 

banker a-varman met his death under tragic circumstances. His 
officer in charge of the passes leading into Kashmir in the western 
border of his kingdom lost his life in an affray at Vlranaka, the seat 
of the Khalas, identified with the village Viran, in the Vitasta Valley 
between Muzaffarabad and Kathai. This led Sankara-v&rxnan to 
march with an army to punish the offenders. After destroying Virl- 
naka he proceeded to Uttarapatha and compelled a number of chiefs 
ruling on the banks of the Sindhu to submit to him. When he was 
passing through Urasa, modern Hazara, the inhabitants of the coun¬ 
try objected to the quartering of his army there. In the conflict 
that ensued, an arrow discharged by the enemies from the summit 
of a hill pierced his neck, and he succumbed to the injuries within 
a short time. For the safety of the army, the news of his death was 
kept concealed by the Kashmiri officers. After six days* march, the 
minister Sukharaja, along with the army, reached Bolyasaka, which 
was within the borders of Kashmir. The place is identified with 
the village of Buliisa on the old route from Muzaffarabad to Kash¬ 
mir, on the right bank of the Jheium, four marches below Baramula. 
There the funeral rites of the king were performed. 

Sankara-varman’s son Gopale-varman ascended the throne 
shortly before A.D. 900. 40 As he was still young, his mother Sugan- 
dha carried on the administration of the State. She fell in love with 
the minister Prabhakara. Prabhakara led an expedition against the 
ShIM kingdom and secured the throne of UdabMn$a for Lalliya 
Shlhi’s son Toramana-Kamaluka by defeating the usurper Samanta. 
Prabhfikara killed Gopaia-varman by a stratagem and placed San- 
kapt, an alleged son of Sankara-varman, on the throne. This new 


118 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


king died ten days after his accession. As there was no direct heir 
to the throne, the queen Sugandha assumed the royalty at the wishes 
of the people. At this 'time, the Tantrin infantry formed a powerful 
political organisation in Kashmir and made their power felt in mak¬ 
ing and unmaking kings. The queen tried to secure the throne for 
Nirjita-varman, also known as Pahgu, who was the grandson of 
Sura-varman, a half-brother of king Avanti-varman. But the Tan- 
trins deprived the queen of her sovereignty, and placed Partha, the 
son of Nirjita-varman, who was ten years old, on the throne in A.D. 
908. Sugandha left the royal palace and took her residence at Hush- 
kapura. Eight years later, in A.D. 914, with the help of the Ekahga 
troops, a military body, rival to the Tantrins, she advanced towards 
the capital to regain her power. But the Tantrins defeated the 
Ekahgas and put Sugandha to death. Nirjita-varman, with the 
sanction of the Tantrins, became the guardian of his son Partha. 
He maintained his position by paying heavy bribes to the Tantrins, 
and oppressed the people with numerous fiscal exactions. At this 
time, in A.D. 917, a great famine broke out in Kashmir, causing 
the death of a large number of people. In A.D. 921 Nirjita-varman 
deposed Partha with the help of the Tantrins and himself assumed 
the royalty. In A.D. 923 he placed his other son named Chakra- 
varman on the throne, and died soon after. Chakra-varman ruled 
for ten years under the guardianship of his mother and grandmother. 
The Tantrins, eager for more money, overthrew him and placed 
his half-brother &ura-varman I on the throne. After a year, Aura- 
varman had to yield his throne to Partha, who had regained the 
fayour of the Tantrins. A year later, in A.D. 935, Chakra-varman 
got back the sovereignty by paying a higher price. Shortly after¬ 
wards Chakra-varman, having failed to meet the demands of the Tan¬ 
trins, fled in fear. Thereupon the minister Sambhuvardhana, by 
offering handsome bribes, purchased the throne for himself. Chakra- 
varman sought the help of the Damaras (feudal landowners) who 
were hostile to the Tantrins. The Damara Sarhgrama took up his 
cadse and inflicted a crushing defeat on the Tantrins near Padmapura. 
Chakra-varman entered the capital ^rlnagara, where he was received 
with honours by the feudal lords, chiefs, ministers and the Ekahgas. 
Sambhuvardhana was taken prisoner and executed. Chakra-varman 
abandoned himself to vicious pleasures, and alienated the sympathy 
of the people. In A.D, 937 he lost his life at the hands of robbers. 
Unmattavanti (Mad Avanti), son of Partha, was.then raised to the 
throne by the ministers. He was one of the most vicious and tyran¬ 
nical kings that ever occupied the throne of Kashmir. At his insti¬ 
gation, his subordinates killed his father in a most diabolical manner. 


119 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

He had an able minister in Kamalavardhana whom he feared. Just 
before his death in A.D. 939 he declared a child named Sura-varman 
II as his son and placed him on the throne. After the death of the 
king, Kamalavardhana put down the Damaras, who had been exer¬ 
cising great influence over the rulers of Kashmir from the time of 
Chakra-varman, entered the capital with his army after overcoming 
all opposition offered by the Ekangas, Tantrins and the feudal chiefs, 
and dethroned £ura-varman II. He could have secured the throne for 
himself without any difficulty. But he foolishly left the election of 
the king to the assembly of the Brahmanas, fondly hoping that the 
choice would fall on him. But the assembly offered the crown to a 
Brahmana named Yasaskara, son of Prabhakaradeva, treasurer of 
the kings Sankara-varman and Gopala-varman, who had earned great 
reputation as a man of learning. The rule of the Utpala dynasty thus 
came to an end in A.D. 939. 

3. Dynasties of Yasaskara and Parvagupta 

Yasaskara restored peace and order in the country. Though his 
career was occasionally marred by vicious actions, he administered 
his kingdom with success. He built a matha (monastery) for the 
residence of the students coming from Arya-desa to Kashmir for 
higher education. Once when he became seriously ill, he wanted to 
place Varna^a, the sqn of his paternal grand-uncle, on the throne in 
preference to his son Samgramadeva, who however as a matter of - 
fact was not begotten by himself. But the designing minister Parva- 
gupta ultimately persuaded the king to hand over the sovereignty 
to Samgramadeva. After the installation of Samgramadeva, Yasas¬ 
kara left the royal palace unceremoniously and took his residence 
in his matha where he was poisoned by his attendants in A.D. 948. 
A year after the death of Yasaskara, Parvagupta killed the young 
king Samgramadeva and captured the throne for himself. 

Parvagupta was the son of Samgramagupta and grandson of 
Abhinava, who was a writer. He died in A.D. 950 leaving the throne 
to his son Kshemagupta. Kshemagupta married Didda, the daughter 
of the Khasa Sirhharaja, king of Lohara, modern Lohrin valley in 
the. territory of Punch, and the daughter’s daughter of Bhlma Shahi 
of Udabhantfa. 41 Didda, who was a woman of keen intelligence, 
played an important role in Kashmir politics in the second half of 
the tenth century. Kshemagupta died after an inglorious reign of' 
eight years, and was succeeded by his young son Abhimanyu. Didda. 
who. became the regent for her son, tried to assume all the royal 
power into her hands and had no scruples in removing anybody who 
stood in her way. She quarrelled with the prime minister Phalguna 


120 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


and dismissed him. She put down the revolt of Yasodhara and his 
associates and won over some ot them to her side by offering them 
high posts in the government. Yasodhara was made the commander- 
in-chief of her army. He led an expedition against the Shahi Thak- 
kana and forced him to submit. But he soon) fell into the ill graces 
of the queen and was dismissed. His old associates again revolted 
and besieged the royal palace. The queen, with the help of her 
faithful minister Naravahana and some othei^ officers, brought the 
situation under control. Shortly after this the queen, on the report 
of'^malicious persons, lost confidence in Naravahana who, in order 
to avoid disgrace and humiliation, committed suicide. About this 
time the Damaras were also trying to raise a revolt. The situation 
was made worse for the queen by the death of Rakka, the commander- 
of the army. In order to cope with the situation Didda recalled 
Phalguna and made him the chief of the army. Phalguna conquered’ 
RajapurT, the modern hill state of Rajauri. 

King Abhimanyu died in A.D. 972 after a rule of fourteen years, 
leaving behind three sons Nandigupta, Tribhuvana and Bhlma- 
gupta. Nandigupta assumed the royalty. Didda received a severe 
shock by the death of her son. For a year she kept her evil propen¬ 
sities under control and engaged herjself exclusively in establishing 
religious foundations and building new cities. But soon after, she 
resumed her vicious activites. She brought about the death of 
Nandigupta. He was succeeded by Tribhuvana, who also shared 
the same fate two years later (A.D. 975). The young Bhlmagupta 
was then placed on the throne. He Was allowed to enjoy this posi¬ 
tion for onlv five years. About this time Phalguna died. The queen 
then killed Bhlmagupta and ascended the throne in A.D. 980. 

Didda made the Kha£a Tuhga of the Parnotsa country her prime 
minister. The appointment of Tuhga, who was formerly a herdsman 
of buffaloes, caused great resentment among the people. Vigraha- 
raja and Sarhgramaraja were the two sons of king Udayaraja of 
Lohara, the brother of Didda. The refractory elements brought the 
prince Vigraharaja to Kashmir to help them against Tuhga. Vigraha- 
raja rallied the Brahmanas against the queen. But Didda succeeded 
in bringing the Brahmanas back to her side by heavy bribery. All 
attempts to dislodge Tuhga failed. Tunga earned great renown by 
leading a successful expedition against Prithvlpala, the king of 
RajapurT, who had become hostile. As Didda had become fairly old 
she appointed her nephew Samgramaraja of Lohara as her successor. 
She died in A.D. 1003 and was followed on the throne by Samgrama¬ 
raja. The supremacy of the Lohara dynasty was now established in 
Kashmir. 


121 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


XI. THE HILL STATES OF CHAMBA 

A number of dynasties were ruling in the hill states of Rajapurl, 
Darvabhisara, Trigarta (Jalandhar), Kira (Kangra), Chamba, Kulu 
(Kuluta), etc. during this period. Of them the history of the Mushana 
family of the Chamba State can be traced chronologically with the 
help of the Vamsdvali and the epigraphic records. 

The Mushana dynasty established its supremacy over Chamba 
in the sixth century A.D. The capital of its early kings was Brahma* 
pura, modern Brahmaiur, about twenty-five miles south-east of the 
Chamba town. The^king Ajita-varman of this family flourished in 
the middle of the eighth century. After him ruled Suvarna-varman, 
who was succeeded by LakshmI-varman. The Vamsdvali narrates 
that during the reign of LakshmI-varman a large number of people 
died as the result of an epidemic. Taking advantage of this situation 
the Kiras (of the Kangra valley) killed the king and took possession 
of the country. Lakshmi-varman’s son'Mushana-varman recovered 
his throne after defeating the Kiras. Mushana-varman was followed 
on the throne by Hamsa-varman, Sara-varman, Sena-varman, and 
Sajjana-varman in succession. According to Dr. Vogel, Sajjana- 
varman founded the city of Chanpaka (Chamba) and transferred his 
capital there. 

An inscription of the tenth century, engraved on a rock at Proli* 
ragala on the Dhauli Dhar, belongs to the reign of a king Mrityun- 
jav a-varman, who is not mentioned in the Vaihsdvali . Dr. Vogel 
suggests that this king succeeded Sajjana-varman. Epigraphic records 
refer to another king Sahilla-varman who fought successfully against 
a confederacy of the Kira forces, the lord of Durgara (Jammu State), 
and the Saumatikas. The king of Trigarta (Jalandhar) sought his 
alliance softer suffering a defeat at his hands, and the chief of Kuluta 
(Kulu) sought his favour for granting him royalty for services ren¬ 
dered. The VamMvali states that the war between Sahilla-varman 
and the Kulu chief continued for twelve years. It is also known 
from an inscription that Sahilla-varman routed the forces of the 
Turushkas in a battle. He probably joined with the Shahis in repuls¬ 
ing an attack of the Turks in the Kabul valley during the reign of 
Alptigin. After achieving all these victories, he assumed the epi¬ 
thets Sahasdnka , Nis$ankamalla, and Matamatasimha. He is also 
said to have assumed the title Karivarsha after making a gift of 
elephants to the Sun-god at the time of a solar eclipse at the holy 
Kurukshetra. His reign came tp a close in the middle of the tenth 
century, and he was succeeded by his son Yugakara-varman, whose 
son and successor was Vidagdha-varman. Both Yugakara-varman 
and Vidagdha-varman issued inscriptions from their capital at 


122 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


Chanpaka granting lands in the Maridalas of Brahmaputra and 
Tavasaka. Vidagdha-vartnan’s successor Dodaka-varman, known 
from a single inscription, ruled in the closing years of the tenth 
century. In the eleventh century, Salavahana, his son Soma-varman, 
and the latter’s son Asa£a of the family ruled the Chamba State. 

XII. KUMAUN AND GARHWAL 

A detailed analysis of six ancient inscriptions of Kumaun and 
Garhwal is available to scholars, 42 although it is not based on quite 
satisfactory transcripts of the original records. Only one of these 
records has been satisfactorily edited, 43 while the rough transcript of 
another'has also been published. 44 The texts of the remaining four 
inscriptions still await publication. 

The inscription, of which only a tentative transcript was pub¬ 
lished in 1838, is the one on a stone-slab in the temple of Siva called 
BageSvar (Vyaghresvara) situated at the junction of the Gomati 
and Sarju in PottI Katyiir in Kumaun (Almora). The inscription 
contains no less than three grants made by three different kings 
in favour of the god Vyaghresvaradeva. The defective nature Of 
the published transcript renders it difficult to be definite about 
the names of the two kings mentioned in the first and probably 
the, earliest of the three charters as they are given in the absurd 
forins £ri~Bhasantanadeva (also Masantanadeva or Basantanadeva) 
and £dya-svairam-svairam-dadau. 46 The names of the kings mention¬ 
ed in the second of the three charters have been read as &ri-Kharpara- 
deva, his son Srl-Kalyanarajadeva, and his son Sri-Tribhuvanaraja- 
deva. It seems that these rulers flourished later than those men¬ 
tioned in the first charter referred to above, but before the "kings 
known from the third charter. The third and last grant incor¬ 
porated in the Bagesvar inscription mentions four generations o^ 
kings. The third name in this list of four kings is that of Lalita- 
Suiradeva who is also known from two other of the six ancient 
inscriptions from Kumaun and Garhwal referred to above. These 
are two copper-plate grants dated in the 21st and 22nd years of 
Lallitasuradeva’s reign, preserved in the temple of Yogabadari at 
P an dukes var i n the Garhwal District. Both the charters were issued 
from the city of Karttikeyapura by Paramabhaftdraka Maharaja - 
dhirdja Paramesvara Lalitasuradeva, the son of P.M.P. Ishtagana- 
deva and Mahadevi VegadevI and the-grandson of Nimbara and 
Mahadevi Naiudevl. Nimbara, who is not endowed with imperial 
titles in the records, was probably the founder of this line of kings. 
Their capital was probably at the city of Karttikeyapura which has 
been identified with modern Baijnath or Vaidyanatha in the "Almora 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


(Kumaun) District. According to tradition, the city was built by 
a Katyur! king of the Katyur valley in Kumaun on the ruins of an 
ancient city named Karavirapura. It is not improbable that the 
name of Karttikeyapura is a S 2 nskritized form of the aboriginal name 
Katyur. Possibly Kartripura of the Allahabad pillar inscription of 
Samudra-gupta was just another Sanskritized form of the same name. 

The astronomical details of the dates of Lalitasuradeva’s grants 
appear to suggest that his 21st and 22nd regnal years corresponded 
respectively to A.I}. 853 and 854. The reigns of his father and 
grandfather may thijis be ascribed roughly to the period A.D. 790-832. 
According to the Bagesvar inscription Lalitaiuradeva was succeed¬ 
ed by his son Bhudevadeva whose reign may be tentatively assigned 
to the third and fourth quarters of the ninth century. 

The three remaining inscriptions out of the six ancient records 
of Kumaun and Garhwal disclose the names of five generations of 
rulers who belonged to a different dynasty and apparently succeeded 
the house of Nimbara. The earliest of the three records of this new 
family is a copper-plate charter preserved at the temple of Balesvar 
in East Kumaun (Almora). It was issued from Karttikeyapura in 
the fifth regnal year of P.M.P. Desa{adeva who was the son of P.M.P., 
Ichchhatadeva and the grandson of Salonaditya. The two other 
charters of the family are preserved in the temple at Pan<Jukesvar. 
One of them was issued from the same Karttikeyapura in the 25th 
regnal year of P.M.P. Padmatadeva, son of Ichchhatadeva, while 
the 6ther was issued from the city of Subhikshapura in the fourth 
regnal year of P.M.P. Subhiksharajadeva, son of Padmatadeva. 
Subhikshapura, apparently named after Subhiksharajadeva, was 
probably the name of a new city built by this king in the vicinity 
of the old city of Karttikeyapura. These five kings seem to have 
ruled abbut the last quarter of the ninth as well as in the tenth 
century It appears that the last member of Nimbara’s family was 
overthrown by Salonaditya who founded a new dynasty; but the 
events leading to this dynastic revolution are unknown. Little is 
known about the history of Kumaun and Garhwal after Subhiksha- 

i 

Raja’s death. 

An earlier line of kings of the Kumaun-Garhwal region is known 
from two plates found at Talesvar in Almora District. 46 The re¬ 
cords have been assigned on palaeographical grounds to the sixth 
century A.D. One of the copper-plate grants was issued in the fifth 
regnal year of Paramabhatttiraka Mahdrdjddhirdja Dyutivarman. 
In the legend on the seal attached to the plate, the king is repre- 


124 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


sented as the son of Agnivarman, gradson of Vrishavarman and 
great-grandson of Vishnuvarman I. The other charter was issued 
in the twenty-eighth regnal year of Paramabhaftdraka Maharaja - 
dhiruja Vishnuvarman II, son of Dyutivarman. The family to which 
the kings belonged is described as ‘the lunar dynasty’ as well as 
‘the lineage of the moon and the sun’, while it is also specifically 
called ‘the Paurava line of kings.’ Both the charters were issued 
from the city of Brahmapura which was apparently the capital 
of the Paurava kings of the Almora region. They record certain 
grants of the kings made in favour of the god Viranesvara who 
is described as an incarnation of Ananta or Vishnu. The god was 
apparently installed in a temple at Brahmapura and was probably 
the family deity of the Pauravas. In the seventh century A.D. 
the celebrated Chinese pilgrim Hiuen Tsang visited the country of 
Brahmapura, no doubt meaning the kingdom of which the city of 
the same name was the capital. The same country is also mentioned 
in Varahamihira’s Bj-ihat-samhitd composed in the sixth century A.D. 
Both Varahamihira and Hiuen Tsang appear to refer to the king¬ 
dom of the Pauravas of Brahmapura, although the inscriptions apply 
the name Parvatakara to their rdjya. Little is known about the rela¬ 
tion of the Paurava kings mentioned in the Taleivar plates with 
the later rulers of the Kumaun-Garhwal region known from other 
sources and discussed above. 

XIII. THE ARABS IN INDIA 
1, Kabul and Zabul 

The early attempts of the Arabs to conquer Kabul, Zabul and 
Sindh have been noted in the preceding volume, and we have seen 
that, by the middle of the eighth century A.D., although they main¬ 
tained a precarious hold on Sindh, they could not establish their 
authority in the other two kingdoms. 

This was partly due to the decline in power of the central 
authority in the Islamic world. The Caliphs of the Umayyad 
dynasty were gradually weakened by internal dissensions and other 
causes and were supplanted by a new dynasty, the ‘Abbasids, in 
A.D. 749. Under a few able rulers the ‘Abbasids restored the power 
and glory of the Caliphate and its effect was also felt in India. 
During the reign of Al-Man§ur, the second Caliph of this dynasty, 
who ruled from A.D. 754 to 775, Kandahar was conquered, and 
the Muslim governor of Sijistan again demanded tribute from the 
king of Zabul. The latter sent some camels, tents, and slaves, buf 
reckoned each article at double its value. The Muslim governor 


125 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

thereupon invaded Zabul but evidently could not subdue its ruler. 
For we are told that during the next three Caliphates (A.D. 775- 
809) the Muslim officers collected tribute as best as they could (or 
according to their strength and weakness). When Caliph Al- 
Ma mum (A.D. 813-833) visited the eastern region, the ruler of Zabul 
paid double tribute to him. 

It is said that the Caliph sent an army against Kabul and forced 
its ruler to submit and pay taxes. But evidently both Kabul and 
Zabul regained independence. Two more expeditions were pro- r 
bably sent against Kabul in A.D. 769 and 786, but without any 
conspicuous success. It was not till about A.D. 870 that both Kabul 
and Zabul were conquered by Ya’qub ibn Layth, the founder of 
th$ $affarid dynasty, who began his life as a brigand iiji Sijistan 
and ultimately became the ruler of Persia and the neighbouring 
regions in the east. The king of Zabulistan was killed and the 
people embraced Islam. Henceforth this petty state, that had car¬ 
ried on a prolonged and heroic resistance against the Arab aggression 
for more than two hundred years, ceased to belong to India either 
politically or culturally. But Kabul probably regained indepen¬ 
dence and formed a part of the Hindu Shahiya kingdom, whose his¬ 
tory has been narrated above. 47 

The story of the successful resistance of the tiny states of 
Kabul and Zabul against the Arabs has not obtained its due place 
in the history of India. It is worthy of note, however, that they 
defied the conquerors of the world and ultimately succumbed, not 
to the political power of the Caliphate,' but to the local principalities 
that arose on its ruins. 


2. Sindh 

The ‘Abbasid Caliphs made a determined effort to consolidate 
the power of Islam in India. They sent expeditions to drive away 
the old officers of the Umayyad dynasty who refused to recognise 
the new authority. Hisham, who was appointed governor of Sindh 
by Al-Manjur (A.D. 754-775), took possession of Multan and Kun- 
duhar, usually identified with Kandahar. He is also said to have 
conquered Kashmir, but this must be regarded as extremely doubt¬ 
ful. For it has been reasonably inferred from a statement in the 
Rajatarahgini that Lalitaditya Muktapl^a thrice defeated a ruling 
chief of the Arabs. Possibly the Arabs made a successful border 
raid into Kashmir, but the fact'that we do not hear of any further 
Arab invasion of that country seems to indicate that Lalitaditya 
successfully defended his kingdom against Arab aggression. 


12G 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


According to A1 Idrisi, the famous city of Mansura, which be¬ 
came the capital of Sindh, was founded by the ‘Abbasid Caliph 
Al-Man$ur; but Baladhurl tells us that it was built by a son of 
Muhammad ibn-Qasim when Hakam was the governor of Sindh 
under the Umayyads. Probably the town was founded in the time 
of Hakam but finished in the time of the ‘Abbasid Caliph Al- 
Man§ur. This great and opulent Muslim capital of Sindh, of which 
we get a detailed account from Muslim writers, was founded on 
the ruins of the Hindu city of Brahmanabad and lay 43 miles north¬ 
east of the modem city of Haidarabad and eight miles south-east 
of the railway station of Shadadpur. 

Caliph Al-Mahdi (A.D. 775-785), who succeeded Al-Man^ur, 
sent a naval expedition against India but it could not gain any 
success. 48 During the Caliphate of Harun Al-Bashld (A.D. 786-809), 
his governor is said to have conquered a few places in Western 
Sindh. The Muslim army had also to fight with the hardy Jaths 
of Kikanan who are known to have resisted the Arabs as far back 
as A.D. 662. Evidently they were not completely subdued even 
during this long interval. There were also frequent conflicts be¬ 
tween the Muslims on the one side and the Jaths and Meds on the 
other in the neighbourhood of Alor, the old capital of Sindh. Some¬ 
times We hear of a successful Hindu rising. Thus the Hindu chiefs 
of Sindan, a place conquered during the Caliphate of Al-Ma’mun 
(A.D. 813-833), rose against its ruler and killed and crucified him. 
According to Baladhurl the Hindus became masters of the city but 
‘‘left its mosque for the Muslims to assemble in and pray for the 
Caliph.” 

On the whole, it would appear from a study of the Muslim 
chronicles that the ‘Abbasids, even in their palmiest days, could 
not gain any conspicuous success in their Indian expeditions. They 
not only failed to extend their dominions beyond Sindh, but were 
even unaible to consolidate their conquests in this province. This 
was undoubtedly due to the active vigilance of powerful Indian 
states bordering on Sindh. The Pratlharas, whose chief Nagabhafa 
I saved Western India from Arab aggression 49 in the eighth century 
A.D., founded a strong principality which proved to be a bulwark 
against any further Arab aggression. King Nagabha^a II of this 
dynasty, 60 who was a contemporary of the great Caliphs Harun 
Al-Rashld and Al-Ma’mun, is described in an almost contemporary 
record as having captured the strongholds of the Turushkas. The 
reference is probably to the Muslim rulers of Sindh some of whom 
originally belonged to Tukharistan. The Pala king Dharmapala, 
who also belonged to the same period, claims in his own record 


127 


THE AGE UF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


that a Yavana vassal chief made obeisance to him. Here again the 
reference seems to be to a Muslim ruler of Sindh. An inscrip¬ 
tion, dated A.D. 842, states that powerful Mlechchha rulers on the 
river Chambal made obeisance to the Chahamana king. These and 
similar other isolated references 51 point to the fact that since the 
initial success of the Arabs in Sindh, in the first quarter of the eighth 
century A.D., they were unable to make much headway in India 
owing to the vigour and alertness of the Indian chiefs. 

The decline of the ‘Abbasid power about the middle of the 
ninth century A.D. had its natural repercussions on Sindh. During 
the Caliphate of Al-Ma’mun (A.D. 813-833), Bashar, the governor 
of Sindh, rebelled but was defeated by Ghassan. The latter took 
Bashar as captive to Baghdad, leaving Musa as his deputy in Sindh. 
Musa nominated his own son as his successor, and henceforth the 
governors of Sindh ruled practically as independent chiefs. Later, 
it formed a part of the dominions of the $affarids (A.D. 872-903). 
After the fall of the $affarids the Muslim territories in Sindh were 
divided into two independent states, viz. those of Mansura and 
Multan. The former extended from the sea to Alor> and the latter 
comprised the upper valley of the united Sindhu up to this city. 
Little is known of their history, but it appears that the greater 
part of the administrative authority was left in the hands of the 
Hindus. 

Neither^of the two states was very powerful. Multan was 
always in dread of the mighty Pratlhara power. The Pratihara 
army frequently marched gainst Multan, and its Muslim ruler 
secured his safety by playing upon the religious sentiments of the 
Hindus. There was a famous image of the Sun-god in the city of 
Multan which was venerated all over India. We learn from Al-Ma’- 
sudi that “when the unbelievers march against Multan and the faith¬ 
ful do not feel themselves strong enough to oppose them, they 
threaten to break their idol and their enemies immediately with¬ 
draw.” I§takhri, who makes a similar statement, adds that “other¬ 
wise the Indians would have destroyed Multan.” 

The other Muslim state in Sindh, viz. Mansura, was equally 
exposed to the attacks of the Hindus. According to Al-Ma’sudi, “it 
was constantly at war with a nation called the Meds, who are a 
rdpe of Sind, and also with other races on the frontiers of Sind.” 

The older generations of historians like Elphinstone felt sur¬ 
prised at the slow progress of the Islamic conquest of India, ^nd 
sought to explain it by various hypotheses which have no founda¬ 
tion in fact. The real matter for surprise, however, is that the 


128 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


vestige of Arab authority continued in Sindh for three hundred years. 
Even according to the testimony of the Muslims, the Pratiharas 
could have easily conquered Multan that guarded the flank of every 
possible route which a future Muslim conqueror from the outside 
would have to follow. That they were deterred from doing this by 
the fear that the holy images at Multan might be broken by the 
Muslim ruler of the place, only shows a lack of foresight and states¬ 
manship and a deplorable want of rationality on the part of the Hindu 
leaders. If they had possessed even a general knowledge of the poli¬ 
tical condition of the lands immediately outside the borders of India 
on the west, they would have made serious efforts to defend India 
against the almost inevitable danger of Muslim invasion. The first 
steps in this direction should have been to drive away the Muslims 
from the petty principalities which they still held in Sindh and to 
establish a strong garrison in Multan and other strategic places in 
the Punjab. The Shahis and the Pratiharas were both powerful 
ruling dynasties who could have easily accomplished this task. But 
they did not do so. Either they were ignorant of the new political 
situation created by the rise of strong Muslim states on the frontiers 
of India, and of the consequent dangers threatening their country, or 
they were too parochially minded to take a broad view of the 
interests of India as a whole. This, how’ever, can hardly apply to 
the Shahis, who were too near the danger to ignore it and whose 
own interest, in this case, coincided with that of India. The united 
stand made at a later date by the Indian chiefs on the invitation of 
the Shahi rulers proves that a real sense of patriotism was not al¬ 
together absent in them. We can, therefore, only conclude that the 
lack of knowledge of the outside world, or failure to grasp the real 
significance of contemporary events, was the principal cause of the 
indifference of the Hindu chiefs to the great danger that was destined 
to overwhelm them at no distant date. 

The danger was brought home to the Shahi rulers by the 
foundation of the state of Ghazni in the last quarter of the tenth 
century A,D. Ere long the inevitable conflict broke out and the 
Shahi rulers were worsted in the fight. Then the horrors of Muslim 
invasions, inspired by greed and animated by fanatic religious zeal 
and iconoclastic fury, were let loose on the fair temples and cities 
of India. She paid dearly for her remissness in the past, but some¬ 
how escaped the great doom which had overtaken Persia, Egypt and 
other countries. The history of this great crisis will be dealt with 
in the next volume. 

* f - 

129 

A.I.K.—9. 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


1. HER, 121. Cf. above, pp. 50-52. 

2. See pp. 33-4. 

3. Harsha, the adversary of Kalachuri Kokkalia I, is wrongly identified with the 
Chandelia king of this name. He is identical with Guhiia Harsha of Dhava- 
garta. Cf. 7HQ, XIII. 485. 

4. See p. 37. 

5. This is the translation of Kielhorn {El, I. 122); but Dr. R.C. Mazumdar suggests 
that the correct translation would be ‘defeated* (IHQ, XXV. 213). 

6. See pp. 33-4. 

7. See p. 37. 

8. Vol. I, pp. 274, 278 ff, etc. 

9. The name is also written as Kokkala and Kokalla. 

10. Prof. MLrashi thinks that Lakshmanaraja belonged to the Kalachuri Dynasty 
and was a predecessor of Kokkalia 1.— El, XXIII. 255. 

11. Tire Bilhari inscription {El, I. 264) mentions that Kokkalia I set up two columns 
of his fame—Krishna on the south and Bhoja on the north. The Benares copper¬ 
plate ( Ibid, II.*306) states that Kokkalia granted freedom from fear to Bhoja, 
Vallabharaja, grl-Harsha, king of Chitrakuta, and the king ^ahkaragana. These 
two reports are taken to imply that Kokkalia helped the Rashfrakuta Krishna 
II and the Pratihara Bhoja I in consolidating their sovereign position, which was 
threatened by their enemies. But in view of the information supplied by the 
Amoda plates (El, XIX. 78) that Kokkalia I raided the treasuries of Kamata, 
Gurjara, and those born of the Raghu family, this king of the Kalachuris 
cannot be regarded as an ally of the Rashfrakutas and the Pratiharas, As 
Kokkalia I is known to have been succeeded by his son SanJcaragana before 
A.D. 888, his adversary Harsha cannot be assumed to have been the king of 
this name of the Chandelia dynasty, who ruled from c. A.D. 900-925. It has 
been suggested that Chitrakuta, referred to, is the hill of this name in the 
Banda District, U-P., 25 miles north-east of Kalinjar, and its king was evidently 
the Chandelia Harsha. The Chandelia Harsha, the king of Khajraho, was not, 
however, in possession of even Kalinjar, about 40 miles north-east of Khajraho. 
Chitraku|a hill was outside the Chandelia kingdom, at least up to A.D. 954, 
when it was bounded on the east by Kalinjar. The expression ‘Chitrakuta- 
bhupdla s may not, therefore, be referring to the Chandelia Harsha. This king, 
whose name has not been mentioned, and who was the ruler of Chitor, might 
have been another adversary of Kokkalia. For detailed discussion, cj. IHQ, XIII. 
482 ff. 

Dr. R. C. Majurndar has recently expressed a different view on the subject 
(P1HC, Xll. 123 ff). He points out that ‘not a single record of the 9th or 10th 
century A.D. refers to the Kalachuris as a great power in the period of 
Kokkalia I, and that the posthumous military glories of this king gradually 
grew with passing years’. He holds the view that Kokkalia was a dashing 
military chief who joined with one great power against another as suitable 
opportunity offered itself, and that far from exercising supremacy over the 
Pains, Pratiharas mid the Rashtrakutas he probably owed allegiance first to 
the Rashtrakutas and then to the Pratiharas. He also points out that Kokkalla’s 
daughter was married to Krishna II long before the latter ascended the 
Rashtrakuta throne. On the other hand we have to remember the following 
facts. Harsha, king of Chitrakuta, Sankaragana (king of Sarayupara), kings 
of Gurjara and &akambhari, mentioned in the Benares and Amoda plates as 
adversaries of Kokkalia, are known to have been feudatories of the Pratibara 
Bhoja, and the king of Konkana mentioned as another adversary of Kokkalia 
in the Amoda plates only, was a feudatory of the Rashtrakuta Krishna. It 
appears that when Kokkalia fought with Bhoja and Krishna, his adversaries 
were assisted by their feudatories. It is thus obvious that when Bilhari in¬ 
scription mentions only the two chief adversaries of Kokkalia, the Benares and 
Amoda plates furnish more details of the conflicts by mentioning the names 
of the feudatories of those two adversaries who participated in them. Amoda 
plates, however, mention two new military adventures of Kokkalia, viz. that 
he won victories over the king of Vanga and the Turushkas, which arc not 
found referred to in the Bilhari and Benares inscriptions. Dr. Majumdar- has 
virtually accepted elsewhere {HER, I. 136) Ihe statement of the Amoda pbtes 
that Kokkalia conquered Vanga as authentic. 


1.30 


CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 


12. See above, p. 54. 

13. See above, p. 83. 

14. See above, p. 31. 

15. See above, p. 36. 

16. The history of this family is principally based on the copper-plates (El, XXVI. 
185) discovered at Ghumli in 1936. 

17. See above, Vol. Ill, p. 173. 

18. EI t IX. 1 ff. 

19. This account is based on chronicles only and is not supported by epigraphic 
evidence. Cf .^DHNI, II. 941. 

20. IA, XII. 159, i. 13. The inscription states that Mahavaraha, kindled with the 
rays of the sun, attacked Krishna I ( Sauryy-o$hma-samdipitam—.dpatantam). 
Kielhorn corrects Sauryya as £auryya, meaning bravery. But N there is no diffi¬ 
culty in accepting the reading of the passage as it occurs. In my'opinion there 
is a pun on the word Saurya, which may be taken to mean also the people of 
this name (cf. Sauryaroam — adhimarulale etc., in Jain Harivamsa ). The verse 
purports to say that Mahavaraha, being strengthened by the support of the 
Sauryas, attacked Krishna I. 

21. El, XIX. 175. Also cf. Bh. List. No. 210G in. 1 

22. See p. 21. 

23. The Rashtrakufa Dhavala’s grandfather Vidagdha was ruling in A.D. 916, and 
his father’s known date is AD. 939. In his old age Dhavaia abdicated his throne 
in favour of his son Balaprasada, who is found ruling in A.D. 997. So it is not 
unlikely that the Chapa Dharanivaraha was a contemporary of both Dhavaia 
and the Chaulukya Mularaja, who ascended the throne in A.D. 942. 

24. According to Nayachandra Suri’s Havimira-Mahdkdvya, Mularaja was killed by 
the Chahamana Vigraharaja. This seems to be unlikely, 

25. Cf. Vol. Ill, pp. 162-3. 

26. See p. 87. 

27. The Bijoli Rock Ins. (El, XXVI. 91) mentions Vindhyanripati as the successor 
of Vakpati I. For the account of Sirhharaja and his predecessors, cf. El, 11 .116 ff. 

28. El, XIV. 176. 

29. Ch. X, pp. 158 ft. 

30. The nature of the political relation of Bhartripatta II with the Imperial Prati- 
haras cannot be ascertained from the Fartabgarh inscription (El, XIV. 176). 
All that can be gathered from it is that the Maharajadhiraja Bhartripatbi made 
a grant to the temple of Indradityadeva in AJD. 942 and the Maharaja Mahcndra- 
paia II from his residence at MahGdaya donated land to the same temple in 
A.D. 946. 

31. Vol. Ill, p. 160. 

32. See p. 31. 

33. See pp. 33, 118. 

34. Karnalu ascended the throne in or before AD. 900. As he obtained the sove¬ 
reignty during the reign of Gopala-varman who, according to Kalhana, began 
his rule in A.D. 902, the date of the latter’s accession is to be shifted back by a 
few years. 

35. El, XXI. 298. 

36. El, XXI. 301. 

37. Firishta mentions Lahore as the capital of Jayapala. This does not seem to be 
correct. Al-BirunI describes Luhavur (Lahore) as a country, the capital of 
which was Mandahukur (Sachau, I. 206). 

33. Vol. Ill, pp. 133-136. 

39. S. Levi (Le Nepal, II. 176-77), however, thinks that there may be some historical 
basis of the story of J&yapida’s fight with Nepal. Nepal was at that time a pro¬ 
tectorate of Tibet and there was a long-standing hostility between this kingdom 
and Kashmir. According to Levi a story-teller would hardly invent an un¬ 
couth and barbarous name like Aranvudi, who was perhaps a Tibetan general 
sent to oppose Jayaplda, The river Kala Gandika, on the banks of which the 
battle is alleged to have taken place, almost certainly represents the Kala 
Gandaki, the westernmost branch of the seven Gandakis, which was the first 
natural barrier against an invader coming from the west. 


131 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


40. For the date of Gopala-vannan, sec fn. 34 above. 

41. See above, p. 113. . - 

42. E. T. Atkinson, The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western Provinces of 
India, Vol. II (forming Vol. XI of the Gazetteer, N.W.P.), 1884, pp. 496-85. Cf. 
BV, XII. 149-52. 

43. I A, XXV. 177 ft. 

44. JASB, Vol. Vir, 1838, pp. 1056-58. 

45. This name apparently begins with sri or srimat and ends with deva. 

46. El, XIII. 109. The editor of the inscription regarded them to be forged without 
sufficient justification. Cf. Bhandarkar, List Nos. 1786-7. Bhandarkar does not 
notice all the inscriptions analysed by Aktinson. 

47. See pp. 112-115. 

48. See pp. 99-100. 

49. Vol. Ill, p. 155. 

50. See pp. 24 ff, 

51. See pp. 20, 25, 39. 


V)2 


CHAPTER VI 


THE DECCAN 

I. THE EASTERN CHALUKYAS 

When Vijayaditya I died after a rule of 18 or 19 years about 
A.D. 764, his son Vishnuvardhana IV became king and ruled the 
Vehgl country for 36 years, i.e. down to about A.D. 799. Shortly 
before A.D. 769-70, the Rashtrakuta king Krishna I sent his son, 
the crown-prince Govinda II, to invade the Vehgl country. Accord¬ 
ing to the Alas grant 1 of the Rashtrakuta crown-prince, issued in 
A.D. 769-70 from the camp of his victorious army at the confluence 
of the Krishnavsna and the Musi, the king of Vengl was humbled 
and ceded his treasury, forces and kingdom. Soon after A.D. 779, 
there was a struggle for the Rashtrakuta throne between Govinda II 
and his younger brother Dhruva, in which the former managed to 
get the assistance of the rulers of Malava, Kahchl, Gangavadi and 
Vengl, all of whom had been previously subdued by the Rashfra- 
kutas and were apparently eager to improve their position by exploit¬ 
ing the situation arising out of the fratricidal war. But Govinda II 
was defeated by Dhruva who next ascended the Rashtrakuta throne. 
Govinda II having been eliminated, Dhruva now set himself with full 
vigour against his brother’s allies. An epigraph of A.D. 802, 2 sup¬ 
ported by the Radhanpur grants 3 of A.D. 808, says that “at half a 
word from the mouth of Dhruva’s letter-bearer, the king of Vehgl, 
wherever he was, constantly performed his service without inter- 
- mission, by his own wish, and built for him an outer wall, lofty as 
the sky, of'marvellous splendour, with the constellations around its 
head like a garland of pearls.” Although the exact nature of the 
claim is difficult to determine and although the capital city of Manya- 
khe^a is said to have been built by Amoghavarsha, some writers go 
so far as to suggest that Vishnuvardhana TV was himself compelled 
to construct a wall for Manyakheta (modern Malkhed in Hyderabad 
State). It is, however, probable that the Vengl king was forced to 
become a subordinate ally of the Rashtrakuta monarch. The Jethwai 
grant 4 dated A.D. 786 speaks of his daughter SllamahadevI who was 
married to Dhruva. 

Vishnuvardhana IV had several sons, viz . Vijayaditya II, Bhlma- 
Salukki (i.e. Bhlma-Chalukya) and Npiparudra (born of a Haihaya 
or Kalachuri princess). About A.D. 799, Vijayaditya II became king, 
and assumed the tiiles Narendramrigaraja, Chalukyarjuna and 


133 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Tribhuvandnkusa. The duration of his rule is variously given in 
different records as 40, 41, 44 or 48 years. Fleet accepted 44 years as 
the proper duration of the reign although from the actual date of the 
accession of the king's great-grandson Chalukya-Bhlma _ I, it now 
appears that Vijayaditya II ruled for 48 years and died about A.D. 
847. The real cause of the discrepancy regarding his regnal period 
seems to be that for some years during this reign the Eastern Cha- 
lukya throne was occupied by a rival. The king built a large num¬ 
ber of &iva temples in different parts of his dominions. 

Vijayaditya II, who assumed the titles Paramabhattdraka Maha- 
rajadhiraja-Paramesvara, was one of the most powerful rulers of the 
family. But his early years witnessed a series of failures. His 
brother Bhlma-Salukki deserted him and joined the Rashtrakutas. 
The king was utterly defeated by the Rashtrakutas under Govinda III 
and their allies the Gahgas, and Bhlma-Salukki was raised to the 
throne of VengT. But Vijayaditya II continued the struggle and, 
when after the death of Govinda III (A.D. 814) his minor son 
Amoghavarsha I ascended the Rashtrakuta throne and was facing a 
rebellion of his officials and feudatories, the Chalukya king succeeded 
in recovering his throne by overthrowing Bhima-Salukki in spite 
of the assistance the latter received from the Rashtrakutas and 
Ganges. This success was pursued by Vijayaditya II with redoubled 
vigour. The Eastern Chalukya army now overran considerable por¬ 
tions of the Rashfrakuta empire and reached the city of Stambha 
(modern Cambay in Gujarat) 5 which they plundered and devastated. 
In the records of his successors, Vijayaditya is said to have fought 
108* battles in a continuous struggle of 12 years with the Rashtra¬ 
kutas and Gahgas, to have destroyed the Dakshina Gahga (the 
southern Gangas), and to have taken possession of Vengi-man^ala by 
extirpating his younger brother Bhlma-Salukki. The records of the 
Rashtrakutas-themselves cf. Navsari grant 0 of Indra III) admit that, 
in the early part of the reign of Amoghavarsha I. the glory of the 
RaRa (Rashtrakuta) kingdom “was drowned in the ocean of the 
Chalukyas” who had “completely devastated the city of Stam¬ 
bha.But the success of the Eastern Chalukyas against the Rashtra¬ 
kutas was shortlived. Amoghavarsha I. who received considerable 
help from Karkka, the Rashtrakuta viceroy of Gujarat, is said to 
have later raised the glory of the Rashtrakutas once again. The re¬ 
bellious feudatories were subdued and the Eastern Chalukya army 
was driven out of Rashtrakuta territory. In the records of his 
successors. Amoghavarsha I is described as having destroyed a large 
host of the Chalukyas at the battlefield of Vingavalli. The hostilities 
continued in spite of the marriage of a Rashtrakuta princess named 
SilamahadevI (probably a daughter of Dhruva by SllamahadevT who 

m 


THE DECCAN 


was a sister of Vijayaditya II) to Vishnu-vardhana V, son of Vijaya- 
ditya II. The Eastern Chalukyas had to acknowledge Rashtrakuta 
supremacy. 

Vijayaditya II came into conflict with a Naga king probably of 
the Bastar region. But the reference may also be to Nagabha^a II of 
the Gurjara Pratlhara dynasty, with whom he fought, according to 
the Gwalior inscription 7 of Bhoja I, probably in connection with his 
Gujarat expedition. 

The next king of Vengl was Vijayaditya’s son Vishnuvardhana V, 
also called Kali-Vishnuvardhana (Kali-Bittarasa), Sarvalokasraya 
and Vishamasiddhi. He ruled only for 18 or 20 months and died 
about A.D, 848. He left several sons, viz. Vijayaditya III (born of 
the Rashtrakuta princess SllamahadevI), Ayyaparaja, Vikrama- 
ditya (I) and Yuddhamalla (I). Vijayaditya iIII succeeded him on 
the throne of the Vengl country and ruled for 44 years (A.D. 848-92). 
The new king had a number of virudas such as Gunaka ( Gunaga ), 
Parachakrardma, Ramarangasudraka, Manujaprahara, Vikrama - 
dhavala, Nrpatimartanda, Virudangabhlma, Bhuvanakandarpa, 
Arasankakesarin , Tripuramartyamahesvara and Tribhuvanankusa. 

Like his grandfather, Vijayaditya III was bent upon Digvijaya 
in which he was assisted by his able minister Vinaya<Jisarman and 
by two reputed generals, namely Ka<Jeyaraja and his son Pan<Jaranga. 
In the south, he conquered the city of Nellura (Nellore), probably 
from the Pallavas of Ranchi. Vijayaditya III is said to have carried 
away gold from the Pallavas. He is further credited with a victory 
over the Pandyas and with giving shelter to the Chola king. Hav¬ 
ing been goaded to retaliation by the Raffa. or Rashtrakuta king 
(rattesa-surhchodita) , he cut off the head of Mangi, king of Nolamba- 
rashtra in Mysore, in a great battle, and also defeated the Gahgas 
completely in the west. Next turning to the north, the Eastern 
Chalukya king defeated the combined forces of the Rashtrakuta king 
Krishna II 8 and the latter’s brother-in-law (wife’s brother) and ally, 
the Kalachuri king £ankila or Sahkuka (5ahkaragaj>a), lord of 
Dahala (the Jubbulpore region), at the great battle of Kiranapura, 
probably modern Kiranpur in the Balaghat District, Madhya Pradesh. 
Like his grandfather, Vijayaditya III overran the Rashtrakuta empire 
and burnt Achalapura (modem Ellichpur in Berar). Vijayaditya III 
is also said to have defeated Baddega, very probably the Chalukya 
chief of Vemulavada who was the grandfather of Narasimha (a feuda¬ 
tory of Indra III, grandson and successor of Krishna II). He is fur¬ 
ther said to have burnt the city of Chakrakuta in the old Bastar State, 
captured the elephants of the king of Kosala (South Kosala in Chhat- 
tisgarh and the adjoining area), and taken by force the gold of the 


135 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Ganga king of Kalihga, from whom he also received elephants as 
tribute. Vijayaditya III appointed his younger brother Vikrama- 
ditya his heir apparent, but the latter probably predeceased him. 
After Vijayaditya’s death the throne passsed to Chalukya-Bhima I, 
son of Vikramaditya. 

Fleet suggested that Chalukya-Bhima I ascended the throne in 
A.B. 883; it is however now known from the Attili inscription 9 that 
this king’s coronation took place in 6aka 814 corresponding to A.D. 
892. Chalukya-Bhima I was also known as Vishnuvardhana and 
had the virudas TribhuvCLndnkusa, Droharjuna, Sarvalokdsraya and 
Jftitasiddhi. He is often called Paramabrahrnanya. He ruled for 30 - 
years and died about A.D. 922. He is said to have fulfilled the de¬ 
sires df distressed and helpless persons and of the ascetics just like 
their parents, friends and preceptors. 

The Anakapalle inscription 10 of Chalukya-Bhima I proves his 
control over Devarashtra in Ela m ahc h i -Kalin g a d e£ a, i.e. the Yella- 
manchili tract of Visakhapatnam District. He made Pandaraiiga his 
general. Another general of Chalukya-Bhima I was Mahakala who 
was the son of a daughter of the king’s foster-mother. 

During this reign, the struggle with the Rashtrakutas continued. 
According to the Pampa-Bhdrata or Vikramdrjuna-vijxiya by the 
Kanarese poet Pampa, the Chalukya’ chief Ba$$ega (probably 
feudatory of Krishna II) defeated Bhlma, apparently Chalukya-Bhima.. 
and took him prisoner. The forces of Krishna II overran the Andhra 
country as far south as Guntur and Nellore Districts and the Rash- 
trakuta king actually appointed his own officials in charge of various 
forts in the Eastern Chalukya country. Pan^arahga, general of Cha¬ 
lukya-Bhima 1, made attempts to overthrow the domination of the 
foreigners. At the battle of Niravadyapura—one of the many that 
took place between the Rashtrakutas and the Eastern Chalukyas— 
Chalukya-Bhima ! s son killed a Bashtrakuta Daiu^Lesa (general) named 
Gundaya, but was also himself killed. Pan^arahga captured some 12 
strongholds from Vaso-Boya, probably a Bashtrakuta partisan, and 
also the hill-forts of Vehglnandu (the Vehgl country). Chalukya- 
Bhima I, who was evidently released after some time, is said to have 
illumined the Vehgl country which had been overrun by Bafta (Bash¬ 
trakuta) chieftains “just as by dense darkness after sunset’’ and to 
have defeated the army of Krishnavallabha (Krishna II) and his 
allies, the kings of Karnata and Lata. Chalukya-Bhlma’s successes 
may have been achieved during the latest years of the reign of 
Krishna II. 

Chalukya-Bhima I had at least two sons, viz. Vijayaditya IV 
and Vikramaditya. of whom the former succeeded him about 


THE DECCAN 


A.D. 922. Hostilities with the Raahtrakutas continued unabated. 
Vijayaditya IV defeated the HashtrakQta forces but lost his life after 
a reign of 6 months, at the battle of Virajapurl to the south of the 
Krishna. The city is said to have been the capital of a viceregal 
family known as the Parichchhedins who ruled “the country of 
6000” lying on the southern bank of the Kj-ishnavena (Krishna). 

Vijayaditya IV had at least two sons, viz. Amma I, alias Vish- 
nuvardhana, and Chalukya-Bhlma II (bom of Melamba), of whom the 
former succeeded him about the end of A.D. 922 with the virudas 
Rajamahendra and SarvalokcLsraya. Amma I ruled for 7 years, i.e. 
till about A.D. 929. The Pulivarru inscription 11 records the grant of 
a village by the king in favour of Indaparaja, grandson of Indaparaja 
of the Maha-Hattavarh^a who was the lord of the city of Manyakheta. 
There is apparently reference here to a grandson (named Indra) of 
the Kashtrakuta king Indra III of Malkhed. It has been suggested 
that the donee may have been a son of Ampghavarsha II (c. A.D. 927), 
who might have taken shelter at the Eastern Chalukya court when 
his father was overthrown by the latter’s younger brother 
Govinda IV (c. A.D. 927-36). The non-mention of Amoghavarsha II 
in the Eastern Chalukya record may, however, suggest that the 
father of the donee was not a crowned monarch. 

Two sons of Amma I, viz. Vijayaditya V and Bhlma, are known 
from records; the former succeeded (A.D. 929) him under the name 
Kanthika-Vijayaditya or Kanthika-Beta. A fortnight after the 
installation of Vijayaditya V, the young king was overthrown by 
Tala (Talapa, Talapa or Tatja), son of Yuddhamalla and grandson 
of Vishnuvardhana V. Tala’s success was specially due to the assis¬ 
tance he received from the Rashtraku|a king Gojjiga or Govinda IV 
and from Ayyappa, king of Nolamba-rashtra. Vijayaditya V was 
imprisoned and Tala declared himself king (A.D. 929), Vijayaditya 
however escaped from captivity and took shelter at the court of the 
Chdlukya ruler Arikesarin II (great-grandson of Ba^tega and patron 
of the poet Pampa), ruler of Vemulava^a and a feudatory of the 
Rashtrakutas. 

The new king Tala was, however, ousted after only a month 
by another claimant to the throne named Vikramaditya (II) who 
was a $on of Chalukya-Bhlma I. Vikramaditya is said to have 
ruled over the Vengl country together with Trikalinga for nine or 
eleven months or for a year (A.D. 929) when he was himself over¬ 
thrown by Bhlma II who was a son of Amma I and a brother of 
Vijayaditya V. But after a rule of 8 months (A.D. 930) Bhlma II 
was killed by one Malla, Mallapa or Yuddhamalla (II), who was a 
son of ,Tflla and a prot6g4 of the Rashtrakuta king Govinda IV. This 


187 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


king, who ruled for seven years (A.D. 930-36), built the Malles- 
varasvami temple at Vijayawada. During Yuddhamalla’s rule, the 
Rashtrakutas were all powerful in the Andhra country. An inscrip¬ 
tion 12 of Amma II naively admits that the Sabara chiefs, the 
commanders of the army of Vallabha (the Rashtrakuta king), and 
others apportioned the Eastern Chalukya kingdom among them- 
selves for seven years (i.e. the duration of Yuddhamalla’s reign). 
With Rashtrakuta help, however, Yuddhamalla succeeded in hold¬ 
ing his position against a number of rival claimants to the throne, 
including Chalukya-Bhlma II who was a son of Vijayaditya IV and 
a step-brother of Amma I; but Yuddhamalla was ultimately ousted 
by Chalukya-Bhlma II. According to the Maliyapundi grant, 13 
the five years following the death of Vikramaditya II witnessed the 
princes of the family who coveted the kingdom, viz. Yuddhamalla, 
Rajamartanda, Kanthika-Vijayaditya (V) and others, fightipg for 
supremacy and oppressing the people like Rakshasas; then Chalukya- 
Bhlma “slew Rajaraayya in battle, made Kanthika-Vijayaditya and 
Yuddhamalla] go to foreign country and despatched to, the abqde 
of death many others who, though respectable kings, had sho^n 
themselves puffed up by evil conduct and were causing distress \o 
the country.” Another record 14 says that Bhlma (Chalukya- 
Bhlma II) ruled for 12 years (A.D. 935-46) after having extirpated 
Yuddhamalla and other claimants to the throne. The Kalachum- 
barru inscription 16 of Amma II says that Chalukya-Bhlma II 
slew the glorious Rajamayya, the mighty Dhala^a the fierce 
TataBikki (or Tata-Vikyana, i.e. Tata Vikramaditya), Bijja always 
ready for war, the terrible Ayyapa (the Nolamba king), the army 
of Govinda (Govinda IV Rashtrakuta), Lova-Bikki who was the 
ruler of the Cholas, and Yuddhamalla. Western Ganga records 16 
refer to a struggle between the Nolarhba king Ayyapa and Mahendra 
(i.e. Chalukya-Bhlma II). 

Chalukya-Bhlma II was also known as Bhlma, Raja-Bhlma and 
Vishnuvardhana. He bore the virudas Sarvalokdsraya , Tribhu- 
vandnkusa , Rajamartanda and Ganda-Mahendra. One of his feuda¬ 
tories was Vijjaya of the Panara dynasty. An important official 
was the Velanandu chief Malliya. Chalukya-Bhlma II had several 
sons, viz. Amma II (born of Lokamahadevi), Danarnava (born of 
Ankidevi) and Kama. Of these Amma II, who was younger than 
Danarnava, became king (probably because he was the son of the 
chief queen) after his father’s death in Saka 867 corresponding 
to A.D. 946. 

Amma, II, who became yuvardja at the age of 8 and king at 
12, was also known by the name Vijayaditya and bore the virudas 



138 


THE DECCAN 


Rajamahendra, Tribhuvanankusa' and Samastabhuvanasraya. There 
is a tradition which connects the foundation of the city Raj amah en- 
drl or Rajamahendrapura (which probably became the capital or 
a secondary capital of the later Eastern Chaiukyas) with a Chalukya 
king named Vijayaditya-Mahendra. This king seems to have been 
no other than Amma II who was known both as Vijayaditya and 
Hajamahendra. He married the daughter of Nripakama, lord of 
Saras or Kolanu (Colair lake) in Godavari District. Durgaraja, 
great-grandson of the celebrated warrior Pandarahga, was the 
king’s general. His minister was Kuppanayya (son of Turkkiya- 
Yajvan) who was also known as Vipranarayana. Amma II is des¬ 
cribed as lord of both Vehgi and Kalinga and is known to have made 
grants of lands in the Barupunan^Ju-uishaya in Elamanchi-Kalinga, 
i.e. the Yellamanchili tract of Viiakhapatnam District. One of his 
records refers to the yuvardja Ballaladeva Velabhata, sumamed 
Botftfiya, son of Pammava of the PattavardhinI family. At the re¬ 
quest of Chameka (a courtesan loved by the king) of the same family, 
the king granted a village in favour of the Jain temple of Sarva- 
lokaSraya Jinavallabha. He is also known to have made gifts to the 
Jain temples at Vijayavajika (Bezwada). One of his grants was in 
favour of the temple of Siva Samastabhuvanasraya built by Naren- 
drampigaraja at Vijayavata (Bezwada). 

After Amma H had ruled for eleven years, i.e. about A.D. 956, 
he was driven out of the Vehgi country by Badapa 1 ., son of king 
Yuddhamalla. Badapa became king with the help of the Rash^rakuta 
king Karna or Kannara, i.e. Krisha IH (e. A.D. 939-67), and Amma 
II proceeded to the Kalinga country (Elamanchi-Kalihga) owing to 
Krishna's (Krishna ni Rashtrakuta) wrath against him. Shortly 
afterwards, Amma II regained his kingdom. 

Badapa styled himself Vijayaditya and Samastabhuvana&raya. 
One of his officers appears to have been Gan<Janarayana, son of 
Nripakama of Saras (father-in-law of Amma II). This Gan^anara- 
yana, who was a famous archer, earned the appellation Karmu- 
karjuna and Satyavallata. 

Badapa was succeeded by his younger brother Mahdr&jddhir$ja 
Tala (n), sumamed Vishnuvardhana. His minister was Kuppa¬ 
nayya, son of Makariyaraja and grandson of Kalivarman of - the 
family of Pallavamalla (probably king Nandivarman of Kanchi). 
Tala was slain in battle after a short reign by Amma II,* who was 
slain in turn by his elder brother Danarnava in A.D. 970. Amraa’s 
death was avenged by his wife's brother Jata Choda-Bhlma who 
defeated and killed Danarnava in A.D. 973 and made himself king 
of Vehgi. The sons of Danarnava went into exile at the Choja court 


189 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


until Rajaraja conquered Vengi for them from Jata Choda-Bhima in 
A.D. 999. 17 

The inscriptions of the descendants of Danarnava do not re¬ 
cognise the rule of Badapa and his successors. They record that 
“after Danarnava, through the evil action of fate, the country of 
Vengi was \yithout a ruler for 27 years (c. A.D. 973-99), after which 
the son of king Dana (Danarnava), that glorious Saktivarman who 
resembled the king of gods, having overcome the enemies by force 
of his valour, protected the earth for 12 years (c. A.D. 999-1011)”. 
Saktivarman, also called Chalukya-Narayana, Chalukya-chandra and 
Vishnuvardhana, is said to have risen to fame even in his youth by 
his victory in a battle with the Cholas (probably the Telugu-Chodas). 
He put to flight one Badyema-Maharaja and killed Chola-Bhlma (i.e. 
the Telugu-Choda chief, Jata Choda-Bhima). As Bhlma is also said 
to have been killed by Rajaraja I, it is clear that Saktivarman joined 
Raj a raj a I in his campaign against Vengi in A.D. 999. Jata Choda- 
Bhima was defeated and killed, and Saktivarman became the ruler 
of Vengi in that year. 


GENERAL REFERENCES 

A. S. Altekar— The Rashtrakutas and their Times. 

J. F. Fleet—I.A., XX; Bombay Gazetteer, I, ii. 

D. C. Ganguly —The Eastern Chdlukyas. 

B. V. Krishna Rao —JAHRS, X. 16. 

H. C. Ray —Dynastic History of Northern India , Vol. I. 

R. Sewell —The Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 

N. Venkataramanayya— The Eastern Chdlukyas of Vengi; The Chdlukyas of 
Le (Ve)mulavdda. 


II. THE EASTERN GANG AS (e. A.D. 750-1000) 

The Early Eastern Gangas of Kalihganagara were rulers of a 
small territory in Srikakulam District. At a later date, the members 
of a branch of this family, who are usually called the ‘Later Eastern 
Gahgas* but may be styled the ‘Greater or Imperial Gangas*, extend¬ 
ed the Gahga power over wide regions of the coastal area from the 
lower course of the Bhaglrathl in the north-east to that of the Goda¬ 
vari in the south-west. The history of the Eastern Gangas till the 
middle of the eighth century has already been narrated. 18 

1. Later Members of the Early Ganga Family 

Of the later rulers of the Early Gahga dynasty mention may be 
made of Rajendra-varman I (who seems to have been the successor 
of Devendra-varman II, c. A.D. 747-52) and his son Anantavarman 
II known from records dated in the Gahga years 284 (A.D. 780-82) 


140 


THE DECCAN 


and 304 (A.D. 800-02). 19 Ananta-varman II was succeeded by his 
brother Devendra-varman III who issued charters in the Gahga years 
308 (A.D. 804-06) and 310 (A.D. 806-08). 20 The successor of Deven¬ 
dra-varman III was Rajendra-varman II, son of the former’s brother 
Ananta-varman II. King Rajendra-varman II is known from his re¬ 
cords with dates ranging between the Gahga years 313 (A.D. 809-11) 
and 342 (A.D. 838-40). 21 This king was succeeded by his cousin 
Satya-varman who was a, son of Devendra-varman III and issued a 
charter in the Gahga year 351 (A.D. 847-49). 22 The next three 
rulers appear to have been Ananta-varman III (Gahga year 358), 
another son of Devendra-varman III, Bhupendra-varman Mara- 
siriiha, 23 and his son Devendra-varman IV who issued the Cheedi- 
valasa grant in the Gahga year 397 (A.D. 893-895). 24 A grant issued 
by the son of a king named Devendra-varman in the year 393 
(A.D. 889-91) has been recently published. 25 This king’s name has 
been taken to be Manujendra-varman, although the reading intended 
may be Rajendra-varman. 

No definite history of the Eastern Gahgas is available for about a 
century after Devendra-varman IV. The earliest records of the 
Greater Gahgas have to be assigned to the close of the tenth century. 
There is some evidence to show that during this century, the Gahga 
kingdom was split up into five tiny principalities, mostly under 
different branches of the royal family. One of these appears to 
have been under the Gahga house of Svetaka and another was pro¬ 
bably under the Kadambas of Jayantyapura. During this period 
the Eastern Chalukyas appear to have encroached upon the Gahga 
territories. King Vijayaditya III (A.D. 844-92) is said to have taken 
by force the gold of the Gahga king of Kalinga and received ele¬ 
phants as tribute from that country. Eastern Chalukya influence 
seems to have been at the root of the introduction of the Saka era 
in the land that had previously used the era; of the Gahgas them¬ 
selves. 

2. Rise of the Greater Gahgas 

The earliest definite and undisputed date in the history of the 
Greater Gahgas is the 9th of April, 1038 A.D. 26 when Vajrahasta- 
Ananta-varman, father of Rajaraja and grandfather of the great 
Ananta-varman Cho<Jagahga, was crowned. The records of Vaj- 
rahasta and his son as well as the earlier ones of his grandson give the 
following information about the early history of this branch of the 
Gahga family. 27 In the Atreya gotra and the Gahga family (a 
Brahmana family according to Muslim chroniclers) was born 
Gunamaharnava who acquired the glory of samrdjya; his son Vaj- 
rahasta united the earth which had been divided into five kingdoms 


141 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


and ruled for 44 years; the next rulers were his three sons, viz. 
Gundama (3 years), Kamarnava (35 years) and Vinayaditya 
(3 years); thereafter Kamarnava’s son Vajrahasta-Aniyankabhlma 
became king and ruled for 35 years; he was followed by his three 
sons, viz. Kamarnava (6 months) who married Vinayamahadevi of the 
Vaidumba family (holding sway in the land about Arcot, Cuddappa 
and Nellore Districts from the ninth to the thirteenth century), Gun¬ 
dama (3 years) and Madhukamarnava (19 years). Vajrahasta- 
Ananta-varman, who was crowned in A.D. 1038, was the son of Ka¬ 
marnava by the Vaidumba princess. This account evidently suggests 
that Gunamaharnava was the first king of this branch of the Ganga 
family, that the Ganga kingdom had been divided into five princi¬ 
palities apparently owing to the weakness of the central government, 
and that Gunamaharnava’s son Vajrahasta succeeded in reuniting 
the diverse units under his sole sway. But though this account of 
the rise of the Greater Gangas is not altogether improbable, at least 
in regard to the broad outline, it has to be noted that the tradition 
recorded in the later records 28 of the family, from the latter part of 
the reign of Ananta-varman Chodaganga, is somewhat different. 

The later account represents the Ganga family as a branch of 
the lunar dynasty and reminds us of the fabricated genealogy of 
the Pallavas, Eastern Chalukyas and others. It traces the descent 
of the family from Ananta (Vishnu), Brahman born of Vishnu’s 
navel, > his mind-born son Atri (the gotrarshi of the Ganga family), 
and Atri’s eye-born son Sasanka (Moon). From the moon to Yayati’s 
son Turvasu, the Puranic account of the lunar dynasty is followed. 
It is then said that Turvasu had, through the favour of the goddess 
Ganga, a son named Gangeya whose descendants were known as 
Ganga. The seventeenth descendant of Gangeya, as enumerated 
in the list, was Kolahala (also called Ananta-varman) who is said 
to have built Kolahalapura (modern Kolar in Mysore) in the Gah- 
gava^i vishaya. Here is an attempt to trace the descent of the 
Eastern Gangas of Orissa from the Western Gangas of Mysore, who 
however claimed to have belonged to the Kanvayana gotra and the 
solar dynasty of Ikshvaku. 29 Kolahala’s son was Virochana in whose 
lineage, after 81 kings had ruled at Kolahalapura, flourished Vira- 
sirhha. Virasirhha’s son Kamarnava presented his own territory to 
his paternal uncle and set out to conquer the earth with his four 
brothers, viz. Danarnava, Gunarnava. Marasimha and Vajrahasta. 
He came to Mount Mahendra in Kalinga (in Ganjam District)! 
and worshipped the god Gokarnasvamin (Gokarnesvara). Through 
the god’s favour, Kamarnava obtained the Vrishabha-lanchhana (bull 
crest) and the insignia of sovereignty. He then took possession of 
the Kalinga country after having defeated £abaraditya and ruled for 


142 


THE DECCAN 


36 years at Jantavura (Dantapura or Jayantyapura?). He was suc¬ 
ceeded by his brother Danarnava, who ruled for 40 years, while to his 
other brothers were assigned the districts called Ambavadi-vishaya 
(Ambavalli in Parlakimedi), Sodaman^ala (Soda in Parlakimedi) and 
VarahavartanI (Tekkali-Chicacole area). Danarnava’s *son Kamar¬ 
nava; who ruled for 50 years, built a city named Nagara and a 
temple of Isa (Siva) under the name Madhukesa. His son Ranarnava 
ruled for five years and was succeeded by his two sons, viz. Vajra- 
hasta (15 years) and Kamarnava (19 years). The son and successor 
of this Kamarnava was Gunarnava, who is said to have ruled for 
27 years and is apparently the same as Gun-amaharnava mentioned 
in the earlier account as the founder of the Greater Gafiga family. 
But in the present account the successor of Gunarnava (Gunamahar- 
nava) is said to have been his son Potankuia (15 years), who was him¬ 
self succeeded by his brother’s son Kaligalahkuia (12 years), followed 
by Potankusa’s brothers Gundama (7 years), Kamarnava (25^years) 
and Vinayaditya (3 years). It has been suggested that this Kamar¬ 
nava and Vinayaditya are mentioned in the Conjeeveram inscrip¬ 
tion of Jata Choda-Bhima, dated A.D. 982, as having been killed by 
that chief. 30 The next king was Kamarnava’s son Vajrahasta who 
is the same as Vajrahasta-Aniyahkabhlma of the first account. It 
will be seen presently that we are on surer grounds from this reign. 
The account of the predecessors of this king up to Gunarnava (Guna- 
maharnava) is extremely doubtful at least in regard to details, while 
the tradition about the earlier history of the family, not found in 
the earlier account, seems to have been entirely fabricated. Some 
scholars find in the reference to the construction of the city called 
Nagara a historical allusion to the foundation of Kalinganagara. This 
is impossible in view of the fact that the builder of Nagara is placed 
about eight generations before a king who was crowned in A.D. 1038, 
while the city of Kalinganagara is known to have existed at least as 
early as the sixth century A.D. 

If Vajrahasta-Aniyahkabhlma (35 years) was succeeded by his 
three sons, Kamarnava (6 months), Gundama (3 years) and Madhu- 
kamamava (19 years) who was followed by Vajrahasta-Ananta- 
varm'an, crowned in A.D. 1038, the regnal periods of these kings may 
have been as follows: Vajrahasta-Aniyahkabhlma, A.D. 980-1015; 
Kamarnava, A.D. 1015-16; Gundama, A.D. 1016-19; Madhukamar- 
nava, A.D. 1019-38. This chronology appears to be supported by 
epigraphic evidence. To Vajrahasta-Aniyahkabhlma (son of Kamar¬ 
nava), A.D. 980-1015, no doubt is; to be assigned the Ponduru grant 
issued by king Vajrahasta, son of Kamarnava, in the Ganga year 
500 (A.D. 996-998). 31 The Mandasa grant of the Kadamba chief 
Dharmakhedi, son of Bhimakhe^i, was issued during the reign of the 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Ganga king Ananta-varman in the Saka year navasatakasaptarasa. 
Navasataka no doubt indicates 900 and saptarasa is probably a 
hybrid Sanskrit-Prakrit word standing midway between Sanskrit 
saptadasa and Prakrit sattarasa meaning 17. 32 This epigraph, dated 
in Saka 917 (A.D. 995) and referring to the Ganga king Ananta- 
varman, suggests that Vajrahasta-Aniyahkabhima, like his grandson, 
was also known as Ananta-varman. The suggestion seems to be 
supported by the Chicacole grant of the Ganga year 526 (A.D. 1022 
24) which was issued by the Ganga king Madhukamarnava repre¬ 
sented in the record as the son of Ananta-varman. This king is 
apparently no other than Madhukamarnava who was the son of 
Vajrahasta-Aniyahkabhima and ruled in A.D. 1019-38. The Kadamba 
chief Dharmakhedi, who issued the Mandasa grant in A.D. 995, later 
issued the Santa-Bommali charter 33 in the Ganga year 520 (A.D. 
1016-18) during the reign of t*he Ganga king Devendra-varman, son 
of Ananta-varman (Vajrahasta-Aniyahkabhima). Devendra-varman 
seems to have been a second name of either Kamarnava (A.D. 1015- 
16) or Gundama (A.D. 1016-19) who were both sons of Vajrahasta- 
Aniyahkabhlma-Ananta-varman. 

The later history of the family from Vajrahasta-Ananta-varman 
(crowned in A.D. 1038), who is styled Vajrahasta III (according to 
the genealogy given in his own records) or Vajrahasta V (according 
to the fabricated genealogy found in the later records of his suc¬ 
cessors) and was the real founder of the family’s greatness, will be 
discussed in the next volume. But we might consider here the plausi¬ 
ble suggestion that the rise of the Greater Gangas was a result of the 
Chola expedition against Kalinga in the reign of Rajaraja Chola 
(A.D. 985-1016). Rajaraja Choja claims to have conquered Kalinga 
some time before A.D. 1003, 34 while his son Rajendra is known to 
have set up pillars of victory, 35 probably during his father’s reign, 
on Mount Mahendra in Kalinga. The omission of Kalinga in the 
list of countries conquered by Rajendra Chola’s generals shortly be¬ 
fore A.D. 1023 36 seems to suggest that the Ganga king was then 
regarded as a subordinate ally of the Cholas. The Greater Gangas, 
who gained power probably under the patronage of the Chola con¬ 
querors, are known to have employed Chola officials and contracted 
matrimonial alliances with the Cholas. The Vaidumba relative of 
Vajrahasta-Aniyankabhlma-Ananta-varman might have been Vishnu- 
deva Duraiarasan who was a feudatory of Rajaraja Chola and is 
known from an inscription of A.D. 992. 37 

3. The Ganga House of Svctaka 

Reference has already been made to the rise of the viceregal 
Ganga house of Svetaka, no doubt at the expense, and owing to the 


THE DECCAN 


weakness, of the Ganga kings of Kalinganagara. 38 The earliest 
known .rulers of the Svetaka house were Jaya-varman (Ganga years 
100 and 120 falling in A.D. 596-616) and Samanta-varman (Ganga 
year 165 or 185). A group of later rulers of Svetaka were Mahindra- 
varman, his son Prithvl-varman, and the latter’s sons Indra-varman 
and Danarnava. King Bhupendra-varman, son of Kailasa, seems to 
be a later member of the same house which probably continued 
its separate existence till the last quarter of the eleventh century. 
The last ruler of the Svetaka house appears to have been king 
Devendra-varman mentioned as the overlord of Kadamba Udaya- 
ditya, son of Dharmakhedi, in the Kambakaya grant probably dated 
in &aka 1003 (A.D. 1081). 33 He is also known from the Gara inscrip¬ 
tion 40 of an uncertain date, the Draksharama inscription 41 of Kulot- 
tuhga Chola’s 33rd regnal year (A.D. 1103), and the Kalingattuparcmi. 
A recently discovered copper-plate grant was issued in Saka 988 
(A.D. 1066) during this king’s reign. The Svetaka house appears 
to have been completely extirpated by Anantavarman Chodaganga 
about the close of the eleventh century. 

4. The Kadambas of Jayantydpura 

We have referred to the Mandasa and Santa-Bommali grants 
of the Kadamba chief Dharmakhedi issued during the reigns of 
Vajrahasta-Aniyankabhlma-Ananta-varman and Devendra-varman 
(Kamarnava or Gundama) in the period A.D. 995-1018. Like their 
overlords, these Eastern Kadambas appear to have represented a 
branch of a western ruling house, viz. the Kadamba family of the 
Kanarese country. R&naka Mahdmandalesvara Dharmakhedi, son of 
Bhlmakhedi and grandson of Niyarnava, ruled over five districts 
from his capital at Jayantyapura. Dharmakhedi’s grandfather 
Niyarnava seems to be no other than the Ranaka Niyarnama men¬ 
tioned as the father of Mahadevi Vijya in a record of Rdnaka Rana- 
bhanja (son of Satrubhanja and grandson of Silabhanja) who ruled 
Khinjali -mandala from Dhritipura. Reference has already been made 
to Udayaditya who was a son of Dharmakhedi and a feudatory 
of Ganga Devendra-varman, probably of Svetaka, and issued the 
Kambakaya grant in A.D. 1081. A Parlakimedi inscription 42 of the 
time of Vajrahasta (crowned A.D. 1038) refers to a feudatory named 
Ugrakhedi of the Nidusanti clan and the Kadamba family. This 
epigraph also contains a later record of Ranyaka Udayakhedi who is 
possibly the same as Udayaditya of the Kambakaya grant. A recent¬ 
ly discovered copper-plate grant of A.D. 1066 mentions Bhlmakhedi, 
son of Dharmakhedi, as a feudatory of Ganga Devendra-varman, 
probably of Svetaka. Nothing is known about these Eastern 
Kadambas after the eleventh century A.D. 

145 

a.i.k.— io 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


in. THE SOMAVAMSIS 

•The early history of the Pan<J uvamsa, also called the family of 
the Moon (Somavamsa), which ruled in South Kosala with Sripura 
(modern Sirpur in Raipur District) as the capital, has been already 
discussed. 43 The rulers of this family were called lords of Kosala, 
although their records have been mostly found in the western part 
of this janapada , 44 Their early charters had the Vaishnavite emblem 
of Garu^a on their seal while the later ones bore the Saiva symbol 
of the couchant bull. Little is known of this family after king 
6ivagupta (Mahaiivagixpta) Balarjuna, who seems to have flourished 
at the close of the sixth and the first half of the seventh century 
A.D. 46 Another group of kings, some of whom bore the names Siva- 
gupta and Mahasivagupta and had names ending in the word kesarin 
(like some members of the Pan<Juvarhsa), is also known to have 
claimed descent from the Somavamsa (family of the Moon) and suze¬ 
rainty over Kosala. The records of the early members of this family, 
which have been found in the Sambalpur tract in the eastern part 
of the ancient South Kosala country, cannot, however, be assigned 
to any date earlier than the tenth century. The kings moreover 
have the distinctive epithet Trikalingadhipati, and never claim to 
have been descended from the Pantjuvam^a. The seal of their early 
records bears not the Garuda or the bull emblem but the Gaja- 
lakshml symbol (although they were &aivas) like that of the Sara- 
bhapunyas and the Kalachuris. The relations of the Somavamsls 
und6r discussion with the earlier ruling families of South Kosala 
cannot be definitely determined in the present state of insufficient 
information. 

The founder of this later Somavamsa was king Sivagupta. His 
records have not yet been discovered but he has been assigned im¬ 
perial epithets in the records of his son. That the later members 
did not regard him as the founder of the family seems to indicate 
that his son and not he was the real founder of the family’s great¬ 
ness. His reign may be roughly assigned to the first half of the 
tenth century (c. A.D. 915-35). It has been suggested that he was 
possibly the Kosala king from whom Mugdhatunga, the Kalachuri 
king of .Tripurl (in Dahala or the Jubbulpore region), claims to have 
conquered a locality called Pall which has been identified with a 
village of that name near Ratanpur in the Bilaspur District. If the 
early members of the Somavamsa actually held sway over Chhat- 
tisgarh, they must have been gradually ousted from that area by the 
Kalachuris of Dahala, although permanent occupation of Chhat- 
tisgarh by the Kalachuris has to be assigned to the eleventh centurv 

«7 * 

146 


THE DECCAN 


Sivagupta was succeeded by his son Janamejaya Mahabhava- 
gupta I alias Dharma-kandarpa (c. A.D. 935-70) whose earliest and 
latest records (dated in the regnal years 3 and 34) were issued from. 
Suvarnapura (modem Sonpur in the old Sonpur State). Some other 
charters of the king were issued from such places as Murasima. 
(modern Mursinga in the old Patna State) and Arama (supposed to 
have been a pleasure garden near Suvarnapura). The king who 
was a devout worshipper of Mahesvara (Siva) is sometimes specifi¬ 
cally mentioned as king of Kosala, and some of the villages granted 
by him are said to have been situated in Kosaladesa. According to 
the Bhuvaneswar inscription of Uddyotakesarin, Mahabhavagupta I 
captured the royal fortune of the king of the Odra country, roughly 
corresponding to the lower part of modern Orissa, which was in this 
age under the rulers of the Kara dynasty. This king, like other mem¬ 
bers of the family, called himself “the lord of Trikalinga.” 46 As has 
been pointed out above, it is not definitely known whether the name 
Trikalinga indicated three countries (e.g. Kosala, Kalihga, and Utkala 
or Odra) collectively, or a particular tract of land lying probably 
between Kalihga - and South Kosala. But, as has been indicated 
above, the country of Utkala or Odra was in this age comprised in 
the dominions of the Karas with whom the Somavamsi monarch may 
have come into conflict. The exact boundaries of the dominions of 
Janameyaja Mahabhavagupta I cannot be determined. Kalachuri 
Lakshmanaraja, who ruled about the third quarter of the tenth cen¬ 
tury and claimed to Have defeated the lord of Kosala, possibly came 
into conflict with thfs king. 

An important official of the king was his minister for war and 
peace, named Malladatta, who was the son of Dharadatta and served 
the Somavamsi ruler at least from the sixth do the thirty-first year 
of his reign. Malladatta was succeeded in the office by a second 
Dharadatta who was probably his son. The history of the ministe¬ 
rial family of the Dattas, which solves a number of problems in the 
genealogy of the Somavamsi rulers, illustrates the interesting an¬ 
cient Indian custom of the hereditary appointment of ministers re¬ 
ferred to in the Udayagiri inscription of Chandra-gupta II of the 
Gupta dynasty. 

Janamejaya Mahabhavagupta I was succeeded, some time after 
his thirty-fourth regnal year, by his son Yayati Mahasivagupta I, 
who assumed the title Paramamahesvara like his father, and seems to 
have ruled in the second half of the tenth century (c. A.D. 070-1000). 
The earlier records of this king were issued from Vinitapura which 
has been identified with modern Binka in the old Sonpur State; but 
the charters dated in his twenty-fourth and twenty-eighth regnal 


147 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


years are found to have been issued from Yayatinagara on the Maha- 
nadl, a city apparently founded by, and named after, the king. Some 
writers believe that Yayatinagara was the name given by king 
Yayati Mahasivagupta I to Vinitapura. His charters, like those of 
his father, often record gifts of land specifically in Kosala or Dak- 
shina Kosala, although an inscription 47 of his ninth regnal year is 
known to record the grant of a village in South Tosala which formed 
an integral part of the dominions of the Karas. In one of his char¬ 
ters, an official of the king is specially mentioned as the Sandhi - 
vigrahin of Kosaladesa. Dharadatta II, who served Janamejaya as 
minister for war and peace during the later years of his reign, con¬ 
tinued in office till at least the twenty-fourth regnal year of Yayati, 
and was later succeeded as minister for war and peace by another 
member of the Datta family, named Simhadatta, who was the son 
of Harshadatta and probably a grandson of Dharadatta II. 

The latest known record of Yayati Mahasivagupta I is dated in 
his twenty-eighth regnal year. The later records of the king des¬ 
cribe him as having captured 32 big elephants and defeated a certain 
ruler named Ajapala of whom nothing is known. 

A short supplement, comprising three verses, engraved at the end 
of a charter of Yayati Mahasivagupta, 48 tells us that a king of Kosala 
of the lunar dynasty (soma-kula), named Svabhavatuhga, defeated 
the Chaidyas or Kalachuris of Dahala (modern Jubbulpore region). 
It seems further to say that certain lieutenants of the Chedi (Kala- 
churi) king, headed by Bhatfa-Pedi, were honoured by their master 
for invading the Somavamsi kingdom and carrying away a number 
of women, but that the Somavamsi monarch, aided by a general 
named Lakshmaiia, pursued the Chedi forces into the enemy’s terri¬ 
tory, killed Bhatfa-Pe<Ji and rescued the captured women. It also des¬ 
cribes how Svabhavatunga’s son (whose name is not mentioned) 
cared little for the Chaidya (Kalachuri king) named Durgaraja and 
burnt the land of Dahala (the Chedi country) rendering it depopu¬ 
lated. v 

As the only Somavamsi king mentioned in these supplementary 
verses is Svabhavatuhga, it may be regarded as another name of 
Yayati Mahasivagupta I himself. If this identity be presumed, we 
get valuable information regarding the political relations between 
the Somavamsis and the Kalachuris in the latter half of the tenth 
century A.D. 

The unpublished Baud plates of the Kara queen Prithvlmahadevl 
alias Tribhuvanamahadevi II, dated in the year 158 of the Kara era, 
state that shejvas the daughter of king Svabhavatuhga of the lunar 


148 


THE DECCAN 


dynasty of Kosala, who fnay be none other than the Somavamil 
monarch mentioned above, and therefore identical with Yayati 
Mahasivagupta I. We have seen above how this SomavaihsI king 
granted in his ninth regnal year a village in. the Kara territory. 
Another inscription of the same king records the grant of a village 
in the Gandhatapatl (modern Gandharadhi in the old Baud State) 
mandala (district), apparently named after 6atrubhahja I Gandhafa 
of the Bhahja dynasty of Dhritipura, which owed allegiance to the 
Karas. This seems to suggest that it was Yayati Mahasivagupta I 
who was responsible for driving the descendants of &atrubhanja’s 
son Ranabhanja from Dhritipura in Upper Orissa to Vahjulvaka in 
the Ganjam region. 43 These two facts, pointing to the success of 
Yayati Mahasivagupta I against the Karas, do not appear to be un¬ 
connected with his daughter’s accession to the Kara throne which, 
as noted above, was a disputed one. It is very probable that Ppithvl- 
mahadevl succeeded in occupying the Kara kingdom with the active 
help of her father Yayati Mahasivagupta I. Possibly in connection 
with his successful campaign against his daughter’s rivals for the 
Kara throne the SomavamsI monarch granted the village of Chandra- 
grama in Dakshina-Tosala, identified with modem Chandgan, about 
32 miles from Cuttack. 60 It may be, pointed out in this connection 
that the year 158 of the Kara era, when Ppithvimahadevl was on the 
throne, does not appear to have been far removed from the ninth 
regnal year of Yayati Mahasivagupta I. 61 


1. El, VI. 208. 

2. Eastern Chalukyas, 44. 

3. El, VI. 242. 

4. El, XXII. 105. 

5. Some scholars, however, identify it with modern Cunbum in Kurnool District. 

6. El IX. 39. 

7. El, XVIII. 107. 

8. Some scholars interpret rattesa-saihchodita as “ordered by the Rashtrakuta 
king’’ whom they identify with Amoghavarsha I. They hold that after the 
death of this king, Vijavaditya threw off his allegiance to the Rash^rakutas and 
thus war endued with Krishna II. 

9. ARSIE, 1913, p. 131. 

10. Ibid, 1909, p. 108. 

11. Ibid, 1924, pp. 10, 98. 

12. Ibid, 1917, p. 117. 

13. El, IX. 47. 

14. I A, VII. 18. 

15. El, VII. 177. 

16. EC, VI. 49. 

17. This is based on the reconstruction of the history of Ja{a Ghoda-Bhlma by 
Dr. N. Venkataramanayya (PIHC, III. 605 ff). See now the same author’s The 
Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi, pp. 200 ff. Cf. also B.V. Krishna Rao, JAHRS, X. 16. 

18. See Vol. Ill, pp. 215 ff. 

19. El, III. 18. 

20. El, XVin. 312. 

21. 3h. List, No. 2051. 

22. 1A, XIV. 11. 


149 


/ 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

23 He is said to have been the son of Vajrl (Vajrahasta). See Bh. List, p. 386. 

24. JASL, XVIII. 77. 

25. JAHRS, XX. 161. 

26. Bh. List, No. 1090. 

27. Ibid, No. 1091. 

28. Ibid, No. 1103. See El, XXVIII. 235ff; ARS1E, 1935-6, pp. 61-3. 

20. There is absolutely no evidence in favour of the conjecture that the Gahgas 

were the descendants of the ancient people called Gangaridae by classical writers. 

For the Indian name of the Gangaridae, see Sircar, ‘The City of Gahga’, 

PIHC, 1947, pp. 91-98. 

30. The two kings, who are also mentioned in the earlier account, lost their lives 
respectively about A.D. 977 and 980. They probably fought with the Telugu- 
Choda king on behalf of the Eastern Chalukyas. 

31. JKHRS, I. 219. 

32. The expression is usually taken to be a combination of the words sapta (7) 
and rasa (6). In that case the date may be Saka 913 (A.D. 991). But I have 
no doubt that saptarasa stands for 17. See JKHRS, I. 219-21. 

33. Bh. List. No. 2053. 

34. EC, X. Mb. 123. 

35. El, VI. 347. 

36. El, IX. 229. 

37. Sewell, HISI, 54. 

38. See Vol. Ill, p. 217. 

39 JKHRS 1 I 219 

40. ARSIE, 1932-3, pp. 56-7. If the inscription is really dated in Saka 1005 
(A.D. 1083) and in the 7th regnal year of the king, his name Devendravarman 
may be regarded as a mistake for Anantavarman (i.e. Chodagariga, son of Raja- 
raja I Devendra-varman, c. A.D. 1070-78). 

41. El, XXII. 138 ff. 

42. El, III. 223. 

43. Vol. Ill, pp. 220 ff. 

44. A recently discovered record, dated in the 57th regnal year of Balarjuna, con¬ 
tains the names of two villages which have been located in the old Kalahandi 
State. This probably suggests that the rule of the Panduvarhsis extended over 
the eastern part of the janapada as well (JKHRS, I. 265-6). In El, XXVIII. 
322-3, the villages have been located in Sambalpur District, Orissa. 

45. Vol. Ill, p. 222. 

46. The published eye-copy (JRASB, L. XIII. 74) of the Bhuvaneswar Inscription 
(1.2) suggests the reading of a word in a damaged section as triling-ddhipa in 
connection with this king. It is uncertain whether Janamejaya is himself called 
the lord of Trilinga or one who defeated the Trilinga king. 

47. El, III. 351; Misra, Dynasties of Medieval Orissa, pp. 63 ff. 

48. It was originally published in JPASB, 1905, pp. 14-16. See now JASL, XIX. 
117 ff. 

49. IHQ, XXVIII. 227; also cf. above, Ch. IV. III. 2. 

50. Misra, Dyn. Med. Orissa, p. 68. 

51. The Daspalla plates of 6atrubhanja, recently edited in El, offer astronomical 
details suggesting the beginning of the era in A.D. 831. Cf. IHQ, XXIX. 148 ff. 
[This is not compatible with the view of Kara chronology adopted above on 
p. 63. Cf. also p. 79, fn. 33.—Ed.] 


150 


CHAPTER VII 


SOUTH INDIA 

I. THE PALLAVAS 

1. Danti-varman and Nandi-varman III 

Danti-varman, whose inscriptions range from his second to his 
fifty-first regnal year and cover a large part of the Pallava dominions, 
was the son of Nandi-varman II Pallavamalla by Reva (Rkvaka), 
the Rashtrakuta princess. Danti-varman, who was thus the grand¬ 
son of Dantidurga Rashtrakuta, married a Kadamba princess. About 
A.D. 804 Rashtrakuta Govinda III invaded Kanchl which had earlier 
been attacked by his predecessor, Dhruva. We do not know how the 
relations between the Pallavas and the Rashtrakutas changed for 
the worse. An inscription in Tamil of Danti-varman in the Partha- 
sarathi temple, Triplicane (Madras), describes him as “the orna¬ 
ment of the Pallava family,” belonging to the Bharadvaja gotta, 
the gotra of the previous Pallava sovereigns as well. This record 
proves the antiquity of that temple which was built by an earlier 
Pallava ruler. The reign of Danti-varman witnessed a recrudescence 
of the Pandya aggression, and Varaguna I occupied the Kaveri ! 
region. The inscriptions of Danti-varman are significantly ^absent 
from that region from his sixteenth regnal year to the end of his 
reign, while some records of the Pan<Jya king are found there. The 
Banas were feudatory to Danti-varman. 

Danti-varman’s son, Nandi-varman III, known by his conspicuous 
surname of TeUarrerinda, worshipped &iva, patronised Tamil lite¬ 
rary savants like Perundevanar, author of the BhcLratavenba, 
and married £ankha, the daughter of Amoghavarsha I Rashtrakuta. 
Nandi-varman’s other surnames like Avani-naranan, Varatungan and 
Ugrakopan are mentioned in a contemporary Tamil work, the 
Nandikkalambakam. It throws a flood of light on his. military 
activities—his achievements at Tellaru (North Arcot District) and 
several other battle-fields. It is clear that Nandi-varman III heroi¬ 
cally rolled back the swelling tide of Fan<Jya aggression, which had 
come to a head during his predecessor’s reign; he inflicted a deci¬ 
sive defeat on the enemy at Tellaru and pursued him, it is said, to 
the banks of the Vaigai. The battle of Tellaru must have been 
fought early in the reign of Nandi-varman, seeing that it is described 
in his Velurpalaiyam plates issued in his sixth regnal year. The 
literary work referred to above mentions him as the ruler of the 


151 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Kaveri region, the Kongudesa, etc., and enumerates his chief cities 
Kanchl, Mallai (Mahabalipuram) and Mayilai (Mylapore, Madras). 
Like Danti-varman, Nandi-varman was the overlord of the Banas. 

2. Nripatunga-varman and Apardjita 

Nripatunga-varman, the son of Nandi-varman III by the Rash- 
trakuta princess, maintained the integrity of his empire and received 
the allegiance of the Banas. His inscriptions are found as far south 
as Pudukkottai. His warlike policy towards the Pandyas was suc¬ 
cessful. His Bahtir (Vahur, near Pondicherry) plates record his 
victory over them on the banks of the Arichit (Arisil or Arasalar, 
a distributary of the^ Kaveri). This battle is regarded by Jouveau 
Dubreuil to have taken place at Kudamukku or Kumbhakonam. 
The Bahur plates mention the grant of three villages by the minister 
of Nrinatunga-varman in the eighth regnal year to a Vidyasthdna 
or Vedic college as a Vidvabhoqam i.e., for the promotion of learning, 
and as Brahmadeya. According to one interpretation of verses 
24 to 26. the college made provision for the study of fourteen divi¬ 
sions of learning, viz. four Vedas, six Ahgas, Mlmamsa, Nyaya, 
Pur ana, and Dharmasastra. Whatever may be the correct inter¬ 
pretation of the word in question viz. choturddasa-gana , there is no 
doubt that the Ghatikd of the earlier period developed into the 
Vidvfisfhjnna of the ninth centurv A.D. In the sphere of education, as 
in other fWds. the Pallavas anticipated the great achievements of the 
Cholas of Taniore and Gahgaikondacholapuram. 

Aparajita is the last known prince belonging to the imperial 
line of the Pallavas. His name is connected with a great victory 
and a decisive defeat. The campaign against the Pandyas culmi¬ 
nated in their defeat at &rlpurambiyam near Kumbhakonam about 
A.D. 880. The victorious Pallavas were aided by their feudatories 
Prithvlpati I (Western Gariga) and Aditya I (Chola). “At the head 
of the great battle of Sripurambiyam this hero (Prithvlpati I) quickly 
defeated Varaguna II, the lord of the Pandyas, and having, at the ex¬ 
pense of his own life, secured that his friend was Aparajita (uncon¬ 
quered) in fact as in name, he ascended to heaven.” 1 The battle of 
Sripurambiyam or Tiruppurambiyam is an epic event in South Indian 
history. The imperial position of the Pandyas was completely lost, 
but their imperial successors were not the Pallavas, who were soon 
after overthrown by the Cholas under Aditya I. At his hands the 
victorious Aparajita suffered defeat about A.D. 893 and the victor 

became master of Tondamandalam. 

• • • • 

With Aparajita, the Pallava imperial line came to an end. 
There were branches of the dynasty like the Nolamba-Pallavas or. 


SOUTH INDIA 


IYolambas holding sway over the region called Nolambavadi. But 
in Tondamandalam, the main theatre of Pallava glory, we find in the 
thirteenth century a great chieftain named Ko-Peruhjihga who defied 
the Chola authority in the days of its decline. He claimed Pallava 
descent, but we cannot connect him genealogically with the imperial 
Pallavas. 


II. THE CHOLAS OF TANJORE 
1. Vijaydlaya and Aditya 1 

The founder of the Cho}a dynasty of Tanjore was Vijayalaya, 
a feudatory of the Pallavas. His dynasty rose to high eminence 
and lasted for more than two centuries. Vijayalaya rose to power 
near Uraiyur, the capital of the Cholas of the Sangam Age. ' An 
inscription at Tirunedungajam (Tiruchirapalli District) records 
a gift of land in accordance with the orders of Parakesari Vija¬ 
yalaya Choladeva. The titles Parakesari and Rajakesari were alter¬ 
nately assumed by the Choja sovereigns from the time of Vija¬ 
yalaya. Though he cannot be connected genealogically with the 
Cholas of Uraiyur (Karikala and his successors), his rise in the 
Uraiyur region is not without significance. He may be assigned 
to the period, c. A.D. 850-871, and his son and successor Aditya I 
to c. A.D. 871-907. Vijayalaya captured Tanjore from the Mutta- 
raiyar, who had their headquarters at &endalai, near Tanjore. 
They were for long feudatories of the imperial P^Jlavas and were 
now under the Pandyas. As there was hostility and open conflict 
between the Pallavas and the Pandyas, Vijayalaya, a feudatory 
of the Pallavas, felt justified in seizing Tanjore from the *Mutta- 
raiyar oh behalf of his overlord. It is also probable that he took 
advantage of the political confusion in the Kaverl region, the bor¬ 
derland between the Pallava and Pandya kingdoms, in order to 
promote his own interests. After the conquest of Tanjore, Vija¬ 
yalaya built a temple there for Durga; and his successors also were 
staunch £aivas. The territory acquired by him extended between 
the North and South Vellar rivers along the lower course of the 
Kaverl and the Coleroon. 

Aditya I (c. A.D. 871-907), the son and successor of Vijayalaya, 
took part in the great battle of Sripurambiyam in which, as men¬ 
tioned above, the Pandyas were defeated by his Pallava suzerain. 
He reaped the fruits of the victory and obtained additions to his 
territory near Tanjore from the grateful king Aparajita. But 
Aditya’s loyalty did not long endure. Not long afterwards he 
fought with his overlord and defeated him. An inscription states 
that in a battle Aditya “pounced upon and slew the Pallava king 


158 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


who was seated on the back of a tall elephant” and that he earned 
the surname of Kodandarama. This event, which may be assigned 
to about A.D. 893, gave Aditya mastery over Tondamandalam. 
Subsequently he conquered the Kongudesa (the districts of Coim¬ 
batore and Salem) from the Pandyas and the Western Gangas pro¬ 
bably with the aid of the Chera king, Sthanu Ravi, with whom he 
maintained cordial relations. Aditya is also credited with the sei¬ 
zure of Talakad the capital of the Western Gangas. Prithvlpati II 
recognised the overlordship of Aditya, whose kingdom now stret¬ 
ched from Kalahasti and Tirukkalukkunram to Pudukkottai and 

* •• »• • • 

Coimbatore and included Talakad. Aditya married a Pallava 
princess and had two sons Parantaka and Kannaradeva. He built 
several temples for Siva. Though the nucleus of the Chola king¬ 
dom was created by Vijayalaya, the real founder of its power was 
Aditya I, a prince of striking ability, energy, and wisdom. 

2. Pardntaka I 

Aditya was succeeded by his son Parantaka who ruled for more 
than forty-five years (A.D. 907-953). The date of his accession is 
definitely known and may be said to be the bed-rock of Chola chro¬ 
nology. The reign of Parantaka was an eventful one and he led 
numerous military campaigns with the help of his allies, viz. the 
Western Gangas, the Kerala ruler and the Kodumbalur chiefs. By 
these successful wars he built up the Chola Empire which attained 
the pinnacle of fame and glory under his successors. 

The most important among the conquests of Parantaka was 
Madura, and it was achieved gradually during the first half of his 
long reign. Soon after his accession to the throne he raided Madura 
and won the title of Madhurantaka or destroyer of Madura. In his 
third regnal year he assumed the title of Maduraikonda or captor 
of Madura. Consequent on his defeat, the Pandya king, Rajasimha II, 
sought and obtained the aid of the Ceylonese ruler. About A.D. 
915 a famous battle was fought at Vellur (south-west of Madura) 
where the Pandyas and the Sinhalese were beaten. A third cam¬ 
paign effected the expulsion of Rajasimha about A.D. 920, and three 
years later Parantaka described himself as Maduraiyum llamum 
Koiida or captor of Madura and Ceylon. But towards the close of 
his reign, he failed in his attempt to obtain from the Ceylonese ruler 
the insignia of Pandya royalty left with him by Rajasimha, who 
had fled to Kerala. The conquest of Madura was, however, by no 
means easy, and Parantaka was engaged throughout the latter half 
of his reign in reducing tlhe conquered country to order and obedi¬ 
ence. In subduing Madurai, he received the help of the Kerala ruler 
and of the Kodumbalur chiefs. 


154 


SOUTH INDIA 


About A.D. 915 the Banas were ‘uprooted’ by Parantaka with 
the aid of Prithvlpati II, the Western Gahga ruler, upon whom 
were conferred the titles of Banadhirdja, Hastimalla and Sembiyan 
Mdvalivdnardyan. About A.D. 915 Parantaka also defeated the 
Vaidumbas of the Renan^u country who were the allies of the 
Banas. The coalition was perhaps headed by Rashtrakuta Krishna 
II, and the decisive victory was won by Parantaka in a battle 
at Vallala (Tiruvallam, N. Arcot District). Parantaka smashed the 
remains of the Pallava power and conquered the country as far 
north as Nellore. By these successive victories, he enlarged his 
empire which extended from the North Pennar to Cape Comorin 
and was bounded on the west by the Chera and Western Gahga 
kingdoms. 

Not long after the Cholas had thus extended their power far 
and wide, the Rashtrakuta king Krishna III invaded Tondamandalam 
with the support of Butuga II, the Western Gahga chief. A decisive 
engagement took place at Takkolam in A.D. 949 in which the Chojas 
were completely defeated and the crown-prince Rajaditya lost his 
life. It was the death knell of the imperialist ambitions of Paran¬ 
taka, who lost Tondamandalam as well as his control over the 
Pandya country. 

Eleven queens of Parantaka are mentioned in his inscriptions, 
and one of them was a Kerala princess. He had five sons—Raja¬ 
ditya, Gandaraditya, Arikulakesari, Uttamaslli and Arihjaya, the 
last being the son of the Kerala princess. Parantaka had also two 
daughters. He was devoted to Siva and constructed many temples. 
He provided the Nataraja shrine at Chidambaram with a gold roof. 
Some of his titles have been mentioned; his other titles are Para - 
kesari-varmanVlrantimyana, Devendra ChakravarU, Panditavatsala 
(one fond of learned men), Kunjaramalla or wrestler with elephants, 
and Surasiilamani or the crest-jewel of heroes. 

3. The Rashtrakuta Interregnum in Tondamandalam 

The Rashtrakuta invasion of Tondamandalam was not a bolt 
from the blue. It was the result of many factors such as the rapid 
territorial expansion of the Cholas, the aggressive policy of 
Parantaka I towards the Banas and the Vaidumbas, the death of 
Prithvlpati II in A.D. 940, followed by the accession to the Western 
Ganga throne of Butuga II, the husband of Krishna Ill’s sister, and 
above all, the growing power of Krishna III, the last great Rashtra¬ 
kuta ruler who possessed ability and enterprise and aimed at 
avenging the defeat of Krishna II at Vallala and rivalling the 
achievements in South India of Govinda III, the greatest of the 


155 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Rashtrakutas. The Banas and the Vaidumbas also appealed to 
Krishna against the rising tide of Chola aggression and imperialism. 
Parantaka I was not oblivious of the dangers inherent in his own 
policy and concentrated on the defences of Tondamandalam by 
entrusting its administration to his eldest son, Rajaditya. 

Krishna Ill’s invasion of Tondamandalam took place some time 
before A.D. 949, the date of the battle of Takkolam, fixed with 
reference to the Atakur inscription of Butuga II. The Atakur 
record says that “when Kannaradeva was fighting the Chola, 
Butuga made the howdah battle-field, and aimed at, pierced and 
killed Rajaditya.” Consequently the Cholas lost the battle, and 
Butuga II was lavishly rewarded with grant of territory by his 
grateful brother-in-law. We have already detailed the conse¬ 
quences of the Chola disaster at Takkolam. The Rashtrakuta 
occupation of Tondamandalam must have taken a few years and 
we have no genuine inscriptions of Krishna III in Tondamandalam 
earlier than A.D. 953. The Rashtrakuta interregnum must have 
lasted for at least fifteen years,—A.D. 953 to 968. During this 
period, ever a dozen inscriptions of Krishna III testify to the activity 
of the village assemblies at Uttaramerur, Ukkal, Kavanur, Tiruk- 
kalukkunram, Bahur, etc. This seems to indicate that the rule of 
the Rashfrakutas was not prejudicial to the progress of the Maha- 
sabha in Tondamandalam, the activity of which was characteristic of 
the reign of Parantaka I. Several inscriptions of Krishna found in 
Tondamandalam describe him as the captor of Kanchi and Tanj ore. 
Some records refer to the progress of the Rashtrakutas southwards 
through the Chola dominions as far as Ramesvaram, where a pillar 
of victory is said to have been erected. It is difficult to estimate 
the truth contained in such statements. Probably there were 
occasional raids into the southern Chola territory. But there are 
no inscriptions of Krishna III or of his feudatories, south of 
Pondicherry. Therefore the Rashtrakuta interregnum was most 
probably confined to Tondamandalam. 

4. Gandciraditya , Parantaka II, and Uttama Chola 

The interval between the death of Parantaka I (c. A.D. 953) and 
the accession of Rajaraja I in A.D. 985 is a confused period in Chola 
history.. The dynastic genealogy and chronology during that period 
are largely uncertain and the course of history is not sufficiently 
clear. Parantaka I was succeeded by his second son Gandaraditya, 
his eldest son having perished at Takkolam. Gandaraditya’s queen, 
Semhiyan MahadevI, who died in A.D. 1001, was a pious and chari¬ 
table lady fond of building temples and esteemed by all the members 
of the royal family, including Rajaraja I, who was the brother of 


156 



SOUTH INDIA 


Aditya II and son of Sundara Parantaka II (son of Gandaraditya's 
brother, Arihjaya). Uttama Chola was the son of Gandaraditya. 
During the short reign of the latter (A.D. 953*957) the need for 
recovering Tondamandalam was not lost sight of. He is regarded 
as the author of a single hymn on the Chidambaram temple. 

Gandaraditya was succeeded by Arihjaya and the latter in his 
turn by Sundara Chola or Parantaka II (A.D. 957-973). He was active 
against the Pandyas, who were independent under Vira Pandya* 
and the latter was defeated in spite of the Sinhalese aid he had 
secured. The Pandya war led to an expedition to Ceylon. In these 
military expeditions, the Kodumbalur chiefs 2 played an important 
part, and inscriptions portray the active role of prince Aditya II. 
In spite of the Chola success, the Pandya campaigns were, on the 
whole, indecisive. But Tondamandalam was recovered from the 
Rashtrakutas, It is significant that Sundara Chola died at Kahchl, 
and Vanavan MabadevI, the mother of Rajaraja I, committed sati. 
Another queen of Sundara Cho]a belonged to Kerala. He was a 
patron of literature, both Tamil and Sanskrit. A little before his 
death, his son Aditya II was murdered at the instigation of Uttama 
Chola, who coveted the throne, as he belonged to the senior branch 
of the royal family. 

Uttama Chola (A.D. 973-985) was the wicked son of his admira¬ 
ble parents, Gandaraditya and Sembiyan Mahadevl. Tondamandalam 
enjoyed peace after its recovery from the Rashfrakutas. The 
earliest Chola coin is a gold piece belonging to the reign of Uttama 
Chola. Five of his queens are mentioned in his inscriptions. His 
son was Madhurantaka Gandaraditya, but Rajaraja had been made 
the heir apparent of Uttama Chola. 

The reign of Rajaraja, which extended beyond the period under 
review, marks the beginning of that ascendancy which made the 
Chojas the paramount power over a large part of India. It will 
be therefore convenient to treat his history along with that of his 
successors in the next volume. 

III. THE FIRST PANDYA EMPIRE 
1. Nedunjadaiyan 

Nedufijadaiyan, the son of Maravarman Rajasimha I, is also 
known as Maranjadaiyan, Parantaka, Jafila or Jatilavarman and 
Varaguna I. His inscriptions range from his third to his forty-third 
regnal year, and it is not unreasonable to assign to him a regnal 
period of fifty years, A.D. 765-815. The Vejvikudi grant dated in 
his third regnal year possesses a unique importance. It gives an 


157 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KAJNAUJ 


account of the vicissitudes of the Pandya country from the time 
of its invasion and occupation by the Kalabhras. It tells us how 
Kaduhgon effected their overthrow and was followed by Avanisula- 
mani and Sendan; of Arikesari Maravarrnan and his great victory at 
Nelveli; his destruction of the Paravas and the people of Kurunadu 
and his triumphs over the Chera king at Puliyur; Kochchadaiyan’s 
victories at Marudur and Mangalore; and Maravarrnan Rajasiihha I’s 
numerous victories and his pre-eminent position. This account is 
followed by a description of the greatness of Neduhjadaiyan, who 
is called Panditavatsala and Pardntaka (destroyer of his enemies); 
he won a great victory over the Kadava (Fallava) at Penniagadam 
near Tanjore, on the southern bank of the Kaverl and crushed a 
rising of petty chieftains headed by Ayo-ve], the ruler of the moun¬ 
tainous country between Tirunelveli and Travancore. Then follows 
an account of the revival of the old grant of the village of Velvikudi, 
which had been abrogated by the Kalabhras. 

The Madras Museum plates of the seventeenth regnal year of 
Jafilavarman (Neduhjadaiyan) mention his further military succes¬ 
ses. He conquered the A^igamans of Tagadur (Dharmapuri, Salem 
District) and brought Kongudesa under his control in spite of the 
aid they had obtained from the Chera and Pallava rulers. He also 
annexed Venad or southern Travancore after the conquest of Vili- 
ham, but the conquered country was a source of trouble for a long 
time. He therefore strengthened his position by fortifying Kara- 
vandapuram or KaJakka<J (Tirunelveli District). He thus waged 
several wars during the first half of his reign. He was the greatest 
imperialist of his dynasty, and successfully encountered the opposi¬ 
tion of the Pallavas and the Cheras. His conquests made him the 
master of Tanjore, Tiruchirapalli, Salem and Coimbatore districts 
and also of Southern Travancore. He was an enthusiastic builder 
of temples for Siva and Vishnu, and some scholars connect his name 
with the Saiva saint, Manikkavasagar. The king’s uttaramantri or 
chief minister was Madhurakavi, who was succeeded by his bro¬ 
ther; the other members of his family were also in the service of 
Neduhjadaiyan. 

2. Srimdra Srwallabha and his Successors 

Srlmara Srlvallabha, the son of Neduhjadaiyan, may be assigned 
to the period A.D. 815-862. According to the larger Sinnamanur 
plates of Rajasiihha II, Srlmara won victories over a number of 
enemies. He assumed the titles Ekavira and Parachakrakolahala 
and combated a destructive invasion of the Pandya country caused 
by the intrigues of Mayapandya or the Pandya pretender. Srlmara is 
said to have fought at Vilinam and triumphed over the Kerala ruler. 8 


158 


SOUTH INDIA 


Above all, the Pandya king won a great victory at Kudamukku or 
Kumbhakonam against a combination of the Gahgas, Pallavas, Cho- 
las, Kalirigas, Magadhas and others. He was, however, subsequent¬ 
ly defeated at Tellaru by Nandi-varman III Pallava and at the 
Arichit by his successor Nripaturiga-varman. Srlmara was succeeded 
by Varaguna or Varaguna-varman II (c. A.D. 862-880) 4 wdio as noted 
above, sustained a crushing defeat about A.D. 880 at Sripurambiyam 
at the hands of Aparajita Pallava, assisted by Frithvlpati I Western 
Gahga and Aditya I Chola. It ruined Varaguna and the Pandya 
empire. 

Varaguna II was followed by Parantaka Viranarayana 
(c. A.D. 880-900). He triumphed at Kharagiri, destroyed Peninaga- 
dam, and waged war in Korigudesa, according to the larger Sinna- 
rrianur plates. His queen was Vanavan Mahadevi, a Kerala prin¬ 
cess. His son and successor was Mar a varman Rajasirhha II, the 
donor of the larger Sinnamanur record, who ruled from c. A.D. 900 
to c. A.D. 920. We have narrated above Parantaka I Chola’s con¬ 
quest of Madura and the defeat of Rajasiihha II followed by his 
flight first to Ceylon, where he left his crown and other valuables, 
and then to his mother’s home in Kerala. “Encircled by the fire of 
his (Parantaka’s) prowess, *he Pandya, as if desirous of cooling the 
heat caused by it, quickly entered the sea (embarked for Ceylon), 
abandoning his royal state and the kingdom inherited from his 
ancestors.” 5 

The battle of Takkolam in A.D. 949 created unrest in the 
Pandya country and led to the overthrow of the newly established 
Chola authority. Vira Pandya assumed, the title of ‘one who took 
the head of the Chola’ and triumphed for some time. It is suggested 
that the Chola king who was beheaded was Gandaraditya or Sun- 
dara Chola. But the expression Talaikonda may only mean that the 
defeated .king fell at the feet of the victor, and consequently Vira 
Pandya’s title may indicate no more than his victory over the Choja. 
He succeeded in frustrating Gandaraditya’s attempt to re-establish 
Chola authority in the Pandya country. But Sundara Chola defeat¬ 
ed Vira Pandya in the battle of Chevur arid forced him to seek refuge 
in the forests. The Tiruvalarigadu plates say that he was killed by 
Aditya II but according to the larger Leiden plates of Rajaraja I, 
“that young boy (Aditya) played sportively in battle (at Chevur) 
with Vira Pandya just as lion’s cub (does) with a rutting mad ele¬ 
phant proud of (its) strength.” There are not convincing reasons 
for believing that a Chola king’s head was cut off by Vira Pandya 
nor for accepting the statement that the latter was killed by 
Aditya II. We do not know whether IJttama Chola’s title of 


159 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Madhurdntcika was inherited by him, or whether he undertook any 
campaign against the Pan$yas. The fact that they were indepen¬ 
dent and powerful till their reconquest by Rajaraja I is clear from 
his Tanjore inscription (twenty-ninth regnal year) which states that 
he “deprived the Seliyas (Parujyas) of (their) splendour at the very 
moment when (they were) resplendent (to such a degree) that (they 
were) worthy to be worshipped everywhere.” 

IV. THE WESTERN GANGAS 

1. Sivamara II to Prithvipati II 

Although the Western Ganga kingdom became most prosperous 
under Srlpurusha and deserved the name of Srircijya } he did nothing' 
to remove the danger to it from the rise of the Rashtrakutas in the 
Deccan. Krishna I invaded Gahgavadi, was encamped at Manne 
in A.D. 768, and effected a military occupation of the country. 
Sripurusha had four sons: Sivamara II (A.D. 788-812), Vijayaditya, 
Duggamara and Sivagella, the last predeceasing his father. Dugga- 
mara disputed Sivamara’s succession but the latter triumphed with 
the support of his feudatory, Nolamba Sihgapota. Krishna 1 
Rashtrakuta was succeeded by Govinda II, whose vicious life and 
neglect of royal duties resulted in hn supersession by his younger 
brother, Dhruva (A.D. 780-793). Sivamara had espoused the cause 
of Govinda II. Therefore Dhruva invaded Gahgavadi, imprisoned 
Sivamara and appointed his own son Stambha as the Viceroy of 
Gahgavadi. Govinda III Rashfrakuta (A.D. 793-814) was confront¬ 
ed at his accession with the hostility of his eider brother Stambha 
in league with a number of neighbouring princes. The former 
released Sivamara from “the burden of his cruel chains” and sent 
him’ back to his country. But he asserted his independence and 
supported Stambha. Govinda overcame his brother but treated him 
generously by re-appointing him to the Western Ganga Viceroyalty 
and thus secured his loyalty permanently. Sivamara again became 
a prisoner but was released and reinstated as ruler of Gahgavadi 
so that his co-operation might be secured in Govinda’s campaigns 
against the Eastern Chalukyas. Sivamara was a very learned man. 
He mastered several subjects such as logic, philosophy, drama, 
grammar, etc., and composed the Gajasataka in Kannada. The 
vicissitudes of his fortunes during the time of Dhruva and Govinda 
III resulted in the partition of the Western Ganga kingdom between 
the son and the brother of Sivamara,—Marasimha and Vijayaditya. 
Thus was founded the collateral line of Marasimha I, whose brother 
was Prithvipati T. The latter’s son and grandson were Marasimha II 
and Prithvipati II. 


160 


SOUTH INDIA 


Govinda Hi was. succeeded by Amoy/havarsha 1 (A.D. 0X4-878), 
a young boy. Consequently the Rashtrakuta feudatories, including 
the Western Gahgas, revolted, and t ? ne boy-king was dethroned. 
From this anarchy the Rashfrakuta Empire was saved, as noted 
above, and Ainoghavarsha regained 7 nis regal position in A.D. 821. 
Though he waged war successfully with the Eastern Chalukyas 
about A.D. 860, he practically acquiesced in Western Gahga inde¬ 
pendence. 

Sivamara II was followed by his nephew (his brother Vijaya- 
ditya’s son) Rajamalla I (A.D„ 817-853),' 6 who continued the main 
branch of the Western Gahgas. He allied himself with the Nolambas 
by dynastic marriages and triecl to exploit the difficulties of Amogha- 
varsha I, who failed to achie ve his ambitious project of '"uprooting 
the lofty forest of fig trees of Gahgavadi difficult to be cut down.” 
The Rashtrakuta force invading Gahgavadi was withdrawn, and Raja- 
malla succeeded in restoring the integrity- of his kingdom. There¬ 
fore in his inscriptions he is likened to “Vishnu in the form of a 
Boar, rescuing the earth from the infernal regions.” 

Rajamalla I was suecceeded by his son Nitimarga 1. (A.D. 853- 
870) who continued with success the struggle for Western Gangs 
independence. He triumphed over the Banas and the Rashtrakutas. 
Amoghavarsha gave Ms daughter, Chandrobelabba, in marriage to 
B-utuga I, the younger* son of Nitimarga L His elder son, Raja- 
malla-II (A.D. 870-907), was ably assisted by his younger brother, 
Butuga I, in the wars, with the Eastern Chalukyas. The two bro¬ 
thers helped the Pallavsis against the Pandyas. Butuga predeceas¬ 
ed his brother, who was consequently succeeded by Nitimarga 11 
(A.D. 907-935), the son of Butuga I. Nitimarga II consolidated his 
position in Gahgavadi, and had three sons, Narasirhha, Rajamalla III, 
and Butuga II. After a short reign, Narasirhha was followed by Raja¬ 
malla III, who was ousted by Butuga II in A.D. 937. 

The collateral line of the Western Gahgas was represented by 
Prithvipati I (A.D. 853-880), son of Sivamara II, and by the former’s 
son Marasimha II (A.D. 880-900), and grandson, Prithvipati II 

(A.D. 900-940), ruling over Kolar and the north-eastern portions of 
Gahgavadi, A Bana king married Kundavvai, daughter of Prithvl- 
pati I. This Gahga ruler acquired fame by co-operating with the 
Pallavas against the Pandyas in the battle of ^ripurambiyam and 
dying on the battle-field. We have referred to Parantaka Ps cam¬ 
paign against the Banas and the help rendered to him by Prithvi¬ 
pati II, who gained the titles of Bdnddhirdja, Hastimalla, and gem- 
biyan Mdvaluxinarayan . According to his Udayendiram plates, Pa- 
rantaka “uprooted, ttfo Banas.” The death of Prithvipati II in 


161 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


A.D. 940 after the passing away of his son, Vikkiyanna or Vikrama- 
ditya, led to the enthronement of Butuga 11 in Gahgavadi with the 
aid of Krishna III Rashtrakuta,, their alliance resulting in the Chola 
catastrophe at Takkolam in A,LX 949. 

2. Butuga II io Rakkasa Gahga 

The Rashtrakuta king Amoghavarsha III (A.D. 936-939) was 
of a religious turn of mind, and consequently he handed over the 
administration to his energetic son, Krishna III (A.D. 939-967). 
His sister Revaka was married to Butuga II, who killed his brother 
Kajarnalla III, and became king of Gahgavadi. We have mentioned the 
part played by Butuga in the battle of Takkolam by killing Raja- 
ditya, and this service was rewarded by Krishna with the gift of the 
province of Banavasi. Butuga was proficient in Jain philosophy 
and is said to have triumphed over a Buddhist in doctrinal disputa¬ 
tion. In short, Butuga II played an active and successful role in the 
annals of Gahgavadi for more than twenty years, though he fully 
acknowledged the overlordship of the Rashtrakutas. He had a son 
named Maruladeva by Revaka; Manila died soon after his father and 
was succeeded by Marasimha III, Butuga’s son by another queen. 

Marasimha III (A.D. 960-974) was faithful to the Gahga-Rashtra- 
kuta alliance and co-operated with Krishna III in his campaigns in 
Gujarat and Malava, but failed in his attempt to restore Indra IV 
to the Rashtrakuta throne against the opposition of Taila II, the 
Western Chalukya king, Chamunda Raya, the Gahga general, 
captured Uchchangi, the chief stronghold of the Nolambas, Mara- 
siriiha’s campaign against them secured for him the title of Nolam- 
bakulaniaka or destroyer of the Nolamba family. Finally, he com¬ 
mitted Sallekhand, or suicide by starvation, in the Jain fashion. 

Marasimha III was succeeded by his elder son Rachamalla or 
Rajamaila IV (A.D. 974-985), Attempts at usurpation of the throne 
were foiled by Chamunda Raya, the great minister who was a good 
Jain and a famous general with the title of Viramdrtanda or sun 
among heroes, and Ranarahga-simha or lion on the battle-field. He 
had distinguished himself in the campaign against the Nolambas 
during the previous reign. He was a master of Kannada, Sanskrit 
and Prakrit. In A.D. 978 he wrote the Kannada work, the Chamunda 

* • e, 

Raya Pur ana which contains, among others, an account of the 
twenty-four Jain Tlrthankaras or prophets. About 982 he erected 
a hasti or Jain temple named after himself, at Sravana Belgoia. 
Above all, he executed about A.D. 983 a colossal statue of Comma- 
tesvara, “larger than any of the statues of Rameses in Egypt,” which 

162 


SOUTH INDIA 


“in daring conception and gigantic dimensions (561 feet in height) 
is without a rival in India/’ He truly earned the title of Raya. 

Rajamalla IV was followed by his younger brother, Rakkasa 
Gahga, during whose reign (A.D. 985-1024) the Cholas captured 
Talakad (A.D. 1004). His inscription, dated A.D. 1024, mentions 
Rajenclra Chola as his overlord, but gradually the Gahga rule came 
to an end. Some later Gahga chiefs are, however, known. A Gahga 
Raja was the minister of Vishnuvardhana Hoysala in the twelfth cen¬ 
tury, and another Gahga Raja of Sivasamudram defied Krishnadeva 
Raya of Vijayanagar early in the sixteenth century. 

V. THE BANAS 

i* 

The Banas were feudatory to the Pallavas under the successors 
of Nandi-varman Pallavamalla. The Western Gahgas and the Nolam- 
bas combined against the Banas, though Kundavvai, the daughter 
of the Gahga ruler Prithvipati I, was married to Vikramaditya I 
Sana or Banaviayadhara. Pie may be assigned to the period 
A.D. 868-890. In the battle at Soremati or Sorernacli (Anantapur 
District) about A.D. 878 the Western Gahgas and the Nolambas 
were defeated by the Banas and the Vaidumbas. An inscription 
of A.D. 892-93 records that the Nolamba chief Mahendra I, called 
Mahendradhiraja, destroyed the Banas, but the latter continued to 
be active. Their inscriptions of A.D. 898, 905 and 909 during the 
period of Vijayaditya II Bana are dated in the Saka era, and men¬ 
tion no overlord. He and his successor, Vikramaditya II, must have 
enjoyed an independent status. But soon the Banas came into con¬ 
flict with Parantaka I and we have narrated how he dealt with them 
and the consequences of his aggressive policy. Vikramaditya III 
Bana, described as the friend of Krishna (III), secured the support 
of the Rashtrakuta power against the Cholas, and joined the battle 
of Takkolam which resulted in the complete discomfiture of the 
Cholas in A.D. 949. Therefore Parantakta Ps ‘extirpation 5 of the 
Banas did not close their story. Their chiefs appear in South Indian 
history up to the sixteenth century and their movement from dis¬ 
trict to district (originally from Andhradesa) took them to the far 
south, inz. the Pandya country w 7 here they were Governors of Madura 
under the Rayas of Vijayanagar. The history of the Banas during 
more than a thousand years possesses a singular interest in that it 
Illustrates the survival of a tribe or dynasty by migration. 

VI. THE NOLAMBAS AND THE VAIDUMBAS 

The Nolambas or No]amba Pallavas (Nolambas claiming Pallava 
descent) ruled mainly over Nolambavadi 32,000 or the Chitaldrug 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

t 

district of Mysore. Their principal cities were Uchchangi, Iienjeru 
(Hemavati) and Chitaldrug. The Nolamba chief Singapota was feu¬ 
datory" to givamara II and the latter’s imprisonment by the Rasht- 
rakutas led to their control of the Nolambas. We have noticed 

e • 

Rajamalla Vs policy of dynastic marriages with them. Polalchora, 
the grandson of Singapota, married the daughter of Rajamalla I, 
and their son was Mahendra I. With the support of the Western 
Gahgas, he sent his general Kaduvetti Muttarasa to invade the Puli- 
nadu belonging to the Banas. They and the Vaidumbas were attack¬ 
ed at Soremati about A.D. 878 but the Nolambas were repulsed. 
Mahendra was subsequently killed in battle by Nltimarga II, who 
consequently assumed the title of Mahendmntaka or destroyer of 
Mahendra. His great-grandson, Nanni Nolamba, came into conflict 
with Marasimha III, who conquered and annexed Nojambavadi, and 
assumed the title of Nolambakulantaka. The Gahga victory was 
followed by a general massacre of the Nolambas, but three princes 
escaped and revived the fortunes of their dynasty after the death of 
Marasimha III in A.D. 974. 

The Vaidumbas were in possession of the Renandu (7000 coun¬ 
try) in the ninth century. The first known chief was Irigaya. Ganda 
Trinetra led the Vaidumba forces to the aid of the Banas against 
the Western Gahgas and the Nolambas at Soremati about A.D. 878. 
Apparently the Vadumbas were feudatory to the Banas. To the tenth 
century belongs Sandayan Tiruvayan I. Probably he Was the Vai¬ 
dumba chief defeated by Parantaka I Chola after his subjugation of 
the Ba-nas. Sandayan Tiruvayan II was known as Srlkantha. Like 
the Banas, after their defeat by the Cholas, the Vaidumbas appealed 
for help to the Rashtrakutas. Thus the Vaidumbas also had their 
share in compassing the ruin of the Chola empire at Takkolam in 
A.D. 949. Subsequently they entered the service of the Cholas. 
Armjaya Chola married a Vaidumba princess, and their son was 
Sundara Chola. 

■ t 

VII. ALUVAKHEDA, KONGUDE&A AND KERALA 

Chitravahana II (c. A.D. 800) and his successors ruled over 
Aiuvakheda for several centuries till it was annexed to the Hoysala 
kingdom in the fourteenth century. Kongudesa became the bone 
of contention between the Western Gahga, Pallava and Pandya 
imperialists, and we have noticed the overthrow of the AtRgamans 
of Tagadur by Neduhjadaiyan Pandya and the establishment of his 
authority in the Salem and Coimbatore Districts. Aditya I Chola 
annexed Kongudesa by overcoming the Western Gahgas and the 
Pandyas. 


164 


SOUTH INDIA 


The last of the Perumals of Kerala was Cheraman Perumal, and 
the end of his rule may be connected with the origin of the Kollam 
or Malayalam era in A.D. 824-25, though some scholars would ex¬ 
plain it as marking the foundation of Kollam or Quiion. The latest 
writer on Cheraman Perumal assigns him to A.D. 742-826, rejects 
the story of his conversion to Christianity or Islam, and maintains 
that his pilgrimage towards the close of his life was not to Myla- 
pore or Mecca but to Chidambaram. The Arabs, who. settled in- 
Malabar in the ninth century, married the women of the country, 
and thus the Moplah population came into existence. Sthanu Ravi 
was on very friendly terms with Aditya I Chola, Though the immi¬ 
gration of the Jews is assigned to the first century A.D. the first 
definite proof of their colony near Cranganore on the west coast 
is the Tamil charter of Bhaskara Ravivarman (A.D. 978-1036) to 
Joseph Rabban giving him and his descendants certain lands and 
privileges. Kerala princesses graced the Pairdya and Chola courts 
as queens, like the queen of Parantaka I who was the mother of 
Arinjaya. Several Chola officers, including a general named Vel- 
langumaran, belonged to Kerala, and Chaturanana Pandita was the 
guru of Raj aditya. 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. Arokiaswami, M., The Early History of the Velldr Basin. Madras, 1954. 

2. Ayyar, V. Venkatasubba, S1I, XII. Madras, 1943. 

3. Gopalan, R., History of the Pallavas of Kanchi. Madras, 1928. 

4. Jouveau-Dubreuii, The Pallavas. Pondicherry, 1917. 

5. Mahalingam, T. V., The Banas in South Indian History (JIH, XXIX. 153-81, 
277-305). 

6. Pandarathar, T. V. Sadasiva, Pirkalach-Cholar-Charittiram Part I (in Tamil), 
Annamalainagar, 1949. 

7. Pandarathar, T, V. Sadasive, Pandiyar Varalaru (in Tamil). Madras, 1950. 

8. Rao, M. V. Krishna, The Gangas of Talkad. Madras, 1936. 

9. Rice, B. L., Mysore and Coorg. London, 1909. 

10. Sastri, K. A. Nilakanta, The Pxindya Kingdom. London, 1929. 

11. Sastri, K. A. Nilakanta, The Cholas, I. Madras, 1935. 

12. Sewell, R. Hist. Ins. Madras, 1932. 

13. Venkayya, V., Five Bana Inscriptions from Gudimallam (El, XI. 222-40). Cal¬ 
cutta, 1911-12. 

1. Udayendiram Grant, SII, II. 382. 

2. Arokiaswami, M., The Early History of the Velldr Basin (Madras, 1954), 
pp. 108-10. For a different view, cf. Pandarathar, T. V. Sadasiva, Pirkdlach- 
Cholar-Charittiram (in Tamil) Part I (Annamalainagar, 1949), pp. 76-78. 

3. For his victory in Ceylon, cf. Chapter VIII. 

4. For an account of his accession, cf. Ch. VIII. 

5. Tiruvalanga^u PL of Rajendra Chola I. For the help rendered to the Pandya 
king by the Ceylonese ruler, Kasyapa V, cf. Ch. VIII. 

6. The last known date of §ivamara II is A.D. 812, and the earliest known date 
of Rajamalla is A.D. 817. 


1.G5 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


APPENDIX 

THE GENEALOGY AND CHRONOLOGY OF THE PALL A V AS 
1. The Successors of Nandi-verm an PallavCimalla 

Nandi-varman Pallavamalla was succeeded by his son Danti- 
varman, whose latest known date is the regnal year 51. As stated 
above, 1 he ascended the throne some time before April 4, A.D. 804, 
when Govinda III was returning from the Pallava country after 
having levied, tribute from Dantiga (Danti-varman) king of Kanchi. 
Danti-varman’s successor was his son Tellarrerinda Nandi-varman 
(i.e. Nandi-varman who defeated his enemies at Tellaru in the Wan- 
diwash taluk of North Arcot District), whose latest known date is 
the year 22 of his reign. This king married the Rashtrakuta prin¬ 
cess Sahkha (probably a daughter of Amoghavarsha I Nripatuhga, 
son of Govinda III) and was succeeded by his son by her, called 
Nripatunga-varman (probably named after his maternal grand- 
father). The latest known date of king Nripatunga-varman is his 
41st regnal year. 2 Thus we find that the four generations of Pallava 
kings, viz. Nandi-varman Pallavamalla, Danti-varman, Tellarrerinda 
Nandi-varman, and Nripatunga-varman ruled for 179 (65 -}- 51 -j- 
22 -[- 41) years,'i.e. nearly 45 years per generation. This is rather 
abnormal. It may be that, like many of the Chola rulers, the reigns 
of the Pallava kings and their successors often overlapped. If, how¬ 
ever, the above regnal periods be regarded as successive, and if the 
latest known dates of the kings in question be regarded as the 
last years of their reigns, Nripatunga-varman probably ceased to 
reign in A.D. 910 (731 4- 179). Nripatunga’s inscriptions have 
been found all over the region from Gudimallam in the north to 
Pudukkottai in the south. The Ban a king Banavidyadhara, i.e, 
Vikramaditya I, was a feudatory both of Nandi-varman Tellarrerinda 
and of Nripatuhga, 3 


Inscriptions disclose the names or virudas of several Pallava 
rulers such as Apara jita-varman (regnal years 3 to 18), Kampa-var- 
man (regnal years 6 to 25), Va y iramegh a - varman (regnal year 2), 
Narasimha.-varman (regnal years 3 to 24), Isvara-varman (i.e. Para- 
mesvara-varman, regnal years 12 and 17 ), Chandraditya and Kattirai. 
Of these Kampa-varman (probably named after Rashtrakuta Stam- 
bha or Kamba who may be supposed to have been his maternal 
grandfather) was possibly also known as Nandikampa which has 
been interpreted as “Kampa-varman son of Nandi-varman (Tellarre- 


SOUTH INDIA 


rinda)”, although it very probably indicates “Nandi-varman 
surnamed Kampa-varman,” The second suggesion (involving 
another that Danti-varman Pallava married a daughter of Stambha) 
is probably supported by the tendency of cross-cousin marriages 
between two royal families in successive generations among South 
Indian rulers. Kampa-varman may thus be regarded as identical 
with Nandi-varman Tellarrerinda (whose latest known date in that 
case would be the regnal year 25 instead of year 22), Vayiramegha- 
varman may have been another name of Danti-varman who was 
apparently named after the Rashtrakuta king Danti-varman (Danti- 
durga) surnamed Vairamegha. Naraisimha-varman and Isvara- 
varrnan may be the same respectively as Narasirhha-varman II and 
Paramesvara-varman I; but these may also have been secondary 
names of two of the later kings. Kattirai and Chandraditya were 
probably local Pallava chiefs under Pallava or Chola overlords. 

According to Chola records, the Chola king Aditya I overthrew 
Pallava Aparajita and killed him towards the end of the ninth 
century A.D. From an inscription at Tirumalpuram near Kahchl 
we learn that Tondaiman Arrur-tuhjina-udaiyar (Aditya I) granted 
a village in the heart of the Pallava empire in the 21st year of his 
reign. The date of Aditya’s accession is now usually believed to 
have been A.D. 871, which would make his 21st year correspond 
to A.D. 892-93. But as there is no evidence regarding the nature 
and duration of the Pallava Chola struggle of this period, it is im¬ 
possible to say that Aparajita was already extirpated by A.D. 892-93. 


According to the Udayendiram grant, the Gahga king, Prithvl- 
pati I, in order to help his friend (overlord) Aparajita, defeated 
Pandya Varaguna II at the battle of Sripurambiyam (near Kumbha- 
konam) but lost his life in the engagement. As the same Gahga 
king is referred to in the Ambur inscription of the 26th year of 
Nripatuhga as one of the Pallava king’s feudatories, Aparajita could 
not have ceased to rule before this year. If Nripatuhga-varman 
ruled till A.D. 910, as noted above, we cannot regard the two as 
identical and can only presume that they ruled over different parts 
of the Pallava dominions. It would also then follow that the Pallava 
sovereignty was not extinguished with Aparajita’s death, but con¬ 
tinued till at least A.D. 913. This view is supported by the Karan- 
dai Plates of Rajendra I which refer to the success of Parantaka I 
against the Pallavas. 4 


167 


THIS AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


2. Tentative genealogy of the Later Pallavas 

Hiranya-varman (great-great-grandson of Bhlma-varman who 
was a brother of the Greater Pallava king Simhavishnu) 

I*. Nandi-varman Pallavamalla (married Rev-a, probably 
the daughter of Bantidurga-Danti-varman-Vairamegha), 
c. A,D. 731-96, 

2. Dantiga-Banti-varman-Vayiramegha-varman (probably mar¬ 
ried the daughter of Stambha or Kamba, son of Dhruva, 
who was a cousin of Dantidurga-Danti-varman-Vairamegha), 
c. A.D. 796-847. 

» 

i 

| 

3. Tellarrerinda Nandi-varman-Kampa-varman v married San- 
kha, probably^ the daughter of Amoghavarsha I, son of 
Govinda III, who was a brother of Stambha or Kamba), 
c. A.D. 847-72, 

l 

I 

4. Nripatirnga-varman (A.D. 872-913). 

It has to be admitted that the reigns of the four kings may have 
overlapped to a considerable extent. It is also uncertain whether 
the latest known dates of these kings were actually the last years 
of their reigns. 

1. Vol. Ill, p. 282. 

2. Ancient India, No. 5, p. 54. 

3. J1H, XXIX, 174. 

4. JOR, XIX, 148. 


168 


CHAPTER VIII 


CEYLON 

I. POLITICAL HISTORY 

Agrabodhi VI was succeeded, after a rule of about 40 years, by 
his brother Agrabodhi VII (A.D. 759-65). He was famous for his 
sense of justice and knowledge of medical science. After he had 
reigned for six years, Mahendra II Silameghavarna (A.D. 765-85), 
son of Agrabodhi VI, seized the throne. The new kings’s authority 
was, however, challenged by Dappula, who was the son of a sister 
of king Agrabodhi VI and became a constant source of trouble 
throughout the 20 years’ reign of Mahendra II. Anarchy prevailed 
almost throughout the land. The next king Udaya (sometimes sty¬ 
led Dappula II, A.D. 785-90) was a son of Mahendra II. The new 
ruler is said to have helped his son-in-law Mahendra to conquer 
Rohana in South Ceylon, and to drive out the latter’s father Dam- 
shtrasiva, collector of revenue at Rohana, to take shelter in India. 
Udaya died after a reign of about five years and was succeeded by 
his son Mahendra III Silameghavarna (A.D. 790-94) who ruled for 
about four years. The next king was Agrabodhi VIII (A.D. 794- 
805), a brother of Mahendra III. This ruler was exceptionally de¬ 
voted to his mother whom he allowed to offer his own person as a 
gift to the Buddhist church and then freed himself by paying to 
the church a sum considered equal to his own value. He died after 
a rule of 11 years, and his younger brother Dappula II (or III, 
A.D. 805-21) next reigned for 16 years. The successor of Dappula II 
(or III), his son Agrabodhi IX (A.D. 821-24), had to fight with Ma¬ 
hendra (son of king Mahendra III) who was the real heir to the 
throne according to the Ceylonese law of inheritance. 1 Prince 
Mahendra was compelled to flee to South India. After a short rule 
of three years, Agrabodhi IX was succeeded by his younger brother 
Sena (A.D. 824-44), surnamed &ilamegha. Sena removed a potential 
danger by having Prince Mahendra killed by his agents in India. 
But he had to face an attack of the Pan<Jya king of Madura in South 
India, who had probably given shelter to Mahendra. 

The Pandya king, who led an expedition against Ceylon, con¬ 
quered the northern part of the island, and the defeated king Sena 
fled to the mountainous region of Malaya. The victorious Pandyas 
took away all the valuables in the Ceylonese king’s treasury and else¬ 
where in the island, including gold images and plates belonging to 


169 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

the monasteries. Then king Sena submitted to the Pandya king, 
and the latter returned to his own country. The Panclya king was 
probably Srlmara Srlvallabha who gained a victory in the island 
of Ceylon according to the Sinnamanur grant. 2 Sena died after 
a reign of about 20 years, and was succeeded by his brother’s son 
Sena II (A.D. 844-79). During his reign a rebel son of the Pandya 
king took shelter at the Ceylonese court. In retaliation for the 
Pandya invasion during the rule of Sena I, Sena II sent a large army 
against the Pandya country. Ceylonese forces besieged Madura 
and completely defeated the Pandya king who lost his life. The 
Pandya capital was plundered and the valuables, including the golden 
images brought from Ceylon, were all taken back to the island. The 
son of the deceased Pandya king was placed on the throne. It may 
be suggested that the reference is probably to the accession of Sri- 
mara’s son Varaguna II in A.D. 862. The successful war of Sena II 
against the Pandyas is mentioned in a number of inscriptions. The 
king died in the 35th year of his reign, and was succeeded by his 
youngest brother Udaya II (or I, A.D. 879-90), surnamed Silamegha- 
varna. Klrtyagrabodhi, a member of the royal family, rebelled 
against the new king and made himself master of Rohana; but the 
rebellion was soon quelled. The king died after a rule of about 11 
years, and his brother Kasyapa IV Srisanghabodhi (A.D. 890-907) 
succeeded him. One of the new king’s ministers was Cholaraja 
whose name seems to connect him with the Chola country in the 
Tanjore-Tiruchirapalli region in South India. Kasyapa IV is said 
to have ruled for 17 years and was succeeded by a son of Sena II 
named Kasyapa V (A.D. 907-17), called Abhaya Silameghavarna in 
his inscription. 

During the rule of Kasyapa V, the Pandya king of the Madura- 
Ramnad-Tirunelveli region was vanquished by his neighbour, the 
king of the Chclas, and he applied for help to the Ceylonese ruler. 
Kasyapa V sent an army to the Pandya king’s help; but the expedi¬ 
tion was unsuccessful. The Chola king appears to be no other than 
Parantaka I, who ascended the throne in A.D. 907 and claimed vic¬ 
tories over the Pandya king Rajasimha (Maravarman Rajasimha III) 
and over an army of the king of Ceylon. 3 Kasyapa V died in the 
10th year of his reign. His successor Dappula III (or IV, A.D. 917-18), 
who ruled for a few months, was probably one of his step-brothers. 
The next king was Dappula IV (or V) Silameghavarna (A.D. 918-30), 
who was probably a brother of the preceding ruler. During his rule, 
the Pandya king, whose country was subjugated by the Cho]as, took 
shelter at the Ceylonese court; but having failed to secure any help, 
the Pandya ruler left his diadem and other valuables behind and 
betook himself to the Kerala country in the Malabar coast of South 


170 


CEYLON 


India, although there is a tradition about the Ceylonese king’s vic¬ 
torious fight with the Damilas who came from the Chola country. 
Dappula IV (or V) died in the 12th year of his rule, and was succeed¬ 
ed by Udaya III (or II, A.D. 930-33), who was a brother’s son of Sena 
II and died in the 3rd year of his reign. 

The next king Sena III (A.D. 933-42), probably a brother of the 
preceding ruler, died in his ninth regnal year, and was succeeded 
by Udaya IV (or III, A.D. 942-50) whose relation to his predecessors 
is unknown. During this king’s rule the Chola king, who had con¬ 
quered the Pandya country, demanded from the Ceylonese monarch 
the diadem and other valuables left in the island by the Pandya 
ruler in the reign of Dappula IV (or V). The demand not having 
been complied with, a mighty Chola army invaded Ceylon and 
occupied large tracts of the island. King Udaya IV (or III) fled 
with the crown and other valuables to Rohana. The Chola king 
can be no other than Parantaka I (A.D. 907-53) who calls himself 
“conqueror of Ceylon” in his records. 4 It is claimed in the Ceylonese 
chronicles that the Ceylonese king’s general now laid waste the 
borderland of the Chola monarch and compelled him to restore all 
the valuables carried away from the island as booty. But the in¬ 
vading Chola army appears to have actually left Ceylon owing to 
the Rashtrakuta invasion of the Chola country under Krishna III 
about A.D. 949, the year of the great battle of Takkolam. Udaya IV 
(or III) died in his eighth regnal year, while his successor Sena IV 
(A.D. 950-53) ruled for three years. The next king Mahendra IV 
Srisanghabodhi (A.D. 953-69), who was probably his predecessor’s 
brother, married a princess of the royal house of Kalinga in India. 
During his rule, the Vallabha king sent a force to Nagadvipa (identi¬ 
fied by some writers with north-western Ceylon, but by others with 
Jaffna) to subjugate Ceylon; but the war was concluded by a peace 
between the two powers. The Vallabha is apparently king Kri¬ 
shna III (A.D. 939-6 7) of the family of the Rashtrakutas, who were 
the successors of the Chalukya Vallabharajas and were known to 
the Arabs as the Balharas of Mankir (Vallabharajas of Manyakheta). 
There are epigraphic and literary records 5 referring to the subjuga¬ 
tion of Ceylon by Krishna III before A.D. 959. although the Rash¬ 
trakuta expedition appears to have been merely a raid. Mahendra IV 
is also said to have repulsed a Chola invasion under Parantaka II, 
who led an attack against the island as its ruler had helped-the 
Pandya king in his revolt against the Cholas. 

Mahendra IV restored certain monasteries that had been pre¬ 
viously burnt by the Cholas. After his death in the 16th year of 
his reign, his 12-year-old son, Sena V (A.D. 969 79), became king. 


171 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


During his rule, there was a rebellion headed by a general, also 
named Sena, as a result of which the king had to flee to Rohana. 
The country was ravaged by Damila forces whose help was requ¬ 
isitioned by the rebellious general. Ultimately the king and the 
rebel entered into a pact; but the former died in the 10th year of 
his reign, still young in years. The next king was his younger 
brother Mahendra V (A.D. 979-1027) 6 who had to face numerous 
difficulties owing to the disturbed condition of the country. He 
made his brother’s widow his queen and, on her death which took 
place shortly afterwards, raised his brother’s daughter to the rank 
of Mahishi. The new king was unable to keep his troops contented 
by regular payment. The Kerala (Malayali) mercenaries in the 
king’s army once besieged the royal residence at Anuradhapura, 
although the king managed to escape by an underground passage 
to Rohana. In other parts of the country complete anarchy prevailed, 
and Kerala and Karnata (Kanarese) as well as Ceylonese chieftains 
carried on the government as they pleased. On hearing of this 
anarchical condition of Ceylon from a horse-dealer, the Chola king 
sent a strong army to invade the island. The Chola king was 
no doubt the mighty Rajaraja, v/ho not only conquered the 
northern part of Ceylon but gave it the name Mummudi-Chola- 
manclalam (cf. the names Rajarajapuram and Jagannathamahgalam 
applied respectively to Mantai or Matota and Polonnaruva) and 
even granted Ceylonese villages to the great temple at Tanjore. 7 
The southern part of the island appears to have been conquered 
by the Chola king Rajendra, son and successor of Rajaraja, in or 
shortly before A.D. 1017, when, according to Ceylonese chronicles, 
the Cholas captured not only the Ceylonese king’s Mahishi, but 
also “the jewels, the diadem that he had inherited, the whole of the 
royal ornaments, the priceless diamond bracelet which was a gift 
of the gods, the unbreakable sword, and the relic of the torn strip 
of cloth.” 8 The king, who had fled to the jungle, was captured on 
“the pretence of concluding a treaty.” Mahendra V was then sent 
with all his treasures to the Chola king in India where the Ceylo¬ 
nese monarch d*ied 12 years later. According to the inscriptions 
of the Cholas, Rajendra, after heavy fighting in Ceylon, captured 
“the crown of the island” (indicating the capture of the king), “the 
beautiful crown of the queen of Ceylon” (indicating the capture of 
the queen) and “the crown of Sundara and the pearl necklace of 
Indra” which the Pandya king had given to the king of Ceylon. 
The Cholas carried away many costly images of gold, destroyed 
the Buddhist monasteres, and stripped the island of all valuables. 
With Pulatthinagara (modern Polonnaruva) as their base, the 
Cholas held complete sway over Rajarashtra or North Ceylon. 


172 


CEYLON 


The people of the island were secretly bringing up the young prince 
Kasyapa in the southern country due to fear of the Cholas. When 
the Chola king heard that the boy had reached his 12th year, he sent 
a force to seize him. An army of 95,000 men now ravaged South 
Ceylon. 

In the meantime king Mahendra V died at the Chola court in the 
48th year after his coronation. Kasyapa, the young son of Mahen¬ 
dra V, was then made king under the name Vikramabahu (A.D. 
1027-39); but he declined to undergo formal consecration so long as 
Rajarashtra was in the occupation of the foreigners. He continued 
to rule at Rohana and died in the 12th year of his reign. Thereupon 
an official named Kirti exercised royal authority for a few days 
after which he was murdered by Mahalanaklrti (A.D. 1039-42) who 
became ruler of Rohana, He was defeated by the Cholas and lost 
his life in his third regnal year. The Damilas took away his 
treasures, diadem, and other valuables which were sent to the Chola 
country. Mahalanaklrti’s son Vikramapandya (probably connected 
with the Pandya royal house of Madura on the mother’s side) carried 
on the government in a small tract from his headquarters at modern 
Kalutara at the mouth of the river Kaluganga in south-western 
Ceylon, for about one year (A.D. 1042) according to the Pali 
chronicle, but thiee years, according to the Sinhalese sources on 
which Geiger relies. He was slain in battle by Jagatipala, said to 
have been a SuryavamsI prince coming from Ayodhya; but Jagatipala 
(A.D. 1042-46) was himself killed by the Cholas, probably after a 
rule- of four years. His queen and daughter, together with all valu¬ 
ables, were sent to the Chola country. Parakrama or Parakramapan- 
dya (A.D. 1046-48), who is often regarded as the son of a Pandya king 
of Madura but may have actually been a son of Vikramapandya, 
was also slain by the Cholas, probably after a rule of two years. 
The Chola king Rajadhiraja, son of Rajendra, claims in a record of 
A.D. 1046 9 that he nad deprived four Ceylonese kings of their crowns, 
namely (1) Vikramabahu, (2) Vikramapandya, (3) Vlrasilamegha 
hailing from Kanauj (apparently the same as Jagatipala), and 
(4) SrI-vallabhamadanaraja (possibly another name of Parakrama- 
pandya or of some other unknown Ceylonese chief) who is said to 
have lived for some time at the court of Kannara, i.e. the Rashtra- 
kuta king Krishna III. Another ruler killed by Rajadhiraja was 
Manabharana, who may have been a Ceylonese chief, although 
Hultzsch takes him to be a scion of the Pandya royal family. The 
Chola king also claims to have captured the queen-mother of Ceylon 
and to have cut off her nose, the reference probably being to the 
capture of Jagatlpala’s queen. The Chola records would thus 
suggest that the rule of Jagatipala, if not also of Parakramapandya, 


173 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


ended in or shortly before A.D. 104G. The records of Rajendra, 
younger brother and successor of Rajadhiraja, say that some time 
before A.D. 1057 the Chola king killed Virasilamegha, “king of the 
Kalihgas” (probably a Ceylonese prince connected with Kalinga on 
his mother’s side), and captured the two sons of Manabharana, “king 
of the people of Lanka.” Virasilamegha and Manabharana, men¬ 
tioned here should be identified with the princes of these names 
referred to in the records of Rajadhiraja, although they are usually 
supposed to be different. In an inscription 10 of A.D. 1069, Rajendra’s 
successor, Virarajeqdra, also claims to have subdued Ceylon. 

Towards the middle of the eleventh century, when the whole 
island was under Chola occupation, the Ceylonese chronicles place 
the rule of two chiefs named Lokesvara (six years, A.D. 1048-54) and 
Kesadhatu Kasyapa (six months, A.D. 1054-55), who had their head¬ 
quarters at Kajaragrama (modern Kataragam on the Menikgahga 
not far from Magama, the chief city of Rohana or Southern Ceylon). 
These chiefs had a rival in the person of a scion of the Ceylonese royal 
family named Klrti, later styled Vijayabahu I Srlsanghabodhi 
(A.D. 1055-1110) C 1 one of the greatest generals of Ceylon, who suc¬ 
ceeded in extirpating Chola rule from the island in the 15th year 
of his reign. Vlrarajendra’s claim of subjugating Ceylon about 
A.D. 1069 seems tc refer to the great Chola victory over Vijayabahu’s 
forces in a battle near Anuradhapura in the 12th year of the Cey¬ 
lonese king’s reign which probably corresponds to a date ncrt much 
earlier than A.D. 1069. A Siva Devale (temple) at Polonnaruva 
contains inscriptions of Rajendra Chola I and of Adhirajendra who 
ruled for some time about A.D. 1070. The liberation of Ceylon by 
Vijayabahu thus seems to have taken place shortly after A.D. 1070 
in the 15th year of his reign. 

II. FINE ARTS 

Ceylon is an offshoot of India not only geographically but also 
culturally. The literary 12 and art traditions of the island as well 
as its religious, political, social and economic life show how deeply 
they were regulated by the conventions of Indian life and thought. 

In early times Indian Bhikshus in Ceylon lived in very simple 
monasteries, mostly stone caves such as those of Mihintale, Vessagi- 
riya, and Isurumuniya in Anuradhapura, and Situlpahuva (Chittala- 
parvata) near the Menikgahga, and in groves like the Mahamegha- 
vana in Anuradhapura. Although information about the* exact 
nature of the buildings used by the early inhabitants and ruling 
chiefs is meagre, there is evidence of the gradual growth of a grand 
monastic architecture inspired by Indian tradition. The great Stu- 


174 


CEYLON 


parama was built at Anuradhapura in the middle of the third cen¬ 
tury B.C., ana an offshoot of the Bodhi tree was planted in the island. 
Unfortunately remnants of the early structures are usually found 
enclosed in later additions. Numerous Vihdras or Buddhist monas¬ 
teries were built in the early period, some of the most famous of them 
being the Tishyamaharama (dating from the second or third cen¬ 
tury B.C. according to some scholars) at Magama or Mahagrama, capi¬ 
tal of Rohana (South-West Ceylon), and the Stuparama, Mahavihara, 
Abhayagirivihara (built by VattagamanI Abhaya or Valagamba in 
the first century B,C.), and the Jetavanarama (built by Mahasena in 
the fourth century A.D.). The monasteries usually covered wide 
areas, and were meant for accommodating a large number of Bhi- 
kshus. The Jetavanarama is 251 feet high and stands on a stone 
platform nearly 8 acres in extent, while the space within the walled 
enclosure measures nearly 14 acres. Generally the monasteries had 
stone foundations, the upper structures being always of wood, clay 
or brick. There w r ere residential quarters, a refectory, and an 
Uposatha house where the Sangha assembled on the fortnightly fast 
day of the new moon and the full moon. The Viharas had a Chaitya 
or Stupa, called Ddgaba in Ceylon. In the first century B.C. the 
great builder DutthagamanI built the Lohaprasada (Lohamahaseya) 
or Brazen Palace (so called from the gilt bronze dome that once 
crowned it) and the Ruvanavaliseya in the Mahavihara at Anuradha¬ 
pura, the former being the Uposatha house and the latter the Ddgaba. 
The Ceylonese Dagabas were usually built essentially on the pattern 
of the Indian Stupas like those of Sanchi, although they differed a 
good deal in details. They had the shape of a heap of paddy or a 
hemisphere, and were erected on three circular terraces, standing on 
a round or square basement, approached by one or four stairways. 
Above the hemispherical dome there was a square called Hataras 
kotuva , on which stood the round Devata kotuva (“citadel of the 
gods” corresponding to the Indian Harmikd), forming the base of 
the pointed ringed spire. The spire represented an earlier chhatra- 
vall (umbrellas). 

The early extant examples of Ceylonese sculptures are usually 
made of limestone and belong to the style of Amaravati and Nagar- 
junikonda. The specimens representing the great miracle of Sra- 
vasti and Maya’s dream in the Colombo Museum may be actually the 
work of South Indian artists. But other specimens representing 
Buddha, Bodhisattvas, and Nagas were apparently works of local 
artists inspired by Indian tradition. Many of the Ceylonese images 
were originally plastered and coloured, and “the rough, weatherworn 
blocks, now visible, do not produce the effect designed by the artists.” 


175 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

In the following period Ceylonese shrines of simpler structures, 
consisting of two sections (one forming the real shrine and the other 
used for the beating of drums) standing on two platforms connected 
by a huge slab, were giving way to great vaulted building's with 
massive brick walls and door-posts of stone. These “huge masses 
of masonry' 5 had usually a Mandapa or porch, a nave, a communi¬ 
cation passage, and a Dagaba. The Dagabas were sometimes small 
in size and stood on square platforms. The celebrated temple, call¬ 
ed the Gedige, at Nalanda (an old military post between Malaya and 
Anuradhapura) is built entirely of stone in South Indian style. Some 
writers believe that it was built for the use of the Pallava troops who 
accompanied Mana-varman to Ceylon in the sixth century, but others 
ascribe its construction to the age of Chola occupation in the first half 
of the eleventh century. 

A number of Hindu temples, called Devales and Kovils, were 
built at Polonnaruva and other places (e.g. Kotaragama, Kandy and 
Ratnapura) in the time of Chola occupation and in Chola style. One 
of them, a Siva temple originally known as Vanuvanmadevi Isvara- 
mudaiyar and made of granuiiite and limestone, consists of a Gar - 
bhcigriha , Antardla, Ardhamandapa ) and Mandapa with a four-storied 
Vimdna. 

King Kasyapa* I built, in the fifth century, the great rock for¬ 
tress of Sigiriya or Sirhhagiri, so called from its fagade in the form 
of a huge seated lion. This rock fortress, on the top of which the 
king erected a large number of buildings, its galleries and the wall 
round them covered with white plaster, and the celebrated frescoes 
done in the Ajanta style, have immortalised the name of Kasyapa I 
in the cultural history of Ceylon. 

Some of the sculptures of this period are made in gneiss. The 
influence of the Gupta style is clearly marked in the bas-relief of 
“the man and woman” and in the meditating Buddha images at 
Isurumuniya (Anuradhapura), as well as in the Moon-stone (a semi¬ 
circular slab carved elaborately in low relief and placed at the foot 
of a staircase in Ceylonese art) at the entrance of the queen’s palace 
at Anuradhapura. The carving of the elephant figures on the rock 
of Isurumuniya and the sage Kapila with horse’s head (representing 
Sagara’s sacrificial horse) show great influence of the Pallava style, 
especially of the famous bas-reliefs at Mamallapuram. 

A number of bronze and copper images dating from the fifth 
century A.D. have been found. The Badulla Buddha (fifth or sixth 
century) in the Colombo Museum exhibits pure Gupta style. The 
fine small figures of Avalokitesvara and Jambhala (Kuvera), now in 
the Boston Museum, have been assigned to the eighth century. 
Numerous bronze or copper images of various Hindu deities and 


176 


CEYLON 


South Indian saints in pure Dravidian style have been recovered from 
the Devales and Kovils. These include images of Siva, especially 
of the Nataraja type, Parvatl, Ganesa, Karttikeya, Vishnu, Lakshmi, 
Balakrishna, Hanuman and Surya, as well as of Sundaramurtisvami, 
Manikka Vasagar, Tirujnana Sambandhasvami and Apparasvaml. 
There is no doubt that these were works of South Indian artists; but 
whether most of thtm were cast in South India or at Polonnaruva, 
the Chola headquarters in Ceylon, cannot be determined with cer¬ 
tainty. Some of the specimens are very fine. An excellent bronze 
image is that of the goddess PattinI Devi which is now in the British 
Museum. PattinI is the guardian of female chastity, but has power 
also over epidemics. Her cult went to the island from South India. 

The frescoes of Sigiriya closely resemble in style those in the 
Ajanta caves. They portray, either singly or in couples, twenty-one 
figures and probably represent celestial damsels (all covered by 
clouds below the waist), though some writers would take them to 
be queens and princesses with their ladies in waiting. Colours used 
by the artists are red, yellow, green, and black. The figures are 
graceful and sensual, and the brush work exhibits sound knowledge 
of modelling and technique. But their standard compares rather 
unfavourably with that of the best frescoes in the Aianta caves. 
The painting in the Pulligoda Galkomde near Polonnaruva, repre¬ 
senting five nimbate seated male figures, may date from the seventh 
century; but the rock-paintings at Hindagale, representing Buddha 
in the thirty-third heaven, appears to be of a later date. 

1. The rule of succession was that the next younger brother of the king succeeded 
him on the throne. Only when there was no brother did the crown pass to 
the next generation, and in that case also the eldest son of the eldest brother 
of the preceding generation became king. The sister’s son of the king enjoyed 
a certain preference This remnant of an earlier matriarchy was at times a 
disturbing factor in the right of succession. A conflict between matriarchy 
and patriarchy is noticeable in the rivalry of Mahendra II and Dappula for 
the throne. 

2. SII, III. 461. 

3. JRAS, 1913, p. 526. 

4. Sastri, Colas , I. 148. 

5. Altekar, Rdshtrakutas, 118-9. 

6. The accession of Mahendra V is assigned by Geiger to AD. 981 but by Hultzsch 
to A.D. 978. Considering the fact that his 36th regnal year corresponded to 
a date in A.D. 1016 or 1017, it seems that he ascended the throne in AD. 979 
or more probably in A.D. 980. 

7. SII, II. 241, 424 if. Rajaraja’s inscription at Padariya in Ceylon is dated in his 
27th year corresponding to A.D. 1011-12 (SII, II. p. v.). 

8. Sewell, HISI. 62. 

9. SII, HI. 51 ff. 

10. Ibid. 20-2-3. 

11. The accession of Vijayabahu is assigned by Hultzsch to A.D. 1054, and Geiger 
to A.D. 1059. But the fact that he was defeated by the Cholas in his 12th regnal 
year, probably falling shortly before A.D. 1069, and that he recovered the island 
from the Cholas in his. 15th regnal year or shortly after AD. 1070 would suggest 
that he ascended the throne in AD. 1055-56. 

12. For an account of the Pali literature of Ceylon, cf. Vol. HI, pp. 394 ff. 

177 


A.I.K—12 


CHAPTER IX 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

A. SANSKRIT 
I. BELLES-LETTRES 

The famous poets of the sixth and the seventh centuries A.D., 
such as Bharavi and Magha, presented a queer combination of real 
poetic merit with pedantry or artificiality. Of the two sides thus 
displayed the latter was not only the easier to imitate but was also 
the more attractive owing to the external show that it could pre¬ 
sent. The lesser p^ets that followed these masters, therefore, natu¬ 
rally fell a prey to the temptation and produced works which are 
noted more for their artificiality than for any intrinsic merit. This 
love of pedantry v/as increased to no small extent by the fact that 
Sanskrit literature was mainly composed not only by the Pavditas but 
also for them. It is, therefore, no wonder if we find pedantry and 
artificiality to be the general characteristics of the great bulk of 
literature produced during this and the following ages. It would, 
however, be wrong to suppose that this age had nothing of real value 
to contribute to Sanskrit literature. It saw the rise of a special form 
of prose composition—the Champu. It is this age, again, that gives 
us our earliest anthology, a class of works of no mean importance to 
the student of Sanskrit literature. But by far the most important 
contribution of this age to Sanskrit literature is in the field of poetics 
which reached its high watermark of development during this period. 

i 

1. Drama 

Great importance attaches to the politico-historical play, the 
Mudrarakshasa, of Visakhadatta, son of the Maharaja Bhaskaradatta 
or minister Prithu, and grandson of Vatesvaradatta, a feudatory, of 
what prince we are not expressly told. The attempt to place Visakha¬ 
datta in the fifth century A.D. on the hypothesis that Vatesvaradatta 
was a Samanta of Chandra-gupta II is not well founded. Nor is 
there any solid ground to assume that he belonged to Bengal. On 
the strengh of the variant “Avantivarman” occurring in the Bha - 
ratavdkya of the play, some place him in the seventh century at the 
court of the Maukhari Avantivarman, while others would place him 
under the Kashmirian Avantivarman in the middle of the ninth cen¬ 
tury A.D. But both these theories are considerably weakened by 


178 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


the fact revealed in Hillebrandt’s critical edition of the play that 
the variant is in all probability spurious. 1 Nor is there any definite 
proof for Jacobi’s identification of the eclipse referred to in the play 
as that of December 2, A.D. 860 when, according to him, the play 
was enacted. 2 Visakhadatta is certainly earlier than the tenth cen¬ 
tury A.D. as he is referred to by Dhananjaya in his Dasarupaka and 
also by Abhinavagupta 3 in his commentary on Bharata’s Ndtyasdstra. 
Viiakhadatta is, therefore, to be assigned very probably to the seventh 
or the eighth century A.D. 

The MudrarukthascL 4 is a play in seven acts, unique in Sanskrit 
literature as being wholly based on some political or historical theme, 
and avoiding not only the erotic feeling but also the erotic atmos¬ 
phere. It is a drama without a heroine. Its author must rank very 
high indeed owing to the great success he has achieved in creating 
a highly captivating play out of the dry historical material; and 
that, too, without the aid of the most inspiring of sentiments—the 
sringura. The pla}’ deals with the astute manoeuvres of Chanakya 
to win over Rakshasa, the faithful, clever and honest minister of the 
exterminated Nandas, to the side of Chandragupta. 

There are two other plays ascribed to Visakhadeva who is very 
probably the same as Visakhadatta. One of these, the Devichandra- 
gupta, dealing with the story how DhruvadevI was saved by Chan- 
dra-gupta from the ignominy of being surrendered to a &aka ruler, 5 
is known to us only from citations in the Ndtyadarpana by Rama- 
chandra and Gunachandra. Abhinava and Bhoja similarly quote 
from another play, the Abhisarihavafichitaka (or bandhitaka) based 
on a love legend or Udayana, which tells us how Padmavati regained 
the lost love of her husband by playing the role of an abhisarikd in 
the guise of a Tabari. 

On apparently the same theme as that of the Mudrdrdkshasa is 
based the Praiibhdchdnakya of Bhima, or Bhimata. This is only 
one of the five dramas composed by Bhima of which the Svapna - 
das&nana won him chief fame. As the Pratibhachdnakya is’modelled 
after the Mudrdrdkshasa, Bhima may be placed somewhere in the 
ninth century A.D There is positive ground for connecting him 
with the Chandella king Harsha. 6 

To the end of the eighth or the beginning of the ninth century 
belongs Murari, son of Vardhamana of the Maudgalya Gotra and 
Tantumati. Some scholars place Murari between A.D. 1050 and 
1135 on the strength of the fact that no rhetorician earlier t than 
Mankha refers to him. 7 But Ratnakara (middle of the ninth cen¬ 
tury ) makes a clear reference to him in his Haravijaya, and the author 


179 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


of the Prasannaraghava also seems to have imitated him. 8 The 
attempt to make him a contemporary of Ramachandra, a pupil of 
Hemachandra, is, therefore, futile. 9 From the reference to Mahish- 
mati as “cgra-mahishi” in act VII of his play, Konow 10 infers that 
Murari was a protege of a Kalachuri prince at Mahishmati. This 
suggestion, if accepted, would place his date prior to the middle of 
the eighth century A.D. when Mahishmati ceased to be the capital 
of the Kalachuris. 11 His work, the Anargha-raghava, is a play in 
seven acts depicting the early life of Rama up to his return from 
the forest, and bears ample testimony to the linguistic abilities of 
its author, though as a drama its defects are too obvious. 12 

Saktibhadra. the author of a play called the Chuddmani (or 
Ascharya-Chuddmani ), also probably belongs to the end of the eighth 
or the beginning of the ninth century A.D. To the ninth century 
belongs the Jain author Hastimalla, 13 son of Govinda of Srivatsa 
Gotra, who was a remote disciple of Gunabhadra. He seems to be 
a voluminous writer; besides several poems he has given us no less 
than eight plays including the Vikrdnta-kaurava (also called the 
Sulochand Ndtaka ), the Subhadrdharana , and the Maithilikalytina. 

Slightly later is the polymath Rajasekhara, who certainly is a 
great master of w T ords but lacks originality and polish, and cannot, 
therefore, rank high as a playwright. 14 He has, among other works, 
composed four dramas. The Bdlardmdyana is a Rama play (a 
mahandtaka) in ten acts with an embryo act ( Garbhanka ) in the 
third. The Bdlabharata, his next, is only fragmentary. Then comes 
the Ndtika —the Viddhasalabhanjika —in four acts, which is follow¬ 
ed by the Karpuramanjari , 15 a sattaka wholly in Prakrit (the only 
play of its type that has come down to us), composed and staged at 
the request of Avantisundari. These works were followed by the 
Bhuvanakosa f purporting to be a detailed geography of the then 
known universe, which is known to us only from a reference made to 
it by the author in his Kdvyarriimdmsd, an elaborately planned work 
on poetics. Besides these, Rajasekhara is known to have composed 
one more work, the Harivildsa which, as we know from Hemachan¬ 
dra, is a Svandmdnlca Kdvya (an epic bearing the name of its author). 
This, from citations by Hemachandra and Ujjvaladatta, seems to be 
a Mahdprabandha and may, as such, be taken to be a product of 
Rajasekhara^ mature age. 

Rajasekhara was the “son of the minister Darduka and gllavatl, 
grandson of Akala-jalada, and descendant of Surananda, Tarala, and 
Kaviraja, all poets of name”. He belonged to the Yayavara family 
of Maharashtra, and was a moderate Saiva by faith. His wife, 
Avantisundari, was an accomplished princess of the Chahamana 


180 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

family and Rajasekhara’s great regard for her is evinced by his refe¬ 
rences to her views in his Kdvyarnimdrhsd, Rajasekhara was the guru 
of king Nirbhaya alias Mahendrapala; while his B&labharata 16 was 
composed for his successor, Mahipala. 17 Again, on the one hand he 
quotes from Vakpatiraja, Udbhata, and Anandavardhana, and praises 
Bhavabhuti; while he himself is referred to by Somadeva and Dha- 
nanjaya and eulogised by Sod^hala. He must, therefore, be placed 
at about A.D. 900. 

Kshemlsvara 18 composed his Chandakausika for Mahipala 19 
whom H. P. Shastri identifies with the Pala prince of that name, and 
Pischel with the Pratlhara Mahipala of Kanyakubja, the patron of 
Rajasekhara. According to the former identification Kshemlsvara 
would belong to the eleventh century, while the latter would take 
him back to the tenth. His grandfather Vijayakoshtha or Vijaya- 
prakoshtha also was a man of learning. The Chandakausika in five 
acts deals with the Harischandra legend of the Mdrkandeya Purdna 
without displaying any distinct dramatic merit or even high poetical 
ability. His other work is the Naishadhdnanda 20 in seven acts based 
on the story of Nala. 

To the tenth century belongs also the Mahdndtaka which holds 
a unique position in Sanskrit literature in more respects than one. 
It is found in two recensions differing very widely from each other. 
The Bengali version has fourteen acts and gives the name as Mahd¬ 
ndtaka; while the Devanagari, which gives the name as Hanuman- 
ndtaka, has only ten. The latter ascribes the work to the monkey 
of the Ramiayana fame. Several and varied indeed are the legends 21 
current about this play; and though differing in details they are 
agreed that what is now extant of this unique work is only a recast 
or reconstruction of the original which is lost. According to one 
legend it was revised by Madhusudana at the command of Vikra- 
maditya, while another makes one Damodara revise it at the com¬ 
mand of Bhoja. The chronology of these versions is hard to fix 
with any definiteness. It is clear, however, that in its present form 
the work contains verses not only from the Ramdyana and the 
Hitopadesa, but also from the Bdlardmayana and the Anctrgha - 
rdghava; and is in its turn drawn upon by Subhata of the thirteenth 
century. But it must be noted that a great portion of this work must 
be much older, as is suggested by the legends, and also by the fact 
that three verses from this play have been quoted by Anandavar¬ 
dhana in his Dhvanydloka , 22 

The Mahdndtaka is not a Nataka in the exact sense of the term. 
It is something between an epic and a dramatic composition com¬ 
parable to Jayadeva’s Gitagovinda, which can be enjoyed simply as 

181 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


such, and is at the same time capable of a quasi-dramatic present¬ 
ment. It is often described as a Chhdyd-ndpaka (shadow-play) on 
the ground that it resembles in many respects the Dutmigada, a 
Chhaya-ndtaka, which was acted on the stage on March 7, 1243, at 
the command of the Chaulukya king Tribhuvanapala. 23 It is, how¬ 
ever, doubtful whether the play can be called a shadow-play at all. 
In fact the exact meaning of the term Chhaya-ndtaka is unhappily 
uncertain; and while Pischel and Konow take it to mean shadow- 
play, it may also denote a “drama in the state of a shadow.” 24 
According to Subandhu, 25 this is a Samagra type of dramatic com¬ 
position which, he says, combines in itself all the different charac¬ 
teristics of all the types of Nataka . But for want of any further 
elucidation on this point, the view of Subandhu must remain vague 
and uncertain. The only statement, therefore, that we may safely 
make about this play for the present, is that it is a literary drama, 
a play never intended to be acted, as seems to be shown by the 
several peculiar features such as the prevalence of verse over prose, 
absence of Prakrit, the large number of characters, the omission of 
the Vidushaka, and its plagiarisms from earlier Rama dramas. 26 

In conclusion, a brief reference may be made to Bhdna or mono¬ 
logue play. Four Bhanas viz . Ubhaydbhisarikd, Padmaprdbhritaka, 
Dhtirtavitasamvdda and Padataditaka, ascribed on the strength of a 
traditional verse respectively to Vararuchi, Sudraka, Isvaradatta 
and &yamilaka, have been published under the title Chaturbhani. 
Contrary to Keith 27 who holds none of these plays to be older than 
A.D. 1000, De fixes the lower limit for Padataditaka (and the rest), 
by references of Abhinavagupta, Kuntala, and Kshemendra before" 
the end of the tenth century, and takes these plays to be much earlier 
than Dhananjaya. 28 Thomas 29 takes the Padataditaka to be consi¬ 
derably older than Abhinavagupta, and places it “in the time of 
Harsha of Kanauj or even that of the latter Guptas,” i.e., sixth or 
seventh century. These Bhanas are different from the later Bhanas. 

2. Kdvya 

In the field of Kdvya notable contributions have been made dur¬ 
ing this period by both Buddhist and Jain authors. The Buddhist 
■Sivasvamin has given us epic, the Kapphandbhyudaya in twenty 
cantos, describing the conversion of king Kapphana who had march¬ 
ed against king Prasenajit of SravastT. He wrote under Avantivar- 
man of Kashmir and is highly influenced by Bharavi and Magha. 

The Digambara Jain, Jinasena, a disciple of Virasena of the 
Senasangha, is referred to in Harivamsa , composed in A. D. 783 by 
another Jinasena, disciple of Kirtisena, and may thus be referred 
to the eighth century A.D. 30 He has given us the Pdrsvabhyudaya- 


182 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


kavya which embodies within it the whole text of Kalidasa’s Megha- 
duta f and has also composed the first forty-two chapters of Adi - 
purtina . To this chulikd, comprising five chapters, has been added 
by the author’s own pupil Gunabhadra, who has also composed the 
Uttarapurdna , a continuation of the AdiptCrdrna giving the lives of 
the Tirthankaras after Rishabha. Lokasena added a further conti¬ 
nuation in A.D. 898. Ravishena’s Padmapurana was composed in 
A. D. 678. 31 Asaga is another Jain author who has given us a long 
epic in eighteen cantos called the Vardhamdnacharita or the Maha- 
viracharita or the Sanmitracharita. According to the Prasasti 32 
occurring at the end of a MS. of this work, Asaga composed eight 
works, including the present one, at Dharala in Choladesa, in Sam- 
vat. 910 (c. A.D. 853). Mention may also be made of another Jain 
author Kanakasena Vadiraja, whose Yasodharacharita was compos¬ 
ed prior to A.D. 950. 33 

The Haravijaya, a long epic in fifty cantos, narrating the story 
of Siva killing the demon Andhaka, shows a strong influence of 
Magha. It is composed by Rajanaka Ratnakara, son of Amritabhanu, 
who flourished under Jayapida and Avantivarman of Kashmir. In 
spite of the presence of some good stanzas the work betrays a de¬ 
plorable lack of proportion and excessive fondness for Yamakas. 
The last four cantos of this work are held to be spurious on the 
ground that Alaka, the author’s pupil, has commented only up to 
the middle of the forty-sixth canto. The Vakroktipanchasika is 
another small poem of the same author. 

Another Kashmirian poet of this period is Abhinanda, son of 
Jayanta, whose fifth ancestor Saktisvamin was a minister of Lalita- 
ditya Muktaplda. He refers to Rajasekhara as a contemporary 34 
and is quoted in his Lochana by Abhinavagupta. His father Jayanta- 
bhatta in his Nydyamanjari refers to Sankara varman as the ruling 
prince of Kashmir. 315 Abhinanda must, therefore, belong to the 
close of the ninth century A.D. His Radambari-Kathasdra is an 
epitome of Bana’s Rddambari in an epic form. In the introduction 
to this work he tells us that his ancestors hailed from Gaudadesa. 
This suggests his identification with another poet of whom we know 
only from anthologies where he is styled Gauda Abhinanda. Al¬ 
though there is no chronological difficulty in the way of this identifi¬ 
cation it cannot be regarded as certain. 36 

Quite different, however, is the author of the Rdmacharita, a 
long epic in thirty-six cantos, also named Abhinanda, son of Sata- 
nanda. The date of this author is sought to be fixed on the strength 
of the reference he makes in his epic to Haravarsha Yuvaraja, son 
of Vikramaslla, probably identical with Dharmapala of Bengal. 37 


183 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


There is one more Abhinanda, also styled Gauda, who has given us 
an epitome of the Yogavdsishtha in forty-eight cantos divided into 
six prakaranas. His identity with the author of the epitome of the 
Kadambari is also not yet definitely proved. 38 

One more name that must be mentioned here is that of Vasu- 
deva, son of Ravi and pupil of Bharataguru, who has given us three 
long epics. The Yudhishthiravijaya, narrating the story of Yudhish- 
thira up to his coronation in eight dsvasas, was composed during the 
reign of Kulasekhara; while the Saurikathodaya and the Tripura - 
dahana mention Rama as the ruling prince. All these poems very 
well display their author’s fondness for Yamakas which has led 
scholars to ascribe to him even the Nalodaya , 39 It is difficult to fix 
the date of Vasudeva, for we have no definite clue regarding the 
identity of his patron Kulasekhara. Pisharoti and Ayyar would 
place him in the ninth century A.D, but Keith declares this date to 
be improbable. 40 

Dhananjaya, the Jain author of Dvisandhana (or Rdghava- 
pdndaviya), has wrongly been identified by Keith and Winternitz 
with Dhananjaya Srutakirti, the author of Namamdld (A. D. 1123- 
1140); for Dhananjaya Srutakirti, the author of Dvisandhana , is 
quoted by Vardhamana .and eulogised by Somadeva and Jalhaija. 41 

The historical kavya is very meagrely represented in Sanskrit 
literature as a whole, and causes of this phenomenon are per¬ 
haps to be found in the peculiarities of the Indian mind. The in¬ 
scriptions, which form an important source of our knowledge of the 
history of the ancient days, and particularly the Prasastis or encomia, 
are often metrical in form and sometimes contain no little poetical 
merit. But the value of these compositions as poetry varies enor¬ 
mously. It must, however, be said that they represent a first step 
towards Prasastis of the eighth century A. D. composed by Rama- 
chandra who styles himself Kavisvara. He displays his mastery 
over language in a poem of fourteen stanzas applying equally well 
to Siva and Parvati. A similar phenomenon is observed in the in¬ 
scription of Lalitasuradeva of the ninth century A. D. 42 

The only important historical kdvya belonging to this period 
is the Navasdhasdnkacharita of Padmagupta alias Parimala, son of 
Mrigankagupta. This w r ork in eighteen cantos narrates a purely 
imaginary story of the winning of the princess Sasiprabha with a 
covert reference to the history of king Sindhuraja Navasahasanka of 
Malava. Padmagupta is mentioned by Bhoja, Kshemendra and 
Vardhamana. He must, therefore, be placed about A.D. 1000. 43 

In the field of lyrical poetry very little has been preserved for 
us between Kalidasa and Govardhana, a contemporary of Jayadeva. 


184 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


In fact the only source of our knowledge of this branch of literature 
during this age is the anthologies which naturally enough have pre¬ 
served for us only fragments of the works of poets of whom again 
nothing more than mere name has been told. There are also cases 
where even the names have been lost. Thus from anthologies we 
know v of one Panini whose skill as a poet of love is evident from the 
poems ascribed to him. The grammatical inaccuracies noticeable in 
these, however, clearly show that he is not to be identified with the 
great grammarian. To Vakkuta and Ladahachandra are ascribed 
elegant stanzas voicing forth the condition of the lover at various 
situations. Silabhattarika is yet another poetess having pretty 
stanzas ascribed to her, and having the unique honour of being rank¬ 
ed with Bana in point of style. 

We are, however, more fortunate in the case of hymns (stotras ). 
After the Mayurasataka and the Chcindisataka of Mayura and Bana 
respectively, and after several very pithy hymns ascribed (in some 
cases rightly) to Sankara the philosopher, we have the Devlsataka 
of Anandavardhana. In these hundred stanzas addressed to goddess 
Bhavani, the author, even against his own theories so ably expressed 
in his Dhvanydloka, pays more attention to the embellishments than 
to suggestion, in keeping with his own admission again that the lat¬ 
ter is only of secondary importance in hymns. To the first quarter 
of the tenth century belongs Utpaladeva’s Stotravall consisting of 
twenty short hymns addressed to &iva. About the same period was 
composed the Mukundamdla which is a hymn in honour of Vishnu 
by Kulasekhara, 44 who very probably is dfferent from the patron 
of Vasudeva, the author of the Yudhishthiravijaya. The date of the 
§yamaladandaka as well as its authorship is now fortunately settled 
on the strength of the evidence supplied by a MS. which leaves no 
doubt that the v/ork was composed, not by Kalidasa to whom it is 
traditionally ascribed, but by one Purantaka, son of Mahadeva, a 
worshipper in the temple of Mahakali. From the same source we 
learn that king Bhoja of Dhara showed his appreciation of the work 
by granting a hundred agrahtiras in A.D. 1Q01. 45 This work is in a 
peculiar variety of prose called Dandaka which has a fixed melody. 
Mention may here be made of two Jain authors, ,§obhana and Mana- 
tunga. The former, also known as &iromani, was a staunch Jain of 
the court of Dhara in the tenth century, and has given us a hymn 
in honour of Tirthankaras variously called Chaturvvmsati-Jinastuti, 
or Tirthesastuti or Sohhanastuti. This has been commented upon 
by his brother Dhanapala. 46 Manatunga, the famous author of the 
Bhaktamarastotra, was, according to a Pattavali of the Brihad-Gach- 
chha, a minister of Vairisimha of the Paramara dynasty of Malava. 
In the Prabhdvakacharita his life is given after that of Bappabhatti 


185 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


who died in Sam vat 895; but at the same time we are told that he 
was a contemporary of Mayura and Bana at the court of king 
Harsha. 47 It is thus difficult to foe the date of this author* though 
we may be sure that he was earlier than A.D. 1000. 48 

Of the didactic poems we may note only three. The earliest is 
the Ku\tan%mata of Damodaragupta, a minister of king Jayaplda of 
Kashmir. This is a very highly interesting small poem and may be 
said to be a sort of manual for the guidance of the hetaerae. To the 
ninth century belongs the Bhallatasataka of Bhallafa who wrote 
under king Sankara varman of Kashmir. This is a collection of a 
hundred stanzas in different metres carefully elaborated. Curiously 
enough it contains one stanza of Anandavardhana. The Jain Soma- 
deva, author of the Yasasiilaka champu (tenth century), composed 
the NUivakyamrita which, though definitely more moral in its tone, 
is yet almost entirely based on Kautilya’s Arthastistra to which it 
may well serve as a sort of commentary. It advises kings to behave 
well and prudently rather than with cunning. 

The Kichakavadha , 49 narrating in five cantos the story of 
Bhima killing Klchaka and his followers, is one of the earliest speci¬ 
mens of Alaska and Yamaha and similiar devices pressed into the 
service of poetry. It has been quoted, as is but natural, by gram¬ 
marians, rhetoricians, and also lexicographers, the earliest being 
Namisadhu who composed his commentary on Eudrata’s Kdvydlam - 
kdra in A.D. 1069. But beyond his name, Nitivarman, we know 
nothing about the author of this work. Similar, though of poor 
workmanship, is the Rakshasakavya (or K&vyamkshasa) which is 
variously ascribed to Kalidasa, Ravideva, and Vararuchi, though 
Keith 50 is inclined to accept Ravideva as its author. Wintemitz 61 
sees stylistic and other similarities of this poem with the Nalodaya, 
and ascribes both to Ravideva, son of Narayana. The Nalodaya, 
narrating in three cantos the story of Nala, is again a highly ela¬ 
borate poem ascribed to Kalidasa. There can, however, be no doubt 
that it is not from the pen of the author of Raghuvamsa , who 
never indulges in elaborate metres or rhymes. Keith 52 ascribes this 
work to Vasudeva, the author of the Yudhishthiravijaya. Whoever 
be tfye author of the Rjdkshasakdvya , its date can tolerably be fixed 
on the strength of the fact that a manuscript of some anonymous 
commentary thereon was copied in Sam vat 1215 (c. A.D. 1159). 
It may, therefore, be presumed that the poem itself was composed 
much earlier than the twelfth century. 63 

The anthologies, as a class of literary works, first make their 
appearance in the tenth century. These, of course, are collections 
of stanzas composed by poets of old, arranged according to various 


186 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


principles. It is, therefore, futile to seek any originality in these 
and yet they are important since they preserve, at least in parts, 
the work of many early poets that would otherwise have been totally 
lost to us. The only work of this class that we have to note here is 
the Kavindravachana-samuchchayap 4 the earliest anthology as yet 
known to us. It differs from some other anthologies only in having 
one section devoted to Buddha and another to Avalokitesvara. It is 
noteworthy that none of the poets, whose stanzas have been preserv¬ 
ed in this collection of 525 stanzas, flourished later than about 
A.D. 1000. Among the royal poets 55 revealed by these anthologies 
may be mentioned Yasovarman of Kanauj, Jayapida and Avanti- 
varman of Kashmir, and Vakpatiraja II of Dhara. 

Budhas vamin’s Slokasamgraha 56 (an abridgement in verse of 
Guniadhya’s Brihat-katha ) is an important poem. For it is more 
faithful to Gunadhya’s work than the well-known collections of tales 
in Kathdsaritsagara and Brihatkathdmanjari which can now be re¬ 
garded as representing only the Kashmirian recension of the ori¬ 
ginal. Unfortunately, however, we have only a fragment of this 
works so that it is difficult to form an exact estimate of Budhasva- 
min’s workmanship. It is, however, apparent that he has shown 
considerable art in his work and deserves praise. He is definitely 
earlier than Kshemendra and Somadeva. Nor can the gulf of time 
removing him from Gunadhya be very wide. There is, hbwever, no 
strong ground on which to fix the date of this author; and Lacote’s 
view that he belongs to the eighth or the ninth century is only a 
conjecture based on the manuscript tradition. 

3. Romance 

In the field of romance, we have to note two works, the Mddhavd - 
nala~Kamakandald~Katha and the Tilakamanjan. The former 
is the well-known love story of the Brahman a Madhavanala and the 
dancer Kamakandala who, after a long and painful separation, were 
at last married to each other through king Vikramaditya, The story 
is narrated in simple artless prose in Sanskrit interspersed with 
numerous verses in Sanskrit as well as Prakrit, many of which appear 
in the Vetalapanchavimwtika and also in anthologies. 67 It is com¬ 
posed by An and a, a pupil of Bhatta Vidyadhara about whose date, 
however, we know nothing definitely. The Tilakamanjan is a 
romance composed admittedly in imitation of Bana’s Ktidambafi by 
Dhanapala, 68 son of Sarvadeva, brother of &obhana who converted 
him to Jainism. He was a contemporary of Halayudha, Padmagupta, 
Dhananjaya and Devabhadra and enjoyed the patronage of kings 
Slyaka and Vakpati of Dhara. Before his conversion he composed 
the Prakrit Lexicon Pdtyalachchhi 69 in A.D. 972-3, and it was after 


\ 


187 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


becoming a Jain that he composed the Rishabhapanchaisihal 6 0 in 
fifty Prakrit stanzas. Merutuhga, in his Prabandhachintdmani , 
has narrated the incident which induced Dhanapala to name his 
romance after his daughter. 

4. Champu 

Whatever may be said to be the origin of the Champu, it 
is certain that it is the most elaborate and artificial form in Sanskrit 
literature, calculated to afford to the poet the amplest opportunities 
to display not only his erudition but also his command over prose 
as well as verse in one and the same composition. Up to the tenth 
century, compositions were either in prose or in verse almost 
exclusively; and even when they were in prose and verse inter¬ 
mingled, the latter was used only occasionally and for some definite 
purposes. But the yearning of poets to display their mastery over 
both simultaneously seems to be responsible for the rise of this 
altogether new form in Sanskrit literature. Though the earliest 
traces 61 of this form can be found in the Jatakamalu and the 
inscription of Harishena, yet the earliest work of this class, written 
in full Kavya style, belongs to the tenth century A.D., so that the 
Champu may be said to be one of the contributions of this age to 
Sanskrit literature. 

The word Champu itself is of obscure origin. Nor has the form 
any very definite technique. Visvanatha defines it merely as a Kavya 
in,prose and verse. 62 which shows that its technique was apparently 
the same as that of Kavya, but for the intermingling of prose and 
verse. Nor is there any fixity as regards the purposes which are 
to be served by prose and verse respectively. 

The earliest work of this class that has come down to us is the 
NalachampH, also called Damayantikatha , of Trivikramabhatta. It 
is only a torso in seven chapters narrating the famous epic story of 
Nala. Trivikrama does not seem to be a very good poet in spite of 
his own boasts, though his erudition and linguistic art must be 
admitted as being pretty high. The Maddlasd champu is another 
work of this class composed by this very Trivikrama, son of Nema- 
ditya 63 and grandson of 6ridhara of Sandilya Gotra. He belonged 
to the beginning of the tenth century and was a poet at the court 
of the Rashtrakuta king Indra HI, for whom he composed the text 
of the Navsari inscription in A.D. 915. 

To the middle of the tenth century belongs the Digambara 
Jain Somadeva, the author of the Yasastilakachampu composed in 
Saka 881 (c. A.D. 959) during the reign of the Rashtrakfita king 
Krishna III. Though Somadeva is known from his work as belong- 


188 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


ing to Devasarhgha, Yasodeva of the Gaudasamgha is mentioned in 
the Lemulavada grant as his grand-preceptor. Again in the Champu , 
Somadeva twice addresses the king as Dharmavaloka which title 
was borne by Tuhga of the Bodh-Gaya branch of the Rashtrakutas. 
It would, therefore, appear that Somadeva was originally a pupil 
of the Gaudasamgha in the Gau^adesa and was probably patronised 
by the Bodh-Gaya Hashfrakutas, from whom he went to Lemulavada 
under the Rashtrakuta feudatories Arikesarin and his successors. 
And as the Rashfrakutas had intimate contact with the Chedis 
and the Gurjara Pratlharas of Kanauj, it is not unlikely that 
Somadeva came into contact with Mahendrapala (probably II) of 
Kanauj, and at his instance composed the Nxtivdky&mrita as is 
declared in some anonymous commentary. 64 Before this, however, 
Somadeva had composed the Shamxavatipraktirana, the Yuktichintd- 
mani and the Mahendramdtalisanjalpa as we know from the colo¬ 
phon of his Nitivdkyamrita . All these, however, are to us no more 
than mere names as yet. 

The Y (isastilakachampu narrates the story of the legendary 
king Yasodhara of IJjjain in seven chapters in full Kavya style, and 
shows the great erudition and linguistic attainments of its author. 
From it again we learn that Somadeva, from his childhood, had 
made a deep study of Tarkastistra , 66 which, however, did not banish 
all poetic abilities from him. But our main interest in this work 
centres round the fact that its last three chapters are devoted to a 
discussion of the Jain dogmas, so much so that this part is often 
taken to be a manual of Jainism for laymen. 

Lastly, mention may be made of Udayasundarlkathd, which is 
sometimes regarded as a Champu . It was composed by Soddhala 
who describes himself as a Vallabha Rayastha of Lata. He flourish¬ 
ed about A.D. 1000 and lived in the court of king Mummuniraja of 
Konkan. 66 


II. SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
1. Lexicography 

The Dhanvontari Nighantu , the earliest extant medical lexicon, 
in its present form belongs to this period, though in its original forjn 
it may be much older. Of the ordinary dictionaries ( kosa ) only one 
can with some accuracy be assigned to this period, and that is the 
Abhidhana-ratnamdla of Halayudha who has followed the authority 
of Amaradatta, Vararuchi, Bhaguri and Vopalita. 67 The arrange¬ 
ment of the work is almost like that of the Amarakosa. The 
synonymous portion extends over four handas called Svarga, Bhumi. 


189 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Pataia and Sdmdnya y and is followed by the Anekarthakanda, the 
fifth and the last, which forms the homonymous portion including 
the indeclinables. The earliest author to quote from this Kosa is 
Mahkha who lived in the first half of the twelfth century A.D. It 
may also be noted that though Kshirasvamin, in his commentary 
on the Amarakosa, quotes a very large number of works and 
authors, he has not quoted Halayudha or his Kosa . This Halayudha 
has been identified 68 with the author of the Kavirahasya and the 
commentary called the Mritasanjlvini on Pihgala's Chhandahsutra. 
The latter was composed in honour of king Muhja Vakpati of Dhara 
between A.D. 974 and 995; while the former is an elaborate poem, 
meant to illustrate the modes of the formation of the present tense 
in Sanskrit literature, and is at the same time a eulogy of king 
Krishnaraja III of the Rashtrakuta dynasty, who ruled over the 
Deccan between A.D. 939 and 967. 

2. Grammar 

In grammar we come across the name of Maitreyarakshita, a 
Buddhist, who wrote a commentary on the Nydsa of Jinendrabuddhi 
under the title of Tantrapradipa, and has also to his credit the 
Dhatupradipa, based on the Diidtup&tha of Panini. It is difficult to 
fix the date of this author; for the only thing we know about him is 
that Sarvananda (A.D. 1159), the commentator of the Amarakosa, 
is the earliest writer to quote him by name. His Dhatupradipa 
refers to, and is therefore later than, the Tantrapradipa . Another 
rival commentary on Jinendrabuddhi’s Nydsa is the Anunydsa com¬ 
posed by Indu or Indumitra who may have flourished earlier than 
Maitreyarakshita. One more vmter, of the ninth century, is Yimala- 
mati who is known to have composed the Bhdgavritti , 69 

^akatayana, 70 the founder of a new school, belongs to the ninth 
century. There can be no doubt regarding the historicity of the 
writer; and his date also has been fixed beyond all dispute on the 
strength of a reference made by him in Ms Amoghavritti to an his¬ 
torical event of the reign of king Amoghavarsha, the great Rashtra¬ 
kuta king who ruled between A.D. 814 and 878. His main work is the 
Sabdanusdsana, which, however, has little originality though at one 
time it seems to have attained very high popularity, not only among 
tpe &vetambara Jains for whom it was intended, but also among 
other non-Jain authors. 

Durgasirhha, who probably flourished about A.D. 800, is the 
oldest known commentator on Katantra grammar or Kalapa, as it 
is otherwise known. In addition to his Vritti, on wMch he himself 
wrote a Tiled, we have also another commentary, viz. &ishya - 
hitany&sa by Ugrabhuti (c. A.D. 1000). Though Katantra may 


190 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


have been very old in its origin, we have at present no work of this 
school earlier than that of Durgasimha. This school spread over 
Bengal and Kashmir, Among the Kashmirian writers may be 
mentioned Bhatta Jagaddhara and Chhichhubhat|a who composed 
the Bdlabodhini and the Laghuvritti respectively about A.D. 1000. 71 

3. Poetics 72 

Greater and more fruitful activity was evinced during this age 
in the field of poetics, 73 To this age belonged great rhetoricians 
like Udbhata, Vamana, Rudrata, Anandavardhana, Abhinavagupta, 
and Kuntaka (or Kuntala), It is this age again that saw the rise 
and growth of the various theories of poetics laying stress re- 
spectively on factors like Alamkdra (ornament or poetic figures), 
RUi (style), Dhvani (tone, suggestion), and Vakrokti (crooked 
speech) as the essence of poetry. This age may, therefore, be said 
to be the golden age of Sanskrit poetics. 

The mightiest champion and. representative of the Alamkdra 
school is Udbhata whose name is associated with several doctrines 
in Alamkdramstra, Thus the theory of drthabheddt sabdahhedah 
or the twofold division of &lesha (double meaning), its inclusion 
among figures of sense, and regarding it as stronger than other 
.figures are often referred to as peculiar to Udbhata, who also seems 
to have elaborated for the first time the divisions of Upamd (simile) 
on the basis of grammar. He often differs from Bhamaha, the 
earliest exponent of the Alamkdra school, on some important mat¬ 
ters. He exercised such great influence on Sanskrit poetics, and 
attained such high celebrity, that he easily eclipsed his predecessor 
Bhamaha and threw him into oblivion for a long period. His 
magnum opus is the Alamkdrasdrasamgraha, defining forty-one 
figures in about seventy-nine verses, and illustrating them in about 
a hundred illustrative stanzas, taken mostly, as we know it from 
the commentator, from his own Kumdrasambhava which, to judge 
from the verses we have before us, very much resembled Kalidasa's 
poem of that name. The work is divided into six chapters (varga) 
and was commented upon by Pratiharenduraja about the middle 
of the tenth century A.D. Udbhata is often quoted in the Dhvanyd - 
lok a, and Kailiana tells us that he was Sabhdpati of king Jayapida of 
Kashmir. 74 Udbhata must, therefore, have flourished in the second 
half of the eighth century A.D. 

Next to Udbhata comes Kudrata, the author of the K&vydlarh- 
kdra which, in seven hundred and thirty-four verses, divided into 
sixteen chapters,"deals with all the important topics of the Sdhitya - 
sdstra, and reviews the whole field of that science. He declares 


191 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KA.NAUJ 


that Kavya must have Rasa (sentiment), and thus indicates his ac¬ 
quaintance with the Rasa theory. But this does not prove that he 
belongs to the Rasa school. The Rltis (styles) he refers to only 
casually, and neglects Gunas (qualities) altogether. But to 
Alamkaras he attaches great importance which may justify the 
view that he was a writer of the Alamkdra school. His partiality 
to figures appears not only from the fact that he defines a greater 
number of them, than, is done by Bhamaha, Dandin, and Udbhata, 
but also from his exposition of the figures which is more systematic 
and scientific than theirs. No predecessor has been mentioned by 
name by Rudrata, though he seems to refer to Bharata and to 
Mayura, the author of the Mayurasataka, This shows that he must 
be later than these two writers. He must again be much earlier than 
A.D. 1068-69 when a commentary on his work was composed by 
Namisadhu, a Svetambara Jain and pupil of Salibhadra. Again he 
is quoted by numerous writers from the tenth century onwards. Thus 
he is quoted or referred to by Rajasekhara, Pratlharenduraja, 
Dhanika, Abhinavagupta, and Mammata. Thus Rudrata cannot be 
later than A.D. 900, and his acquaintance with the Dhvani theory 
coupled with his great affinity with Bhamaha and Udbhata shows 
that he must have flourished between A.D. 800 and 850. It appears 
from Namisadhu’s commentary on Kdvydlamkdra 75 that Rudrata 
was also known by the name Satananda, and that his father's name 
was Vamuka. 

Mention may be made of another work which is based on 
Rudrata’s Kdvydlamkdra. It is the Sringdratilaka which, in three 
chapters called Parichchhedas, deals with the Rasas, the Bhdvas 
(emotions), the kinds of Ndyaka (hero) and Ndyikd (heroine), the 
Vipralambha Sringdra in its various stages, the six updyas (means) 
of winning one’s offended beloved, the other Rasas, and the four 
vrittis. Very often the author of this work, whose name is Rudra¬ 
bhatta, is confounded with the author of the Kdvydlamkdra. But 
there seems to be very little solid ground for the identification of 
these two authors. Thus, for example, while Rudrata has not one 
word to say in favour of the courtesans, Rudrabhatta, even after 
admitting all strictures against them, has yet to offer some defence 
on their behalf. But on the whole there is a remarkable similarity 
between the two, not only of thought but even of phraseology, which 
can be accounted for only on the assumption of one of the tw r o being 
the borrower. Rudrabhatta must, therefore, be placed after Rudrata 
and as such may be said to have lived between A.D. 900 and 1000 
the lower limit being roughly determined on the strength of the fact 
that the earliest writer to quote from the Sringdratilaka is Hema- 
chandra. 


192 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


A marked advance over the Alamkdra school is made by the Riti 
school, the foremost champion of which is Vamana, the author of 
the Kdvydlamkdrasutravrtti . The representatives of the former 
looked upon the Alamkdms as the soul of poetry, and were thus yet 
far away from the real essence of poetry. Vamana, however, for the 
first time emphatically asserted that the soul of poetry was Riti, 
which consists in such a peculiar arrangement of words that they 
would exhibit Gunas. The real essence of poetry had not yet been 
discovered, for the Riti school was not yet aware of what the Guna 
belong to. But credit is due to Vamana for having made a very 
close approach to the soul of poetry which it was left for his succes¬ 
sors to realise in full. Vamana’s work comprises three hundred and 
nineteen Sutras, divided into five parts (pa richchheda), whicii are 
subdivided into twelve adhydyas , with a vritti thereon composed by 
the author himself and illustrations derived from various sources. 
Besides the main theory of Riti being the soul of poetry, there are 
other doctrines which are recognised as being peculiar to Vamana. 
Such, for example, are the distinction between Gunas and Alam- 
kdras, the inclusion of Vakrokti among figures of sense, and the 
peculiar definition of Viseshokti and Akshepa . Vamana quotes from 
Magha and Bhavabhuti among others, and is himself quoted by Raj a- 
sekhara and Pratiharenduraja. Kalhana mentions Vamana as one of 
the minister^ of king Jayaplcla of Kashmir. Vamana would thus 
appear to be a contemporary and perhaps even a rival of Udbhata 
who w T as a Sabhdpati of the same king. 

But by far the most important school of poetics that arose in 
this age is the Dhvani school championed emphatically by Ananda- 
vardhana, the author of the famous Dhvanydloka. Like many other 
works on poetics this also comprises three parts, the Kdrikd, the 
Vritti and the Uddharana. The last is derived from the vast field 
of Sanskrit literature; but there is a keen controversy regarding the 
authorship of the other two. According to Winternitz, Keith, Be, 
and others, the author of the Kdrikd is to be distinguished from that 
of the Vritti . The former is, according to them, in all probability 
Sahridaya, while the latter is Anandavardhana or simply Ananda. 
Dr. Satkari Mookerjee, 76 on the other hand, has argued in favour 
of the identity of authorship of the Kdrikd and the Vritti with no 
fresh material to adduce in support of his view. The problem there¬ 
fore remains unsolved. According to Kalhana, Anandavardhana 
lived at the time of Avantivarman of Kashmir. He may, therefore, 
be said to have flourished about the middle of the ninth century 
A, D. Besides the epoch-making Dhvanydloka, Anandavardhana 
has also composed the Devtsataka, before which, however, he had 
already composed the Tridasdnanda and the Anandakathd, which 

193 

A.I.K.—18 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


are only other names of the Arjunacharita and the Vishamabcuiialild 
respectively. 77 From Abhinavagupta again we learn that Ananda- 
vardhana had also written the Dharmottamd which is a commentary 
on the Prammavinischaya of Dharmakirti. The Tattvdloka is yet 
another work in which he has discussed the relation between 
S&stranaya and Kdvyanaya. About Anandavardhana himself, how¬ 
ever, we know hardly anything beyond tne fact that he was the son, 
of Nona, and that the author of the Kdrikds in the Dhvanyaloka, if 
at all he was different from Anandavardhana, was in all probability 
his guru. 

In the Dhvanyaloka, comprising one hundred and twenty-nine 
Kdrikds divided into four chapters ( Uddyota ), Anandavardhana has 
stated several views regarding Dhvani (tone or suggestion), including 
his own, given its classification on the basis of Vyangya and also on 
that of Vyahjaka, tried to fix the place of Gunas and Alamkdras in 
poetry, and ultimately stated his view regarding Pratibha and the 
province of poetry. It was in this work that the theory of Dhvani 
in rhetorics found its first expression in clear and definite terms, 
though it might have been in the air for some time before it. 

It must, however, be noted that even this admirable work, pro¬ 
pounding an equally admirable theory, had to pass through the ordeal 
of very severe criticism before it found general acceptance. In due 
course, however, it established itself to such an extent, that even a 
fastidious author like Jagannatha declared that Anandavardhana had 
settled all the important problems of poetics. Before dealing with 
the critics, however, we must note its commentator Abhinavagupta, 
who refers to and criticises an older commentary called Chandrikd 
composed by someone belonging to Abhinava’s own family. Abhina¬ 
vagupta was the son of Chukhala and grandson of Varahagupta and 
elder brother of Manoratha, as he himself tells us in his Pardtrimsik 5- 
vivarana. He has several works to his credit, and appears to have 
at least three gurus . In his Lochana he refers to Bhattenduraja and 
Utpala as his guru and paramaguru respectively. Bhatta Tauta, the 
author of the Rdvyakautuka, is also referred to in the same work as 
his guru; while Lakshmanagupta seems to have been his teacher in 
§aiva philosophy. His literary activity may be said to have extended 
from A.D. 990 to 1020, since we know that he composed his Bhaira - 
vastotra in A.D. 993, and his PratyabhijndvimcCrsini in A.D. 1015. 

Pratlharenduraja, Kuntaka, Bhattanayaka and Mahimabhatta 
made very severe criticisms against the views of the Dhvani school. 
Pratlharenduraja is the commentator of Udbhata, and is one of the 
oldest commentators in the field of poetics. He has taken up all the 
examples of Dhvani given by Anandavardhana, and has shown that 


194 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


they are one and all merely examples of Alarhkaras. Bhattanayaka, 
the author of the Hridayadarpana . flourished between A.D. 900 
and 1000; while Mahimabhatta came shortly after A.D. 1000. 
Kuntaka is perhaps the mightiest of the critics of the Dhvani school, 
and is the founder of a new theory called Vakrokti (figurative 
speech). This theory he has explained in his V akroktijivita in four 
parts ( unmeshci ). Like many other works on poetics it contains 
Kdrikds , Vritti } and Udaharanas, the two former being his own work 
and the last being borrowed from various authors. In this work he 
defines Vakrokti as a speech that charms by the skill of the poet, and 
then goes on to give the several varieties of Vakrokti together with t 
illustrative examples. His contention is that Dhvani cannot have an 
independent existence as the soul of poetry. It comes only under 
Vakrokii which, therefore, must be admitted as the soul of poetry. 
Kuntaka quotes Anandavardhana, Rudrata, and Rajasekhara, and 
is himself quoted by Mahimabhatta in his Vyaktiviveka , and his 
views are summarised in the Alamkarasarvasva. He would thus 
belong to the latter half of the tenth century A.D., slightly later than 
Abhinavagupta who makes no reference to Vakroktijlvita. 

The Kdvyamimdmsd of Rajasekhara, whose works have been 
already noticed above, is important and interesting not so much for 
the theory it preaches, but from various other points of view. In¬ 
stead of dealing with the Rasas, Gunas and Alamkdras directly, it 
treats of various topics which are very useful to the poet. This work 
may be said to be a practical handbook of a poet. From the introduc¬ 
tory chapter it would appear that the extant work is only the first 
part of what was originally planned by Rajasekhara. Two more 
authors whose names may be mentioned are Mukulabhafta and 
Bhatta Tauta. The former, the son of Kallata and a contemporary of 
Rajasekhara, flourished in the reign of king Avantivarman of Kash¬ 
mir. In his Abhidhavrittimatrikd , the only work that has come down 
to us, he discusses in fifteen Karikas, with Vritti thereon, the two 
powers of words, viz. abhidhd and lakshand. Bhatta Tauta is known 
to us as Abhinavagupta’s guru and the author of the K&vyakautuka, 
known only from citations. Abhinavagupta in his Lochana tells us 
that he had written a Vivarana on his work. Kshemendra, Hema- 
chandra, and Somesvara refer to and quote from him. He is credit¬ 
ed with the famous definition of Pratibhd as ‘Prajna navanavonme - 
shasdlini pratibhd mata * He held the Santa as the most important 
of the Rasas, and one more peculiar doctrine of his that may be 
mentioned is that Kavi, the Nay aka and the reader (Srota) pass 
through the same experience so far as Rasa is concerned. Evidently 
again, he was against the view of Sankuka, viz . ‘anukaranarupo- 

195 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL &ANAUJ 


rasah * He must have flourished about A.D, 960-990 and had greatly 
influenced Abhinavagupta. 

On dramaturgy there are, indeed, very few works that have 
come down to us; and almost all that we know at present, with the 
exception of Bharata’s Na$yastistra, is later than about A.D. 1000. 
Only two works that are slightly earlier than A.D. 1000 are the 
Dasarupaka and Nat a ha ratnakosa (or Nataka-iakshanaratnakosa ). 
The former belongs to the latter half of the tenth century A.D. 
approximately, since we are told that the Kdrikds were composed 
by Dhananjaya at the time of king Muhja (A.D. 974-994). Dhanika, 
very probably his younger brother, commented on this work slightly 
later. The Nd$akaratnakosa 7Q is a similar work composed by Sagara- 
nandin. From the views expressed in his work, Sagaranandin would 
seem to be earlier than Dhananjaya. Besides this work he seems 
to have written another work, a play named Janakiharana. 

In conclusion, even at the risk of some repetition, we may make 
a general survey of the development of the theory of poetics and 
shew how rhetoricians began by emphasizing the purely external 
constituent of poetry, viz. the figures of speech, and ultimately suc¬ 
ceeded in discovering the real soul of poetry in suggestion or Dhvani. 
The Rasa theory was evolved by Bharata mainly with reference to 
dramatic works and could be applied to complete poetical composi¬ 
tions alone. But nobody ever knew then how it could be applied to 
single verses also. It was only after a lapse of some centuries that 
the Dhvani school arose and extended the Rasa theory to even stray 
verses. The earliest rhetoricians, however, looked upon the Alam- 
k&rds as the most important constituent of poetiy. Thus Bhamaha, 
Udbhafa, Dandin, Kudrata, and Pratlharenduraja not only devoted 
a major portion of their works to Alamk&ras, but also gave a very 
systematic and detailed treatment thereof. They were not quite un¬ 
aware of the Rasa theory or even of the suggested sense or Dhvani. 
But they could not apply that theory to poetry and naturally sub¬ 
ordinated Rasa to Alarnkaras , thus giving figures like 'rasavat, preyas , 
and urjasvi, . Another important result of the Alamkdra theory was 
the exuberant growth of figures of speech in general and the 
sahddlamkdras in particular. The importance gained by the 
sabddlamkdras naturally gave a sort of impetus to what is known 
as the Chiira kavya. Alamkdra , however, is only an external matter 
and has little to do with the soul of poetry as is suggested by the 
name itself. Varnana, therefore, set aside the Alarhkdras and hit 
upon something more internal—more essential—, viz. Riti and 
declared it to be the soul of poetry. That the Riti school wielded 
great influence is evident from the fact that Riti forms an important 


196 


LANGUAGE AND UTEHATURE 


topic in almost every work on rhetorics after Yamana, It must, how¬ 
ever, be observed that the importance already gained by the Alam- 
k&rcis was never on the wane. This is evident from the fact that 
every rhetorician of note has devoted a major portion of his work to 
them. \ amana has certainly made a real advance over his prede¬ 
cessors, but yet even he could not reach the goal and was only grop¬ 
ing in the dark. He could see that the Alamkdras were too extrane¬ 
ous to deserve the title of the soul of poetry. But he could not dis¬ 
cover the real soul thereof, which it was left for Anandayardhana 
to do. The Dhvani school founded by Anandavardhana is, in fact, 
an extension of Rasa theory. Taking his cue from the tenet that 
Rasa is only vyangya, he propounded the theory that vyangya artha , 
Dhvani f is the soul of poetry; and further based his classification 
of poetry on the relative prominence enjoyed by the vdchya and the 
vyangya arthas therein. Thus though, while classifying poetry 
Anandavardhana admits Chitra as the third variety, he holds that 
poetry in the real sense of the term can be only of one type, and 
that is Dhvani kdvya. He runs down Chitra kdvya in very strong 
terms v/ith the natural result that the prominence enjoyed by it 
along with Alamkdras , both of sound as well as sense, dwindled into 
insignificance. And had no later rhetorician like Kuntaka said 
something calculated to revive it, Chitra kdvya in all probability 
would not have waxed so strong at all in Sanskrit literature. The 
views of Anandavardhana had, however, to pass through the fiery 
ordeal of penchant criticism at the hands of Pratiharenduraja and 
others before they found general acceptance. The influence and 
importance of the Dhvanydloka is evident from the fact that it has 
been looked upon as almost the last word on poetics by no less a 
rhetorician than Jagannatha Pandita. About a century later Kuntaka 
with all his critical acumen tried to criticise the Dhvani theory and 
founded a separate school of his own declaring vakrokti as the soul 
of poetry. From Kuntaka’s definition of vakrata and its classifica¬ 
tion it is evident that Kuntaka wanted to make his vakrata as com¬ 
prehensive as possible so as to include all classes of kdvya within its 
purview. According to Anandavardhana Chitra kdvya is kdvya 
onfy by courtesy; but Kuntaka would admit it as kdvya without any 
grudge. For according to him any composition that is possessed of 
vakrata- in any of its six varieties deserves the name of kdvya. Kun¬ 
taka thus, it would appear, tried to effect a comnromise among all 
the three different schools before him; and in this he seems to have 
succeeded very well as can be seen from the fact that in the later 
centuries we find the Chitra aspect of the kdvya also receiving great 
attention. From this point of view, however, one cannot help think¬ 
ing that Kuntaka did more harm than good to Sanskrit kdvya when 


197 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


one finds that once Chitra kdvya and the sabddlaihkdras got a sort 
of sanction at the hands of Kuntaka, they cropped up in such exu¬ 
berance as to stifle real poetry or Dhvani kdvya. It is true that 
Kuntaka had very few followers among the rhetoricians; and yet 
it cannot be denied that poets of the later centuries finding Dhvani 
kdvya perhaps much beyond their capacities, for want of the most 
important requisite, pratibhd 9 turned their attention more to the 
other type of kdvya which afforded better opportunities for a dis¬ 
play of learning and scholarship and which it was easier to compose 
even in the absence of pratibhd . In fact even writers possessed of 
pratibhd did not remain satisfied by composing simple suggestive 
poetry without any display of the various feats with the help of 
words and their sounds. This is evident from works like the Gita - 
govinda. Later rhetoricians right from Mammata down to Jagan- 
natha Pandita championed the Dhvani theory, no doubt; but even 
they could not deny a place to Chitra kdvya in their classification of 
poetry, with the result that its growth could not be retarded. There 
was, indeed, little in the field of poetics after Anandavardhana (or 
perhaps after Kuntaka) which can be said to be new; and the rea¬ 
sons for such a state of things are perhaps to be sought in the social, 
religious and even political condition of India during these centu¬ 
ries. 

4. Metrics 

As regards metrics, the only important writer on Sanskrit 
Metres is Utpala who lived in the latter half of the tenth century 
A.D. In his commentary to chapter 103 of Varahamihira’s Bpihat- 
samhitd, he has given us about sixty definitions of the Sanskrit 
Akshara-Gana Vrittas. About forty of these definitions have been 
bodily reproduced from Jayadeva’s work. 79 Utpala also quotes two 
illustrations from Prakrit which contain the name of the metre as 
well as its illustration. This would show that Prakrit metrics too 
had well developed by that time, so much so that the Prakrit metri¬ 
cians had begun to compose their own illustrations like the Sanskrit 
metricians, instead of quoting stanzas from already, existing Prakrit 
poems. This naturally indicates a late stage in the development of 
Prakrit metrics. 

Svaydmbhuchhandas is a very important 80 work so far as the 
history of Prakrit poetry is concerned. The author Svayambhu is 
an early Jain writer and is known to have composed two long poems 
in the Apabhramsa language. He is later than Mayura and gxiharsha 
and probably lived in the tenth century A.D. He is respectfully 
mentioned by Hemachandra in his ChhandonuS&sana, and by Pushpa- 
danta in his Mahdpuvana in A.D. 905. 


198 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


5. Medicine 

Though the principal Samhitds of medicine had already been 
composed, it was left to this age to bring to perfection the branch of 
pathology in the masterly work called Rugvinischaya , known also as 
Madhazm-niddna after its author, or simply Niddna. This work of 
Madhavakara, son of Indukara, for the first time in the history of 
Indian medicine, treats of all diseases together and has often been laid 
under contribution by later writers on this subject such as Chakra- 
panidatta and Vahgasena. The numerous commentaries on this work 
show that it enjoyed high popularity. It is not clear whether 
Madhavakara is earlier than Dridhabala, son of Kapilabala, who is 
said to have revised and enlarged the Charaka-samhitd of Agnivesa 
in the eighth or the ninth century A.D. He is generally assigned to 
the ninth century A.D. 81 

The Siddhiyoga (also called V rindamadhava) is another curious 
work belonging to the same period which closely follows the order 
of diseases and treatment as found in the Madhava-niddnsa . Its 
author Vrinda himself admits his indebtedness to the work of 
Madhavakara with whom he need not be identified; 82 and since he 
is drawn upon by Chakrapanidatta in the eleventh century he may 
be placed about A.D. 1000. 

Interesting again is the Nighantu of Dhanvantari, the oldest 
medico-botanical dictionary that we have at present. Older works 
of this class, if there were any, have all been lost to us. The Dhan- 
vantarxya Nighantu itself is found in two recensions comprising 
seven and nine chapters respectively. Amara is said to have used 
this work in his Ko§a. But what was used by Amara must be some 
older version of the extant work which cannot be older than about 
the eighth century A.D. since it refers to quicksilver. The idea of 
the earlier and the later editions of this Nighantu , thus suggested, 
finds some corroboration in a stanza found in a manuscript of the 
work stating that the original work of Dhanvantari was revised 'by 
Kasyapa. 83 

Another important branch that was just cropping up in the 
medical science is the one dealing with the preparations of quick¬ 
silver and other metals. The importance of quicksilver grew to a 
large extent, because its preparations were deemed to give perpe¬ 
tual youth, life for thousand years, invisibility, invulnerability, and 
other goods things. The earliest work on this topic that can be dated 
fairly accurately is the Rasaratnakara of Nagarjuna, who is placed 
in the seventh or the eighth century by Ray, and in the tenth cen¬ 
tury by Wintemitz, 84 


199 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


6. Mathematics, Astronomy and Astrology 

In mathematics 85 we read of Sridhara who had written a work 
similar to the Lildvati of B ha ska rac hary a. He is perhaps the same 
as the author of the Ganitasdra who is referred to by Mahavlra in his 
Sdrasa 7 hgraha . The date of this latter can be fixed at about A.D. 850, 
since he tells us that he enjoyed the patronage of the Rashtrakuta 
king Amoghavarsha I. To the last quarter of the ninth century 
belongs the Brihanmdnasa of Manu on which, according to Al-Birum, 
is based the Laghumdnasa which Munjala composed about A.D. 932. 
From AI-Blrunl again we know of Balabhadra, a resident of Kanauj, 
as the author of several independent works on all the branches of 
Jyotihsdstra, and also commentaries on several works including the 
Yogasutra of Patahjali. Another writer of the same period is 
Vatesvara (Vittesvara of AI-Blrunl) probably belonging to Kash¬ 
mir. But the most important author of this age is Aryabhata II, the 
author of the Aryasiddhdnta, who is certainly later than Brahma¬ 
gupta, but earlier than Bhaskaracharya, who mentions him. As 
Bhattotpala does not cite any passage from this Aryasiddhdnta, 
Aryabhata II cannot be much earlier than A.D. 966. Among other 
writers of the tenth century may be mentioned Prithusvami (a mere 
name to us), Bhattotpala, and Vijayanandi, the author of the Karana- 
tilaka, all of whom are noted by A1 Blrunl. Of these Bhattotpala 
made a deep and accurate study of his predecessors in the held. 
He has commented upon several works and possibly also composed 
an independent work on the Ganitaskandha. His commentaries are 
all learned and prove the accuracy of their author. But more inter¬ 
esting and important than the rest is, perhaps, that on the Brihat- 
samhitd, a study of which is calculated to give its reader a good idea 
of the history of this science in India in the earliest stages. This 
commentary was composed in Aaka 888 (c. A.D. 966). The only other 
work that remains to be noted is the Sdrdvali of Kalyanavarman. 
This work is perhaps the same as that referred to by Bhattotpala, 
so that Kalyanavarman must be earlier than the tenth century A.D. 
On the strength of the fact that he calls himself Vatesvara 86 he is 
said to have lived in the last quarter of the ninth century A.D. But 
from internal evidence of the Sdrdvali itself it appears that in 
A.D. 966 Bhattotpala revised the original work of Kalyanavarman 
which at that time was about three hundred years old. It would, 
therefore, seem to belong to the seventh century A.D. 87 

7. General Review of Secular Literature 

We may now close this survey by a few critical observations 
on the mass of literature produced during this age. The first thing 
that we have to notice is that Sanskrit was steadily losing its posi- 


200 


LANGUAGE and literature 


tion as a spoken language, pari passu with the growth of the canoni¬ 
cal languages of the Buddhists and the Jains and of the various other 
DesabhasMs . It is true that Sanskrit continued to be used as the 
chief language for exchange of thought among the learned down to 
a very late date. But this very fact, it may be observed, led to its 
estrangement from the generality of the people, so much so that the 
literature that came to be composed in Sanskrit had its appeal more 
or less to the Panditas rather than to the common people of India. 
It is this gulf that arose between the language of the people and 
that of literature that seems to be responsible for*the several fea¬ 
tures noticeable in Sanskrit literature of this age. Thus in Kdvya 
we notice the sameness of theme in several works. More often than 
not the theme is drawn from the epics or the Puranas, so that by 
itself the theme being too well known has but little interest for the 
poet or the erudite reader. What interests the poet now is a display 
of his erudition, of his mastery over sound and sense, his infinite 
vocabulary, and his power to execute some wonderful and intricate 
devices. The readers of these works, naturally Panditas, also do not 
care for the theme so much as for these extraneous factors. This 
explains how there arose a tendency in Sanskrit literature to be 
pedantic and artificial,—a tendency which, as is natural, grew 
stronger and stronger as the gulf between the language of the people 
and that of the learned gradually widened. The natural effect of 
this is that Sanskrit literature and the Sanskrit speaking Panditas 
were as a class torn away from the masses and remained for long 
an object of awe and admiration, but hardly of love and sympathy. 
As a natural result, therefore, the poet always sought to appeal to 
the Panditas by rigidly following the poetical canons and, within 
the limits set by them, to exercise his talents. This rigidity in its 
turn practically eliminated the personal element of the poet, so much 
so that in Sanskrit literature we miss the revelation of the poet’s 
personality in their poems. This impersonal character of the Kdvya 
is further enhanced by the theory of the rationality of the world 
order which was recognised in India from very early ages. To 
balance these defects, however, there are qualities such as mastery 
over emotions and sentiments in all their shades, intimate and real 
love of nature, a sympathetic outlook, power of description,, and 
capacity to produce fine word pictures in a short space beautified by 
appropriate metre. This is why we find many poets producing ex¬ 
quisite lyrics though they may be no good at epic poetry or even 
dramas. For dramas were composed, later, not for the stage, but 
merely as linguistic and poetical exercises. 

All this weakness in belles lettres was, however, more than 
compensated by the theory of poetics which saw its fullest develop- 

201 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


ment in this age at the hands of these very Panditas, This shows 
that the age as such was the age of critics and not of poets, and ex¬ 
plains the marked difference in quality between artistic and scien¬ 
tific literature during the period as a whole. We have already 
seen how medicine, philosophy, and even astronomical science were 
steadily growing and producing some special branches in their fields. 
The Panditas naturally took greater and keener interest in the sci¬ 
ences, and directed their attention to expounding fresh theories and 
exploring new avenues of thought. 

It may thus be seen that belles lettres had little living interest 
for the masses. Nor had it any such interest for the learned spe¬ 
cialists or original thinkers who worked upon it as merely a means 
to an end. Literature to them was merely a hand-maid to poetics. 
The scientific literature, however, had a living interest for the spe¬ 
cialists, though the masses in general were certainly averse to it. 
Hence we observe that in the mass of literature surveyed here the 
scientific side is more living and dynamic than the other which was 
slowly and gradually freezing to a static condition. 

HI. RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL LITERATURE 

The two great epics had now practically reached their final 
form, though interpolations of-isolated verses, passages, and even 
entire chapters possibly continued till quite a late date. The Dhar- 
masastras and the Puranas had no doubt attained a sanctity which 
should have normally made its rank closed to new accessions. But 
as these texts served as sources of civil law as well as religious 
beliefs and practices, there was always the vital need of keeping 
them abreast with changing times. This led to the composition of 
pseudo-Smritis and Upa-Puranas passing under the names of re¬ 
nowned sages or rather their namesakes who were even older or 
greater than they, such as Greater or Older Manu, Narada, etc. But 
there were other ways of attaining the same object, viz. extensive 
additions to the existing Puranas, and commentaries on the Dharma- 
sastras. If we add to these the compilations and digests of the latter 
we shall practically complete the picture of these two branches of 
literature. 

1. Puranas 

It is now agreed on all hands that large additions were made to 
the Puranas during the period under review. To the texts of the 
original Puranas, which may be pretty old, were added several 
topics, at different times by different hands, i.e . whenever need for 
these was felt. Thanks to the patient researches of Dr. Hazra , 88 


202 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

we are now in a position to assign approximate dates to several sec¬ 
tions of these works. Thus sections on the consecration of Lingo,, 
the Pdsupata-vrata, the Panchakshari mantra, Dikshd, Purascharana. 
Y atidharma , great gifts, and mystical rites and practices were added 
to the Lingo Purdna between A.D. 800 and 1000. During the same 
centuries again the Vardha Purdna got into its text sections on holy 
places, Dikshd } penances, and funeral sacrifices, while those on 
hells, Karmavipdka, gifts, and Stridharma (duties of women) were 
interpolated into it in the tenth century. Sections on Yugadharma, 
vows, worship, tithis, and funeral rites, however, seem to be as old 
as A. D. 800. Similar sections were introduced in the Brihanndradiya 
between A.D. 850 and 950; while the Ndradiya got them between 
A.D. 875 and 1000. It was again during the ninth century that sec¬ 
tions on holy places, Varndsramadharma, marriage, Achdra , Graha- 
makha, Grahasdnti, Rdjadharma and similar other topics were added 
to the Agni Purdna; while sections on Dikshd, Nydsa, Mawnjiban - 
dhana , Pratishthd, funeral sacrifices, Yugadharma, etc., got into the 
Garuda Purdna during the tenth; and the Vdmana Purdna took in 
sections on Karmavipdka, Vdriidsramadharma , vows, Vishnupujd 
etc. during the ninth and the tenth centuries. Similar sections were 
again added to the Karma Purdna during the eighth century; while 
sections on Janmdshtamivrata and Ekddasivrata were added to the 
Brahmavaivarta during the eigth century, and were again recast by 
Bengali authors between A.D. 1000 and 1500. On the whole it may 
be observed that the sections thus added to the Puranas: have hardly 
any counterpart in the older Smritis like those of Manu and Yajha- 
valkya. This explains why these sections were interpolated into 
several Puranas almost simultaneously. The topics dealt with in 
these may be designated Puranic rites and ritual which seem to 
have dominated the society in India during this period. 

2. Dharmasdstras or Smritis 

The two compilations Chaturvimsatimata and Shattrimsanmata 
probably belong to this age since they have been quoted by Vijnan- 
esvara in his Mitdkshard and also by Apararka, but not by Visvarupa 
and Medhatithi. 89 The first contains a summary of the teachings 
of 24 sages. The second, known only from quotations, was also pro¬ 
bably a work of the same type. It is interesting to note that both 
are decidely anti-Buddhist, and the latter even prescribes a bath 
for touching Bauddhas, Pasupatas, Jains, atheists, and followers of 
Kapila. On the whole, however, it has to be observed that the age 
of original literature in Dharmasdstra is now over and that com¬ 
mentators and writers of digests have taken up the field. Visvarupa 
wrote his Bdlakrldd on the Ydjhavalkya-smriti before Vijnanesvara 


203 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


who thrice refers to it in his Mitdkshard. Visvarupa quotes, among 
others, the Slokavdrttika , and is very probably to be identified with 
Bhavabhuti. 90 Ho is generally sought to be identified with his 
namesake, the disciple of Sankara. But that does not appear to be 
a correct view. 

The next great name of this period is that of Medhatithi who 
is the oldest commentator of the Manu-smriti whose commentary has 
come down to us. A northerner, probably a Kashmirian, he was 
erudite and was throughly conversant not only with Dharmasdstra 
but also with Mimdmsd . He quotes Asahaya and Kumarila by name, 
and most probably cites the view of Sankaracharya. Vijnanesvara 
looks upon him as an authority on Dharmasdstra . His activity must, 
therefore, fall somewhere between A.D. 825 and 900. Among other 
writers on Dharmasdstra may be mentioned Bharuchi, Srikara, and 
Yogloka who are known only from quotations. The last named is 
often criticised and taunted by JifAutavahana who appears to be 
much junior to him. Bharuchi’s date probably falls between A.D. 
950 and 1050. Slightly older than Bharuchi is Srlkara who probably 
lived in the ninth century. 

3. Philosophy 

The greatest name of this age in philosophy is that of Vachas- 
patimisra, the versatile and erudite genius that shows himself an 
adept in every branch of the orthodox systems of Indian Philosophy. 
Richly, therefore, does he deserve the epithet Sarvatantrasvatantra 
or Sarvadarsanavallabha that is generally applied to him. Before 
composing his commentary on the Nyayavdrttikatdtparya he compos¬ 
ed an index to the Nydyasutras which he himself has dated A.D. 
84X. 91 This date is confirmed by other considerations. Besides com¬ 
menting on several works, he has also written some independent 
treatises on some of the darsanas. The Tattvakaumudi and the TatU 
vasdradi r <? are the names of his commentaries on Isvarakrishtna’s 
Sdihkhyokdrikd and Vyasabhdshya on Patanjali’s Yogasutra respec¬ 
tively. His Nydyavdrttikatdtparyafikd contains a brilliant defence of 
the orthodox logicians against Buddhistic onslaughts. The Nydya- 
suchini-bandha and the Ny ayasutroddhdra are two more Nydya works 
from the same pen. The Nydyakanilcd is his commentary on the Vidhi- 
viveka of Mandanamisra, while the Tattvabindu is an independent 
work on the Bhatta Mimdmsd in which, it may be noted, Vachaspati 
distinguishes between two schools of the Prabhakaras as old and new 
Bhamati on Sankara’s Bhdshya on the Brahmasutras, of course, is 
too well known. One more Vedanta work of Vachaspati is the 
Tattvasamikshd which is a commentary on the Brahmasiddhi, a 
Vedantic work of Mandanamisra alias Suresvara. From Vachas- 


204 


I/ANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


pati’s own statement 93 in the BMmatl it appears that before it he 
had already composed several of these works. Vachaspati wrote 
under the patronage of king Nriga whose munificence was unsurpass¬ 
ed. It has not yet been possible to identify this king, though it is 
certain that Vachaspati flourished in the first half of the ninth cen¬ 
tury A.D. 

In Yoga there are only three works belonging to this age, viz. 
the Rajamartanda t the Yogavarttika f and the Y ogasdrasamgraha. 
The first is an excellent commentary on Patanjali’s Yogasutra com¬ 
posed by Bhoja, who probably is to be placed in the tenth century 
A.D. The other two are works of Vijnanabhikshu who probably 
belongs to the same period. The former is a running commentary 
on the Yogabhashya of Vyasa while the latter is an independent tract 
aiming at a brief exposition of the Yoga system. It may be noted 
that in both these Vijnanabhikshu has criticised some views of 
Vachaspati. 

Next to Vachaspati stands Udayana who composed the Tattva - 
suddhi (Tatparyaparisuddhi), a commentary on the Nydyavdrttika- 
tdtparyatika, in A.D. 984. Like his illustrious predecessor, Udayana 
also has defended the orthodox views in his Atmatattvaviveka, which 
is a 'defence of the doctrine of the eternity of soul; while in his 
Bauddhadhikkdra he has assumed even the offensive and taken cud¬ 
gels against Buddhistic views. The Nydyaparisishta, which is a sort 
of commentary on the Nydyasutra, is also ascribed to the same 
author. Two more authors of the Nyaya school deserve to be men¬ 
tioned here. Jayanta, the author of the Nydyamanjari, which is an 
independent commentary on the Nydyasutras, stands between Va¬ 
chaspati whom he quotes and Ratnaprabha and Devasuri who quote 
him. He also refers to Sankaravarman as the ruling prince of Kash¬ 
mir. He must, therefore, belong to the last quarter of the ninth cen¬ 
tury A.D. The other writer is Bhasarvajha whose Nydyasdra is a 
survey of the Nyaya philosophy. He belongs to the tenth century 
A.D. 

The literary activity of the Vaiseshikas in this period is restrict¬ 
ed mainly to the commentaries of which the earliest is Lakshanavali 
composed by Udayana in A.D. 984. 94 His Kiranavall, found in two 
sections, viz. Dravyakiranavall and Gunakiranavall, is a sort of run¬ 
ning commentary on Prasastapada’s Bhashya on the Vaiseshikasutra. 
On the same text was composed in A.D. 991 a commentary under 
the title Nyayakandoli by Srldhara Bhafta, son of Baladeva and Ab- 
boka and grandson of Brihaspati, who lived at Bhurisreshthi in Dakshi- 
naradha (West Bengal) and enjoyed the patronage of one Pandudasa. 
The other works that gridhara refers to in this commentary as his 


205 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


own are no more than mere names to us for the present. The 
Nyayakandali 9 however, is highly important, since Sridhara has 
therein, for the first time in the history of the system, given us a 
theistic interpretation of the Nydyavaiseshika , 95 The Vyomavail is 
another commentary on the same text composed by Vyomasekhara; 
while the fourth commentary on the same text again is the LildvaU 
of &rivatsa who probably belongs to the eleventh century A.D. One 
important work of Udayana that must be mentioned here is the 
Kusumdnjali or the Nyayakusumanjali t comprising seventy-two 
Karikds together with the author’s own commentary thereon, in 
which the existence of soul is established from the Nyaya point of 
view. In this work Udayana criticizes not only the aesthetic doctrine 
of the Mimamsakas, but also the theories of causation propounded 
by the Samkhyas, the Vedantins, and the Buddhists. 90 

Vachaspati’s works in the field of Mimamsa have been already 
noticed. In Vedanta, besides Vachaspati we have Sarvajnatmamuni, 
the pupil of Suresvara and the author of the Samkshepasdnraka 
which is only an epitome of Sankara’s Bhashya on the Brdhmasutra. 
Among writers of other schools of Vedanta may be mentioned two 
of the predecessors of Ramanuja. One is Nathamuni, the author of 
the Nydyatattva and the Yogardhasya; while the other, Yamuna- 
charya, the uncle of Ramanuja, has given us the Agamaprdrwdnya, 
Mahdpurusha-Nirnaya, Siddhitraya , Gita-Safagraha, and several 
other works. The Yogavasishthas&ra of Gauda Abhinanda also be¬ 
longs to the same period. It is, of course, like the original text, 
partly philosophical and partly theological. Saivism was also deve¬ 
loping systematic schools, along the lines of Vaishnavism, in great 
affinity with the Vedanta. Thus in Kashmir we get two schools of 
Saivism, the Spandasdstra and the Praiyabhijndsdstra . The former 
was founded about the ninth century by Vasugupta to whom god 
Siva revealed the Sivasutra , the main sutra work of the school. 
Another equally important work of this school is the Spandakarikd, 
comprising fifty-one verses, composed by Kallata on the basis of 
the instructions imparted by his preceptor Vasugupta. Kallata 
lived in the reign of Avantivarman (A,D. 854). The important works 
of the Pratyabhijna, school, are the Sivadrishti and the Pratyabhijna - 
sutra , composed by Somananda and his pupil Utpala respectively 
in the beginning of the tenth century A.D. The latter of these is 
more important and has been commented upon by the famous rheto¬ 
rician Abhlnavagupta, the commentary being called the Pratyabhi- 
jndvimarsint (composed between A.D. 991 and 1015). Abhinava- 
gupta has also given us two more works of this school; the T antra- 
loka and the Paramdrthasdra. In the latter, it may be noted, Abhi- 
navagupta has combined the monistic teaching of Advaita with the 


206 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

practices of the Yoga and the Bhakti of Saivism and Vaishnavism in 
such a manner that it can be said to strike a new path altogether. 
In this work of a hundred Karikas he has laid under contribution 
what he calls the Adharakarikas ascribed to Adisesha (Patanjali), a 
work which has not come down to us. 97 

B. PRAKRIT 

During this period, the Prakrits had already passed beyond the 
stage of a spoken language on the one hand, and were being sup- 
planted by Sanskrit on the other, both in the field of exegesis and 
•enlightenment, among the learned of all classes and sects. The result 
was their comparative negligence even among the Jains. The Jains 
respected the Prakrits as their holy language, since their Agamas 
were composed in them. Yet they could not wholly keep them¬ 
selves aloof from Sanskrit, which had still retained its influence on 
the minds of the learned and was respected as the cultural language 
of the nation as a whole. Any new religious worships, philosophical 
dogmas or spiritual experiments had to be submitted through the 
medium of this language to the circles of the free-thinking leaders 
of the society for their judgment and approbation. Without their 
sanction no system had any hope or chance of being respected or 
continued in the higher strata of the community. Indians in ancient 
and middle ages were a highly free-thinking people by their nature, 
education and equipment. They would not accept anything on the 
mere recommendation of this or that person, howsoever great he 
may be. Everything had to be proved by means of reasoning on 
the generally accepted lines of argumentation which had been deve¬ 
loped through a long period. So that when the wise men of Jainism 
clearly saw that the learned circles would not care even to look at 
their precious theories unless and until they were presented through 
this cultural language of the nation, they gradually took to writing 
in Sanskrit for establishing their claim to a place in the midst of 
the respectable philosophers of the land. They not merely explain¬ 
ed their Prakrit Agamas in Sanskrit, but also wrote independent 
treatises in that language, either for conversion of intelligent men 
to their faith or at least for their thoughtful consideration. Siddha- 
sena Divakara was probably the first among the Jain Panditas who 
thus turned to Sanskrit for the propagation of his faith and philo¬ 
sophy. Haribhadra, pupil of Jinabhata and known also as Vira- 
hanka, was the next great writer of this school. He describes him¬ 
self as the son of Mahattara Yakini, who, an ordinary nun, had be¬ 
come instrumental in his conversion to Jainism according to tradi¬ 
tion. He lived in the latter half of the eighth century A.D. and 
wrote many commentaries in Sanskrit on the Agamas, which before 


207 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


him were generally explained by means of Prakrit commentaries 
like Niryukti, Churni.and Bhashya. Haribhadra’s example was fol¬ 
lowed by others and the tendency found its culmination in the great 
Hemachandra of Gujarat, who lived at the court of king Kumara- 
pala in the twelfth century A.D. 

In spite of this growing tendency to neglect the Prakrits and 
to adopt Sanskrit for their literary works among the Jain Panaitas, 
the inherent beauty of the Prakrit languages and a sense of sanctity 
attached to them by the Jains prevented them from falling into obli¬ 
vion. Naturally the simplicity and homeliness which characterized 
the early Prakrits gradually disappeared from them and artificiality 
and ornamentation took their place. Haribhadra was the first great 
Prakrit writer of this period. His principal Prakrit works are 
Samai'dditya-Katha (Samar aichcha-kaha) and Dhurtdkhy&wa. But. 
his Sanskrit commentaries on the Agamas often contain illustrative 
stories narrated in simple Prakrit and probably reproduced from the 
floating mass of the Prakrit story literature orally transmitted among 
the followers of Jainism. 

Sam,araditya-katha is a religious, tale, (Dbarmakathd) , divisible 
into nine parts, which describe the cycle of nine'lives through which 
the hero Samaraditya and his antagonist have to pass in succession 
as a result of their actions. In addition to this main story many 
popular legends find their place in the work by way of illustration 
or corroboration. Samaraditya-kaiha is written in a simple and fluent 
narrative prose rarely interspersed with long descriptive passages 
in the ornate style of the Sanskrit writers. Here and there it con¬ 
tains short and long metrical passages usually in the Gatha metre, 
but written in a slightly more artificial style than that of the prose. 
Dhurtakhyana, on the other hand, is composed entirely in verse, 
containing 485 Gathas in a simple style. It is a collection of absurd¬ 
looking tales narrated with a good deal of wit and ironical humour 
with the obvious intention of disparaging the religious legends of 
the Brahmanas found in their Epics and Puranas. It is divided into 
five chapters called the Akhyanas where five professional cheats 
(Dhurta ), a woman being one of them, narrate their imaginary ex¬ 
periences about some strange events which they may have seen. 
Before they began, they made a condition that any one who did not 
believe what was being narrated, saying merely ‘It is a lie’, must 
admit defeat and supply food to all who had gathered there. But 
any one who supported it by quoting parallel stories from Epics and 
Puranas shall be deemed to have won and shall not give any thing 
to any one. Ultimately, -the woman-cheat is represented to have 
outwitted the rest by telling them in the course of her story that 


208 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

they all were her slaves who had run away from her, two days back, 
with tjie clothes which they wore but which were her property 
According to the condition the other rogues could either corroborate 
it and actually be her slaves, or admit defeat by saying ‘it is a lie’, 
and supply food to all. They were naturally silenced by this dilemma 
and accepted her as their undisputed leader, openly confessing that 
woman was wiser than man by her very nature. The tales of the 
cheats are fantastic and extremely amusing owing to their imagi¬ 
nativeness. But their cutting sarcasm becomes quite apparent when 
similar tales from the Epics and Puranas, suspposed to contain the 
truths of the Brahmanical religion, are placed side by side with 
them. Both this and the other work of Haribhadra amply prove 
his close acquaintance with folk-tales and legends of all kinds. But 
in addition they also show his creative genius which admirably fills 
up the gaps left by the existing story literature. 

The next important work of this period is Kuvalayamdld, which 
is a religious tale ( Dharmakatha ) narrated in Prakrit prose and 
verse on the pattern of the Sanskrit Champu-hdvya. Its author is 
Uddyotanasuri, also called Dakshinyachihna, pupil of Tattvacharya. 
He was very well versed in all Prakrits and pretty well acquaint¬ 
ed with the important provincial languages current in his times. He 
mentions 18 such provincial tongues, quoting some 2 or 3 charac¬ 
teristic words from each, in the course of the story of his hero when 
he visits a busy market of a great commercial town. The principal 
Prakrit employed in the work is the Maharashtri, but short and long 
passages, usually of a descriptive nature, are also found in the Apa- 
bhramsa and even in Paisachl language. For the metrical parts 
of the work Gatha, DvipadI, Doha and Dandaka metres are employ¬ 
ed, the first being the most predominant one. Uddyotana describes 
Haribhadra as one of his Vidyagurus and mentions Padalipta, Sata- 
vahana, Jatacharya and Ravishena as his predecessors in the art of 
story-telling. The work takes its name from the heroine like Rana’s 
Kddambari. It was composed in the £aka year 700, i.e. A.D. 778. 
An abridged version of this story in Sanskrit was made in the four¬ 
teenth century by one Ratnaprabhasuri. 

Upadesamala of Dharmadasagani consists of over 500 stanzas 
in the Gatha metre. It is a work of a very early origin, but a Prakrit 
commentary on it was composed in Sam. 913 (about A.D. 857) by 
Jayasimhasuri, pupil of Rrishnarshi. Mah esva r astir i, pupil of Saj- 
jana Upadhyaya, composed a religious tale called the Jndnapancharrvi- 
kathd in the latter half of the tenth century A.D. It is a poem in 
Prakrit containing about 2000 Gathas and illustrates the religious 
importance of the JnanapanchamI, which is a name given to the fifth 


209 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


day in the first half of the month of Karttika. Sllacharya, pupil of 
Manadeva of the Nivritti Kula, composed another religious poem on 
the life of 54 important men of Jainism (Mahapurushas or &alaka- 
purushas as they are generally called) in Sam. 925 (A.D. 869-70). 
Similarly, Vijayasinha, pupil of Samudrasuri of the Nagila Kula 
composed a Bhuvanasundrikatha in A.D. 975. It is composed in 
the Gatha metre and contains a total of about 9000 stanzas. To this 
period also belongs Nandishena, the author of Ajita-Santi-stava, a 
Prakrit poem in various rare and artificial metres. The work glorifies 
Ajita, the second, and Santi, the 16th Tirthankara together, because 
both are said to have spent the rainy season in the caves of the 
&atruhjaya mountain. This hymn is recited by special singers at the 
confession festivals. In all these Prakrit works, whether written in 
prose or in verse, a great change in style is noticeable when com¬ 
pared with the earlier works written in Prakrit. The old simple 
conversational style is abandoned in favour of a flowery one charac¬ 
terized by Alamkdras like Alesha, and other literary devices of an 
artificial nature in partial imitation of the Sanskrit writers of that 
period. 

There are many stray Prakrit stanzas attributed to different 
authors numbering more than fifty, and quoted by Svayambhu in 
his metrical work, called Svayambhuchchandas composed before 
A.D. 1000, for illustrating the various metres defined by him. Most 
of these authors are non-Jain and otherwise unknown, two being 
women among them. 

C. NON-CANONICAL PALI LITERATURE 

The period dealt with in this volume is one of decadence, so far 
as Pali literature is concerned, both in India and Ceylon. There 
is hardly any work from continental India, and the political condi¬ 
tions in Ceylon adversely affected literary productions in Pali in the 
island. The advent of Mahinda IV (A.D. 953-69), who encouraged 
the study of Dhamma by patronising monks well versed in the 
Vinaya, kept the torch of learning from being extinguished and 
brought about some revival in the study of Pali literature. A few 
of the authors who flourished during this period are noted below. 98 

(i) Chulla Dhammapala 

Though assigned to Ananda in the Saddhamma-Samgaha the 
Sachchasankhepa (Elements of Truth) has been ascribed to Chulla 
Dhammapala, a pupil of Ananda, in the Gandhavamsa 100 and the 
colophon supports this ascription. The Sachchasankhepa is a short 
treatise of 387 stanzas dealing in five chapters with the Abhidhamma 


210 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

topics riipa (form), vedand (feeling), chitta (thought), khandha 
(miscellanea), and nibbana (nirvana). Chulla Dhammapala appears 
to have been earlier than Anuruddha (twelfth century) as the lat¬ 
ter’s work is said to have superseded the Sachchasankhepa as a vade 
mecum . 101 


(ii) Mahanama 

Mahanama is said to be the author of Saddhammappakdsml, a 
commentary on the Patisambhidamagga. In the epilogue the author 
states that he finished the work in the third year after the death of 
king Moggalana, while residing in the Uttaramanthiparivena of the 
Mahavihara. Though some scholars identify this Moggalana with Mog¬ 
galana I in the first half of the seventh century, B.C. Law prefers to 
identify him with Moggalana III, father and predecessor of Vijaya- 
bahu I (A.D. 1055-1110). 102 Malalasekera believes this Mahanama 

to be the second Mahanama appearing in Bodh-Gaya inscription 
after Upasena II and to have been later than the earlier Mahanama 
by a couple of centuries. 103 

(iii) Khema 

Khemappakaraiia (also called Paramattha-dlpa ) by Elder Khema 
contains short descriptions of the chitta, and definitions of kusala 
and akusald dhamma, a list of twenty-eight mnemonic verses briefly 
giving the meaning of some abhidhamma terms. It is more appro¬ 
priately called N&ma-rupa-samtisa in Ceylon. With its short dis¬ 
quisitions on various subjects concisely written in simple, easy style, 
the work serves as a little handbook for the study of medieval Abhi¬ 
dhamma. References to the author in the Nikayasamgraha and the 
Saddhamma-ratndkara, the latter calling him Tipitaka-pariyatti- 
dhara (versed in the text of Tipitaka), indicate that the book was 
held in high esteem in Ceylon. Vachissara Mahasami of Ceylon 
wrote a commentary on it in the twelfth century. 

(iv) Upatissa 

Though the book itself says nothing regarding its authorship, 
the Bodhivamsa (or Mahdbodhivamsa } History of Bodhi tree) has 
been ascribed to Upatissa of Ceylon by several authors. It is a prose 
work, there being gathas only at the ends of chapters and towards 
the end of the whole book. Beginning with a history of Buddha 
Dlparhkara, it gives a brief account of the life of Bodhisattva under 
previous Buddhas, life of Gotama, his enlightenment, planting of 
Bodhi tree at Jetavana by Ananda, parinibbdna, three councils, land¬ 
ing of Mahinda in Ceylon and establishment of Buddhism there, 
planting of the tree, and starting of ceremonies connected with its 
worship. 


211 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The Mahabodhivamsci has largely drawn on the Nidanakathd 
for its first chapter, and its account is usually shorter. The Samanta- 
pdsadikd and Mahdvamsa serve as sources for the later chapters, 
there being identity in the concluding verses of some chapters of the 
Mahabodhivamsa and the closing chapters of the Mahdvamsa. 
Though thus borrowing from other works, the Mahabodhivamsa has 
a style different from them, more artificial and affected. The author 
is fond of long periods and ornamental epithets. The work shows 
distinct traces of the influence of Sanskrit on Pali and may be 
regarded as inaugurating the -era of Sanskritised Pali. 

Identifying Dathanaga at whose instance the Mahabodhivamsa 
was written, with Dattha who is said to have induced Buddhaghosha 
to write Sumahgala-vildsini, Strong assigns the author to the period 
of Buddhaghosha. But Dathanaga and Dattha are not identical. 
Dathanaga has been identified with his namesake who was appointed 
by Mahinda IV (A.D. 953-69) to discourse on Abhidhamma, and 
Geiger and Wickremasinghe place the work in the tenth century. 104 

(v) Telakatahagdthd 

Reference may be made in conclusion to T elakatdhagdthd 
(stanzas of the oil cauldron), a short poem in 89 stanzas, purporting 
tc be religious exhortations of Kalyanlya Thera, condemned to be 
cast into a cauldron of boiling oil on suspicion of complicity in the 
intrigue with the queen-consort of Kalani Tissa (third century B.C.). 
It appears that a Vihara was built later on the spot where the Thera 
was put to death. 

The Mahdvamsa relates the story in brief, but instead of 
the boiling cauldron, speaks of the Thera as being slain with his 
attendant and thrown into the sea. The Rasavdhini by Vedeha 
(c. fourteenth century) gives greater details of the story. 

There is no reference to the name of the author or his date in 
the work. The language and style most definitely disclaim the pre¬ 
tensions of the work to be the stanzas uttered by the Thera (c. third 
century B. C.) in the boiling cauldron, and point to a much later date. 
Fervently exhorting men to lead a good life, the work incorporates 
fundamental tenets of Buddhism and shows a great depth of religious 
and metaphysical learning. Though well acquainted with Sanskrit, 
the author does not overburden his Pali with Sanskritisms. Mala- 
lasekera assigns the work to the tenth or the earlier part of the 
eleventh century, while Winternitz regards it hardly earlier than 
the twelfth century. 106 


212 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


D. APABHRAMSA LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 
1. Origin of Apabhraihsa 

The last stage of the Prakrit languages is represented by the 
Apabhramsa, which has considerable importance on account of the 
fact that the modern Aryan languages like Hindi, Gujarati, Marathi 
and Bengali have all evolved from it. The earliest mention of 
Apabhramsa in relation to language is found in the Mahdbhashya of 
Patahjali when he says: “Each pure word has several corrupt 
forms—‘Apabhramsas’ such as Gam, Goryt } Gota } Gopotalikd and 
others for a single word ‘Go’” It is obvious from this that Apa¬ 
bhramsa was not yet the name of any particular language or dialect, 
but was used to denote all deviations from the normal Sanskrit. As 
such, even Pali and Prakrit were probably known as Apabhramsa 
about 150 B.C. 

In the Natyasastra of Bharata we find a lot of information 
about the languages of the time. It tells us that language is of two 
kinds, namely, Sanskrit and Prakrit, the latter being only the cor¬ 
rupted or unrefined form of the former. Prakrit, again, has 
expressions of three kinds, namely, Similar, Corrupt, and Local 
( Samaria, Vibhrashta and Desi ). We have then a scheme of the 
distribution of Sanskrit and various Prakrits or Desi Bhash&s 
amongst the actors of play. The Desi Bhashas mentioned are seven 
in number, namely, Mdgadhi, Avanti, Prachyd , Sauraseni, Ardha- 
magadhi, Balhika. and Ddkshinatya. In addition to these, we are 
told, there are the languages used by the Sabaras, Abhiras, Chanddlas 
Secharas , Dravidas , Odras, and Vanacharas which are of an inferior 
type and are known as Vibh&shd. The distribution of these lan¬ 
guages in a drama according to professions and regions is interesting. 
Pulkasas, charcoal-makers, hunters, and wood- or grass-sellers use 
Panchali with the sibilants. Those who trade in elephants, horses, 
goats, camels and the like, and those who dwell in pastoral settle¬ 
ments use the Sahara language. The countries between the Vindhya 
and the sea have a language abounding in the nasal sound. Abhiras 
speak Sabari and Dravidas the Dravidi. The countries between the 
Ganga and the sea have a language abounding in e. Surashtra, 
Avanti and the regions situated on the Vetravati have a language 
abounding in ch. People belonging to Himavat, Sindhu, Sauvlra, 
and others use a language abounding in u. 

The comprehensive view of the languages presented by Bharata 
is very useful and important for linguistic studies. What, however, 
interests us particularly in connection with our study of the Apa- 
bhramsas is that the Himalaya-Sindhu region is said to possess a 


213 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


language in which the u sound was predominant. It is well 
known that amongst all the Prakrits it is the Apabhramsas alone 
that have their nominative and accusative termination u, and in 
several positions o is reduced to u; therefore they abound in this sound. 
North-Western India appears, therefore, to be the original home of 
the Apabhramsas. 

But the Apabhramsa known to tne author of Ndtyas&stra as 
Vibhrashta or Vibhasha was only a dialect: it had not yet developed 
a literary standard. The exact date of the Naty&sdstra is not known, 
but there is no doubt that it belongs to the early centuries of the 
Christian era. By the sixth century the Apabhramsa had developed 
to such an extent that rhetoricians like Bhamaha and Dandin had 
to recognise it as a vehicle of poetic literature almost as exalted as 
Sanskrit and Prakrit, in which both prose and verse compositions 
were produced. Dandin throws some welcome light upon the posi¬ 
tion of Apabhramsa in his time. According to him, theorists con¬ 
tinued to call all linguistic vehicles other than Sanskrit by the name 
of Apabhramsa, while, in the realm of poetry, the languages of the 
Abhlras and others were known as Apabhramsa. There is no doubt 
that Dandin had in his mind the view of Patahjali when he called 
all non-Sanskrit forms Apabhramsa. The view of Bharata about 
the language of the Abhiras has been noticed above. It is this 
language, according to Dandin, which, amongst others, came to be 
utilised for poetic compositions. The history of Abhlras is important, 
but it is not yet fully and properly explored. From the scattered 
notices of the Abhiras referred to above 106 it is clear that they spread 
from the North-West and Punjab to Central India and further 
south between the first and the fourth centuries A.D. The 
language of the Abhiras must have grown in importance along with 
their political power and influence. Besides the testimony of 
Bhamaha and Dandin, we find a copper-plate inscription praising the 
proficiency of king Guhasena of Yalabhl (A.D. 559-567) in Sanskrit, 
Prakrit and Apabhramsa poetry. 

Rudrata in his Kavyalamkara (ninth century) not only includes 
Apabhramsa among his six languages of poetry, but also says that 
Apabhramsa has several varieties according to countries. 

2. Nature of Apabhramsa 

The Apabhramsa language that prevailed in the early centuries 
of the Christian era in the Himalaya-Sindhu region possessed the 
followi ng characteristics■ 

(1) Retention of ri. 

(2) Retention of r as second member of a conjunct. 


214 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


(3) Retention of the intervocalic consonants in their original 
or softened form. 

(4) Nominative singular termination u, and possessive ssa. 

(5) Use of rhymed metre. 

This language might be called ancient Thakki. As the language 
spread towards south to Sindh with the expansion of the people who 
spoke it. the Abhlras, it developed the tendency of ch and j being 
indistinctly pronounced with y sound preceding them (as laid down 
by the grammarians for Vrtichada). 

Apabhramsa had attained the literary form before the time of 
Hemachandra, as is proved by the illustrations in his Prakrit 
Grammar, and by the literature available so far and known to be 
of an earlier date. It is probably for this reason that Hemachandra 
has not noticed the varieties which have been enumerated by the 
grammarians who followed him and who went by the conventional 
dialect distinctions rather than by the actual literary form that held 
the field. 

The word Apabhramsa literally means corrupt, and the gram¬ 
marians regarded the language as such. But the poets themselves 
never admitted this and they have called their language, not Apa¬ 
bhramsa but Desl } i.e. of the land. 

3. Apabhramsa in Sanskrit Dramas 

We know that the sixth case-ending ‘ho’ is a peculiarity of 
Apabhramsa. In the Sariputraprakarana of Asvaghosha (second 
century A.D.) we come across a form makkadaho (Sk. markatasya). 
In the Pahchardtra of Bhasa (c. fourth century), the MagadhI put 
into the mouth of the cowherds contains the nominative and accu¬ 
sative suffix u which is known to be the characteristic of Apa¬ 
bhramsa, e.g. Sadamandalu suyyo (Sk. gatamandalah suryah), 
& aw am ghoshum viddavanti chold (Sk. Sarvam ghosham vidra- 
vanti chaumh). If scholars doubt the genuineness of these readings, 
it is only because they hesitate to accept such an ancient date for 
Apabhramsa. But the history of the language, as traced above, 
shows, beyond doubt, that the occurrence of Apabhramsa forms in 
dramas during that period is not at all surprising. The language 
used by Mathura in the second act of Mnchchhakatika abounds in u 
and so it may be called the MagadhI Apabhramsa. The Mathura is 
presumably a person hailing from Mathura, the centre of the 
western part of the country, and he has obviously imported the 
tendency of his homeland into the eastern language. The commen¬ 
tators have called the language dhakki which is probably a mistake 


215 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

for thakkl. Markandeya calls it Takki and remarks that Haris- 
chandra likes to call this language Apabhrariisa which the learned 
use in their dramas and other compositions. 107 There are sixteen 
verses in Apabhrariisa in Kalidasa’s Vikramorvasiya which can 
now safely be accepted as early examples of Apabhrariisa lyric. 

4. Apabhrariisa Dohas 

The earliest poetry in pure Apabhrariisa appears to have been 
produced in the Doha metre, i.e. couplets of varying measure. In 
the available Apabhrariisa poetry the Doha verses are more uni¬ 
versal and less grammatically regulated than the other forms of 
poetic compositions. This metre has been adopted by almost all the 
modern languages of North India, where the medieval saints used 
it as their favourite vehicle of expression. The Doha compositions 
fall into two classes according to their subject-matter, the romantic , 
and the dscetic. The former class is represented by single verses 
depicting'the sentiment of love, pathos, or heroism. They appear 
to be mostly the compositions of bards. Examples of these occur 
in the grammar of Hemachandra. 

The latter class is represented by a large number of works com¬ 
posed by Jain and Buddhist saints. Paramappayasu and Jogasdru 
of Joindu (sixth century), Pdhuda-Doha of Ramasiriiha Muni, S&vaya- 
dhamma-Dohd of Devasena (tenth century), and Vairdgyasdra of 
Suprabhacharya are some of the best examples of Doha works in 
Jain literature. The theme is the spiritual unity of the universe 
which discountenances all differences of caste and creed. In Deva- 
sena’s Nayachakra, a Prakrit work on logic, we are told that the 
work was originally composed in the Doha metre; but it was subse¬ 
quently transformd into Gathas by Mailla-dhavala because a critic, 
remarked that Doha metre was not suitable for a serious subject 
like logic. The date of Devasena, as recorded in one of his works, 
is V. S. 990 (=A.D. 933). It appears that up to his time the learned 
Panditas had not reconciled themselves to the use of the Doha form 
of composition. 

The Buddhist saints who wrote Doha verses are Tillopada, 
Sarahapada, Kanhapada and others. Their works are found collect¬ 
ed in the Dohdkosa, first compiled by Haraprasad Sastri and later 
re-edited by Dr. Shahidullah and by Dr. P. C. Bagchi. Many more 
examples have been brought to light by Rahula Samkrityayana. 
Their subject-matter may be termed mysticism, showing the same 
traits as the Jain Dohas mentioned above, as well as the composi¬ 
tions of the later saints like Kablr, Dadu, and Nanak. The tradi¬ 
tional name for the language of these works is { Sandhyd Bhdshd,’ i.e. 
Twilight Tongue, which is very significant when we remember that 


216 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Apabhraihsa forms a link between the older classical languages 
Sanskrit and Prakrit on the one hand, and the modem languages 
on the other. i07a The period of these Doha compositions may be 
fixed from the sixth to the twelfth centuries A.D. 

5. Epic Poems 

Epics form a very important, well-developed and voluminous 
part of ancient Indian literature. The same is true of Apabhraihsa 
literature as well. In form and style epic poems in Apabhraihsa 
are as highly polished and conventionalised as the Sanskrit and 
Prakrit Mahakavyas. But they possess some very characteristic 
features. The Kadavaka , consisting of about 8 rhymes in Alillaha 
or Pajjhatika metre followed by a Ghatta or Duval verse, is the 
normal unit of this poetry. This style could easily be recognised 
as the forerunner of the Chaupai-Dohd style of Hindi poems like the 
Padmavata of Jayasi and the Rdmacharita-Mdnasa of Tulasidasa. A 
number of Kadavakas , normally ten to fifteen, constitute a Sandhi 
or canto which sometimes opens with a Dhruvaka verse, and the 
metre and the style frequently change in consonance with the move¬ 
ment of the narrative, so as to harmonise with the sentiment to be 
expressed. The rhetorical qualities of Sanskrit and Prakrit poetry 
are fully reproduced in Apabhraihsa as well. 

The subject-matter of the epic poems so far discovered is mostly 
the lives of the 63 super-men called Said kd-Purushas (i.e. remark¬ 
ably great men) in Jainism, the purpose being entertainment as 
well as social and religious instruction. 

The earliest epics available in Apabhraihsa are the Paiima- 
chariu and Harivamsa Pur ana of Svayambhudeva, which are the 
Jain versions of the Rdmdyana and the Mahdbhdrata , respectively. 
The former contains 90 Sandhis arranged in five Kdndas, the total 
number of Kadavakas being about 1300, calculated to be equal to 
12000 slokas. The latter contains 112 Sandhis and about 2000 
Kadavakas, being equal to 18000 slokas. In the introductory part 
of the Harivamsa Parana, the poet admits his indebtedness to Indra, 
Bharata, Vyasa, Pingala, Bhamaha, Dandin, Bana, Harsha and 
Chaumuha for the diverse requisites of excellent poetry. His debt 
to Chaumuha is of particular interest, since it was from him that the 
poet derived his style of Paddhadid metre with Duval and 
Dhruvaka . Obviously Chaumuha was either the originator of this 
Apabhraihsa style or he was the first to make extensive use of it. 
In a few old verses found prefixed to the Paiima-chariu, Chaumuha 
is praised for his excellent diction, DantI for his charming meaning, 
and Svayambhu as excelling in both. We also find Chaumuha 
extolled for his Goggahakahd } and Bhadda for his Goggahana and 


217 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Machchhaveha. It appears that the three were the precursors of 
Svayambhu and they probably wrote the Mahdhhdrata story 
partly or fully in Apabhramsa poetry. Unfortunately, their works 
have not yet been discovered. Svayambhu is also credited 
with works on Apabhramsa prosody, rhetoric and grammar. 108 
Svayambhu left Paiima-chariu and Hariv&msa Pur ana incomplete, 
but they were ably completed by his worthy son Tribhuvana- 
Svayambhu, and a few chapters at the end of Harlvamsa 
Purdna were added by Yasahkirti about A.D. 1500. Perhaps the 
greatest Apabhramsa poet so far come to light is Pushpadanta who 
wrote his Mahapu'rdnd, Jasahara-chariu and Ndyakumdra-chariu at 
Manyakheta under the patronage of the ministers of the Rashtra- 
kuta Krishna III and his successor. Pushpadanta carries to perfec¬ 
tion the possibilities of Apabhramsa as a vehicle of poetry. His 
charming style, striking figures of speech and occasional double 
entendres recall the best traditions of classical Sanskrit poetry. In 
his Mahdpurdna he has beautifully delineated the lives of the 63 
great men, while in the other two works he has narrated the lives 
of two other religious heroes. The poet himself tells us that his 
parents were originally Brahmanas and belonged to the Saiva faith, 
but later on they‘got converted to Jainism. The poet lived at the 
court of some prince; but some calamity befell him there which 
compelled him to undertake the long journey to Manyakheta where 
his poetic genius was rekindled by Bharata, the minister of king 
Krishna. In one of the verses prefixed to various sandhis of his 
Mahdpurdna, the poet makes mention of the ravages of Manyakheta 
by the king of Dhara. Obviously, this event is no other than the 
invasion by Slyaka II of Dhara during the reign of the Rashtrakuta 
king Khoftigadeva, the successor of Krishna III. This event, accord¬ 
ing to the author of Pdiyulachchhi-nama-mdld, took place in 
V.S. 1029 (=A.D. 972), and the mention of it by Pushpadanta 
proves that his literary activity continued fox at least seven years 
after the completicn of his Mahdpurdna in &aka 887 (=A.D. 965). 

The Karakanda-chariu of Kanakamara, admittedly inspired by 
the poetry of Pushpadanta, is noteworthy for its subject-matter and 
historical references. In ten sandhis it narrates, in comparatively 
easy and lucid style, the life of Karakanda who is recognised as a 
Pratyeka^uddha by the Jains and the Buddhists alike. The hero’s 
compaign in the south gives occasion to the description of the Jain 
caves at Terapur which are identifiable with the existing caves at 
Dharasiva in the vicinity of Osmanabad, which, according to the de¬ 
tails furnished by the poet, may belong to the time of the early 
&ilahara princes. The author gives a short account of himself 
according to which he was a Brahmin of the Chandra-rishi gotra. but 


218 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

adopted the Digambara Jain faith on account of a feeling of renuncia¬ 
tion. The work may be assigned to the tenth century A.D. 

The Bhavisayattakaha of Dhanapala is a poem in twenty-two 
sandhis, and narrates the life of a merchant who suffered immensely 
on account of the jealousy of his step-brother. Though there is no 
evidence to determine the age of the composition, Dr. Hermann 
Jacobi assigns the work to the tenth century A.D. 

Nemin&ha-chariu of Haribhadra is an Apabhramsa poem of 
high merit. The prominent metre here is Raddd as distinguished 
from the normal Paddhadid . Only a portion of this work called 
Sanakumara-chariu has been edited and published. It contains 
343 Raddd verses which constitute verses 443 to 785 of the original. 
The whole book contains more than 8000 slokas. The hero of the 
poem is one of the twelve Chakravartins, and the poet names his 
teacher as Chandra and mentions the date of his work as V.S. 1216. 

Paiimasiri-chariu of Dhahila is a poem in four sandhis, and 
narrates the life of a female devotee to illustrate the evil results of 
deceitful conduct. Though the editor assigns the work to the twelfth 
century, the evidence on which he has relied is rather weak. 

Kir til at a of Vidyapati (fourteenth century) narrates the life 
of Kirtisimha who was a contemporary of Nawab Ibrahim Shah 
of Jaunpur. Thus, it is of much historical importance as well. 
Linguistically, it illustrates the Magadhi tendencies of Apabhramsa, 
makes use of Raddd and other metres, divides itself into pallavas 
instead of sandhis , and thus indicates the advent of modern linguis¬ 
tic tendencies. The epics described above, except the Harivamsa 
Purdna, have all been critically edited and published. 

Pdsandha-chariu or Pdsapuranu of Padmaklrti, which still 
remains in manuscript and for the most part critically unexamined, 
deals with the life of the twenty-third Tlrthankara in eighteen san¬ 
dhis, equal to more than 3300 slokas. The spiritual precursors of the 
poet were Chandrasena, Madhavasdha, Jinasena and Padmaklrti of 
the Sena Samgha. He completed the poem, according to his own 
statement, on the new moon day of Karttika in V.S. 999 (=A.D. 942). 

6. Short Stories 

Another important and interesting branch of Apabhramsa 
literature is short stories meant for entertainment as well as moral 
and religious instruction. We know that the Pali literature is domi¬ 
nated by tales and legends, such as the Jatakas and Avadanas 
intended to point a moral. The Jain literature from the earliest 
time is replete w r ith parables and anecdotes exemplifying religious 
principles. Ethical works, in particular, make frequent mention of 


219 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


persons who observed the rules in spite of much suffering and thus 
reaped the reward in this life or the next. The ethical principle 
laid down for the monks is that they should observe non-violence 
and perfect equanimity of body and mind even at the risk of their 
lives. The laity are recommended to observe the same in a less 
rigorous form, and to discipline and train themselves gradually for 
higher spiritual life. Religious instruction was imparted in two 
ways. Those professing a different faith were sought to be con¬ 
verted by stories revealing the absurdities and incongruities of the 
other creeds; while those who belonged to the true faith had to be 
strengthened in the same and persuaded to observe the religious 
vows and practices by inspiring examples from the past. 

The earliest literature of the first kind in Apabhramsa is the 
Dhamma-Parikkha of Harishena, who acknowledges his debt to 
the work of his predecessor Jayarama in Gdthd metre. Evidently, 
Jayarama’s Dharma-Parikshd was written in Prakrit verses and it 
became the source of similar works in Apabhramsa and Sanskrit. 
Harishena’s work is satirical and is of the same kind as the Dhurt- 
tikhyana of Haribhadra Suri written in Maharashtn Prakrit during 
the eighth century. But until Jayarama’s work in Gdthcis is brought 
to light and its date is determined, it is difficult to say who was the 
originator and who the imitator of this style. The Dhamma- 
Parikkha of Harishena is composed in eleven sandhis comprising 
in all 234 Kadavakas, equal to more than 2000 slokas. The poet 
admits that he was originally a resident of Chitor in Mewad and 
belonged to the Dhakkada family. He migrated to Achalapura 
(probably modern Ellichpur in Amraoti District), where he studied 
metrics and rhetoric, and wrote his magnum opus in A.D. 98?. As 
his predecessors in the field of Apabhramsa poetry, he mentions 
Chaturmukha, Svayambhu, and Pushpadanta. The subject-matter 
of the poem is didactic, with a number of stories and fables inter¬ 
vening, and is similar to that of the Dharma-Patikshd of Ami to gat i 
in Sanskrit composed in A.D. 1014. This latter work is known to 
bear in its language marked traces of Prakritism, which cannot all 
be traced to the present work. It may, however, be presumed that 
Amitagati, when writing his work, had before him the present poem 
composed a quarter of a century earlier. 

E. DRAVIDIAN LANGUAGES AND LITERATURE 

I. Kannada Literature 

With the exception of Tamil, Kannada is the most ancient of 
the Dravidian languages. The word “Canarese,” the Europeanized 
corrupt form of “Kannada,” owes its origin to the early Portuguese 


220 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATUBE 


settlers on the West Coast. The word “Kannada” itself is apparent¬ 
ly derived from “Karnataka,” a popular name for the great Empire 
of Vijayanagar, or from the more ancient name “Karunadu”. There 
are a couple of references to “Karunatar” in the second century 
Tamil classic, the Silappadik&ram, and this fact may be taken as a 
proof that Karnataka started on its independent existence, with its 
own local variation of the parent Dravidian tongue, nearly two 
thousand years ago. The word “Kannada” is construed in various 
ways—the country of the black soil, the big or the high country, 
the sweet or fragrant country, etc. 109 

Next to the Telugu and Tamil speaking peoples, the Kannada 
speaking people are the largest unit among the Dravidians. The 
vast bulk of the Kannada population is comprised within the 
geographical boundaries of Mysore, Western Hyderabad, Kanara, 
the Dharwar, Belgaum, and Bijapur districts of the Bombay State, 
and a few outlying regions as well. We owe to Nripatunga, a ninth 
century rhetorician and poet, the following account of the Kannada 
country and its people: 

‘Twixt sacred rivers twain it lies— 

From famed Godavari, 

To where the pilgrim rests his eyes 
on holy Kaverl. . . 

The people of that land are skilled 
To speak in rhythmic tone; 

And quick to grasp a poet’s thought, 

So kindred to their own. 

Not students only, but the folk 
Untutored in the schools, 

By instinct use and understand 
The strict poetic rules. 110 

The Jains, Vlrasaivas, and Vaishnavas have all enriched 
Kannada literature, and hence it is often divided into three periods, 
called the Jain, Vlrasaiva, and Vaishnava periods respectively. But 
this is misleading, for the so-called periods overlap considerably and 
hence this classification is chronologically not of much value. If 
we take the Kavirdjam&rga of Nripatunga as our starting-point, for 
about three centuries (A.D. 850 to A.D. 1150) Jain predominance 
seems to be clear enough; for the next three centuries, Jain and 
Vlrasaiva writers flourish together; and from A.D. 1450 onwards, 
Vaishnava authors also are increasingly in evidence, and Kannada 
literature accordingly gains in length, breadth and depth. Muslim 
and Christian influences are by no means imperceptible in the lite¬ 
rature of recent times, while it is likely that the early Jain period 


221 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

was itself preceded by a Buddhist period, although no works of that 
period have come down to us. Buddhism, Saivism, Vaishnavism, 
Islam, Christianity—the major world religions, in fact—have all 
thus played a part in shaping Kannada literature, just as they have 
played a part in shaping Tamil literature. 

A characteristic member of the Dravidian group, Kannada 
nevertheless owes a good deal to Sanskrit. Its script is not dis¬ 
similar to the Tamil-Grantha script, and both ultimately derive 
from the Asokan Brahml script. The Tamil alphabet and the 
Kannada alphabet differ in certain particulars, e.g. Tamil has no 
aspirated letters, it has two different letters for the “n” sound and 
it uses the same symbol for surds and sonants (the two ‘p’s and two 
‘b’s for instance). Sanskrit seems to have influenced even the pro¬ 
nunciation of the Kannada language, and certain old Dravidian 
sounds like “1” (as in “Alvar”) and strong “r” are no longer current 
in Kannada. “The chief reason for the differences between the 
Tamil and Kannada alphabets”, says K. Narasimhacharya, “is to be 
found in the fact that the grammar of the Tamil language was, to a 
great extent, systematized independently of Sanskrit influence, and 
that Sanskrit modes of pronunciation being almost unknown to the 
Tamilians, their alphabet, though originally derived from the same 
source, was greatly altered so as to suit their peculiar phonetic 
system. The same independence of Sanskrit influence cannot be 
claimed for the alphabet of the Kannada language, which has mostly 
adhered to the alphabetical system of Sanskrit. The same is the 
case with grammar. . . Nevertheless, the grammatical structure of 
the two languages (Tamil and Kannada) will be found to be essen¬ 
tially similar.” 111 From this it is natural to conclude, not only that 
Kannada and Tamil are sister languages, but also that “Kannada 
was less developed than Tamil when it received the impact of 
Sanskrit.” 112 Generally speaking, Kannada writers are apt to incline 
more towards Sanskrit, though not quite as much as Telugu or 
Malayalam writers. Many of the Kannada men of letters were good 
Sanskritists also, and in some respects Kannada can lay claim to be 
a bridge between Aryan and Dravidian, between the North and the 
South. 

A prose work, Vodda-avadhana, recently discovered, is pro¬ 
bably the earliest of all extant Kannada works. Its author, Siva- 
kotyacharya, was a Jain, and its prose style has been much praised. 
Like many Jain works, Vodda-aradhana, too, has a professedly 
didactic aim. It seems, however, not to be clearly established that 
Vodda-aradhana belongs to a period earlier than A.D. 850, the 
probable date of Kavirdjarmrga. In any case, these two early 


222 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Kannada works must have clearly been preceded by some centuries 
of literary activity. Kannada, as a distinct literary entity, must 
have taken shape at least from the time of the earliest inscriptions 
in that language. The Chikmagalur inscription takes us back to 
the fifth century, and the Sravana Belgola inscription perhaps belongs 
to an earlier period still. It is thus reasonable to conclude that 
there was an early period of Kannada literature extending from at 
least the fourth or fifth century to the eighth or ninth, when many 
writers flourished and laid the foundations of the future develop¬ 
ment of the language and literature; but their works are now totalty 
lost, and it seems unlikely that we shall recover them. 

From the very beginning, Kannada literature seems to have 
enjoyed the patronage of many kings and minor ruling chiefs. Some 
of these were themselves good scholars and writers. For instance, 
the author of the Kavirajamarga was the famous Rashtrakuta king, 
Amoghavarsha, also known by the name Nripatuhga. Among the 
royal families that patronized Kannada literature, special mention 
may be made of the Hoysalas, the Rashtrakutas, the Chalukyas, and 
the kings of Vijayanagar and Mysore. Gold, elephants and other 
costly presents were given to distinguished poets, and titles like 
“kavi-chakravarti” were bestowed upon them. Each royal court 
had generally its own poet, an Astana Vidvan. The Dravidian lite¬ 
ratures could hardly have achieved what they have, but for liberal 
royaj. patronage all along. Many of the kings who encouraged 
Kannada poets also likewise encouraged Telugu poets. In fact, the 
relation between these two literatures has been so intimate that 
some writers have distinguished themselves equally in both. 

The early period of Kannada literature, extending from the 
fifth to the ninth century, is well reflected in the Kavirajamarga 
and in other early works. Nripatuhga mentions several of these 
early writers. Of these, Samanta Bhadra seems to have belonged 
to the sixth century, and to have been a capable Jain controversia¬ 
list and a widely-travelled man. Another Jain writer, Pujyapada, 
probably belonged to the seventh century, and he seems to have 
been proficient alike in Kannada and Sanskrit. The third, Kavi- 
parameshthi, of whom even less is known than of the others, was 
perhaps the earliest of them all. Nripatuhga also mentions such 
early writers as Udaya, Vimala, Jayabandhu, Durvinlta, and 6ri- 
vijaya; but these are but mere names to us, since their works are 
lost and are apparently irrecoverable. 

Notwithstanding the references to these writers of an early 
age and the traditions concerning them, the starting point for the 
Kannada literary historian is Nripatunga’s work on Poetics, Kavi- 


223 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


rdjamdrga, which has been mentioned more than once already. 
Nripatunga was a royal poet, a scholar with a mastery of both 
Sanskrit and Kannada, and a purist who vehemently deprecated 
the reckless borrowings from other languages. Kavimjamdrga 
contains sentiments as beautiful as they are original. It lays down 
that a poem, if it is to stand the test of greatness, must deal with 
nature, and describe the sea and the mountains, the sunrise and 
the moonrise, the waxing and the waning of the seasons. Other 
themes of poetry are heroic life, romance, adventure, games and 
festivities; and, of course, it is the poetic fire that in the final 
analysis turns the mere themes into imperishable poetry. Nripa¬ 
tunga throughout illustrates his principles by .frequent citations, and 
it is plausible to assume that he was generally guided in his work 
by Dandin’s Sanskrit classic, K&vy&darsa. 

Another early writer, Gunavarma I, was the author of Sudraka 
and Neminxtha Pur ana (also called Harivarhsa), and was almost cer¬ 
tainly a later contemporary of Nripatunga. 

The tenth century brings us to one of the great periods of 
Kannada literature. It w T as in this century that the three “gems” 
—Pampa, Ponna, and Hanna—flourished, and it was in this century 
that Nagavarma I wrote the first Kannada treatise on Prosody 
entitled Chhandombudhi or the “Ocean of Prosody,” which is even 
now reckoned as one of the classics on the subject. 

Pampa I, or Adi Pampa, is usually regarded as the greatest 
Kannada poet. His father, a Brahmin, was converted to the Jain 
faith; and the son remained a staunch Jain. Pampa appears to 
have been the court-poet of a minor prince earned Arikesari. In 
A.D. 941, when Pampa was thirty-nine years old, he composed the 
two great poems, Adi Purdna and Vikramdrjuna Vi jay a (also call¬ 
ed, more popularly, Pampa Bharata). The former of these is a his¬ 
tory of the first Tirthakara, 113 in other words, the first of the brave 
heroic souls who have crossed the disturbed and muddy sea of 
human frailty and misery, and reached the shores of unending 
indefinable peace. Jain chronicles name twenty-four of these 
Tlrthakaras, the last of them being the great Mahavlra himself. 
The life-histories of the various Tlrthakaras are held in high esteem 
and reverence by the Jains, much as the story of the various 
avatdras of Vishnu is held sacred by the Hindus. No doubt, in 
these Jain Puranas as indeed in all Puranas, fact and fancy, myth 
and legend, mingle in curious proportions. The first Tirthakara, 
for instance, is described as the father of Bharata, the king who 
gave his name to Bharata-varsha, i.e. India. Pampa’s Adi Purdna 
tells in beautiful language the story of Rishabha, the first Tirthakara, 


224 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


and to the Jains it constitutes a n Aeneid and Book of Genesis com¬ 
bined. 

Ponna, who was Pampa’s contemporary, was also a Jain con¬ 
vert. ITis chief claim to fame is Santi Purdna, the life-history of 
the sixteenth Tlrthakara, who is said to have ruled over Hastinapura 
and held suzerainty all over India. The third, Ranna, a bangle- 
seller by caste, commemorated the traditional history of the second 
Tlrthakara in his Ajita Purdna. This poem was composed in 
A.D. 993, and thus brings us almost to the close of the tenth century. 
A contemporary of Pampa, Ponna, and Ranna, and the patron of 
the last, was Chavunda Raya. He wrote the Chdvundaraya Purdna, 
a comprehensive history of the twenty-four Tirthakaras. It is 
important both as hagiology and as the first—or almost the first— 
extant considerable work of prose in the Kannada language. 
Chavunda Raya is also known to fame as the man of vision res¬ 
ponsible for the Colossus at Sravana Belgola called Gommatesvara. 

Pampa, Ponna, and Ranna were preoccupied with Jain tenets, 
traditions, and interpretations. But they also wrote on other 
themes. Pampa’s Vikramdrjuna Vi jay a and Ranna’s Sdhasa Bhima 
Vijaya (also called Gada-Yuddha) are both secular poems based on 
Vyasa’s immortal epic, the Mahdbhdrata . These are no mere trans¬ 
lations or adaptations, but independent poems by virtue of their 
conception and execution. While the theme is no doubt Vyasa’s, 
there is in Pampa s Vikramdrjuna Vijaya a greater effort towards 
simplicity and concentration. This is achieved principally by iden¬ 
tifying in the person of Arjuna the fortunes of the Pandava House. 
Besides Arjuna, Karna and Duryodhana also are very powerfully 
delineated in Pampa Bhdrata. According to Pampa, Arjuna alone 
marries DraupadI; he is the de facto hero of the epic; and he and 
his wife Subhadra are crowned at the conclusion of the Great War 
at Hastinapura. While all this makes for greater simplicity in 
design and clarity in presentation, Pampa’s persistent identification 
of Arjuna with his own prince, Arikesari, produces a jarring note 
that somewhat detracts from the glory of this poetic symphony. It 
is worthy of note also that Pampa’s love of his country is revealed 
in a passage like this: “When the breeze from the south touches 
me, when I hear good words from some one, when sweet music 
delights my ear, when I see the jasmine flower in full bloom, when 
I sea lovers unite as if they were one soul, and whenever the spring 
festival is held—O! what shall I say—my mind remembers the 
Banavasi land even if I am pierced with goad.” 114 

Ranna too worked on the principle of deliberate limitation. 
The Gadd-Yuddha is plso the Mahdbhdrata in brief, but a Mahd- 

225 

A-I.K.— 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


bMrata seen from a single angle, the hostility between Bhima and 
Duryodhana. Draupadi is humiliated in Duryodhana’s court; she 
unbraids her tresses and takes the oath that she will not gather 
them up again till the evil-doers are adequately punished; and 
Bhima too declares that he will avenge the immitigable insult to 
Draupadi. The story rushes precipitately on till Bhima and Duryo¬ 
dhana meet in the fatal fight with clubs. 

With anger-driven blood-shot eyes, and ghastly frowns, 

Fearful, immense in their aspect, 

Fronting each other with their beginningless hate, 

They engaged in the battle of petrifying stares. 

To the four goddesses of East, West, North and South, 

Bhima and Duryodhana offered due sacrifice; 

Streaming blood and glowing surging eyes 
Made the crimson hibiscus of the sacrifice; 

As if the sun-flushed eastern hill and the western, 

flushed with the setting sun— 

Two vastnesses of pent-up rage— 

Dashed one against the other in mad consuming hate, 

So with their giant maces Bhima and Duryodhana charged. 

“This for the pride of your erstwhile victories; 

This for the killing of all my brothers; 

And this especially for Duhsasana, the drinking of his blood”: 
Taunting Bhima thus, Duryodhana dealt three successive blows. 
“This for the lac-house trap, this for the poisoned food, 

This for the deceitful game of dice, this for the outrage on 

Draupadi, 

And this for your ridiculous plight in the Hall of Mirrors:” 

With these taunts, Bhima drove at Duryodhana’s feet, hands, 

chest, cheeks and forehead. 
When at last Bhima struck at Duryodhana’s vulnerable thigh, 
He fell aslant and bit the earth, as if even then his anger had not 

abated: 

Like a colossal mountain torn out of the base, 

Fell the Lord of the Kauravas and breathed his last. 


Bh’ma has fulfilled his vow, and Draupadi braids her tresses 
up once again. Ranna’s Gada-Yuddha is one of the few Indian epics 
that fulfils the Aristotelian canons of form and concord of parts. 
Ranna is an adept at exploiting the resources of onomatopoeia, and 
the mere recitation of his verses often suggests the full amplitude 


226 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


and roar and thunder of the action. As in the Pampa Bkdrata, so in 
the Gadd-Yuddha, the hero is again and again embarrassingly identi¬ 
fied with the poet’s own patron, Ahavamalla. But, then, patronage 
would demand its “pound of flesh”—and we have no right to com¬ 
plain ! 115 

II. Tamil Literature 

The Saiva and Vaishnavite revival culminated, as we saw in an 
earlier chapter, 116 in the celebrated Tevaram and Tiruvdchakam 
hymns of the Saiva Samayacharyas on the one hand, and the no 
less celebrated Naldyira Prabandham of the Vaishnava Alvars on 
the other. The four Nayanars flourished in the period between 
A.D. 600 and A.D. 750, while the twelve Alvars flourished in the 
period indicated by the extreme limits of A.D. 500 to A.D. 850. 
After three centuries of such inveterate mystical striving, punctuat¬ 
ed by those thousands of rhapsodies of the spirit, Buddhist and 
Jain influence in the Tamil country declined to almost vanishing 
point. A period of comparative inactivity set in, and the literary 
development presented a bleak prospect for a time. No doubt, the 
Saiva and Vaishnava hymns were still tremendously potent influen¬ 
ces, and there were not wanting bhaktas who boldly struck the lyre 
of devotional or mystical poetry. Some of the Saiva hymns com¬ 
posed during this period were later included in Tiru-isaippa, the 
ninth of the Tirumurais collected together by Nambi-Andar-Nambi. 
Tiru-isaippa consists of twenty-nine sacred poems, dedicated to vari¬ 
ous South Indian Saiva temples, and comprises about 300 stanzas. 
The contributors to Tiru-isaippa are Tirumalikai Tevar, Senthanar, 
Kariir Tevar, the tenth century prince Kandar-athithan, Purushotha- 
ma Nambi, and some others. 

One of the poems of Tirumalikai Tevar is a fulsome eulogy of 
Siva’s divine personality, limb by limb, a form of praise dear to 
devotees, and somewhat akin to Tiruppanalvar’s famous Amala - 
ndthippiran. Beginning with Siva’s “lovely feet adorned with the 
crowns of the worshipping Deva kings”, Tirumalikai Tevar proceeds 
to describe the legs and the navel, and ends with the lotus face and 
the plaited red hair mattressing the head. Senthanar likewise sings 
of Siva in picturesque terms: 

The lump white crescent, the spreading plait, 

The three-fold dagger, the blue neck, 

The sparkling eye adorning the beautiful forehead; 

and the words of homage continue in strains of melting devotion. 


227 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Kandar-athithan’s intensity of devotion is no less striking, for the 
cry is wrung from his heart: 

I cry like the separated calf from its mother! 

Pattinathar, author of Koil-ndnmanimdlai, also belonged to this 
period—probably to the latter half of the ninth century. His out¬ 
pourings on the occasion of the death of his mother, coming from a 
yogi like him, are touchingly human: 

When shall I see again the mother 

Who bore my burden in her aching limbs for ten tedious months, 

Nursed me as a child with ambrosial milk 

Holding me close with both her affectionate arms? 

Pattinathar’s fulminations against the tribe of Eve, whose spoilt 
child he had once been, may sound misogynous to/modern ears; but 
there is a metallic ring in his clear-cut ethical asseverations in 
Tiruv e kampa-md lai: 

Man is a stringed puppet that dances as long as the string is 

intact. 

Nothing is good but the friendship of the good and devotion to 
God. The rest—wife, relations, children, and all life’s 

vanities—is illusion, 

Whjr were these people born, O Ekambara of Kanchipiji.ra?— 

The cantankerous, the evil-minded, the lecherous! 

Pattinathar’s pupil, Pathira Giriar, exchanged in a mood of 
renunciation the sceptre for the begging-bowl, and moved from 
place to place singing divinely intoxicated verses d la Smart’s Song 
to David or Piers Plowman. This rather lean period in Tamil letters 
was but the inevitable interregnum dividing the Age of the Naya- 
nars and the Alvars from the great age of Kamban that was to follow 
not long afterwards. 


1. De, “VisakhadattaB.C. Law Volume, I, pp. 50-57. 

2. Keith, SD, p. 204. 

3. He refers to Visakhadeva who is very probably to be identified with 
Visakhadatta—cf. De, Op. Cit, p. 57 n. 

4. For an appreciation of this play read Devasthali, Introduction to the study of 
Visakhadatta and his Mudru-Rakshasa. 


228 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


5. Vol. Ill, p. 17. 

G. Konow, ID, p. 86; Keith, SD, p. 239. 

7. Bhattanathaswami, I A, XLI, p. 141. 

8. Keith, SD, pp. 225-6; Konow, ID, p. 83. 

9. Hultzsch’s view noticed by Keith, SD, p. 225. 

10. ID, p. 83. 

11. Durgaprasada places him in the middle of the ninth century. Cf. Winternitz, 
GIL, III, p. 241 n. 4. 

12. For these, see Keith, SD, p. 229. 

13. Krishnamachariar, HCSL, p. 641 f. 

14. Pischel quoted by Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 241. 

15. This is probably the first play of Rajasekhara according to Keith, SD, p. 232; 
but Winternitz (GIL, III, p. 240) holds just the opposite view, viz. that 
Rajasekhara must have composed this play after he had made a name by 
composing his Sanskrit plays. For the chronology of Rajasekhara’s works in 
general, see Mirashi, Pathak Comm. Vol., pp. 359-366. 

16. Also known as Prachandapdndava. 

17. See above, pp. 33, 89. 

18. He is also known as Kshemendra, but not to be identified with the Kashmirian 
poet of that name. 

19. For several views about his identity, see Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 249, n. 4; 
also De, NIA, II, pp. 267-8 ( Ross Comm. Vol., pp. 83-4). 

20. Peterson, Third Report, pp. 340-2. 

21. For these, see Konow, ID, p. 89. 

22. Konow, ID, p. 89; Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 242; Keith, SD, p. 271. 

23. Winternitz, GIL, III, pp. 244-5. 

24. For a full discussion, see Keith, SD, pp. 53-74; also De, IHQ, VII, pp. 537-8. 

25. Cf. De, Jha Comm. Vol. pp. 139-44. 

26. Keith, SD, p. 56. 

27. SD, p. 185 fn. 3. 

28. JRAS, 1926, pp. 87-8, 90. 

29. JRAS, 1924, pp. 262-5. 

30. For both Jinasenas, see Velankar, Jinaratnakosa, Vol. I, p. 29 (under Adipurana ) 
and p. 460 (under Harivamsapurdna I). 

31. Keith, HSL, p. 498; Velankar, Jinaratnakosa, p. 233. 

32. See NIA, IV, p. 396. 

33. Keith, HSL, p. 142. 

34. Winternitz, GIL, III. p. 74, n. 4; Keith HSL, p. 135. 

35. Krishnamachariar, HCSL, p’ 163. 

36. HBR, p. 310. 

37. HBR, p. 123. 

38. Keith, (HSL, p. 480) tacitly accepts this identity; but De expresses doubt 
(NIA. II, p. 269 n. 7, Ross Comm. Vol. p. 85 n. 7). 

39. Ayyar, QJMS, XIV, pp. 302-11. 

40. Krishnamachariar, HCSL, p. 326, n. 3; Keith, HSL, p. 97, n. 5 and 98. 

41. Winternitz, GIL, III, pp. 75, 415; Velankar, Jinaratnakosa, p. 185; Krishnama¬ 
chariar, HCSL, p. 169; HSL, p. 137. 

42. Keith, HSL, p. 150; Winternitz GIL, III, pp. 43-4; also Biihler translated by 
Ghate in IA, XLII, pp. 29 ff., 137 ff., etc. 

43. The work is said to have been composed about A.D. 1005—Keith, HSL, p. 151. 

44. For details and references, see Krishnamachariar, HCSL, pp. 325-6, and 326 n. 3. 

45. See Andhra Patrikd, Annual Number (1917-18), p. 224, quoted by Krishnama¬ 
chariar, HCSL, p. 492 and n. 1. 

46. See Jinaratnakosa, Vol. I, p. 387 (Sobhanastuti ); and Peterson, Fourth Report, 
p. cxxi (Sobhana). 

47. Peterson, Fourth Report, p. xcii (Manatuhga; author of the Bhayaharastotra) . 

48. Keith (HSL, p. 215) holds that Siddhasena Divakara composed his Kalyana - 
mandira in deliberate imitation of the Bhaktdmarastotra. But as this Divakara 
flourished between A.D. 650 and 750, Manatuhga may have to be placed in 
the first half of the seventh century A.D. 

49. NIA, II, p. 268 (Ross Comm. Vol., p. 84). 


229 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


50. HSL, p. 98. 

51. GIL, III, p. 65. 0 orT , 

52. HSL, p. 98; also see Krishnamachariar, HCSL, pp. 236 n. 3, 169 n. 2, 271 n. 17 

and 372 n. 1 for further references. 

53. Gode, J1H, XIX, pp. 312-9. 

54. Edited by Dr. F. W. Thomas from a Nepalese manuscript of the twelfth century 


—Keith, HSL, p. 222. 

55. For quotations from these, see Krishnamachariar, HCSL, pp. 399-401. 

56. Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 316 and n. 1 (also n. 2); Keith, HSL, p. 273. 


57. Winternitz, GIL, HI, p. 341. 

58. Peterson, Fourth Report, p. lxii (Dhanapala). 

59. Keith, HSL, p. 331. 

60. This is also called the Dhanapalapahchdsika. Cf. Velankar, Jinaratnakosa, Vol. 
I, p. 58. 

61. Oldenberg has adduced analogous cases in the Jataka book. For references, 
see Keith, HSL, p. 332, n. 2. 

62. SDar, VI, 336. 

63. Devaditya according to Keith, HSL, p. 332, where the legend about th6 composi¬ 
tion and the unfinished state of the work is also given. 

64. Raghavan, NIA, VI, pp. 67-9. 

65. Cf. Yasastilakachampu (NSP), I. 17. 

66. HSL, p. 336. 

67. Ramavatara Sarma, Kalpadrukosa, Intro, p. XXV. 

68. Bhandarkar, CW, II, p. 71. 

69. De, NIA, II, pp. 272 and n. 2, 3, 4 and 6 ( Ross Comm. Vol. p. 88 and n. 2, 3, 4 
and 6). 

70. Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 401 and n. 2. 

71. Belvalkar, SSG, p. 91. 

72. It has been necessary to use in this section many technical terms which can¬ 
not be adequately translated or explained within the short scope of this 
chapter. For their full significance the readers are referred to standard works 
on the subject mentioned in Bibliography. 

73. Kane, HAL, pp. XLI-XCV, Revised 2nd edn. pp. 125-246. 

74. See above, p. 115. 


75. V. 12-14. 

76 . B.C. Law Volume, Part I, pp. 179-193. 

77. Cf. Devisataka, stanza 104 and commentary thereon (KM, IX, p. 30). 

78. NIA, II, pp. 412-419. Ndtakaratnakosa forming only a part of Kumbha’s 
Samgltardja, cf. Raghavan, ABORI, XIV, pp. 259-63. 

79. C. K. Raja Commemoration Volume, pp. 141-152. 

80. JBBRAS, 1935; JUB, 1936. 

81. Keith, HSL, p. 511; Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 550. For a discussion regarding 
other works ascribed to this author see De, NIA, II, p. 274 ( Ross Comm. Vol., 
p. 90). 

82. Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 550 and n. 4; contra, Keith, HSL, p. 511 and De NIA, II, 
p. 274 ( Ross Comm. Vol. p. 90). 

83. Cf. Devasthali, Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in 
the Library of the University of Bombay, No. 278, p. 113. 

84. Ray, History of Hindu Chemistry, ii, Sanskrit Texts, p. 14; Keith, HSL, p. 512; 
Winternitz GIL, III, p. 552. 

85. Dikshit, Bharatiya Jyotislia Sdstra (in Marathi), 2nd ed. pp. 229-236, and 
312-315. 

86. Dikshit, op. cit, p. 486 and n. 

87. POC, Summaries of Papers, XI, 1943, p. 64. 

88. R. C. Hazra, Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs r 
Dacca, 1940. 

89. Cf. Kane, KHDS, I, pp. 224, 239. 

90. Festschrift Kane, pp. 405-407. 

91. Chitrav, Madhyayugina Charitra Kosa s.v. Vachaspati. 

92. Also called Tattvavaisaradi. 

93. Read the concluding verses of Bhamati. 

94. Dr. D. C. Bhattacharya gives the date as A.D. 1054 ( JGJRI, XI, pt. 4). 


230 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


95. De, NIA, II, p. 271 and n. 3 ( Ross Comm. Vol. p. 87 and n. 3). 

96. Winternitz, GIL, IU, p. 466. The same Udayana is also the author of the 
Lakshandvali a Vaiseshika work composed in A.D. 984 (ibid, p. 474). 

97. A work in 85 karikas ascribed to Ad Lesha (Patahjali) printed in Pandit, 
Vol. V, 1871, pp. 189 ff, and TSS, No. 12, 1911, is different from the one referred 
to by Abhinavagupta—cf. Winternitz, GIL, III, p. 446 and n. 3. 

98. Pali Language and Literature, pp. 34-5. 

99. Saddhamma-Samgaha, Ch. IX. 

100. JPTS, 1886, pp. 60, 70. 

101. JPTS, 1917, p. 2. 

102. Buddhaghosa, p. 77 n. 3. 

103. PLC, pp. 144-5; CII, III, pp. 274 ff. 

104. Dipavamsa und Mahdvamsa, p. 79; Catalogue, p. xiv. 

105. PLC, p. 162; HIL, II, p. 223. 

106. See Vol. II, pp. 221-3. 

107. Prdkrita-sarvasva, 16.2. 

107a. H. P. Sastri (Bauddha Gan O Doha, Intr.) called this language Sandhyd-bhashd. 
or “twilight language”. V. Bhattacharya (IHQ, IV. 287-296), P. C. Bagchi 
(IHQ, VI. 389-396) and F. Edgerton (JAOS, 1937. 185 f), however, have / shown 
that the correct name is Sandhabhasha, meaning “symbolical or intentional 
speech”. Winternitz (HIL, II. 393) and De (HBR, I. 329), among others, accept 
this meaning.—Ed. 

108. See above, pp. 197, 209. 

109. R. S. Mugali, The Heritage of Karnataka (1946), p. 22. 

110. E. P. Rice, Kanarese Literature, p. 29. 

111. History of Kannada Language (1934), p. 56. 

112. Mugali, The Heritage of Karnataka, p. 29. 

113. Written both as Tirthakara and Tirthahkara. 

114. Prof. R. S. Mugali’s translation. 

115. For the section on Kannada Literature, I am greatly indebted to Dr, S. C. 
Nandimath and the late Prof. S. S. Basawanal. 

116. Vol. Ill, Ch. XV, Sec. III. 


231 


CHAPTER X 


POLITICAL THEORY, ADMINISTRATIVE 
ORGANISATION, LAW AND LEGAL 

INSTITUTIONS 

I. POLITICAL THEORY 

The stream of political thought which in the preceding period 
ran principally along the channels of the late Smritis and the early 
Puranas, as well as Kamandaka’s ‘Essence of Polity’ ( Nitisara ), was 
continued in the present epoch in the Smriti-commentaries of Medha- 
tithi and Visvarupa and the later Puranas, as well as ‘the Nectar 
of the Sayings of Polity’ (Nitivakydmrita) of the Jain Somadeva 
(tenth century A.D.). We shall attempt in the present chapter to 
consider some of the leading political ideas of these works, specially 
as regards the theory of kingship. 

Medhatithi, while repeating the old Smriti view of the com¬ 
prehensive scope of rajadharma, brings out clearly the dominance of 
the king’s public functions. Explaining the term rajadharma in the 
opening verse of Manu’s seventh chapter, he takes this to signify 
the (whole) duty of the king. This duty, he continues, comprises 
that which relates to visible affairs (drishpdrtha) , such as the six 
types of foreign policy, and that which is concerned with invisible 
things {adrishtdrtha) , such as the fire-offering (agnihotra) . It is the 
former, he observes, which are chiefly dealt with in the present 
place, for these alone are generally known as rajadharma. In other 
words rajadharma, while equivalent to the Whole Duty of the king, 
comprises chiefly his public acts, or to put it more generally, is 
synonymous with Politics. Corresponding to this double composi¬ 
tion of rajadharma, Medhatithi indicates its twofold source. For 
he says in the same context, that the duties here described are based 
not wholly upon the Vedas, but upon other sources as well. Explain¬ 
ing the scope of the latter, he observes, on the authority of a text 
of Katyayana, that the duties which are not contrary to Dharma - 
sastra are laid down here. Rajadharma , then, has a twofold source, 
namely, the Vedic and the non-Vedic (Arthasdstra) , the latter being 
subordinate to the former. 

As regards the idea of kingship Visvarupa as well as Medha¬ 
tithi introduces info the Smriti literature a discussion which was 
started by the early Mlmdmsa writers in the field of Vedic ritual. 


232 


POLITICAL THEORY 


This is concerned with the question of eligibility of individuals to 
the royal title (rajan). These authorities, adopting the strict dog¬ 
matic attitude, confined the application of this title to the Kshatriya 
alone, though they were led by the logic of facts to recognise its ex¬ 
tension to non-Kshatriyas in accordance with the maxim of 
representation. A more logical attitude is adopted by the Smriti 
writers above mentioned. Thus Visvarupa in one place 1 quotes 
Manu 2 to show that the royal title belongs to one who possesses a 
kingdom, and not to a Kshatriya alone. In another place 3 Visvarupa, 
after affirming on the authority of Manu 4 and Yajnavaikya 6 that 
the designation rdjan belongs to the Kshatriya, adds the qualification 
that the title to dominion ( rdjya ) belongs not to every Kshatriya, 
but to one who has the attributes of coronation and so forth. Very 
similar is the view of Medhatithi . 6 For he includes within the con¬ 
notation of rdjan any territorial ruler {janapadesvara), although of 
non-Kshatriya caste, while on the other hand he excludes Kshatriyas 
who have not received consecration. Medhatithi’s originality con¬ 
sists in his justification of this interpretation. While the use of the 
term Kshatriya in the text, he argues , 7 proves that a Kshatriya alone 
is eligible to rulership, a substitute is permitted in the Kshatriya’s 
absence, for otherwise the subjects would perish. Again he says 8 
that while according to Manu 9 the Kshatriya is to live by bearing 
arms and weapons, other castes who live by the Kshatriya’s occupa¬ 
tion are likewise entitled to rulership. For, as is stated by an anony¬ 
mous (Smriti) text, whoever protects the people is known as king 
( nripa ) and this duty has been ordained for the purpose of ensuring 
the welfare of the people in general. Manu’s use of the generic word 
pdrihiva for king, Medhatithi concludes, makes his teaching appli¬ 
cable not to the Kshatriya alone but to any other territorial ruler, 
for otherwise the kingdom would not be stable. Medhatithi, there¬ 
fore, while fixing the stamp of legitimacy upon rulers irrespectively 
of their Kshatriya caste, bases his view upon the principle that 
kingship is essential for the security of the State as well as the peo¬ 
ple. 

As regards the mutual relations of the ruler and his people 
Medhatithi 10 hints at the principle of the king’s unlimited executive 
authority. Here, while explaining Manu’s warning against incur¬ 
ring the king’s anger, he- observes that other men may forgive a 
fault because of difficulties in placing complaints before the king, 
but when the king makes up his mind to destroy a man, the latter 
is surely ruined because the king is all-powerful. Medhatithi, how¬ 
ever, is careful to lay down the limitations on the authority of the 
king’s executive edict. The ‘law’ ( dharma ) laid down by the king 
for the people’s observance, he says , 11 refers to the executive arrange- 


238 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


ment ( kdryavyavasthu ) that is not contrary to the canon as well as 
custom. More particularly he observes that the king has no autho¬ 
rity over the castes and orders as regards religious matters such as 
the fire-offering, for otherwise there would arise the occasion for con¬ 
flict with other Smritis. In the above the author evidently applies 
the fundamental Smriti principles of the supremacy of the canon and 
the binding authority of custom to limit the scope of the king’s execu¬ 
tive edict. Medhatithi likewise discusses the nature of the twofold 
obligation of protection imposed upon the king by the old Smriti law. 
The point is fully discussed by him while explaining Manu’s text 12 
promising the reward of heaven to the king who protects those 
following the Aryan rule of life. Medhatithi’s first interpretation 
distinguishes between the king’s contractual and his general obli¬ 
gation of protection. It is proper, we are told, that the king should 
go to heaven by protecting the poor, the friendless and the learned 
Brahmana who pay no taxes and no duties. In the case of others, 
however, the king, by not performing his obligation, incurs sin, for 
their protection is purchased by payment of the king’s means of sub¬ 
sistence. On the other hand the king attains immunity from sin, 
but not the reward of heaven, by paying the ransom in the shape of 
offering protection. This means that the king’s contractual obliga¬ 
tion is a compulsory ( nitya ) duty in contrast with his general obli¬ 
gation which is optional ( kdmya ). This is explicitly supported by 
the old Smriti argument that taxes are the purchase-money paid to 
the king for the service of protection. According to Medhatithi’s 
alternative explanation, Manu’s text should be understood to refer to 
fulfilment of the rule regarding the king’s livelihood. This simply 
repeats the old Smriti conception that the king’s general obligation 
of protection is imposed upon him by his distinctive occupation. 
Another view, quoted by Medhatithi, does away with the distinction 
between the king’s contractual and his general obligation. Dismis¬ 
sing the reference to the king’s reward of heaven as a mere declama¬ 
tion, this view maintains that the protection of those who do not 
contribute to the king’s livelihood is likewise fixed by the king’s 
occupation, for these people also form part of the kingdom (which it 
is the king’s obligation to protect). Supporting the above by an 
argument from analogy, the author observes that artisans plying 
their craft for a living are made by the king to perform some work 
in lieu of taxes 13 and similarly the king, engaged in his livelihood 
in the shape of protection of his subjects, is made by the canon to 
protect the Aryas as a compulsory duty. Again the author applies 
the analogy of a householder kindling the sacred fire, who performs 
obligatory rites not for winning heaven or for any such reward. The 
king’s obligation of protection, in other words, is compulsory since 


234 


POLITICAL THEORY 


it is bound up with his occupation which is imposed upon him by 
canonical authority. Adding in this context the sanction of poli¬ 
tical danger to that of spiritual penalty for non-observance of the 
king’s contractual obligation, Medhatithi says : 14 “He who receives 
taxes and still fails to slay thieves, incurs a double blame, namely in 
this world the disaffection of his subjects and in the next the loss of 
heaven: it is but proper that he who receives the taxes and yet fails 
to give their requital should incur (this twofold) blame”. 

The old Smriti law from the time of the Dharma-sutras onwards 
mentions a number of civil rights of individuals which they are 
entitled to defend by force of arms, if necessary. These rights are 
explained and amplified by Medhatithi. Construing the relevant 
verses of Manu 16 as two different sentences, Medhatithi takes the 
first verse to mean that ‘the twice-born classes’ may take up arms 
on all occasions. Medhatithi rejects the contrary interpretation 
which would by making the two verses a complete sentence confine 
their scope to the specific occasions mentioned by Manu and no 
other. This is justified in part by the characteristics of desperadoes 
( dtaidyl) who do not wait for the other party to take up arms. The 
other argument is based upon the important principle of insuffi¬ 
ciency of the State administration to ensure universal security. It 
may be urged, Medhatithi argues, that one may take up arms when 
one’s religious duties are disturbed and when disorder is produced 
in evil times in consequence of the king’s death, but at other times 
when the kingdom is well governed the king himself gives protec¬ 
tion. To this argument Medhatithi replies that the king cannot 
stretch his arms so as to reach every man within his kingdom. There 
are, he explains, some wicked men who attack the most valiant of 
the king’s officers, but are afraid of persons bearing arms. From 
this it follows that the people are justified in bearing arms at all 
times. This is evidently a plea for giving the individuals (spe¬ 
cially of the upper classes) the permanent right to carry arms for 
self-defence. Continuing his argument Medhatithi puts the ques¬ 
tion whether bearing arms is intended only to strike terror, and he 
answers it emphatically in the negative. The slayer of a desperado, 
he observes, is liable neither to punishment by the king nor to 
penance, and he can kill the latter by all means, either publicly in 
the presence of other people, or secretly by administering poison 
and so forth. This obviously gives the individuals the fullest right 
to self-protection even at the cost of secret murder of their assai¬ 
lants. Finally Medhatithi, while paraphrasing Manu’s list of occa¬ 
sions justifying killing of desperadoes, adds that one may take up 
arms for the protection of his family or property. He also quotes 
an anonymous view which extends this right to the protection of 

235 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAU« T 


others as well on those occasions. One may, Medhatithi observes in 
the same context , 16 unhesitatingly fight for self-defence. The in¬ 
dividual’s right of self-defence, in other words, extends to the pro¬ 
tection of his family and property and, according to one view, to the 
protection of others as well. 

As regards the political rights of individuals Visvarupa assumes 
an attitude which brings him into line with Mcihabharata texts 17 
justifying the subject in slaying a tyrant. When the king, we read , 13 
is guilty of a grave crime, he should be slain by throwing even a 
mighty clod of earth against him. For, he argues, the destruction 
of the army, the revenue and so forth would otherwise be inevitable, 
as all these have their roots in the king. The people, in other words, 
are entitled to slay the tyrant in the interest of the State. 

It will be seen from the above examples that boldness and ori¬ 
ginality of political ideas are by no means wanting in the Srnriti 
commentaries of this period. Such is, however, not the case with 
the thought of Lakshmidhara, author of the oldest known Srnriti 
Digest called Kritycikalpataru. We shall deal here with the section 
of this work dealing with rajadharma ( Rdjadharmakdnda ). As re¬ 
gards the origin of kingship, Lakshmidhara 19 quotes Manu’s dogma 
of divine creation of the king out of particles of the eight Regents 
of the Quarters, so as to make him a superman. With the same 
mechanical exactitude he quotes 20 the old Srnriti texts relating to 
the nature of kingship. Such are the texts regarding the parity of 
the king’s executive and judicial functions with the attributes of 
multiple deities and those enjoining the individual’s obligation of 
honouring and obeying the king. To the same category belongs his 
quotation 21 of the R&mayana text on the evils of a kingless country. 
The king, then, according to the author, is a superman by virtue of 
his divine creation, while his functions are comparable with those 
of various deities. The king’s office, again, is the grand safeguard 
of security and welfare of the people. From these conceptions fol¬ 
lows the people’s obligation of honouring and obeying their ruler. 
As a set-off against the above principles bearing on the king’s author¬ 
ity, the author 22 quotes the old Srnriti passages enjoining the ruler’s 
obligation of protection by means of the usual sanctions. 

Compared with the political ideas of the Smriti-commentators 
analysed above, those of the late Puranas are singularly wanting in 
originality. As regards the origin of kingship the legends of crea¬ 
tion of the social order in these works 23 involve the principle that 
the Kshatriya is divinely ordained for the purpose of protection. 
We are moreover specifically told that the Self-existent One created 
the king out of particles of the gods so that he might inflict chastise- 


236 


POLITICAL THEORY 


merit for the protection of all creatures , 24 According to Brihad* 
dharma 25 Brahma created the king’s body by taking lordship from 
Indra, prowess from Agni, cruelty from Yama, good fortune from 
the Moon, riches from Kubera and goodness from Ramajanardana, 
and the king alone atid no other should be recognised as Indra. Again 
we read 26 that the king assumes different divine forms by virtue 
of his different functions or attributes. The king then is a multiple 
deity literally by virtue of his creation out of divine particles by 
the Highest Deity and metaphorically because of parallelism of his 
attributes and functions with those of various divinities. In the 
composite account of the origin and nature of kingship in Vishnu - 
dhcir mo tiara 27 , the author first shows, by means of his picture of a 
'State of Nature’ without a king, how the king’s office is the founda¬ 
tion of the institutions of family and property, as well as the/grand 
security of observance of duties by the castes and the safeguard of 
the people against providential and human calamities. This is 
accompanied by the author’s statement of the doctrine of the king’s 
divinity in the literal sense of the term. The king is born among 
men by being strengthened with Vishnu’s lustre and by bearing the 
divine attributes on his person. The fundamental importance of 
kingship in the interest of the people is illustrated by a passage in 
Garuda 28 which includes a land without a king in a list of places 
where one should not live. 

The above ideas of the king’s office and functions are pressed 
into service in the late Puranas (as in the Smritis) for justifying 
the obligation of the people towards the ruler. In the extract quoted 
above 29 the Vishnudharmottara observes in the words of a Mahfi- 
bharata text 30 that the chiefest duty of the people of a certain 
territory ( rashtra) is the consecration of the king. Again we are 
told that honouring and obeying the ruler is the divine as well as 
the human obligation of the people. “When the king is pleased 
the gods themselves are satisfied and when he is angry the people 
are filled with anger: the king indeed is born because of his high 
spiritual merit and therefore the whole world submits to the king’s 
command”- The king,, says Brihaddharma , 31 should not be harmed 
or reviled or slighted or abused, for the gods move about on earth 
in the form of kings. The same work mentions 32 propitiation of 
the king among the duties of the Vaisya, while it includes 33 the act 
of seeing the king among the householder’s daily and periodical 
duties. 

The principle of the king’s authority is balanced in the late 
Puranic theory (as in the theory of the Smritis) by that of the ruler’s 
obligations. How t protection is the divine purpose of the Kshatriya’s 


237 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


and the king's creation is told in the stories of their origin mentioned 
above. The king, according to Brihaddharma , 34 is a Kshatriya de¬ 
voted to the protection of the people. According to Vishnudhar - 
mottara 35 the king immediately after his selection by the chief men 
in the State shall take the vow ( vrata ) that he would protect all of 
them who are righteous. As in the older thought, this obligation is 
enforced by the promise of spiritual rewards and the threat of spiri¬ 
tual penalties . 36 Some clauses of positive law in the late Puranas 
(like those in the Smritis) reflect the principles of the king’s authority 
and obligation. Agni 37 repeats the penalties for such offences 
against the king’s dignity and authority as violation of the Queen, 
miswriting the king’s edict and mounting the king’s conveyance. On 
the other hand Vishnudhar mottara 3S repeats the ancient Smriti 
clause requiring the king to restore stolen property to owners of all 
castes. 

The late Purana versions 39 of the old Mahdbhdrata legend of 
Vena and his son Prithu throw some light upon the authors’ ideas of 
the nature of the king’s office. It must be observed at the outset 
that these versions are given, not (as in the Mahdbhdrata account) 
for explaining the origin of kingship, but in the context of geiiea- 

i 

logical narratives of the Patriarchs, or at the most in answer 
to questions about the origin of the earth and the mixture of castes. 
Nevertheless we learn from the Matsya and Brihaddharma accounts 
that the motive for selection of the king (Prithu in the former and 
Vena in the latter case) was fear of anarchy. This of course involves 
the old Smriti view that the king’s office is essential for the security 
of the people. In the different accounts of Prithu we are told that 
he bore the mental aspect of Vishnu ( Garuda ), that Vishnu having 
consecrated Prithu to universal lordship appointed kings over diffe¬ 
rent orders of beings (Agni), that Prithu was an incarnation of God 
Vishnu ( Brihaddharma ), and that he was Vishnu in human form 
(Vishnudharmottara) . This involves the doctrine that the first legi¬ 
timate king (or universal ruler) was created by the great God Vishnu 
and was His human incarnation. The king, then, derives his autho¬ 
rity not only from his divine creation, but also and above all from his 
divine personality as a representative of Vishnu. On the other hand 
the story of the remonstrance of the sages addressed to the tyrant 
Vena implies the doctrine of supremacy of Justice (or Righteousness) 
or else of canonical injunctions over the king. 

The Nitivakyamrita of the Jain monk Somadeva Suri 
announces itself as a manual of instruction to kings and others on 
the subject of general morals including statecraft. The author’s 
political thought bears little trace of his Jain beliefs and principles, 


238 


POLITICAL THEORY 


but on the contrary is inspired throughout by the old Smriti- 
Arthasastra tradition. Somadeva 40 accepts in toto the ancient 
Arthasastra category of four sciences (namely, ‘the Sacred Canon’, 
‘Philosophy’, ‘Economics’ and ‘Politics’) which he aptly designates 
as ‘the royal sciences’. Explaining the place of ‘the Sacred Canon’ 

(tray I ) in this list he says , 41 in words recalling Kautilya, that the 
castes and orders are fixed in their duties and are dissuaded from 
their opposites through it, and that both the king and the people 
attain the threefold end by avoiding confusion of their distinctive 
duties. This repeats the old and fundamental Smriti principle that 
Society is an association for the complete fulfilment of the indivi¬ 
dual in accordance with the law of his appointed duties and that 
the source of this law is the Sacred Canon. 

As regards the nature of kingship Somadeva in the first place 
repeats the complex view of the king’s origin and office found in 
Manu-smriti and other works. The king, we read, is a great deity 
and bows to none else except to his superiors . 42 Again we are 
told 43 that all the Regents of the Quarters attend upon the king 
who is therefore described as the best of his class. In another place 
the author exalts the king to the level of the three Highest Deities 
of the Brahmanical pantheon. The king, we read , 44 becomes 
Brahma in his childhood when as a student he resides in his pre¬ 
ceptor’s household and studies the sciences; he becomes Vishnu when 
after attaining sovereignty and receiving the ceremonial initiation 
at his consecration he attracts the love of his subjects by his quali¬ 
ties; and he becomes &iva when with increased strength and with 
the possession of the highest authority he sets about extirpating 
thorns of the State and becomes a conqueror. Elsewhere Somadeva, 
applying the old conception of the supremacy of righteousness, dis¬ 
tinguishes between the consequences of the king’s attitude towards 
this vital principle. When the king is unrighteous, every one else 
becomes the same . 45 But when the king justly protects his subjects, 
all quarters fulfil the desires of people, the rains fall in time, and all 

beings live in peace , 46 The king in this sense is the cause of time. 

* 

As a corollary of his view of the king’s authority Somadeva, 
like the authors of the Brahmanical Smritis, enjoins upon the people 
the obligation of honouring and obeying their ruler . 47 Repeating 
the Smriti view of the king’s obligation towards his people the 
author further observes 48 that protection is the duty of the 
Kshatriya and that the king’s duty consists in cherishing the good 
and chastising the wicked. Protection, indeed, is the supreme and 
distinctive obligation of the ruler. He is no king who fails in his 
duty of protection : 49 the king’s dharma does not consist in shaving 


289 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


the hair, wearing matted locks and so forth. Following the same 
Smriti authority Somadeva 0 enforces the king’s obligation of protec¬ 
tion by the promise of spiritual rewards. On the other hand the 
author, probably under the influence of the Jain doctrine of ahimsd, 
so far from repeating the advanced Smriti ideas of resistance against 
the evil ruler, resigns himself passively to the latter’s acts. The 
king’s wrong-doing, he says,' 51 like the ocean’s crossing the shores, 
the Sun’s causing darkness and the mother’s devouring her own 
children, is a characteristic of the Iron Age. 

II. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION—NORTH INDIA 

The Pratlharas were the most dominant political power in 
North India in the latter part of the ninth and the beginning of the 
tenth century A.D. In their stone records, they ordinarily assumed 
the imperial title of mahdrdjddhirdja , though in their copper-plate 
inscriptions they usually chose to be called by the more modest sty ie 
of maharaja. The territory under the direct administration of these 
emperors was divided info the traditional bhuktis (provinces), sub¬ 
divided into mmidalas (districts), which were further split up into 
vishayas . Among the officers of the central government mentioned 
by name in their records are the dandapdsika (police officer), rnahd- 
pratilwra (chief of the palace guards), dandanayaka (general), and 
balddhikrita (commander of forces). A remarkable inscription of 
A.D. 876 52 shows how the affairs of Gwalior (and probably of other 
important cities as well) were conducted in the time of Bhoja I. A 
certain Alla was appointed by the Emperor as the officer in charge 
of the fort ( kottapdla ), while Tattaka was commander of the forces 
(balddhikrita) , and a Board consisting of two sreshthis (guild- 
presidents) and one sdrthavaha (caravan-leader) was apparently 
entrusted with the civil affairs of the town. Not only then was the 
civil administration of the town separated from the military, but 
further, the command of the fort was distinct (no doubt, for reasons 
of security) from that of the troops stationed thereabout. The con¬ 
cluding lines of the record give us some further indications of the 
character of the civil administration. Here we read that the whole 
town ( sakalasthdna ) made a gift of land in two specified villages 
which were in its own possession (svabhukti) . It would therefore 
appear that besides the town executive just mentioned, there -was 
a town Council (or Assembly) which owned some adjoining villages. 
The description of the donated land as being measured by the impe¬ 
rial cubits (paramesvariya-hasta) suggests that the official 
standard was used by the town authorities for the survey of lands 
in their possession. In the above record, Alla is mentioned as guar¬ 
dian of the fort by Bhoja I’s appointment. From another inscription 


240 


POLITICAL THEORY 


of the same reign 33 we learn that Alla’s father was born in a Brah~ 
rnana family and was appointed ‘Warden of the Marches’ (maryada- 
dkurya) by Emperor Ramabhadra. Afterwards Alla succeeded to 
this office and was further appointed guardian of the fort by Bhoja I. 
This proves that Brahmanas at that time sometimes adopted a mili¬ 
tary career and that offices went by hereditary succession. 

Outside the territory directly governed by the Emperor lay the 
tracts ruled by chiefs belonging to various clans, such as the Chaha- 
manas, the Tomaras, the Chapas, the Chalukyas, and the Pratiharas. 
There were besides the great feudatory families like the Chandellas 
and the Paramaras who were destined for a long and independent 
career as ruling powers after the fall of the Pratiharas. What is 
more, we find the donated village in two records of A.D. 893 and 
899, 54 described as belonging to a group of eighty-four villages. This 
was exactly the standard size of the clan-chief’s estate in mediaeval 
Rajputana. In the light of the above facts it is possible to trace back 
the type of clan-monarchies, as they have been called by Baden- 
Powell, at least to the period of the Imperial Pratiharas of Kanauj. 
The administration of the Pratihara feudatories possessed the usual 
complement of officers known to Northern India from older times. 
The list of persons receiving information of the donor’s grant in the 
record of A.D. 893, mentioned above, consists of the raja (prince), the 
rdjanyas (nobles), the rajasthdnlyas (viceroys), the uparikas (gover¬ 
nors), the amdtyas (ministers), and the dandapdsikas (police officers). 
Another record of a feudatory chief, mentioned above, refers to a san- 
dhivigrdhika (minister of foreign affairs) as the writer of the charter. 
From the well-known Siyadoni inscription 35 we learn that this town 
was in possession of chiefs bearing the lofty title mahdrdjddhirdja in 
the tenth and eleventh centuries A.D. We have some hints of the 
policy of the imperial government in keeping the feudatories in check. 
In the two records of A.D. 893 and 899, referred to above, the grant 
of lands by the donor required the approval of an individual des¬ 
cribed as tcintrapala of the reigning emperor. Probably the tantra - 
pala held an office similar to that of the Political Agent in an Indian 
State during the British rule. The grant by Mahendrapala II of a 
village in the holding of a certain talavargika in A.D. 946 probably 
points to the Emperor’s right of alienating lands in the possession of 
the smaller feudatories. Nevertheless we find even in the reign of 
Mahendrapala I reference to a fight between two mahdsdmantas in a 
memorial tablet of V.S. 960. The decline of the Imperial Pratihara 
power gave the opportunity to many of the clans—the Kachchha- 
paghatas of Gwalior, the Chandellas of Jejakabhukti, the Haihayas of 
Dahala, the Paramaras of Malwa, and so forth—to assert their virtual 
independence. 

241 

A.I.lv.—10 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The contemporary Arab observers were greatly impressed with 
the military strength of the Imperial Pratiharas whom they called 
Ba’urah and kings of Jurz. 66 What concerns us here is to note the 
high tribute paid by one of them to the efficiency of the Pratihara 
administration. “There is no country in India,” says Mas’udI, 57 
“more safe from robbers.” 

By far the most important of the dynasties of Northern India 
contemporaneous with the Imperial Pratiharas were the Palas of 
Bengal, their rivals for the prize of empire. The Pala monarchy vras 
distinguished from nearly all other governments of this period by the 
peculiar circumstances of its origin. It was to stem the tide of anar¬ 
chy that Gopala, the founder of the line, was called to the throne by 
the prakritis, meaning probably the leading chiefs. 58 Such a momen¬ 
tous beginning failed to lay the foundation of a truly constitutional 
monarchy in ancient Bengal, probably because there was i-J perma¬ 
nent and regularly constituted Council of Ministers (or Assembly of 
the People) at that time. In the later records of the Palas, their gov¬ 
ernment is wholly assimilated to the pattern of a personal monarchy, 
and there is no question of any constitutional restraint upon the 
king’s authority. The Palas from the first assumed the usual impe¬ 
rial title of paramesvara paramabhatpiraka mahdrdjddhirdja, for 
which the precedent had been set by the Imperial Guptas in their 
North Bengal inscriptions. As regards the offices of the central gov¬ 
ernment, a mantr'l is mentioned only in later Pala inscriptions belong¬ 
ing to the times of Mahlpala I, Vigrahapala III, and Nayapala. But 
we have the record 59 of a distinguished Brahmana family which fur¬ 
nished a succession of what can only be called Chief Ministers from 
the time of Dharmapala to that of Narayanapala. Making due allow¬ 
ance for evident exaggeration in the claims of these ministers, we 
may conclude that they exercised a commanding influence on the 
Early Palas. But this influence was due entirely to their personal 
capacity, and not to the constitutional status of the office in question. 
From the list of officials given in the formula of the Pala land-grants, 
we can infer that the central government of the early kings comprised 
a number of Departments. These Departments with the officials be¬ 
longing to each may be enumerated as follows:—Finance ( shashtha - 
dhikrita, torika, tarapati, and saulkika), Police ( dandasakti, danda* 
pcLsika, and chauroddharanika) , Army and Navy (sendpati, gaulmika, 
ndvddhyaksha, and baladhyaksha). Besides, there were executive 
officers with functions imperfectly known (rajdmdtya, daiihsadhasa- 
dhanika, duta f khola, gamdgamika, abhitvdramdna, tadayuktaka, and 
viniyuktaka) , as well as superintendents (adhyakshas) of the royal 
herds and studs. The later records point to the creation of new officers 
representing the Departments of Finance ( pramdtri ), Police (dan- 


242 


POLITICAL THEORY 


dika), Justice (dasapamdhika), Army (prdntapdla, kottapdla, and 
perhaps kfutndaraksha) , besides the more indefinite sarabhanga, 
kshetrapa f and so forth. Some names like senapati , bhogapati, 
shashthadhikrita f and dandasakti, on the other hand, drop out of the 
picture altogether. The later inscriptions testify to the creation of a 
whole set of High Imperial officers of the type known to the Imperial 
Guptas. Such are the mahdsdndhivigrahika (minister of Foreign 
Affairs), mahdkshapatalika (Chief Accounts Officer), mahdsendpati 
(Commander-in-Chief), Mahddan^andyaka (Chief Commander of 
forces?), mahcikart&kritika, mahddauhsddhasddhanika, and mxihdku- 
mdrdmdtya (three classes of executive officers). 

Among the dignitaries mentioned in the formulas of the Pala 
land-grants are included the uparika , the vishayapati f the vishaya - 
vycivahcrins (comprising the jyeshthakdyastha or leading scribe 
and the mahdmahattaras, mahattamas, and mahattaras who were 
elders of three grades), as well as the ddsagrdmika (lord of ten vil¬ 
lages), and the grdmapati (village headman). The uparikas and the 
vishayapatis were respectively in charge of provinces (bhuktis) and 
districts ( vishayas ) into which the Pala kingdom is known from 
other records to have been divided for administrative purposes. 
The office of ddsagrdmika seems to show that the unit of local ad¬ 
ministration known to Manu and the Mahabhdrata Q0 existed in 
Bengal at this period. The vishayavyavahdrins suggest a body of 
leading householders of the district. The grdmapati points to the 
continuance of the traditional village administration under a head¬ 
man. 61 

In the ninth century Kamarupa was ruled by kings of the line 
of Salas tambha who are commemorated by a number of inscriptions 
one of which bears the date corresponding to A.D. 829. The kings 
adopted the usual imperial title of mahamjadhiraja paramesvara 
paramabhattdraka , or more shortly mahdrajddhirdja. Though the 
succession to the throne was usually hereditary in the male line, 
we have a remarkable instance 62 of two Princes Chakra and Arathi 
being passed over in favour of the latter’s son for the offence of dis¬ 
regarding the opinion of their elders. Among the chief officers of 
State are mentioned a mahdsainyapati, a mahadixirddhipatya, a 
mdhdpratihdra , a mdhdnvdtya, a Brahmairndhikdra, and a number of 
balddhyakshas . The mahdsainyapati and the baladhyaksha may be 
identified respectively with mahdbalddhikrita and baladhihrita of 
the Gupta records, while the mdhdpratihdra is an old Gupta official 
title. The mahdmdtya probably stood at the head of the civil ad¬ 
ministration, while the mahdsainyapati and baladhyaksha repre¬ 
sented the military chief and his assistants. From the description 
of the donated land in one of the records, it appears that the kingdom 


243 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


was divided into the usual vishayas. The same record refers to 
rural people headed by the vishctyakaranas and the vyavahdrikas , 
but the precise nature of their functions is unknown. 

We can form some idea of the general characteristics and ten¬ 
dencies of administration in Kashmir during this period from Kal- 
hana’s account. The succession to the throne was by hereditary 
descent, subject to breaks caused by usurpation and the like. The 
accession of Yasaskara (A.D. 939) after the extinction of the Utpala 
line was a striking exception to the general rule. For Yasaskara 
was elected by an assembly of Brahmanas. 63 But this revolution 
was barren of constitutional results like the still more famous revo¬ 
lution in Bengal in the shape of Gopala’s election to the throne. As 
regards the organisation of the administration, we find Lalitaditya, 
the greatest king of Kashmir, being credited in the Rdjatarangim 64 
with the creation of five new offices ( karmgsthdnas ) over and above 
the eighteen older offices attributed to the semi-legendary king 
Jalauka 65 . The five offices were those of mahapratihara, mahd- 
sdndhivigrahika, mahdsvasdla, mahabh&ndagarika, and mahd- 
scidhanabhdga. Of these, the first two, known from Gupta times, 
mean respectively the Chief of the Palace Guards, and the Minister 
of Foreign Affairs, while the last three probably mean Chief Officer 
of Cavalry, Chief Treasurer, and Chief Executive Officer respective¬ 
ly. Other State offices are incidentally referred to by Kalhana in 
the course of his description of the subsequent reigns. Some of 
these like nagaradhipa (Prefect of the city), pratlhdra (Chief of 
palace guards), dandandyaka (general), and rdjasthariiya (viceroy?) 
had their counterparts in the kingdoms of the plains. 66 Common to 
both again was the akshapatala (accounts office), although the 
ekdngas of the Rdjatarangini, forming a sort of military police 
attached to the same, are unknown elsewhere. Other offices like 
those of the paddgra (revenue collector?), the dvdrapati (commander 
of the frontier passes), the mandalesa (governor), and the kampa* 
nesa (commander-in-chief) are more or less peculiar to Kashmir. 67 

Kalhana has preserved 68 anecdotes of two well-known kings, 
Chandraplda and Yasaskara, testifying to the exceptional wisdom 
and equity of their judicial decisions. Incidentally we have in these 
•examples a concrete illustration of the well-known Smriti rule re¬ 
quiring the king personally to look after the administration of 
justice. The interest that the Kashmir kings took in works of pub¬ 
lic utility is illustrated by Kalhana’s remarkable account 69 of the 
extensive drainage and irrigation works carried into effect by an 
exceptionally able officer called Suyya in the reign of Avantivarman 
(A.D. 855/6-383). The history of financial administration, on the 


244 


POLITICAL THEORY 


other hand, is on the whole a dreary record of unjust exactions 
inflicted by a succession of tyrants. 70 

III. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION—SOUTH INDIA 

The Rashtrakutas of Manyakheta were the heirs of the Cbaluk- 
yas of Vatapi in the imperial sovereignty of the Deccan. Though 
the Rashtrakutas were at first content with the feudatory title of 
mahdsdmantddhipati, they afterwards adopted full imperial titles. 
Next to the king in dignity, if not in authority, stood the Crown 
Prince. In contrast with their successors, the Chalukyas of Kalyani, 
the Queens and Princesses of the Rashtrakuta line hardly exercised 
any political influence. We have only one record 71 of a Queen 
granting a village on her own authority. Among the high officers 
of State are mentioned those bearing the titles of mabascindhivi- 
grahika (Minister of Foreign Affairs), bhandagarika (Treasurer), 
battdhikrita, dandandyakci, and mahdprachcmdcidaridanayaka (three 
grades of military officers) and the officer connected with the court 
of justice. One record 72 mentions a mahas&ndhivigrahika as being 
the son of a baladhikrita, which indicates a tendency towards the 
selection of high officials by hereditary descent. 

The structure of local government under the Rashtrakutas 
partook of the regional variety of their empire. In Maharashtra 
and South Gujarat the donated villages are often described as lying 
within groups of 12, 24, and 84, while sometimes such a village is 
located within a bhukti . The numerical groups are reminiscent 
of the typical clan-chief’s estate and its sub-divisions to which refer¬ 
ence has been made above. The bhukti is the old administrative 
division known from the Gupta times. In the Kannada region, on 
the other hand, the villages are included in groups having larger or 
smaller numerical endings. 73 These figures, as Fleet 74 pointed out 
long ago, refer to the real or supposed number of villages comprised 
within the groups. The policy of the central government often 
allowed combination of the larger and smaller divisions under the 
same officer. We also hear of separate officers ( nahgavwfbdas , 
translated as county-sheriffs) in charge of smaller groups of 300 
and the like. We have reasons to think that the office of the county- 
gavunda was one of high authority and dignity. In one record 75 
the county-gavunda in charge of two groups of 300 each bears the 
title of dharmamakartija known to the Early Pallava and Kadamba 
kings, and he expressly reserves for his own share a fixed revenue 
along with the king’s share, while granting some lands to a temple. 
The county -gavurida, either singly nr jointly with other gavunfas, 
could endow lands, transfer revenues, and grant remissions for pious 
objects. 76 


245 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The machinery of town and village administration under the 
Rashtrakutas was as varied as that of the administration of the pro¬ 
vinces and districts. In North Konkan, which was ruled by the 
Silahara feudatories of the Rashtrakutas, the towns were in charge 
of purapatis or nagarapatis (Town Prefects). In the Kannada tract 
the towns were ruled by ur-gdvundas (sheriffs). In Maharashtra 
and South Gujarat the villages had their headmen called grama- 
kutas 9 the number of these in a single village being sometimes as 
many as six or twelve. 77 By the side of the headman there was the 
group of mahattaras (elders) with an executive board bearing the 
title of adhikarins. 78 In the Kannada area the villages had their 
bodies of mahajancis , who not only attested gifts by private indivi¬ 
duals and received assignments of local taxes from provincial and 
district officers, but also made grants of land for pious purposes. 79 

The feudatories of the Rashtrakutas constituted an important 
factor in the State administration. The great feudatory families 
like the Gangas of Gangavadi 96000 were invested with military 
commands, and they fought w T ars on behalf of their paramount sove¬ 
reign. The court and administration of the great feudatories were 
modelled on those of the paramount power. Thus the Rashtrakutas 
of Gujarat who bore the title of mahasamantadhipati had on their 
staff, as we learn from the formula of their land-grants, the sandhi - 
vigrahika, the rdshtrapati, the vishayapati, the g'rdmakuta, the 
niyuktaka, and the yukta } —a sandhivigrahika (or mahasandhivigra- 
hika) being mentioned as usual as the writer of charters. Never¬ 
theless the status of the feudatories must have differed greatly 
according to their importance. While the higher class could assign 
taxes and alienate lands without the consent of the paramount 
power, 80 the lower grades had to submit to alienations of their lands 
at the orders of the ruling sovereign or his ministers. 81 The semi¬ 
independent position of the great feudatories is expressed by the 
conventional phrases indicative of their rule which differentiate it 
at once from the rule of the paramount Emperor and the govern¬ 
ment of mere State officials. 82 

The administration of the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi, whose 
-rule, beginning before the Rashtrakutas, survived their downfall, 
has some interesting features. Among their high dignitaries of 
State are mentioned, besides the yuvavdja (Crown Prince) and the 
senani (Commander-in-Chief) known to other dynasties, a body of 
five ministers and the katakadhisa (Superintendent of the Royal 
Camp). The provinces were called vishayas and the leading mem¬ 
ber (perhaps the governor) had the title of 'rashtrakuta. We have 
some glimpses into the working of the village administration under 


246 


POLITICAL THEORY 


the rule of this dynasty. In one case 83 the king is said to have 
granted the office of grdmakiifa in perpetuity to an individual. This 
proves that the village headman, at least in some cases, could be 
nominated by the king. Another record 84 states that the mahd- 
janas of a village elected the members of a Brahmana family on the 
Committee of five (pancha-vctra) , because of their eloquence in 
committee assemblies. From this it may be inferred that the Vehgl 
country under the Eastern Chalukyas, like the Chola Empire in 
later times, knew self-governing village assemblies with elected 
committees for the transaction of business. 

Few details have been preserved of the administration of the 
Pandya kings in the first period of their ascendancy (from the begin¬ 
ning of the seventh to that of the tenth century A.D.). There are, 
however, clear indications of the existence of a well-organised 
government under their rule. A distinguished family of the time 
of the Early Pandya king Jatila Parantaka (c. A.D. 765-815) fur¬ 
nished a number of high officials with the titles uttcCramantri (Prime 
Minister) and mahdsdmanta to the State service. We hear, besides, 
of officers for executing the king’s orders for a pious gift as well as 
of other revenue officers. Reference is made to the sen&pati 
(general), while other records mention an officer in charge of 
elephants ( matangajddhyaksha ) as well as troops in the service of 
the king or other leaders. 86 Not only therefore was the army in 
charge of the supreme general, but there were separate commands 
for its different branches, while the king as well as other leaders 
maintained troops in their service. The lowest unit of the local 
administration was the gramam (village) and a number of these 
formed the kurram or nadu sometimes Sanskritized into rashtra. 
In the working of the village administration the assembly ( sabhd 
or ur) played an important part. Such was the reputation of these 
bodies for integrity and efficiency, that kings often placed perma¬ 
nent endowments of gold coins in their hands for meeting the ex¬ 
penses of worship in temples out of the interest accruing therefrom 
at specified rates. 86 Again, the body of temple servants and the 
representatives of the village assemblies were sometimes jointly 
constituted as trustees for the proper administration of the temple 
funds. 87 The assembly also owned lands which could be granted 
by the great men of the village, and its approval was necessary 
when a Brahmana donee of a village granted lands to his kinsmen. 88 
From a record of A.D. 800 89 we learn that the assembly used to 
meet at a stated hour in a fixed public place. According to the 
rules framed by the assembly on this occasion, it was to be open 
to all land-owners, but only those who had a certain property quali¬ 
fication along with the prescribed intellectual and moral attainments 


247 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


were to take part in its deliberations. Only those possessing the 
requisite qualifications were to be admitted to the committees 
( variyctms) of the assembly. This important record proves that 
self-governing village assemblies with elected executive committees, 
such as can be traced more fully in records of the time of the Chola 
Parantaka I, existed in the Bandya kingdom about a century earlier. 

The administration of the early Imperial Cholas assumed a 
high degree of complexify with the march of time. A record of 
the reign of Sundara Chola 90 points to a relatively simple adminis¬ 
trative machinery and procedure for executing the king's order for 
a pious grant of land. The king’s oral order was first communicat¬ 
ed by the proper executive officer to the local authorities. After¬ 
wards the record of the transaction was drawn up and attested by 
a number of witnesses who were either local magnates, or govern¬ 
ment officers. Far more complex is the process indicated in the 
larger Leiden plates of Rajaraja I 91 recording the Emperor’s grant 
of a village to a Buddhist shrine. Here the king’s order is succes¬ 
sively committed to writing by the proper official, signed by four 
Chief Secretaries, and ordered to be entered in the Accounts Regis¬ 
ter by a Secretary and arbitrators. The entry is made by four 
officers of the Tax Department and three other officials called ‘main- 
tainers of tax system’. Then a Superintendent and five other 
officials are deputed for the marking of the donated village. Finally, 
the royal order is sent to the Assembly (n&ttar) of the district to 
present themselves on the spot and to draw up and grant the deed 
of assignment to the donee. The advanced organisation of the 
Chola Empire is illustrated by the fact that a general survey of 
lands with a record of rights was carried out about the middle of 
Rajaraja I’s reign, while fresh surveys were undertaken from time 
to time thereafter. Cases were decided by the judge with the help 
of learned Brahmanas at the dharmasana (probably meaning the 
king’s court). 

The lowest unit of the local administration was the self-govern¬ 
ing village of which there were two principal types. The first type had 
an assembly called the ur and an executive body called the tilunga- 
nam (sometimes shortened into ganam). The second type, which 
was specially represented by villages of Brahmanas, had an assem¬ 
bly called the sabha and various committees ( variyams ) of the same 
to carry out its executive work. The working of this second type 
is best illustrated by some records of the reign of Parantaka I relat¬ 
ing to the Brahmana village of Uttaramerur. At first the sabha 
of this village by a resolution ( vyavastha ) fixed the mode of appoint¬ 
ment (by a mixed method of lot and election) to its five executive 


248 


POLITICAL THEORY 


committees. Shortly afterwards, the sabha adopted another resolu¬ 
tion amending the rules of election. After some time the sabha, 
by a fresh vyavastha, arranged for appointment of a committee for 
assaying gold for the village people. 92 It was to consist of experts 
to be chosen by lot from those who paid taxes and lived in different 
quarters of the village. It was to be responsible to the Tanks and 
Annual Committees and (unlike the sabha and its committees) was 
to receive a monthly remuneration. It is reasonable to think that 
the above method of entrusting executive work to elected com¬ 
mittees was followed by other sabhas as well. The sabhas exercised 
a wide range of powers. They kept their own records relating to 
the rights of the villagers. They decided disputes that did not fall 
within the jurisdiction of other groups. They granted lands; for 
maintenance of services and sacred teaching in the temples. They 
founded and maintained hospitals and took charge of all charitable 
endowments in the village. They controlled a number of taxes 
which they could assign or remit at their pleasure. They had their 
own staff of officials such as the madhyastha, who assisted in the pro¬ 
ceedings of the assembly without sharing in its deliberations. 93 

IV. LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

The period from A.D. 750 to 1000 is definitely associated with 
the works of the great Smriti commentators and makers of Digests 
in place of the metrical Smritis. The change, as already observed, 94 
marks the advent of a new stage—the critical in place of the con¬ 
structive—in the history of Hindu Jurisprudence. Among these 
famous Smriti commentators Medhatithi and Visvarupa, who wrote 
commentaries on Manu and Yajnavalkya respectively, deserve spe¬ 
cial notice. Reference has also to be made to -the Smritisamgraha, a 
Digest by an unnamed author. 95 

1. Visvarupa 

Visvarupa’s opinion on the law of partition and inheritance is 
marked by resemblances and differences with Vijnanesvara’s 
thought. He anticipates Vijnanesvara in holding that ownership 
does not arise for the first time on partition, but that partition takes 
place of what is already jointly owned. But, unlike Vijnanesvara, 
he interprets Yajnavalkya 96 to mean that the father, distributing 
his property in his lifetime, has absolute discretion in giving equal 
or unequal shares to the sons. Again, he takes Yajnavalkya 97 to 
imply that the father, giving equal shares to the sons in the case 
just mentioned, shall allow the husband’s share to his wives, as also 
to the widows of his pre-deceas-ed sons and grandsons who have not 
been provided with stndhana. Vijnanesvara, on the other hand, 


249 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


would take the text in its literal sense to apply to the father’s own 
wives alone. Similarly Visvarupa understands Yajnavalkya 98 to 
mean that what a man acquires by himself, without detriment to his 
father’s interest, as well as a nuptial present and what he gets as 
present from a friend, shall not be shared by him with his co-par- 
ceners. He also takes Yajnavalkya" to mean that what was gained 
by learning shall not be given to the co-parceners. These views 
differ completely from those of Vijnanesvara. In the case of a man 
without a son, Yajnavalkya 100 mentions the order of succession as 
follows:—wife, daughters, both parents, brothers and their sons, etc. 
Commenting on these passages Visvarupa says that the wife shall 
succeed if she were pregnant at the time of her husband’s death, 
and the daughter shall do so if she was an “appointed” daughter. 
This is quite different from the view of Vijnanesvara who would 
allow the widow to succeed without any restriction save that of 
chastity, and the daughters to do so without any qualification save 
that the unmarried has precedence over the married, and the un¬ 
provided over the endowed daughter. 

2. Medhatithi 

Passing to the views of Medhatithi, we may first notice his 
statements on the constitution and functions of the courts of justice. 
Referring to the members of the king’s court, Medhatithi 101 shows 
by a concrete example that the Brahman as assisting the king have 
to be versed in polity, while he quotes an alternative view to the 
effect that, whereas the mantris (counsellors) should have know¬ 
ledge of the details of the case, the Brahmanjas should have the qua¬ 
lity of impartiality. More important than the above is the fact that 
Medhatithi extends membership of the court in special cases to 
other parties as well. For he says: 102 “Where the parties, e.gr. 
traders, cultivators, and cattle-breeders belong to the same pro¬ 
fession, and where other persons belonging to this profession feel 
that they would be affected by this decision, they are entitled to 
take part in the investigation.” 103 In the same context Medhatithi 
throws an interesting light on the nature of the hierarchy of courts. 
Taking Narada 104 as his text, he defines kula as ‘the body of rela¬ 
tives’, srenl as ‘a body of traders and others following the same pro¬ 
fession’, ganas as ‘persons who always move about in groups’, and 
unlike sreriis act collectively. He also takes ‘an authorised person’ 
to mean ‘the Brahmana learned in the Vedas.’ It follows from the 
above that the srertHs corresponded to trade- and craft-guilds, and 
the ganas to wider and more closely knit Associations. The family 
courts, Medhatithi goes on, through fear of relations do not always 
exercise a check upon persons deviating from the right path. Hence 


250 


POLITICAL THEORY 


a party not having confidence in them is entitled to carry his case 
to the Guilds. The Guilds are very jealous of their independence; 
in fact they take care not to let any matter within their purview go 
before the king, lest the king’s officers should take the opportunity 
to interfere with their work. It is their practice to take sureties for 
satisfaction of judgment from both parties at the beginning of the 
suit, the surety being liable to a fine in the case of his party not 
accepting the decision. The Associations investigate cases by them¬ 
selves, and they appoint committees ( upasad ) for enforcing their 
decision. Their practice of collective action makes them dreaded 
by all. The king, because of his great power, is superior to all other 
courts, so that a case decided by him cannot be re-opened. From 
the above discussion Medhatithi draws the important conclusion 
that the other courts (“Brahmanas and others”) are entitled to pro¬ 
nounce judgments, though the king alone has the right of inflicting 
punishment. Medhatithi takes this opportunity to point out the 
essential difference between the standpoints of the king and other 
authorities in judicial trials. The motive of the king, he says, in 
looking into cases is the proper administration of his kingdom, 
while that of others lies only in settfing doubtful points for the 
benefit of the people. In another context Medhatithi 105 explains 
the difference between the spirit of the king’s executive and judicial 
administration. “When he is seated upon his royal throne, the king 
regards wealth ( artha) as the most important matter even in pre¬ 
ference to morality ( dharma ). But when he is engaged in deciding 
suits, he regards morality as the most important thing.” 

The rationale of judicial proceedings consists, according to Med¬ 
hatithi 106 , in ensuring the immunity of the people from seen and un¬ 
seen troubles along with preservation of the kingdom which would 
otherwise be destroyed. In this we have a remarkable illustration 
of the Smriti view of the identity of interests of the king and his 
subjects. Medhatithi’s views on various points of judicial procedure 
treated by the older authors indicate the remarkable independence 
of his thought, combined with good sense and love of fair-play. Deal¬ 
ing with Manu’s rule requiring the king to take up cases of suitors 
in the order of their respective castes, Medhatithi observes: “This 
order of investigation based upon castes is to be observed only when 
the troubles of all the suitors are of the same degree: when, on the 
other hand, the business of the lower caste is very urgent or very 
important, then it should be taken up first.” Medhatithi justifies 
this rule on the remarkable ground that the public interest over¬ 
rides the written text. (Salus populi est suprema lex) For he 
says: “The investigation of cases is for the purpose of maintaining 


251 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


order in the kingdom, so that the rules laid down need not always 
be followed literally.’ , In connection with the question of time 
allowable for filing the plaint and its answer, Medhatithi 107 argues 
that the plaintiff already knows the amount of his dues or the man 
who has wronged him. On the other hand when the defendant is 
dragged before the court, he does not know the nature of the com¬ 
plaint against him and cannot find the right answer. The plaintiff, 
therefore, must complete his plaint on the same date, or he may 
be granted two or three days’ time. The defendant should be grant¬ 
ed a postponement which, however, must be only for the period 
regarded as a fair interval for the understanding of the suit and the 
finding of the answer. The text of Gautama 108 allowing postpone¬ 
ment of the answer for one year, Medhatithi emphatically says, 
should not be followed in practice, as he pertinently asks, if non¬ 
understanding is sufficient cause for delay, why should it cease to 
be so after the lapse of one year only? 

From the benefit of the rule allowing postponement of the ans-. 
wer, Medhatithi expressly excludes the group of heinous offences. 
His argument in support of this contention indicates his clear grasp 
of the essential difference between civil and criminal cases. “In the 
case of non-payment of debt and the like,” he says, “if the parties 
settle it themselves, it is no business of the king to interfere. But 
in the case of a criminal, it is the duty of the king to punish him 
even though he may have come to terms with the plaintiffs.” In 
other words, civil suits are the concerns of the private parties, while 
crimes are essentially offences against the State. The different pro¬ 
cedure adopted in the two classes of suits is explained by Medhatithi 
while discussing Manu’s text 109 which forbids the king or his ser¬ 
vants to promote a suit. “This applies”, he says, “to non-payment 
of debt and similar subjects: as for thieves and criminals who are 
like thorns in the kingdom, these the king shall capture and punish 
even when he catches them himself.” Dealing with the law of evi¬ 
dence, Medhatithi categorically rejects Narada’s statement that 
documentary evidence is superior to witnesses. As he cogently 
argues, “Documentary evidence is of two kinds—those written by 
the party himself and those written by another person. This last 
again is of two kinds—(a) those written by a scribe who volunteers 
to do the writing, and (b) those written by an authorised scribe. 
Now, a document written by another person is in every way of the 

nature of a .witness.No reliability attaches to what has been 

written by a single man, just as it does not attach to a single wit¬ 
ness. It may be argued that it is only when witnesses set down their 
hands to something that they become documentary evidence. But 
this difference cannot make the one superior to the other.... ‘Being 


252 



POLITICAL THEORY 


authorised’ also cannot be regarded as a ground of distinction, be¬ 
cause as a matter of fact all persons authorised by the king are not 
necessarily thoroughly tested.” 

Medhatithi’s ideas of the law of ownership may be illustrated 
by one example. Dealing with the question of the king’s title to 
the property lost but claimed by the owner thereafter, Medhatithi 110 
quotes a view to the following effect:—“Even after the lapse of three 
years, it will not be right for the king to take or possess what belongs 
to another person, and hence what is meant is that after the lapse 
of three years, if the rightful owner does not turn up, the king shall 
enjoy the usufruct of the property.” This doctrine which implies 
that title cannot be lost by any extent of adverse possession is quoted 
by Medhatithi only for refutation. But it was destined to be adopted 
afterwards by Vijnanesvara and his school. 

We have referred above to some of Medhatithi’s views on parti¬ 
tion and inheritance. But some other points may be noted. Accord¬ 
ing to an unnamed authority quoted by Medhatithi, 111 Manu’s rule 
assigning additional portions of the family property to the eldest, 
the middle-most, and the youngest sons at the time of partition 
refers to past times and is not meant to be observed during the cur¬ 
rent Age. Medhatithi rejects the above view on the authoritative 
ground that no such restriction as regards time is allowed anywhere. 
In so far as the unmarried sister is concerned, Medhatithi 112 quotes 
a view which objects to her being given a share in the family pro¬ 
perty on the ground that the girl is entitled by custom only to the 
benefit of her marriage being performed. Rejecting this view Medha¬ 
tithi says: “The direct assertion of the Smriti is definitely more 
authoritative than custom. As a matter of fact, however, the cus¬ 
tom referred to is by no means universal.” 

3. The Smritisamgraha 

We may conclude this chapter with some reference to the views 
of the Smritisamgraha Digest, which are often of great historical 
interest. Ownership, according to the author, is indicated by the 
sdstras and is not an affair of the world—a view which was after¬ 
wards to become classical through its adoption by Vijnanesvara and 
his school. Elsewhere the Smritisamgraha observes that the son’s 
ownership is created in the father’s property by partition—a view 
which was afterwards to be vigorously opposed by Vijnanesvara. 
In another passage the Smritisamgraha takes the view quoted by 
Medhatithi only for refutation, namely that Manu’s allowing an 
extra share to the eldest son at the time of partition is not followed 
in the present Age. In the order of heirs enumerated in the Smriti - 


253 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


scirhgraha, the paternal grandmother takes the property after the 
mother and before the father—a view followed afterwards by Dha- 
resvara. Finally the Smritisamgrahci allows the widow of a separat¬ 
ed co-parcener without sons to succeed only if she submits to niyoga 
under the instructions of the elders. This doctrine which was des¬ 
tined to be vigorously opposed by Vijnanesvara is interesting as 
marking a mile-stone on the road to the childless widow’s acquisi¬ 
tion of an absolute right to succeed to her husband’s property. 113 


1. TSS Edition, p. 98. 

2. I. 109. 

3. op. cit., 181. 

4. VII. 2. 

5. I. 119. 

6. On Manu, III. 119, IV. 84, 110, V. 93, VII. 1-2. 

7. On Manu, VII. 2. 

8. On Manu, VIII. 1. 

9X9 

10. On Manu, VII. 12. 

11. On Manu, VII. 13. 

12. IX. 253. 


13. Manu, VH. 138. 

14. On Manu, IX. 254. 

15. VIII. 348-49. 

16. On Manu, VIII. 350. 

17. (Cr. Ed.) XII, 93.9; (B) XII, 92.9; XIII, 61. 32.33. 

18. TSS Edition, p. 192. 

19. Ibid, p. 2. 

20. Ibid, pp. 2-6. 

21. Ibid, pp. 7-8. 

22. Ibid, pp. 83-86. 

23. Bhavishya, I, 2. 120-24; Garuda, I. 217. 12. 

24. Matsya, CCXXVI. 1; Vislinudharmottara, II, 71.1. 

25. Brihaddharma, III, 3, 8-9. 

26. Matsya, CCXXVI. 3-12; Brihaddharma, III, 3.6. 

27. II, 2. 2-16. 

28. CX. 26. 


29.11,2.2-16. 

: 30. (Cr. Ed. and B.) XII, 67. 2. 

31. Ill, 3. 7. 

32. Ill, 4. 1. 

33. Ibid, 6. 1, 56. 

34. Ill, 3. 1. 

35. II, 4. 2. 

36. Brihaddharma, III, 3. 10-11; Agni, CCXXIII. 9-10; Vislinudharmottara 

II, 61. 18-27. ' 

37. CCXXVII. 63-64. 

38. II, 61. 49-50. 


39. Garuda, I 6. 5-8 ; Agni XVII. 11-18; XIX. 22-29; Matsya, X, 3-16; Brihad - 
40 y a £™ a ’ ***’ 4-59, 14. 1-74; Vishnudharmottara, I. 108-09. 


41. VII. 2, 3; ibid, 20. 

42. V. 67. 

43. XVII. 52. 

44. XXIX. 16-19. 

45; XVII. 33. 


46. Ibid, 51. 

47. XVII. 25-27; XXXII. 66. 

48. vn. 8. 


254- 


POLITICAL THEORY 


49. VII. 21. 

50. VII. 23. 

51. VII. 49. 

52. El, I. 159. 

53. El, I. 156. 

54. El, IX. 4 ff. 

55. El, I. 175 f. 

56. Cf. the observations of Sulaiman (A.D. 851) and Mas’udI (A.D. 941-943) 
quoted in HIED, I. 4, 21, 23. 

57. HIED, I. 4. 

58. El, IV. 243 f. For the above explanation of prakritis, cf. HBR, I. 98. 

59. El, II. 150. 

60. Manu, VII. 118-119; Mhh, (Cr. Ed.) XII. 88. 3, 6; (B) XII. 87. 3, 6. 

61. On the Pala administration, see HBR, I. 273-80, 285-87; Benoy Chandra Sen, 
Some Historical Aspects of the Inscriptions of Bengal (Pre-Muhammadan 
epoch), Calcutta, 1942 (Part III). The most important references are El, 
IV 243, XXIII. 290, XVIII. 304, XVII. 318, XV. 293, 304 and JASB, LXIX. Part 
I, 68. On the significance of the titles of khola and khandaraksha see U.N. 
Ghoshal, The Beginnings of Indian Historiography and other Essays, 151-153. 

62. Kamarupasdsandvali by P. Bhattacharya, pp. 48 ff. 

63. Rdjatarahgini, V. 476-77. 

64. Ibid, IV. 14i-43. 

65. Ihid, I. 118-20. 

66. Stein (Rdjatarahgini) translates dandanayaka as ‘Prefect of City’ and raja- 
sthaniya as ‘Chief justice.’ 

67. For references to the above titles, see Stein’s Rdjatarahgini, Tr. II. Index s.v. 

68. RT, IV. 55 f., 85 f; VI. 14 f. 

69. Ibid, V. 84 f. 

70. For a detailed account of the above, see U. N. Ghoshal, Hindu Revenue Sys¬ 
tem, 249-252 and IHQ, XVUI. 307-9. 

71. El, XXII. 105. 

72. El, X. 85 f. 

73. Such were Banavasi 12,000, Kundur 500, Purigere 300, and Kandarage 70. 

74. Dyn. Kan. p. 298 fji. 2. 

75. El, XIV. 365 f. 

76. El, XIV. 365 f; XVI. 278 f. Altekar ( The Rashtrakutas and Their Times, 158- 
160) thinks that the rdshtramahattaras and the vishayamahattaras referred to 
in El, VIII. 186 and I. 55 (actually the former inscription mentions rashtra- 
grdmamahattaras ) refer to councils of notables and elders in the provinces and 
the districts respectively. But the evidence is clearly inconclusive. 

77. JBBRAS, X. 283 f; El, XIV. 144 ff. 

78. El, X. 85 f; XIV. 150; XVII. 249 etc. According to Altekar (The Rashtra- 
kutas, 196) the dyuktas, niyuktas and upayuktas mentioned in the Rashtra- 
kuta land-grants after the grdmakutas and before the grdmamahattaras were 
no other than village accountants and their assistants. 

79. El, XXI. 208; VI. 102 f. 353; VII. 201 f. 

80. IA, XIII. 136; El, in. 310. 

81. I A, I. 141; El, XVin. 248. 

82. The phrase applied to the feudatories is ‘ruling with pleasure of agreeable 
or friendly interchange of communications’. This is distinguished on the one 
hand from the grandiloquent formula applied to the paramount ruler, namely, 
‘the virtuous reign, augmenting with perpetual increase, being current so as to 
endure so long as the moon and sun and stars may last’, and on the other 
hand from the simple style of purely subordinate officials, namely, ‘to govern 
with punishment of the wicked and protection of the good’. Cf. Dyn. Kan, 
p. 428, f.n. 4. 

83. El, VII. 185 f, 

84. El, V. 135 f. 

85. See K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, The Pandya Kingdom 60-61, for references to the 
uttaramantri and the mahasarnanta, and ibid, 85-86, for reference to the 
matahgajddhyaksha. 

86. In the adjoining territory under the rule of the Bana kings we have similar 
records (El, XI. 227-228) of village assemblies receiving endowments of gold 
from a queen and a magnate for providing worship in temples out of the 
resulting interest. 


255 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


87. El,-IX. 92 f; XXI. 109 f; etc. 

88. El, XVII. 298 f. 

89. El, XXII. 9 f. 

90. El, XV. 50. 

91. El, XXII. 238 f. 

92. El, XXII. 149. 

93. The above is based, where references are not given, upon K. A. Nilakanta 
Sastri, The Cholas II (Part I) 277 f. 

94. Vol. Ill, j 356. 

95. According to Kane ( KHDS, I), Medhatithi “most probably flourished bet¬ 
ween 825 and 900 A.D.” (p. 225), Visvarupa, between 750 and 1000 A.D. 
(p. 261) and Smritisamgraha “was probably completed between the 8th and 
10th centuries of the Christian era” (p. 242). 

96. YAj, II. 118. 

97. Ibid, II. 119. 

98. Ibid, II. 122. 

99. Ibid, II. 126. 

100. Ibid, II. 139, 140. 

101. On Manu, VIII. 1. 

102. On Manu, VIII. 2. 

103. The present and following translations of extracts from Medhatithi are taken 
from the work Manu-Smriti, The Laws of Manu, with the Bhdshya of Medha¬ 
tithi, translated by Ganganath Jha, (published by the University of Calcutta). 

104. I. 8. 

105. On Manu, VIII. 23. 

106. On Manu, VIII. 1. 

107. On Manu, VIII. 56. 

108. XIII. 28. 

109. VIII. 43. 

110. On Manu, VIII. 30. 

111. On Manu, VIII. 112. 

112. On Manu, VIII. 118. 

113. For references to the texts of Smritisamgraha quoted above, see Smritichan- 
drika, Vyavaharakanda, 257, 259, 266, 294. 


256 


CHAPTER XI 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

A, GENERAL REVIEW 

The fundamental features of religious ideas and practices, which 
characterised the previous period, 1 continue during the period under 
review. But the relative importance of the different religious sects 
undergoes a great change. - The Puranic Hinduism, in the forms of 
Saivism and Vaishnavism, now gradually dominate the field, and vie 
with each other for supremacy. Both Buddhism and Jainism are 
gradually ousted from the Tamil land and other parts of South India. 
Jainism for a time gains an ascendancy in the Deccan, and retains 
its stronghold in Western India, while Buddhism, as a living force, 
is practically confined to the dominions of the Pala kings in Bengal 
and Bihar. Both these heterodox creeds are still followed by isolated 
groups all over Northern India, but there is ample evidence that they 
were fast losing their importance, save in very restricted areas. Two 
notable characteristics of religious life in the preceding period, viz., 
toleration and worship of images, not only continue in full force but 
are ever on the increase. The temples grow in number and massive 
grandeur, and the images are multiplied almost without any limit. 
These two features of the religion are not noticed separately in the 
present volume, but will be dealt with in the next, which will afford 
an opportunity to trace their development in an unbroken line, down 
to the last days of Hindu rule. 

The spirit of toleration displayed by the followers of different 
religions led to a Catholicism which overrode narrow sectarian views, 
and members of the same royal family are known to have been vota¬ 
ries of different religious cults. The most typical example is fur¬ 
nished by the Imperial Pratiharas. The founder of this family was a 
devotee of Vishnu, while his three descendants were worshippers, 
respectively, of Siva, Bhagavati and Sun-god. The Pala Emperors, 
though staunch Buddhists, employed orthodox Brahmanas as their 
hereditary chief ministers and attended the religious ceremonies of 
the latter. Many other examples of this type will be met with in 
the history of the different royal dynasties treated in this volume. 

It is no wonder, therefore, that the period brings into prominent 
relief the reciprocal influence of different religious sects upon one 
another. Both Buddhism and Jainism develop theistic tendencies 

257 

A.I-K.—17 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


on the analogy of Saivism and Vaishnavism. Buddhas and Jinas 
are regarded as gods, and their images are worshipped in temples 
with devotional songs, accompanied by rites and ceremonies which 
clearly betray the influence of the devotees of &iva and Vishnu. 
Jina is described as the Universal spirit-—a very near approach to the 
conception of God—manifesting itself as 6iva, Sugata, and Vishnu, 
while Buddha and Jinas are accepted as avataras or incarnations of 
Vishnu. The idea of Hari-Hara, or personification of the two gods 
Siva and Vishnu in one image, is another illustration of the same 
spirit. On the other hand the cult of ahimsa, which still manifests 
itself in many spheres of Indian life, notably in the vegetarian diets of 
upper class Hindus in large areas of India, is a permanent memorial 
of the influence of Jainism and Buddhism upon Brahmanical sects. 

One of the potent factors in the evolution of the religious ideas 
of this period is the emergence of the Tantrik cult which profoundly 
influenced Buddhism and transformed it almost beyond recognition. 
The same ideas also pervaded different Brahmanical sects and radi¬ 
cally changed their views and practices. 

The fundamental unity of ideas underlying these changes not 
only explains the characteristics of religious transformation in 
general, but the gradual assimilation of Buddhism with the Brah¬ 
manical religion in particular. Jainism alone withstood these new 
currents and largely maintained, as before, its rigid orthodoxy. This 
is one of the reasons which enabled it to continue as a distinct cult 
while Buddhism slowly but steadily lost its separate existence in 
India. 

While the growth of Tantrik ideas was sapping the vitality of 
Buddhism, Brahmanical religion was enthroned on a high pedestal 
by philosophers like Sahkaracharya. His triumphant career finally 
assured the victory of orthodox Brahmanical religion over the hetero¬ 
dox sects. Though he was a Saiva by persuasion and undoubtedly 
gave a great fillip to that sect, his philosophical dissertations were 
conducive to the revival of other Brahmanical sects as well. The 
predominance which £aivism acquired from this dominant person¬ 
ality was further helped by the growth of a special school in Kash¬ 
mir which did away with many outlandish practices that disfigur¬ 
ed that sect. Vaishnavism also developed an intellectual and philo¬ 
sophical aspect, as opposed to the emotional fervour of the preceding 
period, in the Tamil land. The Acharyas took the place of Alvars, 
and Nathamuni, who flourished during this period, was the forerun¬ 
ner of a band of distinguished religious leaders who shed lustre on 
the succeeding age. We find already the beginnings of that great 
controversy about the respective place of bhakti (devotion), jnana 


258 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


(knowledge) and karma (Vedic rites and ceremonies), in the scheme 
of final salvation. These three ideas which clustered round the 
Vaishnava Acharyas and the two Schools of Mimamsa associated with 
the names of Sankara and Kumarila still form the main planks or 
bases of the Hindu religion. 

B. BUDDHISM 
I. DOCTRINAL CHANGES 
1. Emergence of Tantrikism 

The period under review witnessed not only the decadence of 
pure Hmayana and Mahayana Buddhism but also the appearance 
of a new phase of the religion, in which the original ethical and phi¬ 
losophical principles were superimposed in such a way by an esoteric 
Yogic system, combined with endless rituals and forms of worship, 
that it could hardly be called Buddhism any longer. As we have 
seen above, Buddha’s rational and ethical teachings, free from wor¬ 
ship and rituals, gradually gave way in the early centuries of the 
Christian era to a popular form of the religion with a new ethical and 
devotional outlook, while his philosophical teachings received a new 
interpretation at the hands of the masterminds like Asanga, Nagar- 
juna, Vasubandhu, and Aryadeva. With Chandraklrti and Santi- 
deva, Dinnaga and Dharmakirti ended the glorious days of Buddhist 
logic and philosophy. Then came the days of stotras and stavas be¬ 
gun by Sarvajnamitra of Kashmir in the eighth century A.D. 1a The 
religion lost itself in the maze of mysticism and was engulfed by a 
host of mudras (finger-gestures or physical postures), mandalas (mys¬ 
tical diagrams), kriyds (rites and ceremonies) and eliaryds (medita- 
tional practices and observances for external and internal purity). 
The teachings of one of the noblest minds were thus deformed into 
a system of magical spells, exorcisms, spirit-beliefs, and worship of 
demons and divinities. 

It is strange that the promulgators of the new system sought 
their justification from the ancient words of Buddha and the philo¬ 
sophical teachings of Asanga and Nagarjuna, and succeeded in con¬ 
juring up before the eyes of the masses a religion with immense pos¬ 
sibilities. It must however be admitted that this new type of sddha- 
nas or yogic practices did confer on the adepts some superhuman 
powers and also led many to the realization of high spiritual states, 
and that there were among the adepts some who, in purity and know¬ 
ledge, ranked in no way inferior to some of the best ariiats of the 
past. In fact this new phase of Buddhism was not a hocus-pocus or 
a ruse for debauchery but envisaged something very deep and subtle 


259 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

to be realized only by those who were initiated into the secrets by 
their spiritual teachers. At the same time it must be admitted that 
the human mind can be worked up into any type of perversity 
through faith, logic and reasoning derived from the same religion 
which once upheld the noblest ideals of human life and the same phi¬ 
losophy which unfolded the deepest mysteries of the universe. Be 
it ancient India or Egypt, mediaeval China or the Middle East, 
modem Europe or Japan, we find the same story, viz. that in the 
name of religion and philosophy, necessity and circumstances have 
debased human mind to the lowest conceivable vulgarity. 

The mission of Buddha to wean the Indian mind from the blind 
faith in the efficacy of worship and rituals passed into oblivion, and 
the leaning of the Indian mind towards the worship of divinities and 
the awe and veneration for rituals and mystical utterances ( man¬ 
tras ) re-asserted itself. The belief in the efficacy of the Atharva- 
vedic mantras, the superhuman powers acquired by the mystics 
(sadhakas ), the arts of divination, necromancy and the hundred and 
one superstitious beliefs could not be totally eradicated from the 
Indian mind, however arduous might have been the efforts of Bud¬ 
dha in that direction. The huge sacrificial literature (the Srauta - 
sutras) that grew up in the post-Vedic period permeated the Indian 
mind to such an extent that it was almost impossible to separate reli¬ 
gion from ritualistic worship and mystical utterances (mantras). 
Buddha had to repeat his warnings to his disciples and devotees to 
disabuse their minds of the efficacy of the mantra rituals, but the 
sequel shows that he failed in his mission. In as early a text as the 
Digha Nikaya there is one complete suttanta (Atdnatiya ) 2 which is 
described as a rakkha (protecting spell) to be memorised for avert¬ 
ing evils from yakshas, gandharvas and other evil spirits. The 
anomaly of the occurrence of parittas ( =rakkhd— protecting spells) 
in the Pitakan texts has been discussed in the Milindapanha . 3 The 
Mahdmayurtdhdrant appears in the Vinaya-Pitaka of the Sarvasti- 
vadins. Hence it must be admitted that throughout the career of 
Buddhism, the use of incantations or mystical utterances was in 
vogue, and so Taranatha 4 rightly said that in general the origin of 
Sutras and Tantras could not be distinguished in regard to time, place 
and teacher, and the utmost that could be stated is that the Tantras 
(excluding the Anuttarayogatantra) appeared at the same time as the 
M.cihdydna-sutras. The tradition is that the yogic practices propound¬ 
ed by Asanga led to the growth of esotericism, which in course of time 
became Tantrikism. Tantrikism is not confined to Buddhism and re¬ 
presents a common phase of development both in Buddhist and Brah- 
manical religions. A more detailed account of its nature and pro- 


260 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


gress will be given in a later section of this chapter. Here it will suffice 
to note only its characteristic features so far as Buddhism is con¬ 
cerned. 


2. Dharanis 

The earliest literature which may be called precursor of Tantra 
was known as the Dharanis and formed a part of the Mahaydna - 
sutras. At the time of composition of the Lalitavistara! 5 or Sandhi- 
nirmochana-sutra 6 (about second century A.D.), the special sense of 
Dhdrani was unknown and its earliest use as a mantra was made in 
the Kdranidavyuha 7 of about the fourth century A.D. It is a text 
devoted to the glorification of the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara who 
with Tara formed the chief deities of worship in the early Tantra 
literature. In most of the early Mahayana texts, e.g., in the Suvar- 
naprabhdsa-sutra Q there is a section exhorting the gods and demons 
to protect those, who read and write the Sutra, from harm. In the 
Saddharmapundarika 9 there are a few Dharanis which, if uttered 
by the reciters of the Sutra , would protect them from all harm. In 
course of time a large number of Dharanis were composed, and the 
utterance of these Dharanis not only protected the reciters from 
ndgas, yakshas, rakshasas and other evil spirits, but also from king’s 
punishments, snakes, ferocious animals, fire, theft, diseases, deadly 
sins and all causes of untimely death. The utterance of Dharanis 
again conferred all kinds of blessings on the reciters like peace and 
happiness at the time of death, a desirable rebirth, and even a strong 
desire for Bodhichitta and ultimate emancipation. 

In course of time, the mantras were written on birch-bark and 
used as amulets for particular purposes. 10 The utterance of the 
Dharanis or Mantrapadas was preceded and followed by an ela¬ 
borate ritualistic worship of Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and other 
deities. These were represented either by images or by paintings, 
for which also there were directions in the texts. The priests, who 
officiated in these ceremonial worships, w r ere called Vidyddharas 
whose function was to recite the Dharanis or Mantras which, in 
some special instances, were designated as Vidydrdjm (e.g. Mahd - 
mdyuri-vidyavdjni), for the benefit of the xorshipper (yajamand). 

The growth of the Dhdrani literature took place between the 
fourth and eighth centuries A.D.- A large number of manuscripts 
containing Dharanis have been discovered in Gilgit, Eastern Turkes¬ 
tan and Central Asia. These are written in Upright Gupta charac¬ 
ters of the seventh ceutury A.D. Some of these appear also in the 
languages current in Central Asia. 


261 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The Dhdranls or Mantrapadas had very little to do with the 
secret yoglc practices of Tantrikism. The efficacy of the Dhdranls 
rested mainly on the repetition of mantras on the auspicious days of 
a month along with some ceremonies for the worship of Avaloki¬ 
tesvara. There is no place for Sakti in these ceremonies nor in the 
mudrds and mandalas, kriyds and charyds. 

3. Avalokitesvara and Tara 

The only deity invoked in most of the earlier Dhdrams is the 
Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, who was a devotee of Buddha Vairo- 
chana. The abode of Avalokitesvara is placed at Potalaka, a place 
somewhere in the south, near Srldhanyakataka (Amaravati). In 
the Kdrandvyuha (fourth century A.D.) this Bodhisattva is glori¬ 
fied as the first god to issue out of the primordial Buddha (Adi- 
Buddha Adinatha—Va jra) and to create the universe. In this 
text, the goddess Tara does not appear-while there are references 
to Mahesvara and Uma, as devotees of Avalokitesvara. It seems that 
in course of time this Uma-Mahesvara conception was superimposed 
on Mahayana and paved the way for the advent of Tantrayana. 

It is in this text again that we come across for the first time 
the well-known mantra e Om manipadme hum 3 with an account of 
the immense magical merit derived by the utterance of the six 
syllables. This mantra is said to be the innermost core (hridaya) u 
of Avalokitesvara and the quintessence of all knowledge (including 
the navdhga —nine divisions of the Tripitaka) and was known as 
the shadakshalrl-mahdvidydrtijni. Repetition of these words not 
only conferred all the conceivable earthly and heavenly blessings, 
but also led to the attainment of the highest knowledge, the truth. 

Thus, we see that up to the fourth century A.D., Bodhisattva 
Avalokitesvara was the chief object of worship, and the goddess 
Tara had not yet been included in the Buddhist pantheon. 

In the Manjusrlmulakalpa , the Bodhisattva Manjusri is glori¬ 
fied, but the goddess Tara is also recommended for worship by those 
in distress seeking relief. In the Guhyasamdja 12 Buddha Vairo- 
chana appears as the primordial Buddha, from whom emanated 
many Buddhas in the female forms of Lochana, Mamaki, Pandara- 
vasini and Samayatara. In the Manjusrlmulakalpa , 13 the names 
of different forms of Taras are Bhrikuti, Lochana, Mamaki, Sveta, 
Pandaravasini, and Sutara and these are described as Mahamudras 
(great aids for yoga). In the text the goddess Tara is described as 
the Vidyarajnl, full of compassion and given to the alleviation of 
sufferings of worldly beings. Her sphere of action is the east but 
she wanders over the whole world. 14 


262 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

The elevation of Tara to the position of the highest deity is found 
for the first time in the Mahdpratyangird-dhdranl, a fragment of which 
was found in Central Asia written in Upright Gupta characters of 
the seventh century, and transliterated in Chinese characters by the 
famous Tantrik teacher, Amoghavajra (A.D. 704=774). In this 

treatise Tara is described as goddess of white colour and noble mien, 
wearing a garland of vajras , holding a vajra in her hand, and having 
the figure of Vairochana on her crown, and so forth. The Kashmi¬ 
rian poet Sarvajiiamitra of the eighth century composed a stotra in 
praise of Tara called the Sragdhara-stotra, in which the goddess is 
described as a giver of strength to the weak and solace to the dis¬ 
tressed, the saviour of all beings from sufferings. 

It is from the seventh century A.D. onwards that we find the 
exuberance of Tara-stotras, and goddess Tara (Prajna or Prajna- 
paramita) raised to the mothership of all Buddhas and made a com¬ 
panion of Avalokitesvara, the personification of love (maitn) and 
compassion ( karwnd ). This notion reminds us of the Hindu Tan¬ 
trik conception, 15 in which Brahman is placed as the primoraial 
cause, the unmanifested Purusha and Sakti. Brahman, being neuter 
and incapable of creation, produced Siva and Sakti, of whom Sakti 
is the cause of liberation ( moksha ), Siva or Purusha, the cause of 
bondage (samsdra) . The Buddhist conception runs almost parallel 
to the above and we may equate Brahman to Adi-Buddha, Sakti to 
Tara or Prajna, the cause of liberation, and Siva to Avalokitesvara, 
the only deviation being that Siva or Purusha is the cause of samsdra 
while Avalokitesvara is the embodiment of love and compassion. 

It did not take long to reach the Tantrik conception that Tara 
as such was Buddha’s sakti and the relation of Buddha to Tara was 
similar to that of Siva to ParvatT, the dual manifestations of Adi- 
Buddha or the monistic Brahman. 

4. Early Tantrik Texts 
(i) The Manjusrimulakalpa 

The earliest works dealing with Tantrik Buddhism are the 
Manjusrimulakalpa and the Guhyasamdja. The composition of both 
of these works took place some time after the Kdrandavyuha and 
before the Mahdpratyangird-dhdravd, i.e. about the fifth or sixth 
century A.D. 16 Though both may be classified as Tantrik Buddhist 
texts, the topics of the two treatises are quite different. The 
Guhyasamdja deals with yoga and anuttarayoga and incidentally 
with mandalas, while the Manjusrimulakalpa gives an exposition 


263 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


of endless mudrds (finger-poses), mandalas (mystical diagrams), 
mantras (mystical spells), kriyds (rites) and chary as (duties of an 
officiating priest in worship). This text teaches that observance of 
moral precepts (sila), vows ( vratas ), cleanliness in acts ( saucha - 
chard), religious austerities ( niyama ), offering of oblations ( homa ), 
muttering of prayers ( jdpa ) and meditation (dhyana) are the pre¬ 
requisites for success in the Mantra cult. The directions regarding 
the above are given by the Mandaldchdrya (spiritual preceptor profi¬ 
cient in diagram, paintings, etc.), who gives the initiation (abfti- 
sheka) and then imparts the mantra . After a long time, when the 
teacher feels that his disciple has advanced spiritually, he teaches 
him the duties for secret tantra-mudrd . 17 

By far the best part of the treatise is the section devoted to 
pafavidhana, i.e. directions for drawing pictures of different Bud¬ 
dhas, Bodhisattvas, Tara and other goddesses as also of the 
Krodharajas, Yamantakas, Yakshas and Yakshinis. 18 The drawing 
of diagrams ( mandalas ) forms another important section of the 
treatise. Each mandala as well as each pata is associated with cer¬ 
tain rites and ceremonies for worshipping the deities or propitiating 
the evil spirits. Within and outside the mandalas, images of deities 
including Buddhas and Bodhisattvas had to be painted, and the text 
abounds with detailed directions of the paintings of a mandala and 
the group of deities to be placed within the same. Even the deities 
like Siva with a trident seated on a bull, the well-adorned Uma, 
the ever young Karttikeya seated on a peacock are included in the 
paintings. 19 This text contains mantras for both Hindu and Bud¬ 
dhist deities. It makes an important contribution to the art of paint¬ 
ing by describing how the abstract qualities like dana (charity), 
maitrt (love)', and prajna (knowledge) are to be depicted. 

Apart from mantras and directions for patas (paintings) and 
mandalas (diagrams) the text furnishes us with a list of the holy 
places for quick success in Mantra cult and recommends particular¬ 
ly Srlparvata as the most suitable for such practices. This list 
includes all those countries which became later the chief seats of 
Tantrik Buddhism. 20 In this text there is very little of the secret 
Yogic practices envisaged in the Tantrik literature. The practices 
recommended are mostly rites and ceremonies for worship of 
Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, and other deities, and utterances of mantras . 
There is an admixture of Hinayana and Mahayana doctrines with 
mantras and rituals. It depicts the stage just preceding the deve¬ 
lopment of full-fledged Vajrayana or Tantrayana and may be des¬ 
cribed in the words of Taranatha 21 as Kriyd and Karma tantras, on 
the decline of which appeared the Yoga or Anuttarayoga tantra. 


264 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


(ii) The Guhyasamdja 

The Guhyasamdja, devoted to Yoga afid Anuttarayoga, contains 
also several mantras and a few direction^ for mandalas , but its chief 
aim is to explain the Tathdgata-guhya f i.e. the unknowable reality, 
the source of all Tathagatas as also of the phenomenal world, and 
how to realise it. Its importance as an early text of Vajrayana lies 
in the fact that it indicates the new ways and means for realising 
the reality, the guhya, the vajra, with the help of mantras and 
masalas, rites and ceremonies. The Tathdgata-guhya is so deep and 
subtle that |t can be described as the secret of all secrets; it is the 
unchangeable eternal reality, the Vajra, the Sunyata of Nagarjuna, 
and the Vijnaptimdtratd of Vasubandhu. It is unfortunate that the 
word ( guhya > has tempted a few scholars to trace in the text sexual 
ritualistic practices, and Dr. Benoytosh Bhattacharyya, in his intro¬ 
duction to the Guhyasamdja , 22 has done injustice to the work by 
isolating, from the topic and trend of exposition, the verses which 
have references to the conception of sakti, by interpreting certain 
verses superficially without any reference to the theme of the pas¬ 
sages preceding and following them, 23 and also by misinterpreting a 
few verses. 24 

The Guhyasamdja, as stated above, gives repeatedly the exposi¬ 
tion of the Truth which, according to the text, is the Vajra, or one¬ 
ness of the universe, in which there is no distinction between a man 
and a woman, between a wife and a sister or a mother, between the 
excreta and the meat of any animal, even of a human being. The 
Truth or the Vajra is immanent in the phenomenal world of rupa 
(from), rasa (taste), gandho. (smell), sparsa (touch), etc., hence the 
adepts are asked to realise the fact that Vajra is as much identical 
with the phenomenal world as with the Truth. 25 The text 26 states 
that even ragacharyu (acts of passion) is included in the functions of 
Bodhisattvas because it is not different from the Truth, the Vajra, 
just as all objects are in space and space is in all objects. Dvesha 
(hatred), moha (delusion), rdga (attachment), chintdmani (Bodhi- 
chitta) and samaya (doctrine') are the five hulas and constitute the 
means of escape from kdma. 27 The first three as also chintdmani 
(Vajra) are called ratis, but they are really Buddhas in female form. 
This Imagery wants to establish that dvesha, moha, and rdga are as 
much emanations of Buddha or the Truth as is the Bodhichitta. The 
Bodhisattvas are instructed to develop their body, speech, and 
thought in such a way that they may become V air as, i.e. remain un¬ 
affected by the worldly affairs. 28 In this text chitta, developed into 
chitta-vajra stage, is identified with Bodhichitta, and so the concep¬ 
tion of Bodhidhitta is different from that of the Bodhicharyavatdra 


265 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


and other Mahayana texts. The Bodhichitta or Chitta-vajra in this 
text 29 means the realisation of the unity, the non-duality ( advaya - 
madvaidhikaram) of the Truth and the universe. 

5. Two Schools of Tantrik Teachers 

Among the Tantrik teachers, the Vajracharyas, there were two 
schools of thought; one adopted the Madhyamika and the other the 
Yogachara. The conception of Vajra, as given in the Guhyasamdja 
and in the works of Anahgavajra and Indrabhfiti, is that of sunyata 
or extreme advayavdda of Nagarjuna, while that in the Dohas and 
Cliarydpadas of Lui-pa, Kanhu or Bhusukupada is the idealism or 
Vijnaptimatratd or Chittamatra of Asanga and Vasubandhu. The 
Tibetan tradition speaks of two lines of Vajracharyas, one commenc¬ 
ing with Padmavajra and the other with Saraha. 30 It is not im¬ 
probable that the Tantrik teachers had differences not only in regard 
to the methods of sddhanas, i.e. kriyd, charya, mantra, and yoga, but 
also about the conception of Vajra. 

6. Distinction between Tantrikism and Mahayanism 

The difference between Tantrikism and Mahayanism (i.e. the 
Madhyamika-Yogachara systems) was in the ways and methods of 
realising the highest truth. The Tantrikism takes the aids of mudrds, 
mandalas and mantras for inducing concentration of thoughts (yoga) 
and even takes recourse to hatha-yoga (meditation with artificial 
aids). With these mudrds and mandalas are associated freely the 
conceptions of goddesses and yoga-minded women of any caste or 
origin. The sole underlying object of such association was to make 
the adepts realise that the female sex, believed to be the 
source of all our worldly sufferings, was as much an appearance as the 
male sex, and that in the order of worldly creation, the place next to 
Adi-Buddha is that of 6akti (female energy), i.e. Tara of the Bud¬ 
dhists and Uma of the Brahmanas. It is stated in the Guhyasamdja 31 
that a few Buddhas issued out of the body of the Vairochana Buddha 
in the form of female goddesses as Lochana, Mamaki, Fandaravasinl, 
Samayatara, some in the shape of Rupa (form), Sabda (sound), 
Gandha (smell) and Sparsa (touch), some as Dvesharati , Moharati, 
Rdgarati and Vajrarati, some as the four elements, earth, water, air 
and fire, and others as the five constituents of a being, viz. Rupa 
(physical elements constituting form), Vedand (feeling), Samjnd 
(conception), Samskdra (impression) and Vijnana (consciousness). 
In the same text 32 it is also stated that earth is represented by 
Lochania, water by Mamaki, fire by Pandaravasini and air by Tara, 
while the five constituents of a being are represented by the five 


266 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Dhyanl-Buddhas. 33 Thus an important and early Tantrik text 
teaches that all the causes of our worldly attachments, viz. the four 
elements, five constituents, the objects of the organs of sense are in 
reality emanations of Buddhas, who are in turn emanations of the 
Vairochana Buddha, i.e. the Adi-Buddha. In other words, the uni¬ 
verse represents the variety of the unity, the Adi-Buddha. 

On account of the abuses made of the Tantrik practices by quite 
a large number of religious sects, there is a general notion that all 
the Tantriks advocated the use of five Makaras, viz. madya (wine), 
rmmsa (meat), maithuna (sexual union), matsya (fish) and mudra 
(finger-poses). In the Guhyasamaja and a few other early texts, 
there are references to meat-eating, union with females, and finger- 
poses, but not to the use of wine and fish, which were probably later 
additions. It is a pity that a religion, with the highest monistic philo¬ 
sophy and the noblest ideals, recommended such ways and methods 
for the quick realisation of the Truth, and that it resulted more in 
abuses than in the proper utilisation of the aids. Although Tantrik- 
ism has been generally condemned, it still retains its hold and works 
unconsciously upon the Indian mind. 

II. HISTORICAL REVIEW 
1. Traditional Account by Taranatha 

Taranatha presents us with a picture of the state of Buddhism 
during the period which immediately preceded the reign of king 
Gopala, i.e. the first half of the eighth century A.D., when lived and 
worked the famous logician Dharmakirti. He writes that during the 
time of Dharmakirti and earlier, Buddha’s teaching was shining like- 
the sun. The Acharyas of the Mahayana schools were very scholarly 
and the members of the Sanghas were excellent. The number of 
monks of the Hinayana schools was very large. After Dharmakirti 
there appeared many distinguished Acharyas but they could not stand 
in comparison with the stalwarts of the earlier period and were 
unable to maintain the high traditions of their teaching. He then 
furnishes us with a 1st of such scholars. One of these was Acharya 
Vinltadeva, who wrote commentaries on some of the works of 
Dharmakirti, 34 and a few independent works on logic. He was also 
the author of the history of the eighteen sects of early Buddhism. 
Other teachers who dealt with logic and taught the Sutra and Vinaya 
texts were 6llapalita, Santisoma, Acharya Jnanagarbha, and Acharya 
Srlgupta. In the east there were a few Naiyayikas (Logicians) who 
wore pointed caps and defeated the non-Buddhist Naiyayikas in dis¬ 
putations. Taranatha speaks of a number of Vinaya teachers, who 
evidently belonged either to the Sarvastivada or the Theravada 


l 26 7 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


sects. They were Dharmamitra, a Vibhajyavadin of Tukhara, Punya- 
klrti of the Maru country, and Matricheta of Kashmir. The only 
Sautrantika teacher mentioned by Taranatha is Subhamitra. 

From the time of Arya Asahga, there appeared many distinguish¬ 
ed Mantracharyas, but their teaching of Anuttarayoga was trans¬ 
mitted secretly to a few deserving disciples. Though it did not spread 
widely, it superseded the prevailing Kriyd (rites) and Chdrya (obser¬ 
vances) tantras. Taranatha 35 criticises those who are doubtful about 
the indigenous origin of the Tantras and tiy to trace foreign influ¬ 
ences. He is of opinion that the Tantras appeared at the same time 
as the Mahayana Sutras, but the texts of Anuttarayoga tantra which 
are full of deep meaning were produced gradually in the following 
order:— 

(i) Buddhakapala-tantra of 6ri Saraha; 

(ii) Yoginisamcharya of Lui-pada (or Lui-pa); 

(iii) Hevajra-tantra of Kambala and Padmavajra; 

(iv) Samputa-tUaka of Krishnacharin; 

(v) Krishnayamari-tantra (3 sections) of Lalitavajra; 

(vi) Vajrdmrita of Gambhiravajra; 

(vii) Mahamayti of Kukkuri; and 

(viii) Kalachakra of Pifo. 

Taranatha writes that at the time of Dharmakirti there were 
three Acharyas headed by Saraha and his disciple Lui-pada, and the 
four distinguished Tantrik Acharyas, viz., Kambala, Lalitavajra, 
Padmavajra and Indrabhuti. At that time there were two chief 
centres of Tantrikism, one at Nalanda and the other at Udyiana. 

Lui-pa, the head of a line of Tantrik teachers, was also a con¬ 
temporary of Asahga, and claimed Saraha as the founder of his line 
of Acharyas. Lui-pa was born in Ujjayini, and was a writer of a king 
of the west called Samantasubha. 36 He was initiated into the 
Chakrasambara mandala by Smasanapati and reached Bhangala 
(Bengal). He initiated the king of Odivisa (Orissa), Diarika, and his 
minister Tehgi into Tantrik rites. 37 In the Tibetan Catalogue, the 
following works are attributed to Lui-pa besides the Yogim-sam- 
charyd mentioned above:— Sribhagavadabhisamaya, Vajrasattva- 
sndharia, Abhisamayavibhanga and Buddhodaya. The common prac¬ 
tice among the disciples of adopting the names of some distinguished 
Acharyas has created a good deal of confusion. It is very likely that 
Lui-pa of Asahga’s time was different from the Lui-pa, the composer 
of Dohas. Acharya Kambala attained some siddhi. He wrote Praj - 
ndpdramitd-navosloka-pinddrtha and Svasamvedanaprakritasdstra. 


268 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

i 

He, along with Padmavajra, brought the He-vajra-tantra (He—dgyes 
—cheerful) from Udyana to Nalanda. One of his contemporaries 
was Acharya Lalitavajra, who was a teacher of Nalanda. He also 
brought from Udyana a few Dharanis, Kriskriayamari-tantra and a 
few works on Tantrik rituals (Kalpa-kramas) , and propagated the 
same in India. He taught Vairochana-mayujdla-tantra. Taranatha 
writes that he was a contemporary of Naravarman, 38 a petty non- 
Buddhist prince of the West. 

Acharya Padmavajra, in one Tibetan tradition ( vide Cordier 
Catalogue), is placed at the head of a line of spiritual heads (guru). 
He composed the Guhyasiddhi 39 in which he gave an exposition of 
the Vajra-conception and the means of attaining it almost on the 
same lines as the Guhyasamaja } dealt with above. He wrote Utpatti- 
kram a-sadhana and a few other works. 

Anahgavajra succeeded Padmavajra. He wrote a number of 
works, of which one, the Prajnopaya-vinischaya-siddhi, is available 
in original in Sanskrit. 40 In this short treatise he explains the Truth 
almost in the same way as Nagarjuna did in his works. His contri¬ 
bution is that the Truth can be attained only by the combination of 
knowledge (prajnd) and compassion (updya---karuna), and that the 
adept must take the aid of a spiritual preceptor as also of mudrus and 
mantras to realise the same. 

Acharya Indrabhuti, who succeeded Anahgavajra, was a king 
of Sambhala, one of the two dominions into which Udyana was 
divided, the other being Lahkapuri, which was ruled over by Jalen- 
dra. Indrabhuti took to Tantrik practices even when he was ruling 
the kingdom. He received Acharya Lalitavajra with due venera¬ 
tion when the latter visited his kingdom, and learnt from him more 
of the Tantrik sadhanas. He was also the author of several works, 
one of which, the Jrvanasiddhi, is available in original Sanskrit. 41 
His name appears also in the Sadhanamala 42 as the author of Kuru- 
kullasadhana. In the Jnanasiddhi, he points out that neither mudrd 
nor mandala nor japa nor mantra can help one to attain the Truth. 
It is with the help of the Guru, and by following his directions that 
one must realise the Truth. Indrabhuti does not actually discard 
the efficacy of the artificial aids, but what he wanted to impress 
upon his disciples was that these were to be treated as mere aids and 
not the means for the realisation of the Truth. He composed also 
the Sahaja-siddhi. 

Acharya Indrabhuti was succeeded in the spiritual leadership 
by his sister and disciple Lakshmimkara who had also a few works 
to her credit. One of her ^orks, Advayasiddhi, has been found in 
original Sanskrit. In this work, she more or less reiterated the 


269 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

views of her brother Indrabhuti. 43 She is believed to be the prea¬ 
cher of Sahaja-yana. 

Lakshmlmkara’s disciple and successor was Acharya Lllavajra 44 
who wrote several works, some of which were on Sahaja-yana. He 
was consecrated at Udyana. He belonged to the Nyaya-madhyamika 
school and invoked ManjusrI. He attained perfection and lived some 
time after the demise of king Devapala, about the middle of the ninth 
century A.D. 

2. The Patronage of the Pala Kings 

The patronage of the Pala kings forms one of the most impor¬ 
tant factors in the history of Buddhism during the period under re¬ 
view. The Pala rulers were all Buddhists, and during their long 
rule, extending over nearly four centuries, Buddhism found a safe 
refuge in Bihar and Bengal after it had ceased to have any footing 
in the rest of India, with the exception of Kashmir, Nepal, and a few 
isolated regions. 

While the numerous inscriptions of the Palas leave no doubt 
about their adherence to Buddhism, they do not tell us much about 
their activities in furtherance of this faith. For this we are in¬ 
debted mainly to the traditions recorded by Tibetan historians like 
Bu-ston and Taranatha and in texts like the Manjusnmulakalpa . 

(i) Gopala 

It is said about Gopala, the founder of the royal dynasty of the 
Palas 45 , that he was a devotee and benefactor of Buddhism. 46 He 
revived the Nalanda monastery, erected several new monasteries in 
his dominion, and offered lavish gifts to the Buddhist clergy. At 
his time Kashmir continued to be an important centre of Buddhism 
to which place resorted the monks “from the western countries. In 
the west, his contemporary king of Kachchha, Vibharatta, had Bud¬ 
dhist leanings, but his ministers had Brahmanic faith. For this 
reason the temples erected in that part of the country contained 
images of both Buddhist and non-Buddhist gods. Here was one 
famous temple, called Amritakumbha, consecrated by the Tantrik 
Acharya Viriipa, the junior. 47 

It is said that during the reign of Gopala, an upastuca built the 
towering Odantapurl (Tib. hyed hphur=zf[ ying high) monastery, 
spending immense gold, which he obtained miraculously. The walls 
and the rooms of the monastery were superbly executed and the 
best of workmanship was displayed in the erection of the monas¬ 
tery. This structure served as a model for the first monastery built 
in Tibet. 


270 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


The great philosopher and dialectician &antarakshita lived and 
worked during the reign of king Gopala and passed away from this 
world at the time of king Dharmapala. At the invitation of the Tibe¬ 
tan king Khri-sroh-lde-tsan, son of the Chinese queen of Sron-tsan- 
gam-po, he went to Tibet and stayed there up to A.D. 762. In Tibet 
he was called Pandita Bodhisattva or Dharmasantighosha. He came 
of a royal family of Bengal and became a distinguished Acharya of 
Nalanda. He belonged to the Svatantrika-madhyamika school, 46 
though in his work Tattva-samgraha 49 he is found to be supporting 
the Yogachara views. He wrote a commentary on Dharmakirti’s 
Vddanyaya but his masterpiece was the voluminous work Tattva- 
samgraha in which he discussed and refuted the views of several 
Brahmanic as well as Buddhist philosophers and dialecticians. 

(ii) Dharmapala 

The next king Dharmapala was a great admirer of the teachings 
of the Prajhaparamita-sutras and made Haribhadra, the great com¬ 
mentator of the Prajnaparamitd-sutra and exponent of the Yogachara 
philosophy, his spiritual preceptor. He erected as many as fifty 
monasteries for the study and teaching of the same. In Vikrama- 
silavihara, founded by him, he granted allowance to those who studied 
these texts. Taranatha acknowledges that the teachings of the Prajna- 
pdramitds spread widely under the auspices of this king. 60 After 
the demise of Haribhadra, Dharmapala made Haribhadra’s disciple 
Buddhajnanapada his spiritual preceptor. At the advice of this new 
preceptor, the king supported also the study and teaching of the 
Guhyasamaja . 

Acharya Haribhadra (his full name being Haribhadrapada) came 
of a royal family. He studied the Madhyamika t€ixts with Santarak- 
shita, and the Yogachara texts with Vairochanabhadr^. He was ins¬ 
pired by Ajita Maitreyanatha in a dream and preferred the Yoga¬ 
chara teachings. He wrote commentaries on the Ashtasahasrika * 
Prajndpdramitd and other texts. His commentaiy ( Aloka ) on the 
Ahhisamayalankdra, a treatise interpreting the Prajnapdramitd- 
sutras from the Yogachara standpoint, bespeaks his vast and deep 
knowledge of the Buddhist doctrines. He resided in the Traikutaka- 
vihara and died about twenty years after Dharmapala’s accession to 
the throne. 61 

One of the best disciples of Haribhadra was Buddhajnanapada, 
who, after the demise of Haribhadra, became the .spiritual preceptor 
of the king. He propagated the rituals and teachings of the Kriyd 
and Yoga tantras particularly of the Guhyasamaja, M&yajtila, Chan - 
draguhyatilaka* and Manjusrtkrodha. He performed the consecra 


271 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


tion ceremony of the Vikramasila monastery and became its spiritual 
head, the Vajracharya. 

Besides these two teachers, there were a number of distinguished 
monks, specialising in certain branches of studies. They are as 
follows:— 

(i) The Tantrik Acharyas Prasantamitra, Buddhaguhya and 

Buddhasanti, disciples of Buddhajhanapada, Rahulabhadra 

and Acharya Padmakaraghosha of Kashmir. 

* 

(ii) The commentator Kamalaslla. 

(iii) The dialecticians (Naiyayikas) Kalyaina-rakshita, Sobha- 
vyuha, Sagaramegha, Prabhakara, and Purnavardhana and 
Dharmakaradatta of Kashmir. 

Prasantamitra was a disciple of Jhanapada. He studied the Pro jna* 
paramit&s and some sections of the Kriyd and Yoga tantras and 
attained Y amantaka-siddhi. He built a monastery called Amrita- 
kara to the south of Nalanda. 

Dharmapala founded the Vikramasila monastery in the north 
on the top of a mountain near the Ganga in Magadha. Around the 
central monastery, there were fifty-three cells suitable for Tantrik 
esoteric practices and fifty-four rooms for general use of monks; in 
all there were 108 chambers. These were surrounded by a wall 
having six gates. One hundred and eight monks (Panditas) were in 
charge of this monastic institution; and each had a certain specified 
duty, viz. making offerings to deities, performing homa, giving ini¬ 
tiation, looking after pigeons, temple-attendants, and so forth. Some 
of these monks were entrusted with the duties of teaching different 
subjects, e.g. grammar, metaphysics, logic, ritualistic practices, etc. 
Not only were these 108 Panditas maintained by the state, but even 
the students or listeners to the discourses were given food and money. 
There was provision for the award of diplomas to the monk-students 
who showed proficiency, and the reigning kings took interest in the 
award of the diplomas. 62 The income of the establishment was 
shared equally by the 108 Panditas. 

This monastery grew up to be an important academic centre, 
to which flocked students not only from all comers of India but also 
from Tibet and other foreign countries. At this monastery many 
Sanskrit texts were translated into Tibetan. Jinarakshita, the com¬ 
mentator of Sarvajnamitra’s Sragdhcird’Stotra , 63 lived in this monas¬ 
tery and so also did Dharma-srlmitra, mentioned in the Brihat-sva* 
yambhu-piirdna. 5A Dharmapala’s second spiritual preceptor Acharya 
Buddhajhanapada was put in charge of the monastery at its com¬ 
mencement. 


272 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


In Chapter 38 of his work, Taranatha gives an account of the 
succession of the Vajracharyas of the Vikramaslla monastery. He 
writes that there were five generations of Vajracharyas, but actually 
there are twelve names, preceding the six dvara-panditas, viz. 
Buddha jnanapada — Dlpankarabhadra — Jayabhadra — Sridhara 1 
—- Bhavabhadra — Bhavyaklrti — Lllavajra — Durjanachandra — 
Krishnasamayavajra — Tathagatarakshita — Bodhibhadra — Kama- 
larakshita; — then the six dvdra-p audit as — Dlpahkara-Srljnana and 
others and then — Abhayakaragupta — ^ubhakaragupta and others. 

During the reign of Dharmapala, the Saindhava-sravakas creat¬ 
ed some troubles at Vikramaslla-vihara. They came to the monas¬ 
tery soon after its erection. They destroyed the metal image of 
Heruka and burnt the Mantra-treatises. They preached that Maha- 
yanism (i.c. Tantrikism) did not represent Buddha’s teachings and 
converted many pilgrims coming from Bengal to their faith. These 
Sravakas were mostly bhikshus of Simhala. King Dharmapala was 
enraged at this attempt of the Sravakas and was going to punish 
them, but he desisted from doing so at the advice of his spiritual 
preceptor Buddhajnanapada. 

The revival of Hlnayanism by the monks of Simhala and of 
Sindhu is an important event in the history of Buddhism. The fact 
that they decried the Mahayana and Tantrayana teachings at such 
a late date as the ninth century, and still later during the rule of 
the Sena kings, speaks highly of their courage and firm faith. It 
seems that they obtained the patronage of the Gurjara rulers who 
asserted their sovereignty in the east during the Pala period. 

The successors of Dharmapala did not interfere with the endow¬ 
ment 5 ' 3 and so this monastic establishment carried on its work quiet¬ 
ly for a century without any event of extraordinary importance. 
About the tenth century A.D. Vikramaslla monastery became a 
famous academic centre with six renowned dvara-pariditas, whose 
function was not only to admit students into the monastery, but also 
to enter into controversy with the teachers of other religious faiths. 
The names of these dvara-panditas are as follows:— 

i) Ratnakarasanti in charge of eastern gate; 

ii) Vagisvarakirti of Banaras in charge of western gate; 

iii) Naropa in charge o£ northern gate; 

iv) Prajnakaramati in charge of southern gate; 

§ 

v) Ratnavajra of Kashmir, the first Mahastambha, and 

vi) Jnanasrlmitra of Gauda, the second Mahastambha. 

.* 

273 

A.I.K.—IS 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


(iii) Devapdla 

Devapala was a zealous advocate of Buddhism. 56 His remark¬ 
able achievement was the restoration of the sand-buried temple, 
6rl Traikutaka, and its enlargement. This temple in course of time 
came to be known as the new Somapurl-vihara the ruins of which 
have been discovered at Paharpur. 57 Haribhadra states in the colo¬ 
phon of his work, Abhisamayalahkaraloha, that he resided in the ex¬ 
cellent monastery Traikutaka, which was adorned with learned men. 

In the Nalanda stone-inscription 58 of Vipula-srlmitra, it is stated 
that he was a disciple of Asoka-srlmitra, who again was a disciple of 
Maitrl-sHmitra. The teacher of Maitrl-srlmitra, Karunasrlmitra, 
while residing at the Somapuri monastery, was burnt to death by an 
army of Vangala. At the time of Dharmapala, the Saindhava-srava- 
kas burnt the image of Heruka and Tantrik books. The dvdra-pan- 
dita of Vikramasila was Jnana-srlmitra, who was at first a Saindhava- 
sravaka and then became a Tantrayanist. It seems that the inscription 
refers to a deadly quarrel between the Saindhava-sravakas, whose 
names probably ended with the words “Srimitra”, and the Tantraya- 
nists of Bengal. 

Another event of outstanding importance in the history of Bud¬ 
dhism is the communication of the king of Suvarnadvipa, Balaputra- 
deva of the Sailendra dynasty, to Devapala, to which reference has 
been made above. 59 In this connection, we may refer to Chapter 
XL of Taranatha’s History in which it is stated that Buddhism was 
propagated in ancient days in the small islands called Siiiihaladvlpa, 
Yavadvlpa, Tamradvlpa, Suvarnadvipa, Dhanasrldvlpa and Pahgu- 
dvlpa. In the last two islands only there were Mahayanists and a 
few in Simhala. 

(iv) The Successors of Devapdla 

As Taranatha’s account of the Pala kings after Devapala is hope¬ 
lessly confused, it is impossible to give a chronological list of the 
Buddhist teachers mentioned by him. He refers to a number of 
distinguished monks. Four of them, viz. Sarvajnadeva, Jinamitra, 
Danaslla of Kashmir and Dharmakara went to Tibet at the time of 
Ral-pa-can for translating the Buddhist texts. 60 In the colophon of 
Dul-va (= Vinaya), it is stated that in the ninth century, the text 
was translated by Sarvajnadeva and Dharmakara, and revised by 
Vidyakaraprabha. From among the Tantrik teachers we may men¬ 
tion the names of Tilopa, Gambhlravajra, Amrita-guhya, Bhaga and 
Anandagarbha. Tillipa or Tilopa is counted as one of the 84 mahd- 
siddhas. He was the guru of Naropa, one of the six dvara-pcvnditas 
of Vikramasila, who. lived in the tenth century. It was his disciple 


274 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Mar-pa, who founded the Kar-gyu-pa sect in Tibet in the eleventh 
century. This line of teachers propagated the Tantrik teachings 
widely in MagacLha. 

A king whom Taranatha calls Mahapala, but whose identity can¬ 
not be established, was a supporter of the Sthavira-vadins, whose 
centre was in the western parts of India. They are referred to by 
Taranatha as Saindhava-sravakas and bhikhus of Simhala. 61 Tara¬ 
natha writes that the king showed great honour to the Saindhava- 
sravakas who must have lived in large numbers in the Odantapuri- 
vihara, and for whose accommodation, the king made an annexure, 
called the Uruvasa-vihara. This king enlarged the monasteries of 
Nalanda and Somapuri-Traikutaka. At his time the Kdlachakr at antra 
was introduced by Pito. Among the distinguished Acharyas of his 
time, the names of Jetari and Krishnasamayavajra may be men¬ 
tioned. The former was a disciple of Buddha jnanapada and was 
recognised as one of the his ecclesiastical successors. Acharya Jetari 
was exceedingly intelligent. He learned quickly the various scripts 
and sciences, the Abhidharma, and other works. He at first failed 
to obtain the royal diploma of Vikramasila and it was after he had 
made himself famous by defeating in controversies many Painditas 
of other lands, that he was granted the diploma of Vikramasila. 
He delivered discourses in the Vikramasila monastery and wrote 
short commentaries on Santideva^s Sikshdsamuchchaya and Bodhi - 
charydiiatara, on Akdsagarbhasutra } and other texts. He wrote three 
treatises on logic, viz. Hetutattava-upadesa, Dharma-dharmi-vini- 
schayn and Bdldvatdrcttarka. 

III. ICONOGRAPHY 

Numerous standing and seated images of Buddha of the media¬ 
eval period have been discovered in different parts of India, his 
independent recumbent figure illustrating his Mahaparinirvajna being 
extremely rare. Mahaparinirvana of the Master is depicted in 
mediaeval Buddhist art in a secondary manner. Many sthanaka 
and dsana types of Buddha are extant which contain on their pra- 
bhavall summary representations of seven of the principal miracles; 
the miracle—and every incident in the life of the Master is a mira¬ 
cle according to the pious Buddhists — of the great decease is in¬ 
variably shown on the top centre of the back-slabs of such reliefs. 
The eight miracles, including that depicted by the main central 
seated or standing image, were connected with the four principal in¬ 
cidents, Buddha’s birth, enlightenment, preaching of the first sermon 
and great decease, and the four others, such as his taming of Nala- 
giri, the wild elephant that was set upon him by his cousin 
Devadatta at Rajagriha, his descent at Sankasya from the Trayas- 


275 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


trimsa heaven after preaching the law there to his departed mother, 
the acceptance of the honey ottered by a monkey at Vaisaii, and 
lastly the great miracle, in which he simultaneously multiplied him¬ 
self in the presence of king Prasenajit of Kosala and a host of his 
own followers and other Tirthikas at Sravastl. The Eastern Indian 
School of mediaeval sculpture contains numerous examples of such 
standing and seated figures of Gautama, and the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta, alone possesses a large number of such images, mostly 
hailing from Bihar and Bengal. The central figure in these com¬ 
positions usually depicts Buddha seated in baddhapadmasana with 
his hands mostly showing the bhusparsa , indicating that it represents 
the Master’s victory over Mara at Bodh-Gaya preliminary to his 
attainment of the enlightenment, the other seven miracles in mini¬ 
ature being shown in well-arranged groups on his either side on the 
back-slab. The main image with its hands in the dharmachakra- 
mudra f illustrating the preaching of the first sermon, is comparatively 
rare, as is also the standing type with the seven miniatures on the 
background. The much mutilated figure in the collection of the 
Vangiya Sahitya Parishat Museum, Calcutta (No. ) is thus of 
some interest, for it shows Buddha standing in the sarnapddasthdnaka 
attitude on a double-petalled lotus {visvapadma) below which the 
Buddhist formula 62 is written in ninth century script, flanked on 
either side by three parallel rows of two scenes each with that of 
Mahaparinirvana just on the top. The rarity of such compositions 
can be accounted for by referring to the artistic sense of symmetry 
required in the display of the miniatures. In this particular relief, 
if the central figure is connected with the descent from the Traya- 
strimsa heaven, then the explanation of the miniature standing Bud¬ 
dha on the right in the middle row is difficult; the one on the left in 
the same row undoubtedly stands for the taming of Nalagiri, the wild 
elephant of Raj agriha, and the Safikasya and Raj agriha miracles 
are the only two in which the standing posture is necessary. The 
birth-scene, of course, would necessitate the showing of Maya in 
the same pose, but it is almost invariably carved in the right lower¬ 
most corner of the prabhavali and it does not jar at all with the 
artistic sense. Many standing Buddha images again, which do not 
contain these illustrations of the stereotyped set of miracles, fall 
either under the Devavatara or Nalagiri-taming types; the first of 
the two is more common and is often shown attended on either side 
by 6akra and Brahma. Just to emphasise the act of descent, the 
artists sometimes indicate stairs beneath the feet of the three, thus 
reminding us of the early Buddhist convention of showing the same 
scene with three stairs side by side, the middle one having one foot- 
mark on its topmost rung and another on its lowermost one. 63 


276 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Numerous seated images of Buddha have been found, which can be 
classified under different groups according to their association with 
one or other of the miracles, clearly indicated by their different 
hand-poses and sitting postures. The Sddhanamdlu describes one 
iconographic type, named by it as Vajmsana Buddha, in which Bud¬ 
dha is seated in baddhapadmasana on a visvapadma with his hands 
in the bhHspcirsamudrd ) attended by Avalokitesvara on the left and 
Maitreya on the right, the respective iconographic cognizances of 
the acolytes being a lotus and a bunch of Nagakesara flowers . 64 
Other dsana Buddha figures, which do not contain the seven miracles 
in miniature in the prabhavali, show Buddha preaching the first ser¬ 
mon, which event is suggested not only by the dharmachakramudrd 
peculiar to this motif, but also by the presence of a wheel ( dharma - 
chakra) flanked by two couchant deer on the pedestal. A good many 
mediaeval compositions have been found in eastern India which show 
Buddha seated in a similar manner with his hands in the same mudra, 
but we do not find the wheel and deer indicative of the locality of 
Sarnath on the pedestal, in the place of which are shown the Naga 
kings, Nanda and Upananda, on either side of the lotus stalk; figures 
of miniature seated, standing, and rarely recumbent, Buddhas are 
gracefully arranged round the central image. These undoubtedly re¬ 
present the Great Miracle of Sravasti which seems to have been a 
very favourite theme with the artists of mediaeval India. A com¬ 
paratively rare type of seated Buddha depicts him with an alms-bowl 
placed on his hands, joined over his lap, and a monkey carved on the 
pedestal or by his side; this is nothing but an illustration of the 
scene of the monkey’s offering honey to Buddha at Vaisali. An inter¬ 
esting relief in the collection of the Asutosh Museum, Calcutta Uni¬ 
versity, depicting this variety of seated Buddha, contains an addi¬ 
tional detail by his side, the monkey climbing a tree for bringing 
down the honey to be offered to Buddha. The usual sitting posture 
of these Buddhas is baddhapadmasana or yoqasana in which the legs 
with soles upwards are interlocked on the lotus-seat. But there is 
another rarer sitting mode in which the legs are shown hanging 
down the edge of the seat, which is described by many scholars as 
“being in European fashion”. Its textual name seems to have been 
paryahkasana, different from ardhaparyahkdsana in which one leg is 
tucked up on the seat and the other dangles down. It was at one 
time the practice to name the Buddha figures shown in this way as 
those of Maitreya, the Buddha of the future; but this identification 
cannot be accepted, for the particular sitting posture is often shown 
in the scene of the Great Miracle of SravastI where Gautama Buddha 
is the principal actor. Moreover, such figures are dressed in monk’s 
robes which would ill fit with Maitreya. But a number of standing 


277 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


and seated Buddhas have been found in northern and eastern India, 
who, though attired like a monk, wear a jewelled crown and two 
short necklaces, no other parts of the body being adorned with orna¬ 
ment. These crowned Buddhas were assumed by some to stand for 
Adi-Buddha who appeared late in the pantheon; but this view is 
hardly tenable, for most of them, if not all, are associated with the 
incidents in the life-story of Gautama Buddha, and are thus none 
but so many of his representations . 65 Another point of interest with 
regard to the standing Buddhas is that miniature figures of seated, 
and rarely standing, Buddhas are often depicted on the top section 
of their prabk&vciVi, and these presumably were meant to represent 
some of the Dhyanl-Buddhas, whose cult, described above , 66 was 
further developed during this period. 

The cult of the Dhyani-Bodhisattvas also underwent a great 
transformation. It has already been said that the special cognizance 
of Maitreya, the Buddha of the future and thus a Bodhisattva, in the 
mediaeval Buddhist art is a bunch of Nagakesara flowers placed in 
one of his hands in place of the earlier nectar-flask. Another dis¬ 
tinctive mark of this Bodhisattva is a miniature stupa placed in his 
crown or by its side. This refers to the stupa of Kasyapa Buddha in 
the Kukkutapada-giri near Bodh-Gaya; on descending to earth from 
the Tushita heaven Maitreya would go to it from which Kasyapa 
would come out and present to him the garments of a Buddha. Mai¬ 
treya can hardly be found now represented singly; he is either shown 
as a well-dressed secular figure in the company of the seven ManushI 
Buddhas very rarely represented, or as one of the acolytes of Vajra- 
sana Buddha. But several of the Bodhisattvas of a different cate¬ 
gory, the Dhyani-Bodhisattvas, were extremely popular iconographic 
motifs of the mediaeval age. That Padmapani-Avalokitesvara 
among them should be the most important one can be explained by 
the fact of his having been the Dhyam-Bodhisattva of Gautama Bud¬ 
dha, and thus numerous varieties of him have been described in the 
s&dhanas; mediaeval images, more or less corresponding to some of 
these descriptions, have been found mostly in northern and eastern 
India. If a careful analysis is made of the iconographic traits of 
some of them, there is hardly any difficulty in recognising in a good 
many of them the Mahayanistic adaptations of two of the principal 
Brahmanical cult-icons, viz. Vishnu and Siva. The iconography of 
~the general form of Avalokitesvara and of a few others of his special 
ones has some analogy to that of Vishnu, and the ideology underlying 
both these gods, especially relating to their character as gods of pre¬ 
servation and deliverance, is one and the same. But the particular 
aspect of Siva, when he appears in the role of a benignant deity and 
a healer of diseases after proper propitiation, is none the less discer- 


278 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


nible in certain other forms of this Dhyani-Bodhisattva; a few others 
of his less common ones, again, portray in a way the dire and terrific 
aspect of this Brahmanical deity. One particular variety among the 
different types of Avalokitesvara, Hari-Hari-Harivahanodbhava 
Lokasvara, undoubtedly owes its iconographic presentation to secta¬ 
rian rancour. As many as fifteen variants have been selected from 
those described in the SddhciuaTTULld > of which five or six at most have 
been recognised among the numerous Buddhist sculptures of eastern 
and northern India. These are Shadakshari Lokesvara, Siihhanada, 
Khasarpana (named after a village in the ancient Khadi-Truxriciala, 
modern Twenty-four Pergannas, West Bengal), Lokanatha and Nila- 
kantha. The others are mostly to be found among sculptures and 
paintings of the northern countries like Tibet and Nepal and they are 
usually dated after A.D. 1300. Shadakshari Lokesvara shows a com¬ 
position with the figure of the four-armed Bodhisattva, its front 
hands being in the namaskdra-mudrd and the back ones holding a 
rosary and a lotus, and having a smaller male replica of him to his 
right and another similar but female one to the left; these two are 
none other than Manidhara and Shadakshari Mahavidya, the respec¬ 
tive male and female attendants of this variety of Avalokitesvara. 
A very interesting mediaeval relief depicting it was discovered by 
Oertel in course of his excavations at Sarnath; it was wrongly iden¬ 
tified by him as representing the three jewels of Buddhism, viz. 
Dharma, Buddha and Samgha. 67 The two-armed god Siihhanada 
Lokesvara is described in the texts as three-eyed, seated in the 
mahamjalila pose on a roaring lion, wearing a tiger-skin garment but 
no ornaments, having a miniature figure of Amitabha on the jatd - 
mukuta on his head, with a trident entwined by a white serpent to 
his right and a sword placed on a lotus flower to his left, the lotus 
stalk being held by his left hand resting on the seat; the three eyes, 
the tiger-skin garment, the absence of ornaments, the matted locks, 
the snake-entwined trident, — all these traits definitely associate him 
with &iva, and the Dhdranis of Siihhanada refer to him as the healer 
of diseases. The beautiful sculpture of Siihhanada Lokesvara found 
at Mahoba closely corresponds to the description given above. That 
the Khasarpana variety of this god was a popular object of worship 
in eastern India is proved by a number of such images discovered 
in different parts of Bihar and Bengal. The principal type of this 
deity depicts him gracefully seated in the lalitdsana pose on a maham- 
buja, decked in all sorts of ornaments and holding a fully blossomed 
lotus flower by its stalk in his left hand, the right one being in the 
varada pose. He is almost invariably accompanied by Tara and 
Sudhanakumara to his right and BhrikutI and Hayagrlva to his left; 


270 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


the five Dhyam-Buddhas are very often carved on the upper part of 
the prabhavali with Amitabha, his spiritual father, placed in the 
centre. The finely carved image corresponding in most of its details 
to the above description, found at Vikrampur and now in the Dacca 
Museum, is a representative specimen of this type of Avalokitesvara. 
Many standing images of Avalokitesvara endowed with four and 
sometimes with six arms have been found in northern and eastern 
India; some are in the collection of the Indian Museum, Calcutta, and 
a few are in the Patna Museum. These have been usually described 
as Lokaniatha, but the description given of this variety of Avalokites¬ 
vara in the Sddhanamald does not tally with the sculptures. The 
four-armed figures show vara, akshamala, bhringdra and padma in 
the lower right, upper right, upper left and lower left hands res¬ 
pectively," Suchlmukha and Hayagriva to the right and left are the 
usual attendants in these cases. The six-armed standing figures, on 
the other hand, have a vara, mdtulunga, akshamdld in the right hands, 
and a bhringara, pdsa and padma in the left ones; here both the 
attending figures are female and very probably represent Tara and 
Bhrikutl. Standing images of Lokesvara with more than six arms 
are, though rare, not unknown; reference may be made to one twelve¬ 
armed variety of this god in the collection of the Indian Museum, 
its additional hands holding such emblems as ankusa, kartri and a 
few other indistinct objects. 68 The Lokanatha aspect of Avalokite¬ 
svara, however, as described in the Sddhanamald, is two-armed, the 
left hand holding a lotus, the right being in the varada pose; one of 
the sddhanas of this deity refers to the mandala of eight gods like 
Maitreya, Kshitigarbha, Vajrapani and others surrounding him. But 
Lokanatha is generally depicted alone, seated or standing, only occa¬ 
sionally accompanied by Tara and Hayagriva. Nilakantha, as des¬ 
cribed in only one sadhana, is similar in appearance to his spiritual 
father Amitabha; he is not decorated with any ornaments, and has 
two serpents on his either side; the name and the iconographic traits 
of this type of Lokesvara fully show that he is one of the Maha- 
yanistic adaptations of Siva. Several other types of Lokesvara 
images of the mediaeval period have been found, which do not con¬ 
form to the descriptions of any of the varieties given in the Sadha- 
namMa; this fact proves that as in the case of the Brahmanical icono¬ 
graphy, our collection of Buddhist iconographic texts is also in¬ 
complete, and many must have been irretrievably lost. As regards 
the mediaeval images of the other Dhyam-Bodhisattvas, whose 
names have been already given, it may be observed that whatever 
literary importance they might have had in the period, they apparent¬ 
ly had no prominence in the hieratic art of the time. 


280 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


ManjusrI is the general name of another group of interesting 
Bodhisattvas who, though not strictly belonging to the category of 
the Dhyanl-Bodhisattvas, occupied an important place in the deve¬ 
loped Mahayana pantheon. He was comparatively late in making 
his appearance, and his inclusion in the pantheon could not have 
been much earlier than the Gupta period. References in mediae¬ 
val Buddhist literature seem to connect him with China and Nepal, 
and the way in which he is mentioned seems to suggest that there 
v/as some historicity behind him, and his human original was per¬ 
haps connected in some way or other with the introduction of civi¬ 
lisation in Nepal from China. Thus, there was a great deal of diffe¬ 
rence between Avalokitesvara and ManjusrI, the former having an 
abstract ideological background, while the latter a concrete human 
base, which was, however, subsequently assumed to stand for and 
illustrate some abstract qualities like knowledge and wisdom. The 
Stidhanamala contains a number of sadhanas describing as many 
as fourteen different varieties of this god-concept, some of which 
were associated with Akshobhya or Amitabha, while others were 
either independent or had some association with the group of the 
five Dhyani-Buddhas. The usual emblems of ManjusrI are a sword 
( Prajnd-kkadga or the sword of wisdom) and a book (book of know¬ 
ledge — prajncL), the idea being that the god severs the coils of 
ignorance with the sword and imparts knowledge from the book; 
he is thus in a way the Mahayana counterpart of Brahma and Saras- 
vatl of the Hindu pantheon. A good many extant figures of him, 
including several variants, have been discovered in different parts 
of northern and eastern India, and this fact shows that his was a 
popular cult-image, specially in eastern India. Several of the medi¬ 
aeval representations of this god can be identified as Mahjughosha 
and Siddhaikavira (emanations of Akshobhya), Arapachana and 
Sthirachakra who have no definite association with any of the 
Dhyani-Buddhas. These varieties are usually differentiated on the 
basis of particular sitting and standing postures, hand-poses and the 
nature of the attendants. Images of Manjuvara and Arapachana are 
more numerous; the former is characterised by his lion seat and the 
dharmachak'ra-mudrd, with the book Prajrvdparamitd placed on lotus 
on his left, while the latter is shown seated in baddhapadmasana, his 
right hand brandishing a sword and the left with the book placed 
on his breast, his attendants being Kesini, Upakesinl, Siiryaprabha 
and Chandraprabha who are shown as exact miniature replicas of 
the central figure. That Arapachana form of ManjusrI was held in 
great respect by the Mahayanists of the mediaeval period is proved 
not only by the number of his images discovered in eastern India, but 
also by a few found in Indonesia. The Javanese sculpture of this 


281 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


form of Manjusri, now in the collection of the Leyden Museum, 
Holland, is a fine specimen of Indonesian art. Manjughosha, like 
Manjuvara, has a roaring lion for his mount, but his other peculiar 
cognizances are lotus on his left side and vyakhyfinamudrd. A very 
fine sculpture of the early mediaeval period in the collection of the 
Sarnath Museum, unfortunately much mutilated, corresponds to a 
great extent to the textual description of Siddhaikavlra, who has a 
blue lotus in his left hand and varamudrd in his right. This form of 
Manjusri, which is comparatively rare, has some similarity with the 
usual iconographic type of Lokanatha, a form of Lokesvara, but the 
figure of Akshobhya on the crown of the former discloses his real 
identity. Sthirachakra is another rare form of this Bodhisattva and 
is characterised by a sword in his left hand and varamudra in his 
right. The Vangiya Sahitya Parishat sculpture of Manjusri, seated 
in ardhaparyankasana on a double-petalled lotus, probably depicts 
this variety; it, however, holds the stem of a nilotpala in its left hand, 
over the blossom of which is placed the sword. 

A reference to the images of a few of the numerous varieties 
of gods and goddesses who were associated with one or other of the 
Dhyanl-Buddhas will not be out of place here, although the con¬ 
cepts of many of them seem to have been subsequently added. Some 
of these deities again were textually connected with more than 
one Dhyani-Buddha at the same time, and other images bore on 
their crown the miniature figures of either one or the other of these 
meditative Buddhas. Thus, Jambhala and Tara (especially her 
form known as Mahachina Tara) were emanations of Akshobhya, 
but the same god and another variant of the goddess, viz. Khadi- 
ravabi Tara could also emanate from Ratnasambhava and Amogha- 
siddha respectively. Jambhala and Vajra-Tara, again, in some of 
their aspects, were associated with all the five or four of the Dhyanl- 
Buddhas; in these cases, the miniature figures of the latter are usual¬ 
ly shown on the top part of the prabhavali of these images. Many 
of these deities of the developed Mahayana pantheon again can be 
shown either from their names or their attributes to have been 
directly or indirectly derived from various members of the Brah- 
manic order. Thus the gods like Saptasatika Hayagrlva, Heruka, 
Yamari and Jambhala, the first an emanation of Amitabha and the 
last three of Akshobhya, have their prototypes among the various 
Brahmanical gods, as their names or iconographic traits show. 

Hayagrlva, according to the Puranic mythology, was primarily 
a demon to kill whom Vishnu assumed the form of a horse-headed 


282 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

man. The special cognizance of Saptasatika-Hayagnva is the scalp 
of a horse over his head; another aspect of the same god, which is 
associated with Akshobhya, is three-faced and eight-armed, and 
the number of arms as well as the emblems in the hands distinctly 
connect it with the Hayagriva incarnation of Vishnu. 

The fierce god Heruka, whose two-armed varieties have been 
found in eastern India, is characterised by the dancing pose, a corpse 
below him, emblems like vajra and kapala in his hands, a khatvdnga 
along the left side of his body, ornaments like a garland of skulls 
( mwiidamala ) and other features which leave no doubt that this 
particular god-concept was based on the terrific aspect of &iva. 
The Dacca Museum image of Heruka, though it shows a double- 
petailed lotus beneath its left leg in place of a corpse ( preta ), corres¬ 
ponds in other respects to the textual description, and is a well- 
carved specimen of the mediaeval Buddhist art of eastern India. 

Yamari, as its name indicates, is based on one of the various 
Samharamurtis of Siva, Kalari or Kalantaka-murti, in which form 
Siva punished Kaia or Yama, the god of death, for his audacity in 
attempting to take the life of Markandeya, a great Saiva devotee. 
Some of the iconographic traits of Yamari, however, are taken from 
the very god of death whose enemy he is supposed to be, while others 
are clearly derived from the fierce form of the Hindu god. Like 
Yama, he has a buffalo for his mount and a mace with a skull painted 
on it or a vajra on its top as his emblem; like Siva, he wears a tiger- 
skin, snake ornaments, and holds a noose ( pdsa ) in one of his hands. 

Jambhala is undoubtedly a Buddhist counterpart of Kubera- 
Vaisravana, as some of his characteristic traits indicate. Like the 
latter, he is connected with wealth and treasure; mediaeval repre¬ 
sentations of him are known, in which he is shown seated in lali- 
tdsana with one of his legs resting on an upturned coin-jar by the 
side of which are placed seven more jars. The number of the jars, 
eight, distinctly proves that they stand for eight treasures (ashta- 
nidhi) of Kubera; like the Brahmanical deity his figure is also pot¬ 
bellied, though the bag in his prototype’s hand is replaced by a mon¬ 
goose vomitting jewels. In the Brahmanical mythology, Kubera is 
associated with Lakshmi or Sri, the goddess of fortune who is the 
presiding deity of the ashtanidhis ; 69 in the Mahayana adaptation of 
him, however, Vasudhara (another name of the earth goddess, 
Bhumi or Prithivi) appears as his consort. A good many figures of 
Jambhala, mostly seated ones, with many of the above-mentioned 
iconographic traits have been found in different parts of eastern and 
northern India. 


283 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Ganapati is another male deity recruited from the Brahmanic 
faith into developed Mahayana pantheon, and he is identical in his 
mediaeval iconic forms to his Brahmanical prototype. He is general¬ 
ly depicted as being trampled down under the feet of such goddesses 
as Aparajita and Parnasavarl. His independent form as one-faced 
and twelve-armed, dancing on the back of his mount (a rat), is des¬ 
cribed in a late sadhana, but corresponding icons of the mediaeval 
period are not known; there is nothing in the texts to show that his 
face was that of an elephant. 

Interesting varieties of goddesses are associated with one or 
other cf the Dhyanl-Buddhas, and they seem to be more numerous 
than those of the gods. The worship of the female principle was 
comparatively more prevalent in eastern India in mediaeval times, 
and this fact is also emphasised by the large number of images of 
the Buddhist goddesses discovered there. The cult of Tara and her 
various forms was strong in this part of India, and Tara, a great 
object of veneration in the Brahmanical Tantrik cult, appears to 
have been borrowed directly from the developed Mahayana pan¬ 
theon. Mahachma-Tara, one of the principal forms of this goddess, 
however, as her attributive epithet indicates, was an importation 
from Mahachma, a land outside India, which has been identified by 
some scholars with Tibet. Mahachlna-Tara, also known in Buddhist- 
Tantrik literature as Ugra-Tara, is an emanation of Akshobhya, and 
she was most probably the original deity from which various other 
aspects of this goddess were derived. The popularity of Tara among 
the Mahayanists is indicated by the fact that it is the common ap¬ 
pellation of many Buddhist goddesses such as Janguli, Parnasavarl, 
Ekajata and others. She is described in the sddhanas as of terrific 
appearance, four-armed, standing in the pratyaUdha pose on a corpse, 
her right hands holding a sword and a chopper ( kartri ), and left 
ones, a lotus flower and a skull-cup (kapala); a miniature figure of 
Akshobhya is within the ‘crown of chignon’ (ekaiata) on her head. 70 
The iconographic trait of ekaiata of this goddess gave rise to the 
concept of another terrific deitv of the Mahayana cult. Ekaiata by 
name, who was also an emanation of Akshobhya; several mediaeval 
images of her have been found in eastern India. 

The most common form of Tara, however, numbers of whose 
images have been found in the north and east of India, is the one 
which is described in the sadhanas as Khadiravani-Tara, also known 
as £yama-Tar.a, an emanation of the Dhyanl-Buddha Amoghasiddha. 
She is depicted either standing or seated in a graceful pose, her right 
hand showing the vctrada-mudrd , and the left one holding a lotus 
with a long stalk; her two attendants are Asokakanta Marlchl on her 


284 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


right and Ekajata on her left. In the extant mediaeval represent¬ 
ations of this variety of Tara, sometimes curious miniature figures 
of eight goddesses or eight illustrative scenes are found carved on 
the prabhdvall on either side of the principal deity. One such im- 
age in the collection of the Dacca Museum shows the former feature, 
and it has been suggested that these miniature goddesses individually 
stand for each of the syllables of the eight-syllabled Tara -mantra 
(Om Tare tu Tare Svdhd ). 71 On an image of this goddess, originally 
hailing from Katnagiri (Cuttack district, Orissa), we find the other 
feature which collectively stands for the ashtamahdbhayas (eight 
great fears) from which she saves her devotees 72 . 

Another variety of Tara, described several times in the Sddha- 
namduij is the Vajra-Tara who is simultaneously an emanation of 
the groups of five or four Dhyanl-Buddhas. She is four-faced and 
eignt-armed, and is seated in the vajraparyahhdsana on a double- 
petalled lotus inside a mardala which consists of encircling attendant 
deities like Pushpa-, Dhupa-, Dipa- and Gandha-Taras, and Vajrah- 
kusl, Vajrapasi, Vajrasphofl and Vajraghanta; the mandala, in order 
to be complete, should also contain the figure of Ushnishavijaya on 
the top and that of Sumbha below. It should be noted that the num¬ 
ber of the companion goddesses is ten, which exactly corresponds to 
that of the ten-syllabled mantra of the principal goddess, Om Tare 
tu Tare ture Svdhd, and it is presumed that the former individually 
stand for the respective syllables. Another interesting feature 
worth noting in respect of most of these attendant divinities is the 
fact that they are nothing but the personifications of the upachdras 
(materials used in ritual worship) and weapons or emblems held 
by the principal deity in her hands (these roughly correspond to the 
ayudhapurushas of the Vaishnavite icons). Vajrasphotl and Ushni¬ 
shavijaya are, on the other hand, associated, the former with the 
holy sound that is uttered during the ritualistic performances, and 
the latter with the peculiar physical characteristic of the Buddha. 
Several metai images of the mandala of Vajra-Tara have been found 
in eastern India; the Indian and Dacca Museum specimens corres¬ 
pond fairly well to the above description. 73 

Reference has already been made to Vasudhara, the consort of 
Jambhala, who is also like him either an emanation of Akshobhya 
or Ratnasambhava; she is the Buddhist counterpart of the Brahma- 
nical Vasudhara, PrithivI, or BhudevI, who, as one of the consorts 
of Vishnu, holds a blue lotus in her hand. But Vasudhara is cha¬ 
racterised by varada-mudrd in her right hand and an ear of corn 
in her left, and the latter object fittingly symbolises her corn-pro¬ 
ducing capacity. Several stone and metal images of this goddess, 


285 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


both single and in the company of her consort, have been discovered 
in the north and east of India. 

Another Mahayana goddess, also emanating from Akshobhya 
but, unlike the last-mentioned, one of a terrific character, is Naira- 
tma who resembles to some extent the Brahmanical Kali. She is 
shown dancing vigorously with right leg raised and bent inwards, 
the left firmly planted on a corpse ( preta ) lying on its back, holding 
kartri (short sword) and kapala (skull-cup) in her two hands; she 
looks terrible with bare fangs, protruding tongue, a garland of hu¬ 
man skulls, and a khatvanga placed along the left side of her body. 
Her general pose and appearance remind us of those of Heruka 
discussed above, - though their respective emblems are somewhat 
different. Her images are extremely rare, and the Indian Museum 
specimen may be regarded as unique. 74 

Parnasavarl, another female member of the Mahayana pantheon, 
is of great iconographic interest on account of certain features apper¬ 
taining to her. She is both an emanation of Akshobhya and Amo- 
ghasiddha, and her iconography is the same in both of her aspects. 
The sddhanas describe her as three-faced and six-armed, her right 
hands holding vajra, sara and parasu , her left ones, parnapichchhika 
(a cluster of leaves), dhanu and tarjampdsa (a noose round the index- 
finger in the tarjanlmudra ); she stands in pratyalldha pose either on 
personified representations of various diseases or pestilences or on 
obstacles personified (Vighnas—the same as Brahmanical Gainesa, 
the remover of obstacles, Vighnantaka), and is clad in leaf garments. 
Her mantras describe her as a Pisdcto (ogress) and sarvamariprasa- 
mdrn (healer of all epidemic diseases). This fact, as well as her 
very name which associated her with the leaf-clad Savaras, one of 
the aboriginal tribes of India, distinctly proves that she was recruited 
from a non-Aryan cult, as a few of the particular constituents of 
Durga, the Brahmanical goddess, were adapted from aboriginal cult 
deities. Two extant images of PamasavarT found in East Bengal 
closely follow the textual descriptions, and both have the figure of 
Amoghasiddha on the top centre of their prabhdvall. 75 

Prajna-Paramita is a goddess of benign aspect and was held in 
great veneration by the mediaeval Buddhists of India and Indonesia. 
She was regarded as the personified form of the Mahayana treatise 
Prajndptiramitd, which is said to have been recovered from the 
nether regions by Nagarjuna, the principal expounder of.the re¬ 
oriented Buddhism. She is usually recognised by vydkhyana-mudrd 
and the manuscript Prajnapdramitd on a lotus; one of the finest 
images of this benign Mahayana goddess originally hailed from Java 
and is now in the collection of the Leyden Museum. 76 


286 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


A very interesting goddess of this cult is Marichi, an emanation 
of Vairochana, the first of the Dhyani-Buddhas. Several images of 
her have been found in eastern and northern India and this proves 
that she was held in esteem in this region. Her iconographic features 
show that she was an adaptation from the north-Indian Surya and 
her name means ‘One who has rays’. She is usually depicted as 
three-faced (the left one of which is that of a sow) and eight-armed, 
her hands holding such attributes as a needle, a string, an elephant- 
goad, a noose, a bow, an arrow, a thunderbolt, and a bunch of Asoka 
flowers; she stands in the arrow-shooting pose on a chariot drawn by 
seven pigs, and driven either by a goddess with no legs or Rahu, 
only a head with no body attached to it. Some of these eight-armed 
and three-faced figures of Marichi are attended by four goddesses 
bearing peculiar names such as Varttali, Vadali, Varali and Vara- 
hamukhi, all sow-faced and four-armed carrying several weapons and 
emblems similar to those in the hands of the central deity. The 
very fine image of Ashtabhuja Marichi, originally found at Sarnath 
and now in the collection of the Lucknow Museum, corresponding 
mostly to the description given above, contains, however, the figure 
of the Dhyani-Buddha Amitabha in its crown—a striking departure 
from the texts. 77 Another variety of Marichi, one-faced and two¬ 
armed, the right hand being in the varada pose and the left touching 
an Asoka bough, is generally depicted as an attendant deity of Khadi- 
ravani-Tara. 

Another goddess of the developed Mahayana pantheon, who is 
sometimes wrongly regarded as identical with Marichi, is Vajrava- 
rahi, the chief consort of the fierce god Heruka discussed above. 78 
She is either two-armed or four-armed, and her attributes and pose 
resemble those of her consort. Her images of the mediaeval period 
are not common like those of Marichi. 

Such independent goddesses as Sarasvati, Aparajita, Grahama- 
trika, etc. have, as their nomenclature shows, distinct Brahmanical 
association, but their Buddhist adaptations came to have definite ico¬ 
nographic re-orientation. Vajrayogini, as the sadhanas describe her 
form, clearly reminds us of the Tantrik goddess Chhinnamasta who 
was held in great veneration by the Sakti-worshippers of Bengal; 
she was one of the ten Mahavidyas whose cult was an important one 
in mediaeval and later Bengal. In a comparatively late period the 
Tantrik aspect of the Sakti worship seems to have adopted much from 
the Mahayana-Vajrayana cult and it is sometimes extremely difficult 
to fix up the definite cult-association of one or other of the individual 
deities. 


287 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

The brief study of Buddhist iconography given above shows 
what bewildering diversity the religious art of the later Buddhists 
attained in the mediaeval period. The comparatively simple and 
general character of the early Buddhist art was made extremely com¬ 
plex in its later phase and various factors were at work for this 
re-orientation. The most important of these was the gradual assi¬ 
milation in various ways of the god-concepts of many contemporary 
rival sects, most, if not all, of which belonged to Brahmanical reli¬ 
gion. Many of the numerous images of the Mahayana-Vajrayana 
cult illustrate this fact in an interesting manner. Another important 
point not to be lost sight of in the study of them is the deep esoteric 
symbolism which underlies many of them in spite of their bizarre 
forms. The numerous unnamed artists, whose services were requi¬ 
sitioned for the satisfaction of the religious needs of the pious Bud¬ 
dhists, were not half-hearted in their work, and some of the speci¬ 
mens which they turned out were enduring works of art. 

C. JAINISM 
I. ' INTRODUCTION 

As in the preceding period, Jainism lacked royal support in 
northern India, but this was compensated by the popularity of the 
religion among the trading classes in the north, and the extensive 
royal patronage it enjoyed in the South. 

This is the most flourishing period in the history of Jainism in 
the Deccan. There was no serious rival for it, and it was basking in 
the sunshine of popular and royal support. Dr. Altekar 79 surmises 
that probably one-third of the population of the Deccan was follow¬ 
ing the gospel of Mahavira during the period under review. Jainism 
received a serious set-back shortly afterwards owing to rapid spread 
of the Lingayata sect. 

Important commentaries on the Digambara Canon were com¬ 
posed towards the close of this period. 80 During the tenth century, 
Uddyotana started 84 gachchhas through his disciples. 81 The Jain 
Philosophy reached its high-water mark as evidenced by the master¬ 
pieces of Akalanka, Haribhadra, Vidyananda and others. Literary 
output also was immense. The Jain writers inaugurated an Augustan 
period in Kannada literature, and composed outstanding works in 
Tamil too. 

It may be noted as one of the remarkable features of Jainism of 
this period that it saved itself from the influence of the all-pervading 
Saktism. 82 That the fortunes of Jainism were unaffected by the 


288 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


revival of Hinduism has been ascribed to the state patronage, and 
the influence of the pious Jain saints. 83 

It is interesting to note how Jain gurus achieved their ends by 
adopting well devised and comprehensive methods. The austere 
routine, pious life and the absence of possessive instincts seem, in 
the case of Jain monks, to have always led to their being admired 
and honoured in the society. As king-makers they secured royal 
patronage for generations. By winning over generals, feudal lords 
and provincial governors, their success at provincial centres was 
assured under the aegis of these officials. By securing popular sup¬ 
port, they had among their followers the most important section 
of the middle class, the Vira Banajigas and the commercial class, 
whose financial help went a long way in the cause of Jainism. It 
enabled them to construct magnificent Jinalayas and images. Their 
spectacular effect, along with the active royal support, made Jainism 
popular and strong. These Jain gurus themselves owned nothing 
and wanted nothing. And further their insistence on the observance 
by the rich of the Jain doctrine relating to the four gifts (learning, 
food, medicine and shelter) helped a great deal in winning the alle¬ 
giance and devotion of the masses, as it answered the primary needs 
of humanity. This resulted in drawing large sections of populace 
wdthin the Jain fold. 

II. JAINISM IN THE NORTH 

Except in the west and perhaps Malwa, Jainism appears to have 
lost its hold over the rest of the north during the period. It had al¬ 
ready lost its importance in Magadha, the land of its origin. The Nir- 
granthas, who formed a dominant religious sect in Bengal in the 
seventh century, seem to have wielded no appreciable influence 
there during our period, and there is no reference to them in the 
numerous inscriptions of the Palas. 

The Chapa rulers 84 were patrons of this religion. Vanaraja 
Chavtfa, the founder of the line, was installed on the throne, accord¬ 
ing to the Jain Prabandhas, by his Jain guru Silagunasuri. Though 
the official religion was Saiva and &akta, most of the influential per¬ 
sons in the realm, like Mahajanas, were Jains and occupied high 
positions in the state. Vanaraja’s prime minister was a Jain varvik 
named Champa, the founder of Champaner. Ninnaya, a merchant 
prince whom Vanaraja regarded as father, built a temple of Rishabha 
at Anahilava<Ja. Ninnaya’s son Lahora was a general in Vanaraja’s 
army. At the suggestion of his guru 6llagunasuri, who refused the 
gift of the kingdom, Vanaraja built a temple known as Pancbasara- 
chaitya in which the idol of Parsvanatha brought from Panchasar 

289 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


was consecrated He and his successors also built other temples. 
These rulers tried to keep in check the rivalries among priests of 
different sects in their kingdom. The Pratlharas also figure promi¬ 
nently in the Jain literature. 85 Vatsaraja (or Ama, as he is called in 
Jain Prabandhas) is said to have built a temple at Kanauj, 100 cubits 
high, and consecrated a golden image of Mahavira; at Gwalior he 
established an image of Mahavira, 23 cubits high. He is said to have 
built Jain temples at Kanauj, Mathura, Anahilavada, Modhera, etc. 
His son Niagabhata II is said to have been converted to Jainism and 
the latter’s grandson Bhoja was also a great patron of the religion. 

Many famous Jain writers like Dhanesvarasuri, Dhanapala and 
Santisuri flourished in the court of Paramara kings. 

It was during this period that in the contest between Digambaras 
and Svetambaras, as the Prabandhas report, the sacred Girnar-tirtha 
was declared to be Svetambara. Pradyumnasuri is credited with the 
conversion of the rulers of Sapadalaksha, Tribhuvanagiri, etc. to 
Jainism. 

III. JAINISM IN THE DECCAN AND SOUTH INDIA 

Several dynasties, such as the Gaiigas, Rashtrakutas, Chalukyas, 
Kadambas and their feudatories held sway over Deccan during the 
period under review, either successively or as contemporaries. We 
shall deal with the state of Jainism under these rulers in the above 
order. 

The Gahga rulers were great patrons of Jainism. Nltimarga 
and his second son Butuga were devout Jains. Marasiihha was a 
disciple of Ajitasena, and was a staunch Jain. He actively supported 
renowned Jain scholars, maintained the Jain doctrine, caused basadis 
and vriMnastambhas to be erected at several places, and, after abdica¬ 
tion, ended his life by Sallekhand (slow starvation). His minister 
Chamumjaraya, one of the triumvirate of the special promoters of 
Jainism, was a brave general and possessed several exceptional 
virtues including liberality. Nemichandra and Ajitasena were his 
preceptors. He gave many endowments for the cause of Jainism; 
caused the colossal image of Gommata to be set up at Sravana Bel- 
gola; constructed a hasadi on -Chikkabetta at &ravana Belgola; and 
patronised the Kannada author Ranna. His example was followed by 
his successors and feudatories. 

The Rashtrakutas were tolerant of the several religious sects of 
the time, and many of the rulers of the dynasty were not only great 
patrons of, but even showed distinct inclinations towards, Jainism. 
The great Rashtrakuta Amoghavarsha I Nripatunga was more a Jain 


290 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

than a Hindu; he followed the Syddvada and also revered the Hindu 
family deities. His chief preceptor was Jinasena and he had appoint¬ 
ed Gunabhadra as the preceptor for his son Krishna II. Authorship of 
the ritual of Jain monasteries in Banavasi is attributed to Arnogha- 
varsha. His other works and the literary activity of the Jains during 
this period will be dealt with later in this chapter. Amoghavarsha 
abdicated more than once, probably to observe the vow of a kin- 
chancita . How he accepted Jain-dikshd is graphically described in a 
contemporary work Caiiita-<sara-samgraha of Mahavlracharya 86 

The age of the Rashtrakutas (A.D. 754-974) was immediately 
followed by a Saiva reaction under Tailapa II 87 and his immediate 
successors. It is alleged that they persecuted the Jains, but the 
temporary withdrawal of their patronage was due more to political 
than to religious causes. 88 On the contrary we read that Tailapa II 
had strong attachment to Jainism, and patronised Ranna, Kaviratna, 
the author of Ajita-purdna , who received the title kavichakravartin 
from the king. 89 Tailapa’s son Satyasraya constructed a monument 
(nisidhi ) in honour of his Jain guru. One of his successors, Jaya- 
simha HI, caused a basadi to be constructed at Balipura. 

Though the reigning monarchs of Andhradesa were invariably 
Parama-MahesvarCLs, members of the royal family, high state officials, 
vassal kings and feudal lords sometimes followed Jain faith, and 
were either srdvakas or sravikas. Some of the Eastern Chalukyas 
were Jains or patrons of that religion and made pious endowments to 
that faith. Three records of Ammaraja II speak of Jainism as a very 
popular religion in the tenth century, and show that the ruler, though 
Saiva, extended his patronage to Jainism. 

An inscription at Ramatlrtham near Vizianagaram indicates that 
Jainism continued to flourish till the beginning of the eleventh cen¬ 
tury, and that the Ramatlrtham hill was regarded as a place of pil¬ 
grimage by the Jains since early days. A Kannada inscription of the 
reign of king Vimaladitya states that Trikalayogin Siddhantadeva- 
muni, Acharya of Deslgana, who was a guru of the king, paid respects 
to the Ramatlrtham hill. With the reign of Rajarajanarendra, son 
and successor of Vimaladitya, Jainism lost royal patronage and sym¬ 
pathy. 

At Vijayawada, the support of the Eastern Chalukyas to Jainism 
was counter-balanced by the Parichchhadi Pasupati rulers who fol¬ 
lowed Hinduism. These, along with Kota kings and Kakatiyas, were 
responsible for the disappearance of Jainism from Andhradesa. 

Though Hindus by religion, some Kadamba rulers were also 
patrons of Jainism. 90 


291 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


We know from various contemporary records that the feudatories 
and high officials of the various ruling dynasties were supporters of 
Jainism. Mention may be made of a few important ladies in this 
connection. Jakkiabbe, who was appointed Ndl-gdvwnda in her 
husband’s place in Rashtrakuta Krishna Ill’s reign, performed the 
vow of Sallekhana, Attimebbe, daughter of Tailapa’s commander 
Mallappa and wife of Nagadeva, was an ideal devotee, and an 
exemplary patron of learning who got prepared one thousand Mss. of 
Ponna’s Santi-puraina in Kannada and had them circulated all over 
the country. Jakkisundari caused a basadi to be built in A.D. 968. 
Pembabbe, elder sister of Butuga, performed penance for thirty 
years. 

Thus we find that during the heyday of its power there was not 
a single dynasty in the Deccan that did not come under the influence 
of Jainism at one time or another. Non Jain rulers also patronised 
Jainism. Ministers, generals, women—all played their part as de¬ 
vout Jains. 

The story of Jainism in the Tamil area is one of decadence 
during our period. The rise of the 6aiva Nayanars and their orga¬ 
nised efforts to stamp out Jainism, the conversion of Kun Paindya by 
Sambandar and that of the Pallava king Mahendra-varman by 
Appar, led to the downfall of the Jains in Tamil land about A.D. 750. 
Jains were subjected to further humiliation at the hands of the Vai- 
shnava Alvars, till in the ninth and tenth centuries, they do not seem 
to have enjoyed any prominence in the land. After Nayanars and Al¬ 
vars, the rise of the great Acharyas aided the evolution of Hinduism. 

As a result of all this, the Jains left the Pallava and Pandya 
kingdoms and migrated possibly to Koppana, Sravana Belgola and 
surrounding territory where they were patronised by the Gahga and 
other rulers. The few that remained led an obscure life in Tamil 
land. A perusal of the literature produced by the Jains indicates 
that they generally lived in large numbers in Mylapore, Nedumbai 
and Tirumalai. 

It may be noted that the Alvars and Nayanars, who led the oppo¬ 
sition against Jainism, adopted the very methods of the Jains to sub¬ 
vert their religion, and to attract the populace to the newly reju¬ 
venated Hinduism. In the first place, they adopted the four-fold 
dana ( dhdra , abhaya, bhaishajya and sastra) in their system to 
counter the most effective missile of the Jains. Further, the 6aiva 
saints aimed at the highest altruistic principles, discarded caste 
system, and recruited people from the lowest grade in their fold. 
Like the Jains, the &aiva saints instituted a hierarchy of sixty-three 
saints, and composed hymns in honour of local deities. Their potent 


292 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


weapon was the winning over the good grace of the king, thereby 
securing political patronage of the state. Gradually, as different 
kings became converts or reconverts to Hinduism, which was now 
made more attractive and receptive to the general public, Jainism 
lost its hold and receded into the background. 

There were other causes peculiar to Kamatak that worked the 
disintegration of Jainism there. Beginning with castes and sub¬ 
castes taken over from Hinduism, Jainism was progressively adopt¬ 
ing a number of Hindu practices and beliefs, with the result that 
it was gradually becoming almost indistinguishable from the sur¬ 
rounding creeds. It thus lost its characteristic mark, and its ad¬ 
herents there fell a prey to the prevailing proselytising forces. 

IV. LITERATURE 

The Jain literature of this period, written not only in Sanskrit, 
but also in Prakrit, Apabhraihsa and the DesabhashcLs , is extremely 
rich and varied, its characteristic features being the Jain dogmatics 
and ethics, legendary literature in the form of the Puranas and 
didactic tales, and logic. In the south, the honour of the creation 
of the Kannada literature and of enriching it with classics of abid¬ 
ing value goes to the Jains. Their contribution to the Tamil litera¬ 
ture is also valuable; and we find that most of the major and minor 
epics, which are the pride of Tamil literature, are composed by Jain 
authors. 

Haribhadra, originally a Brahmana, was the outstanding per¬ 
sonality among the Jain writers of the period. He has written a 
large number of books in Sanskrit and Prakrit. He is the earliest 
Sanskrit commentator of the canon, and his contributions to Jain 
logic are outstanding. His Dhurtakhyana is a remarkable satire in 
Indian literature. He inaugurated a new era in Yoga literature by 
employing new terminology and an extraordinary and descriptive 
style. He has also compared the Jain terminology with the Yoga 
prakriyas in Patanjali. In his Shad-darsana-samuchchaya he gives 
a brilliant exposition of the different systems of philosophy of the 
day. Among other Jain writers of the period, mention may be made 
of Bappabhatti, Silanka, 6obhana and Dhanapala. The work of eluci¬ 
dating canonical texts in Sanskrit, begun by Haribhadra and SHanka, 
was continued by Abhayadeva (eleventh century) and Malayagiri 
(twelfth century), gobhana, Dhanapala, Devendragaipi and Deva- 
bhadra produced innumerable romantic tales, both in Sanskrit and 
Prakrit, followed by Hemachandra and the writers of the Praban- 
dhas and Charitas, who pertain to the subsequent period. 

Turning to the authors in the South, we may begin with Aka- 
lanka, whose date has been a matter of controversy. 91 He was a 


293 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


great logician, whose famous works are Rajavarttika and Ashtasati. 
Jinasena’s Harivamsa-purdna 92 is one of the earliest Jain versions 
of the Pantfava tale. Another Jinasena, who was the preceptor of 
the Rashtrakuta king Amoghavarsha, wrote the Adi-purana, which 
was completed by his disciple Gin?abhadra. 93 Amoghavarsha’s 
reign produced a galaxy of Jain writers, including the king himself, 
who is credited with the authorship of Prasnottaramalikd on Jain 
ethics, and Kavirdjamdrga in Kannada on rhetorics. Mahavlracharya 
wrote G<inita-sara-samgraha under Amoghavarsha. Sakatayana, a 
grammarian, called his work Amoghavritti in honour of his patron. 
Vidyananda, Maijikyanandi and Prabhachandra—a triumvirate of 
famous Jain logicians—were probably all contemporaries, and lived 
about A.D. 800. Under the Rashtrakutas were produced the Yasasti - 
laka (to which reference will be made later) and NHtivdkydmrita of 
Somadeva. 

To the ninth century belong the famous commentaries Dhavala 
and JayadhavaW, composed by Virasena and Jinasena, the latter 
being the author of Adi-purdna noted above. Amritachandra was a 
brilliant commentator who expounded Kundakunda’s works and also 
wrote the Tattvarthas^ra y Purushdrthasiddhyupaya } etc. Towards 
the close of the tenth century Nemichandra produced a number of 
fresh philosophic compendiums of considerable importance. It was 
during this period that Pushpadanta composed his monumental 
Apabhramsa work at the Rashtrakuta capital of Manyakheta (or 
Malkhed). 

V. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 

The most important contribution of Jainism in cultural field is 
the principle and philosophy of Ahimsd. Though Ahimsd preached 
by Jainism is in a more extreme form than Buddhism, it has been 
duly graded for the householder and for the monk in view of the 
circumstances of life in which they are placed, and had no emascu¬ 
lating effect on the people. Jainism gave to India men who turned 
Ahvmsd into a philosophy of action, and numerous instances on record 
show that the Jain generals and kings did not spare themselves on 
the battlefield, and were not less averse to warfare than their con¬ 
temporaries of Brahmanical faith. 

The Jain householders were not led astray by ascetic ideals, but 
they did their duties as true householders without ignoring the prac¬ 
tical considerations. The Jain kings or soldiers, who killed their 
enemies on the battlefield, were following the Jain precept of doing 
one’s duty. Such killing, as the hanging of a murderer, being in 
pursuance of the enjoined duty, does not constitute violation of 
Ahimsd , as prescribed by the code of a 6ravaka. 


294 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


It may also be noted that the principle of Ahimsa was responsi¬ 
ble for ending the himsd in Yajna and other Vedic rites, and also for 
introducing vegetarian diet in a large part of India. 

The Jains also enriched the fine arts. The subject will properly 
be dealt in the Chapter on “Art”. Here we may simply draw atten¬ 
tion to the colossal image of Gommata at Sravana Belgola, which is 
the most distinctive contribution of Jainism. Koppanja, Belgola 
Haleb id and other places are studded with spacious and massive 
temples with beautiful images, many of which belong to this period. 
The free-standing pillar ( stambha ), found in front of almost every 
basadi or Jain temple in Karnatak, is another peculiar contribution. 
Some of the cave temples of this period also show how Jainism has 
enriched this field. 

A flood of light is thrown on the state of Jainism during the 
period under review by Yasastilaka, a literary romance in Sanskrit 
prose and verse, composed by Somadeva in A.D. 959. 94 Devotion to 
Jina, goodwill towards all creatures, hospitality to all, and an altruis¬ 
tic disposition were the religious ideals of the true Jain according to 
Somadeva. He emphasises the four gifts of protection, food, medi¬ 
cine and religious instruction; but would prefer that hospitality and 
charitable assistance should be confined mostly to the believers in 
the Jain faith. The frequency with which Somadeva defends cer¬ 
tain practices of the Digambara ascetics such as nudity, abstention 
from bath and ablutions, and eating their food while standing, indi¬ 
cates that the non-Jains looked on these as unattractive features of 
Jainism, and it was deemed necessary to remove all misconceptions 
in order to facilitate propagation of Jain faith among the masses. 

Somadeva's testimony clearly indicates that though eager to 
propagate their faith, the Jains were opposed to admitting undesir¬ 
able elements within their fold and welcomed only those who volun¬ 
tarily accepted the religion. Considerable latitude, however, was 
shown to such converts as were unable to completely forego their 
former customs and beliefs. The process of infiltration of non-Jain 
elements in the religious practices of the Jains had already set in, and 
gradual transformation of Jainism was already at work, when Soma¬ 
deva accorded recognition to them and tried to bring them into har¬ 
mony with the orthodox position of the faith. He describes the five 
yatv/is of Jain householders which are clearly modelled on the 
pancha-mahayajnas , though he means ddna by yaina. South Indian 
Jain literature shows that the Jains were not onposd to fire ritual 
as such so long as it involved no animal sacrifice. Somadeva sums up 
the position bv observing that it is legitimate for the Jains to follow 
any custom or practice sanctioned by popular usage so long as it does 


295 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

not come into conflict with the fundamental principle of the Jain 
faith or the moral and disciplinary vows. In the light of this, thq 
provision for balicharuddna , vaisvadeva and agnihotra in some 
Rashtrakuta grants for Jain establishments appears to be legitimate 
and permissible. Despite their attacks on the Hindu caste system 
we find it to be prevalent among the Jains, at least in certain parts 
of the country, even at the time of Somadeva, 

In many other respects, too, Jainism was strongly influenced by 
the faiths and practices of the Brahmanical religion. Jina and his 
mystical predecessors came to be looked upon as gods, and many 
hymns to Jina were sung as devotedly and fervently as the Brah¬ 
manical ones, often using similar words but with a different sense. 
Jainism is described along with Buddhism as a theistic religion, in 
the sense that it accepts God as a spiritual ideal but not as a Creator, 
in the Shad-darsana-samuchchaya by Haribhadra. Further, Jina is 
described as the Universal Spirit who is Siva, Dhatri, Sugata, and 
Vishnu, possibly to accommodate Jainism to the spirit of the age. 95 
Bhakti, again, is taken as the supreme means of salvation, and Jina 
became the saviour of souls, in the sense that his words lead them to 
Moksha. The temple ritual with grants for the upkeep of temples, and 
anointing images with milk, decorating them with flowers, etc. also 
speaks of the influence of Hinduism. It may, however, be noted, 
that the image worship and ritual indicated above arose among the 
laity and not among the monks. We notice the influence of Hinduism 
to a larger extent, particularly in the South, where we find not only 
the four castes, but the caste marks, prohibition of widow marriage, 
and such other things. 

Finally, as already stated, the various Gachchhas originated in 
the north with the 84 disciples of Uddyotana. According to the Kha- 
rataragachchhapattavali he flourished 550 years after Devarddhi. 96 
Gandhani inscription on the back of the metal image of Sri Adinatha, 
dated V.S. 937 (A.D. 880), refers to Uddyotana’s two disciples. The 
inscription shows that he became Acharya in A.D. 880. Pattavalis 
give 994 V.S., i.e. A.D. 937 as the year of his death. The inscription 
does not mention Gachchhas as these arose after each of his disci¬ 
ples. 97 Most of those Gachchhas have become extinct, and some 
new ones like Tapa, Kharatara., Anchala, etc. have come into exis¬ 
tence. Uddyotana died on a pilgrimage which he had undertaken 
from Malavadesa to Satrunjaya to worship Rishabha. 98 

VI. ICONOGRAPHY 

Parts of Raj put ana and Central India, Kathiawar Peninsula, 
Bengal, Bihar, Orissa and some parts of southern India (specially the 


296 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


central and western Deccan) possess Jain sculptural and architec¬ 
tural remains of the early and late mediaeval periods. There is no 
doubt that much of the ancient religious art of the Jains has been 
destroyed, and only a limited number of the extant Jain images 
go back to a period before the early mediaeval. 

Jain images of a comparatively early period are very few in num¬ 
ber in Bengal and certain parts of Bihar, but in other parts of Bihar 
and Orissa, they are fairly common. The image of Rishabhanatha 
found at Surohor (Dinajpur District, Bengal), and belonging to the 
tenth century A.D., is of unique iconographic interest, on account of 
its certain rare features. The sculpture is shaped like a shrine con¬ 
taining in its centre the main figure seated in dhydnasana, with the 
miniature figures of the twenty-three other Jinas similarly seated 
inside small shrines all round it; the latter are also characterised by 
their peculiar marks which we do not find in the Lucknow Museum 
composition of the Gupta period noticed above." The two male 
chauri-bearers on either side of Rishabhanatha, the flying garland- 
bearer, Vidyadhara couples on his top right and left, the two-tiered 
pedestal with a wheel and two lions on the upper tier and the bull 
and the figure of the donor on the lower, are all arranged with 
delicate skill and refinement. Another mediaeval composition depict¬ 
ing the same theme in a different manner was found at Barabhum 
(Midnapur District, Bengal) and is now in the collection of the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta. 

Three other Jina images, all hailing from Bengal, are charac¬ 
terised by the presence of the miniature figures of the Navagrahas 
on either side of the main figure standing in the K&yotsarga pose. 
Two of them representing Parsvanatha with his snake-hood show 
four of the grahas on each side, the presence of the ninth in the 
list, Ketu, being indicated by the snake cognizance of the Jina; the 
third, recognisable as Santinatha from his Idnchchhana, the ante¬ 
lope on the pedestal, displays four grahas on the right and five on the 
left, the fifth in the left side standing for Ketu. The sculptures all 
belong to the late mediaeval period and their execution is not indiffe¬ 
rent. Some mediaeval Jina images hailing from other parts of India 
do not fail to show the formal stereotyped character, but the atten¬ 
dant Jinas and other figures are displayed in different ways. Thus 
the seated Rishabhanatha from Sravasti (Gonda District, U.P.) shows 
the miniature seated Jina figures on the rectangular prabhdvali in 
four rows of eight, two, six. and eight. The standing figures of Ajita- 
natha and Chandraprabha, both from Deogarh (Jhansi District, Cen¬ 
tral India), have only eight and four figures of standing Jinas carved 
on the back slab. The sculptors, however, have failed to carve the 


297 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


individual marks below the attendant Jinas in these reliefs, perhaps 
due to exigencies of space. Some other seated and standing Jina 
icons of the mediaeval period, though they do not contain the figures 
of attendant Tlrthahkaras, are very rich in the number and variety 
of other types of accompanying figures which are displayed on their 
prabhdvali in a very interesting manner. 

Reference may be made to one very well-carved seated image 
of Santinatha in the collection of the Fyzabad Museum, which shows 
the dancing Navagrahas in the lowermost section of the pedestal, 
the Upasaka, Sasanadevata, an antelope on either side of a wheel 
on the simhdsana above it, two beautifully carved chauri-bearers, 
one on each side of the central figure, two elephants with pitchers 
carrying riders on lotuses parallel to the head of the Jina, and lastly 
on the topmost section of the rectangular prabhdvali the two gar- 
land-bearing Vidyadhara couples on the right and left and one single 
garland-bearer over the triple umbrella above the Jina’s head,— 
all three being depicted in the flying posture. In spite of the form¬ 
al character of the principal theme, the whole composition is mark¬ 
ed by subdued grace and beauty. 

The Dilwara group of marble temples at Mount Abu, of 
which the most important are those of Vimala and Tejahpala (c. 
A.D. 1032-1232), display some of the finest examples of Jain figure- 
sculpture, chiefly from the point of view of their exquisite delicacy 
of carving and severe simplicity. These images are very similar in 
appearance, and “representing nothing more than the skilled realisa¬ 
tion of a fixed formula” are each a note in the whole scheme of the 
religious representation. What a contrast between these dream-like 
figures of beauty and the colossal Jain sculpture at Sravaga Belgola 
(Hasan District, Mysore), one of the largest-free-standng images in 
the world! The topmost section of the granite hill Indragiri was 
fashioned with marvellous success into this gigantic statue of Saint 
Gommatesvara, the son of the first Jina Rishabhanatha, who resigned 
his kingdom to become an ascetic. The saint is represented in the 
immovable serenity of one practising the K&yotsarga austerity, un¬ 
disturbed by the serpents about his feet, the ant-hills rising to his 
thighs, or the growing creeper that has already reached his shoul¬ 
ders. This huge sculpture (57 feet high), whose plastic treatment is 
very formal, was carved under the orders of Chamun<Ja Raja about 
A.D. 983. Most of the extant Jain images from the early mediaeval 
period onwards are stereotyped in their treatment and were execut¬ 
ed according to a set formula in which much that is common to the 
cult-icons of the rival Indian creeds is present. 


298 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


It has already been shown that the subsidiary deities of the first 
class in the Jain pantheon are the Yakshas and the YakshinSS, known 
also as Upasakas and Sasanadevatas. The Jain text Pravachana- 
saroddhara describes the Yakshas as devotees of the Tirthankaras, 
and they, with their female counterparts, are the principal attendants 
of the Jin as. Though they are usually shown as accessory figures in 
many medieavel Jain sculptures, separate figures of some of them 
were well represented in the Jain temple-carvings of the post-Gupta 
and later periods. Their names and their iconographic features dis¬ 
tinctly indicate the Brahmanical association of many of them. Thus, 
Gomukha, the Yaksha of Rishabhamatha, from his bull face and bull 
mount as well as such of his attributes as battle-axe, noose, etc. shows 
his distinct affinity with Siva; the name of his principal, Rishabha- 
natha, and the special cognizance also prove the latter’s affiliation to 
the same Brahmanical deity. The tenth Yaksha, known as Brahma, 
is distinguished by four faces and a lotus seat and such attributes as 
citrus, rosary, abhaya or varamudrd } club, noose, etc.; though some 
of the latter attributes are foreign to the Brahma Prajapati of the 
Hindu pantheon, yet the name, the number of faces, the lotus-seat 
etc., closely connect him with the first member of the Brahmanical 
triad. Similarly isvara and Shanmukha Yakshas, the eleventh and 
thirteenth in the list, can be associated with Siva and Subrahmanya 
on the basis of their names, mounts and attributes. But such asso¬ 
ciation in the case of many others in the list is not apparent, though 
their names seem to point towards similar affiliation. A reference 
to the iconography of Kumara, Garuda, Kubera, Varuna and others 
will prove this point. It seems that their names were adopted from 
Brahmanical religion, but their elaborate iconography was developed 
according to the ideology of the Jains. As regards many of their 
female counterparts also, their names alone do not always explain 
their Brahmanical association, though in some cases their names, 
attributes and mounts distinctly indicate it. Ambika or Kushmainidini, 
the 6asanadevata of Neminatha and consort of Gomedha, falls under 
the category of the latter, and her iconographic features leave little 
doubt that she is a Jain adaptation of the Hindu goddess of the same 
name. But the Jains developed a mythology of their own, which had 
very little in common with the stories connected with her Hindu ori¬ 
ginal. She is one of the Jain goddesses whose images have been 
found all over India and her two-, four-, eight-, and even twenty¬ 
armed varieties of the early and late mediaeval periods are known. 
The wall paintings of the Vardhamana temple at Tiruparuttikunram 
(Jaina-Kanchi) in the Madras State illustrate the story of Agnita 
and her two sons Subhankara and Prabhankara; Aenita was the name 
of Ambika in her human birth according to the Digambara version 


299 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


of the story of the YakshinI’s origin. The Svetambara and Digam- 
bara accounts taken together help to explain almost wholly the ico- 
nographic traits of Ambika; her symbol of a bunch of mangoes and a 
child or sometimes two children near her with her lion mount are 
her characteristic cognizances. Sometimes she is shown accompa¬ 
nied by seven dancing female figures by her side (probably another 
adaptation of the Saptamatrika), and at other times she is seated or 
standing by her consort Gomedha. Several mediaeval reliefs in the 
collection of the Varendra Research Society’s Museum, Rajsbahi 
(Bengal), show a couple seated underneath the spreading branches 
of a tree with children in their laps; miniature figures in Yogasana 
are placed above the branches of the tree. These sculptures may 
be taken as the eastern mode of representing Gomedha and Ambika, 
and there is little doubt that they are adaptations of the figures of 
Panchika (Kubera) and Hariti, associated with Mahayana Buddhism. 
Padmavati, like her spiritual father, the Jina Parsvanatha, is asso¬ 
ciated with snakes and her Brahmanical or popular counterpart is 
the folk-goddess Manasa, one of whose names is also Padmavati or 
Padma. 

D. &ATVTSM AND VAISHNAVISM 
I. SATVTSM 

1. Growth and General Popularity 

§aivism attained a dominant position in India during the period 
under review. This is testified to by the adherence of a large number 
of royal families to this faith and the building of richly endowed 
temples, 100 some of which have attained world-wide fame. 
Alongside this material manifestation of religious fervour, there was 
also a parallel philosophical movement which tended to fix the tenets 
of Saivism. While the main principles remained the same, there 
were local variations and consequent doctrinal differences. It has 
been stated in an earlier volume that very early in the development 
of Saivism there came into being several sub-sects. Most of these 
sects, or rather schools, were the result of different philosophical ten¬ 
dencies among the worshippers of Siva. Just as in Vedanta we have 
Dvaita, Visishtadvaita and Advaita, besides many other points of 
view, even so in Saivism we have schools ranging from pluralistic 
realism to monistic idealism. 

2. K&shmir Saivism 

There is a form of Saivism, popularly known as Kashmir Sai- 
vism, which is a kind of monism or non-dualism. The names by which 
the system is known are: Trika, Spanda and Pratyabhifm , 101 The 


800 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


name Trika primarily refers to the triple principle with which the 
system deals, viz. Siva-sakti-anu or pati-pdsa-pasu. Though the other 
schools of Saivism also accept these three categories, Kashmir Sai- 
vism regards the individual soul and the world as essentially identi¬ 
cal with Siva, and so the three, according to it, are reducible to one. 
The term Spanda indicates the principle of apparent movement or 
change from the state of absolute unity to the plurality of the world. 
And the expression Pratyabhijna, which means ‘recognition’ refers 
to the way of realising the soul’s identity with Siva. 

The beginnings of Kashmir Saivism are to be traced to the &iva~ 
sutras whose authorship is attributed to Siva himself. The sutras 
are said to have been revealed to a sage by name Vasugupta who 
lived towards the end of the eighth or the beginning of the ninth 
century A.D. A succession of talented exponents of the system fol¬ 
lowed Vasugupta. Kallata, 102 who was Vasugupta’s chosen pupil, 
wrote, among other works, Spanda-sarvasva in which he explained 
the meaning of the £iva-sutras as taught by his master. Somananda, 
the author of Siva-drishti and a vritti thereon, was probably another 
pupil of Vasugupta. Among other teachers of Kashmir Saivism, 
who flourished during the period under review, we find the names of 
Utpala, Ramakantha and Abhinavagupta. The last named was a 
prolific writer on a variety of subjects. The period of his literary 
activity extended over a quarter of a century, from about A.D. 991 to 
1015. His best known work on Kashmir Saivism is the Paramdrtha- 
sara which is an adaptation of an earlier Advaita work of the same 
name by Adi Sesha. 

The Ultimate Reality, in Kashmir Saivism, as in every school of 
Saiva philosophy, is Sambhu or Siva the Supreme God. Siva is the 
Atman, the self of all beings, immutable and ever perfect. He is 
pure consciousness ( chaitanya ), absolute experience (para samvit), 
supreme lord (paramesvara) . He is the ground of all existence, the 
substrate of all beings. He is beginningless and one; he resides in all 
that moves and all that moves not. Time and space do not limit him, 
for he transcends them, and they are but his appearance. He is both 
immanent ( visvamaya ) and transcendent (visvottiriia) . The world 
does not exhaust him, for he is infinite. He is called anuttara, the 
reality beyond which there is nothing. In the familiar strain of the 
Upanishads, the teachers of Kashmir Saivism tell us that the Ultimate 
Reality is beyond the reach of thought and language. Yet both mind 
and speech attempt to understand and express the Real in its rela¬ 
tion to the universe. 

The pure consciousness, which is the Supreme Reality and is 
referred to as Siva, is the material as well as the efficient cause of 


301 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

the universe. This view is much the same as the one sponsored by 
Advaita-Vedanta as regards Saguna-Brahman. God or Reality is the 
substance of which the world is made as well as the instrument which 
makes it. Fundamentally there is no difference between the cause 
and the effect. But while for Advaita the manifested world is non- 
real, for Kashmir Saivism it is real. 

By means of several illustrations the writers on the Pratyabhi- 
jna system explain the creation of the universe from and by Siva. 
The world is very often compared to the reflected city in a mirror. 
“As in the orb of a mirror pictures such as those of a town or village 
shine which are inseparable from it, and yet are distinct from one 
another and from it, so from the perfectly pure vision of the supreme 
Bhairava, this universe, though void of distinction, appears distinct, 
part from part, and distinct from that vision.” 103 And again, “As 
syrup, molasses, jaggery, sugar-balls, candy, etc., are all alike juice 
of the sugar-cane, so the diverse conditions are all of Sambhu, the 
Supreme Self.” 104 The illustration of the rope appearing as the snake 
is also employed, though not with the same implication as in Advai¬ 
ta-Vedanta. Another familiar analogy used to explain creation is 
the appearance of ideas in the mind. The creation-theory of the 
Pratyabhijna school is known as abhdsavdda, i.e. the view which 
holds that the universe consists of appearances which are all real in 
the sense that they are aspects of the Ultimate Reality. 

The manifestation of the universe is effected through the Power 
(sakti) of Siva. And Power is not different from the Possessor 
thereof. Sakti is Siva’s creative energy, and is spoken of as his femi¬ 
nine aspect. There are innumerable modes of Sakti. But the most 
important of them are five. They are: (1) chit-sakti, the power of 
intelligence or self-luminosity, which means that the Supreme shines 
by itself without dependence on any other light and even in the 
absence of all objects; (2) ananda-sakti, the power of independence 
(svdtantryCL ) which is bliss or joy, and by virtue of which the Ulti¬ 
mate Reality is self-satisfied;(3) ichchha-sakti, the power of will or 
desire, the wonderful power of the Lord to create; (4) jnana^sakti, 
the power of knowledge by virtue of which the objects are brought 
together and held together in consciousness; and (5) kriyd-sakti , the 
power of action which is responsible for the actual manifestation of 
objects and their relations. By these powers the supreme Siva in his 
aspects as Sakti manifests himself as the universe. He manifests him¬ 
self by his own free will ( svechchhayd ) and in himself as the sub¬ 
strate ( svabhittau) . That is, there is nothing other than Siva. If the 
universe appears as if different, such appearance is a delusion. With 
the opening out of Sakti, the universe appears; and when Sakti closes 


802 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


herself up, the universe disappears. Srishti (creation) and pralaya 
(dissolution) alternate; and this process is without a beginning. 

As in the other schools of ^aivism, thirty-six categories or tat- 
tvds are recognised in Kashmir Saivism. The tattva which is count¬ 
ed as the thirty-sixth but which is first in the logical order is Siva, the 
Ultimate Reality, as it holds the potentiality of creation. It is of this 
reality, as we said, that the universe is an appearance. The £aiva- 
tattva is the first stage in the process of world-manifestation. Of 
the five aspects of gakti, chit or intelligence predominates over the 
others at this stage. The next category or tattva is sakti . It is not 
proper to call it the second stage, for it is by virtue of its operation 
that the manifestation of the £iva-tattva is made possible. When 
sakti is counted separately, what is meant in reality is the manifesta¬ 
tion of its dnanda aspect—-the aspect of bliss and self-satisfaction 
which is the precursor of the manifestation of a variety of forms. The 
other categories need not be discussed in detail as they are mostly 
abstruse philosophical principles. 

The supreme aim of the Pratyahhijnd system is to enable the 
individual soul to find its salvation. The salvation consists in the 
soul’s recognition of its identity with the Ultimate Reality. As 
bondage is the result of ignorance, release is to be attained through 
knowledge. The knowledge which liberates, however, is not mere 
intellectual awareness; it is spiritual intuition of the fundamental 
unity. The intuition is gained by dikshd, which is the name for the 
act whereby spiritual knowledge is imparted and the bondage of 
innate ignorance is removed. The intellectual knowledge of the 
Pratyahhijnd system is also necessary, because without it dikshci 
will not be efficacious. 

This is how the process of recognition is illustrated and explained; 
“A certain damsel, hearing of the many good qualities of a particular 
gallant, fell in love with him before she had seen him, and agitated 
by her passion and unable to suffer the pain of not seeing him, wrote 
to him a love-letter descriptive of her condition. He at once came 
to her, but when she saw him she did not recognise in him the quali¬ 
ties she had heard about; he appeared much the same as any other 
man, and she found no gratification in his society. So soon, however, 
as she recognised those qualities in him, as her companions now 
pointed them out, she was fully gratified. In like manner, though 
the personal self be manifested as identical with the universal soul, 
its manifestation effects no complete satisfaction so long as there is 
no recognition of those attributes; but as soon as it is taught by a 
spiritual director to recognise in itself the perfections of Mahesvara, 

308 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


his omniscience, omnipotence, and other attributes, it attains the 
whole pleroma of being.” 105 

Mere human effort will not be of much avail in the path to 
mcksha. What really moves here is the Divine Will. Besides^the three 
powers of creation, sustentation, and destruction of the universe, 
God has the powers of concealment and grace. His real nature is 
concealed from the soul; and after the soul has played out its part in 
scimsdra } God’s grace descends on the individual; and the individual 
is released. The descent of Divine Grace is called sakti-nipdta. 

Moksha, according to the Pratyabhijnd system, is a return to 
the original state of perfection and purity of consciousness. Abhi- 
navagupta describes it thus: “When thus the imagination of duality. 
has vanished, and he (the released soul) has surmounted the illusive 
mdyd } he is merged in Brahman, as water in water, as milk in milk. 
When thus through contemplation the group of elements has been 
resolved into the substance of Siva, what grief, what delusion can 
befall him who surveys the universe as Brahman?” 106 

3. Sankardchdrya 

In the south Saivism received a great impetus from the life and 
work of a spiritual genius who was born in the Chera country about 
the year A.D. 788, and who, in the short space of terrestrial existence 
granted to him, revolutionised the spiritual outlook of men in India. 
Though he is primarily known as the greatest exponent of Advaita 
Vedanta, Sankara was nevertheless the Acharya par excellence who 
cleansed the Hindu faiths of the excrescences that had gathered 
round them due to accidents of history, and taught each aspirant to 
follow the way that was best suited to him. Besides the commen¬ 
taries which he wrote on the Upanishads, the Bhagavad-gitd } and the 
Brahma-sutras, he composed hymns in praise of the major gods of 
Hinduism. Several of these hymns glorify Siva as the God of gods. 
Sankara was himself a Saiva by birth. And tradition has it that he 
was an incarnation of Siva, born for the purpose of consolidating 
Hindu dharma, and in answer to the implorings of Sivaguru and 
Aryamba at Kala^i. In the course of his digvijaya, Sankara met in 
argument several groups of pseudo-Saivas who were responsible for 
the prevalence of left-handed practices, and by quelling them freed 
the followers of Saivism from their baneful influence. At Ujjain, 
for instance, which was famous for the worship of Mahakala, he is 
said to have vanquished in argument a Pasupatacharya. It is also 
recorded that he visited Kashmir. And it is not unlikely that his 
doctrine of Advaita influenced, in some ways, the formulation of the 
Pratyabhijnd system. 107 


804 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


4. Iconography 

The tendency to multiply the variety of Saiva images was car¬ 
ried to its fullest extent in the early and late mediaeval Saiva reliefs, 
most of which illustrate numerous stories current about the god. 
Those that do not seem to be associated with any particular mytho¬ 
logy retain the early form, and can be generally described on the 
basis of later iconographic texts as Siva Chandrasekhara. These are 
standing figures; seated types of such images, depicted singly or in 
company with Uma and Skanda, are usually known as Sukhasana- 
murti, Uma-Mahesvara-murti, Somaskanda-murti, etc., the last of 
which was known only in South India. They represent the placid 
( sdumya) aspect of the god, while there are other mediaeval image- 
types, usually^ designated as Bhairava, which emphasise his terrific 
(ugra ) one. The numerous figures of Siva of the post-Gupta age, 
hailing from different parts of India, which are illustrative of various 
Saiva mythologies, can also be sub-divided into two principal groups, 
viz . samhdra (destructive) and anugraha (gracious), corresponding 
to his ugra and sdumya aspects. These two aspects remind one of 
malignant-benignant concepts underlying Vedic Rudra; an epic 
passage refers to the two bodies of Siva, one auspicious and the 
other fierce ( dve tdnu tasya devdsya. . .ghorarii anyam sivcim 
anyam . . .). Other graceful forms of Siva are known which are 
called Dakshina-murti and Nritya-murti etc. in the Saivagamas like 
Suprabhedagdmd; they do not illustrate any story, but portary the 
god as a master in various arts such as dancing, playing on musical 
instruments, expounding the sastras, as also in the practice of 
Yoga. Reliefs depicting the themes of the marriage of Siva and 
Uma (Kalyana-sundara-murti), Siva’s expiation of the sin of 
Brahmahatya (Kankala-murti, Bhikshatana-murti), descent of the 
Gahga on Siva’s head (Gangadhara-murti), granting of Pasupatastra 
to Arjuna by Siva (Pasupatastra-dana-murti)-—really a form of 
Anugraha-murti, joint forms of Siva and Uma (Ardhanarlsvara) 
and of Siva and Vishnu (Hari-Hara), etc., are also known from fairly 
early period; they usually come under the god’s sdumya form. 
Ardhanarlsvara and Hari-Hara motifs emphasise in their own way 
the attempts to harmonise different cult-deities such as Siva, Sakti 
and Vishnu. Another group of images were mostly evolved in 
South India in the mediaeval times, which like the Chaturviihsati- 
murtis in the case of Vaishnavism, were intended to symbolise some 
of the principal tenets of Saivism. Sadasiva-murti, Maha-Sadasiva- 
murti, Mahesa-murti, etc. belong to this category. This bewildering 
diversity in the anthropomorphic way of representing Siva is all the 
more noteworthy wbm it is remembered that the principal object 


305 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


of worship enshrined in the main sanctum is almost invariably an 
aniconic symbol. 

Reference has been made above 108 to the nature and significance 
of the Ardhanarisvara-murti. The Purapara image in the Rajshahi 
Museum shows a less common way of representing this divine as¬ 
pect, where the god shown fully in the round is two-armed and 
ithyphallic; it is a fine piece of sculpture and can be regarded as 
one of the best specimens of the late Pala period. 

Mediaeval sculptures representing the marriage of Siva and 
Parvatl, usually described as Kalyana-sundara or Vaivahika-murti, 
are common in several parts of India, one of the most outstanding 
examples of which is the very much mutilated Elephanta relief, a 
fine and sublime product of the Indian artistic genius. The easy 
grace of the standing pose of Uma and Siva, the tasteful grouping 
round them of the accessory figures, the eager and wistful attitude 
of the latter who appear as regular participants in the main scene, 
have been expressed with great skill by the unknown sculptor. 
The Vaivahika-murtis, found in Bengal, do not stand comparison 
with the Elephanta sculpture in point of artistic execution, but they 
portray some local marriage customs. The Vangiya Sahitya Pari- 
shat (Calcutta) specimen of such an image is a representative one 
of this group. 109 The Dakshina-murti types of Saiva sculptures are 
principally south-Indian in character, and such figures as Yoga-, 
Jhana-, Vyakhyana-, and Vinadhara-dakshina-murtis have seldom 
been found in northern and eastern India. 110 But if, as we have 
suggested above, the Nritya-murtis of Siva are included among such 
Saiva images, it can be shown that particular types of this variety 
of Dakshina-murti of Siva were fairly prevalent in other parts of 
India as well. The south Indian Nritya-murtis of Siva at first show 
a well-marked variety which, however, came to be merged in one 
outstanding type, the Siva Nataraja, a sublime creation in the 
domain of art. The Ellora and Chidambaram temples, as well as 
several other Saiva shrines of the Deccan, contain figures of Siva 
shown in various dance poses, such as Chatura, Katisama, Lalita , 
Lalatattl^ka , Talasamsphotita, etc.; but these gradually gave place 
to the ideal Nataraja type which, mostly in bronze and rarely in 
stone, became common in South India. 111 Rao says: “In all Siva 
temples of importance a separate place is allotted to Nataraja which 
is known as the Natana Sablid or simply Scibha. The most important 
of these sabhas is that at Chidambaram.” 112 This Nadanta dance 
mode of Siva Nataraja shows him with his right leg firmly planted 
on the back of the wriggling Muvalaka (Apashmarapurusha, the 
evil personified), his left leg raised high up in a slant, his front left 


806 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


hand in the dola- or gajci-hasta pose pointing to the lifted foot, the 
front right hand in the abhaya pose, the back right and left hands 
carrying a kettle-drum and a ball of fire respectively; the whole 
composition is placed on a well-decorated pedestal on which rest 
the ends of the circular or elliptical prabhd (tiruvasi in Tamil) 
which encircles it. The sublime ideology underlying this very 
characteristic dancing type of Siva images has been elaborately ex¬ 
pounded by A.K. Coomaraswamy . 113 The Tamil text, called Unmai 
vilakkam, explains the symbolism underlying the cosmic dance as 
follows: “Creation arises from the drum, protection proceeds from 
hand of hope (the abhaya pose in the front right one), from fire 
proceeds destruction, the foot held aloft gives mukti” (the same as 
anugraha or release). Thus, in a way, it practically embraces all 
the five-fold activities of the lord,—his panchakrityas , viz., creation, 
preservation, destruction, grace, and obscuration, the tiruvasi round 
him symbolising the last of the activities. A different variety of 
Nataraja seems to have been evolved in Bengal and eastern India, 
which shows the ten- or twelve-armed god dancing in deep ecstasy 
on the back of his mount, Nandi, surrounded by a host of accessory 
figures. Such ten-armed images closely follow the description of 
the dancing Siva given in the Matsya Purdna, and the Dacca Museum 
specimen, originally collected from Sankarabandha, a village in the 
Dacca District, can be regarded as the most representative of this 
group. It is a fine piece of artistic work of the Pala period and 
portrays with characteristic vigour the intense movement accom¬ 
panied by rhythmic grace . 114 The Anugraha-murtis of Siva have 
been found both in northern and southern India, but Some of their 
varieties Ike Chandesanugraha-murti are typically south Indian in 
character. Ravananugraha-murti figures are often found carved in 
mediaeval Saiva temples, and one of the Ellora reliefs, depicting the 
theme, has been adjudged as one of the best artistic remains of 
ancient India . 115 Partially broken square stone pillars from 
Chandimau and Rajaona (Bihar), now in the collection of the Indian 
Museum, Calcutta, characteristically portary the scenes of Siva 
releasing the goddess Ganga from coils of his jatds (matted hair) 
after being propitiated by Bhagiratha, and the Kiratarjuna story in 
which Siva in the guise of a hunter (Kirata) fights with Arjuna, and 
being satisfied with the latter’s prowess, grants him the Pasu- 
patastra . 116 A huge stone boulder at Mamallapuram (Madras) 
contains an elaborate scene carved on its surface, which was sup¬ 
posed to illustrate the Kiratarjuna episode; it was later explained 
as illustrating some phases of the story of the descent of the Ganga. 
But it has now been proved beyond doubt that the earlier suggestion 
about its character is correct . 117 


307 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Among the different types of terrific or Ugra forms of Siva, 
some oi wmcn do not seem to illustrate any particular Saiva mytho¬ 
logy, mention may be made of his Bhairava-, Aghora-, Virabhadra-, 
ana V irupaKsna- murtis. The first is also sometimes described as 
Branmasirascnnedaka-murti of Siva, and the Pur anas and the 
Agamas try to explain this aspect of Siva, cutting off one of the 
heads of the polycephalous Brahma, by different stories. But there 
seems to be very little real connection between these varying myths 
and the iconic types. The Agamic texts enumerate as many as sixty- 
four Bhairavas, divided in groups of eight, each group being headed, 
respectively by such names as Asitahga, Ruru, Chanda, Krodha, 
Unmatta-Bhairava, Kapala, Bhlshana, and Samhara. They are the 
consorts or guardians of the sixty-four Yoginis referred to in the 
Tantrik form of the Sakti worship. The particular type of Bhairava 
commonly found in India is, however, known as Batuka-Bhairava 
(literally youthful Bhairava), who is usually shown as a nude figure, 
terrifying in appearance, with fangs protruding from the corners 
of the mouth parted in a weird smile, with eyes round and rolling, 
and hands holding such objects as a sword, a khatvanga or Sula, and 
a kapala; he wears wooden sandals and is accompanied by a dog. 
One Ellora stone panel is of unique iconographic interest, inasmuch 
as it contains a figure of Atiriktahga Bhairava, one of the eight 
headed by Samhara; it shows the extremely emaciated standing 
figure of the god resting his weight on his three legs (the third leg 
is the extra limb —atirikta anga) and attended by other ghostly 
emaciated figures, one of whom is Kali. Rao observes, about this 
remarkable relief, that “though grotesque, the sculptor has execut¬ 
ed his work with great skill.” 118 Some Aghora and Virupaksha 
forms of Siva have been found in Bengal, and one of the latter, in 
the collection of the Dacca Museum, depicts in a very striking man¬ 
ner the uncanny horror underlying such concepts of the god. 119 
Another type of less terrific image of the deity is his Kankala-murti, 
in which he carries on his trident the skeleton of Vishvaksena, the 
gate-keeper of Vishnu, who was killed by Siva for his refusal to 
admit him into the presence of Vishnu. Such images of the late 
mediaeval period are comparatively common in South India. 
Bhikshatana-murti of Siva, which is mythologically associated with 
the Kankala-murti is, however, of a placid type, and it shows the 
deity as a wandering youth of the untouchable order (the bell tied 
round one of his legs emphasises social degradation), usually 
nude, holding a kapala in one of his hands, and somtimes accom¬ 
panied by a frisking deer; it may be observed that the above two 
types do not appear to have been used as cult objects in northern 
and eastern India. 120 Among the images of the god portraying his 


308 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


terrific nature, which illustrate different episodes in his divine car¬ 
eer, mention may be made of Gajasurasamhara-murti, Tripurantaka- 
murti, Andhakasuravadha-murti, Kalari-murti, Kamantaka-ra.urti, 
etc. The first three of these forms portray the destruction of the dif¬ 
ferent demons like Gajasura, or the demon in the shape of an elephant 
whose hide he wore as his garment after destroying him, the three 
Asuras of the three castles ( tripura ), and Andhakasura. Some of 
the finest sculptures of the early mediaeval period represent these 
motifs, and the much mutilated Ellora and Elephanta panels, depict¬ 
ing the Tripurantaka and Andhakasuravadha-murtis of Siva, reach 
sublime heights of artistic creation; in the multi-handed awe-inspir¬ 
ing god in both of them is very skilfully portrayed the dynamic 
energy with which he destroys the demons of evil. It is worth 
noting, in connection with the myths underlying such images, that 
some of them seem to be regular developments of Vedic epithets 
associated with Rudra, one of the constituents of the composite god 
Siva of the Epic and Puranic period. Thus, in the satarudrlya 
section of Yajurveda one of the names of Rudra is Krittivasa, i.e. 
a god who has the hide of an animal (an elephant) for his garment; 
it will not be an exercise of our imagination, if we say that the whole 
episode of Gajasurasamhara-murti is an indirect development of 
the above epithet. Tripurantaka-murti appears also to have deve¬ 
loped out of some concept associated with Rudra. Gajasurasamhara- 
murti is a very favourite theme in the south, and this type of Saiva 
images is also found, though comparatively rarely, in northern India. 
Kalari-murti, in which form the god chastised Kala or Yama, the god 
of death, for his attempt to take away the life of Markandeya, a great 
devotee of Siva, while he was engaged in worshipping his deity, is 
fairly common in South India and reference may be made to the strik¬ 
ing Ellora sculpture depicting the theme. Kamantaka-murti is sel¬ 
dom represented in mediaeval art. 

There are certain types of Saiva images which seek to illustrate 
some of the tenets of the Suddha-Saiva doctrine. As such they are 
not very old, for they presuppose a time when the philosophy under¬ 
lying the Suddha-Saiva system was fully developed. A comparison 
can be fruitfully instituted between such Saiva icons with the 
Vaishnava ones falling under the Vyuha category. The latter also, 
as has been shown earlier, are associated with one of the principal 
tenets of the Pancharatrins: but unlike most of such Saiva images, 
those of the two principal Vvuhas of Vasudeva-Vishnu, viz. Vasu- 
deva and Samkarshana, are of a very early date. No Sad^siva and 
Mahasadasiva-murtis of Siva, which idealise the whole philosophy 
of the Suddha Saiva school of Saivism, can be ascribed to the Gupta 
age; all the known specimens can be dated in the mediaeval and 


309 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


late mediaeval periods. They are mostly of south Indian origin, 
being associated principally with a cult which attained its develop¬ 
ment in that region. The Agamanta Saivism seems to have been 
originally evolved in North India, for some of its ideas and concepts 
are closely parallel to those of the Pahcharatra system whose 
northern origin is beyond any doubt. But it was subsequently fully 
developed in all its ideological ramifications in its south Indian sur¬ 
roundings, and that explains why these Saiva images mostly hail 
from different parts of the Peninsula. The Sena kings, of Bengal, 
whose orginal home land was the Karnata country, were devout 
worshippers of Sadasiva, and they used a five-faced arrdf ten-armed 
figure of the god as their seal-device. It was owing to their patro¬ 
nage that Sadasiva cult gained some importance in Bengal, as is 
proved by the discovery of several Sadasiva images from its various 
parts. This variety of icons is described in the Makdnirvdnatantra. the 
Uttara-kdmikdgama and the Garuda Purdna. The last two texts des¬ 
cribe the god as endowed with five faces, ten arms, seated in the 
baddhapadmasana pose, showing in his right hands abhaya-, and 
varada-mudrd } sakti, trisula and khatvanga f and in his left ones, 
sdrpa, akshamald, damaru, nilotpala and vijapura. The five faces 
typify the different aspects of Siva—the Panchabrahmas or isana- 
dayah, viz., Sadyojata, Vamadeva, Aghora, Tatpurusha, and Isana, 
who in their turn are supposed to have emanated from the five parti¬ 
cular powers of the supreme deity, Siva, viz . Para-sakti, Adi-sakti, 
Ichchhasakti, Jnana-sakti, and Kriya-sakti. These five aspects again 
are also known as five sadakhyas or tattvas such as Siva-sadakhya, 
Amurtta-sadakhya, Murtta-sadakhya, Kartri-sadakhya, and Karma- 
sadakhya, each being dependent on or emanating from its imme¬ 
diate predecessor. It will not be possible here to go into further 
details about the ideologies underlying the Sadaiiva-murti, but 
even a cursory study of it will enable one to be aware of the deep 
mysticism behind the concrete icon. The importance in which it 
was held in the developed cult is emphasised by the fact that its 
sectaries thought that all the different ‘ lildmurtis 9 of the supreme 
god Siva (these are the various types of saumya- and ugra - murtis, a 
brief account of which has been given above) are so many manifes¬ 
tations of the Mahesa-murti which is itself derived from a thousandth 
part of the last of the tattvas, viz. Karma-sadatattva or Karma- 
sadakhya mentioned just now. Rao was of opinion that the so-called 
Trimurti of Elephanta cave, as well as the central image of Rana 
Mokalji’s temple at Chitorgadh (MewarJ, really represents the 
Mahesa-murti of Siva. The Mahasadasiva-murti is a further com¬ 
plicated aspect of Sadasiva-murti, being endowed with twenty-five 
heads and fifty arms; each of the five heads of the latter being 


310 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


replaced by the same number of heads makes up the requisite num¬ 
ber, which again symbolises the twenty-five tattvas of Indian philo¬ 
sophy. The way in which “these heads are arranged in tiers in 
arithmetical progression”, in some of the extant south Indian spe¬ 
cimens of this variety of a late date, distinctly reminds us of the 
multi-headed forms of Avalokitesvara worshipped by the Buddhists 
of Tibet and Nepal. There are other Saiva images such as those of 
Ekadasa-Rudras, Murtyashtakas, Vidyesvaras, etc., which either 
emphasise the Rudra or Vedic part of the composite god Siva or 
illustrate in their own way one or other of the philosophic concepts 
of the Saiva system. But these images are comparatively late and 
rare. 

Mention may be made now of another image-type which does 
not illustrate any Saiva tenet, but emphasises the highest position 
of Siva amongst the orthodox Brahmanical Triad. This is the Eka- 
pada Trimurti of the god, in which he is shown as standing one- 
legged, holding his usual attributes in his hands, with four-armed 
Brahma and Vishnu issuing respectively from his right and left 
flanks, their front hands showing the anjalimudra and back ones 
carrying their respective emblems. If we leave out these flanking 
figures, the one-legged central deity reminds us of the god-concept 
Aja-Ekapada, one of the eleven Rudras (Ekadasa Rudras), which is 
one of the Vedic constituents of the composite god Siva. This type 
of Siva image, again, was at the root of another little-known Vaish- 
nava one in which the central figure is that of Vishnu, the flanking 
ones being those of Siva and Brahma; there can be no doubt that it 
was the direct outcome of sectarian jealousy, the Vaishnava sectary 
retaliating, in this curious manner, the lowering of the position of 
their own cult-god by the Saivas. Another very little-known Saiva 
image-type, known as Sarabhesa-murti, distinctly owes its origin 
to the sectarian rancour, for Siva is said to have killed Narasimha 
(the Man-lion form of Vishnu) after assuming this curious hvbrid 
form, in which the features of man, bird, and beast were combined, 
when the latter got out of hand after he had destroyed Hiranya- 
kasipu, a great devotee of Siva. 121 These two image-groups are, 
however, mainly south Indian in character, as are those of the sixty- 
three Nayanmars 122 or Siva-bhaktas of the Tamil land, which were 
sometimes placed in particular sections of important Saiva temples 
of southern India. 

II. VAISHNAVISM 
1. The Achdryas 

We have seen how, under the patronage of the Imperial Guptas, 
Vaishnavism became a great force in the religious life of both 


311 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


northern and southern India and how some of the Tamil saints 
(Alvars), who flourished during that age, gave a new impetus to 
south Indian Vaishnavism. In the post-Gupta period, the influence 
of the Vaishnava faith can be traced in every corner of northern 
India; some of the notable kings of various dynasties flourishing in 
different north Indian tracts are known to have favoured this reli¬ 
gion. The same was also the case with South India. It must how¬ 
ever be admitted that the greatest stronghold of Vaishnavism in 
post-Gupta India was the Tamil country where it flourished at first 
under the impetus of the Alvars up to the eighth century and then 
under another class of saints known as the Acharyas. While the 
Alvars represented the emotional side of Tamilian Vaishnavism, the 
Acharyas, who were their successors, represented its intellectual or 
philosophical side. 

The earliest of the Acharyas was Nathamuni, otherwise called 
Ranganathacharya, who was a native of Vlranarayanapura (modern 
Mannargudi in the South Arcot District). The traditional date of his 
death is given as A.D. 920. This date appears to be too early for 
Nathamuni’s death, but may actually be the date of his birth. 
Another tradition makes him the contemporary of a Chola king re¬ 
siding at Gangaikondacholapuram and thus assigns his death to a 
date not earlier than the reign of Rajendra Chola I who founded 
the above city in the first half of the eleventh century. This date 
for Nathamuni’s death is now usually accepted. 

Nathamuni lived at Srlrangam and was the author of the Nyaya - 
tattva which gives an elaborate exposition of the philosophy of the 
Visishtadvaita school. The essential doctrine of this school is that 
of the prdpatti which is absolute surrender to God in renunciation 
and faith and is based on the Gita and the early Pancharatra works. 
It is said that this doctrine was first brought into practise by 
Nammalvar or Sathakopa and was later elaborated by Nathamuni 
and his successors, the greatest amongst them being Ramanuja. 
The sect founded by Nathamuni became known as the &rlvaishnava. 
Nathamuni was inspired by the songs of the Alvars, especially by 
those of Nammalvar or Sathakopa. He is said to have recovered all 
the songs of Sathakopa and to have arranged those as well as the 
extant songs of the other Alvars into four collections of about one 
thousand stanzas each. 

The school founded by Nathamuni did not approve of Karmon 
done for worldly results and favoured renunciation of all results of 
deeds. It was a reaction against the Purva-mlmamsa school of 
such teachers as Prabhakara, Sabarasvamin, Kumarila and Mandana, 
according to which salvation may be attained by the faithful per- 


312 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

r 

formance of ceremonial rites prescribed by the Sruti and Smriti 
literature, as well as against the Advaita (Absolute Monism) school 
of Sankara (ninth century) which laid the greatest stress on Juana, 
making religion more an affair of the head than of the heart. The 
history of this school of Vaishnavism under Nathamuni’s successors 
will be treated in the next volume. 

2. Iconography 

Images of Vishnu and of his avatdras (incarnations) belonging 
to the post-Gupta period are found in large numbers all over India. 
An interesting variety of the asana-Vishnu of the mediaeval times 
in the collection of the Khajuraho (also spelt Khajraho) Museum 
shows the god with the fore-finger of his main left hand raised to 
the height of his lips, with the usual accompanying figures clustering 
round him. The peculiar hand-pose, indicative of silence, not re¬ 
corded in any of the known varieties of the Vishnu image, reminds 
us of the bronze statuette discovered by Marshall at Sirkap and 
identified by him as the child-god Harpocrates. There is no refer¬ 
ence to such figures as the Vishnu maunavratin of Khajuraho in any 
of the well-known iconographic texts. 123 

Images of several incarnatory forms and manifestations of 
Vishnu, whose early and late mediaeval representations are known, 
are of great iconographic interest. The textual description of one 
such, viz. Yajnapurusha or Yajhesa, corresponds to a very great 
extent to one image in the eastern gateway ( gopura ) of the Chidam¬ 
baram temple. It shows a two-headed, four-horned, seven-handed 
and three-legged figure with a bull by his side, and symbolises the 
Vedic sacrifice in a very interesting manner. In the £atapatha 
Brahmana, Vishnu, originally an aspect of Surya, is regarded identi¬ 
cal with sacrifice, and this is why the symbolical representation of 
Yajna is called in some Pahcharatra texts and Puranas an avatara 
of Vishnu. 124 Another incarnatory form of the god is Dattatreya or 
Hari-Hara-Pitamaha who can be recognised among some mediaeval 
sculptures of India. It either shows the three members of the 
orthodox Brahmanical triad, namely, Brahma, Vishnu and Siva, 
placed side by side, or it may appear as a four-armed Vishnu whose 
Brahma and Siva aspects are indicated by their respective mounts 
carved on the pedestal by the side of Garuda. The standing and 
seated images of this god, hailing respectively from Ajmere (Raj- 
putana) and Badami (Deccan), are unique specimens of the second 
variety of Dattatreya images. 125 Visvarupa and Hayagriva are two 
other avatdras of Vishnu, whose images, though rare, are not abso¬ 
lutely unknown. The former, a twenty-armed deity with various 
attributes in the respective hands, characteristically portrays the 


818 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


all-powerful and all-pervading god. A partially broken image from 
north Bengal, though it does not fully conform to the textual des¬ 
cription of this aspect of Vishnu, seems to stand for Visvarupa. 126 
Hayagriva or Vadavavaktra, as the name indicates, is another com¬ 
posite form of the god, in which the head of a horse is placed on a 
human body. This peculiar form is said to have been assumed by 
Vishnu in order to chastise a demon of that shape, who had despoiled 
the Vedas. Though images of Hayagriva are comparatively rare 
in India, it is interesting to note that this iconic type travelled to 
the countries of the Far East. 127 

Kamadeva, the same as Pradyumna, the son of Krishna by 
RukminI, was represented in mediaeval India. His characteristic 
attributes are a sugarcane bow and arrow in his hands, and his spe¬ 
cial cognizance is a makaradhvaja; he is usually shown accompanied 
by his two consorts Rati and Trisha. 128 Garuda is usually carved on 
one corner of the Vishnu images with his hands in the navnaskdra- 
mudrd; sometimes he is shown carrying his master on his back. But 
separate figures, which served as capitals of columns erected in front 
of Vaishnava shrines, are also known. The Besnagar Garudadhvaja 
of the second century B.C. had one, but unfortunately it is lost. The 
bird-mount of Vishnu is shown with the face and limbs of a man, 
stylised locks of hair rising from his head, and with the beak, wings 
and claws of a bird; when used as a capital piece, he is sometimes 
janiform. His comparatively rare four-armed types show a snake, 
the mortal enemy of the Garuda, in one of his hands. The earliest 
representations of Garuda are to be found on the coins of the Imperial 
Gupta rulers. A fine specimen of janiform Garuda capital is in the 
collection of Rajshahi museum (Bengal), belonging to the tenth cen¬ 
tury A.D.; it has three eyes and snake ornaments. 

Of the goddesses associated with Vishnu-Krishna, Lakshml, 
Sarasvati (Sri and Pushti) and Bhudevi are the most represented 
ones. They usually appear as attending consorts of the cult-god, 
though their independent figures are also not wanting. In the north 
and east Indian Vishnu reliefs, Sri and Pushti are almost invariably 
shown as the principal companions, while in the south Indian ones, 
the place of Pushti is taken by Bhudevi. Sri or Lakshml, when 
depicted alone, is usually shown as Gaja-Lakshml, the lotus-carry¬ 
ing goddess bathed by two elephants, a very familiar motif which 
can be traced to the second century B.C., if not earlier. Other 
varieties of this goddess, two-armed and four-armed, are also known. 
Reference to one eleventh century bronze figure of four-armed Gaja- 
Lakshml, hailing from north Bengal and now in the collection of 
the Rajshahi Museum, may be made in this connection; one of its 


314 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

hands is broken, the other three hold a citron, an elephant-goad, 
and a jewel-basket. A Bharhut railing pillar contains a standing 
female figure playing on a harp; it may be regarded as the earliest 
representation of Sarasvati in Indian art. Her separate figures from 
the late Gupta period onwards, however, are comparatively common. 
Two-armed images of the goddess are shown playing on a Vina, but 
in four-armed ones, the back hands carry a rosary and a manuscript; 
her usual vehicle is a swan, but in some Bengal sculptures of the 
Devi a frisking lamb takes its place. 129 One of the finest mediaeval 
figures of Sarasvati is in the Rajshahi Museum; it was found in a 
village in the district of Bogra (Bengal). 

The above brief summary gives only a glimpse of the infinite 
iconographic variations of one of the most important Brahmanical 
cults of India. There is little doubt about their evolution being 
gradual, but presumably by A.D. 1300, most of these came to be 
displayed in one or other parts of the different Vaishnava shrines 
of India according to their relative importance. Rao tells us that 
many of the minor avatar as and manifestations of Vishnu were used 
as avaranadevabcis, i.e , f deities placed in small subsidiary shrines in 
various corners of the dvaranas or enclosures of Vaishnava temples. 
The Jagannatha temple at Puri and the big Srlrangam temple of 
comparatively late date illustrate this ancient Vaishnava practice. 
These iconic types may appear to the uninitiated as mere aberrations 
of human art instinct; but to the appreciative and the initiated they 
are nothing more nor less than attempts through the medium of the 
language of symbolism to portray the different aspects of the princi¬ 
pal deity. 

(E) TANTRIK RELIGION 

The word Tantra has been sought to be derived in the Kasika- 
vritti from the root tan, to spread, with the suffix shtran added. 
Some philosophical commentators have traced it to the root tatri 
or tantri, to originate or to know, while the two roots tan and tantri 
have elsewhere been identified and used also in the sense of spread¬ 
ing or weaving. In its present widely accepted sense Tantra means a 
literature which spreads knowledge, and particularly knowledge 
of profound things with the aid of mystic diagrams (yantra) and 
words possessing esoteric meanings (mantra), and helps the attain¬ 
ment of salvation. As a matter of fact, however, out of about three 
dozen senses in which the term Tantra may be used, quite a number 
is utilized in different philosophical systems in an ordinary non-reli¬ 
gious sense, and it is only in later literature, from about the fifth 
or sixth century A.D., that Tantra as a special religious or philo- 


315 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


sophical concept gradually came into use. The earliest uses of the 
word Tantra, as in Srauta-sutras, the Harivamsa, Susruta, Saihkhya 
philosophy, and didactic fables, did not bear the meaning of a special 
literature dedicated to the cult of Sakti. The worship of Mothers 
and reference to Dakinis attending them may be traced to Gangdhar 
inscription 129a of the fifth century A.D., and the images of Mothers 
are referred to in the Brihat-samhitd. But neither Amara in his 
Kosa nor Bana in his works refers to the followers of Sakti, though 
both know the Divine Mothers and Amara knows also that the man¬ 
tras have power ( sakti ). 

It is necessary at this stage to issue a note of warning. Though 
Saktism and Tantra are now so much identified that the word 
Tantra is almost reserved for the religious literature of the Saktas, 
while the term Agama is confined to the Saivas and Saihhita, Kainxja, 
or Ratra (knowledge) to the Vaishnavas, the earlier use of the word 
Tantra was quite fluent, and it could be applied to Vaishnava and 
Saiva sacred literature as well. The conventional division of 
Brahmanical religious literature was into Veda, Smriti, Puraina, 
and Tantra, arranged in the chronological order and assigned to the 
four ages of the world. The only justification for this is that it is 
after the Puranas had established the pre-eminence of Vishnu, Siva, 
and Sakti, that the Tantras could get under way. It does not mean, 
however, that these different types had nothing in common between 
them. The contents of the Tantras were obviously modelled on 
those of the Puranas to a great extent, while some portions of the 
Purana literature would read almost like a Tantra manual. In 
fact, both claimed to be in some sense the fifth Veda; but as this 
honour was claimed by other types of literature also, e.g. the 
Mahabharata , the science of Music, and Tamil Saiva literature 
(called Tamil Veda), we may understand the designation ‘Tantra’ 
as intending all sacred literature and art in which all could parti¬ 
cipate irrespective of caste and sex, being unlike the Vedas in this 
respect. While one class understood by the word Agama an adven¬ 
titious literature coming from non-Aryan sources, i.e. from outside, 
another class took the word in the sense of the Veda itself, which 
is also called Agama, being revelational in character. In fact, the 
relation between Agama , Siva’s revelation of ultimate truths 
through Parvatl, and Nigama, Parvatl’s discourse in reply to Siva’s 
query, was sometimes conceived of as similar to that between Sruti 
and Smriti; naturally the Sakta Tantras could not accept this inferior 
position and claimed the highest authority for themselves. They 
claimed to have superseded all previous types of religious tenets and 
practices in the Kali age. 


316 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Xhe antiquity of the Tantras, in the present acceptance of the 
term, is difficult to determine. We learn from an inscription in 
Cambodia 12 b that the Tantrik texts were introduced there from 
India at the beginning of the ninth century A.D. Tantrik manu¬ 
scripts of seventh to ninth century have been found in Nepal, and 
Buddhist Tantras are known to have been translated into Chinese 
in the eighth, and into Tibetan in the ninth century. The origin of 
the Tantrik cult and the composition of special texts may thus be 
dated about the sixth century A.D.; some Buddhist Tantras may be 
even older. 

Some of the Tantras themselves give their number as sixty- 
four, though the number of texts available is much larger. The 
number sixty-four is exclusive of the Saiva Agamas, which fall con¬ 
ventionally into two groups of ten and eighteen, and the Vaishnava 
Samhitas which, though conventionally numbered as one hundred 
and eight, are more than double the number in available texts. The 
Tantras, which are extolled as the best of the four sdstras included 
within Kalpa (namely Agama, Yamala, Damara, and Tantra ) and 
supposed to hold sway in the present Svetavaraha Kalpa (the first 
thirtieth'period of the month of Brahma), deal with an exhaustive 
list of topics; namely, origination and dissolution of the universe, 
ascertainment of mantra , installation of deities, description of places 
of pilgrimage, the .duties of the different stages of life ( asrama ), 
support of Brahmanas, maintenance of other creatures, ascertain¬ 
ment of yantras, theogonic speculation, knowledge of trees, location 
of heavenly bodies, purveying of traditional history ( purCina ), dis¬ 
quisition on precious things, description of sacred vows (vrata), 
determination of cleanliness and uncleanliness, delineation of hells, 
description of cycles of existence [harachakra) , signs of masculinity 
and femineity, duties of kings, modes of charity, contemporaneous 
obligations (yugadharma) , customs (or legal procedure), and spiri¬ 
tual elevation. These contents are classified into four pddas (quar¬ 
ters): jnana (philosophical doctrines, sometimes of an occult 
character), yoga (meditation, specially meant to acquire magic 
powers), kriyci (activities connected with temple-building and idol- 
worship) and charyd (observances, rites, etc.). Some of the Tantras 
are credited with enormous length in later accounts, while others 
are said to be of moderate dimensions, but the number of slokas in 
each, as traditionally known, is meticulously recorded in enumera- 
tive lists. 

We get a fair idea of the general principles of Tantrik belief 
from the Mahdnirvdna Tantra which, though of later date, is one 
of the most popular and well known Tantrik texts. Almost like a 


817 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Vedantic text, it deals with Brahman, which, according to the Saktas, 
is nothing but Sakti, the eternal dynamic source of all beings. It 
is perceived that all life proceeds from the womb of a woman; so 
we should think of the ultimate creative principle in terms of the 
‘mother’ and not of the ‘father’. Philosophical concepts like Prakriti 
and Maya, and mythological figures like Parvatl, Durga, Lakshml 
and Radha constitute the female principle of creation, and are merely 
different names of the jaganmatcL (Mother of the World). All gods 
including Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, are contained in and issue out of 
the Divine Mother. This sect, therefore, looks upon every woman 
as an incarnation of the Universal Mother to whom proper respect 
should be paid. 

The Tantrik cult lays special stress upon the mantras, i.e. pray¬ 
ers and formulae, bljas f i.e. syllables of mystic significance peculiar 
to each deity, yantras , i.e. diagrams drawn on paper or inscribed in 
precious stone, metal, etc., mudrds, i.e. special positions of fingers 
and movements of hands, and nyasas, i.e. placing the deities on the 
different parts of the body by touching them with finger-tips and the 
palm, mostly of the right hand. These are the means by which the 
Sadhaka (the aspirant after perfection) invokes, and identifies him¬ 
self with, his chosen deity (ishtadevatd). Though occasionally they 
have been utilised in dark and magical practices to control men and 
gods (abhichdra ), the primary aim of the Sakta worshippers in using 
them has been to become one with the deity and to attain salvation. 

The Tantra texts justify their existence on the plea that the 
Vedas are a sealed book to the majority and hence an easier cult is 
necessary for the people at large. Moreover, the Tantra form of 
worship is open to women and Sudras also. As a matter of fact, how¬ 
ever, it became equally popular with the higher castes and classes 
once the indispensableness of Tantrik initiation ( dikshd ) was 
recognised. 

Perhaps no religious literature of India has raised such contro¬ 
versy in evaluation as the Tantras. On the one hand, they have been 
extolled as the repository of sublime truths, rigorous discipline, 
catholic outlook and indispensable means to the attainment of the 
highest spirituality. On the other hand, they have been branded 
as a type of composition containing unmeaning jargon, mysterious 
mummery, veiled and open obscenity, and revolting antinomianism 
of different kinds. Theurgy and thaumaturgy jostle with high 
philosophy and deep devotion, dark rites and liberal thoughts go 
cheek by jowl with one another, and accurate knowledge alternates 
with occult science. We have, in fact, a strange mixture of higher 
and lower thoughts, of strenuous discipline and moral laxity, 


318 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of sound understanding and primitive credulity, that presents 
a chequered pattern, bewilders the curious in enquiry and con¬ 
fuses the novice in practice. The matter is further complicat¬ 
ed by the fact that the language used is sometimes enigmatical 
and has both an exoteric and an esoteric meaning, and without the 
help of an adept or an interpreter, the proper sense is likely to be 
missed. Hence diksha (initiation) by a guru (preceptor or spiritual 
guide) is essential for getting access to the esoteric or real meaning 
of a\particular word or sentence,—a meaning handed down tradi¬ 
tionally Indifferent Tantrik schools and not communicated to those 
who would not join the particular fraternity. It is the guru who 
opens the eyes of the disciple to the true meaning of texts, guides him 
through dark, devious and dangerous practices to the realm of light, 
and anoints him ( abhisheka) as a peer of the spiritual kingdom. 
Getting the better of his stupefying intellect ( tamasa ) and unintelli¬ 
gent activity ( rdjasa ), the bound soul (posit) heroically (i fir a) severs 
the bond (pdsa) of subjection to various restraints and, with the help 
of the pure element in his mental constitution (stittvika) , attains the 
divine ( divyabhdva ) that is latent in every finite spirit. 

It is obvious that such a complicated system, in which the lower 
and the higher elements of human nature tussle with one another, 
could not have been a matter of sudden growth, nor could it have 
been derived from a single source, particularly if we consider the 
complexity of its practices and the diversity of the creeds involved. 
On a priori grounds it may even be surmised that systematization 
must have been preceded by popular beliefs and rites connected with 
the worship of female deities, of which the cult of the Mothers 
(matriganci ) latterly became the most prominent. These dark forces 
of nature embodied man’s fear of the mysterious and the terrifying, 
without and within, and his hope that they could be pacified and con¬ 
trolled by appropriate incantations, sacrifices and meditations. That 
they appealed to something universal in man in his primitive think¬ 
ing is attested by the presence of similar beliefs in many other cul¬ 
tures of widely distributed areas of the globe. That Brahmanism, 
Jainism and Buddhism should all develop or incorporate occultism 
in course of time and fall back upon the use of magic syllables 
(mantra) and mystic diagrams (yantra) proves that they had to 
take note of some basic needs of the human mind in a composite popu¬ 
lation drawn from different social and cultural strata and diverse 
tribal and racial strains. Magic, religious ministration and medi¬ 
tation naturally figured in an ascending order, and as intellectual 
coherence was demanded by the inherent logic of the human mind 
or by the necessity of meeting hostile criticism, methodical philo¬ 
sophy gradually grew in importance. The different components of 


819 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Tantra owe their existence and emphasis to these diverse needs as 
they developed in space and time. 

It is natural that after claiming to be the final revelation for 
mankind in the Kali-yuga the Tantras should draw up a scale of 
excellence among the aspirants treading the path of spiritual pro- 
gress. The successive rungs of the spiritual ladder are constituted 
by three states (bhava) or paths ( mdrga ),—the pasu (the natural 
man living a life of routine like animals) following the conventional 
moralities of society; the vira (the bold or heroic soul) daring to 
indulge in antinomian rites and practices under rigid rules of dis¬ 
cipline; and the divya (the divine who is above all dualities) uncon¬ 
cerned about all distinctions as befitting one who has gone beyond 
all empirical variety and attained union with the Absolute. Stated 
in the language of religious classification, though not meant to be 
taken in the literal sectarian sense, these three were supposed in 
later compendia to fall mainly into seven subdivisions (dchara), four 
being included within the pasu stage, two in the vira stage, and one 
in the divya stage. The first group of four is constituted by Veda- 
chara, Vaishnavachara, Saivachara, and Dakshinachara (sometimes 
the whole group being roundly described as Dakshinachara); the 
second group of two is made up of Vamachara and Siddhantachara; 
and the last solitary stage is constituted by Kaulachara. In the first 
group external worship, devotion to Vishnu, meditation on Siva, and 
mental approach to Devi or Sakti find respective expression in the 
four stages. In all these the observance of social morality and the 
performance of prescribed rites and ceremonies find full sway;— 
avoidance of cruelty to animals, abjuration of intoxicants and unlaw¬ 
ful enjoyments, conjugal fidelity, control of the senses, austerity, 
practice of charity, regular worship of the gods in a pure bodily 
condition, etc, constitute the main elements of spiritual culture, 
though in the fourth stage the acquisition of magical powers by some 
secret innocuous Tantrik rites is not barred out altogether. The 
fifth ushers in a new outlook and technique, for the correct under¬ 
standing of mystic rites, generally performed in secret at night, 
requires proper training at the hands of a guru and the acquisition 
of the necessary courage to disregard social conventions about 
sexual purity, to defy taboos about food and drink, and to look upon 
all women as manifestations of Sakti (kulandyiha, bhairavi or yogini) 
and all males as representatives of Siva ( bhairava ), there being no 
bar to the use of any married woman (kulastri) for furthering per¬ 
sonal perfection by rites, prohibited to the ordinary members of a 
society, which might include the use of intoxicants and of the pecu¬ 
liar feminine impurity as an item of bodily decoration during wor¬ 
ship. Still, the Vamachara tries to avoid publicity in the matter of 


320 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


disregarding fear, shame, pity, caste convention, etc. which his secret 
rites involve. The aspirant ( s&dhaka ) practising Siddhantachara, 
however, is not afraid of following socially disapproved practices 
openly. He is relentless in the pursuit of what he thinks to be true, 
and is not, therefore, troubled by the opinions of others regarding 
what he eats and drinks, enjoys or hurts, for he holds that there is 
nothing that cannot be purified by appropriate means. The use of the 
five M’s (panchatattva or panchamakdra)—madya (wine), matsya 
(fish), maihsa (meat), mudrd (parched grain) and maithuna (coition) 
—under certain prescribed conditions of discipline could be made 
without secrecy in appropriate places and times, and was intended to 
further the progress of the aspirant towards the elimination of all 
empirical distinctions and the attainment of complete freedom. The 
Kuldrnava Tantra virtually tells us that just as one rises with the 
help of the very ground on which one has fallen, so also it is through 
drinking life ta the very lees that one has to make the spiritual ascent. 
A thorn has to be eradicated with the help of another thorn; simi¬ 
larly indulgence must be forced to yield satiety and higher value. 
Wine that merely intoxicates is a sinful beverage, but as the producer 
of a euphoric condition, in which care and anxiety are absent, it is a 
desirable drink. Similarly, flesh that nourishes the body, fish that 
increases sexual potency,* grain that invigorates the system, and 
coition that brings about a blissful condition ( mcihasukha ) and pro¬ 
longs the race at the same time, are all intended to keep the sddhaka 
in a fit condition of body and mind to pursue spiritual aims. It is 
obvious that in the case of some gross minds they failed to serve 
their legitimate purpose, specially when promiscuity was permitted 
with different types of women, mostly coming from lower castes and 
dubbed as saktis. There was, however, a general prohibition against 
using any woman except one’s wife for the purpose of the last of the 
five tattvas (maithuna) , and there were also other restrictions. The 
idea was that a sddhaka must go beyond dualities of all kinds—of 
love and hate, merit and demerit, touchable and untouchable, for¬ 
bidden and non-forbidden, or delectable and nauseating, in food and 
drink, prohibited and non-prohibited in sex relation, male and 
female, friend and foe, etc.,—and cultivate not only equanimity in 
himself but also equality towards all. 

It is only when this state of mind is acquired that the last stage 
of sanctification is reached, namely, Kaulachara. This is the divyd 
condition, for then the aspirant transcends the likes and dislikes of 
earthly life like God himself to whom all things are equal. Pity and 
cruelty are equally unmeaning in an ultimate reference, and so also 
approbated and unapprobated conduct. Just as one of the Upani- 
shads has said that to one who has attained Brahma-knowledge no 

321 

A.I.K.— 21 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


sin attaches for any kind of antinomian act, so also the Tantras place 
the Kaula (worshipper of kula or Sakti ) above all moral judgments, 
and put no prohibitions and restraints in his way as being unneces¬ 
sary for one who has pierced the veil of space and time, process and 
differentiation. A Kaula roams in all dehdras at will, being at heart 
a Sakta, outwardly a Saiva, and in social gatherings a Yaishnava. 
He sees himself in all things and all things in himself. It appears, 
however, that the later (uttara) Kaulas preferred the gross to the sym¬ 
bolic, just the reverse of what was fancied by the earlier (purva) 
Kaulas, and the Samayins alone discarded both gross sex and sym¬ 
bolic yantra and restricted themselves to mere mental imagery in 
celebrating the worship in a circle ( Srlchakra ). As usual, we have 
very exalted explanations of the origin, nature and objective of Kaula 
®adhana, and in the Kaulajndnanirnaya, which probably belongs to the 
eleventh century, we have a description of the various dehdras, which 
must have been crystallised some time before this work was written. 
In fact, we have the information purveyed by the same work that 
there were various Kaula schools prevalent at the time, as also that 
very many methods of yoga (yogaprandli ) were followed by these 
schools. We have incontestable evidence also that both the Bud¬ 
dhists and the Nathists, too, countenanced the Kaula method of self- 
realisation. 

Elaborate rules are laid down as to the proper persons from 
whom initiation is to be taken. While the Vaishnavas, Sauras and 
Ganapatyas can initiate one belonging to their respective sects, the 
&aktas and &aivas are privileged to initiate all sects, including their 
own. Orthodoxy must have been alarmed, as at the time of Maha- 
vira and Buddha, by the popularity of the ascetic and homeless 
wandering mendicants, and so it put a virtual, though not absolute, 
ban on the initiation of householders by their fraternity. But it made 
a compromise by admitting that Tantrik initiation was essential even 
for Brahmanas and indispensable for women and non-Brahmanas. 
who had no right to Yedic initiation, and it ignored, when not extol¬ 
ling, the union with a sakti (woman partner) who was not the legally 
married wife of the sddhaka; but it preferred a married man as guru, 
even though he might indulge in vdmachara practices in the mystic 
circle, where eight pairs of yoginis or ndyikds and their bhairavas 
(male partners) used to meet. We are interested in the information, 
furnished by the Dakshindchdra-tantrardja , that Gauda, Kerala ana 
Kasmlra (with Kalika, Tripura and Tara as goddesses, respectively, 
according to a later account) are the homes of the purer (Dakshind- 
chara) sects. Elsewhere (Brihat-Gautamiya Tantra ) it is stated that, 
of gurus, those coming from the west are the best, those from the 
south are middling, those from Gauda and Kamarupa are inferior 


822 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


to the preceding, and those from Kalihga are the worst. An ampli¬ 
fied description in Jdbdia (quoted by Vidyadharacharya) puts the 
gurus from Madhyadesa (Aryavarta), Kurukshetra, Lata, (Nafa, 
Nata), Konkana, Antarvedi, Pratishthana and AvantI at the top, those 
from Gaud a, Salva, Sura (?), Magadha, Kerala, Kosala and Dasarna 
in the middle, and those hailing from Karnata and the banks of the 
Narmada, the Reva and Kachcha, the Kalindas, the Kambalas (or 
Kalambas) and the Kambojas (probably in Assam) at the bottom 
of the scale. The Kuldlikdmndya mentions five celebrated seats of 
Tantrik cult in different parts of the country, namely, Guyana, Jala 
(Jalandhara), Purna (-giri), Matanga (Srisaila) and Kamakhya. In 
the Sddhanamdld the four celebrated Tantrik pithas are Kamakhya, 
Sirihatta, (with Arbuda or Jalandhara replacing Sirihatta in some 
texts), Purnagiri and Uddiyana. Kamakhya or Kamarupa in Assam 
is well known and Sirihatta is Syihet. Purnagiri has been identi¬ 
fied with Poona, but location in Assam has also been suggested for 
it. Uddiyana has been identified with Kashgarh (Sylvain Levi), Swat 
valley (Waddell, S. C. Das), Orissa (H. P. Sastri), and Western 
Assam (B. Bhattacharyya). These areas for Tantrik gurus of diffe¬ 
rent grades of excellence, and these Tantrik centres, throw an in¬ 
teresting light on the diffusion of the creed and the probable place 
of its origin. When to this is added the information that north¬ 
east India had active interchange of thought with the trans-Hima- 
layan regions like Tibet, it has not been unreasonably concluded 
that Tantras originated in this Indian area, and foreign elements 
like the cult of Tara came from Buddhism of the adjoining regions 
mentioned above. From about the tenth century a composite 
Tantra, drawing materials from Brahmanic, Buddhistic and Nathist 
circles, grew up, and some deities, adepts, cults and practices be¬ 
came common to all of them, though the traditions did not always 
tally among the different communities and localities. ' Denomina¬ 
tionally and geographically considered, Veddchdra is patronised in 
Maharashtra, Vaishnavdchdra among the Ramanuja and Gauda 
schools, Dakshindchara among the &ankarites of the south, &aiva~ 
chdra and Vrrdchdra among the Lingayats and Vlrasaivas, and 
Vdmdchdra, Siddhantdchara and Kauldchdra among the &aktas of 
Kerala, Gauda, Nepala and Kamarupa. The first three disfavour 
both Vlrdchdra and Bauddhachdra, while the others extol them. 

Let us turn now to certain other specific beliefs and speculations 
of the Tantras, and try to trace their antecedents. The &aiva Aga- 
mas, the Vaishnava Samhitas and the &akta Tantras agree on one 
point, namely, that a female principle representing the sakti or 
energy must be associated with the ultimate reality or the source 
or locus of power considered as male. This power is not only the 

328 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


cause of manifestation, but is also responsible for differentiation, 
and hence a diversified world in time and space, including finite in¬ 
dividuals, comes into being because of the association of the male 
and the female, as in the generation of the world of living things. 
An elaborate philosophy developed in all the Schools—Saiva, Sakta, 
and Vaishnava, professing to explain the different types and stages 
cf evolution, the first two approximating each other in their main 
outlines and the last perhaps slightly antedating them both. This 
origin of the cosmos is to be distinguished, however, from the birth 
of children to the divine pair as in Puranic accounts of the birth 
of Ganesa and Karttikeya, for instance, when Siva and Sakti are 
considered anthropomorphically. The universe, so originated, has 
a systaltic process, inasmuch as the created world returns to its 
source in course of time, when Sakti comes to repose in the Lord, 
either temporarily in pralaya at the end of a cosmic cycle (the philo¬ 
sophers of Karma and the Pauranikas mostly favouring this partial 
dissolution), or finally by the efforts of finite souls who, by religious 
practice, yogic concentration, contemplation and meditation realise 
their oneness with God and annul their finitude. The general ten¬ 
dency of the Tantras is to accept the world in both its physical and 
mental aspects as real, only that matter or prakriti , as such, was not 
accorded independent existence as in the Sarhkhya system, but was 
supposed to be under the control of the spirit and, in fact, the body 
was regarded as the seat of the divine in every part thereof. 

The mystery of speech is an ancient tradition in India and from 
the Vedic times onwards Vach (Speech) has been a prominent god¬ 
dess and a revealer of wisdom. Transcendental and phenomenal 
forms of speech (para, pasyantz, madhyamd f and vaikhan) and the 
association of word (sabda) with meaning ( artha ) were speculated 
upon; and as ages rolled on, the power of the spoken word, whether 
as boons or as curses, as prayers or as incantations, grew in popular 
esteem. In the Tantras and Agamas a systematic attempt was made 
to relate sound (nada) to reality and its different vocal symbols or 
seed-words (hija-mantra ). It was believed, in fact, that just as 
intense imagination might cause a kind of visual hallucination and 
bring about the perceptual presentation of concrete figure through 
thinking alone, so also intense meditation on certain mystic 
words, which were supposed to stand for certain deities, would 
produce photic phenomena and bring before the sadhaka’s eye an 
image of the divinity concerned. Starting with a single letter, the 
mantra might consist of a string of such letters (mala, garland). Not 
only each deity but each aspect of the deity has its own special btja- 
mantra . The time and place of initiation, the initial letter of the 


324 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


initiate’s name, and even the rosary for uttering the mantra have 
to be suited to the chosen deity. 

Once it was accepted that varnas (letters) are the stuff of reality, 
a rapprochement between the worshipper and the worshipped deity 
became almost inevitable. Thus the body of a deity was supposed 
to be composed of the letters of the alphabet ( lipi ), the number being 
generally fixed at fifty. A true worshipper would find a correspon¬ 
dence between the different parts of his own body and the letters 
of the alphabet that make up the divine body. By the process called 
nydsa (placing) a worshipper would place these letters in different 
parts of his own body and consider himself to be possessed of a body 
of mantras. But until the necessary purification is effected one cannot 
divinise himself. So the purification of the elements that make up 
the human body ( bhutasuddhi ) has to be done first. The other puri¬ 
fications refer to the seat ( sthcma ), the words or formulae (mantra), 
the materials ( dravya ), and the image of the deity ( deva ). Sur¬ 
rounding himself with a circle of water, as if by a wall of fire, the 
worshipper is to go through the process of identification with the 
deity by meditating on the Vedantic formula of Jiva-Brahman iden¬ 
tity and by sending, by the way of the central of the three nadis 
(nerves)— idd, snshumnd and ping ala, his finite self along with the 
knlakundalini sakti through the six psychic centres ( shafchakra) 
up, till she unites with the infinite Self (Siva or Paramatman) in the 
thousand-petailed lotus (sahasrara) in the cranium and the entire 
paraphernalia of finite existence is dissolved. By prdndydma (re¬ 
gulation of breath) the evil that is in one’s own self ( pdpapurusha) 
is to be thrust out and burnt, and then alone will the body be fit to 
receive the ‘mother’ letters ( mdtrikamantra) in the various external 
( bdhya ) parts of the body and in the differently numbered petals 
of the various lotus-centres or chakras inside ( antar ) the bodily sys¬ 
tem, and thus be entirely pervaded by the deity. No wonder that 
before the recognition of the fifty-one Sakti-pithas distributed all 
over India, pilgrimages to sacred places should have been considered 
unnecessary by Saktas, who located these symbolically within their 
own body. 

But while mantras are located in the body by nyasa they are 
also placed outside in a yantra (diagram) which represents, as it 
were, the body of the deity. The Vedic gods were invoked without 
any image and on the sacred grass ( barhis, kusa) in a sacrificial field, 
and the sculptured deities that followed were seated on lotuses, 
perhaps through a wrong interpretation of the word padmdsana, a 
bodily posture. A yantra has, like the sacrificial field, gates or doors 
(dvara ) and a painted or inscribed seat; and all together or in the 


325 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


various petals of the lotus, inscribed or drawn, or in the different 
parts of other types of diagrams are inserted the letters of the 
bijamantra of the deity worshipped. Coloured rice-powder is some¬ 
times used to fill in the geometrical figures created by the drawing, 
just as five differently coloured substances are used to cover the 
ground of a mandala (e.g. Sarvatobhadramandala). In Jainism small 
images used to be put in the spaces in a yantra during worship; from 
this the transition to the incision of figures there is an easy process; 
and when the letters form the body of the deity, as in Tantrik belief, 
the placing of letters inserted is not difficult to explain. In Buddhism 
we can effectively and easily trace the process of transition from the 
Sutra to the Hridaya-sutra, thence to Dhdranl, from this to mantra, 
and lastly therefrom to Bija. As drawings and paintings are ephe¬ 
meral, it was directed that if possible a more permanent yantra 
should be made. For this purpose some metal like gold, silver and 
copper, or an alloy of the three metals (trilauha) , or some precious 
stone like crystal, emerald, ruby, coral, etc., should be inscribed with 
the yantra and care should be taken that the yantra does not get 
mutilated, faded out by use, cracked, burnt or broken, in which case 
it was directed to be thrown into a sacred stream or place of pilgrim¬ 
age or the ocean. Every deity has his or her own yantra, but the 
most famous of these yantras is the Sr ly antra on which lavish praise 
has been bestowed. In its various parts it is supposed to represent 
the origin, maintenance and dissolution of the world of things, the 
dot in the middle representing the unitary world-ground. The 
hija-mantra of the &akti goddess is mentally placed in the various pro¬ 
jections of its constituent triangles and lotuses and in its circles and 
squares. Elsewhere we are told (e.g. in the Rudraydmala) that the 
six chakras represent the Bauddha, Brahmya, Vaishnava, &aiva, 
Saura and &akta diagrams, the last being central; in later literature 
they have been compared to the six systems of Indian philosophy. 
Elaborate rules about the choice of place and the creation of a proper 
atmosphere of worship have been laid down, and it has been reite¬ 
rated pretty frequently that external worship (puja, stava, etc.) 
is less efficacious than japa (muttering) and homa (oblation or dedi¬ 
cation), and these less than dhydna (meditation). Here is a fine 
description of Tantrik piijd from Avalon’s Principles of Tcontra: 
“Meditation. Worship, Japa, and Homa are the four hands of the 
Yajna or worship; Matrika, Shodha and other Nyasas form its body; 
knowledge of the real truth as to Xshtadevata is its Atma; devotion 
is its head; reverence is its heart; and the act of performing is its 
eye. Knowing the body of Yajna to be composed in this manner, 
a good Sadhaka should perform it in all its limbs, and not divide 
and make it limbless.... It is by His union with the supreme £akti 


820 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


which arises out of the effort to accomplish all those limbs that 
the x ajhapurusha produces Siddhi”. And here is the culminating 
ph&oe of external worship with flowers: 4 The knowing ones regard 
the following as the ten flowers to be used in worship:—non-ignor¬ 
ance ( amayd ), non-egoitv or non-appropriation (anahamkara) , non¬ 
attachment ( ardga ), non-vanity ( amada) y non-delusion ( amoha ), non¬ 
pride ( adambha ,), non-calumniation (aninda), non-perturbation 
( akshobka ), non-jealousv ( amdtsCLrya) and non-greed ( alobha ). 
But better than these are the five virtues which make up the other 
group of flowers:—non-injury or non-violence ( ahimsd ), self-control 
or subjugation of the senses (indr iya-nigr aha) , charity or kindness 
( dayd ), forgiveness (kshamd ) and knowledge ( jhdna ).” This surely 
is religious teaching at its highest. Again and again in India when 
the letter was threatening to kill the religious life, the spirit came 
to the rescue. In their attempt to provide a comprehensive scheme 
of social life, individual perfection, and religious devotion, the Tan- 
tras failed occasionally to keep the baser elements in proper check 
among a motley population of different grades of culture. But the 
innate moral sense operated here as elsewhere to redeem men from 
the thraldom of desire and selfishness. Perhaps we shall never re¬ 
capture the atmosphere in which the Pur-anas and the Tantras were 
written, but we cannot afford to undervalue the devotion and thought 
that went into their composition, or their ennobling influence in the 
long run on the very composite population of an entire subcontinent. 
They certainly brought the gods nearer the hearts and homes of men 
and inspired their devotion, prompted their collective action for 
charity, and gave a fillip to the building of religious edifices all over 
the country. 

CF) MINOR RELIGIOUS SECTS 
I. POPULAR BRAHMANICAL RELIGION 
1. Religious Syncretism 

By the time the period opens the main elements that constitute 
the religious life of India have already made their entrance into 
popular faith. It is now a question of making alliances and settling 
precedence among the major gods and of composing suitable reli¬ 
gious literature to establish the superiority, if not theLsupremacy, 
of the chosen deity. The days of the early Puranas are over now, 
but there was still scope not only for new compositions but also for 
working up the older literature and adding and altering contents. 
The religious unity of India was almost achieved; and though local 
tradition and patriotism were sometimes responsible for making 
extravagant 'diaims on behalf of local deities and sacred spots and 
rivers, the different religious communities acknowledged almost 


327 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

the same set of major gods and made an earnest effort to make a 
rapprochement with other communities even when pushing the 
claims of their own cults in distant areas and making converts. Bud¬ 
dhism was dying in the south but was still a living creed in the nor¬ 
thern part, where it became the inspirer of religious art in Bengal 
and Bihar under the Palas; Jainism had still a strong following in 
the south and was having a running fight primarily with £>aivism. 
Brahmanism had to reckon with both, specially as the former was 
developing a well organised pantheon and the latter-was trying to 
win and retain popular support by absorbing theistic elements from 
the contiguous Brahmanic culture. 

Archaeological evidence is not wanting to show that the (hosti¬ 
lity of the creeds was not often quite mild arid that the appropriation 
of the sanctuary of one religion by another and effacing the religious 
symbols of the former by the latter were sometimes practised. As 
popular instruction in religious cult extended from the scriptures. 
to the temples, it became increasingly necessary for each major reli¬ 
gion ter possess gorgeous temples of its own to attract pilgrims and 
evoke religious sentiment in the faithful; and fortunately devout 
patrons were not wanting to endow places of religious worship and 
build costly and spectacular houses of gods or saints. The scribes 
continued their work no doubt, but the sculptor was gradually 
becoming a more efficient instrument of popular edification and 
education in religious matters. East, west,-north, south-^-every- 
where gods and saints were decently, if not gorgeously, housed and 
the carvers’ art purveyed to the hungry souls'not only delectation 
of the spirit but also feasting of the eye. The high aesthetic and 
spiritual banquet served must have whetted religious appetite and 
excited the spirit of imitation and emulation. From the seventh 
century onward temples grew in honour of different deities in 
different parts of India and the rock-cut and structural temples, 
which are at present the wonders of the world and of which Elura 
(Ellora) and Khajumho are respectively the most prominent 
examples, came into existence and often in close proximity to one 
another as a trial of artistic strength among rival faiths. And no 
Wonder, because during this period flourished the mighty Pratlharas, 
Palas, Chandellas, Eastern Ghalukyas, Rashtrakutas, Chalukyas of 
Kalyani, Pallavas and Cholas who professed diverse creeds and were 
zealous champions and liberal patrons of their respective creeds. 

But rivalry is only one of the features of the religious life of 
the times. ' Side by side there developed a syncretistic attitude in 
religion—a' spirit of tolerance and mutual give-and-take. A modi¬ 
fied monolatry, which maintained the'supremacy of the particular 
supreme'deity of the community while at the same time admitting 


328 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


the existence and right to worship of other gods, made its appearance. 
£>ankaracharya has been credited with the initiation of the panchd - 
yo-tana pujd —the worship of the five gods Vishnu, Ssiva, Sakti or Devi, 
Surya and Ganesa, the principal deity of the worshipper being plac¬ 
ed in the middle and the other four in the four corners of a square. 

But whether it is Sankara or Kumarila or somebody else that in¬ 
troduced it, the fact remains that the idea caught the imagination of 
the public as the best solution of the rather perplexing problem of 
harmonising monotheism with polytheism and allaying communal 
bitterness and religious quarrel. Was the Paliava cave-temple at Tri- 
chinopoly, with Vishnu and Siva images inside in two sanctuaries 
and Brahma, Surya, Ganesa and possibly Subrahmanya sculptured 
outside at the entrance, an anticipation of this new cult? The 
Smartas not only -followed the practice of worshipping the five gods 
(and sometimes many more) but also compiled Puranic handbooks, 
in the different parts of which the major gods got their due lauda¬ 
tions, and even an Upnishad—-the Atharvasiras —-turned up to 
give the new method of worship a holy and hoary antiquity. It 
appears that there was some hesitation in counting the five major 
deities, for while the first four were almost constant features, Brah¬ 
ma sometimes displaced Ganesa, thereby indicating that the revealer 
of the Vedic sruti was hard to dislodge from popular veneration and 
Ganesa was still looked upon as a plebeian god. Even in the tenth- 
century Chola temple of Koranganatha near Trichinopoly not only 
Brahma but also his spouse Sarasvatl appears, the latter forming 
with Lakshml and Dakshina Kali a trinity of divine saktis as in many 
other parts of India. That Ganesa continued to figure in the door- 
lintels of the temples of other gods, specially &iva, must be regarded 
as a sign of his inferiority to the rest. How Karttikeya, who ap¬ 
peared probably earlier and more frequently in sculpture with &iva 
in the Paliava Somaskanda figures and held his own against Ganesa « 
in the period of the Badami and Aihole caves, failed to maintain his 
position and how in the Paliava architecture Ganesa began to sup¬ 
plant Karttikeya from the Rajasirhha period onward in the divine 
family group cannot be satisfactorily explained. It must be admit¬ 
ted, however, that in the Mahishamardini mandapa at Mamallapuram 
it is Karttikeya or Mahasena, and not Ganesa, that is seated on Par- 
yatfs knee, and in the far-off Paharpur temple in North Bengal, in 
the scene of diva's drinking of poison, it is Karttikeya who clings to 
the terror-stricken Burga. It stands to reason that as diva’s position 
in popular reverence increased, Karttikeya and Ganesa (and also 
Nandi, Rishabha or Vasava, the bull) also should receive popular 
homage, and that they should be even provided with separate build- 


829 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


ings at a later time instead of remaining as mere ornamentations of 
the temple or the aureole (prabhdvaU) of Siva, and thus become cult 
objects themselves. 

One of the most noticeable features of the religious develop¬ 
ment of the period is the place found for other divinities (including 
those supposed to be antagonistic) in the temple of a sectarian deity. 
If figures of Karttikeya or Ganesa or Mahakall or Parvatl are found 
in Siva temples, as in the Mahaiihgesvara and other temples near 
Konur and in the Badami, Aihole and Ellora caves, ready explana¬ 
tion can be found for it in the fact that they are related to Siva as 
son or wife. For the same reason the Gajalakshml image would be 
quite appropriate in the Varaha temple at Mamallapuram (being, 
according to Burgess, the first to appear in a Hindu garb though the 
Buddhists had used it from the time of the stupa of Bharhut). 
Similarly, Kalabhairava and Saptamatrikas (Seven Mothers) may 
make their appearance in Siva temples as associated with the deity 
himself or Durga. Likewise Ganesa and Karttikeya images are 
quite relevant as adjuncts of Devi images, as, for example, of the 
image from Mandoil or that from Nowgong in the District of Raj- 
shahi. But when Vishnu and other gods appear in chaitya windows, 
niches and elsewhere in a Siva temple (as, for example, in the earlier 
Bhumara temple in the old Nagod State, or in the Kadaroli Temple 
in Belgaum District, or Dhumar Lena Cave at Ellora) or vice versa 
(as, for instance, in the Badami Caves dedicated to Vishnu), or when 
in a Vishnu or Dasavatara temple appear the figures of many other 
gods and goddesses, such as Surya, Brahma, Siva, Soma, Ganesa, 
Ganga, Yamuna, etc. as in some mediaeval temples of Kathiawad 
(e.g., at Kadvar) and Central India ( e.g at Janjgir in Bilaspur Dis¬ 
trict) and even in the earlier cave-temples of Badami, Aihole, Ellora, 
Undavilli, etc., the motive could either be to belittle their impor¬ 
tance by relegating them to inferior positions or reducing them to 
mere decorations or, what is more probable, to admit, like the tole¬ 
rant mediaeval Puranas, that they too were worshipful, the location 
(whether, for instance, as a part of the deity as in Ardhanarisvara, 
Trimurti, Hari-Hara and such composite figures, or by the side of 
or sprouting out of the main deity, or inside the temple, or outside 
it in medallions in windows, or as figures in niches, or as bas-reliefs 
on door lintels or in architraves or in dados or in jambs of doors 
or windows or in ceilings) and the size and the state of fullness of 
the figure indicating the imoortance of the foreign deity. This 
would exolain, for instance, the figures of Ganapati, Brahma. Siva, 
Vishnu and Karttikeya carved in a row on the top of the nointed 
stele of the two-handed Durga image hailing from Dakshina- 
Muhammadnur (Tioperah) and in the slab of the four-handed Ugra- 


330 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

Tara figure of Sikarpur (Bakarganj), the figures of Brahma, Siva 
and Vishnu on the top of the Mahesvarapasa (Khulna) Devi figure 
and the different divine figures in the early Durga temple of Aihole. 
The figures of Brahma, Siva and Vishnu on door lintels at Khaju- 
raho, in the stele of a standing image of Vishnu of the Pala period 
in the Stuart-Bridge Collection in the British Museum, and in the 
panel above the door-frame in the Sandera and Ruhavi temples of 
Gujarat indicate the continuation of the conventional Trimurti even 
after Brahma had ceased to be a major deity. In fact, even in 
Surya temples of a later time, as at Modhera and Delmal, Brahma 
continued to be figured. This is because in Gujarat the cult of 
Brahma continued to be a living creed at the beginning of this period, 
judging by the Trimurti-temple at Kasara dedicated to Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva, and the slightly later Brahma temple at Khed- 
Brahma in the old Idar State. Even now the very few Brahma 
temples of North India, still used for worship, cluster in this west¬ 
ern area, being located mostly either in Gujarat or in Rajputana, 
the other few temples being found distributed in South India. 

More strange decorations are found, for instance, in the Bud¬ 
dhist temple of Pa harp ur (Somapura Vihara) which was destroyed 
in the eleventh century. Here many Brahmanical deities — Siva 
Balarama, Krishna, Ganesa, Karttikeya, Durga, Yama, Agni, Vishnu, 
Brahma, etc.—get artistic representation either in stone or in terra¬ 
cotta plaques on the outside. In Jain temples too many Hindu gods 
are to be found, but here they have been mostly adopted or adapted 
from Brahmanism by the Jains themselves, which need not have 
been the case with the Buddhists who had a well developed pan¬ 
theon of their own and were not in need of Hindu deities as decora¬ 
tive motifs. We must suppose, therefore, that at this period tole¬ 
ration of other creeds went to the length of presenting the national 
religious beliefs in various works of art so that devotees visiting 
any temple might be au courant with the multiple devotion of the 
community at large and regaled with graphic representation of an¬ 
cient religious history. It is almost like a religious art exhibition 
without reference to the particular deity enshrined. This will ex¬ 
plain display of Vaishnava and Saiva images at Badami, of 
Hindu, Buddhist and Jain sculptures side by side at Ellora, the 
co-existence of Vaishnava, Saiva, Saura, Bauddha and Jain temples 
at Khajuraho, and an almost similar group of small temples at Saran- 
garh in Bankura Distrct, constructed in the later part of this period. 
At Khera in the old Gwalior State the principal Hindu deities are 
similarly grouped together — Mahishamardinl, Ganesa, Surya, Siva 
and other gods. In the temples relevant figures were naturally the 
first to be utilised—in the Dasavatara temple at Ellora, for example, 


331 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Vamana, Trivikrama, Varaha and Narasimha fill niches in the Vaish- 
iiava temple. Sometimes these forms started minor religious cults 
—the cult of Dattatreya (the Trinity in fusion) is one such; at other 
times a particular form of the god was accepted as the patron deity 
of this or that royal family. 

But composite and fused deities also made their appearance. 
Even in the Badami and Aihole caves such fused figures are to be 
found, c.g. f Ardhanarlsvara and Hari-Hara, and the practice was con¬ 
tinued in Elephanta, Mamallapuram and Ellora. In fact, new com¬ 
binations were made in later centuries, for example, Surya-Naraya- 
na of Madaun, Sdrya-Brahma of Mahendra (Dinajpur District), Mar- 
tanda»Bhairava of Manda (District Rajshahi), Trimurti Surya in a 
Delmal (N. Gujarat) temple, at Chidambaram and elsewhere, Tri- 
niurti (Mahesa) of Elephanta and Ellora Caves, the Ekapada-Tri- 
murti of later times in which Vishnu and Brahma sprout forth from 
a central Siva figure, and Brahma-Vishnu-Siva-Surya of the Dula-Deo 
temple at Khajuraho. Outside India, at Thaton in Burma, we have 
the figure of Narayana from whose navel issues a lotus stalk which 
branches out into three lotuses on which are seated Brahma, Vishnu 
and Hiva, just as in the Tantras they were supposed to have come 
out of ^akti and in Mahayanism they were considered to be emana¬ 
tions of Vairoehana. At the same time old associations were being 
broken. Vasudeva and Sankarshaaia appear now as Krishna and 
Baiarama; but the former gradually outdistances the latter until 
Baiarama becomes either an emanation or an avatdra or one 
of the twenty-four forms of Vishnu distinguished in iconography. 
Dasarathi Rama and Parasurama attained some importance even 
in the Mahdbharata, and the former is mentioned, along with Bali, 
son of Viroehana, as a subject of cult image by Varahamihira. But 
though the temporary interest in the Vyuha doctrine had exalted 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha (and rarely Samba in the place of Ani- 
ruddha) also, it does not appear that they ever became deified— 
they represented philosophic concepts rather than religious objects 
except that they began to be regarded as two out of the twenty - 
four forms of Vishnu. What is more interesting is the attempt 
made in the Kurraa Purana to reduce Siva and Brahma to mani¬ 
festations of Vishnu when in some of the other Purana s like Mar - 
kandeya, Brahma, Agni and even in the Kurma Purana itself and in 
the Padma Tantra the indefinite number of Vishnu’s avatdras was be¬ 
ing reduced to ten and distributed among the different vyuhas of 
Vishnu. But while popular sentiment in favour of incarnations was 
reflected in the increasing sculpturing of Varaha, Viamana (Upendra) 
or Trivikrama and Narasimha, Rama and Parasurama practically 

882 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


find no lithie representation in temples except in the Dasavatara 
group, the latter’s devotion to Siva and defeat by the former going 
heavily against his deification to the fullest extent. A standing figure 
in the Kadvar temple, which was probably a Dasavatara temple car¬ 
rying on Gupta tradition, has been identified by Cousens as Para- 
surama and by Sankalia as Rama, but the date of the image is un¬ 
certain. At Mamallapuram in the temple of Varaha Svami the figure 
of Rama, worshipped by Maruti (Hanuman), is said to occur, but 
obviously with minor importance. What interests us more is the 
inscribed image of Hanuman at Khajuraho belonging to the end of 
the ninth century, as that indicates not only the prevalence of the 
cult of Rama but also the coming importance of the monkey-god in 
popular devotion. 

2. Solar Cult 

Meanwhile the solar cult, of which Multan was a strong centre 
in the seventh century, was slowly diffusing itself all over the coun¬ 
try. The Sun figure appears in the early Christian centuries in 
Gandbara and Mathura regions, obviously modelled on Helios- 
Mithra. It is found in early Buddhist monuments at Bhaja, Bodh- 
Gaya, Khan^agiri, and Lala Bhagat near Kanpur and in &aivite and 
Vishnuite monuments like Mamallapuram, Trichinopoly, etc. Again, 
already in the Lankesvara cave at Ellora, Surya is sculptured among 
the major gods, though not clad in the northern fashion, and he 
appears again in cave No. 25 (Suresvara temple). The gift of the 
Rashtrakufa king Govindaraja to the temple of the Sun (Jayaditya) 
at Kavi shows that princely support was not altogether lacking in 
later times and even the Valahhi rulers could be occasionally found 
to patronise this faith. Though the theory has been recently ques¬ 
tioned, Kashmir may have had some hand in popularising the wor¬ 
ship of the Sun in the western part of India, the early Rathiawad 
temple-specimen in the Kashmirian style being the Sun-temple at 
Gop. In Kashmir itself was built towards the middle of the eighth cen¬ 
tury the magnificent Martanda temple. The multiplicity of the Sun 
temples in the southern part of Kathiawad, where tribes emigrating 
from Kashmir and worshipping the Sun probably lived, indicates 
that in this part of India the cult of the Sun was quite vigorous. The 
temples at VisaVada, Kinderkheda, Modhera, Somanatha-Pattana, 
Than, Sutrapada and other places are fairly well packed in time to 
justify the conclusion that devotees to this deity continued their 
allegiance and ceremonial worship in fair numbers during a fairly 
long period of time in this part of India. A Sun-temple at Dholpur, 
perhaps of the ninth century, a tenth century temple at Osia, a pro- 


833 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


bably earlier Sun figure at Hansi Fort (District Hissar), temples in 
the old Jodhpur, Sirohi, Bharatpur and other States, and temples 
found or referred to as existing in the western part of the present 
Uttar Pradesh indicate that the cult of the Sun was well patronised 
in north-western and western India during mediaeval times. Possi¬ 
bly the Durga temple at Aihoie and the Papanatha temple at Patfa- 
dakal were associated with Sun worship at a slightly earlier date, 
and towards the close of this period the Sun temple in the Kliaju- 
raho group reared its head. Judging by the increasingly accurate 
reference in Indian religious literature of the time on this sub- 
ject to the Persian belief, it may be presumed that the Magas, 
Bhojakas or Sakadvlpl Brahmanas spread out over Northern India 
within a short time and popularised the solar cult. It should be 
added, however, that the southern tradition, as embodied in the 
Surya figure in a shrine near Lad Khan’s temple at Aihoie and 
Parasuramesvara temple at Gudimallam, was also not slow in diffus¬ 
ing itself, for in Bengal images of both northern and southern types 
have been found and, in fact, even earlier tradition is not unrepre¬ 
sented as, for instance, in the Kumarpur and Niyamatpur reliefs. 
Further, in Bengal we find an evolution of new r er and more 
complex forms; witness, for instance, the seated character of the 
deity in the octo-alloy miniature from Chauddagram (District Tip- 
perah) and the twelfth century Bairhatta image in addition to the 
usual standing figure, the gradually increasing number of attendants 
(including Mahasveta or PrithivI), the number of hands increasing 
from two (as in the eighth and early ninth century figures from 
Bihar, now in the Indian Museum, and the ninth century figures in 
the Rajshahi, and South Kensington Museums) to four, and from 
four to six, and even coalescence wth other deities, e.g. the Mar- 
tanda-Bhairava three-headed (the fourth head being invisible in 
relief) figure with ten arms belonging to a later date. All this 
tends to prove that the solar cult was not moribund even in Bengal 
and Bihar. Orissa and adjoining regions took up the solar cult in 
right earnest during the succeeding centuries, and the many tem¬ 
ple ruins in Orissa (e.g. Khiching and Konarak) and the settlement 
of many Sakadvlpl Brahmanas (called Angirasas in Orissa and 
Acharyas in Bengal), who looked after the solar temples as priests 
and actively pursued the profession of astrologers and averters of 
astral influences ( grdh.asa.nti, which is referred to in the 
Matsya Purana), bear testimony to the vigour of the solar worship 
in Eastern India. In Gujarat a Trimurti with Surya as the prin¬ 
cipal god is not unknown, and it appears that the ScLradatilalca Tan - 
tra provides even for a four-faced and eight-handed form. In the 
extreme south early temples to the Sun are rare, but in inscrip- 

331 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


tions of the eighth and ninth centuries solar temples (Adityagrihas) 
in the northern part of the old Madras Presidency are referred to* 
At a later date even an attempt to establish a trinity of Surya, 
Siva and Vishnu, with prominence given to the first, was made in 
Traipurushadeva temples. This is in accordance with the Matsya 
Purmia prescription that vows are to be made to Siva, Surya and 
Vishnu. 

We may well believe that some difference of opinion existed 
at first about the composition of the group of major deities and 
that local tradition may have had some hand in fixing the number 
and personality. In the Pallava temple at Tiruttani near Arko- 
nam in Madras State the deities which find a niche on the walls 
or the porch are Vishnu, Siva, Brahma, Durga and Ganesa, which 
shows that in that area Brahma was still holding his own against 
Surya who does not appear to have been a favourite god in South 
India. In the Gondesvara temple at Sinnar near Nasik, on the 
other hand, Surya is included in the group and at Nalanda, Surya 
is seen with Mahishamardini figure. Surya is found combined 
with the other three major deities in different places-—with Vishnu 
in Surya-Narayana figures (Vishnu being himself an Aditya), with 
Siva in Martanda-Bhairava figures, and with Brahma in the image 
of a slightly later date from Mahendra (District Dinajpur). The 
Matsya Parana dictum that Brahma, Vishnu, Siva and Surya are 
identical or non-different (abheda) ? the Kurma Purdna statement 
that it originally consisted of four Samhitas—Brahmi, Bhagavati, 
Sauri and Vaishnavi,—and the division of the Skanda Purdna into 
six Samhitas, namely, Sanatkumara, Suta, Vaishnavi, Brahmi, Sah- 
kari and Sauri, seem to indicate that these four gods were asso¬ 
ciated together in some places and times. But this group was 
liable to alteration, as when the Ndradlya Purdna ascribes to the 
second part of the Vdmana Purdna four Samhitas, namely, Mahes- 
vari, Bhagavati, Sauri and Ganesvarl, thus belittling the importance 
of Brahma and extolling that of Ganesa. The Garuda Purdna re¬ 
serves the highest position for Vishnu but prescribes modes of 
worship of Siva, Durga, Ganesa and Surya also in the full Smarta 
manner, while the Bkavishya Purdna gives different groupings in 
different parts and, though conceding the importance of Surya in 
some parts, reserves pre-eminence for the old triad — Brahma, 
Vishnu and Siva. That the solar cult was popular in Eastern India 
may be inferred from the fact that in an inscribed sculpture of the 
reign of Dharmapala the images of Surya, Siva and Vishnu are 
found together, the first replacing Brahma. Surya replaces Vishnu 
in the enormous door-lintel of the ruined tenth century Siva tem¬ 
ple at Tezpur in Assam with Brahma and Siva on the two sides. 

335 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


He appears also in thei much earlier pre-Ahom temple at Dah 
Parvatiya near by. The deliberate attempt to lower the status; pi 
Brahma in Saivite literature took the form of showing him as the 
officiating priest in the marriage of Siva and Parvati, as the cha¬ 
rioteer of Siva in Tripurantaka images, as punished for his moral 
lapse by Siva who tore off one of his heads, and as cursed by Siva 
for having falsely declared to have reached the top of the lihga when 
Vishnu had not reached its bottom in a contest for superiority with 
the latter. His origin out of the navel of Vishnu or out of the 
mundane egg thrown into water by the Primal Being was exploited 
by the Vaishnavas to show his inferiority. The Padma Purdna 
( Srishii-Khanda ) made a belated attempt to revive the cult of 
Brahma, but did not succeed in rehabilitating him in popular favour. 

That Surya retained some importance in worship can be made 
out from the fact that his images are widely distributed and latter¬ 
ly assumed a varied character according to the diverse fancies of 
local potentates and sculptors, or divergent traditions of the Puraipas 
and the Silpa-sastras. The old associates — w T ives and attendants 
— are mostly retained, and new- ones, such as the Adityas, the 
planets and zodiacal signs, and even the seven Rishis (who appear, 
by the way, as reliefs in a Trivikrama image recovered from Si wan 
and worshipped in the Kashipuri temple at Kaithal in Kuru- 
kshetra) and the seven Matrikas find their way into some of the 
images. The number of hands varies from two to ten in Bengal 
alone. If, as is sometimes supposed, .Donda (Dandl or Kun«Ji) 
stands for Skanda and Pihgala for Agni, then the superiority of 
Surya over these two is indirectly asserted by placing them as 
attendants by his side. Incidentally it may be observed that Saras- 
vati or Aruta-Devi, the goddess of learning as depicted in Jain¬ 
ism, carries symbols of both Surya and Brahma in her different 
forms (Vidyadevls) and, in fact, in a Sarasvatl figure from Pin da- 
wara in Sirohi not only is the lotus symbol present but the Sun is 
represented above the crown; and occasionally in Jain Nava-gra- 
ha slabs Sarasvati appears at one of the ends, which also shows 
her solar association. But the wide prevalence of Navagraha 
figures in Jain images, specially of the Tlrthankara Aantinatha .and 
occasionally of Neminatha, below, round or on the sides of the 
main image, and their presence below the figure of the Mahayana 
goddess Dasabhuj a-sita-Marich I (Marlchi being the Buddhist female 
counterpart of the Hindu male deity Surya and regarded as an 
emanation or the wife of Vairochana) indicate that they were be¬ 
coming fashionable as temple decorations, for they are not only 
found in a panel (separate images being extremely rare) on the door¬ 
frame on the entrance door-way and sometimes on the tor ana 


836 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


of a Surya temple in Rajputana and Gujarat and elsewhere, but 
also in Saiva sculptures (e.g. Vaiv-ahika or Kalyanasundara figure 
in the Vangiya Sahitya Parishat Museum, Calcutta) and in the 
Mother-am-child images. It has not been unreasonably surmised 
that when these figures are in bold relief, as in the Khari (24- 
Paraganas) Navagraha slab, the set was regarded as a cult-object 
and used in grahay&ga or svastyayana to avert evil. The discovery at 
Khiching of a Navagraha-chakra of a later date is therefore of 
some interest in this connection. Perhaps what happened in the 
case of their occasional associate, Ganesa, occurred in their case 
also. To avert their wrath or evil influence people started with 
placing them outside their shrines and then they began to worship 
them. In this way popular devotion was canalised from the major 
adoration of principal deities to the channels of minor piety. 

3. Sakti Cult and the &aiva Deities 

The most notable religious revival of the age centred round 
Siva who practically swept the other gods off their feet. Sectarian 
Purainas in laudation of this divinity did not make their appear¬ 
ance all at once, but came in regular succession. From Kashmir to 
Cape Comorin there was a stir in the religious world and some of 
the most famous cave temples of India owe their origin to con- 
temporary religious fervour directed towards Siva. Ellora, Sal- 
sette and Elephants bear- eloquent testimony to the excavator’s 
art, while the builder's skill is manifested in the Kailasanatha tem¬ 
ple at Kanchl at the opening of this period, and in the Great Temple 
of Tanjore at the end of this era. In Orissa also the Bhuvanesvara 
group of temples dedicated to Siva began to rear their heads in 
this period. As by now the affiliations of the Saivite group of 
divinities had been firmly established, the stocks of this group soar¬ 
ed high in popular estimation. Naturally, Siva’s consort and child¬ 
ren began to shine in a kind of reflected glory—-at any rate, their 
importance was materially enhanced. They began to be placed 
in independent charge of divine exploits and even some Upani- 
sbads were written to extol their power and beneficence. By the 
twelfth century the Saivite momentum spent itself and Vishnu, 
who never lost support at any time even during the preceding epoch, 
began to dominate sculptural representation. In the mediaeval tem¬ 
ples of Rajputana, however, the figure of Lakullsa on the door-way 
continued to be a favourite device. 

But there was a deeper reason for this emergence of family 
alliance of divinities. The period synchronised with the rise of 
a new philosophy and a new attitude towards divine consorts. At 

337 

VI.K.— 22 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


the root of the speculations of the period lay the philosophical 
theory that not God as such but God as associated with his power 
(sakti) is responsible for the creation, maintenance and destruction 
of the universe, and hence the mysterious association of the 
Supreme God with this Sakti must be admitted. Thus while in the 
Vedantic school of Sankara it is the eternal Maya sakti of Brahman 
that become responsible for the origin of the world of diversity, in 
the theistic schools of the Vaishnavas and the Saivas this sakti got 
greater personification and became the wife of the supreme 
deity. Whether this conjugal ideal was preached to counteract 
the ascetic tendency of Buddhism and Jainism must remain an 
open question, for we find that in Jainism too the sasana-devatas 
appear in pairs and Mahayana Buddhism also recognised very soon 
female deities side by side with the male Buddhas and their ema¬ 
nations. It is difficult to establish conclusively the beginnings of 
this Sakta tendency in Saivism, Vaishnavism and Buddhism, for 
sexual esoterism is a very old phenomenon in Indian religious his¬ 
tory. In India of the period we are discussing, popular religion 
influenced, and was in its turn reinforced by, speculation and 
mythology alike. The Vaishnava Samhitas, the Saiva Agamas and 
the Sakta Tantras were tumbled down upon the votaries of the 
different faiths in a multitudinous heap, and for the first time 
the right of the language of the people to be the medium of ex¬ 
pression for religious exaltation and religious devotion was reco¬ 
gnised in the south. The new religious sentiment, as affected by 
philosophical speculations, became mellowed in temper and began 
to be directed to a God of grace, united with a practically eternal 
partner, conceived as a female principle, whether philosophically 
as sakti or prakriti or religiously as Lakshmi, Sarasvati or Uma. 
The new motif appears in gradually increasing representation of 
Lakshmi-Naray ana, Brahma-Sarasvati and Siva-Parvatl in temple- 
niches, as for instance in the temple at Ruhavi (and later in the 
Navalakha temple at Gumli) in Gujarat and in many Haihaya 
monuments, as for example in the Viratesvara temple at Sohagpur 
in the old Rewa State where over the doorway an eight-handed 
male figure is flanked by Brahma and his wife, and Vishnu and his 
wife, and the figures of Parvatl and Ganesa also make their appear¬ 
ance in the architrave. In the struggle for recognition the first 
bout of victory went to the Siva-Sakti cult, strongly supported in 
the north by Kashmir Saivism and in the south by Tamil Agamism. 
That there was keen rivalry among the warring creeds can be easily 
made out from the volume of the Saiphita, Agama and Tantra lite¬ 
rature of the time. 


888 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


In the new devotion to the Saivite household both the terrible 
and the benign aspect of the deities received equal and wide atten¬ 
tion. The marriage of Siva with Uma and the peaceful house¬ 
holders’s life of Siva with Parvatl and infant Ganeia or Skanda 
find, as in Pallava sculpture, equal lithic representation with Durga 
killing the buffalo demon either as a decorative bas-relief or as a 
principal image in Mamailapuram in the seventh century and 
with Ganesa, Virabhadra and Chamunda appearing in the Sapta- 
matrika slabs. One of the earliest dated pleasant images is that 
of Sarvani in bronze or octo-alloy, discovered in Chauddagram 
near Tipperah and belonging to an earlier period, but other benign 
types of Devi images, mostly with an iguana as vehicle, are also 
known in Bengal. It appears also that earlier Puranic motifs of 
art were resuscitated with greater elaboration and freer reins to 
fancy. Judging from images, the earlier MahishamardinI figures 
seem to have had their inspiration from some other source than 
the Mdrkandeya Purdna as the Devi’s leonine mount is absent from 
some of the earliest images. Again, there is variation in the mode 
of the presentation of both the lion and the buffalo demon. Durga 
sometimes fights dismounted from the lion, sometimes she sits on 
her mount with both legs on one side, and sometimes she sits ast¬ 
ride the lion. The demon too is sometimes half-human and half- 
buffalo, sometimes he is human-bodied but buffalo-headed, and 
sometimes he is wholly human in appearance but with two buffalo 
horns sticking out of his forehead—a mode of representing 
theriomorphic powers of which Egyptian parallels would come 
readily to one’s mind. Similarly, the hands of Durga could be 
two, four, six, or eight, or even ten or twelve at a later time. In 
fact, the Devi with sixteen, eighteen, twenty and even thirty-two 
hands has been represented in Bengal. The ten arms may re¬ 
present the combined ten hands of the four-handed Brahma, the 
four-handed Vishnu and the two-handed Siva, seeing that Durga 
was considered to be Maha -Kali, Maha-Lakshml and Maha-Sarasvatl 
in one. As a matter of fact, Hemadri in his description of Katya- 
yam mentions that she should imitate the three deities, by which 
are obviously meant Brahma, Vishnu and Siva. He also describes 
a ten-handed Durga with a slightly different set of weapons and 
also a twenty-handed Chandl with many more weapons in her 
hands. As he wrote his Chaturvarga-clnintdmani in the thirteenth 
century, apparently he was recording later varieties of the Durga 
image. But the twenty-handed image from Sirala (District Raj- 
shahi), belQnging to the tenth century and now lost, has a good 
deal of resemblance with Chandl described by him. In fact, the 


389 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Puraaias and sculptural remains vary considerably on this point 
of the number of &akti’s hands, and their attributes. 

The MarkaV'deya Pumna, which grew by accretion during the 
early centuries of the Christian era and is the locus classicus for 
the exploits of the &akti goddess in the Chandl or Devi-nw,hdtmya 
or Sdptasati chapters, includes the Mahishamardini episode in addi¬ 
tion to some other accounts of ^akti’s achievements as also the 
promise of her periodic appearance whenever the demons would 
threaten the peace of gods. It is also responsible for popularising 
the cult of the Mothers, generally seven in number, who are the 
energies ( &akti ) of the different major gods that came to the assis¬ 
tance of the Divine Mother (Ambika, Durga, Chaindika, Katyayani), 
armed with the mount and vehicles and weapons of their respective 
lords. Whereas the MahishasuramardinI was herself formed by the 
coalescence of the Saktis of many more deities than seven and was 
endowed by them all, Chandika maintained an independent posi¬ 
tion in her light against Sumbha and Nisumbha and even withdrew 
the Seven Mothers within herself as her vihhuiis when taunted by 
Sumbha for fighting with extraneous aid. In the Saptamatrika 
slabs appear the saktis of the principal gods from left to right, 
with occasional variations here and there, in the following order-— 
Brahman! or Sarasvati, Mahesvari or RaudrI, Kaumari or Kartti- 
keyani, Vaishnav! or Lakshml, Varahi, Indranl or MahendrI, and 
Chamunda or Chamundl. NarasimhI replacing Chamunda (as in the 
Mdrkandeya Piirdna) or Yarn! replacing Varahi is not unknown. 
To the list is sometimes added Mahalakshmi or Yogesvarl to make 
the eighth. Hemadri mentions Chandika herself as the eighth 
Mother; he also gives other lists of Mothers in which abstraxt quali¬ 
ties and concrete personalities are mixed up together. Even an 
image with Vagisvar! replacing Vaishnav! has been discovered in 
Bengal. The Saptamatrika figures are hanked on the left by Siva 
( Virabhadra) or Skanda and on the right by Ganesa (and occasional¬ 
ly by Kaia or Bhrihgi), but Ganesa is here not a young boy of diminu¬ 
tive size, as in Siva-Parvati images, but is of the same size as the 
Mothers as befitting a leader who, alternately with &iva, some¬ 
times forms, in fact, the vanguard of the group of divine Saktis. 
He appears as such in the Chedi country also, as in the Vaidya- 
natha Mahadeva temple where not only the Saptamatrikas but also 
the Navagrahas figure, as they do in some other temples, of this 
area like the temple at Marai in the old Maihar State. 

The Puranas and the Brihat-saihhitd had recognised the exist¬ 
ence and worshipfulness of the Mothers; the Kadamba and Chalukya 
kings had worshipped them; and bas-reliefs in caves and temples 


840 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


had presaged their coming splendour. But the growing importance 
of the Sakti cult brought them into greater prominence and distri¬ 
buted their cult far and wide—-from the Kangra valley to Cape 
Comorin and from the Jhelum to Sadiya. In Eastern India specially 
they got independent representation. The colossi of the Eight Mothers 
from Muktimandapa near Jaipur (Yirajakshetra} and the Eight 
Mothers with Sivaduti on the bank of the Vaitarani indicate their 
popularity in this part of East India. In Bengal also some of the 
Mothers have been separately sculptured and Chamunda of various 
forms, such as Rupavidya, Siddha-yogesvarl and Dantura, has found 
independent lithic representation. Even a Sakti of Ganesa (Gane- 
sani) was subsequently conceived when Ganesa became a major 
deity. 

Reinforcement to the Sakti cult came from a contemporaneous 
Buddhistic revival in which Tara, the Sakti of Avalokitesvara, play¬ 
ed a prominent part. This goddess, of whom the nearest Brahmani- 
cal equivalent is Tarim and the Jain parallel is the sasanadevata 
Sutaraka or Sutara, was absorbed at first as a yogini and then as a 
deity along with Ekajata, Kurukulla and other Mahayana female 
divinities in the north, and found early representation in the different 
cave temples and also stone and metal embodiment under the Palas . 
fe.g., the bronze eighteen-armed Tara found in Nalanda). The adven¬ 
turous mariners who carried Indian civilisation by sea to the Far 
East during the Pala period invoked her as the patron of navigators 
through a pardonable identification of the meanings of Tara, which 
signifies both a star and a goddess. In the later Tantras, which are 
products of the fusion of Buddhistic and Brahmanical beliefs, many 
of the Buddhistic female deities were identified with Brahmanical 
Sakti goddesses, and even the Jain pantheon, by matching each male 
attendant of a Tirthankara with a female, recognised the strength 
of the popular feeling in favour of pairing male principles with their 
female counterparts. In Jainism not only were Vasudeva and Bala- 
deva (with the snake-canopy) and Ganesa and possibly also Kartth 
keya taken over from Brahmanism but also Sarasvat! and Lakshmi, 
and its own cult of Padmavatl became quite vigorous at a slightly 
later date. 

That the Mothers hovered between lower (yogini) and higher 
(dein) divinities is proved by the fact that, barring the 6akti of &iva, 
none became a definite cult object, though isolated images of Lakshmi 
(sometimes Ashta-Lakshml, including Gajalakshml, corresponding to 
the eight Saktis of Vishnu, as in the Padma Purana), Sarasvati, 
Ganga, Yamuna and other female deities are found here and there 
all over India (e.g., in the Haihaya monuments). And this is natural 


341 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


because the fame of most of them rested on the assistance they ren¬ 
dered to Durga, Chandika or Ambika in her struggles against the 
demons that threatened heavenly peace. It is very likely also that 
the £iva-£akti cult was a federation of two originally independent 
faiths and Durga had already been so separately extolled that it was 
not possible to bring her into a completely subservient relation to 
Siva. This will explain why in the Mah&bhdrata she appears at one 
place as the wife of Narayana and at another as the wife of Siva, and 
in the Durgd-saptasatx of the Mdrkandeya Puvana she is more a Vaish- 
navi Sakti than a Saivite one, though her names betoken her Saivite 
association. Sarasvati and Lakshmi, though widely worshipped as 
the respective patrons of learning and riches, practically remained 
wives of Brahma and Vishnu in Brahmanism. It is really in the 
heterodox systems of Jainism and Mahayana Buddhism that Sarasvati 
attained greater independence and evolved many forms and was 
surrounded by personified abstractions. In Jainism Lakshmi too 
enjoyed a similar independent status. That Sarasvati should appear 
both as a sasanadevata and as an independent deity may provide a 
clue to the exact position of these minor goddesses. Like the 
Yakshas they never rose to the highest position in any pantheon and 
yet they supplied artistic models for decorating temples and even 
providing loci of minor veneration. Ganesa, for instance, hovered 
between a yaksha and a deity, as when Sri Vinayaka the deity 
became reduced to Ganesa the yaksha door-keeper with sounding 
bells, both in India and outside. Kubera also hovered between a 
major deity (one of the dikpdlas) and a yaksha-chief. 

The name ‘Mothers’ had apparently something to do with the 
placing of children on the laps or by the side of these mother- 
goddesses, who were virtually looked upon as the guardian angels 
of small children. The Mahayana deity Haritl, it may be remem¬ 
bered, had a similar figure and function. She had ectypes in 
Manasa, the serpent goddess, and also &Itala, the goddess of small¬ 
pox, who begins to figure towards the end of this period in temples 
in Kathiawad and Gujarat (e.g. at Sejakpur and Sunak). Later on 
the goddess Shashthi took over this protective function from the 
Mothers. The occasional absence of a child on Sarasvati’s knee or 
side may be responsible for the association of ‘six’ with the protec¬ 
tion of children, unless we believe that Shashthi has something to 
do with the six Krittikas that suckled the infant Karttikeya. 

Probably the name ‘Mothers’ was euphemistic when extended to 
the Yoginls and was designed to cover up their destructive or terrible 
aspect (as in the cases of &iva and Ganesa) as befitting agencies that 
came into existence to aid a supreme female deity in battle and to 


342 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


assist her in preventing the generation of new demons out of the 
blood-drops of the slain by licking these up, as represented in the 
Andhakavadha scene at Tewar. Their number was rather fluid, 
but when the lesser Saktis were added to the major ones it swelled 
to seven or eight, and then, by the usual process of multiplication, 
it rose from eight to sixteen, and then to sixty-four or more in 
Puranic and even Jain accounts, and they were then considered as 
Yoginis. In the Chausant YoginI temple at Bheraghat on the Nar¬ 
mada near Jubbulpore, where there is a circular colonnaded en¬ 
closure, are to be found together not only the sixty-four Yoginis but 
also the eight Saktis, three rivers, four other goddesses, Siva and 
Ganesa, thus making a total of eighty-one figures together with 
three more spaces at the entrances. At Khajuraho the sixty-four 
Yoginis appear in an oblong temple, but in other places like Rani- 
pur-Jural and Coimbatore such circular temples have been found 

and in Kalahandi there occurs the Surada temple containing sixty- 

* 

five cells. Many of these are hypaethral, which shows that the dei¬ 
ties enshrined were of minor consideration in the devotion of men. 
The Bheraghat figures have suffered, like other monuments, the fana¬ 
tical fury of the iconoclasts; but most of them fortunately retain their 
names inscribed in the sixty-five peripheral chapels. A perusal of the 
names discloses the fact that they are not all canonical Some were 
obviously incorporated from popular cult obiects of the time and 
the locality, and some were actual or corrupted forms of Brahmanic 
originals. A comparison with the list given by Hemadri about three 
centuries later shows that there was no fixity in the names of the 
Yoginis though their cult was fairly wide-spread. Even the eight 
Yoginis now worshipped in Bengal have titles not to be found in 
Hernadri’s list; in fact, the East Indian names of the sixty-four Yoginis 
do not have any terribleness about them, being mostly names of 
Durga herself, as the names in Hemadri’s list have. Thus, barring 
the convention that the Yoginis must be sixty-four, there is very 
little common in the different lists of names. What interests us in 
the Bheraghat icons is the presence of §rI-Teramva, a Mahisha- 
mardinl figure with sixteen hands, and of SarvatomukhI with a 
lotus under-seat containing the Tantrik emblem of crossed triangles 
(shatkona), with the b:ja word Hrim in the centre. Images of Brahma, 
Vishnu, Surya, Ganesa, Karttikeya, some of the Divine Mothers, and 
Ganga and Yamuna have been found in the ruins of the Bheraghat 
temple, in the centre of which probably stood an Uma-Mahesvara 
group according to Coomaraswamy. It is probably at a later period 
that this Smarta method of combining the principal gods in the same 
sanctuary was adopted. 


343 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Once Saktism became popular it was merely a question of time 
as to how exaggerated emphasis would be laid upon the diverse 
modes of divine manifestation. Thus Durga might herself be con¬ 
ceived as many, and this gives us Nava-Durga (of which the Nava- 
lihgas of Kukkanur might be considered as the late male counter¬ 
parts) or nine forms of the goddess known under different names. 
One set of such names—Sailaputri, Erahmacharinl, Chaindaghanta, 
Kushmanda, Skandamata, KatyayanI, Kalaratri, Mahagauri and 
Siddhidatri—-practically sketches her career and functions. Another 
better known set is composed of Ugrachanda, Praehanda, Chaodogra, 
Chandanayika, Chanda, Chandavati, Chandarupa, Atichandika and 
Rudrachanda—-all signifying the wrathful aspect of the deity. .A 
rare image of Nava-Durga in relief with an eighteen-handed central 
figure surrounded by eight sixteen-handed miniature figures was 
discovered at Porsha (Dina j pur) and is now in the Rajshahi Museum. 
Nava-Durga, Kalika and Chandika have been found enshrined in 
Jagesvara in Kumayun during this period- Similarly, just as Parvatl 
was differentiated into Durga, Chamunda, Mahishasuramardim and 
Mahalakshmi, so also Chamunda was herself viewed under the three 
forms of Karali or Bhadrakali, Kalabhadra and Kali or Mahakali, 
and was endowed with various numbers of arms under different 
names. Reference has already been made to the diverse forms of 
Chamunda in Bengal sculpture. 

By the side of these major Sakti deities we have other goddesses 
like Jyeshfha, the elder sister of Lakshmi but associated with mis¬ 
fortune (Alakshml), reference to whose temple is made in an eighth 
century inscription near Madura. An inscribed four-handed Vagls- 
vari image of c. A.D. 940 from Nalanda, seated on a lion and torment- 
ing a demon, is now in the Indian Museum, and another figure of 
the same goddess in octo-alloy, with eight hands, is in the Rajshahi 
Museum. A little later than the period we are discussing came, in 
the wake of Tantrik revival, the Dasa-Mahavidyas—Kali, Tara, 
Shodasi, Bhuvan-esvan, Bhairavi, Chhinnamasta, Dhumavati, Bagala 
Matahgi and Kamalatmika (Gaja-Lakshmi), obviously modelled on 
the ten avatar as of Vishnu; but isolated deities like Kali, Ugra-Tara, 
Vindhy a vasini, etc. came earlier and had other associates, both 
fierce and benign, like Praiyahgira, Dhumavati or Dhumrakalf, 
Lalita, Tripurasundarl (often identified with Shodasi'), Kajaraje-s- 
varl, etc. added at a later time. 

It appears also that Karttikeya was progressively losing con¬ 
tact with this Sakti group even though his Sakti (Kaumari or 
Karttikeyani) forms one of the Mothers and he himself occasionally 
turns up in Seven-Mother slabs. Mentioned as Subrahmanya in the 


844 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Manasara, he still retained considerable popularity in the South 
under the titles of Velayudha, Muruga, etc., specially with non- 
Brahmana classes, was assigned two wives—Valli and Devasena (or 
Devayana)—and had many shrines dedicated to him. In the Gujarat 
area too Karttikeya or Mahasena receives the homage of the Chaulu- 
kyas and at Ellora he finds lithic representation thrice. Judging 
by the Gurgi inscription, his image along with those of Uma, Uma 
with Siva, Sarasvatl and Ganapati, was placed round a central image 
of Siva in the area of the Gurgaj mound, where huge images of 
Durga or Parvatl have also been discovered. In the torana removed 
to Rewa, Karttikeya and Ganesa also figure with the Mothers, as do 
the major gods (Brahma included) and the planets, in Siva’s mar¬ 
riage procession scene. 

Ganesa, however, retains and, in fact, improves upon his posi¬ 
tion; he not only accompanies the Mothers but also attends and 
imitates the dance of Siva in sculptural representations and acts 
as a defender of the Brahmanical faith by guarding temples. Even 
a five-faced Ganesa, in imitation of his five-faced (panchanana) 
father, has been unearthed both in Orissa and in the ruins of Ram- 
pal (Dacca). His figure has been found on the door lintel of one 
of the ruined temples at Saidabad in Kashmir. No wonder that some 
terrible forms of Buddhistic deities should be represented as curb¬ 
ing his power in the shape of trampling upon his prostrate body 
(and sometimes that of his Sakti also)—Mahakala, Aparajita and 
Black Manjusri being the most noted Mahayanic oppressors of the 
elephant-headed gcd of the Brahmanical pantheon. It must be 
acknowledged, however, that Buddhism entertained an ambivalent 
attitude towards this deity, for it itself worshipped Vinayakas of 
different kinds. Similarly Baia-Ganapati and the conch-shell 
symbol of some Ganesa images betrayed occasional attempts at a 
rapprochement with Vaishnavism, but they did not prove a very 
successful venture. His place in temples, however, was assured; 
he adorns the door lintel of practically every major god in Gujarat 
—Siva, Brahma, Surya, Devi, etc.,—and also in Haihaya Saiva tem¬ 
ples, just as Gaja Lakshml did in many Chalukya temples- 

Ganesa’s star of fortune became definitely ascendant towards 
the close of this period, for, under the name of Ganapati, he became 
a popular cult object, particularly in Western India, and had a 
distinct sect, the Ganapatyas, devoted to his special worship. With 
heads ranging from one to five and arms correspondingly increased, 
with one, two or more tusks with the trunk variously disposed, and 
with many of the ornaments, attitudes and even the shapeless linga- 
form (of red stone) borrowed from Siva, Ganapati became the cen- 


345 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


tre of a popular cult, open and esoteric, the rival of Siva him¬ 
self, and even superior to the other gods who sought his aid and ap¬ 
proached and placated him when in distress. When the new fervour 
arose, there was a revival of the ancient number of six, of whom the 
five Sakti-Ganapatis are the most prominent, namely, the red four¬ 
armed Uchchhishta-Ganapati, the red ten-armed Maha-Ganapati, the 
yellow six-armed Urddhva-Ganapati, the tawny-coloured six-armed 
Pingala-Ganapati, and the white four- or eight-armed Lakshmi 
Ganapati. Haridra-Gamapati with yellow 7 colour and four arms was 
also regarded as the supreme deity. In Anandagiri’s enumeration 
Navamta, Svarna and Santana Ganapatis replace Urddhva, Pingaia 
and Lakshmi Ganapatis. It is probable that some of the names owe 
their origin to the materials with which the Ganapati figures were 
made-—cream or butter (navanita) 9 gold (svarva), turmeric (hari- 
dra ),—or to the degree of their yellowness. The devotees of these six 
forms formed esoteric sects. Theogonic speculations tried to give 
Ganapati a mystic origin out of &iva, and Tantrikism invested him 
with yantras and mantras suited to different purposes. The image 
of his &akti, labelled as &rI-AinginI, as also his own image is to be 
found among the Bheraghat icons and in the Indian Museum collec¬ 
tion, and Ganesa himself with his Ganas also finds sculptural repre¬ 
sentation. The five heads, as in H era mb a - Gana pat i, sometimes get 
separate forms under Buddhistic influence at a later time as in the 
Nritya Ganapati of Nepal. In fact, images of Ganesa with other Bud¬ 
dhistic influences, e.g- Bhumisparsa-mudra, are also known from 
other countries, which is not unnatural, seeing that latterly he be¬ 
came a Buddhistic loan deity. The ashta-siddhis came to be constru¬ 
ed into his &akti in Tantrik belief. In the Navagraha slabs he occu¬ 
pies the extreme right position—just the reverse of what he does 
in the Saptamatrika slabs. His association with the Diggajas of 
the four cardinal points can be made out from the Ghativala column 
near Jodhpur (with four Ganesa images at the top facing the four 
quarters) with a dated inscription of the ninth century A.D., while 
in a slab from Sonarang (Bengal), Ganesa is found sculptured on the 
right and the Saptamatrikas on the left of a Surya temple. The 
Ghatiyala figure installed in a market place perhaps marks his as¬ 
sociation with success in trade. 

The end of this period virtually closes the origin of new divini¬ 
ties. Henceforward local variations, elaborations and fusions cha¬ 
racterise the evolution of new forms. The most outstanding reli¬ 
gious upheaval was furnished by the Tantras which necessitated 
an understanding with the deep-seated craving of the human heart 
and an acceptance of the female principle in religious worship. After 


346 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Mahay anism had reached its zenith and given a new pantheon, a 
rapprochement with that cult was also found necessary, and when 
Buddhism degenerated and declined, its elements were utilised with 
suitable modifications to serve the needs of the newly absorbed 
Buddhist population. There was a fusion of Buddhistic and Brah- 
manical cults also and a revival of interest in the occult was res¬ 
ponsible for the popularity of Gorakshanatha and other Siddhas. A 
new esoteric literature was born as a result of this new type of 
interest. 


II. ICONOGRAPHY 
1. Sdkti 

Images of Devi or &akti, both of Ugm and Saumya types, 130 are 
met with in large numbers. Numerous eight- or ten-armed images 
of the MahishasuramardinI have been discovered in different parts 
of eastern India, and their principal type, with certain additional 
features, came to be the accepted iconic model of the composite 
clay image in the autumnal Durga worship in Bengal. An image, 
unique of its kind, retrieved from a north Bengal village in the 
Dinajpur District, portrays in a very interesting manner the nine 
Burgas (Nava-Durga) ; m the central figure of MahishasuramardinI 
is eighteen-armed with eight other sixteen-armed miniature figures 
of the same type grouped round it. The all-powerful and all- 
embracing character of the Divine Sakti is further emphasised by 
another unique stone image of the thirty-two-armed Devi engaged 
in combat with demons (not the buffalo-demon in particular), found 
in the said district; on the top part of its prabhdvali are shown the 
miniature figures of Ganapati, Surya, &iva, Vishnu, and Brahma. 132 

A four-armed standing figure of the goddess, of the saumya 
type, found in one of the rock-cut shrines of Ellora, exactly corres¬ 
ponds to the description of Parvatl, one of the six varieties of Gaurl, 
viz., Uma, Parvatl, Sri, Rambha, To tala and Tripura, as described 
in the Rupamandana. She holds in her four hands, from the lower 
right onwards (i.e. lower right, upper right, upper left and lower 
left), a rosary, &ivalihga, a miniature figure of Ganapati, and a water 
vessel, and has two pots of fire placed on her either side. 133 A com¬ 
parison between this rare type of Devi image from Ellora, and a 
particular form of her four-armed standing figures of the mediaeval 
period commonly found in Bengal, will be of interest here. The 
latter shows her standing erect, with such attributes as a boon 
{vara) or pomegranate, a &ivalihga, a tridandi or a trident in her 


347 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


hands in the above order, and an iguana (godhihd) carved on the 
pedestal. There are different varieties of this type which can be 
dubbed Chandl on account of the godhikd on the pedestal of many 
of them (this animal had particular association with the story of 
Chandl and Kalaketu, current in Bengal). An inscribed stone image 
of the Devi, dated in the third regnal year of Lakshmanasena, now 
in the collection of the Dacca Museum, shows a couchant lion for 
her vehicle; she holds vara , ankusa, padma, and kamandalu in her 
hands and like Gaja-Lakshmi, is being bathed by two elephants* The 
pedestal inscription describes her as Chandl; but Bhattasali de¬ 
nominates it as Bhuvanesvarl on the authority of the Sdraddtilaka- 
tantra. 134 

Separate images of the Devi of the dsana variety are compara¬ 
tively rare, she being usually depicted sitting on the lap of her 
consort Siva in such types of Saiva images as Uma-Mahesvaramurti 
discussed above. Several seated images, however, have been dis¬ 
covered in Bengal, and a few of them can be called Aparajjita, Maha- 
lakshmi, etc., on the basis of various iconographic texts. A very 
interesting sculpture, found among the ruins of ancient Vikrampur 
(Dacca), shows a Sivalinga, “out of which emerges the half-length 
figure of a four-armed goddess, with her front hands in the dhydna- 
mudrd , and the back right and left hands holding a rosary and a 
manuscript respectively”; Bhattasali identifies the image as that of 
Mahamaya or Tripura-Bhairavi* 135 The Matrika group of images 
have been found in different parts of India, but the earliest of them 
does not go back to a period earlier than the Gupta. The Gangdhar 
stone inscription .of Visvavarman, of the time of Kumara-gupta I, 
refers to the construction of the temples of the Divine Mothers, 
which are described as “terrible abodes’ (vesmdtyugram) . The ex¬ 
tant images of the Matrikas, however, with the exception of that 
of Chamunda, do not indicate anything fierce or terrific; most of 
them are shown as exact female counterparts of their corresponding 
male divinities with the complete cognizances and attributes of the 
latter. Varahi and Chamundi alone are different; the former, a 
sow-faced female seated on a buffalo, and the latter, an extremely 
emaciated figure with a scorpion mark on her shrunken belly, seat¬ 
ed on a corpse ( pretdsand ). To emphasise the mother-aspect, these 
goddesses are sometimes shown as carrying a suckling baby on 
their laps, and the Ellora Saptamatrika panel is a striking example 
of this type of Matrika images. Figures of Vlrabhadra and Ganesa 
are usually carved on either side of the row of the Mothers, for the 
myths describe them as their guardians. Chamunda seems to have 
been one of the most important cult-goddesses in the Tantrik pan- 


348 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


theon, and this is proved by her several peculiar forms, such as 
Rupavidya, Siddha-Yogesvari and Dantura, whose images have been 
discovered in Bengal. An image of the last-mentioned aspect of 
Chamunda, showing a two-armed goddess sitting on her haunches, 
found originally in a Burdwan village and now in the collection of 
the Vangiya Sahitya Parishat Museum, Calcutta, strikingly portrays 
the weird and the uncanny “with its bare canine teeth, rounded eyes, 
ghastly smile, emaciated body, lean and pendulous breasts, sunken 
belly, and peculiar sitting posture”. 136 

2. Ganesa 

Reference has been made above 137 to the different varieties of 
the images of Ganesa. His standing and seated figures are usually 
four-armed, but when he is shown dancing, he is endowed with 
more hands. An eleventh century six-armed stone image of the 
god, hailing from north Bengal and now in the collection of the 
Indian Museum, shows him dancing on the back of his mount, at¬ 
tended by two other dancing figures, one on each side, playing 
on musical instruments; objects like the tusk, hatchet, rosary, blue 
lotus, pot of sweetmeat, etc- are displayed in his hands, and there 
is a bunch of mangoes carved on the top centre of the pointed stele. 
It is a finely carved sculpture, and the artist has handled the theme 
of a grotesque nature with great balance and sense of proportion. 133 
Another rare type of Ganesa is that with five heads and ten arms 
seated on the back of a roaring lion; this variety is described in 
the text as Heramba Ganapati. Several such figures of the late 
mediaeval period have been found in India, and one unearthed 
from the ruins of Rampal (Dacca), contains on the upper part of 
its stele six other miniature figures of Ganesa, perhaps the cult 
pictures of the six sub-divisions of the Ganapatya sect. 139 Another 
type of Ganesa, mostly found in southern India, is the Unmatta- 
Uchchhishta variety in which the god is shown in company with 
his consort in a suggestive pose; several of its extant specimens are 
rather of an indelicate character. 140 

3. Kdrttikeya 

The South Indian images of Subrahmanya display a multipli¬ 
city of forms which are given various names in the Tantrik and 
Agamic texts; but most of these are late in point of date. The 
Ellora stone panel shows a four-armed figure of the god with a cock 
placed in his front left hand, and two goat-headed attendants, one 
standing on either side of him. The latter evidently stand for such 
mythological personalities as Negamesa or Harinigamesi. A late 


849 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


relief from Tirupparankunram temple in southern India represents 
a unique variety of Karttikeya figure, viz . Devasena-Kalyanasun- 
dara-murti, the theme of which is the marriage of Devasena and 
Karttikeya; it is evidently based on the Kalyanasundara-murti of 
Siva, as the Nritya-Ganapati figures are modelled on his dancing 
types. 141 


4. Surya 

The iconographic representation of Surya came to be far more 
elaborate in course of time and several accessories were added. The 
figures of Kundl bearing pen and ink-pot, on the proper right and 
of Daridi holding a staff on the proper left, are already present 
in some late Gupta reliefs of Surya; the figures of several spouses 
of the god, such as Nikshubha, Chhaya, Sarhjna or Rajhi, Suvarna 
and Suvarchasa, with the goddess Mahasveta and other attendants, 
are now depicted crowding round the main deity. The legs of not 
only the central figure but also of those of the various attendants, 
both male and female, are shown encased in some sort of leggings; 
but the long coat has completely disappeared, and the close cover¬ 
ing of the upper part of the body is just suggested by some delicate¬ 
ly carved lines on the torso and the arms. The lotus flowers held 
in the hands are not mere buds but fully blossomed ones shown 
parallel to the ears, and the seven horses are almost invariably re¬ 
presented on the chariot. The Surya image, found at Kotalipada 
(Faridpur) and now in the Vangiya Sahitya Parishat Museum, Cal¬ 
cutta, dated in the eleventh ventury A D., is a representative speci¬ 
men of such icons of northern India; but it contains such addi¬ 
tional features as agm-kundas carved on the saptaratha pedestal, 
from which issue lotus-flowers whereon the god and his principal 
attendants are standing. Another eleventh century stone relief of 
the god, procured from a Dinajpur village for the Rajshahi Museum, 
shows a unique mode of representation; he is depicted six-armed, 
his natural hands hold two fully blossomed lotus flowers, the four 
added ones showing vara , akshamala, abhaya and kamandalu . The 
Visvakarmavatdra Sdstra description of Dhatri, the first of the Adil¬ 
yas in the Dvadasaditya group of divinities, partially corresponds 
to this type; the former, however, is four-armed, the third pair of 
arms showing the vara - and abhaya-mudras being omitted. Four¬ 
armed standing and seated Surya images, though rare, are not abso¬ 
lutely unknown in northern India. If a comparison is made bet¬ 
ween the normal two-armed Surya figure of the north with the same 
of the south, both belonging to the mediaeval period, some remark¬ 
able differences may be noticed; the nature of the most important 


850 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


among them seems to prove that the southern Bury a figures did not 
come under any foreign influence, for their legs are always left 
bare- 142 Seated Sun images of the mediaeval period are compara- 
lively rare, and an inscribed one, acquired from a Dinajpur village, 
is ail the more interesting, for the pedestal inscription of the ele¬ 
venth-twelfth century A.D. refers to the god as samasta-rogdiidm 
hartta (remover of ail diseases). Composite reliefs of the Sun-god 
from northern as well as southern India, combining in them 
the features of several members of the orthodox Brahmanica! triad, 
are known. These sometimes are joint representations of Surya 
and Narayana, or Surya and Siva, and very rarely the attributes of 
Surya, Brahma, Vishnu and Siva are all combined in a single mono¬ 
graphic motif. The eight-armed and three-headed figure in the 
Chidambaram temple, with Arixna and the seven horses carved on 
the pedestal, and his hands carrying such attributes as a conch- 
shell, a discus, a pair of lotus-buds, etc. evidently represents the last. 
The so-called Trimurti figures found in Bundelkhand region are 
really typical combinations of Surya and Vishnu, and are even 
sometimes described as Surya-Narayana. A unique three-headed 
and ten-armed sculpture of the twelfth century A.D., found at a 
Rajshahi village, typifies in a very characteristic manner the combin¬ 
ed form of Surya and Siva; its three faces—the central one placid, 
and the side ones terrific—, its ten hands holding such attributes as 
sakti f khatvdnga, nilotpala f darnaru and the usual lotuses, and other 
iconographic traits closely correspond to the description of Mart- 
tanda-Bhairava given in the &draddtilaka-iantra. uz All these compo¬ 
site types of images perhaps show indirectly the part which the 
Sun-god played in the evolution of many of the god-concepts con¬ 
nected with several of the important Brahmanical cults- 

Several mediaeval sculptures of eastern India, showing a rider 
with a drinking cup in his hand and accompanied by a host of fol¬ 
lowers, were at first wrongly described as those of Kalki. But they 
have now been correctly identified as those of Revanta, the son 
of Surya. Both of them are shown riding on horseback, but the 
distinctive feature of Revanta is that, he should be shown a-hunting 
accompanied by a host of attendants. The Brihat-samhita descrip¬ 
tion of the god (Revanto-svdrudho mrigaya-kri<Mdi~parivdrah) gives 
us the correct clue to his identity, and several stone reliefs depicting 
him have been found in eastern India, mostly in Bengal. These re¬ 
present him as a rider in company with male and female followers, 
two-armed, booted, holding in his left hand the reins of the horse and 
a drinking cup in his right hand; the artists even include among the 
accessories a retriever dog. The late mediaeval Ghatnagar (Dinaj- 


351 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


pur) basalt image of Revanta, however, does not follow the above 
description in all its details, and presents the god in a novel manner. 
The M&rkandeya Puruna 144 says that Revanta was made the lord of 
the Guhyakas by his father, and his special task was to deliver mor¬ 
tals in distress “amid the terrors of forests and other lonely places, 
of great conflagrations, of enemies and robbers”; the Ghatnagar re¬ 
lief shows the god engaged in combat with a band of robbers who 
were about to disturb the peaceful pursuits of the village people- 145 

5. Navagrahas 

The worship of the Navagrahas was also of special importance 
in times of danger, and they were duly propitiated by means of 
grahayaga and svastyayana by different Hindu sectaries. So their 
images were in great demand throughout India and they were usually 
carved in a row on the lintel of the main sanctum of a Vaishnava 
or a &aiva temple. The Siva temples of Bhu vanes vara (Orissa) bear 
this feature- Sometimes these are also shown on the prabhti of 
other cult divinities. Separate representations of these deities are, 
however, very rare, and the presence of two of them, Chandra and 
Rrihaspati, among the basement reliefs on the main mound at Pahar- 
pur, are of great iconographic value. 146 The Navagraha slab in the 
collection of the Asutosh Museum, Calcutta University, is a very fine 
sculpture; it shows the nine so-called planets: Ravi, Soma, Mangala, 
Budha, Brihaspati, Sukra, £ani, Rahu, and Ketu, standing side by 
side on lotus pedestals, holding their respective attributes in their 
hands with Ganesa in the front of the row, and their respective Hn- 
chchhanas carved below. 147 The big Navagraha slab, which served 
originally as the lintel piece of the Sun temple at Konarak (Orissa), 
shows the deities as seated ones. 

(G) THE PARSIS 147a 

Numerically, the Parsi Community forms an almost insignificant 
element in the Indian population. But it deserves an honoured place 
in Indian history, chiefly for two reasons. In the first place, it is the 
only living remnant of Zoroastrianism,—a splendid culture and civi¬ 
lisation of ancient times, which has very nearly vanished from its 
homeland, and is to be found almost exclusively in Western India 
and the Bombay State. The importance of this point is further en¬ 
hanced by the fact that Zoroastrianism is closely associated with the 
Vedic Culture of India to which detailed reference has been made 
in Vol. I. 148 Secondly, the Parsi Community has furnished quite a 
large number of eminent men—leaders in politics, and captains of 


352 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

trade, industry, and commerce—who have played a prominent role 
in the making of modern India. 

Though the Parsis have made India their homeland, they have, 
like the Muslims, carefully preserved their separate entity. But 
unlike the Muslims they have not increased their ranks by local con¬ 
version and have no association—ideological or spiritual—with any 
community outside the boundaries of their adopted land. 

The Iranians—as the Parsis were known in old days—must have 
settled in India in small or large bands from time immemorial. But 
they were thoroughly absorbed by the Indian population, and have 
left no trace of their existence save in such elements of culture 
which India might have borrowed from them. The present Parsi 
Community, in India represents one or more of the last waves of 
migration from Iran (Persia) after the conquest of the country by 
the Muslim Arabs. 

The Sasanid King of Iran, Yazdagird III, was first defeated at 
Qadisiyya in A.D. 637 and his power was finally shattered in the 
battle of Nehawand in A.D. 641. That the Muslim occupation of 
their country, which followed this conquest, forced colonies of 
Zoroastrian Iranians to seek refuge in India, admits of no doubt. 
There is also a general agreement that the first batch of these emi¬ 
grants settled at a town called Sanjan, situated some 90 miles to 
the north of Bombay- But considerable difference of opinion exists 
about the date of their arrival. 

A Persian poem, Qissa-i-Sanjan, composed by Bahman Kaykobad 
Sanjana about the year A.D. 1600, recounts the tale of the wandering 
of the band of Iranians who ultimately settled at Sanjan. The author 
does not give any specific date, but mentions the duration of the stay 
of the emigrants in different places, mostly in round numbers. It 
would follow from this that the emigrants arrived at Diu in Kathia- 
wad about A.D. 806, and after staying there for 19 years, settled at 
Sanjan in A.D. 825. But most scholars refuse to take the poem as 
historical and regard it as merely a figment of fancy. 149 

Dastur Aspandiarjl Kamdin, in a small book, published in A-D. 
1826, gives a specific date, Samvat 772 (= A.D. 716), for the settle¬ 
ment of the Iranians at Sanjan. It is possible that he relied upon a 
much older tradition. Unfortunately the details about month and 
tithi, given along with the date, do not fit this year. Besides, the date 
A.D. 716 seems to be too early, if we are to believe in the Iranian 
tradition that the emigrants wandered for a considerable period in 
Iran before leaving for India- Hodivala, who has considered the 

353 


A.I.K.—23 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


whole question in great detail, suggests that the figure for the year 
is really 992, and as 9 and 7 were written very much alike such a 
confusion may be easily explained. The main support of his argu¬ 
ment is that the details of the date given fit in with the year 992. 150 
So it would appear that Hodivala’s suggestion might be accepted and 
the date of the first Pars! settlement in India (at Sanjan) may, there¬ 
fore, be provisionally fixed at Samvat 992 (— A D. 936). 

The earliest positive date for the settlement of these Iranian 
emigrants in India is furnished by two inscriptions found in Kanheri 
caves. 151 These record the names of two parties of Iranian tourists 
who had visited the caves, and like many modern visitors, chiselled 
their names on the rocks. The first inscription gives the names of 
seventeen men, and the second, of ten men, including four of the 
first; and these are dated respectively in A.D. 999 and 1021. The 
script as well as the language of both the inscriptions is Pahlavi and 
the personal names are, without exception, purely Iranian. As the 
Farsis in India freely adopted Hindu names, it has been argued that 
the arrival of the Iranians in India could not have been very old 
at the time the inscriptions were engraved. This in a way supports 
the date A.D. 936 suggested above. 

The Pars! tradition mentions that the ruler who gave permission 
to the first emigrants to settle at San j an was named Jadi Rana. 
According to the Qissa-i-S&njan, he belonged to the race of the ‘Shah- 
rayas\ Neither the name nor the race is otherwise known. But here, 
again, Hodivala 152 suggests that the original word Shdhrdydn is a 
misreading or mistake for Shilharayan, which denotes the Silaharas. 
This is quite plausible. In that case we may also accept his other 
suggestion that the king referred to was Vajjada-deva. Vajja^a 
might easily become Jadi, and as the emigrants, fresh from Iran, 
would not like to address their benefactor as ‘deva’, which had in 
the Zoroastrian literature a meaning entirely the reverse of that 
which it bears in Saqskrit, they added the epithet ‘Rand’. 

The Silahara king Anantadeva made a grant to ‘Kharasan- 
Mandalf in A.D. 1081. Hodivala suggests that this refers to the 
Parsi Community. 153 As the Pars! records always speak of the first 
emigrants as having ‘‘come from Khorasan”, it is a reasonable pre¬ 
sumption that for some time after their arrival they were known 
as “Khorasan-Mandair ’. 

Hardly anything is known of the Parsis in India during the period 
under review. Their later history will be dealt with in a subsequent 
volume. 


354 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


H. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 

1. The Bhdshyas 

We have traced in the preceding volumes the rise of heterodox 
religions which crystallised into Jainism and Buddhism, their deve¬ 
lopment as great and powerful sects challenging the supremacy of 
the orthodox Brahmanical religion, their reaction upon the latter, 
and the resulting contest between various schools in the arena of 
philosophy. This battle of wits became acute between A.D, 600 and 
A.D. 1000. As Winternitz remarks: 154 “The second half of the seventh 
and the first half of the eighth century A.D. was a period of lively 
philosophical disputes. Kumarila, the great Mimaihsa philosopher 
and representative of Brahmanical orthodoxy, attacked the Buddhist 
and Jinistic logicians, including among the last-named the promi¬ 
nent teachers Samantabhadra and Aka lank a, whilst Prabhachandra 
and Vidyananda defended their co-religionists against Kumarila.” 

The intellectual war that was waged found expression not so 
much in new writings as in exegeses on old ones. It was now the 
period of bhashyas or expositions of the sutras. Less important 
commentaries and expository summaries were also written and bore 
the titles of vrittis t kdrikds, etc., besides the general name of tt?oa- 155 

2. Orthodox and Heterodox Schools 

Much of the philosophical discussion turned on the two main 
points at issue between the orthodox and heterodox schools. Hetero¬ 
doxy challenged the authority of the Vedas as a source of knowledge. 

I But, asked orthodoxy, what was its own position? The word of 
Buddha or of Mahavlra was regarded as infallible and sacrosanct. 
But if the word of human teachers can be invested with such sanctity 
and infallibility, the Vedas, which are not attributed to any human 
authorship, must be regarded as a more authoritative source 
of knowledge. In popular debates and in sober arguments, this point 
was hammered into the minds of men with continued application 
and vigour. 

Not only in epistemology, but in ontology also, heterodoxy 
had its weak points. Buddhism denied, in some form or other, a per¬ 
manent soul and a permanent world. If everything was momentary 
as the Buddhists asserted, then what are we to deal with? And 
if the soul was but a stream of consciousness, if there was no per¬ 
manent substance behind the changing states and processes of con¬ 
sciousness, whose salvation is philosophy to think of? And if, again, 

355 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


no definite statement — no definite affirmation or denial — about 
anything could be made, as the Jains said, then also how was a 
philosophy possible at all? Again, the Buddhist theory of the im- 
permanance of the soul and the theory of karma (action) and trans¬ 
migration conflicted with each other. If there was no soul that 
endures, to whom does karma cling and who is it that migrates 
from body to body and is bom again and again? Thus the affirma¬ 
tions and denials of heterodoxy both contained weak points; and 
the battery of orthodox arguments continued to be directed against 
them for centuries after Buddha. 

That orthodoxy eventually overcame its enemy on these points 
is a fact. But the heterodox thinkers developed a powerful logic— 
an organon of thought and debate — which could not be brushed 
aside. It was assimilated by those who opposed its discoverers. 
The development of logic in orthodox schools was considerably in¬ 
fluenced by Jain and Buddhist writers on the subject. 

It was not in logic alone that heterodoxy vanquished its victor. 
In metaphysics, too, its gifts were very great and largely accepted 
by its victor, though in a modified form. The Buddhist theory of 
extreme idealism and the doctrine that all is ultimately a void 
(sunya) influenced the philosophy of the great Vedantist, Sankara, 
to such an extent that later critics of Sankara did not hesitate to 
dub him as a ‘Buddhist in disguise’, even though he had criticised 
the Buddhists in his commentary on the Vedanta-sutras. 

Though the germs of the theory of karma and transmigration 
can be traced as early as the Upanishads, its fuller development 
owes a good deal to Jain-Buddhist thinkers. And a popular, though 
somewhat fanciful, shape was given to it in the Jataka stories of 
Buddha. 

We cannot attempt an exhaustive catalogue of the many ways 
in which the Jain and Buddhist thinkers have influenced the philo¬ 
sophy of the land. But there is one thing which ought to be em¬ 
phasised. Their ethics have considerably influenced — may we add, 
and improved—the ethics of the orthodox fold- The doctrine of 
ahirhsa or non-injury (non-violence) to the animal world is speci¬ 
fically a Jain-Buddhist doctrine though the Yoga system also accepts 
it as one of the forbearances. They regarded pure life and pure 
thought as a higher religion and morality than mere ablutions in 
water or offerings in fire. The theory of the brotherhood of man 
is another of their contributions. Monastic life received a new 
valuation and new impetus at their hands. 


856 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


But with all its great contributions, heterodox philosophy had 
to own defeat by the end of the eighth century A.D. and, though 
not yet a spent force, had to be satisfied henceforth with an inferior 
place assigned to it. 

3. Vedanta's Bid jor Supremacy 

When heterodox philosophy was a power to reckon with, all 
the orthodox philosophies had a common cause to fight for and they 
were allies. But when heterodoxy began to sink beneath the sur¬ 
face and was ousted from learned societies, these allies began to 
fall out among themselves. The differences between them were 
not absent before; but they were overlooked and sidetracked in face 
of a common enemy. When that enemy was crushed, these diffe¬ 
rences came to the forefront. The Sutras of Vedanta attempted to 
refute every other system, either orthodox or heterodox, including 
even such minor philosophies as the doctrines of the Pancharatra 
school. Sahkhya-Yoga attacked Nyaya-Vaiseshika and vice versa . 
The quarrel was mainly over the fundamentals of metaphysics. 
The Sahkhya theory of unconscious prakriti was assailed and its 
apparent or real godlessness received no less attention. On the 
other hand, the Nyaya-Vaiseshika theory of atoms was equally 
castigated. The Sahkhya believed in what was called satkdryavada 
or the theory that the effect was latent in the cause and was only 
a metamorphosis of it. The Nyaya opposed it with the theory that 
the effect was something new (drambhavdda), not present in the 
cause. These disputes have been carried on till quite recent times. 

While the different systems carried on their disputes in this 
way, the Mimamsas made a bid for supremacy over all. They— 
the two Mimamsas—had this advantage that they were more really 
loyal to the Vedas than the other systems; and the Vedas had esta¬ 
blished their right to be heard. The loyalty of Sahkhya-Yoga and 
Nyaya-Vaiseshika to the Vedas was after all a lip-loyalty; for they 
did not squeeze their conclusions out of the Vedas. The Mimamsas, 
both of them, on the other hand, were more thoroughly dependent 
on the Vedas, drew all their inspiration from that source and did 
not utter a line that was not supported by some text or other of the 
Vedas. This was a great advantage, specially when the Vedas, 
after the battle with heterodoxy, were again rehabilitated in popu¬ 
lar esteem. To this must be added the fact that able and famous 
professors of these philosophies like Kumarila and Sankara toured 
the whole country, from east to west and north to south, threw out 
a general challenge to all scholars of rival schools to meet them in 
open debate and either to vanquish them or own defeat and accept 


357 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


their philosophy. Half historical and half mythical accounts of 
these peregrinations have been preserved, and these tend to show 
how the philosophies emanating from the Vedas eventually trium¬ 
phed over all other philosophies and conquered the whole country. 
Of course, it was never a complete victory, for the rival systems of 
thought are still alive. But the Mimamsas and their source, the Ve¬ 
das, had won a great position and an immense prestige in the thought 
of the country. 

Originally the two Mimamsas, as we have seen before, spoke 
and preached like one philosophy and with one voice. But gradu¬ 
ally there was a split between them over an issue which was accen¬ 
tuated in the philosophy of Sankara. The Vedas speak of two 
things—-action (karma) and meditation (jntina) —and accordingly 
there are two distinguishable parts of the Vedas, The Upanishads 
(or Vedanta, i-e. the concluding portion of the Vedas) speak of medi¬ 
tation more than anything else. The question arose: were the 
works enjoined in the earlier part of the Vedas—the rites and cere¬ 
monies—necessary for all and at all times? Two extreme views 
were advocated. One was that they could never be avoided; so long 
as a man was in his body, Le. until death, the duties enjoined upon 
a man according to his caste (varna) and the stage of life (airama) 
in which he was, must continue to be performed. The other view 
was that these duties were only hypothetically imperative, and were 
indicated as means to an end. If a man wanted to live a life of 
happiness here and of bliss hereafter, the works should be done. 
But if one felt no interest in these things, if he rather desired salva¬ 
tion from all bondage (or moksha), these duties were not binding 
on him. Such a man should renounce the world forthwith, cut off 
all earthly bonds, give up all works, and live the life of contem¬ 
plation and of a hermit. There was also a third view according to 
which it was only in the last two of the four asrarrms (stages of life), 
that meditation could exclude works. The duties prescribed in the 
Sastras, rightly performed, cleansed the soul and prepared it for 
proper meditation and intimate illumination. The beauty of the 
whole thing was that texts from the Vedas could be cited for each 
one of the extreme views; and for the third also there were authori¬ 
tative sources. It was not really a philosophical question; but it 
meant a difference and provoked a quarrel; and separated the Uttar a 
Mimdm&d or Vedanta from its erstwhile ally, the Purva Mlrnamsd. 

The Purva Mimamsd claimed that the essence of the Vedas was 
directions for works. As the Upanishads did not contain such 
directions (vidhis), or very few of them, they had only a secondary 
importance and the philosophy based on them was of inferior value. 

358 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


But the Vedanta in some of its forms brought the quarrel to a head 
by professing a total disregard for the works of religion which the 
Mlmamsa supported. The cleavage between the two is nowhere so 
sharp as in the life and teachings of Sankara, the author of a cele¬ 
brated commentary (bhdshya) on the Vedanta-sutras. 

4. The Philosophy of Sankara ; (c . A.D. 788-820) 156 

There are certain points on which all Vedantists must agree. 
The theory of pramdina or source of knowledge is one of them. Then, 
the apparent discrepancies in the texts of the Upanishads can and 
must be reconciled; and after such synthesis they yield but one 
philosophy, viz. that of Brahman as the Ultimate Reality. Regard¬ 
ing the evolution and dissolution of the world, too, there is little 
difference among Vedantists. There is yet another point in which 
they are at one. It is the superiority of the Vedanta as a philo¬ 
sophy as against all other philosophies. But regarding the sectarian 
philosophies, such as that of Vaishnavism or Saivism, all Vedan¬ 
tists have not agreed. If a Vedantist belonged to some such sect, 
as many of the later Vedantists did, then he would urge that 
Vedanta was consonant with the philosophy and worship of this sect. 
If a Vedantist did not belong to any sect, he would look upon a 
sectarian philosophy as hostile to Vedanta and, therefore, as one 
which must not be countenanced. 

On points on which all Vedantists agree, Sankara has little 
original to say. The most striking feature of his philosophy, how¬ 
ever, as he wrings it out of the sutras of Vedanta, is his extreme 
monism which makes Brahman alone real and the self and the 
world of things only an appearance, an illusion of the finite mind 
in its state of ignorance. All that we see around us and all that 
we feel, consist of such stuff as dreams are made'of—a stupendous 
Maya or Illusion. Brahman, the one Ultimate Reality, is only an 
existence, without any qualities by which it could be described. 
Brahman is pure consciousness; not a subject knowing an object, 
for there is nothing other than Brahman of which Brahman could 
be conscious. In our ordinary knowledge there is the relation bet¬ 
ween a subject that knows and an object that is known. In Brah¬ 
man’s consciousness, however, such a relation was not possible; for, 
there was nothing that could be an object of thought to Brahman. 
And the Maya , by which a world of things and selves was fabri¬ 
cated, was neither an existence nor a non-existence and was, there¬ 
fore, indescribable. 

Sankara stands out as a notable milestone in the progress of 
Vedantic thought. His style is easy and persuasive; but his per- 


359 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

sonality was more persuasive and imposing. We are told by tradi¬ 
tion and by his admiring biographers that he travelled through the 
length and breadth of the country, met all kinds of philosophers 
and pseudo-philosophers—even those who practised human sacri¬ 
fices—and vanquished them all in debate, and thus spread his 
philosophy far and wide. He established sanctuaries in distant 
parts of the country, and placed some of his ablest and most devoted 
disciples in charge of them to propagate his philosophy from there. 
From philosophy it grew into a missionary movement which has 
not yet died. There are still well-known sanctuaries associated 
with the name of Sankara which continued to be centres of Vedanta 
culture. 

In his travels, Sankara gained many disciples, sometimes direct¬ 
ly by persuasion, and sometimes indirectly by defeating rivals in 
debate. One of the more famous of those disciples was Mandana 
Misra, 157 a staunch follower of the Purva Mlmamsa. Being defeated 
in a debate, at which his wife presided as judge, he took to the 
monastic life, assumed the new name of Suresvara and wrote on 
the Vedanta on the same lines as Sankara. How far the many anec¬ 
dotes current about Sankara may be regarded as historical it is, 
of course, difficult to say. 

Sankara’s great claim to our recognition and to a permanent 
place in history lies in the fact that he created an extraordinary 
position for Vedanta. This is evident from the fact that he was 
followed by a number of able and distinguished writers on Vedanta; 
and gradually several different schools of Advaita Vedanta arose. 
What is more important is that writers belonging to established 
sects of religion, such as Vaishnavism and Saivism, began to utilise 
the Vedanta as the philosophical basis and background of their res¬ 
pective creeds. This is done by a subtle identification of the god 
of their creed with the Brahman of Vedanta. Thus a Vaishnava 
like Ramanuja would say that Brahman is no other than Vishnu 
of his worship. Some like Vallabha would go so far as to say that 
Brahman is no other than Krishna of Vrindavana. And a 6aiva 
like 6rlkantha would say that Brahman is identical with 6iva of his 
worship, who is called by other names also, such as Pasupati, Rudra, 
etc. The actual development of these schools, however, takes us 
beyond A.D. 1000. The only notable commentator on the Brahma - 
sutra , other than Sankara, falling within this period, is Bhaskara 
who taught the Bhedabheda doctrine (co-existence of distinction and 
unitv in intimate relation with each other in Brahman) and severely 
criticised the mairavada of Advaita Vedanta. The period also saw 
the origin and development of the important philosophical School of 


360 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

Kashmir Saivism, known as the Trika system, which, in spite of 
its theistic tendency, gradually leaned towards Advaitism. 

1. Vol. Ill, Ch. XVIII—A. 

la. Taranatha surveys the career of the religion in these words: There appeared 
more than half of the eighty-four famous Buddhist Acharyas who had gained 
the Siddhi, after the time of Dharmaklrti down to the time of king Chanaka. 
At the time when the six jewels (Hiuen Tsang speaks of four luminaries, viz. 
Asvaghosha, Aryadeva, Nagarjuna and Kumaralabdha, see Watters, I, p. 245; 
Taranatha. perhaps added Asanga and Vasubandhu) stayed on earth, the 
Mahayana Acharyas were very scholarly and apart from the fact that the 
monks were excellent, the number of 6ravakayanists was much higher. Starting 
from this time on, the teachings growing weaker and weaker went down in a 
short time in the south, although in other countries it declined gradually. 
During the time of the seven Palas, the religion was widely spread in Magadha, 
Bengal, Odivisa and the other border countries and in Kashmir. In other 
countries, except a few, it did not exist; in Nepal it was much spread. In 
these countries the Mantrayana and Mahayana were much spread; there also 
existed a great many Sravaka sects. See Schiefner, Geschichte des Buddhismus, 
201 - 2 . 

2. Its Sanskrit version has also been discovered in Eastern Turkestan. 

3. The parittds mentioned in the Milindapanha (150-51) are Ratanasutta, Khandha- 
paritta, Moraparitta, Dhajaggaparitta, Atanatiyaparitta, and Ahgulimalaparitta. 

4. Taranatha, 275. 

5. Lalitavistara, 2; sarva-Bodhisattva-dhdrani-pratibhdna pratilabdhaih sarva 
Bodhisattva-dhdrani-pratilabdhaih. 

6. Sandhinirmochanasutra, 124; Sruta-dharani. Samddhiraja-sutra (p. 531) also 
calls itself a Dhdrant. 

7. Kdranftavyuha, ch. vii; Tais-ch-api Tathagatair-iyam dharanim bhdsitum - 

drabdhah _ Omchale chule chule svdha. 

8. Suvarnaprabhdsa-sutra, Chs. XI, XII. 

9. Saddharmapundarika, 396, 477. 

10. Gilgit Manuscripts by Dr. N. Dutt, I. 44. 

11. Very likely Mani represents Prajnd, the producer of Tathagata, placed on 
Padma, the Avalokitesvara, or Mani may mean Vajra, the Bodhichitta. 

12. Guhyasamdja, 2. 

13. Manjusrxmulakalpa, 508. 

14. Ibid, 647-48. 

15. See Avalon, Principles of Tantra, 324. 

16. There has been some controversy over the date of composition of the Manju - 
srimulakalpa between Dr. Benoytosh Bhattacharyya and Prof. Wintemitz, the 
former holding the opinion that the original form of this text was much shorter 
and was composed about the second century A.D., while the latter Was inclined 
to the view that its composition should be placed in the sixth or seventh cen¬ 
tury A.D. The Manjusrxmulakalpa in its present form must have been com¬ 
posed about the eighth century A.D., as it gives an account of king Gopala’s 
accession to the throne but does not refer to the activities of Dharmapala or 
Devapala. The word “Mahlpala” occurs in two stanzas. Some provincial 
dialects as also some places in Bengal and Assam which became noted at a 
later period as most suitable for secret yogic practices are also mentioned in 
this text. 

17. Guhyasamdja, 93-4. The Guhyasamdja is mentioned by Santideva (seventh 
century A.D.) in his Sikshasamuchchaya, and by Indrabhuti in his Jhdnasiddhi. 
It is listed as one of the texts of the Vajra School (Pali Vajiriyas) in the Nikaya 
Samgraha, a Sinhalese work of the fourteenth century. 

18. It is very likely that the Bengali artists called Pa^uyas still maintain the 
traditions of the Manjusrimulakalpa. 

19. Guhyasamdja, 93-4. 

20. Ibid , 87-8. 

21. Schiefner, 20. 

22. See Guhyasamdja, Intro, xiii and Text, 120. 

23. See Intro, xi and Text Ch. VII. 

24. See e.g., his Intro, xi; “place it (the hand of 6akti) on the hand of the dis- 

361 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


ciple” The hand here is not of the Sakti but of the Guru. See 161. 

25. Guhyasamdja, Ch. VII. 

Sarva-kdm-opabhogaisz=cha sevyamdnair—yathechchhatah 
Anena khalu yogena laghu Buddhatvam-dpnuyat 

This stanza should be read in the same light as the following stanza of 
the Mddhyamika-Kdrika (Ch. XXV, 19). 

Na samsdrasya nimdndt kim-chid—asti viseshanam 
Na nirvdnasya samsdrat him-chid—asii viseshanam 

In other words a Bodhisattva should try to realise that there is not the 
slightest difference between nirvana and samsdra (phenomenal world) as the 
latter is only an imaginary superimposition on the former. This superimposi¬ 
tion appears only to the unwise and not to the fully enlightened, the Buddha. 
The Guhyasamdja, on the basis of this identity of nirvana and samsdra, regards 
the enjoyment of samsdra as not harmful so long as one does not distinguish 
samsdra from the nirvana . 

26. Guhyasamdja, 37. 

27. Ibid, 6. 

28. Ibid, 129. 

29. Ibid, 137. 

30. Sddhanamdld, II, Intro., xli. 

31. Guhyasamdja, 2-3. 

32. Ibid, 137. 

33. See Indrabhuti, J fumasiddhi, Ch. II. 

34. Vidyabhusana, Indian Logic, 321-22. 

35. Tdrandtha, 275. 

36. Mystic Tales of Lama Taranatha, 11. 

37. There were more than one Darika, and the Darika initiated by Lui-Pa was 
different from the Darika of Dohdkosha. 

38. Cf. B. C. Sen, Some Hist. Aspects of the Ins. of Bengal, 201; Sircar, Set. Ins., 377: 
Mandasor stone ins. of the time of Nara-varman (A.D. 404). 

39. See Sddhanamdld, Intro, xlviii. 

40. G.O.S. No. XLIV. 

41. G.O.S. No. XLTV. 


42. Sddhanamdld, 353. 

43. See Sddhanamdld, II, Intro. 60. 

44. This LUavajra should be distinguished from Lalitavajra’s disciple Lilavajra 
(Taranatha, 191) who lived about the seventh or eighth century. 

45. See above, p. 43f. 

46. Cf. Manjusnmulakalpa, 631. 

47. Cf. Pag-sam-jon-zang, 111. 

48. Waddell, Buddhism of Tibet, 31. 

49. Tativa-samyraha, (G.O.S. Nos. XXX, XXXI), 184. 

50. This confirms the statement about the propagation of these texts occurring in 
the Ashpisdhasrika (225). 

51. His colophon to the commentary ( Aloka, 563-64, G.O.S.) corroborates the state¬ 
ment of TaranMha. 

52. Tdrandtha, 232, 243. 

53. Commentary on Sarvajnamitra’s Sragdhardstotra, 50. 

54. Brihat-svayambhu-purana, 320-21. 

55. Tsranatha, 229. 

56. Taranatha, 211. 

57. Cf. Ch. XII. 


58. El, XXI. 97. 

59. See p. 51. 

60. See Waddell, op. cit., 33. 

61. Tlranatha, 221. 

62. The formula is *Ye dharmd hetu-prabhava hetum teshdrh tathdgato hyavadat, 
teshdrh c ha yo nirodha evarh vddt rnahdsramaiiah*. It contains one of the prin¬ 
cipal maxims of Buddhism and is very frequently found engraved on different 
parts of the mediaeval Buddha and Bodhisattva reliefs. 

63. R. D. Banerji, EISMS, PI. XXIX (a); B. M. Barua, Bharhut. Ill, PI. XLVII. 

64. Sddhanamdld, I, Nos. 3-5, pp. 18-25; H, PI. I. 


65. For these crowned Buddhas, cf. R. D. Banerji, op. cit.. Pis. XVH (b). XXI (c). 
XXXI (b) & (c), XXIII (b), XXIV (c), XXVI (d) etc. 

N. G. Majumdar identified them as Adi-Buddha figures, VJLS. Annual Report 


362 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


1926-27; but A. K. Coomaraswamy challenged this interpretation, JRAS, 1928, 
837, PI. V, fig. 8. 

66. See above, Vol. Ill, 393. 

67. B. T. Bhattacharyya, Indian Buddhist Iconography, 34, PI. XVIII a. 

68. R. D. Banerji, op. cit., PI. XXXTV, fig. (a); for the four and six-armed figures 
of Lokesvara, cf. ibid, pis. XII (a) VIII (a) and (d). The four-armed types 
in the collection of the Patna Museum hail from the interior of the Cuttack 
district of Orissa. 

69. DHI, 116, 370-71; the ashtanidhis are the concrete manifestations of the 
Padrninl-vidya, of which Sri or Lakshml was the presiding deity. 

70. The description of the Brahmanical goddess Tara as given in Brahmananda’s 
Tdrarahasya and Krishnananda Agamavaglsa’s Tantrasdra exactly corresponds 
to the above; B. T. Bhattacharyya, op. cit., 77. 

71. B. T. Bhattacharyya, op. cit., 107, pi. XXXII (e). 

72. These great fears as can be seen from this relief are majjana-bhaya, dasyu - 
bhaya, simha-bhaya, sarpa-bhaya, agni-bhaya, yaksha-bhaya, bandhana-bhaya, 
hasti-bhaya; these are depicted by miniature scenes in which the person in 
danger in each case is shown praying to the miniature replica of the goddess 
shown above. 

73. B. T. Bhattacharyya, op. cit., 123-26; 129-30, pi. XXXVI b; Bhattasali, Icono¬ 
graphy of Buddhist and Brahmanical Sculptures in the Dacca Museum, 45-53, 
pi. XV-XVII. 

74. Bhattacharyya, op. cit., 90-2, pi. XXX (a). 

75. R. D. Banerji, EISMS, pi. XXXIX, (b). 

76. E. B. Havell, Indian Sculpture and Painting, pi. XIV. 

77. B. T. Bhattacharyya, op. cit., 97, pi. XXXI a. 

78. For Bhattacharyya^ refutation of the view that Vajravarahl and Marlchl 
were the two aspects of the same deity, cf. op. cit., 93-4. 

79. AR. 313. 

80. Cf. Farquhar, ORLI. 218, 

81. Buhler, Indian sect of the Jainas, 77. List of the Gachchhas is given on pp. 
78 f. 

82. ORLI, 213. 

83. AR. 272. 

84. See above, pp. 101 if. 

85. Above, pp. 19 ff; cf. also “Bappabhattisuricharita” in Prabhdvakacharita (SJS) 
pp. 85 ft. 

86. Cf. Jain, Jaina Siddhdnta Bhdskara, IX, No. 1, on Amoghavarsha. 

' 87. See above, p. 15 ff. 

-88. Cf. Vaidya, History of Medieval Hindu India, HI. 403; Sharma, Jainism and 
Kamatak Culture, 25. 

89. Sale tore, Medieval Jainism, 42 ff. 

90 Fleet IA VI. 34. 

91! Upadhye,* NIA, II. 132 f; Saletore, JBHS, VI. 10-33. 

92. See above, p. 181. 

93. Some writers have taken these Jinasenas to be identical. But the names of 
their patrons and the different dates of composition prove them to be distinct 
persons separated by years. 

94. This and the following two paragraphs are based on Dr. Handiqui’s excellent 
monograph, Yasastilaka and Indian Culture , especially Chs. 1, 6, 9, 10 and 13. 

95. Cf. I A, Vlll. 106; Rice, Mysore and Coorg from inscriptions, 203. 

96. I A, ,XI. 248. 

97. Nahar, Jaina-lekha-samgraha, III. 164. 

98. The writer is indebted to Dr. A. N. Upadhye and Prof. H. D. Velankar for 
having gone through the section on Jainism and making a number of suggestions. 

99. Vol. II, p. 420. 

100. See pp. 28, 61, 89, 122, 138, 146, etc. 

101. There are other names also such as Shatfardha-sastra. 

102. According to Rdjatarangini Bhat^a Kalla$a, a pupil of Vasugupta, was a con¬ 
temporary of Avantivarman who ruled from A.D. 855 to 883. 

103. Abhinavagupta’s Paramdrthasara , w. 12-13; cf. JRAS, 1910. 723. 

104. Ibid, 728. 

105. Cf. Sarva-darsana-samgraha of Madhavacharya. Tr. by Cowell and Gough, 
p. 136. 

106. Paramdrthasdra, w. 51-52; JRAS, 1910. 734. 

368 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


107. For the philosophy of &ankara, see below, section H. 4. 

108. Vol. Ill, p. 435. 

109. HBR , I. 436. 

110. For such south Indian icons, cf. Rao, op. cit., II. 273-92 & Pis. 

111. These are described and illustrated by Rao, EHI, II. 108 kinds of dances 
carved on either side of a gopura in the Nataraja temple at Chidambaram cor¬ 
respond with 108 modes of dance as described in the Bharata-Ndtyasdstra. A 
book named Tdndavalakshanam, published some years ago, contains a full 
idea about them. 

112. Rao, op. cit., II. 229. 

113. A. K. Coomaraswamy, Dance of £iva. Rao, op. cit, II. 231-52, 

114. HBR, I. 443-44; N. K. Bhattasali, Iconography of Buddhist and Brahmanical 
Sculptures in the Dacca Museum, 112-13, pi. XLII. 2. 

115. E. B. Havell, Indian Sculpture and Painting, 49-52, pi. XXII. 

116. R. D. Banerji, ASI, 1911-12. 

117. J1SOA, XVIII. 54 ff. 

118. Rao, op. cit., II. 181-82, pi. XLIII. 

119. N. K. Bhattasali, op. cit., 118-20, pi. XLVII (a). HBR, I. 447. 

120. For an elaborate description of the Kankala- and Bhikshatana-murtis of Siva 
cf. Rao, op. cit., II. 295-309, and pis. 

121. For these types of images refer to Rao, op. cit., I. Introduction, 44 pi. E. 

122. See above, Vol. III. pp. 328 ff, 428 ff. 

123. JISOA , I. 99-100, 103, pi. XXX. 

124. For this ideology and the description of the image, see Rao, op. cit., I. 248-49. 
Krishna Sastri who reproduces the Conjeevarajn relief, is wrong in his des¬ 
cription of this figure as Agni; South Indian Gods and Goddesses, 242-3, 
fig. 147. 

125. Rao, op: cit., I. 251-56, & pi. LXXII, fig. 2 and pi. LXX1H. Dattatreya concept 
of the god refers indirectly to a conscious attempt of harmonising the different 
cults. 

126. HBR , I. 437, pi. Ill, fig. 12. 

127. Van Guliq in his monograph on ‘Hayagrlva’ shows the migration of this divi¬ 
nity outside India. 

128. For two interesting east Indian reliefs illustrative of this god, cf. HBR, I. 438, 
pis. V, 14 and 15. 

129. Is a clue to this peculiar cognizance to be found in the Satapatha Brdhmana 
passages (XII. 7.1.3 and 14; XII. 7.2.3 and 7) which closely associate rams 
and ewes with Sarasvati? N. K. Bhattasali refers to ram-fight and ram-sacri¬ 
fice in Bengal on the occasion of the Sarasvati-piija— Cat., 188-190, pi. LXHI. 

129a. CII , HI. 74. 

129b. R. C. Majumdar, Inscriptions of Kambuja, pp. 362 ff. 

130. See above, Vol. Ill, 441 ff. 

131. The nine Durgas are sometimes named, Ugrachanda, Rudrachanda, Prachanda, 
Chandogra, Chandanayika, Chanda, Chandavati, Chandarupa, arid Atichandika. 
In the Devikavacha of the Devxmahatmya their names are Sailaputri, Brahma- 
char ini, Chandraghanta, Kushmanda, Skandamata, KatyayanI Kfilaratri, MahS- 
gaurl and Siddhidatri. 

132. For these two Devi icons, cf. HBR, I. 453-54, pis. XIII, 35 and I, 5. 

133. The Rupamandana verse reads,— Akshasutram Sivam devam ganddhyaksham 
kamandalum, Pakshadvaye ’gnikunde cha murtissa Pdrvatx smrita. Rao, op. cit., 
I, pi. CVI1I (fig. 1). App. C., Praiimdlakshanam, p. 120. 

134. N. K. Bhattasali, Icon. Dacca Museum, 202-3, pi. LXIX. HBR, I. 451. pi. LXXVTI: 
180. 

135 . HBR, I. 452, pi. VI. 19. 

136. HBR, I. 455, PI. XTV. 36. Several other figures of Dantura have been found 
in north Bengal. 

137. See Vol. HI, 444 f. 

138. ASI, 1934-35, pi. XXIV (a). 

139. Bhattasali, op. cit. 146-47, pi. LVT (b). 

140. Rao, Iconography, 53-5, PI. XI (fig. 2) & PI. XII. 

141. For the Ellora and Tirupparankunram reliefs of Karttikeya, cf. Rao. oo cit 

I. 445, 448, PI. CXXIV & CXXIX. ' 

142. These differences have been enumerated by T.A.G. Rao, op. cit., I. 311-12. 
Several South Indian Surya figures of late mediaeval period are illustrated by 

364 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


him in Plates LXXXVII—LXXVIH, XCI, XCII & XCIV etc. of the same 
volume. 

143. Sdraddtilaka-tantra, patella xiv. For the Chidambaram relief, cf. H. Krishna 
Sastri, South Indian Gods and Goddesses, p. 236, fig. 144; for the Surya- 
Narayana images cf. I A, 1918, 136 ff.; for the Marttanda-Bhairava relief now 
in the Rajshahi Museum, cf. VRS —Rep, 1929-30, 9-10, fig. 2. 

144. Markandeya Purdna, CVHI, vv. 22-3. 

145. VJRS-Rep., 1927-28, 1, fig. 2. HER, I. 459, pi. XVI. 42. 

146. S. K. Saraswati, Early Sculpture of Bengal, 65-7, fig. 17; MASI, No. 55, 53-4, 
pi. XXX (b) and (c); Dikshit’s identification of these two reliefs as Siva and 
Brahma is unacceptable. 

147. HER, I. 459, pi. XVII. 43. 

147a. General references. 

S. H. Hodivala, Studies in Parsi History . Bombay, 1920. 

I. J. S. Taraporewala, The Exact Date of the Arrival of the Parsis in India 

(Kane Festschrift, pp. 506-514). 

148. Ch. XI: “Indo-Iranian Relations”. 

149. Hodivala, Studies in Parsi History, 1-36. 

150. Ibid, 70 ff. 

151. The inscriptions have been translated in the Zarathoshti Abhydsa, HI. 160; 
TV 212 

152. Op. tit', 74 ff. 

153. Parsi Prakdsa, X. 80. 

154. HIL, II. 478. 

155. Some writers of the period are:— 

Buddhism: Santarakshita, Kamalaslla, Dharmottara. 

Jainism: Akalanka, Vidyananda, Manikyanandl, Prabhachandra. 

Nyaya-Vaiseshika: Vachaspati, Jayanta, Udayana, and Srldhara. 

Sankhya: Probably the Sutras themselves were finally redacted during this 
period. Gaudapada, the commentator of Sankhya-Karika, belongs to this 
period. 

Yoga: Vachaspati, who wrote on other systems also. 

MImarhsa: Mandanamisra. Parthasarathi, according to Dr. S. N. Das Gupta, 
flourished during this period. 

Vedanta: Sankara, Suresvara (see footnote 157 below), Padmapada, Ananda- 
giri, Sarvajnatmamuni, Bhaskara. 

156. For various views about the date of Sankaracharya placing him between sixth 
and ninth century AX)., cf. GIL, III, 434, fn. 1. An inscription in Cambodia 
mentions the very interesting fact that Sivasoma, the guru of king Indra-varman, 
was a disciple of Bhagavan Sankara who is presumably no other than Sankara- 
charya. As king Indra-varman ascended the throne in Saka 799, Sankara- 
charya cannot be placed much earlier than the beginning of the ninth century 
AX). Attention to this passage was drawn many years ago by Dr. R. C. 
Majumdar in a short note in Indian Review (Madras) and also by Prof. 
K. A. N. Sastri in JOR, XI. 285. But it has not yet received much attention 
from students of Indian Philosophy. The question has been recently discussed 
by Pandit B. Upadhyaya in his Hindi work entitled "Sri Sahkardcharya” 
(Ch. IV) (Hindustani Academy, Allahabad, 1950). But his arguments against 
the evidence of the Kambuja Ins. are unconvincing. 

157. Among the disciples of Sankara the most prominent are Suresvara, the author 
of the famous Vdrttika, and the Naishkarmyasiddhi; and Padmapada, the 
author of the Panchapadika which has been commented upon by Prakasatman 
about A.D. 1200. 

Scholars hold different views regarding the identity of Suresvara and 
Manqlana. 


365 


CHAPTER XII 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 

L EDUCATION 
1. Courses of Study 

The old Smritis are completely silent about the methods and 
processes of primary education. But the later Smriti authorities 
introduce us to a new sacrament, significantly called vidyarambha 
(commencement of education), and alternatively aksharasvtkriti or 
akshardbhydsa (training in the alphabet). According to them the 
initiation is to take place in the boy’s fifth year, or at any rate 
before his investiture with the sacred thread. On an auspicious 
day, during the prescribed season, various deities and sages are 
to be worshipped to the accompaniment of offerings to the sacred 
fire, and honour shown to Brahmanas. Then the teacher, seated 
facing the boy, is to give him his first lesson. According to an un¬ 
named Smriti authority the curriculum is to consist of a primer 
(mdtrikanyasa ) and arithmetic ( ganita ). 1 

The ancient Brahmanical sacred law laid down a comprehen¬ 
sive scheme of Vedic education for students belonging to the first 
three classes of the Hindu social system. This is supplemented and 
modified in some important points by the later Smriti authorities 
who, however, often differ from one another. Thus as regards 
periods of study, perpetual studenthood is included by Ndradiya 
Pur ana 2 and long-term studentship by Aditya Purdna 3 among prac¬ 
tices to be eschewed in the Kali Age. On the other hand Medha- 
tithi, 4 following the authority of Manu, 5 recognises two kinds of 
religious students, viz. the life-long student (naishphika) , and the 
student who offers some return to his teacher at the end of his train¬ 
ing term (upakiCrvana). 

As for the courses of study, it is strange to find the metrical 
Vasishtha~, Ktitydyana-, and the Laugdkshi- Smritis 6 strongly con¬ 
demning the study of a Vedic recension other than one's own. This 
is quite unlike the catholic attitude of Medhatithi who requires 7 
the pupil to study three, two, or one recensions of each of the three 
Vedas instead of an equal number of recensions of one single Veda. 
In the same context Medhatithi asks the student to undertake, in 
the interval between the end of his training-term and his marriage, 


366 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


a course of study in grammar and the like for helping him to under¬ 
stand the meaning of the Vedas. Turning to another point, we find 
Parasara, Vyasa, and Laghu-Vyasa 8 insisting upon the comprehen¬ 
sion of meaning of the Veda in place of mere reading of the text. 
Medhatithi, 9 however, argues that the comprehension of meaning 
follows naturally after hearing the text. 

The Smriti authorities of this period, unlike those of the Gupta 
and preceding ages, seldom refer to technical education. 10 We 
have a concrete account of the training of a young merchant in the 
Bhdvisayattakahd f a tenth-century Jain prose romance, but it is too 
exaggerated to be of much practical value. We leam from it, how¬ 
ever, that young merchants of rich families used to be sent for resi¬ 
dence at the teacher’s house, and that not merely intellectual train¬ 
ing but also the development of character was aimed at by the 
teacher. 11 We may refer likewise to Medhatithi’s vivid and obvious¬ 
ly authentic account 12 of the high technical equipment expected from 
a Vaisya, the rudiments of which at least must have been acquired 
in boyhood from a master of the craft. 13 

Medhatithi 14 recommends the Vedic student, even after mar¬ 
riage, to go abroad for acquiring further proficiency in sciences 
(sdstra). The value of foreign travel as a means of general edu^ 
cation is indicated by an expressive simile in Kuttanimatam. 15 Here 
it is averred that those who do not learn the dress, manners, and 
speech of other lands are like oxen without horns. 

2. Student Life 

Medhatithi insists upon the strict enforcement of the old Smriti 
law requiring a Vedic student to beg daily for his alms. The student, 
he says, 16 must not beg alms one day and live by them next day 
after mixing the same with butter and so forth; on the contrary, he 
is to beg for alms and partake of them the same day. For the period 
intervening between the end of his studentship-term and his 
marriage, the student, according to him, 17 shall continue to observe 
the vow of continence, though he need not observe other vows about 
abstaining from honey, meat, and so forth. A curious rule in the 
palak&pyasamhitd 18 which recalls the Smriti law relating to inter¬ 
marriage between the varnas, requires the Brahmana to teach three, 
the Kshatriya two, and the Vaisya one varna, but forbids teaching 
even a virtuous Sudra. A text of Yama 19 and Kurma Purdna 20 con¬ 
demn a teacher putting off instruction to a pupil who has lived with 
him for a year. As to the relations between the Vedic teacher and 
his pupil, the teacher’s duty of using persuasion in the first instance 

867 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


and of applying the rod only in a mild form and in the last resort is 
inculcated by Medhatithi. 21 On the admissibility of receiving fees 
from pupils the Smriti authorities of this period are sharply divided 
in their views. Following the authority of Manu and Yajnavalkya, 
Vartiha Pur ana 22 includes the Brahmana teaching for a stipulated fee 
(bhritakadhyapaka) among those who must not be invited at a fune¬ 
ral repast. On the other hand, Matsya Purdna 23 clearly sanctions 
the acceptance of a fee from a pupil beforehand by his teacher, for 
it says that one who does not teach a science ( vidyd ) or a craft 
{silpa ) after taking a fee (mulya) shall be fined the whole of this 
sum by a just king. Medhatithi carefully distinguishes between the 
cases where teaching for a fee is allowable and those where it is not 
permitted. According to his view 24 teaching in return for a fee is 
blameworthy only when the payment is made a condition precedent 
for the teaching, while receiving instruction from a paid teacher is 
to be condemned only when the fee is paid by the student himself. 25 
Elsewhere 26 Medhatithi declares that the conferring of some benefit 
upon the teacher by the pupil, prior to his return home after finish¬ 
ing his course of study (samdvartana ), is not precluded by the text 
of Manu 27 

As regards the service to be done by the Vedic pupil, Medha¬ 
tithi 28 gives in different places examples of the kinds of household 
work to be performed by him as well as those forbidden to him. 29 

3. Female Education 

Long before the present period the Smritis had denied the right 
or privilege of Vedic study to women. By progressively sanctioning 
early marriage of girls, they further destroyed the chances of higher 
education of women. How backward was the state of higher studies 
among girls in general during the present age is proved by the signi¬ 
ficant omission of all references to women teachers in the contem¬ 
porary lexicographical works, and still more by the testimony of 
Medhatithi 30 to the general ignorance of the Sanskrit language among 
women. Nevertheless we have reasons to believe that women, in¬ 
cluding those not belonging to the higher classes, had some opportu¬ 
nities, as in the preceding Age, for liberal education as well as train¬ 
ing in the fine arts. Rajasekhara 31 refers, in justification of women’s 
competence in poetical skill, to examples of princesses, of daughters 
of high officials ( mahdmdtra) 1 of courtezans, and of concubines, who 
were poetesses as well as adepts in sciences ( sdstra) 9 In Avanti- 
sundarl, the accomplished wife of Rajasekhara, we have a striking 
illustration of a lady deeply learned in Sanskrit lore. 33 The dramas 
and prose romances of this Age also illustrate the contemporary state 

868 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


of learning among women. In the plays of Rajasekhara, 33a we find 
that court-ladies and even the queen’s maids-in-waiting are capable 
of composing excellent Sanskrit and Prakrit verses. Again, we have 
a number of stories pointing to the skill of princesses in the fine 
arts, specially those of painting, music and versification. 34 

4. Some Educational Centres and Establishments 

In Vikramasila monastery, referred to above, we have an out¬ 
standing example of an advanced centre of learning like Nalanda and 
Valabhi in the seventh century A.D. We have also sufficient evidence 
to prove that there existed at this Age organised educational institu¬ 
tions which were founded and maintained by the people from the 
king down to humble individuals. To begin with Northern India, 
king Avantiyarman of Kashmir (A.D. 855/6-883) appointed a certain 
well-known r teacher to expound grammar in a Vaishnava temple 
.founded by himself, while another ruler Yasaskara (A.D. 939-948) 
founded a hostelry ( matha ) for the residence of students hailing from 
Aryadesa for education. 35 Turning to Western India, we find a 
village-chief ( grdmapati ) in A.EL 945 granting lands to a community 
of scholars ( vidydrthisamgha ) and a dwelling house to the teacher 
of a school (said) which had been founded by a minister of the 
Rashtrakuta king Krishna III. It was further agreed that the Brah- 
manas of this village were to contribute to the same scholarly body 
sums at stipulated rates on occasions of tonsure, investiture with the 
sacred thread and marriage, while the Parishat was to feast the same 
body whenever a feast was given to Brahmanas. The school was 
afterwards rebuilt by another chief. 36 In South India the documents 
as usual are fuller than those of any other part of the country. A 
college -(vidyasthdna) at Bahugrama (modem Bahur near Pondi¬ 
cherry) received an endowment of three villages from the Chief 
Minister of the Ganga-Pallava king Vijaya-Nripatungavarman. At 
the time of the grant it was being continued by the residents of the 
village and it provided for the teaching of fourteen branches^of 
learning. 37 At Kanchlpuram there lay to the east of Rajasimhes- 
vara temple a college (kalluri) which is referred to in an inscrip¬ 
tion of Rajendra Chola I. 38 

II. SOCIAL LIFE 

1. Social Divisions and Sub-divisions 

The old spirit of caste segregation is reflected in a passage of 
Medhatithi 39 which requires the dead bodies of Sudras, Vaisyas, 
Kshatriyas, and Brahmanas to be carried out of the city by the 

369 

A.I.K.—24 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


south, west, north, and east gates respectively. As regards Brah- 
manical privileges, Matsya Purdna prescribes for a Brahmana 
guilty of serious offences, banishment and branding with distinctive 
signs instead of the death penalty. Going a step further Medha- 
tithi 41 forbids not only corporal punishment, but even a money- 
fine, to be inflicted upon a guilty Brahmana. From this he draws 
the corollary that if a Brahmana of learning, good conduct, and 
noble birth casually commits a crime, he should not be punished 
even with a fine for the first offence. Like Brihaspati and Katya- 
yana before their time, Sumantu 42 forbids slaying of an dtatayi 
(desperado) in the case of his being a Brahmana, while an un-named 
Smriti authority 43 includes the killing of dtatayi Brahmanas in 
righteous warfare among forbidden acts. Finally Skanda Purdna, 44 
developing a line of thought in Manu 45 observes that he who makes 
a gift in a straightforward fashion, without scrutiny (into the quali¬ 
ties of the Brahmana donee), satisfies the manes as well as the gods. 
While thus following the older precedent relating to Brahmanical 
immunities and privileges, the Smritis of this period equally pursue 
the older tradition in condemning Brahmanas of particular types. 
Like Manu and Yajhavalkya, Vardha Purdna 46 gives long lists of 
Brahmanas wdio, because of their physical appearance or occupa¬ 
tion or conduct, must not be invited to a funeral repast. Among 
these is the devalaka (defined as a Brahmana worshipping a deity 
for money for three years) who, according to an un-named Smriti 
authority, 47 is so impure that a man touching him must purify him¬ 
self by bathing with his clothes on. A list of six classes of Brah¬ 
manas who, though born as such, are not Brahmanas at all, occurs in 
Sdtdtapa quoted by Apararka. 48 The Brahmanas, again were de¬ 
graded by residence in various foreign lands. As Matsya Purdna 49 
says, Brahmanas living in the mlechchha countries of Trisahku, 
Barbara, G$ra (Orissa), Andhra (Telugu country), Takka (Punjab), 
Dravida (Tamil country), and Konkana must not be invited to a 
funeral repast. What is more singular still, some Smriti authorities 
of this period do not exempt the dtatayi Brahmana from being execut¬ 
ed. Thus Vriddha-Hdrita and Matsya Purdna repeat Manu’s famous 
text 50 condoning, if not enjoining, the killing even of a learned 
Brahmana who is an dtatayi. More radical is the view of Visva- 
rupa 61 who allows immunity not only to the slayer of an dtatayi 
Brahmana, but also to one who has killed a Brahmana in battle, and 
one who has done so for money at the instigation of another. 

We now turn to the class of 6udras who stand at the other end 
of the social scale. The later Smritis follow and even surpass their 
predecessors in emphasising the social and religious disabilities of 
this class. Thus, according to a text of Pa rasa r a, 5 2 eating a gudra’s 


870 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


food, association with a Sudra, sitting on the same seat with a 
Sudra, and taking lessons from a Sudra are acts dragging down even 
a ‘blazing’ person. An un-named* Smriti 63 includes a Sudra’s cook¬ 
ing of food for Brahmanas and the like in the list of practices 
forbidden by the consensus of virtuous men at the beginning of 
the Kali Age. A new departure is marked by a few texts which 
go to the length of declaring the touch or even sight of a Sudra 
to be an act of pollution. Thus, according to an un-named Smriti, 64 
a twice-born man, on seeing a Sudra, must stop performance of his 
rite, while one touching him must take a bath. According to 
Gargya, a twice-born man, on touching a Sudra or a Nisbada, must 
purify himself by ceremonial sipping of water. 64a With these rules 
may be contrasted the texts of the ancient Grihya-sutras and Dharma- 
sutras which, by requiring the feet of Brahmana and other guests 
to be washed by Sudras, do not at least contemplate the Sudra to be 
an untouchable. 65 The old Smriti ban on Vedic teaching to Sudras 
is repeated during this period by Laghu-Vyasa 6 6 who forbids the 
Veda to be taught in the vicinity of Sudras. Similarly according to 
K&sikhanda, 67 a Brahmana must not let a Sudra hear a Vedic mantra. 

We may now turn to the views of Medhatithi which are suffi¬ 
ciently important and distinctive to be considered separately. Thus, 
as regards the Sudra’s social status, Medhatithi 68 observes that 
Manu’s text, inculcating the Sudra’s divinely ordained duty of servi¬ 
tude and his incapacity for emancipation, is a pure declaration 
(arthavada ), since another text of Manu declares the Sudra eligible 
to release from servitude under special circumstances. Slavery, con¬ 
tinues Medhatithi, 59 instead of being innate in the Sudra, is voluntary 
with him, for he acquiesces in it only with a view to acquiring merit 
and, even then, he cannot be given away or pledged, unlike a bought 
or house-born slave. In fact, concludes Medhatithi, a Sudra does 
nothing wrong if, being in possession of wealth, he lives without 
dependence upon a Brahmana. This discussion clearly shows that 
Medhatithi recognises the Sudra’s absolute right to personal freedom. 
What is more, Medhatithi 60 explains Manu’s term gudrasishya (pujpil 
of a Sudra) to mean that Sudras were sometimes teachers of gram¬ 
mar and other sciences. Dealing with the Sudra’s religious rights, 
Medhatithi, in the fashion of the Makdbhdrata , 61 excludes the Sudras 
from stages of life other than that of the householder. As he obser¬ 
ves, 62 the Sudra, by serving Brahmanas and living as a householder, 
attains through service of Brahmanas the fruit of all dsramas except 
salvation, which is the fruit of the fourth dsrama alone. As a house¬ 
holder the Sudra is not entitled to perform Smdrta rites of marriage, 


371 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


but he is not prohibited from uttering the name of a deity according 
to the views of revered teachers. 63 Again, according to Medhatithi, 64 
while Srauta rites are not open to a Sudra, because of his ineligi¬ 
bility for initiation, there is no prohibition against his performing 
those that are prescribed for all in the Smritis. Referring to 
Manu, who censures a Brahmana for performing the Agnihotra 
rite with money obtained from a Sudra, Medhatithi 65 observes that 
this does not apply to cases of compulsory rites already under¬ 
taken, and that it applies in fact only to the Fire-laying ceremony 
(agnyadheya) mentioned in the text. Similarly Visvarupa 66 ob¬ 
serves that; the naming ceremony and other sacraments are to be 
performed for Sudras, but without mantras. In short, the Sudra, 
according to Medhatithi, has limited duties corresponding to his 
limited rights. As he observes, 67 the Sudra incurs sin only if he 
commits acts that are expressly prohibited to him; the Sudra is not 
entitled to initiation and similar sacraments, and he incurs no sin 
for failure to bathe and fast and worship the deities. 

The Smriti authors of this period deal also with various ethnic 
and professional groups known to the Brahmanical sacred law from 
ancient times as mixed castes. According to Medhatithi 68 sons 
of twice-born classes, born out of women of lower varnas other 
than Sudras, are entitled to the ceremony of initiation, and thence 
to all the privileges of a twice-born man. Among individual caste- 
groups the Ambashthas are declared by Usanas and Vaikhdnasa - 
Smartasutra, after Manu, 69 to be descended from the union of 
Brahmana males with Vaisya females, and to have various occupa¬ 
tions including agriculture and perhaps surgery. The Ambashthas 
are definitely included among Sudra castes in Brihaddharma Purdna. 10 
Usanas 71 mentions a similar caste-group called Bhishak, which is sup¬ 
posed to be the offspring of Brahmana males and Kshatriya females, 
and to be occupied with the study of medicine, astronomy, astrology, 
and mathematics. The caste of Karana, derived in the older 
Smritis 72 from the union of Vaisya males with Sudra women or in 
similar ways, is included among Sudra castes in the Brihaddharma 
Purdna passage just cited. Again, the term Kayastha, signifying a 
royal official in the earlier Smritis, inscriptions, and general litera¬ 
ture, 73 occurs in V edavydsa-Smriti 14 in a list of Sudra castes. The 
largest number of texts deals, naturally enough, with Chandalas 
known to the Smriti law from early times as occupying the lowest 
rank in the order of mixed castes. Reproducing the provisions of 
the older law, Agni Purdna 76 declares that Chandalas shall be 
employed for the execution of criminals, they shall wear the clothes 
of the dead, while they must live outside the village and must not 
touch others. Medhatithi 76 assigns to Sopakas (supposed to be 

372 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


born of Chandalas by Pukkasa women) the tasks of executing crimi¬ 
nals, of carrying away unclaimed corpses and taking their clothes, 
of eating cakes offered to the dead and the like. Like the earlier 
Smriti law, that of the present age lays down strict rules for pre¬ 
venting the pollution of other classes by the touch of Chandalas. 77 
Medhatithi, again, gives examples of the distinctive signs 78 that 
should be borne by Chandalas when going about their business. 
Elsewhere 79 Medhatithi extends the rule about untouchability of 
Chandalas to other pratiloma castes such as the Suta, the Magadha, 
and the Ayogava. A new question taken up for discussion by the 
Smritis of this age, and testifying to an intensified spirit of caste 
exclusiveness, relates to the impurity of the Chandala’s shadow 
On the one hand Atri, Angiras, Satatapa, and Ausanasa-Smriti 80 go 
to the length of prescribing purification by bath for crossing a 
Chandala’s shadow, while Vyaghrapada and Brihaspati 80a would have 
the Chandala kept beyond a prescribed distance. On the other 
hand, £ivadharmottara 81 says that the shadow of Chandalas or out- 
castes does not pollute a man. It is to the credit of Medhatithi 82 
that he sides with the latter group of Smritis in declaring that the 
Chandala’s shadow cannot pollute the others. 

In the Smritis of this period we also catch reflections of the 
Brahmanical view relating to social intercourse with various hete¬ 
rodox sects. It appears that not only the touch but even the 
sight of these sects was regarded by some authorities as involving 
pollution. Thus Brahmanda Purdna 83 enjoins that one should bathe 
with his clothes on after touching Saivas, Pasupatas, Lokayatikas, 
and others. According to a similar text of Shattrimsanmata 8A one 
should do the same if he touches Bauddhas, Pasupatas, Laukayatikas 
and others. Vriddha-Harita 85 enjoins purification by bath on touch¬ 
ing Saivas and on entering a Saiva or a Buddhist temple. An un¬ 
named Smriti 86 lays down that one should look at the Sun for puri¬ 
fication on seeing Jains, Pasupatas, Bauddhas, Kaulas and so forth, 
and should purify himself by bath on touching them. 

Such are the scattered references found in the Smriti law of 
this period to the divisions and sub-divisions of the Hindu social 
system. In the contemporary historical records we have some 
evidence of the extent to which this law was observed in actual 
practice. 87 In so far as the Brahmanas are concerned, the inscrip¬ 
tions of this period repeatedly describe the Brahmana donees of 
land as being devoted to the study of the Vedas and engaged in the 
performance of their religious rites. And yet it is remarkable that 
Brahmanas occasionally followed occupations permitted only in 
times of distress or even positively degrading according to the 


373 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Smriti law. 88 Like the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas sometimes 
followed occupations not allowed to them ordinarily. 89 Other 
records introduce us to the various sub-divisions among the four 
fundamental castes. Thus as regards the Brahmanas, the Niagara 
(or Sapadalaksha) section of them has been traced with the help of 
inscriptions to the kingdom of the Maitrakas of Valabhi. 90 Refer- 
rences to various sub-divisions of the mercantile castes have been 
found in the inscriptions as well as general literature of this period. 9 ^ 

Among the mixed castes, certain inscriptions of the latter half 
of the eighth century, belonging to the Pandya kingdom, refer to 
members of a Vaidya lineage ( vaidyakula ) occupying high offices of 
State. 92 Again, we find in inscriptions and literary works of the 
sixth century and thereafter, occasional references to individuals 
of the Karan a caste who filled high governmental offices, though 
the alternative sense of a scribe is not unknown down to later 
times. 93 Inscriptions and works of general literature from the 
latter half of the ninth century onwards refer to a caste destined to 
attain great importance in later times, viz. the caste of Kayasthas. 94 

As regards the foreign races that had settled in India in the 
preceding centuries, the records of this period show that with the 
exception of the Muslims they had been thoroughly assimilated with¬ 
in the Hindu social system. These races, to begin with, must have 
adopted everywhere the indigenous language—we hear even of a 
&aka poet Kapila composing a record of the Saindhavas of West 
Kathiawad. 95 Still more important is the fact, to be noted later, 
that the inscriptions of this time have preserved for us a few exam¬ 
ples of Hunas and other chiefs being married into Brahmana families. 

Compared with the abundant data of the pre-Gupta and Gupta 
periods about slavery, we have very scanty information about this 
institution in the present Age. The humane treatment of the slave 
as well as of his wife and son is recommended by Medhatithi. 96 
In South India, under the Imperial Cholas, not only did the temples 
acquire slaves by purchase, but poor people sometimes voluntarily 
sold themselves into slavery to temples to escape starvation during, 
times of famine. 97 Finally we have a story in Upamitibhava- 
prapanchakathd 98 which shows that the aboriginal Bhillas traded 
in slaves. 


2. Marriage Rules 

The Smyiti authorities of this period treat the older marriage 
rules sometimes with considerable independence. As regards 
inter-caste marriages, Medhatithi 199 would make marriages of 

874 


X 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


Brahmanas with Kshatriya and Vaisya women altogether excep¬ 
tional, while forbidding the marriage of a Brahmana with a Sudra 
girl. Nciradiya Pitraria 100 declares that marriages of twice-born 
men with girls of other varnas are forbidden in the Kali Age. In 
another context Medhatithi gives the general rule about the 
status of sons born of inter-caste marriages. In the case of mar¬ 
riages in the natural ( anuloma ) order, we are told, the son takes 
the caste of the mother, and in the case of marriages in the reverse 
( prdtiloma ) order, he takes the caste of the father. Marriage with 
the daughter of a maternal uncle is condemned both by Medhatithi 
and Visvarupa. 102 Among forms of marriage, the gandharva (mar¬ 
riage by mutual love), which was sanctioned by some old Smriti 
authors and condemned by others, is definitely censured by Medha¬ 
tithi. 103 In fact Medhatithi, following the authorities of the Gupta 
Age, contemplates the girls to be given in marriage, as a general rule, 
by their guardians. 104 As regards the marriageable age of girls, 
Medhatithi agrees with the views of the authorities of the preced¬ 
ing age. Girls, says he, 10? should be given away in marriage when 
they are eight or six years old and called nagnika. Again he says 106 
that the right time for giving away a girl in marriage is between 
her eighth year and her attaining puberty. The relative ages of the 
bridegroom and the bride laid down by Manu, says Medhatithi in 
another context, 107 must be taken not in a literal sense, but gene¬ 
rally to mean that one should marry a girl very much younger than 
himself, such being the practice of cultured men. 

When the guardian, for some reason or other, is unable to 
bestow the girl before her marriageable age, she is allowed by the 
old Smriti law to choose her own husband after waiting for a short 
term. Referring to this rule Medhatithi 108 explains that a girl 
should stay in her father’s house for three years after attaining 
puberty (in her twelfth year), and then she may choose her husband 
without fear of sin. In case the bridegroom dies after payment of the 
nuptial fee, the girl, says Medhatithi, 109 should be asked to choose 
her own husband. In the same context 110 Medhatithi lays down 
appropriate rules for disposal of the fee according as the girl chooses 
to marry a husband other than the younger brother of the dead 
bridegroom, or else elects to remain a life-long celibate. 

Medhatithi’s rule relating to the repudiation of a girl after her 
betrothal reflects his view of the inviolability of the marriage 
sacrament. According to him 111 repudiation of a maiden suffering 
from physical or mental defects, even after acceptance, is allowed 
before the performance of the marriage. Writing in a prosaic 
strain, he says in another context 112 that while other commodities 


375 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


can be returned even after ten days with mutual consent, this rule 
of law does not apply to girls given away in marriage. Just as used 
and worn-out clothes cannot be restored to the seller even within ten 
days’ time, so a maiden who has been married cannot be abandoned. 
Even when girls are given away for a fee, Medhatithi continues, they 
may be treated like other commodities only before marriage, while 
a girl who has been given away according to the approved forms 
cannot be revoked at all. Concluding his argument, he observes 
that Yajnavalkya’s rule, 113 allowing a girl to be taken back for a 
better bridegroom even after her betrothal, holds good before and 
not after the seventh step (at the nuptial ceremony) is taken; V?hen 
both parties have necessary qualifications, the betrothal cannot be 
revoked even before marriage, while even a defective wife (other 
than a non-virgin) cannot be abandoned after marriage. 

As regards re-marriage of women, Agni Pur&na 114 repeats the 
remarkable texts of Narada and Parasara permitting a woman to 
take a second husband in the event of five calamities, viz . when 
the husband is lost (i.e. unheard of), or is dead, or has adopted the 
life of a recluse, or is impotent, or has become an outcaste. Likewise 
Visvarupa 115 seems to sanction remarriage of women, for he quotes 
an authority permitting a father to give away his daughter, though 
no longer a virgin. On the other hand, it is forbidden by Brahma 
Purina and Medhatithi. 116 

As to the custom of niyoga, Visvarupa 117 permits it in the cases 
of a Sudra and a royal family without a successor. Medhatithi 118 
forbids the connection of a widow with another man for the sake 
of her maintenance, or for progeny. But elsewhere 119 he follows 
the authoritative tradition in allowing niyoga to widows. What 
is more, he amplifies the law of niyoga by saying 120 that the elders 
entitled to authorise the act are the mother-in-law, the father-in-law, 
and other members of the husband’s family, but not those of the 
wife’s own family. The process of authorisation, Medhatithi con¬ 
tinues, may be repeated in the event of a daughter or a blind or a 
deaf son being born. The law of niyoga , he further observes, 121 
applies not only to a widow, but also to a woman whose husband is 
impotent, and so forth. 

The general literature also reflects the current ideas and prac¬ 
tices regarding marriage. AbhidhanaratnamdW 22 contains the 
words varshd and patimvara meaning a girl choosing her own hus¬ 
band, as also the words punarbhu and didhishu meaning a remarried 
woman. We learn from a number of tales in Upamitibhava- 
prapanchakathd that while love-marriages were known, they were 

376 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


regularly solemnised only after approval of the girls’ guardians. 
It appears, however, that marriages were often arranged by parents 
or other guardians of the parties, sometimes even before the latter 
were born. Sometimes girls, with the approval of their parents, 
bhose their husbands at a svayamvara ceremony. No social obloquy 
was attached to marriages between first cousins. But a woman took 
it to be a grave misfortune to become a co-wife. 123 The historical 
records of this period tend to show that notwithstanding the ban of 
the Smriti-iaw on this point, inter-marriages of Brahmanas with 
Kshatriya women were still prevalent. 123a 

3. Law of Adultery 

Medhatithi’s view 124 of the law relating to adultery agrees 
with the strict ideas of Gautama and Manu who would have the 
guilty pair put to death with torture. He prescribes severe punish¬ 
ment even for those who have just begun to make approaches to 
other men’s wives, while he lays down the death penalty for a non- 
Brahmana committing adultery with a woman of the twice-born 
caste, as well as for a man guilty of forcible connection with a 
family-woman ( kulastri ) of lower caste whose husband is alive. 
And yet it would appear from notices in the contemporary literature 
that there were, as in former times, various classes of notoriously 
frail women, while other women occasionally committed sin. The 
evil reputation of women of the former type is illustrated by 
AbhidhanaratnamaW 25 which applies to the actor (nata) a synonym 
(jayajiva) signifying his dependence upon the earnings of his 
wife, as well as by Ratirahasya 126 which includes the wives of 
dancers and singers (charana) among those who are easily amenable 
to seduction. Similarly Medhatithi 127 mentions that the wives of 
char anas, though not exactly prostitutes, admitted paramours into 
their houses with the permission of their husbands. The list of 
women who easily succumb to the seducer’s wiles is given in Rati~ 
rahasya and in Upamitibhavaprapanchdkathd , 128 

The historical records support the Smriti law. In an inscrip¬ 
tion of A.D. 992, belonging to the reign of the Western Chalukya 
king Ahavamalla, 129 a list of penalties is laid down for various 
offences according to which the adulterer is to be put to death, 
while the adulteress shall suffer amputation of her nose. The 
general application of the strict Smriti law in actual practice is 
testified to by the Arab writer Abu Zaid, who says (c. A.D. 916) 
that in the case of adultery both the man and the woman are put to 
death, while the man alone is punished if the woman is found to 
have been forced against her will. 130 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


4, The Position of Women 

In so far as the status of the wife is concerned, the Smriti autho¬ 
rities of the period, like their predecessors, emphasise the duty of 
absolute obedience and devotion of wives to their husbands. 
Medhatithi illustrates the wife’s duty of personal service towards 
her husband by saying 131 that she shall shampoo his feet and 
render him such other service as befits a servant. But this is sub¬ 
ject to the all-important condition that the husband follows the 
righteous path and is free from hatred as well as jealousy towards 
his wife. For the husband, so runs Medhatithi’s memorable dictum, 
has no dominion (prabhutva) over his wife. The husband and the 
wife, says he in another connection, 132 differ only in their bodies 
but are entirely united in their functions. Equal right of the hus¬ 
band and the wife to seek legal remedy against each other in the 
last resort is emphasised by Medhatithi. For he says 133 that the 
wife, very much persecuted by her husband, like the husband^yery 
much troubled by his wife, has the remedy of appealing to the king 
for decision of their disputes. Other passages deal with the wife’s 
right to maintenance by her husband. According to a verse attri¬ 
buted to Manu and quoted by Medhatithi and Vijiianesvara 134 the 
virtuous wife must be maintained even by committing a hundred 
bad acts. Similarly Daksha 136 includes the wife in the list of those 
whom one is bound to maintain. Even the wife’s fault does not 
make her liable to abandonment or forfeiture of her possessions. As 
Medhatithi says, 136 the wife, even though guilty of grievous 
sins, must not be turned out of the house. The punishment of con¬ 
fiscation prescribed by Manu for a wife hating her husband, Medha¬ 
tithi continues, is meant simply as a warning to bring her to her 
senses, and it does not sanction the confiscation of all her belongings. 
After this, it is not surprising that Medhatithi 137 requires a husband, 
when going abroad, to make provision for his wife. Indeed, according 
to him, the husband must not journey abroad leaving his wife 
behind except for the specific purposes mentioned by Manu. The 
law on the subject of the wife’s maintenance is summed up by 
Medhatithi in another context. 138 Here he says that the faithful 
wife must not be abandoned, even though she may be disagreeable 
in look, or harsh in speech, and the like. On the other hand, the 
unfaithful wife may be confined in a room when she has been guilty 
of a single act of transgression, but if she repeats the offence, she is 
to be abandoned. Referring to Yajnavalkya’s text 139 allowing a 
mere subsistence to an unfaithful wife, Medhatithi observes that it 
applies when the husband is able and willing to maintain her, but 
if he is not willing she may be abandoned. The wife, concludes 


378 


SOCIAL) CONDITIONS 


Medhatithi, must be maintained even if she hates her husband, but 
if she becomes an outcaste she may be abandoned. 

As to the husband’s right of correcting his wife, Matsya Purina 
repeats Menu’s injunction 140 authorising the husband to beat his 
erring wife (though not on the head or the back) with a rope or a 
split bamboo. With more humanity Medhatithi 141 takes Manu to 
enjoin not the actual beating of the recalcitrant wife, but only a 
method of putting her on the right path. From this he draws the 
corollary that verbal chastisement is also to be inflicted on the wife, 
while beating may be occasionally resorted to, according to . the 
gravity of the offence. Going a step further Visvarupa 142 says that 
the guarding of wives consists in being really devoted to them and 
not in beating them, and he quotes in this connection a saying of 
those acquainted with worldly ways about the delicacy of Pahchala 
women. That the imposition of money-fine was also one of the 
methods of correction open to the husband is apparent form Medha¬ 
tithi. 143 Here we read that the husband, being lord (prahhu) of 
the wife, 144 may inflict the prescribed fine (of six krishnalas) upon 
the Kshatriya or other wife, and a heavier fine upon a Brahmana 
wife, for drinking wine or for visiting shows, when forbidden to do 
so. Medhatithi 145 justifies Manu’s rule of repudiation of a wife who 
is barren, or who bears only daughters, or whose children die, on 
the ground that the husband would otherwise violate the injunction 
about laying of the sacred fire and the begetting of sons. But he 
refuses to follow Manu in sanctioning the repudiation of a wife who 
is harsh of speech. In the same context 146 Medhatithi extends 
Manu’s two conditions of such supersession (viz. that the wife’s 
consent has been obtained and that she is not disgraced) from the 
case of a devoted and modest but sick wife to those of a barren wife 
and a w r ife bearing only daughters. 

On the question of the alternatives open to a wife after she has 
waited for the prescribed period for her husband’s return from 
abroad, the views of the authorities of this epoch, as we learn from 
Medhatithi, 147 reflected their different standpoints from one of extreme 
puritanism* to one of considerable latitude. After the prescribed 
period the wife, according to one authority, must live by pursuing 
unobjectionable occupations. Modifying this strict view, Medha¬ 
tithi urges that while she must live by unobjectionable occupations 
before the expiry of her waiting term, she may live by objectionable 
pursuits thereafter. Basing his opinion on Parasara’s text quoted 
above in favour of the remarriage of women, a third authority goes 
so far as to allow the stranded wife to deviate from chastity. A 
fourth author, taking the vital word pati in Parasara’s text in the 


879 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


sense of ‘protector,’ recommends her to accept another man’s protec¬ 
tion in the capacity of toilet-maid and the like. In such a case even if 
the wife has entered into six month’s or one year’s contract, the 
husband on his return from his travel may take her back imme¬ 
diately. The fifth and the last authority would allow the wife to 
marry another husband according to the practice of punarhhus (re¬ 
married women), in which case the husband cannot interfere with 
her after his return, and she continues to be the wife of the second 
husband. 

As regards the status of the widow, the life of strict celibacy 
and self-restraint enjoined upon her by the old Smritis was sought 
to be enforced during this period. As long as a widow remains faith¬ 
ful to her husband’s memory, says Medhatithi, 147 * she deserves, to 
have her property looked after by the king; but in the contrary 
case, she is not only to be disqualified for possessing property, but 
is to be banished (in the sense of being driven out of the main build¬ 
ing and provided with a separate dwelling-house as w T ell as separate 
food and clothing). 

As in the former period, the dread rite of satl at this time was 
enjoined by some authorities, but condemned by others. 148 Accord¬ 
ing to the Arab writer Sulaiman, 149 wives of kings sometimes burnt 
themselves on the funeral pyres of their husbands, but it was for 
them to exercise their option in the matter. The actual occurrence 
of this grim rite is testified to by a few historical examples of queens 
and other ladies of high families thus scarifying their lives. 160 But 
the view, that the custom was still mainly confined to royal families 
and had not yet spread among the masses, 161 is hardly supported 
by a passage in Kuttanimatam ^ 52 which recognises it as one of the 
general virtues of a wife. 

The custom of dedicating maidens for service in temples, which 
may be traced back to older times, was continued in this period. 
Reference to this class is found in Medhatithi 163 as well as in 
inscriptions of this period. 164 Abu Zaid 154a also speaks of courte¬ 
zans attached to Indian temples. 

The class of prostitutes, known from early times, existed as a 
distinct social unit in the present age. Matsya Ptirena 165 lays down 
a list of their duties and rights ( vesyadharma ) as well as the special 
clauses of law applicable to them. The deliberate settlement of such 
women in public places is hinted at by an early Arab geographer, 
While others notice it as a peculiarity of Indians that they held this 
profession to be lawful. 166 Several passages in the literature of this 
period deal with the class of accomplished courtezans (ganika) 
whose virtues and vices are celebrated from the earliest Buddhist 


380 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


times. In two stories of Upamitibhavaprapanchakatha'^ • we find 
concrete instances of the better type of ganikas as well as of those 
of the common variety. It is above all in Ku\tanxmatam that we 
have the fullest notices of the life of a ganika during this period. It 
relates a story 168 which shows that connection of a Brahmana with 
a ganika (such as was not disapproved in the times of Bhasa and 
Sudraka) was now regarded as a disgraceful act. We may also refer 
to a passage in Kut\anvmatam illustrating at any rate the author’s 
view of the very high qualifications, both of body and mind, that a 
ganika was expected to possess at this period. 169 

In general, the position of woman was patterned on the same 
lines as in the preceding period. Amplifying the old Smriti doctrine 
of the perpetual tutelage of women, Medhatithi 160 observes that wo¬ 
men should have no freedom of action regarding the great objects of 
human existence (viz. virtue, wealth, and pleasure), but should 
obtain permission of their husbands or other male relations before 
spending money on such acts. Women who are addicted to singing 
and similar acts, Medhatithi continues, shall be restrained by their 
male guardians. Arguing that a woman’s mind is not under her 
control, and that she lacks the requisite strength, Medhatithi 161 
concludes that she shall be guarded by all her male relations at all 
times. Turning to the specific disabilities of women, we find Medha¬ 
tithi 162 justifying their general incapacity for giving evidence as 
witnesses. As he observes, unlike other qualifications which are 
acquired and hence liable to lapse through carelessness and so forth, 
fickleness is inherent in women. But elsewhere 163 he admits that 
there are women who are as truthful and as steady as the best ex¬ 
pounders of the Vedas, and they may appear as witnesses. 

On the other hand, a more humane view is taken of the hus¬ 
band^ authority over his wife. The wife, according to Medhatithi, 
must not be forsaken unless she becomes an outcaste, and ‘forsaking’ 
in this case means not that she is to be deprived of food and clothing, 
but that she is to be cut off from all intercourse and forbidden to 
do household work. According to Matsya Parana the mother must 
never be abandoned, while Medhatithi observes that the mother must 
not be turned out of the house even for failure of her maternal 
duties, for to the son the mother never becomes an outcaste. 164 
Medhatithi’s view of the law relating to female outcastes in general 
follows the humane lines indicated above. Referring to Manu’s 
penalty of banishment for outcaste women, he 166 explains it to mean 
that they shall be provided with a separate dwelling-place as well 
as food and clothes, and they may retain what they have saved. 
Again he says 166 that female outcastes, not performing the prescribed 


381 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


expiation, are to be allowed food, drink, and clothing of an inferior 
quality, and permitted to live in a separate hut close to the main 
building. 

As regards the custom of Purdah, Abu Zaid furnishes the very 
important information that most Indian Princes, while holding 
court, allowed their women to be seen unveiled by the men present, 
whether natives or foreigners. 

5 . Some Social Types 

The early Arab geographers belonging to the ninth and tenth 
centuries noticed the paucity of towns as a distinctive characteristic 
of India in contrast with China. 167 No doubt it is because of this pre¬ 
ponderance of the rural element in Indian life that we miss in the 
literature of this period any special reference to the type of the 
city-bred man of fashion ( nagardkd ), so well described in Vatsya- 
yana’s standard work on erotics. We have on the contrary in 
Kutpanimatam 168 a remarkably full and vivid picture, doubtless 
drawn from real life, of a typical country-squire who should, accord¬ 
ing to this authority, be the first object of a courtezan’s attentions. 

The hero of this account is a young son of an officer (bhatta) 
in the king’s service, who is his own master as his father constantly 
resides in the royal capital. His dress and manners are sufficiently 
showy. He wears long hair with a thick tuft, which is bound with 
a long-handled and sharp-toothed comb and is done up with a multi¬ 
coloured tassel. He wears finger-rings as well as ear-rings of a 
distinctive sort, while his neck is adorned with thin golden threads. 
All his limbs were dyed yellowish with saffron rubbed on his body. 
He wears ornamental shoes, while his clothes have a gold border and 
are dyed yellow with saffron. A very showy fellow, he makes his 
public appearance in the company of a train of attendants. In the 
huge dancing-hall which is crowded with guild-masters, merchants, 
parasites and gamblers, he sits with his followers on specially pro¬ 
vided seats. He is served by a young betel-casket bearer with paint¬ 
ed finger-nails, with a garland of thick glass beads around his neck 
and with conch-shell bangles on his wrist. He is surrounded by 
five or six armed attendants accustomed to speak freely and bearing 
a haughty mien. Equally conceited and foolish, he recites verses 
incorrectly and intrudes upon the conversation of intelligent people 
sitting by his side, while he makes known the king’s confidence in 
his father. He inwardly enjoys the extravagant praise of his atten¬ 
dants for his knowledge of song, instrumental music and dramaturgy, 
his charities and his love of hunting. He compliments, without under¬ 
standing, the performances of the female dancers. 169 


382 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


In contrast with the life-like description of the country-squire 
given above is the slightly idealised picture of the life and surround¬ 
ings of a poet that is given by Rajasekhara 170 —a picture which re¬ 
minds us in some respects of Vatsyayana’s nagdraka. The poet, we are 
told, should be pure in speech, mind, and body. Purity in speech and 
mind is derived from the sdstras, while for ensuring bodily purity 
the nails of the feet shoul be cut, betel-leaf should be chewed, the 
body should be anointed a little with unguents, the clothes should 
be costly but not gaudy, and the head should be decked with flowers. 
The poet’s residence should be swept clean; it should have various 
sites suited to the needs of the six seasons; it should take away 
sweat and fatigue; the attached garden-house should have its awn¬ 
ing of numerous trees. The house should have a miniature hill for 
sporting; it should have tanks and ponds; it should have a collection 
of tame birds and animals comprising peacocks, deer, pigeons, ruddy 
geese, sw r ans, partridges, herons, ospreys, parrots, and starlings; it 
should have a shower-house with excellent floor, a creeper-bower 
as well as swings and hammocks; the poet’s male and female ser¬ 
vants, his scribe, his friends, and the ladies of his family should 
have appropriate specified qualifications and should serve him in 
the specified manner. 

6. Some Groups and Associations 

There are good grounds for believing that a number of groups 
and associations belonging to towns and villages played an important 
part in the social life of this age. Giving an instance of the co-ope¬ 
rative efforts of villagers, Medhatithi 172 says that the people of one 
village, afflicted by constant encroachment on their grazing-grounds 
and their water-reserves by the people of another village, would form 
a compact for defence of the ancient privileges of the village 
(praktanigrdmasthiti), and any one breaking the compact and joining 
the other party would be liable to the penalty of banishment, or in 
the alternative, to the milder punishment of a fixed money-fine (six 
nishkas or four suvarnas) as laid down by Manu. To the above we 
may add that Medhatithi 173 , includes samghas (associations) of the 
same or different castes among those whose members are liable to a 
fine for breach of compact under Manu’s law. From this it follows 
that not only village groups, but also associations of single and 
multiple castes, were engaged in collective enterprises based on 
mutual compacts recognised by law. The important functions per¬ 
formed by the organised village assemblies in South India in receiv¬ 
ing and managing trust-funds will be treated elsewhere. But a few 
similar examples may be given here. From a Kannada inscription 
of A.D. 978 174 we learn that a trust, then created in favour of an 


883 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


) 


aimshouse (sattraj } was placed under the control of thirty households 
of the town. Other records speak of the activities of temple com¬ 
mittees (goshthi) whose history can be traced back to a few early 
Sanchl inscriptions 175 and a body now mentioned for the first 
time, namely, the community of goldsmiths {sauvarnnikoimahafana), 
placed in charge of temple funds. Purchases of house sites on 99 
years’ lease by the sauvarnnikamahdjanfis as well as the goshlhis of a 
certain temple out of the temple funds are commemorated in a series 
of documents bearing dates between A.D. 865 and 904 and belonging 
to the region of the Upper Ganga basin. 176 An inscription of 
A.D. 882-83 177 mentions that the management of certain charities, 
made by a few horse-dealers in Pyithudaka (Peheva in Karnal Dis¬ 
trict), was entrusted to the goshthikas . This involved the collection 
of various self-imposed taxes from the horse-dealers and purchasers 
as well as their distribution for specified purposes. An association 
of weavers, entrusted with the management of a temple, is referred 
to in an inscription of the reign of Uttama-Chola. 178 

7. Standard of Living 

The high standard of living of the people prevailing generally 
in earlier times seems to have been maintained during the present 
period. The names of a number of professions mentioned by Medha- 
tithi 179 reveal a state of luxurious living. Such are the professions 
of a bath-man (snapaka), a toilette-man ( prasddhaka) f and a pro¬ 
fessional cook fpachaka) as well as a maid-in-waiting (sairandhfi). 
The variety of garments and ornaments current in these times was 
remarkable. Abhidhanaratnamdla^o gives the synonyms for an 
upper garment ( pravarana ) and a woollen blanket ( dvika ) as well as 
women’s bodice ( kurpasa ) and petticoat (chandataka ), while it 
knows 181 technical terms (kutha, etc.) for blankets thrown over the 
backs of elephants. Similarly it refers to ear-ornaments (tatanka) t 
armlet ( keyura ), neck-ornament ( graiveya) y finger-rings, waist-bands, 
and women’s leg ornaments (nupura) } In a list of things delightful 
to the touch found in Upamitibhavaprapanchdkathd 182 are included 
couches (sayana) with soft cotton sheets, seats filled with goose 
feathers, gowns (brihatikd) and other soft garments, upper garments 
(prdvdra), woollen-cloth (? rdllikd or rakshikd), silks, home-grown 
(patt&Thsuka) and Chinese (chtn&miuka), as well as musk, aloes, 
sandal, and other unguents. Girls before marriage used to wear blue 
bodices ( cholikd ), while after marriage they tied the knot (ruin) to 
their garments. 183 Women’s golden as well as jewelled girdles 
(kanchi and rasand) and large ear-ornaments ( tatanka) are mentioned 
in verses quoted by Rajasekhara. 184 Ladies of high families habi- 


384 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS: 


tually delighted in the display of ornaments and the use of various 
unguents. In Rajasekhara’s elaborate description of the heroine’s 
toilette, arranged by the queen just after her bath, we are told 185 
that her limbs were anointed with saffron and her eyes with colly- 
rium, her lovely locks well arranged, her hair was decorated with 
flowers, while her person was adorned with ear-rings, rows of brace¬ 
lets, a ruby-encrusted girdle, and emerald-anklets. The same princess, 
while on the swing, wears a pearl-necklace, bracelets ( valaya ), a 
girdle with small bells attached to it, and jewelled anklets. Almost 
the same ornaments are worn by the heroine in another of Raj a- 
sekhara’s dramas while playing with a ball. 186 The same lady at 
night-time appears in a robe of Chinese silk with a pearl necklace 
around her neck, camphor powder on her bosom, and sandal paste 
thickly applied to her limbs, so that in the admiring sight of the king 
she looks hke a goddess descended from the moon. 187 

The little cameos descriptive of the seasons and the nights that 
we find in Rajasekhara’s dramas also reflect the contemporary style 
of living. In a description of the end of the winter and the beginning 
of the spring season, we are told 188 that the maidens no longer put 
bees’ wax on their lips, they do not anoint their braids of hair with 
fragrant oil, they do not put on a bodice, and they are indifferent to 
the use of thick saffron for their mouths, while they again set their 
hearts on sandal-juice. Again we are told in a description of the 
evening 189 that the jewelled roof-terraces ( manimayavalabhi ) and 
the picture galleries (bhittinivesa) are being opened for pleasure, the 
couches ( paryanka ) are being hastily spread out by the attendants, 
and the maids-in-waiting (sairandhrl) are incessantly moving their 
fingers on the silks. At the rise of the full-moon, we read, 190 aloes 
are burnt as incense at the pleasure-houses ( lildgara ), where like¬ 
wise the lamps are lighted, the festoons of rare pearls are suspended, 
the charming pleasure-couches ( kelisayana ) are being prepared, and 
hundreds of female messengers (duti) are conversing together. 
Among the delights of summer are mentioned 191 those of rubbing 
sandal-paste at mid-day, playing , in bathing-pools until night-fall, 
and drinking cool liquor (surd) at evening, as well as listening to 
the cooling sound of the flute. In a description of a dark night we 
find 192 that the girls then go out with garlands to seek their lovers 
after decking their ears with peacock-plumes, their arms with 
emerald-bracelets, their bosoms with sapphire necklaces and their 
cheeks with musk. In summer women cooled their bodies with 
sandal-juice. 193 To the above, may be added the evidence of 
UpamitibhavaprapanckdkatM 194 according to which quantities of 
aloe-wood incense as well as woollen blankets (rallaka-kambala) 
were used in winter. 

385 

A.I.K.—23 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The description of the typical poet in Kavya.mimd.msd and of the 
typical country-squire in Kuttanimatam, to which we have already 
referred, widely as they differ from each other, illustrates at least the 
prevailing view of luxury of these classes. It was, however, in the 
royal palace that pomp and ostentation reached their zenith. Among 
the luxuries of the palace, we find a plantain-arbour ( kadalxgriha) 
with a raised emerald seat inside, 135 a king’s sleeping-chamber with 
perforated columns and a jewelled quadrangle, 196 and a crystal- 
house with picture of a king, queen, jester, betel-box bearer, chow- 
rie-bearer, dwarf, and monkey painted on the wall. 197 The female per¬ 
sonnel of the queen’s apartment in Karpuramanjarl consisted of 
armed groups of five chowrie-bearers, five maids-in-waiting, five 
betel-box bearers, and five bath-keepers guarding her on the four 
sides, as well as a group of five overseers with golden staves in their 
hands. 198 


To the above testimony drawn from the indigenous literature 
we may add that of the contemporary Arab writers who agree in 
declaring the love of ornament to be characteristic of the Indians. 
According to Sulaiman, Indians, both male and female, decorated 
themselves with golden bracelets and precious stones. Indians, says 
Ibn al-Faklh, used to wear ear-rings, and both males and females 
adorned themselves with golden bracelets. According to Abu Zaid, 
Indian kings wore necklaces of precious red and green stones mount¬ 
ed on gold, while they held pearls in the greatest esteem. Speaking 
of the tract from Kambay to Saimur (Chaul) Ibn Haukal says that 
because of the extreme heat the men used fine muslin garments. 199 

8. Popular Amusements 

The popular amusements of these times were similar to those 
of the preceding period. It was the fashion for high-born girls to 
play with balls (kanduka). Especially in the spring season and on 
the occasion of the Swing Festival, they used to enjoy the swing from 
trees in a garden. A very spectacular scene was presented by the 
charchari (musical or dancing) performance. On this occasion mai¬ 
dens, richly adorned with pearls, performed various dances known 
by appropriate technical terms, and thereafter they sprinkled one 
another with water from jars sometimes adorned with jewels. Or 
else, suitably attired and posed, they paraded as savage mountaineers, 
or even enacted cemetery scenes with offerings of human fiesh in 
their hands. 200 Dancing for recreation by ladies and dramatic re¬ 
presentations in honour of deities are referred to in the inscriptions 
of the period. 201 

Other amusements described in the literature of this period 


886 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


remind us of the diversions of the ndgaraka described in Vatsyayana’s 
Kdmasutra. In Rajasekhara’s account of a poet’s daily life* 02 we 
read that he is to arrange a poetical assembly ( kavyagoshthi ) after 
his mid-day meal. Elsewhere reference is made to the goshthl of 
persons in high life, of a queen and of other women. 203 Abhidhdna- 
ratnamdld gives us technical terms for drinking-parties (dpdna and 
panagoshthi) as well as for drinking in company (sahapiti and saha- 
pdnaka ), 204 Ratirahasya 205 tells us how young pleasure-seekers used 
to meet their mistresses at night in well-lighted and scented houses 
amid amorous assemblies (narmagoshthi), to the accompaniment of 
sweet music. According to the same authority 206 excursions to 
gardens (udyanay&trd), excursions for drinking (pdnaydtra), and 
water-sports ( jaldvatdra ) gave opportunities to unchaste wives to 
meet their lovers. A vivid description of the spring revels in a capital 
town, breathing the spirit of a true saturnalia , is found in Upamiti - 
bhavaprapanchdkathd. 207 Describing the scene at the mythical town 
of Bhavach&kra (‘Round of re-birth’) the author tells us how the 
people trooped out of the city into the garden and sported beneath 
valuka, asoka, and other trees, while drunken revellers engaged 
themselves in amorous sports, and gallants took up goblets of scented 
wines from bejewelled drinking-vessels and placed them to the lips 
of their mistresses. Amid songs and dances the revellers formed 
themselves into numerous drinking bouts (dpdnaka). The climax 
was reached when the king, mounted on a huge elephant and sur¬ 
rounded by a large retinue, emerged out of the town and joined in 
the revelry. His appearance was greeted with music from various 
instruments, sprinkling of sandal and saffron juice, song, dance, 
laughter, and other exuberant manifestations. The long, having 
Worshipped the goddess Chandika, strangely enough, with libations 
of wine, formed a drinking party with the assembled people. The end 
of the revels was marked by tragic scenes. Princess R&tilalita, wife 
of the king’s brother, being pressed by her intoxicated husband, 
danced much against her will in the presence of the assembly. This 
excited the evil passion of the king, who tried to lay violent hands 
upon her when all the others were stupefied by drink. Escaping from 
his clutches the princess sought the protection of her husband who 
challenged the king to a duel. In the resultant melee the king was 
killed by his brother in single combat. 

9. Lawful Food and Drink 

On the subject of lawful food the Smriti law of thi^ period fol¬ 
lows, with some explanations, the traditional lines. Brahma 
Purdna 208 declares a number of herbs and vegetables as well as 
cereals to be forbidden food. Medhatithi 208 * lays down at great 


387 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

length the occasions on which the eating of meat is lawful, and he 
seeks to define clearly the animals whose meat is or is not lawful 
food. From this it appears that notwithstanding Manu’s general 
list of prohibited birds and animals, the peacock, the horse, the white 
ass, the female sparrow, the wild cock and the wild pig counted 
distinctly as lawful food, while certain kinds of web-footed and fish¬ 
eating birds were classed optionally as such. Medhatithi again 
gives 209 the cow, the goat and the deer as instances of animals with 
one line of teeth which according to the text are fit to be eaten. 

As regards the use of intoxicating drinks, we seem to mark in 
the authorities of our times a distinct tendency towards relaxation 
of the strict rules of their predecessors in the case of the Kshatriya 
and Vaisya castes. Both ¥Ianu and Yajnavalkya forbid the three 
upper classes to drink different classes of wines, and impose penances 
ranging up to death upon those guilty of indulging in the same. But 
Medhatithi 210 and Visvarupa 211 understand Manu’s text to mean 
that while the three kinds of sum (viz. those made from rice-flour, 
molasses, and honey or grapes or madhuka flowers) are forbidden to 
Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas and the Vaisyas are permitted to drink 
the last two kinds. It is the Brahmana drinker of surd alone, explains 
Medhatithi, 212 who is guilty of mortal sin (mahdpdtaka) , and as such 
is liable to corporal punishment notwithstanding the injunctions of 
the Smritis to the contrary. Summing up the settled law ( vyavasthd) 
on the subject, Medhatithi 213 observes that while the penance for 
intentionally drinking wine made from rice-flour is death, that for 
intentional drinking of other kinds of wine involves performance of 
only the lunar penance (chdndrdyana) . Among original authorities 
Aditya Parana 2 1 3& and Brahma Purdria 214 include the drinking of 
wine ( madya ) among practices to be eschewed by twice-born men in 
the Kali Age. On the other hand Vishnudhalrmottara 216 mentions ten 
kinds of wines (including those prepared from madhuka flower, from 
grape-juice, and from honey) which are forbidden to Brahmanas, 
but permitted to Kshatriyas and Vaisyas. 

We have so far dealt with the Smriti rules relating to food and 
drink. There is every reason to believe that the old Buddhist and 
Jain canonical laws on this point were still regarded as authoritative 
during the present period. As an illustration of the continuance of 
the Jain ban against meat-eating and drinking, we may refer to the 
long and severe sermons on the evils of both put into the mouths 
of some observant princes. 216 

The references in the general literature and the historical re¬ 
cords enable us to find out how far the above rules were observed in 


388 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


actual practice. In Rajasekhara’s description of the six seasons, 
partaking of pork along with newly husked rice by the people is 
said to be common during the cold ( hemanta ) season, while the 
essences of deer and quails, as also wine mixed with water, are men¬ 
tioned among the dainties of the summer season. 217 But elsewhere 
Rajasekhara mentions eating of pork among the practices of un¬ 
cultured people. 218 The literary evidence further shows that both 
men and women, other than Brahmanas, freely drank wine. Accord¬ 
ing to a verse quoted by Rajasekhara, 219 drinking wine ( madhu ), 
after partaking of pepper and betel, was the general practice among 
Southern (Dramila) ladies. Medhatithi says 220 that while Bhahmana 
women did not drink wine at festivals, Kshatriya and other women, 
to whom drinking was not forbidden, indulged in excessive drink¬ 
ing when they gathered together on festive occasions. In view of 
these statements it is reasonable to infer that the testimony regard¬ 
ing abstinence from wine by Indians, which is repeated by early 
Arab authors one after another, 221 is a rash generalisation based 
upon imperfect acquaintance with facts. On the other hand, we 
may accept the testimony of Mas’udl 222 about the eating of rhino¬ 
ceros’s flesh by the Indians to be true. 

10. Toilette and Personal Hygiene 

\ 

•: 

The high level of personal cleanliness and comfort reached in 
the preceding age was well maintained during this period. As re¬ 
gards personal hygiene, Agni Pur ana, 223 lays down elaborate rules 
for daily observance of purification of the body (saucha), cleaning 
of the teeth with twigs, and bathing by the householder. Bathing, 
again, is divided into several kinds according to its object by some 
Smriti authorities. 224 The observant Arab writers noticed these 
habits as distinctive of the Indian people. According to Suiaiman 
and Ibn al-Faklh 22 * 5 the Indians, unlike the Chinese, cleansed their 
teeth with tooth-picks and bathed daily before taking meals. 

As regards toilette, we have elsewhere noticed how the litera¬ 
ture of this period refers to the use of unguents and ornaments of 
different kinds, especially by high-born ladies. Mention has also 
been made of the vivid and life-like picture of the dress of coiffure 
of the country-squire in Kuttanimatam. 22Q We may notice here 
some further references to personal adornment. Abhidhanaratna- 
mala knows not only the synonyms for saffron, sandal, musk, cam¬ 
phor, and aloes, but also the marks ( tilaka) made on the body with 
such unguents. 227 The tilaka and similar other decorations made 
on the cheeks of maidens are referred to in two verses quoted by 
Rajasekhara. 228 We get a fairly complete list of unguents used 


389 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


in different seasons in Kdvyamtmdms <i. 229 From this account we 
learn that sandal, agallochum, saffron and musk were used in the 
rainy season, saffron with bees-wax was applied to the mouth and 
fragrant oil to hair in the cold ( hemanta ) season, crushed saffron 
was applied by women to their bodies in winter, and camphor powder 
was used in the summer season. References are also made to the 
use of other artificial aids to beauty. Thus Abhidhdnaratnamald 230 
knows technical terms ( sthdnaka and hastabimba) for a particular 
method of perfuming the body with unguents as well as those 
(patravalli ) for decorations made on women’s bodies by experts on 
beauty culture. Ratirahasya contains various recipes for removing 
bad odour from the mouth and other parts of the body, and for 
beautifying the complexion of men as well as women. 231 A satiri¬ 
cal account in TJpamitibhavaprapanchdkatha shows how old men 
were sometimes not above using these beauty aids. Describing the 
attempts of old and decrepit men to appear young, the author says 
that they used hair-dyes of various sorts, frequently cleansed their 
bodies with various oils, carefully concealed the wrinkles on their 
cheeks, drank the elixir of life, and constantly applied cosmetics to 
their persons. 232 We may refer, lastly, to Rajasekhara’s works to 
illustrate how different fashions prevailed among ladies in different 
parts of the country. We learn that Martha girls specially applied 
saffron-paste to their cheeks and collyrium to their eyes. 233 The 
chewing of betel-leaf with areca-nut and camphor was the characte¬ 
ristic of the Kerala people. 234 The Nepalese women used musk-paste 
in the summer season. 236 In a description of the characteristic 
dress and toilette of women of different regions, we are told that 
the women of Bengal ( Gauda) painted their bosoms with wet san¬ 
dal and coloured their bodies like durva grass with aloe, those of, 
Kanauj ( Mahodaya) wore large ear-ornaments and necklaces or large 
pearls dangling down to their navel, those of Malabar ( Kerala) had 
their peculiar style of coiffure and method of tying up their gar¬ 
ment-knots, while the men of Malwa ( Avanti) followed the style of 
dress of the inhabitants of the Upper Doab (Pdnchdlas) and their 
women followed the style of the Southerners. 236 Rajasekhara, with 
evident partiality for his adopted country, says that fashions of 
dress and coiffure as well as ornaments of ladies of Kanyakubja were\ 
followed by fashionable ladies all over the country. 237 

11. Beliefs and Superstitions 

The records of this period point to the continuance of the age¬ 
long belief in omens and portents. Basing its account upon the 
older astrological works, Matsya Purdna 238 gives a long and syste¬ 
matic account of omens, classifying them under appropriate heads 


390 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


and prescribing adequate remedies for averting their evil effects. 
The same work devotes a separate chapter 239 to rules for propitia¬ 
tion of planets. The extent of popular superstition is illustrated by 
a passage of Medhatithi. 240 Malevolent rites (abhichdra) , says he, 
are those causing sudden death by incantations and the like, magic- 
spells are those meant to bring others under control, while sorcery 
(krityd) produces by means of magical incantations such conditions 
as insanity and distrust against friends and relations. The abhi¬ 
chara, Medhatithi adds, is of two kinds, viz. the Vedic which is 
illustrated by the syena and similar sacrifices, and the non-Vedic 
which is exemplified by such practices as taking off the dust of one’s 
feet and pricking it with a needle. Repeatedly in the literature of 
this period we have concrete instances of such superstitions holding 
high life in their grip. In Upamitihhavaprapahchdkathd we are re¬ 
minded of the steps taken by the ministers to avert the evil eye (dur- 
janachakshurdosha.) from affecting a certain king and queen. 241 In 
the same work 242 a queen’s dream, in the last watch of the night, 
of a handsome man entering her womb is interpreted by the king 
as presaging the birth of an excellent son, and the prophecy is ful¬ 
filled in due course. In Karpiiramahjart we read how the sooth¬ 
sayers prophesied that the heroine’s husband would be an emperor, 
and the queen herself accordingly arranged her marriage with the 
king. 243 In Viddhasalabhahjikd we find the king using a ghost-trick 
with success not only against the queen’s maid-in-waiting, but against 
the queen herself. 244 After this, it is not surprising that the 
restoration of the right of a village to make offering of boiled rice 
to ghosts should be solemnly recorded in an inscription of A.D. 958 
belonging to the modern Dharwar District. 245 The Arab writer 
Abu Zaid also refers to the ‘most astonishing feats’ of the diviners 
and those who drew omens from the flight of crows in India. 246 

In conclusion we may refer to a few other beliefs of the people 
mentioned in the records of this period. The ban against sea-voyage, 
which is laid down by some older Smritis, 247 is reported by 
Ndradiyamahapurdna , 248 Suicide was resorted to both as a quasi¬ 
religious rite and as a relief against bodily ailments. We have an 
example 249 from the Kannada country of a loyal subject giving up 
his head to a goddess on the birth of the king’s son in fulfilment 
of his vow (c. A.D. 991). According, to Abu Zaid and Mas’udi a body 
of king’s companions, who had shared in taking rice with him at 
his coronation, would burn themselves to the last man after! his 
death. Again, it appears from Abu Zaid and Ibn Khordadbah that 
persons on getting old would often commit suicide by drowning or 
by burning themselves.^ 50 


391 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


12. Pious and Charitable Works 

The Smriti law of this period, following the older tradition, 
declared the gift of land as the most meritorious or all gifts, 251 
Again Matsya Parana, which is followed by Linga PiCrdna, describes 
at great length a set of 16 great gifts ( mahaddnas ) involving the dis¬ 
tribution of large quantities of gold to Brahmanas. 232 The Smriti 
law of this period also follows the older precedent in enjoining 
upon all castes (including the Madras) such pious acts as digging 
of wells, ponds, and tanks, construction of temples, distribution of 
food, and laying out of gardens. These are collectively called purta 
by way of distinction from ishta meaning the performance of Vedic 
sacrifices. 253 The inscriptions and other historical records of this 
period offer many instances of the observance of these rules. Apart 
from numerous examples of construction of temples and donation 
of lands to Brahmanas and others, we have several instances of 
kings performing the ceremonies of tuldpurusha and hiranyagarbha 
which are included in the list of 16 mahaddnas mentioned above. 254 
Other records refer to the construction of monasteries and alms¬ 
houses, digging of wells and similar activities. We have again 
several instances of gift of land for the encouragement of learning. 

13. General Estimate of Character 

From the detailed survey of social conditions, it would not be 
difficult for the reader to form a general estimate of the character of 
the people during this period. Nevertheless, a few points which are 
sure to strike the observant critic may be emphasised. We cannot 
but condemn the illiberal attitude towards &udras, and particularly 
towards the Chandalas and other castes; we must also censure the 
illiberal treatment of women, and in particular their exclusion from 
Vedic sacraments and studies and the lowering of their age of mar¬ 
riage. On the other hand, we may well admire such features of 
the Indian character as the love of learning, the spirit of charity 
and benevolence, and the high standard of fidelity and devotion main¬ 
tained by the wife. We may conclude with the remarkable tribute 
paid to the mental as well as physical qualities of Indians by an 
intelligent Arab observer whose work became, in the words of Ibn 
Khaldun, ‘the prototype of all historians.’ “The Hindus,” says 
Mas’udi, “are distinct from all other black people in point of intellect, 
government, philosophy, strength of constitution, and purity of 
colour.” 

1. Cf. the quotations in Apararka on Yoj. I. 131, Sm. C., I. 26, and Saihskara- 
prakdsa, pp. 321-26. A connected and complete account of the Vidydrambha 
ceremony is given in the late mediaeval SaThskararatnamala (904-07) of Gopl- 

302 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


natha DIkshita, which also quotes a few other authorities like Sridhara and 
Garga. 

2. I. 24, 13 -16, 

3. Quoted in Sm. C., I. 29. 

4. On Manu, III. 1. 

5. Ibid, II. 108 and 243 f. 

6. Quoted in Samskaraprakasa, 506-07 and Sm. C., I. 133-35. 

7. On Manu , III. 2. 

8. Quoted in Samskaraprakasa, 507-08. 

9. On Manu, III. 1. 

10. There are scattered references in literature, but these are not of much use. 

11. In the story ( Bhav . II. 1-3) the young Bhavisayatta, son of Dhanapati, a 
rich and virtuous merchant of Gajapura, is sent to his preceptor’s house 
(ujjhdsdla) where he learns quickly the lore of the Jain canon, grammar 
lexicography, astronomy, spells and charms, as well as knowledge of weapons, 
archery, hand-to-hand fight, wrestling, and the ways of elephants and horses. 
Returning from his preceptor’s house he was complimented by his parents 
on his acquisition of knowledge and character. On the date of Dhanapala, 
author of Bhav., see Jacobi (Bhav. ed., Introd. 3 f) followed on independent 
grounds by C. D. Dalai and P. D, Gune (GOS ed. Introd. 3-4). 

12. On Manu, IX. 329-31. 

13. The Vaisya, says Medhatithi (ioe. cit.), shall know in what region and at 
what season gems, pearls, corals, metals like copper, iron and bronze, woven 
cloth, perfumes and condiments fetch a higher price than in another. He 
shall know, Medhatithi continues, what seed is sown thickly and what sparse¬ 
ly, what soil is suited for a particular kind of seed, what harvest is expected 
from a particular type of soil. He shall also know what commodities (skins 
and the like) are spoilt if kept for a long time, in what country large sup¬ 
plies of grains are available, at what season barley is profuse, what is the 
custom of a particular country, by using what fodder and salts cattle are 
likely to improve and so forth. This implies a thorough knowledge not only 
of the marketing conditions and other characteristics of various articles but 
also of much miscellaneous information. 

14. On Manu, IX. 76. 

15. Kutt, 212. 

16. On Manu , II. 182. 

17. Ibid, III. 2. 

18. Quoted in Samskaraprakasa, 513. 

19. Quoted in Sm. C., 1. 143. 

20. Quoted in Samskaraprakasa, 515. 

21. Manu, II. 159. Introducing the text Medhatithi explains that the author’s 
object is to prohibit excessive chastisement in the form of beating, chiding 
and the like to which the teacher takes recourse on finding his pupil to be 
inattentive. Addressing the pupil as his child, the teacher should, accord¬ 
ing to Medhatithi, ask him gently to finish his lesson quickly so that he might 
afterwards play with boys of his own age. But if the boy still remains in¬ 
attentive, he should be beaten with a bamboo slip as mentioned in the text. 
Writing elsewhere (on Manu, II. 70) in a humorous vein, Medhatithi observes 
that the boy, at the time of Vedic. study, should wear light dress, because 
if he were to be clad in woollen clothes he would not feel the strokes of 
the rope administered by the teacher for inattention and, not feeling the 
strokes, he would not study in the proper manner. 

22. Manu, III. 156; Ydj, III. 230; Vardha Parana , XIY. 5. 

23. Quoted by Apararka on Ydj, II. 198. 

24. On Manu, III. 156. 

25. He who stipulates to teach the Veda, Medhatithi says (loc. cit.), in return 
for a specific payment is called a bhritakddhydpaka (‘teacher for a stipulated 
fee’). Such form of payment is known among bearers and others. But one 
does not become such a teacher, if he teaches a pupil without first making 
a verbal stipulation for payment of a specific sum for a specific teaching, and 
receives the fee afterwards. In fact teaching in return for payment of an 
unstipulated fee has been actually sanctioned. Similarly one is said to be 
taught for a stipulated fee if he studies with his teacher after paying the 
fee himself. But one does not incur blame if, in the absence of any other 


393 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


teacher, his father or other guardian has paid the fee and placed him under 
a teacher. 

26. On Manu, II. 112. 

27. Manu, II. 235. 

28. On Manu, II. 108, 182, 191. 

29. Commenting on Manu, II. 108, which requires a student to perform acts of 
service to his teacher, Medhatithi mentions, as an example of such acts, the 
fetching of water in jars for the teacher’s use. Again while explaining 
Manu, II. 182, Medhatithi says that the student should do all household work 
that is not degrading, but he must not be made to perform such acts as eating 
remnants of food, other than that of his teacher, and sweeping the floor. 
Explaining Manu, II. 191, Medhatithi observes that the student should do 
unasked such acts for his teacher as fetching water in jars and massaging his 
body when he is fatigued. 

30. On Manu, II. 49. 

31. Kdv. X, p. 53. 

32. Suktimuktdvalx ( GOS Ed. 47) of Jalhana, a twelfth century anthology, con¬ 
tains verses written by Rajasekhara in praise of five such poetesses, viz . 
6llabhattarika, Vikatanitamba, Vijayanka, PrabhudevI, and Subhadra. 

33. In Kdv. (Chaps. V, IX, XI) Rajasekhara quotes no less than thrice the views 
of his wife on difficult questions of rhetoric. 

34. Upamiti, pp. 354, 453-59, 875-92. 

35. Rdjat , V. 28^9; VI. 87. 

36. El, IV. 60 f. 

37. El, IV. 180-tel. 

38. ARSIE, Ins. No. 240 of 1930-31. 

39. On Manu, V. 91. 

40. Matsyapurdna, CGXVII. 163 f. 

41. On Manu, VIII. 124. 

42. Quoted by Vijnanesvara on Ydj, II. 21. 

43. Quoted in Sm. C., I. 30. 

44. Quoted by Apararka on Ydj, I. 224. 

45. III. 149. 

46. Manu, III. 150-67; Ydj, I. 222-24; Vardha Purdna, XIV, 4 f, CXC. 83 f. 

47. Quoted by Apararka on Ydj, III. 30. 

48. On Ydj, I. 20. The list consists of one who has taken service with a king, 
one who performs sacrifices for many persons, one who performs sacrifices 
for a whole village, one who is in the service of a village or town, and 
lastly, one who does not perform the twilight ceremonies ( sandhyd ) in the 
morning and in the evening. 

49. XVI. 16. 

50. VHddha-Hdrxta, IX. 349-50; Matsya Purdna, CCXXVH. 115-17; Manu, VIII. 

51. SMS* nr. aa, 

52. Samskdraprakasa , 513. 

53. Quoted in Sm. C ., I. 31. 

54. Quoted by Apararka on Ydj, III. 292. 

54a.Ibid. 

55. Cf. Hir. Gr.-su, I. 12, 18-20; Ap. Dh.-su, XI. 3, 6, 9-10. 

56. Quoted in Samskdraprakasa, 525 and Sm. C. t I. 137. 

57. Quoted in Samskdraprakasa, loc. ci£ 

58. On Manu, VIIL 413-14. 

59. Ibid, VIII, 415. 

60. Ibid, III. 156. 

61. Mbh. (Cr. Ed. and B), XII. 63, 12-14. 

62. On Manu, VI. 97. 

63. Ibid , III. 67 and 121. 

64. Ibid, X. 127. 

65. Ibid, X. 42. 

66. On Ydj, I. 13. 

67. On Manu , X. 126. 

68. Ibid , X, 41. 

69. Usanas, w. 31-2; Vaikhdnasa-Sindrtasu.tra, 10. 12; Manu, X. 47. etc. 


394 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


71. Vv. 26-27. 

72. Gaut. IV. 17; Manu, X. 27; Ydj, I. 92, etc. 

73. Cf. Vish. VII. 3. Ydj, I. 322; Mrichchha , IX: Rdjat, V. 180-84; VIII. 23, 83; 
£/, XV. 130 f. 

74. I. 10-11. 

75. 151. 10 f. 

76. On Manu, X. 38. 

77. Cf. the quotations in Apararka on Ydj, III. 292 (various penances prescribed 
for touching Chan^alas); Medhatithi on Manu . V. 12 (wood and things of 
wood as well as walls of houses said to be defiled by Chan<lalas* touch); ibid . on 
Manu, X. 51 (vessels other than those of gold and silver in which Chan^alas 
and 6vapakas have eaten to be thrown away). 

78. Viz. the signs of the thunderbolt and the like fixed by the king, or else the 
executioner’s axe or other weapon to be carried on their shoulders (i bid. on 
Manu, X. 55). 

79. On Manu, X. 13. 

80. Atri 288-89; Ahgiras, quoted by Vijnanesvara on Ydj, III. 30; J^atatapa quoted 
by Apararka on Ydj, III. 292; Ausanasa-smriti, IX. I. 552. 

80a. Quoted by Vijhanesvara on Y£j, III. 30 and in Sm. C., 1. 17, 

81. Quoted by Apararka on Ydj, I, 193. 

82. On Manu, V. 133. 

83. Quoted by Vijhanesvara on Ydj, III. 30. 

84. Quoted by Apararka on Ydj, loc. cit. 

85. IX, 359, 363-64. 

86. Quoted by Apararka, loc. cit. 

87. For Arab accounts cf. HIED, I. 6, 16-17, 76; Hodiwala, p. 19. 

88. Cf. El, I. 186 f (3 sons of a Bhatta mentioned in list of horse-dealers. Cf 
El, II. 161 f (Brahmana Garga and his descendants served as ministers of 
Pala kings Dharmapala and Devapala); EL V. 123 f (a Brahmana and a Vedic 
scholar advised king Vijayaditya II in defeating an enemy); El. XIII. 189 
(Brahmana Superintendent of buildings praised for fighting an invader); El, 
IV. 60 f (Brahmana chief minister and minister of peace and war); El, XIII. 
389 (two distinguished Brahmana dandanayakas) ; El, II. 217 f (Brahmana raja- 
dauvdrika or king’s door-keeper); El, XV. 58 f (a Brahmana minister); SU, 
II. Nos. 31 and 39 (a Brahmana general). 

89. Cf. El, I. 159 f (son of Kshatriya mentioned as cultivator of field); Ef, XIX. 
58 f (Kshatriya merchant mentioned in record of A.D. 893). 

90. It has been inferred ( IHQ, VI; 1A, 1932, pp. 43-46) from the occurrence 
of the same name-endings and the same tutelary deity in certain ins. from 
Eastern India that colonies of Nagara Brahmanas were settled in Sylhet 
(c. A.D. 500), Tippera (c. A.D. 750), and Orissa (c. A.D, 795). But this theory 
lacks confirmation. 

91. Cf. El, XIX. 58 f (individuals of Vanik-varkkata, Lamba-kanchuka and Mathu¬ 
ra castes mentioned as vendors or purchasers of lands, houses and shops in 
records of A.D. 864, 896 and 898). Dhanapala, author of the Bhavisayatta- 
kahd, belonged to the Dhakkada-Bani caste ( GOS ed., XX. 9). 

92. See 1A, 1893, 57 f; El, VIII. 317-21; 'El, XVII. 291-309. 

93. For the caste significance, cf. IHQ, VI. 53 f (Karana-kdyastha mentioned as 
minister of peace and war of Gupta Emperor Vainya-gupta); El, XV. 301 f 
(chieftain Lokanatha described as Karana ); Ramacharita, Kaviprasasti v. 3 
(poet’s father described as foremost of Karanas and as minister of peace 
and war). For the professional significance, cf. Medintkosha and Vaijayantx 
s.v. 

94. For the earliest known epigraphical reference to Kayastha caste, see El, XVIII. 
243 (writer of charter of A.D. 871 bom in Yalabha-Kayastha varhka). For 
other early epigraphic and literary references, cj. El, XII. 61 (Gauda-Kayas- 
tha family mentioned in record of A.D. 999); Nydya-kandali of Srldhara, 
Benares ed. 269 (work written in A.D. 991 at the instance of Pantfudasa, head- 
monk of Kayastha lineage).* But Kayastha in the old professional sense of 
a scribe or other official is found even in later records dated A.D. 995 (El, 
X. 78-79); Trikdndasesha, II. 10.2. It has been held (IHQ, VI. 60 f and I A, 
LXI. 51) that the Kayasthas of Bengal are descended from Nagara Brahmanas 
who had settled in Eastern India as early as in the sixth century A.D. But 
this startling theory, as has been rightly pointed out (HBR, I 589), lacks con¬ 
firmation. 


395 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


95. El. XXVI. 200 ff. 

96. According to Medhatithi (Manu, VH!. 299) Manu’s rule, allowing an erring 
slave, wife or son to be beaten with a rope or a split bamboo, enjoins a 
method of correcting them and not the actual beating. Hence, verbal cnastise- 
ment, Medhatithi continues, shall be applied to correct them, beating being 
resorted to only where the fault is serious. 

97. For refs. cf. ARS1E, Nos. 216-19 of 1925, 94 of 1926, etc. These records are 
of uncertain dates. 

98. Upamiti, 404-05. . . , 

99. On Manu, III. 14. In times of difficulty or in the event of not finding a girl of 
one’s own varna, says Medhatithi, girls of two other varnas may be .married 
by a Brahmana but not a 6udra girl. We learn from Kar. I that Rajasekhara, 
the Brahmana guru of the Pratihara king, married a Chahamana princess. 

100. I. 24. 13-16. 

101. On Manu, X, 6. 

102. Medhatithi on Manu, II. 18, and Visvarupa on Ydj, HI. 254. 

103. On Manu, VIII. 366. 

104. Medhatithi breaks new ground when he says (on Manu, V. 151) that the 
father can give away the girl only with the mother’s consent, for the hus¬ 
band and the wife have joint title to all things, and the daughter belongs 
to both. 

105. On Manu, IX. 88. 

106. Ibid, IX. 4. 

107. Ibid , IX. 94. 

108. Ibid, IX. 90-91. 

109. Ibid, IX. 99. 

110. Ibid, IX. 97. 

111. Ibid, IX. 72. 

112. Ibid , VHI. 227. 

113. I. 65. 

114. CUV. 5. 

115. On Ydj, I. 63. 

116. Brahma Purdna, quoted by Apararka on Yaj, I. 68-69; Medhatithi on Manu, 
VIII. 225. 

117. On Ydj, I. 69. 

118. On Manu, V. 158. 

119. Ibid, V. 165. 

120. Ibid, IX. 59. 

121. Ibid , IX. 60. 

122. II. 328. 

123. Upamiti , pp. 353-64; 369-86; 400 ff; 453 ff; 872-91. 

123a. I A, XXXIX, 191 (inscription of the Guhila Chieftain Saktikumara, dated 
A.D. 977, stating that while the founder of his dynasty was a Brahmana, his 
grandfather, great-grandfather and great-great-grandfather married respec¬ 
tively a Rashtrakuta, a Huna and a Chahamana princess). Rajasekhara’s 
Karpuramanjari, Act I (the author’s wife belonged to Chahamana lineage, 
while he himself was a Brahmana and guru of the Gurjara Pratihara king 
Mahendrapala). 

124. On Manu, VIII. 359. 

125. II. 437. 

126. XIII. 29-34. 

127. On Manu, VIII. 362-63. 

128. Rati, XL 31; Upamiti, 896. 

129. SII, IX, No. 77. 

130. For Arab writers quoted in this chapter reference may be made to HIED, 
Ferrand and Hodivala. 

131. On Manu, IX. 1. 

132. Ibid, I. 32. 

133. Ibid, IX. 1. 

134. Respectively on Manu, IV. 25; and on Ydj, I. 224 and H. 75. 

135. H. 36. 

136. On Manu, IX. 77. 

137. Ibid, IX. 74. 

138. Ibid, IX. 95. 

139. Ydj, I. 70. 


396 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


140. Matsya Purdna, CCXXVII. 153-55; Manu, VIII. 299-300. 

141. On Manu, VIII. 299. 

142. On Ydj f X.. 80, 

143. On Manu, IX. 84. 

144. This contradicts Medhatithi’s dictum quoted above denying to the husband 
dominion over his wife. 

145. On Manu, D£ -.« 81. 

146. Ibid, IX. 82. 

147. Ibid, IX. 76. 

147a. On Manu, VIII. 28. 

148. Apararka on Ydj, I. 87; Medhatithi on Manu, V. 156. 

149. HIED, I. 11. 

150. Among the examples of satis during this period are a queen of king Yaias- 
kara of Kashmir and a queen of his successor Kshemagupta ( Rdjat, VI. 107, 
195-96); a lady probably early in the reign of the Chola King Parantaka I 
(Ins. No. 376 of 1903); a queen of Sundara Chola (Ins. No. 236 of 1902 and 
SII. 393 f). 

151. AR. 344. 

152. V. 480. 

153. On Manu, IX. 135. 

154. Cf. Bayana (Bharatpur State) ins. of queen Chittralekha dated A.D. 955 (El, 
XXII. 122 f); Tumbagi (Bijapur District) ins. of West Chalukya king Satya- 
sraya dated A.D. 1004 (El, XVII. 8 f); Ins. No. 149 of 1036-37 belonging to 
the reign of Parantaka I; Ins. of Rajaraja I, recording transfer of 400 temple 
women from other temple-establishments in Chola land to the king’s own 
temple at Tanjore (SII. II. No. 66). 

154a. HIED. 11. 

155. LXX. 28 f; CCXXVIII. 144 f. 

156. Cf. Abu Zaid, quoted in Hodivala , 12 (Indian custom of settling prostitutes 
in inns built for travellers); Ibn Khordadbah, Ibn al-Faklh, and Ibn Rosteh 
quoted in F&rrand, 28, 63, 73 (Indian custom of regarding prostitution as 
legal). As an illustration of the kind of service performed by this class of 
women in the royal household, cf. Upamiti (p. 385) which states that on the 
occasion of marriage between prince Nandivardhana and princess Kanaka- 
mahjarl the bridegroom was bathed by prostitutes. 

157. Ibid. pp. 374 if and 618 if. 

158. Kutt, vv. 256 ff. 

159. In this passage (vv. 106 f) the female messenger sent by Malatl to her lover 
describes not only her physical beauty in full detail, but also mentions her 
thorough knowledge of the works on erotics of authors like Vatsyayana, 
Dattaka, Vifaputra, and Rajaputra, as well as her exceptional skill in the dra¬ 
matic manuals of Bharata, Visakhila, and Dantila, in the science of medicine 
for trees (v%ikshayurveda), in the art of painting, sewing and drawing lines 
on the person (patrachchhedavidhdna) , modelling ( pusia ), cooking, playing 
musical instruments, dancing and singing. 

160. On Manu, IX. 2, 

161. Ibid, IX. 3. 

162. Ibid, VIII. 77. 

163. Ibid, VIU. 68. 

164. Matsya P. CCXXVII. 150; Medhatithi on Manu, VIII. 389. 

365. Ibid, VIII. 28. 

166. Ibid, X. 188. 

167. Ibn al-Faklh (F errand, 63) observes with evident exaggeration that in India 
there are no towns unlike China where there are large towns. Sulaiman 
(Ferrand, 63 n) says more cautiously that in India, the greater part of the 
country is without towns, while in China fortified and large towns are found 
in every part of the country. 

168. The following translation is based upon the Bengali rendering of Tridiva 
Nath Ray in his work called Kuttanimatam, Calcutta, 1360 B.S., pp. 12-15. 

369. We have a historical reference to Bhattaputras in ARSIE, No. 281 of 1936-37 
which mentions two groups of them as recipients of a village granted by 
Rashfrakuta king Krishna HI in A.D. 964. 

170. Kdv . X, p.' 49. 

171. On Manu, VIIL 219-20. 

172. On Manu, VIII. 219-20. Medhatithi however adds the saving clause that the 
compact must be such as is beneficial to the village and so forth, is in con- 

397 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


<r 


formity with canon law and custom, and is not harmful to the interests of 
the city and the kingdom. 

173. On Manu, VIII. 221. 

174. El, XVI. 2 ff. 

175. El, II. 99, 100, 102, 

176. El, XIX. 58. 

177. El, 1.186. 

178. SII, IH. No. 128. 

179. On Manu, IX. 76, 143. 

180. II. 321 f. 

181. Ibid, II. 153. 

182. Upamiti , 220. 

183. Vid . I. 

184. Kdv. VI, p. 27. 

185. Kar, II. 

186. Vid. H. 

187. Ibid, III. 

188. Kar. I. 

189. Ibid. 

190. Ibid, III. 

191. Ibid. IV. 

192. Vid. III. 

193. Ibid, H, IV. 

194. Upamiti, 584. 

195. Kar. II. 

196. Vid, I. 

197. Ibid. 

198. Kar. IV. 

199. Ferrand, 63, HIED, I. 39. 

200. Cf. Kar. II; Vid. II; Kdv . XVHI; Upamiti, p. 354. On the significance of 
charchari see Kuttanimatam, Bengali Trans, by Tridiva Nath Ray, pp. 192-3, f.n. 

201. IA, XII. 13; El, V. 23. 

202. Kdv, X, p. 52. 

203. Cf. Vid. I, IV; Rati, IV. 22. 

204. II. 173-75. 

205. X. 1-2. 

206. Ibid, XIII. 93. 

207. Upamiti, 590-603. 

208. Quoted by Apararka on Yd), I. 176 and in Chandesvara’s Grihastharatndkara, 
359. 

208a. On' Manu, V. 14 ff., 27, 41-2. 

209. On Manu, V. 18. 

210. Ibid, XI. 93-94. 

211. On Yd), III. 222. 

212. On Manu, IX. 235-36. 

213. Ibid, XI. 146. 

213a. Quoted in Sm. C. I. 29. 

214. Quoted by Apararka p. 15; Sm. C. I. 12; Par. Mddh, I. 1. 133. 

215. XXII. 83-4. 

216. Upamiti, 603-04; 627-29. 

217. Kdv, XVIII, pp. 102, 107. 

218. Ibid, VIII, p. 39. 

219. Kdv. VIII. p. 39; cf. also Kdv. XVIII, Upamiti, 590 ff. 

220. On Manu, IX. 84. 

221. For references, cf. Sulaiman (HIED, I. 7), Mas’udI (ibid, I. 20), Ibn Khordad- 
bah (Fei'rand, 28) and Ibn Rosteh ( Ferrand , 70). 

222. Ferrand, 105. 

223. CLV. 1 f; CLVI, 14 f. 

224. Cf. Daksha 11.48. Sahkha VIII 1-17; and Agni P.. CLV. 3-4. For fuller details 
see KHDS, II. 1. 658 f. 

225. Ferrand , 62 and n. 

226. With the above we may compare the description in Kutf. 149 f. of the dress 
and get up of a gantkd at the time of entertaining her lover. She should wear 
clothes that are soft, washed, and fumigated with incense; she should put on 
elegant ornaments, and she should perfume her mouth with a boiled deletion. 

398 


SOCIAL CONDITIONS 


For the last-hamed we have a parallel in. the description of the king’s bath in 
Bana’s Kadambari (cf. above, Vol. Ill, p. 571 n 5). 

227. Abh. Rat. II. 386, 388-90. 

228. Kav. XIII. p. 70. 

229. Ibid , XVIII. 

230. II. 385, 387. 

231. XV. 85-92, 94-101. 

232. Upamili, 545. 

233. Kar, I. 

234. Bala, X. 

235. Kav, VIII, p. 39. 

236. Ibid, III. pp. 8-9. 

237. Bala, X. 

238. CCVIII-CCXXXIX. 

239. XCIII. 

24C. On Manu, IX. 290. 

241. Upamiti, 158. 

242. Ibid, 156. 

243. Kar. IV. 

244. Vid. III. 

245. El, IX, 6. 

246. HIED, I. 10. 

247. On Manu, III. 158, 166-67; and Ausanasa, IV. 525-26. 

248. I. 24. 13-16. 

249. EC. VIII. 

250*. HIED, I. 9, 10, 164. Hodivala, 9-10. 

251. Cf. the quotations in Apararka on Yaj. I. 210, 289-90; Agni Pur dim. CCIX, 
23-24. The most well-known names in the list are tuldpurusha and hiranya- 
garbha. The first involves the weighing of the donor on scales against gold 
which is thereafter distributed among the Brahmanas, while the second in¬ 
volves the performance of sacraments on the donor seated in a golden vessel 
which is thereafter broken and distributed among the Brahmanas. For the 
complete list of the mahaddnas and summaries of their procedure, see KHDS, 
II. 2. 870-77. 

252. Matsya Purana, II. 274-89; Linga Purana, II. 28 f. 

253. Cf. Atri, 43-46; Likhita, 6; Yama, 68-70; Agni Purana, CCIX. 2-3 (def. of 
ishta and purta). 

254. Cf. El, XVIII. 243 f. (Rashfrakuta Dantidurga performed hiranyagarbha ); El, 
IX. 33 f (Rashtrakuta Indra III performed tuldpurusha in A.D. 914); El, VII. 
36 (Rashtrakufa Govinda IV performed tuldpurusha); El, I. 140 f ( tuldpurusha 
by Chandella king Dhanga). 


399 



CHAPTER XIII 


ECONOMIC LIFE 

1. AGRICULTURE, INDUSTRY, AND TRADE 

In the records of the present period we have abundant evidence 
of that advanced state of agriculture which we have found to be a 
characteristic of the Gupta and preceding ages, Abhidhanarat- 
71amala mentions a large variety of cereals and other food-grains 
with their synonyms. 1 The list comprises salt rice of three varieties, 
coarse grain ( kodrava ), mustard ( sarshapa ) of two varieties, long 
pepper or saffron or ‘‘Italian millet' 5 ( priyamgu ), wild sesamum 
(jariila ). wild rice (nlvdra), as well as pulses of four different kinds 
( masura } kaldya, ralld t and ddhaka). A group of 17 articles (includ¬ 
ing rice and barley) is included by the Smritis in the category of 
grain ( dhdnya ), according to Medhatithi. 2 Again, Medhatithi 3 men¬ 
tions sugar-candy (ikshukhanda) and sugar (sarkard) along with 
sweetmeats and milk products as illustrations of the varieties of 
cooked food. The excellence of Punqlra (North Bengal) sugar-cane, 
which yielded juice even without a pressing instrument in contrast 
to a variety of sugar-cane ( kosakdra ) with its mass of flowers, is 
pointed out in a verse of K dvyamimdihsd , 4 Similarly Vishnudhar- 
mottara , quoted in Mitramisra’s Paribhdshdprakdsa , gives a list of 
five kinds of grains (dhdnya), viz. barley, wheat, paddy, sesamum, 
and edible grains of two varieties ( kahgu or sydmaka and chinaka). 5 
Among other agricultural products, camphor and aguru are given 
as examples of costly articles by Medhatithi. 6 The gosirsha variety 
of sandalwood is included in a list of specially precious products 
in Upamitibhavaprapahchdkatha . 1 Other evidence indicates the 
knowledge of scientific agriculture. From Abhidhdnaratnamdld we 
learn that soils were classified variously as fertile (urvard), barren 
(iriria), fallow ( khila ), desert ( maru ), and excellent (mrit&d or 
mritsnd), as well as those green with grass (sddvala) or abounding 
in reeds ( nadvala ), those which were black or yellow, and those 
which owed their fertility to rivers or rains. 8 Abhidhdnaratnamdld . 
further states that different kinds of fields were selected for different 
classes of crops. It gives 9 synonyms for fields producing several 
varieties of rice (vrihv, sali , kodrava and a variety ripening in 60 
days), of beans (mudga and masha), of oil-seeds (sesame and linseed) 
as well as those producing hemp, barley, and vegetables. Machines 
(yantra ) for crushing big sugar-canes are mentioned in a description 


400 


ECONOMIC LIFE 


of*4he winter season in Upamitibhavaprapanchdkatkd . 10 Fields irri¬ 
gated by Persian wheels (arahata) and by leather buckets are men¬ 
tioned in a record of A.D. 946, 11 Again, it appears from Medhatithi 12 
quoted above that the Vaisya {the agriculturist par excellence) was 
expected to know among other things what seed was to be sown 
thickly and what sparsely, what soil was fitted for a particular kind 
of seed and what soil was not so fitted, and what harvest was expect¬ 
ed from a special variety of seed. 

The early Arab writers 13 of the ninth and tenth centuries refer 
to the fertility of the soil and the rich cultivation, both of grain 
and fruits, specially in Western India with which they were parti¬ 
cularly acquainted. Some cities in Gujarat grew mangoes, cocoa- 
nuts, lemons, and rice in great quantities, and likewise produced 
quantities of honey. One such city also grew canes and teak trees, 
while Malabar produced pepper and bamboo. 

One of the oldest Indian industries is the textile. The progress 
of this industry in the Gupta epoch appears to have been continued 
during this period. The records of this period 131 * mention a great 
variety and different qualities of textiles such as woollen and hem¬ 
pen yarns, garments made of silk and of Ranku deer’s hair, and of 
sheep’s and goat’s wool. The professions of the weaver, the tailor, 
and the dyer (in three different colours, viz . red, blue, and yellow) 
are mentioned in contemporary literature. 131 * Medhatithi 14 says that 
wives, left unprovided for by their husbands, are to live by such un¬ 
objectionable occupations as spinning ( kartana ) and lace-making 
( jdlikakarana), and widows forced to live by their own labour are 
to subsist by the same occupations. 

The working of metals was pursued with as much success as in 
the preceding epoch. The list of metals found in contemporary 
literature 54 "* includes copper, bell-metal (or brass), iron, lead, tin, 
silver, and gold. Certain centres of metal industry were famous. 
From the synonyms given in the Abhidkdnaratnamdld we learn that 
Surashtra was famous for its bell-metal, while Vanga was well- 
known for its tin industry. 35 No less than five centres manufactur¬ 
ing swords are mentioned in Agni Parana 16 along with the distinctive 
qualities of their products. These are Khatikhattara and Rishika 
(unidentified), ^urparaka (Sopara), Vanga (East Bengal), and Anga 
(Monghyr and Bhagalpur Districts). Ibn Haukal 17 mentions the city 
of Debal in Sindh as famous for the manufacture of swords. Of the 
metal-work of this period we have extant specimens in some of the 
older Cho]a bronzes. Again, the inscriptions of the Great Temple 
at Tanjore mention the gifts of images, ornaments and vessels of 
gold, copper, and silver whose recorded weight reaches a very high 

401 

AJ.K—2ri 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


figure. A colossal copper water-pot weighing 3083 palas for crown- 1 
ing the copper pinnacle of the same great shrine was presented by 
Rajaraja L 18 

The art of the jeweller appears to have maintained its old level. 
Lists of jewels are preserved in various texts, 19 the longest being 
found in Agni Purana which mentions no less than 33 kinds of gems 
and analyses the good qualities of diamond, emerald, ruby, pearls, 
sapphire and vciiduryci , 20 The Tanjore temple inscriptions to which 
reference has been made above, distinguish betv/een numerous varie¬ 
ties of diamonds, rubies, and, above all, pearls, and they point out 
the flaws to be found in these gems. 21 The lists of presents recorded 
in these inscriptions include various kinds of gems and indicate the 
uses to which they were put in actual practice. The number and 
weight of the objects, which are always given with scrupulous care, 
occasionally reach formidable proportions. 22 The list of presents 
given by Rajaraja I, according to one of these records, included quite 
a few nine-jewelled rings with one diamond, one sapphire, one pearl, 
one topaz, one cinnamon-stone, one coral, one emerald, one lapis- 
lazuli and one ruby set on each. 23 

On the extent and direction of Indian internal trade the records 
are almost completely silent. 24 Scattered references indicate that 
India’s trade with the outside world was carried on both by land and 
sea. To the overland routes described above 25 we may add one more 
from India to China through Tibet. 25a As regards maritime trade, we 
know that enterprising Arab merchants from Southern Arabia had 
built up by this time, across the Indian Ocean, extensive trade re¬ 
lations not only with India, but also with the countries of the Far 
East as far as China. Of the share of Indians in this trade we have 
but scanty knowledge. According to Mas’udi, ships from India along 
with those from Basra, Siraf and Oman, from Bjawaga and Champa, 
ascended the Khanfu river to reach Khanfu (—Canton), at a distance 
of six or seven days’ journey from its junction with the sea. Com¬ 
ing to Indian sources we find in Trikanda$esha, as explained by the 
commentator, a list of names (hoda, tarandhu, and vahana) for ves¬ 
sels plying on the high seas. 26 More important are the reminiscen¬ 
ces of voyages made by daring Indian merchants, apparently to the 
rich lands of South-East Asia, which are found in the contemporary 
prose romances. 27 

It is chiefly from the accounts of the early Arab geographers 
that we get a list of the principal Indian sea-ports during the pre¬ 
sent period. On the coast of Sindh, near the mouths of the Sindhu, 
lay Debal, “a large mart and the port not only of this but also of 
the neighbouring regions.” On the Gujarat coast were Kambay, 

402 


ECONOMIC LIFE 


Thana, and Sopara, and further south lay Sindan (modern Sanjan, 
88 miles north of Bombay), from which was exported pepper. On 
the Malabar coast lay the important port of Kaulam Malaya (mo¬ 
dern Quilon) where the ships sailing from Muscat took in fresh water 
before crossing the sea of Harkand (Bay of Bengal) for the journey 
to Kalah-bar 28 

Turning next to articles of trade, it will be appropriate to begin 
with a list of India’s exports. As regards agricultural products, Ibn 
Khordadbah 29 writing towards the end of the ninth century, men¬ 
tions Indian exports consisting of diverse species of aloe-wood, san¬ 
dalwood, camphor and camphor-water, nutmeg, clovepink, cubele, 
cocoanut, vegetable stuffs, and textures of velvety cotton. The early 
Arab writers give us detailed reports of exports from different parts 
of the country. Thus costus, rattan, camphor-water, indigo, and bam¬ 
boos were exported from Sindh. It appears that costus from the 
Himalayas and indigo from Gujarat, as well as camphor and rattan, 
probably from Malay and Sumatra, were brought to the ports of 
Sindh for export. According to Kdvyamlmdmsd pine and deodar trees, 
grapes, saffron, and jujube were products of Uttarapatha (North- 
West India), 30 while birch-barks are mentioned as products of the 
Himalayas in a verse quoted in the same work. 31 According to Ibn 
Bosteh, teak was exported from the Rashfrakuta kingdom of Western 
India where it was extensively grown. The pepper which was ex¬ 
ported from Sindan, and the sandals for which Cambay was famous, 
according to Arab writers, were sent probably from South India 
noted from early times as the home of these products. Kdvyamimdnhsd 
mentions among products of Western India (Paschaddesa) varieties 
of bamboos, palm trees, bdellium, and date trees. 32 The characteris¬ 
tic products of Malaya Hill (Western Ghats below the Kaverl) in 
South India consisted of sandalwood, pepper, cardamom and various 
perfume-bearing plants. 33 From the extensive reference to the use 
of sandalwood which is found in the literature of this period we 
can infer that a large and valuable trade in this article was carried 
on by South India with the rest of the country. As regards Eastern 
India, Purvadesa (defined as the land to the east of Banaras) grew, 
according to Ravyamimamsa, different species of fragrant plants and 
trees {lavali creeper and granthiparnaka tree) as well as aloes and 
grapes. 34 Again, Kamarupa, according to Abu Zaid, 35 produced a 
variety of aloe-wood called k&marubi which was valued sometimes 
at 200 dlndras per maund. It was, he says, of the highest quality, 
and was so tender as to retain the impression of the seal stamped 
on it. It was brought all the way from Kamarupa to the temple of 
the Sun-god at Multan, where the merchants bought it from the 
priests of the deity. If Abu Zaid’s reference to Kamarupa is to be 

403 , 


* 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

taken as correct, it would point to aloe having been the most valuable 
article of export from Assam. It should, however, be mentioned 
that another Arab writer Mas’udi, probably with better reason, sub¬ 
stitutes Khmer (Cambodia) for Kamarupa in the corresponding 
passage. Of another kingdom called Rahma (or Ruhmi) by the 
Arabs, we are told that it produced Indian aloe-wood and a remark¬ 
ably fine variety of cotton fabrics. The textiles of Rahma, accord¬ 
ing to Ibn Khordadbah, were of velvety cotton, while Sulaiman de¬ 
clared them to be so light and fine that a robe made of that cloth 
could be passed through a signet ring. If the identification of 
Rahma with the Pa la kingdom could be accepted as correct, it would 
follow that cotton textiles of unique fineness were manufactured in 
Bengal at this period and exported to other lands. 36 

As regards animals and animal products Kavyarntmamsd in¬ 
cludes skins and chowries made of chamara deer's tail among the 
products of Uttarapatha, and musk among those of Purvadesa. 37 In 
the extreme south the Tamraparn! river in the Pandya kingdom, at 
the point of its junction with the sea, was still famous for its pearl 
fisheries. 38 According to Medhatithi, 39 precious stones and pearls 
in the South, horses in the West, elephants in the East, as well as 
saffron, silks, and woollens in Kashmir were royal monopolies, and 
private trading in them was punished with confiscation of all the 
property of the offender. We may refer, lastly, to the testimony of 
two Arab writers, Sulaiman and Mas’udi, that horns of rhinoceros 
were exported from the kingdom of Rahma to China for being made 
into fashionable and costly girdles. 40 The same writers supply the 
information that the kingdom of Ruhmi produced “samara” (yak- 
tail) hair from which fly-whisks were made. 

As for mineral products, antimony (srotQnjana), rock-salt ( sain - 
dhava ), and beryl ( vaidurya) are mentioned by Rajasekhara 41 
among the characteristic products of Uttarapatha, The rock-salt 
must have come from the famous Salt Range in the Punjab. As re¬ 
gards precious metals, Sulaiman and Mas’udi 41a heard reports of the 
•existence of gold and silver mines in the kingdom of Gudjra (Gur- 
jara-Pratihara kingdom of Kanauj), while they definitely declared 
that gold and silver were found in the kingdom of Rahma (Pala 
kingdom?) above mentioned. These statements, vague and incon¬ 
clusive as they are, lack corroboration. 

We now turn to the import-trade. The paucity of horses in India 
has attracted the attention of foreign observers at all times. We have 
during this period the testimony of Sulaiman and Ibn al-Faklh 42 
that the Indians, unlike the Chinese, had few horses. The best breed 
of horses known to India at this period, as in former times, came 


404 


ECONOMIC LIFE 


from Western and Central Asia. Abhidhdnaratnamdld mentions as 
examples of excellent horses those of Persia, Vanayu, Kamboja, 
Bahlika (Balkh), Sindhu, and the land bordering on the Sindhu. 43 
Upamitibhavaprapanchdkatkd singles out Bahlika, Kamboja, and 
Turushka horses as the best. 44 Horses are also included among the 
characteristic animals of North-West India in Kuvyamimdmsd . We 
may well believe that an extensive and valuable export trade in 
horses was carried on with India by the countries on her western 
frontier. The importation of wine from Kapisa is hinted at by the 
synonym Kapisayana given for wines in Abhidhdnaratnarndld .^ 5 Ibn 
Said, 46 an Arab writer of later date, mentions the import of dates 
from Basra into Daybul in Sindh. The phrase chlndmsuka (Chinese 
silk), found in the literature of this period as in former times, suggests 
that this fine stuff was still being brought from China. It is per¬ 
missible to infer from the stories in the Upamitibhavaprapahchdka - 
thd that gems came from South-East Asia. Again, if Abu Zaid and 
Mas’udi are correct in their statements, it would follow that the 
costly aloe-wood presented to the Sun-god at Multan was imported 
from distant Cambodia. 

2, THE ORGANISATION OF INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

The guilds and similar associations continued to play an im¬ 
portant part as in the previous centuries. We learn from Medhatithi 
that both industrial and mercantile guilds functioned in his time, for 
he defines 47 the guild ( srenl ) as consisting of people following com¬ 
mon professions, such as tradesmen, artisans, money-lenders, coach- 
drivers, and so forth. From Medhatithi’s illustration of the laws of 
guilds in the same context we find that they sometimes compounded 
with the government for payment of a fixed sum in place of the 
usual share of their profits; in return they took advantage of the 
Smriti clause guaranteeing the inviolability of their agreement, and 
cornered the market for their own profit. 48 More important than 
the guild as an example of mercantile organisation was the samgha. 
In its generic sense samgha is defined by Medhatithi 49 as a com¬ 
munity of persons following the same pursuit, though belonging to 
different castes (jdti) and regions (desa), This is illustrated by the 
example of sarhghas of mendicants ( hhikshu ), of merchants (vanik), 
and of those versed in the four Vedas. The mercantile samgha , then, 
unlike the guild, was an association of traders comprising different 
castes and inhabiting different regions. As Manu’s text 60 imposes 
the penalty of banishment upon those violating the compact made 
under oath with a samgha , it follows from Medhatithi’s interpreta¬ 
tion just quoted that the mercantile associations, like the guilds, had 
the right of making bye-laws that were binding on their members. 


405 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Besides the sreni and the samgha there were associations of labour¬ 
ers, and doubtless of capitalists as well. Illustrating Manu’s 
law on the subject Medhatithi 51 lays down the rule that among archi¬ 
tects, masons, carpenters, and the like the wages shall be distributed 
on the principle that he who does the most difficult part of the job 
shall receive more, and he who does the easier part shall get less. 

In the inscriptions of this period we have concrete examples, 
not only of different classes of guilds, but also of their constitution 
and functions. Among the guilds specially mentioned are those of 
weavers, potters, gardeners, and artisans. Mention is made of single 
as well as multiple headmen (mahattaras) who evidently formed (as 
in the old Smriti law of Yajnavalkya and Narada) the executive 
of these bodies. The guilds collectively made endowments for pious 
objects or received them on trust to provide for such objects out 
of the accruing interest. In either case they arranged for distribut¬ 
ing the task among themselves, evidently in accordance with the old 
Smriti rule giving legal authority to the agreement of guilds. 82 
Sometimes the guilds, no doubt because of their proved honesty, 
were entrusted with the task of auditing the accounts of temples, 63 
Finally we have in the inscriptions of South India evidence of the 
working of two famous trading corporations. The first is the mani- 
gmmam whose history can be traced from the end of the ninth down 
to the thirteenth century. It was apparently a non-denominational 
institution open to Hindus as well as Christian settlers, and its acti¬ 
vities were carried on in the coastal as well as in the inland towns of 
South India. The second is the famous Nanadesa-Tisaiyayirattu- 

Ainnurruvar which was destined to extend its activities to Burma 
• •• • 

and Sumatra in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. There is reason 
to believe that it was already established by the time of the early 
Imperial Cholas, Vijayalaya and Parantaka I. 64 

While on the subject of guilds and mercantile associations we 
may notice the important role of the village-assemblies in the pub¬ 
lic economy of this period. Repeatedly, in the ninth and tenth cen¬ 
tury inscriptions of South India, we find village-assemblies called 
sabhd and ur receiving deposits of money or gifts of land on trust 
for pious and charitable purposes. Out of the interest accruing from 
these sums, or the income derived from the land, they undertook to 
provide for the objects stipulated by the donor. This implies that 
like the guilds described above, the village-assemblies often acted 
as bankers and public trustees. 65 We have even examples of spe¬ 
cified markets within various town-limits functioning similarly as 
bankers for pious and charitable persons. 66 


406 


ECONOMIC LIFE 


3. INTEREST AND WAGES 

The old legal rate of interest, laid down in Vasishtha at 15 p.c. 
per annum, had ceased to be binding, and the usage had outgrown 
even the somewhat flexible rules of later Smriti texts. But 
Medhatithi generally upholds the older law relating to usury against 
later interpretations. As regards Manu’s higher scale of rates 
(2%, 3%, 4%, and 5% per month) to be paid respectively by Brah- 
manas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, Medhatithi says 57 that 
these alternatives are allowable to a money-lender v/ho cannot main¬ 
tain his family at the l\% rate, or to one who has only a small capi¬ 
tal, or in case of the borrower not being a specially righteous person. 
To this, however, Medhatithi adds the saving clause that the above 
rate must not be exceeded by even a half or a quarter. Like the 
older Smriti writers Medhatithi permits a series of special rates of 
maximum interest, but unlike them he makes these higher rates 
dependent upon the fact (or even chance) of the debtor’s success 
with his loan. If the money-lender, he says, 38 has been reduced 
to poverty and the debtor has grown opulent with the wealth earned 
from the borrowed grain, the interest shall be five times the prin¬ 
cipal, but otherwise it shall only be four times the same. Even 
where the creditor, continues Medhatithi, 69 has reason to believe that 
the debtor is about to carry on an extensive business with the capital 
lent, he may take the maximum rate of 5% irrespective of the debtor’s 
caste and of the articles lent. 

The violations of the Smriti law, arising no doubt from the press¬ 
ing need for capital, were sometimes so frequent as to harden into 
regular (if unauthorised) customs. For Medhatithi mentions 60 that 
in some countries, grains are lent out during spring and double the 
quantity is realised in autumn, and sometimes a mortgaged article 
is enjoyed even after the value of the produce so enjoyed is equal 
to double the amount of the original debt. Such customs, Medha¬ 
tithi adds, violate Manu’s rule 61 that the accumulated debt and 
interest shall not exceed double the principal, as well as that of 
Yajnavalkya 62 limiting the amount of the accumulated interest to 
80% of the principal. 

The variations in the rate of interest are repeated in the con¬ 
temporary historical records. In a West India record of A.D. 854, 
belonging to the reign of the Rashtrakuta Amoghavarsha, 63 the 
donor, endowing a certain sum of money in favour of a monastery, 
declares that after his death the interest (7cm) is to be fixed by com¬ 
petent persons. In the inscriptions of South India 64 we find a 
bewildering variety in the rate of interest such as 25, 20, 15, 12£ and 
even 5 per cent per annum. 

407 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The Smriti lav/ relating to wages can be gleaned from Medha- 
tithi. 64a The wages which were paid in cash or in kind were fixed 
by contract according to the nature of the work to be done, the 
contract sometimes extending over a period of six months or even a 
year. Wilful breach of the contract rendered the labourer liable to 
forfeiture of his wages as well as to payment of compensation to 
his employer. Inscriptions of South India during the sway of the 
Imperial Cholas give us lists of wages of different classes of skilled 
as well as unskilled labourers employed in the temples. These are 
specified in terms of the daily supply of paddy and the yearly allow¬ 
ance of coins, in the yearly supply of paddy, and so forth. 65 

4. INFLUENCE OF CANON LAW UPON ECONOMIC 

DEVELOPMENT 

The old Smriti attitude, viewing the pursuit of agriculture, in¬ 
dustry, and trade with high disfavour, is continued in the present 
period. This general standpoint is reflected in a passage of Medha- 
tithi 66 where he takes the original text to mean, not that the Vaisya 
shall be made, against his will, to perform the occupations of agri¬ 
culture, money-lending, trade, and cattle-breeding, but that the king 
shall punish any other man who does this work except in times of 
distress. Coming to particular industries, Medhatithi 67 regards 
handicrafts as very low occupations, and he illustrates them by the 
examples of cooks and weavers. Again, with reference to Manu’s 
text including the execution of great mechanical works among minor 
sins (upapdtakas ), Medhatithi 66 gives as illustrations the construc¬ 
tion of bridges and of embankments for regulating water-flow. 
Medhatithi’s view of the relative status of different occupations is 
similar to that of Manu. 69 For he says 70 that among the Vaiiya’s 
occupations agriculture is the worst for a Brahmana, then comes 
trade, and next the tending of cattle and so forth. 

5. GENERAL ECONOMIC CONDITION 

The above survey provides broad hints of the general econo¬ 
mic condition of the people during the present age. That the state 
of agriculture, industry, and trade in these times was at least as 
advanced as in the preceding centuries is borne out, as shown above, 
by the joint evidence of general literature, historical records, and 
foreign writings. It is worth remarking that those parts of the 
country like Sindh and Gujarat, which came specially under the 
observation of the Arab visitors, are specially noted for their fer¬ 
tility and good cultivation. The variety and excellence of Indian 
textiles and metal-work, and above all of Indian jewellery, are 


408 


ECONOMIC LIFE 


attested to by literary as well as epigraphic evidence. The sea 
and land routes of Indian teachers visiting China, Central Asia, and 
Tibet, as well as South-East Asia, were no doubt followed by the 
Indian merchants as well, reminiscences of whose unrecorded ad¬ 
ventures have been partially preserved in the form of stories in 
the contemporary Jain prose romances. The daring and enterprise 
as well as the profit-motive of the merchants, of which we get such 
vivid accounts in the Jain stories, no doubt more than compensated 
for the discouragement held out by the traditional Smriti law. About 
the condition of the people, it is possible to form a general opinion. 
The quantity and richness of the presents in gold, silver, and jew y els 
offered by Rajaraja I to the Tanj ore temple, and the fabulous wealth 
of Indian temples described by Muslim writers, specially in connec¬ 
tion with Sultan Mahmud’s invasions, illustrate the high prosperity 
not only of the Imperial courts but also of the great shrines of this 
period. Some of the Imperial capitals must have attained conside¬ 
rable magnitude. In the reign of Rajaraja I the city of Tan j ore, 
according to two contemporary inscriptions, 71 contained at least 25 
streets, bazaars and quarters. 72 That the high level of prosperity 
was a fairly general one, at least in some regions, may be proved not 
only from the broad descriptions of the standard of living given 
above, but also from subsidiary evidence recorded in literature. 


1. Abh. Rat. , II. 425-29. 

2. On Manu, VIII. 320. 

3. Ibid , VIE. 326 f. 

4. Kdv, XII. 

5. Paribhashdprakdsa, 115. 

6. On Mann, VIII. 321. 

7. Upamiti . 420. 

8. Abh. Rat, II. 3-6. 

9. Ibid, n. 7-9. 

10. Upamiti, 585. 

11. El, XIV. 182.. 

12. On Manu, IX, 330. 

13. HIED, I. 15-16, 24, 27-8, 35, 37-40; Ferrand, 117. 

13a. Cf. Medhatithi on Manu, II. 98; VIII, 321; VIII. 326; Kar, I. 

13b. Abh.Rat., 11.433 f; Matsya Pur ana, (quoted by Apar^rka on Yg.j, II. 289-90). 

14. On Manu, IX, 75. 

14a. Abh. Rat., II. 15-9; Bhavishya Purdna (quoted in Paribhashdprakdsa, 115). 

15. Abh.Rat, II. 15 f. 

16. CCXLV, 21 f. 

17. HIED, I. 37. 

18. Cf. SII, II. Nos. 1, 2, 29, 30, 32, 34, 38, 39; 42-44, 46-52, 55, 56, 79-81, 84, 91. 

19. Abh. Rat, II. 20-1; Aditya Purdna (quoted in Paribhashdprakdsa, 115). UpcCmiti, 
420. 

20. Agni Purdna, CCXLVI. 1 f. 

21. For a convenient summary with full references, see Sll, II. Introd. 16-17 and n. 

22. Thus among donations given to the temple by Rajaraja I are mentioned (SII, 
II. No. 93) gold necklaces, armlets, bracelets, arm-rings etc. set with rubies, 
emeralds, diamonds, sapphires, pearls, amethyst and crystals, sandalwood coat¬ 
ed with plates of gold and set with various kinds of jewels and so forth. The 
gifts of Rajaraja I’s queens included (ibid, Nos. 34, 46, 51) ornaments on which 


409 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


were strung pearls, coral, lapis lazuli, and sapphire. Ornaments sets with pearls 
of three varieties, coral, lapis lazuli, and so forth were presented (ibid, No. 6) 
by Rajaraja I’s elder sister. Presents given by Rajaraja I’s general comprised 
(ibid, No. 3D) golden ornaments set with pearls, diamonds, crystals and so forth. 
The temple manager donated to the shrine of Ganapati at the same temple a 
magnificent ring made of gold and set with eight rubies, two crystals, 14 
diamonds, and 119 pearls (ibid. No. 86). Among presents made to the temple 
by a private donor in Rajaraja I's reign were included (ibid, No. 79) golden 
ear-rings set with pearls, pearl-ornaments, a gold marriage-badge set with five 
diamonds and one ruby, sacred foot-strings set with pearls, and so forth. In a 
list of treasures belonging to the same temple are included (ibid, No. 59) a 
diadem containing more than 343 karanju of gold, ten diamond crystals, 64 
corals, and no less than 13328 pearls as well as nine golden girdles adorned with 
crystals, pearls, and coral. Another list of treasures belonging to the same 
temple dated in the reign of Rajaraja I includes (ibid, No. 3) sacred girdles and 
bracelets of gold set with pearls, a sacred crown of gold set with diamonds, 
crystals, and pearls, a sacred garland of gold set with crystals and pearls, and 
a sacred outer parasol of gold set with crystals and pearls. Many of the sacred 
girdles contained more than 1500 pearls each, while the outer parasol contain¬ 
ed 1372 pearls. 

23. SII, II. No. 93. 

24. Cf. however, the story in Kdv. Ill, describing the sale of a pearl, found in 
S. India at Kanauj. 

25. Vol II, pp. 606, 613, 617 ff, 644. 

25a. Cf. Ya’kubi’s list of products imported into India (Ferrand, 50-52). 

26. Trikandasesha, I, 19.6. 

27. Bhat?. Ill-VI; Upamiti, 860-904, 996-1002. 

28. For references, see HIED, I. 15, 37, 441; F err and, 32, 38-40. 55, 57; 64, 95. On 
the above see also Hobson-Jobson s.v. Cambay, Deul-Sind, Quilon, Saint- 
John’s, Sopara and Tana. 

29. Ferrand, 31. 

30. Kdv. XVII. 94. 

31. Ibid, XIV. 81. 

32. Ibid, XVII, 94. 

33. Abh. Ratn. II. 388; Kar . I; Kdv. XIV, XVII; Bala. 670, 

34. Kdv. XVII, 93. 

35. Ferrand, 88. 

36. Ramha identified with Pala kingdom of Bengal (HBR, I. 122) but Ferrand (29 
and 43 n) identifies it with Pegu and Qoedes (Hisioire Ancienne des Etais 
Hindouises d’Extreme-Oricnt 135 ) with Lower Burma. Probably the Arab 
accounts have jumbled together the records of the two kingdoms of Bengal 
and Lower Burma. 

37. Kdv., XVII. 93. 

38. Cf. Kdv. V. XIV; Bdla, 671; Kar. III. 

29. On Manu, VIII. 399. 

40. These girdles were prized so highly by Chinese royalty and grandees that they 
sometimes fetched 2000 or even 4000 dindras each (Ferrand, 44, 105). To the 
above we may add the curious statement of Ibn al-Faklh (Ferrand, 57), that 
perfumed rats were exported from Sindh to Zabag. 

41. Kdv., XVII. 94. 

41a. Ferrand, 43, 104. 

42. Ferrand, 62 and n. 

43. II. 284. 

44. Upamiti, 474. 

45. II. 174. 

46. Ferrand , 48 n. 

47. On Manu, VIII. 41. 

48. Certain principal tradesmen, says Medhatithi (loc. cit.), offer to the king his 
royal dues fixed verbally by declaring before him: “We are living by this 
trade, let the tax thereupon be fixed at such and such a rate, be our profits 
more or less.” Now on the king agreeing to this proposal, the tradesmen join 
together and" lay down certain rules among themselves tending to bring them 
large profits and injure the interest of the kingdom, e.g. such and such a com¬ 
modity should not be sold during such and such a time. If any one among them 
transgresses these rules, he shall be punished for breach of the guild-laws 

49. On Manu % VIH. 219. 


410 


ECONOMIC LIFE 


50. VIII. 219. 

51. On Manu, VIII. 211. 

52. Cf. EL I. 159; VI. 166; XIII. 192; XXIV. 333; S1I. III. No. 91. 

53. Cf. Ins, of reign of Uttamachola SIX, III. No. 124 (local merchants join with 
village-assembly as well as temple-officers in making up accounts of gifts of 
gold to a temple). 

54. On Manigrdmam see El, IV. 248 and ARSIE, 1926-27, pp. 93-94 giving a number 
of references. On Nanadesa Tisaiyayirattu Aihhurruvar see K, A. Nilakanta 
Sastri, The Cholas, Vol. II Part I, 419-20 and the references quoted there. 

55. Cf. ARSIE, 469-70 of 1925-26; App. B. of 958 and 963 A.D.: 109 of 1932-33; 503 
of 1929-30; App. B.; SII, III. No. 44 of 888 A.D.. ibid, No. 1. SII, II. Nos. 7, 24, 
25, 26, 27, 28, 35; SII, XII. Nos. 75, 87, 90; El, XXVI. 234-35. 

56. Cf.^ SII, II. Nos. 24 and 37. In El, XXI. 109 f a pious endowment of 1400 
kdsus is deposited by Pandya king Varaguna Maharaja II with Brahmanical 
and non-Brahmanical village assemblies ( sabha and ur ) as well as a town- 
council (nagar attar). 

56a. On Manu, VIII. 151. 

57. On Momt, VIII. 142. 

58. Ibid, VIE. 151. 

59. Ibid, VIII. 152. 

60. Ibid, VIII. 3. 

61. Manu, VIII. 151. 

62. Ydj, HI. 37. 

63. I A, Xin. 134. 

64. El, IX. 89 XI. 228 XXI. 109; XXVI. 234; SII, XU Nos. 75, 87, 90; HI. Nos, 94, 

103, 105, 186, 190,128; II. Nos. 6, 9, 24, 25, 26, 28, 35, 37. 

64a. On Manu, VIII. 215. 

65. For a list of wages mentioned in Tanjore Temple Inscriptions, see SIX, II. Introd. 
p. IB. Also see Altekar, AR, 395-98, for some calculations of equivalents of 
salaries and wages figuring in Karnatak and South Indian Inscriptions of this 
period. 

66. On Manu, VIII. 410. 

67. Ibid, X. 99. 

68. Ibid, XI. 64. 

69. X. 80 f. 

70. Manu. X. 85. 

71. S 

72. F 


411 


CHAPTER XIV 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

I. THE SAILENDRA EMPIRE 

The outstanding fact in the history of South-East Asia in the 
eighth century A.D. is the rise of a great empire which comprised 
Sumatra, Java, Malay Peninsula, and most of the islands of the 
Indian archipelago. The rulers of this empire belonged to the 6ailen- 
dra dynasty. They put an end to the supremacy of Sri-Vijaya in 
Malay Peninsula, 1 and occupied a large part, if not the whole, of it 
by the end of the eighth century A.D. Some time before A.D. 778 
they had conquered Western and Central Java. It is generally 
held that they were originally rulers of &ri-Vijaya (Palembang in 
Sumatra) and extended their authority gradually over Java and 
Malay Peninsula; but this view rests upon a very slender basis. It 
is equally likely that the Sailendras first rose to power either in 
Java or in Malay Peninsula. 

We do not possess sufficient data to reconstruct an outline of 
the history of the &ailendras. The names of a few early kings 
flourishing in the eighth century A.D. may be traced in contem¬ 
porary epigraphic records. One of them is probably Rajadhiraja 
Vishnu. Another, king Dharanlndra, is described as “the orna¬ 
ment of the ^ailendra dynasty who has conquered kings in all dir¬ 
ections, and who has crushed the most powerful hero of the enemy.” 
Another, king Sangramadhananjaya, is also mentioned in a record 
of the last-mentioned king, but the relation between the two is not 
specified. 

The Nalanda Charter of the reign of Devapaia, mentioned 
above, 2 refers to three generations of ^ailendra kings. It first men¬ 
tions the great king of Yava-bhumi. His proper name is not men¬ 
tioned, but we are told that it meant ‘tormentor of brave foes\ The 
original Sanskrit expression *mra-vairi-mathana. 9 immediately re¬ 
calls the epithet ‘vairi-iiara-vira-vimardana’ applied to the Sailendra 
king Dharanlndra mentioned above, and the two may be regarded 
as identical. The son and successor of Dharanlndra is named Sama- 
ragravlra. This king married Tara, daughter of a king whose name 
has been read both as Varma-setu and Dharma-setu. The former 
reading seems preferable. Those who adopt the latter reading sug¬ 
gest his identification with the Emperor Dharmapala of Bengal, 


412 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

The SGn of Samaragravlra and Tara was Balaputradeva, who is call¬ 
ed king of Suvarnadvipa, a term which denotes in a general way the 
whole of Malay Peninsula and Malay Archipelago. 

More definite information is, however, available in respect of 
the extent of the empire and its wealth and grandeur. This is main¬ 
ly derived from the accounts of various Arab writers in the ninth 
and tenth centuries A.D. They refer to the country as Zabag or 
Zabaj and call its king Maharaja . According to Ibn Khordadbah 
(A.D. 844-848) the daily revenue of the king amounted to two hun¬ 
dred mans of gold. Sulaiman (A.D. 851) says that Kalah-b^r (i.e. 
the country round the Isthmus of Kra in the Malay Peninsula) is a 
part of the empire of Zabag. Ibn al-Faklh (A.D. 902) adds that 
there is no country in the south after Zabag and its king is very rich. 
Ibn Rosteh (A.D. 903) remarks about the great king of Zabag that 
4 he is not regarded as the greatest among the kings of India, because 
he dwells in the islands.’ But he adds: “No other king is richer 
or more powerful than he and none has more revenue.” 

Abu Zaid Hasan (A.D. 916) gives a more detailed account of 
the kingdom of Zabag. “The area of the kingdom,” says he, “is 
about 900 (square) par sang s (1 par sang = 3 miles). The king is 
also overlord of a large number of islands extending over a length 
of 1,000 parsangs or more. Among the kingdoms over which he 
rules are the island called Sribuza (Sri Vijaya) with an area of about 
400 (square) parsangs, the island called Rami with an area of about 
800 (square) parsangs , and the maritime country of Kalah with an 
area of 80 (square) parsangs” 

Mas’udi (A.D. 943) also gives a long and interesting account of 
Zabag which, he says, separates India from China and is comprised 
within the former country. About the extent and wealth of Zabag 
he remarks: “In the bay of Champa is the empire of Maharaja, 
the king of the islands, who rules over an empire without limit and 
has innumerable troops. Even the most rapid vessels could not 
complete in two years a tour round the isles which are under his 
possession. The territories of this king produce all sorts of spices 
and aromatics, and no other sovereign of the world gets as much 
wealth from the soil”. 

Al-Biruni (A.D. 1030) tells us that “the eastern islands in this 
ocean, which are nearer to China than to India, are the islands of 
the Zabaj, called by the Hindus, Suvarna-dvlpa, i.e. the gold islands 
... because you obtain much gold as deposit if you wash only a 
little of the earth of that country.” This common geographical name 
Suvama-dvipa, roughly denoting the Sailendra Empire, perhaps 
owes its origin to that great historical fact. 


418 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

These accounts of the Arab writers, to which others may be 
added, leave no doubt that the Sailendra empire was extensive and 
powerful and comprised a large part of the Malay Peninsula and 
Malay Archipelago collectively known as Suvarna-dvipa. There are , 
also good grounds to believe that the ^ailendras exercised supre¬ 
macy over Kambuja till Jaya-varman II freed his country early in 
the ninth century A.D. It is also likely that the frequent Javanese 
naval raids on Annam (Champa) and Tonkin, to which reference 
will be made later, were really carried out by the Sailendras who 
then occupied Java. Thus the Sailendras were the leading naval 
power in the East, and their influence was felt on the eastern coast 
of Indo-China as far as the border of the Chinese empire. 

This naval supremacy enabled the &ailendras to control the 
sea-borne trade between China and the Western countries. Mas’udI 
observes that formerly there was direct voyage between China and 
ports like Siraf and Oman, but in his time the port of Kalah served 
as the meeting place for the mercantile navies of the two countries. 

As noted above, Kalah was in Malay Peninsula within the domi¬ 
nions of Zabag. Abu Zaid Hasan also informs us that “the town of 
Kalah is the most important commercial centre for trade in aloe, 
camphor, sandalwood, ivory, tin, ebony, spices, and various other 
articles.” He adds that there was a regular maritime intercourse 
between this port and Oman. . 

The control over the vast maritime trade of those days explains 
the fabulous wealth of the Maharaja of Zabag referred to by most 
of the Arab writers. Several of them record a curious story which 
is narrated by Abu Zaid Hasan as follows: “There is one very 
extraordinary custom in Zabag. The palace of the king is connect¬ 
ed with the sea by a shallow lake. Into this, the king throws every 
morning a brick made of solid gold. These bricks are covered by 
water during tide, but are visible during ebb. When the king dies, 
all these bricks are collected, counted, and weighed, and these are 
entered in official records. The gold is then distributed among the 
members of the royal family, generals, and royal slaves according 
to their rank, and the remnant is distributed among the poor.” 

The Chinese annals contain frequent references to a kingdom 
called San-fo-tsi which undoubtedly stands for the Sailendra empire. 

It sent embassies to China in A.D. 904 or 905, 960, 961, 962, 971, 
972, 974, 975, 980 and 983. 

The trade relations with China were also revived in the tenth 
century. A regular shipping house was opened at Canton in A.D. 

971 and two more at a later period, which were frequented by mer¬ 
chants from San-fo4si and other places in the East Indies. 


414 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


We further learn from Chinese sources that towards the close 
of the tenth century A.D. there were bitter hostilities between San- 
fo-tsi and Java. About A.D. 990 Java invaded San-fo-tsi and at 
first obtained some success. San-fo-tsi sought the protection of 
China, for she was reduced to such a state that her envoys could not 
voyage safely from China back to their country. But in A.D. 1003 
San-fo-tsi recovered sufficient strength to send an embassy to China 
without any hindrance from Java. Three years later Java was com¬ 
pletely crushed, as we shall see later, and the Sailendras were no 
longer threatened by that power. 

The foundation of the Sailendra empire was an epoch-making 
event. For the first time in its history Malayasia, or the greater 
part of it, achieved a political unity under an empire, and a common 
geographical name Suvarna-dvipa was applied to it. It will appear 
from what has been said above that the power of the Sailendras 
reached its zenith in the latter half of the eighth century A.D. In 
the ninth century both Kambuja and Java threw off their yoke as 
will be described later. Nevertheless the Chinese and the Arab 
accounts clearly show that the Sailendra empire continued to be a 
powerful and extensive one throughout the ninth and tenth cen¬ 
turies A.D. 

The Sailendras introduced in Java a new type of Indian alphabet 
which differed considerably from the current one locally evolved 
from an older form of Indian alphabet. Another significant fact 
about this time is the adoption of a new name, Kalinga, for 
Malayasia, at least by foreigners. These seem to indicate that the 
Sailendras were fresh arrivals from India, but there is no positive 
evidence in support of this view. There is, however, no doubt that 
they had a close and intimate connection with India. The Sailendra 
rulers were devoted followers of the Mahayana form of Buddhism 
and they evidently derived it from Bengal. The Sailendra emperor, 
Dharanindra-varman, who ruled in A.D. 782, had as his guru or pre¬ 
ceptor an inhabitant cf Gauda (a part of Bengal) named Kumara- 
ghosha. About the middle of the ninth century A.D. king Balaputra- 
deva of the Sailendra dynasty, mentioned above, built a monastery 
at Nalanda, and requested the Pala emperor Devapaladeva of 
Bengal 3 to grant five villages for its upkeep. Devapala complied 
with the request, and this fact is recorded in his copper-plate grant 
which also gives a short account of Balaputradeva. Similarly the 
Sailendras had intimate connections with the Chola rulers of South 
India in the eleventh century A.D. as will be described later. 

The Sailendras introduced a new type of culture, the most pro¬ 
minent memorials of which are the splendid monuments in Java 


415 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

such as Barabudur which still excites the wonder and admiration 
of the world. 

II. KAMBUJA 
1. Jaya-varman II and III 

The mighty and extensive kingdom founded by the family of 
Bhava-varman was split up into a number of states in the eighth 
century A.D. Two of these are referred to by the Chinese as ‘Kam- 
buja of the land’ and ‘Kambuja of the water.’ The exact limits of 
these two kingdoms are not easy to determine. In all probability 
the former denoted the territory, full of hills and valleys, to the 
north of Cambodia proper, including a large part of Laos and touch¬ 
ing the Chinese province of Tonkin and the Thai kingdom of Yunnan. 
This kingdom, which extended along the middle course of the Me¬ 
kong, sent an embassy to China in A.D. 717, but five years later sent 
an army to help an Annamese chief who had revolted against China. 
But friendly relations with China were restored, and in 771 the 
king visited the Imperial court. The last embassy was sent to China 
in A.D. 799. 

The ‘Kambuja of the water’, or Kambuja proper, comprised 
the lower valley of the Mekong river. A number of kingdoms 
flourished in this region in the eighth century, and inscriptions refer 
to three of them with capitals respectively at Sambhupura, Vyadha- 
pura, and Aninditapura. The first of these is represented by modern 
Sambor on the Mekong. Vyadhapura was situated most probably 
at the foot of the hill called Ba Phnom, and possibly this kingdom 
represented ancient Fu-nan. The site of Aninditapura is probably 
to be looked for in the region east of Angkor on the northern side 
of the Great Lake. No detailed account of any of these kingdoms 
is known, though inscriptions have preserved the names of a number 
of kings. It is interesting to note that the rulers of Aninditapura 
regarded themselves as descendants of Kaundinya, the reputed foun¬ 
der of the Hindu kingdom of Fu-nan, and Soma, the local Naga 
princess married by him. 

The political disintegration of Kambuja in the eighth century 
A.D. made it an easy victim of the neighbouring powers. King 
San jay a of Java (A.D. 732) conquered the country, and possibly the 
Sailendra Emperors of Java, Sumatra, and Malay Peninsula also 
exercised supremacy over it in the latter part of the eighth century 
A.D. 


But Kambuja threw off the foreign yoke and rose to prominence 
early in the ninth century A.D. under its famous king Jaya-varman II. 


416 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

This king spent his early years in Java, in what capacity we do not 
know. But he came to Kambyja and became its king in A.D. 802. 
He moved from one capital to another till he fixed it on the top of 
the hill called Mahendraparvata (Phnom Kulen, to the north-west 
of Angkor Thom). There he invited a Brahman a named Hiranya¬ 
dama from Janapada (probably in India) to perform some Tantrik 
rites, so that Kambujadesa might no longer be dependent on Java 
but have a paramount ruler of its own. Hiranyadama instituted 
the cult of Devaraja, and initiated Sivakaivalya, the royal guru 
(preceptor), into the rituals of this worship. Jaya-varman II took 
a vow to employ the family of Sivakaivalya and none else to cele¬ 
brate the worship of Devaraja. The king then returned to his old 
capital city of Hariharalaya (Lolei, 13 miles to the south-east of 
Angkor) ai)d reigned there till his death. 

This short account of king Jaya-varman II is derived from a 
long record incised in A.D. 1052 by a descendant of Sivakaivalya, 
whose family had filled the post of Royal Priest from the reign of 
Jaya-varman II till that time,—a period of 250 years. It is a long 
record of 340 lines containing 130 verses in Sanskrit and 146 lines 
of prose text in the native Khmer language. It describes in detail 
the Tantrik rites performed by Hiranyadama and proves the great 
hold of Indian culture in these distant colonies. 

Although we do not possess any record of the time of Jaya- 
varman II, we may form a fair idea of his life and reign from scat¬ 
tered notices in later inscriptions and literary traditions. It is obvi¬ 
ous that he did not ascend the throne of Kambuja by hereditary right, 
though it is very likely that he was remotely related to some royal 
families of Kambuja. Why he went to Java and how he became 
the ruler of Kambuja remain unknown, but there is no doubt that 
he freed the country from foreign yoke. The most interesting thing 
in his early career is the frequent change of capitals, no less than 
five of which are mei ioned in the record referred to above. 
Although the sites of all these capitals cannot be definitely deter¬ 
mined, it appears that Jaya-varman fixed his first capital—Indra- 
pura—not far from the ancient royal seat of Sambhupura, and that 
he was a native of this region. Then we find a gradual change of 
the royal seat towards the west, first towards Angkor, then further 
west towards Battambang, and lastly back again to Angkor. It is 
generally held that these changes were either due to royal caprices 
or inspired by a desire to find a suitable site for the capital of the 
newly founded kingdom. But it is equally likely that the changes 
indicate troubles which forced the king to take refuge in different 
parts of the country at different times. Or it may be that it took 

417 


A.I.K.—27 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


him many years to establish his supremacy over the country as a 
whole, and the different capitals merely indicate the different stages 
of political consolidation from the east to the west; ultimately, when 
the whole eountr^ had been subdued, he fixed his capital finally at 
Hariharalaya in the central part of the kingdom. 

It is stated in an inscription of Hari-varman, king of Champa, 
dated A.D. 817, that his army ravaged Kambuja and advanced up 
to the very heart of the kingdom. If is not unlikely that this forced 
Jaya-varman II to leave the eastern and central part of the kingdom 
and betake himself to the western region. 

On the whole, although we do not know of many specific events 
in the reign of Jaya-varman II, there is no doubt that he played an 
important part in the history of Kambuja. After a century of 
political disintegration and foreign conquest he restored the freedom 
and unity of the kingdom of Kambuja, and gave it a stability which 
put it on the road to a splendid and glorious career for many cen¬ 
turies. Posterity remembered him as one of the greatest kings, and 
most flattering references are made to him in inscriptions centuries 
after his death. Even now the Kambuja tradition represents him 
as a divine hero, the son of Indra. The sacred sword of Kambuja, 
which is still used by its kings at the ceremony of coronation and 
is jealously guarded by priests who claim descent from the old 
Brahmanas, is believed to be a relic of Jaya-varman II, who remains 
the national hero and a great landmark in Kambuja history. Popu¬ 
lar tradition also ascribes to him most of the'grand monuments in 
ancient Kambuja, but we cannot definitely associate any of the 
existing buildings with his name. The cult of Devaraja instituted by 
him, which continued to be the state religion for many centuries, 
was a form of Tantrik Saivism. He died in A.D. 854 and received 
the name of Paramesvara after his death. Henceforth it became a 
fashion to give such posthumous names to the kings, and these 
were usually formed by adding the word loka or pada to a divine 
name (Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, Indra, etc.). All these go to prove the 
thorough-going influence of Indian culture on Kambuja. 

Jaya-varman II was succeeded by his son Jaya-varman III who 
ruled from A.D. 854 to 877. Except his inordinate passion for ele¬ 
phant-hunting, we do not know anything about him. With him ends 
the direct line of Jaya-varman II. According to a Chinese chroni¬ 
cler, who visited his kingdom in A.D. 862, it included the whole of 
Laos in the north and almost touched the frontier of Yunnan. How 
much of it was acquired by him or by his father, it is difficult to say. 
But it is fairly certain that under Jaya-varman II and his son the 
kingdom of Kambuja had grown into a powerful empire. 


418 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

The Arab writers give us a glimpse of the history and culture 
of Kambuja of this period. Ya’kubI. (c. A.D. 875) describes the 
Khmer kingdom as vast and powerful, the king of which receives 
homage of other kings. Ibn Kosteh (A.D. 903) says that “there are 
eighty judges in the Khmer country. Even if a son of the king 
appears before them they would judge equitably and treat him as 
an ordinary complainant.” Several Arab writers bestow high 
praise on the Khmers for their abstinence from drinking and debau¬ 
chery in general. Ibn Khordadbah (A.D. 844-848) says: “The kings 
and peoples of India abstain from drinking wine but they do not 
consider adultery as an illicit act, with the sole exception of the 
Khmer king who forbids both drinking and adultery.” This is 
repeated by several other Arab writers. It is interesting to note 
that in the passage quoted above, Khmer is included in India. 

* 

2. Dynasty of Indra-varman 

King Indra-varman, who succeeded Jaya-varman III and found¬ 
ed a new royal line, was but very remotely related to the latter. 
His queen IndradevI was connected with the royal families of the 
three kingdoms of Sambhupura, Aninditapura, and Vyadhapura 
mentioned above. The mother of IndradevI, named RajendradevI, 
was descended from a royal family founded by Agastya, a Brahmana 
from Aryadesa (i.e. India). These facts, interesting in themselves, 
and indicating the importance of both Indra-varman and his queen, 
do not show that they had any hereditary right of succession. It is 
probable that Indra-varman was the ruler of one of the vassal states 
in Kambuja, and had somehow managed to secure the throne. The 
respectful terms in which the inscriptions of the new family refer 
to Jaya-varman II and III preclude the idea of any open rebellion 
by Indra-varman. 

But the change in the royal family did not affect in any way 
either the extent of the kingdom or its political importance. On 
the other hand Indra-varman claims in his record that his commands 
were respectfully obeyed by the rulers of China, Champa, and Yava- 
dvipa. Such specific claims cannot be dismissed as mere figments 
of imagination. As we have seen above, Kambuja was made to suffer 
a great deal by both Champa and Java (Yava-dvipa) towards the 
close of the eighth and the beginning of the ninth century A.D. It 
is very likely that she turned against her old enemies and scored 
some success. There are also good grounds to believe, as we shall 
see later, that Indra-varman extended his sway over the province 
of Yunnan, and it is evidently in this region that he came into con¬ 
flict with China. 


419 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Indra-varman was a great builder, and the extant monuments 
of his reign belong to an intermediate stage between the Primitive 
and Classical art of Kambuja. His inscriptions refer in detail to 
his building activities. We are told that he excavated a big tank 
called Indra-ta^aka, constructed a simhdsana (royal throne) accord¬ 
ing to his own design, the vehicle called Indra-yana, Indra-vimanaka, 
and Indra-prasadaka (probably two palaces), all made of gold, built 
various temples and installed images therein. 

Indra-varman died after a reign of twelve years (877-889) and 
was succeeded by his son Yaso-varman who occupies a place of 
honour in the history of Kambuja. He founded a new capital city 
which was at first called Kambupuri and later Yasodhara-pura. For 
a long time this city was believed to be the same as Angkor Thom 
whose magnificent ruins still excite the admiration of the world. 
But it is now generally held that the new capital was situated on 
the top of the hill called Phnom Bakhen, but it extended beyond 
the hill and included a large part of the present site of Angkor Thom. 
This region remained the centre of Kambuja power and culture till 
their decline and downfall. 

Yaso-varman has left quite a large number of inscriptions, 
which throw interesting light not only on his life and reign, but on 
the new type of civilisation, associated with Angkor, which was 
largely his own creation, and whose glory and splendour form the 
most brilliant chapter in the history of Kambuja. 

Yaso-varman is credited with numerous military campaigns, 
including a naval expedition, and is said to have reinstated van¬ 
quished kings and married their daughters. But no specific details 
are stated. There is, however, no doubt that he ruled over a vast 
empire. On the north it included Yunnan and reached the frontier 
of the then kingdom of China. On the west it was bounded by the 
mountains forming the watershed between the rivers Menam and 
Salween. The eastern and southern boundaries were formed res¬ 
pectively by the kingdom of Champa and the sea. 

Yaso-varman was not only a great patron of art and literature 
but was himself a great scholar. He was fond of Sdstras and Kavyas 
and is said to have composed a commentary on Patanjali’s Mahi- 
bhtishya. He was liberal in his religious views, and though a devot¬ 
ed follower of Saivism, patronised Buddhism generously. He 
founded numerous asramas or abodes of religious communities, and 
made elaborate regulations for them, many copies of which, engrav¬ 
ed on stone, still exist and mark the spots where these sacred her¬ 
mitages stood. These and numerous other records of the time 


420 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


indicate a happy, prosperous and peaceful kingdom ruled over by 
an able and wise monarch who took all possible measures to ensure 
the welfare of the kingdom in all its aspects, political, economic, 
religious, and social. Even making due allowances for the usual 
exaggerations of court-poets, we must regard Yaso-varman as a 
brave general and an ideal king who excelled both in the arts of 
peace and war. There was undoubtedly some basis and justi¬ 
fication for the statement in these records that the glory of Yaso- 
varman was sung, even after his death, by the people “in their 
games, on their beds, and in their travels.” It reminds us of a similar 
verse in praise of Dharmapala 4 with whom Yaso-varman may be 
aptly compared. 

Yaso-varman died about A.D. 900 and was succeeded by his 
two sons, Harsha-varman I and Isana-varman XL But the latter was 
overthrown some time before A.D. 928 by Jaya-varman IV, the 
husband of a sister of Yaso-varman. The usurper removed the 
capital as well as the tutelary deity Devaraja to Koh Ker (Chok 
Gargyar), situated in a wild barren country about 50 miles to the 
north-east of Angkor. The only known important event in the reign 
of Jaya-varman IV is his successful fight with Champa, whose ruler 
he is said to have crushed. 

Jaya-varman IV was succeeded by his son Harsha-varman II in 
A.D. 941 or 942. Next came Rajendra-varman, the son of another 
sister of Yaso-varman. °-It is likely that there were struggles for 
succession to the throne in which Rajendra-varman came out victo¬ 
rious. He ascended the throne in A.D. 944 and removed the capital 
back again to Ya^odhara-pura which had been deserted for a long 
time. Rajendra-varman has left a large number of long records, 
which credit him with victorious campaigns in all directions. But 
the only specific event that we know of is'his successful invasion of 
Champa in the course of which he advanced as far as the Khan-hoa 
province and desecrated the Po Nagar temple. 

Rajendra-varman died in A.D. 968 and was succeeded by his son 
Jaya-varman V. Although &aivism remained the official religion, 
the king was an ardent champion of Buddhism, and issued regula¬ 
tions and instructions for the propagation of that faith. He was 
also a great builder and led a successful invasion against Champa, 
He died in A.D. 1001 and with him ended the direct line of Indra- 
varman. 

3. General Review 

The two centuries that intervened between the accession of 
Jaya-varman II and the death of Jaya-varman V were marked by a 


421 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


i 

rapid growth of the Kambuja empire, and constitute an important 
chapter in the history of Indian cultural and colonial expansion in 
Indo-China. In order to understand this properly we must take 
a bird’s-eye view of the general political condition of Indo-China 
in the tenth century A.D. 

The Chinese annals give a broad and comprehensive survey of 
the political geography of Indo-China about the year A.D. 960 when 
the Song dynasty began its rule in China. The whole of Tonkin, 
with the two districts in Annam immediately adjoining to the south, 
constituted the Chinese province of Ngan-nan; but it became an 
independent state under an Annamese chief in A.D. 968, and its 
name changed to Dai-co-viet. To the north and north-west was 
the independent Hinduised Thai principality of Nan-Chao or Mithila- 
rashtra (North Yunnan) that had thrown off the Chinese yoke about 
A.D. 730. To the south and west of these two lay the well-known 
kingdoms of Champa, Kambuja, and Bamahhadesa (Lower Burma). 
The central region of the Peninsula, surrounded by these states, was 
peopled by the Thais who had imbibed the rudiments of Hindu civi¬ 
lisation and set up a number of principalities which bore Hindu or 
Hinduised names. 

The extension of the political supremacy of Kambuja beyond its 
northern boundary can be definitely traced as far back as A.D. 862 
when the kingdom of Alavi-rashtra,- comprising the southern part 
of Yunnan, formed a part of the Kambuja empire according to a 
Chinese chronicler who visited these regions in that year. In the 
light of this we cannot dismiss, as fanciful, the claim of Indra-varman 
that his commands were obeyed by the king of China, and of Yaio- 
varman that his empire reached up to the frontier of China, Pos¬ 
sibly they conquered Mithila-rashtra or North Yunnan, and thus 
reached the very border of what then formed the kingdom of China. 
Many local chronicles have preserved reminiscences of the Kambuja 
rule along the valley of the Upper Mekong as far north as Yunnan. 

The Kambuja kingdom also expanded along the valley of the 
Menam river in the west. Lavapurl, which comprised the territory 
extending from the Gulf of Siam in the south as far as Kampheng 
Phet on the north, formed an integral part of the Kambuja kingdom, 
which also exercised political authority over the numerous petty 
states in the northern part of Siam (or Thailand). The northernmost 
of th^se bore the very significant name Khmera-rashtra or the 
kingdom of the Khfners (the people of Kambuja), and touched the 
Kambuja kingdom of Alavi-rashfra mentioned above. 

To the south of Siam, the part of Malay Peninsula lying to the 
north of the Isthmus of Kra belonged to Kambuja. The rest of the 


422 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

Malay Peninsula belonged to the Sailendras who also ruled over 
Java and Sumatra, Indra-varman’s claim of supremacy over Java 
may refer to a successful contest with the Sailendras, though noth¬ 
ing is definitely known. 

As regards the kingdom of Champa, references have been made 
to frequent fights between it and Kambuja almost throughout the 
ninth and tenth centuries A.D. There seems to be no doubt that 
Kambuja gained the upper hand in these struggles at least in the 
tenth century A.D. 

It is thus apparent that under the two powerful dynasties found¬ 
ed by Jaya-varman II and Indra-varman, Kambuja had emerged 
from comparative obscurity into the most powerful kingdom in 
Indo-China. Its power and magnificence impressed the Arab travel¬ 
lers, and one of them Ibn a!-Fakin (A.D. 902) describes the Khmer 
kingdom as having an extent of four months’ march. 

III. CHAMPA 

1. The Dynasty of Pdnduranga (c, A.D, 757-860) 

On the death of Rudra-varman II 5 the throne of Champa was 
occupied by Prithivlndra-varman (A.D. 757). We learn from epi- 
graphic records that “he enjoyed the land by having conquered all 
his enemies by his own power”, and that he destroyed all the thieves. 
This indicates a period of internecine war and anarchy in Champa. 
The express statement in the same record that he enjoyed the whole 
of Champa shows that he succeeded in consolidating the entire 
country under his authority. 

Prithivindra-varman was succeeded by his nephew (sister’s son) 
Satya-varman in or some time before A.D. 774. During his reign the 
coast of Champa suffered a great deal from the raids of sea-men 
from Java, referred to as “vicious cannibals coming by means of 
ships.” Whether these were pirates or regular mariners it is difficult 
to say. But they wrought great havoc. There was a sacred temple 
in Champa, founded, according to popular tradition, by king Vichitra- 
sagara “in the year 5911 of the Dvapara yuga.” In A.D. 774 the 
Javanese raiders burnt this temple and carried away the image, viz. 
a Mukhalinga of &iva. Satya-varman inflicted a crushing defeat 
upon them in a naval engagement, but could not recover the image 
as it had been destroyed. He, however, installed a new image and 
hence came to be regarded as the second Vichitrasagara or an in¬ 
carnation of that king. 

Satya-varman was succeeded by his younger brother Indra- 
varman. There was another Javanese raid in A.D. 787 causing the 


428 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

destruction of another famous shrine containing an image “establish¬ 
ed there for many thousands of years.” Indra-varman re-installed 
the deity under the name of Indra-bhadresvara. This Indian custom 
of associating the name of the king with that of the divine image set 
up by him was very often followed in Champa. Indra-varman him¬ 
self installed two other images called after him Indra-bhogesvara 
and Indra-paramesvara, and endowed many religious establishments. 
Indra-varman is said to have fought with many enemies and ruled 
over the whole of Champa. He renewed diplomatic relations with 
China, and sent presents of rhinoceros and buffaloes to the emperor 
in A.D. 793. 

Hari-varman, the husband of Indra-varman’s sister, next ascend¬ 
ed the throne (c. A.D. 801). In one of his records, dated A.D. 817, 
he claims to have defeated the Chinese. According to Chinese 
history a king of Champa conquered the two Chinese districts of 
Hoan and Ai in January, A.D. 803, and renewed the expedition in 
A.D. 809; but the Chinese governor forced him to retreat by inflict¬ 
ing a crushing defeat upon him. Most likely this occurred in the 
reign of Hari-varman and forms the basis of his claim for victory 
over the Chinese. One of his generals led a victorious expedition 
against Kambuja. He seems to have advanced into the heart of the 
country and ravaged its towns. Its probable effect upon Kambuja 
has been discussed before in connection with the history of Jaya- 
varman II. 6 The successful aggressive policy of Hari-varman 
against his two very powerful rivals undoubtedly gave him justi¬ 
fication for assuming the proud title of “Rdjddhiraja Sri Champa- 
pura-Paramesvara” (king of kings, Lord of Champa). 

Hari-varman was succeeded by his son Vikranta-vlarman III 
(c. A.D. 820-860). He was the governor of Pandurahga during his 
father’s reign. Since all the inscriptions of this dynasty have been 
found in this southern region, it has been suggested that it was 
probably the original seat of the royal family and the main strong¬ 
hold of the rulers of this dynasty. But they ruled over the whole 
kingdom and had their official capital in the city of Champa. 
Vikranta-varman III died without issue, and with him ended the 
dynasty which is usually referred to as the dynasty of Pandurahga. 

2. The Bhj-igu Dynasty (c. A.D. 860-985) 

The first notable king of the new dynasty that ruled Champa 
for more than a century was Indra-varman II. The epigraphic 
records give him a mythical pedigree reaching back to God Siva. 
But although his father and grandfather are referred to as kings, it 
is explicitly stated in more than one inscription that Indra-varman 


424 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


gained the kingdom of Champa “by the special merit of his auste¬ 
rities, and by virtue of his pure intelligence, not from his grand¬ 
father or father.” Most likely the immediate ancestors of Indra- 
varman were mere local rulers, and he made himself master of the 
whole kingdom by his own prowess. His original name was “Sri 
Lakshmindra Bhu mis vara Gramasvamin,” and after he became king 
of Champa he assumed the title “Sri Jaya Indra-varman Maharaja- 
dhiraja.” The epigraphie records refer to his family as Bhrigu 
dynasty, presumably because, according to the mythological account 
of the origin of the family, Bhrigu was sent to Champa by Mahadeva 
himself. 

Not mucn is Known about Indra-varman II except his religious 
endowments. In spite of his faith in Saivism the king had evident 
leanings towards Buddhism, for he erected a Buddhist temple and 
a monastery. He must have enjoyed a long and peaceful reign 
(c. A.D. 860-895); and he sent an embassy to China in A.D. 877. 

Jayasirhha-varman (c. A.D. 896-905), who succeeded Indra- 
varman II, was probably related to him, but nothing is definitely 
known. The epigraphie records give us a long list of his pious dona- 
tions. Reference is frequently made to the wealth and splendour 
of Indrapura which was probably the real capital of this dynasty, 
though Champa was still officially recognised as such. The king is 
said to have spread his power to other lands, though no specific 
event is recorded except that he sent a diplomatic mission to Java. 
This was renewed by Bhadra-varman III (c. A.D. 905-910), who suc¬ 
ceeded the son of Jayasimha-varman. The epigraphie records refer 
repeatedly to his victories over enemies and also to the multitude of 
royal ambassadors coming to his court from different countries. One 
of his ministers is expressly credited with sufficient linguistic talents 
to understand thoroughly the messages sent by kings from different 
countries. All these indicate that Champa was now recognised ab¬ 
road as an important and powerful kingdom and the country played 
its part in international politics. 

Bhadra-varman’s son and successor Indra-varman III was a 
distinguished scholar. We are told in one of his records that he 
mastered the different systems of philosophy ( shat-tarka) including 
Mlmamsa, as well as Buddhist philosophy, the grammar of Panini 
together with its commentary Kasika, and the Uttara-kalpa of the 
&Mvites. But the king could not pursue his studies in peace. The 
king of Kambuja, probaby Rajendra-varman, invaded his domi¬ 
nions, advanced far into the interior, and even carried away a golden 
image of the deity which the king had installed in a temple at Po- 


425 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Nagar. The invasion had no permanent result* but the kingdom of 
Champa suffered a great deal. 

The kings of Champa had stopped their customary embassies 
and presents to China during the troublesome period following the 
overthrow of the T’ang Dynasty. Indra-varman resumed the prac¬ 
tice and sent an embassy to China with various presents in A.D. 951. 
Seven more embassies were sent by him during the period between 
A/D 958 and 971. 


3. The Annamese Invasions 

Indra-varman III enjoyed a long reign of about 60 years from 
about A.D. 911 to 971. He was succeeded by Praramesvara-varman 
who sent no less than six embassies to China, between A.D. 972 and 
979. As noted above, an Annamese chief had founded an indepen¬ 
dent kingdom immediately to the north of Champa in A.D. 968. 
This ruler, named Dinh Bo Linh, died in A.D. 979. A rival Anna¬ 
mese chief, who was defeated by him and had taken refuge in 
Champa, now planned to seize the throne of Annam with the aid of 
Paramesvara-varman. The latter led in person a naval expedition 
against the capital city of Tonkin and reached within a few miles of 
it. But a storm destroyed the whole fleet with the exception of the 
royal vessel, and though Paramesvara-varman returned safely to his 
kingdom, the whole expedition had a tragic end (A.D. 979). The 
newly elected Annamese Emperor Le Hoan sent an ambassador to 
Paramesvara-varman, but the latter imprisoned him against the 
diplomatic conventions of all ages and countries. In order to 
avenge this grave humiliation, Le Hoan personally led an expedi¬ 
tion against Champa. Paramesvara-varman was defeated and 
killed at the first encounter, and although Indra-varman IV was 
hastily proclaimed king in Champa he could not save the situation. 
Le Hoan ravaged the capital city and occupied a large part of the 
kingdom. Then, after making arrangements for its administration, 
he returned (A.D. 982) with an immense booty, about 100 ladies of 
the royal harem of Champa, and an Indian Bhikshu (monk). 

Indra-varman IV, who had taken refuge in the southern part 
of his kingdom, now sent a Brahmana envoy to the Chinese court, 
complaining against the Annamese occupation of Champa, but 
received no help from that quarter. Shortly after, internal dissen¬ 
sions among the Annamese chiefs enabled one of them, Lu*u-Ky- 
Tong, to seize the throne of Champa, and Le Hoan was unable to dis¬ 
lodge him. After the death of Indra-varman IV he was officially 
proclaimed king of Champa. But soon a national hero appeared, who 
freed the country from foreign yoke. He ascended the throne in 


426 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


A.D. 989 under the name of Vijaya Sri Hari* varman (II) at Vijaya, 
in Binh-Dinh, but later removed to the old capital at Indrapura, 

Le Hoan now again ravaged the borderlands of Champa. Hari- 
varman sent an embassy with rich presents to the Chinese Emperor 
who commanded Le Hoan to keep within his own territory. Hari- 
varman also conciliated the Annamese king by refusing assistance 
to a rebel Annamese chief. Le Hoan appreciated this act and in 
return stopped his incursions and released a number of Cham pri¬ 
soners (A.D. 992). During the same year Hari-varman was gratified 
beyond measure by receiving a rich present from the Chinese 
Emperor consisting of magnificent horses, standards, and other 
equipments of war, Hari-varman wrote back to the emperor that 
thanks to the imperial favour his kingdom was again enjoying 
peace, and his neighbours no longer entertained any desire of ruin¬ 
ing him. It is evident, however, that the imperial favour emboldened 
the Cham king to ravage the Annamese territory to the north, 
although outwardly he was on friendly terms and sent diplomatic 
missions to Le Hoan, This undercurrent of hostility between 
Champa and her northern neighbour continued during the next half 
a century and ultimately proved her ruin. For the time being, how¬ 
ever, things went on well, though Hari-varman’s successor, called in 
Chinese chronicles Yan Pu Ku Vijaya Sri, who ascended the throne 
some time before A.D. 999, transferred the capital permanently to 
Vijaya, far to the south, as a precautionary measure. 

XV. JAVA 

1. The Kingdom of Mataram 

A powerful kingdom was founded in Central Java by king 
Sannaha in the first half of the eighth century A.D, Sanjaya, the 
successor of Sannaha, is known to have been ruling in A.D. 732. He 
is described in the Changal Inscription as “conqueror of the coun¬ 
tries of neighouring kings"; and a literary work, composed much 
later, gives details of his conquests which included Sumatra, Kam- 
buja, and probably also Malay Peninsula. It is difficult to say how 
far this later tradition can be regarded as historical. But Sanjaya 
was undoubtedly a great hero as his name figures prominently even 
in later epigraphic records. Some scholars have even gone so far 
as to regard him as the founder of the &ailendra Dynasty mentioned 
above; but this view rests upon very slender foundations. There 
are, however, good grounds to believe that Sanjaya was the founder 
of the kingdom of Mataram which, after a career of glory in the 
early period, again flourished in the sixteenth century as an impor¬ 
tant principality under a Muslim Sultan. The old capital of this 


427 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


kingdom was situated probably at or near Prambanan in Central 
Java which is famous for its big temples. 

Shortly after the death of Sahjaya, if not during his reign, the 
Sailendras conquered Central Java, probably, during the period 
A.D. 742-755. The successors of San jay a were forced to shift their 
headquarters about 150 miles to the east, and they ruled in Eastern 
Java for nearly a century. But they recovered their old capital 
about the middle of the ninth century A.D., evidently after the 
Sailendras had voluntarily left or were overthrown by them- A 
passage in a Chinese history describes Java as a powerful state at 
this period, and its supremacy was acknowledged by twenty-eight 
small states on all sides. Although epigraphic records give the 
names of a number of kings belonging to this dynasty, we know 
hardly anything about them till we come to Balitung. Besides his 
proper name Balitung which was Indonesian, he assumed different 
coronation names such as Uttuhgadeva, Isvara-Kesavotsavatuhga, 
isvara-Kesava-Samarottuhga, and Dharmodaya Mahassambhu. His 
dominions certainly included both Eastern and Western Java, and 
his known regnal years are A.D. 898 and 910. It has been suggested 
that Balitung was originally a ruler of Eastern Java, and by marry¬ 
ing a princess of Mataram, became also ruler of that kingdom in 
Central Java. This, as well as the view that the famous temple of 
Lara Jongrang was the burial temple of Balitung, can only be re¬ 
garded as probable hypotheses. 

Balitung or Dharmodaya Mahasambhu was succeeded by 
Dakshottama in or shortly before A.D. 915. He occupied a high 
office during the reign of his predecessor, and probably belonged to 
the royal family. He certainly ruled over both Central and Eastern 
Java, and so probably did his two successors Tulodong and Wawa. 
But the kingdom of Mataram came to an end during the latter’s 
reign, about A.D. 928. Wawa was thus the last of a long line of 
kings who ruled in Java for two centuries, and for the first time, in 
recorded history, politically united Eastern and Central Java. 

A stone inscription at Dinaya, to the north of Malang, refers 
to king Devasimha, his son Gajayana, and the latter’s daughter 
Uttejana. Her son was the king who issued the inscription to com¬ 
memorate the consecration of a stone image of Agastya in A.D. 760 
with elaborate rituals performed by priests versed in Vedic lore. 
Whether the kings mentioned in this record belonged to the family 
of Sanjaya, or were independent of it, it is difficult to say. 

2. End oj Hindu Civilisation in Central Java 

Petty dynasties were thus probably ruling in Java even during 
the period when the greater part, even if not the whole, of Central 

428 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


and Eastern Java was included in the kingdom of Mataram, which 
had its headquarters in Central Java, except for the brief interlude 
of Sailendra supremacy. But with the death of Wawa and the end 
of the old royal dynasty, the centre of political authority definitely 
shifted to Eastern Java, and what is even more striking, there was 
a complete collapse of culture and civilisation in Central Java. It 
is difficult to account for this dual change, and various theories have 
been put forward to explain it. According to one view, the governor 
of the eastern province revolted against the central authority and 
perpetrated massacres and ravages in Central Java on a large scale. 
But this can hardly account for the complete extinction of a flourish¬ 
ing culture, and the theory is belied by the fact that the large num¬ 
ber of monuments in Central Java bear no signs of wilful destruc¬ 
tion. Another theory attributes the wholesale desertion of Central 
Java to some natural phenomenon or visitation, like the eruption 
of a volcano or a violent epidemic which superstitious people might 
have interpreted as a sign of divine displeasure. But there are facts 
to prove that the migration of the people or the obliteration of cul¬ 
ture in Java was not so sudden as the above theory would imply. 
According to a third view the rulers of Eastern Java deliberately laid 
waste the whole of Central Java in pursuance of what is now known 
as a ‘scorched earth policy’ against a possible invasion by the 
&ailendras. It is, however, difficult to believe that such wholesale 
destruction would be undertaken merely at the apprehension of an 
invasion. 

It seems more probable that ever since the king of Mataram 
was forced to shift his capital to the east on account of the conquest 
of Central Java by the ^ailendras, the centre of politics and culture 
was transferred to that region, and remained there, even though a 
vain attempt was made, after about a century, to revive the old 
glory of Central Java by transferring the capital back again to that 
region. This view is supported by the fact that even during the 
century that followed this formal re-transfer of capital, most of the 
inscriptions, so far discovered, belong to Eastern Java. Slowly but 
steadily the political and cultural life continued to flow towards the 
east, and gradually Central Java lost its political importance as well 
as cultural pre-eminence. This might have been obscured from the 
ordinary view by the glamour of the court-life, but the process of 
change was nevertheless a reality. Some unknown factors, such as 
a violent volcanic eruption, epidemic, or ravages by the Sailendras, 
might have hastened the progress of the decay which was in any 
case rendered inevitable by the original transfer of capital in the 
middle of the eighth century A.D. 


429 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


But whatever may be the reasons, there is no dispute about the 
stark fact that Hindu culture and civilisation lost its hold on Central 
Java about the middle of the tenth century A.D., and we have here 
a repetition of what took place in Western Java five hundred years 
earlier. Since the eleventh century A.D., Eastern Java remained, 
for another period of five hundred years, as the only stronghold of 
Hindu culture and civilisation in Java. 

3 . Eastern Java—Dynasty of Sindok 

Sindok, the first ruler in Eastern Java, was regarded as a famous 
king by posterity, and relationship with him was claimed, even if 
no direct descent was traced, by many kings for centimes. Yet 
Sindok appears to have been intimately connected with the old royal 
family, and occupied such high offices of state under his two pre¬ 
decessors as are only held by an heir-apparent to the throne. 
Probably he was not the son of Wawa, but belonged to a different 
family, and hence, though he succeeded to the throne in the natural 
course, he was regarded as the founder of a long line of Javanese 
kings. It has been suggested that he married the daughter of king 
Wawa and acquired the throne by the right of his wife. But this 
as well as the suggestion that he was a grandson of Daksha is highly 
problematical. 

Sindok ascended the throne in c. A.D. -929 and assumed the 
name Sri Isana-Vikrama Dharmottuhgadeva at the time of* his coro¬ 
nation. Nearly twenty inscriptions of his reign have been discover¬ 
ed so far, but they do not record any specific events of his reign. 
To judge from the findspots of these inscriptions the kingdom of 
Sindok comprised merely the valley of the Brantas river, but it 
possibly extended far beyond this area. 

The last known date of Sindok is A.D, 947. He was succeeded 
by his daughter &rl Isanatuhgavijaya, who ruled as queen and was 
married to ^rl Lokapala. She was succeeded by her son &ri Makuta- 
vamsa-vardhana, who is said to have belonged to the family of 
Sindok and owed the throne to this king and not to the family of 
his own father Lokapala. It is not likely, therefore, that Lokapala 
ever ruled as king, though we possess three records issued by a 
king bearing this name. 

King Makutavamsa-vardhana had a daughter, Mahendradatta, 
also known as Gunapriya-dharmapatm, who was married to Udayana. 
The princess, with her husband, ruled over the island of Bali with¬ 
out any royal title. The fact that her name precedes that of her 
husband in contemporary records proves that she ruled in her own 


430 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


right as the daughter of the king of Java. Incidentally it proves 
that the king of Java had established his suzerainty over Bali. 

No other important event in the reign of Makutavamsa-vardhana 
is known. Nor do we know anything definite about the succession 
to the throne. It is known from a later record that king Dharma- 
yamsa ruled in Eastern Java towards the close of the tenth century 
A.D., but we do not know whether he was the immediate successor 
of Makufavariisa-vardhana or, even, if he belonged to the same royal 
family. It has been suggested that he belonged to a different family 
but married the daughter of Makutavamsa-vardhana. 

The two most important events in the reign of Bharmavamsa 
are renewal of diplomatic relations with China and the struggle with 
the &ailendras. The two are probably not altogether unconnected, 
and show an aggressive or imperial policy on the part of Java which 
had probably begun earlier as evidenced by the conquest of Bali. 

In A.D. 992 a Javanese envoy visited the Chinese court. He 
represented, with the assistance of an interpreter, that a great 
Chinese merchant, who owned many vessels, had come several times 
to Java, and he availed himself of the merchant’s guidance to come 
to the Imperial Court. This shows that Java had not been in touch 
with China for a long period. 

The Javanese envoy to China reported “that his country was 
in enmity with San-fo-tsi and that they were always fighting with 
each other.” We learn from an envoy of San-fo-tsi that he left the 
Chinese court in A.D. 990, but on reaching Canton learnt that his 
country had been invaded by Java. So he rested there for about a 
year and proceeded to Champa with his navy in the spring of A.D. 
992. But as he did not receive any good news there he returned to 
China and requested the emperor to issue a decree making San-fo-tsi 
a protectorate of China. 

As noted above, San-fo-tsi undoubtedly refers to the Sailendra 
kingdom. It is evident that even though the &ailendras left Java, 
the animosity between the two continued and broke out into open 
hostilities in or some time before A.D. 990. In that year Java took 
the offensive, invaded the kingdom of the gailendras, and reduced 
them to such straits that they had to seek the protection of China. 
It is very likely that Java also sent envoys to China as a counterpoise 
to this move on the part of her rival. But though Java had achieved 
great success in the beginning, it was short-lived. In A.D. 1003 
San-fo-tsi recovered sufficient strength to send an embassy to China 
without any hindrance from Java. It is evident that the &ailendra 


431 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


king had succeeded in his resistance and hurled back the invaders 
from his country. 

In spite of this set-back, king Dharmavaihsa enhanced the glory 
and prestige of Java in Indonesia. Unfortunately, the origin and 
incidents of his struggle with the Sailendras are not known, but it 
may not be unconnected with the tragic end of the Javanese king 
less than four years later. We learn from a record of his successor 
and son-in-law Airlangga that in A.D. 1006 Java was destroyed by 
a great catastrophe ( pralaya ) which overwhelmed it like the sea. 
“Then the flourishing capital city,” so runs the record, “which was 
hitherto a seat of joy and merriment, was reduced to ashes, and the 
great king met his end in the year 929 (— A.D. 1007).” 

It is held by some that the above passage refers to a natural 
calamity like a volcanic eruption. But this is hardly borne out by 
the detailed story of Airlangga’s flight, his fugitive life, and the 
recovery of the kingdom after arduous fight with various enemies. 
There can be hardly any doubt that the calamity was caused by a 
hostile attack. It is natural to infer that the enemies who destroyed 
the political life of Java were either the Sailendras or some powers 
backed by them. But there is no evidence in support of it, and the 
absence of any reference to the Sailendras in the detailed account 
of the subsequent struggles of Airlangga makes it very unlikely. 
But whoever might have been the enemy, his triumph was complete. 
King Dharmavamia died and his kingdom perished with him in 
A.D. 1007. The story of its recovery by Airlangga will be narrated 
in the next volume. 

V. BURMA 

The Hinduised Pyu kingdom, 7 with its capital at Srlkshetra 
(Prome), was the most powerful kingdom in Burma during the 
period under review. According to Chinese accounts it included 
nearly the whole of the country, except the Mon kingdom in the 
coastal regions of Lower Burma, and probably also Arakan. For 
we are told that the Pyu kingdom touched Kambuja on the east and 
India on the west, extended .up to the sea on the south and adjoined 
Dvaravati on the south-west (evidently a mistake for south-east, if 
it refers to the well-known Hindu kingdom in Siam). It is said to 
have been 500 miles from east to west and 700 to 800 miles from 
north to south. It extended up to the Thai kingdom of Yunnan in 
the north and claimed supremacy over 18 subject kingdoms. The 
Chinese account also gives us a list of eight or nine garrison towns 
and of the 32 most important among the 298 tribes or settlements. 
The capital city, 27 miles in circumference, was surrounded by a wall 


482 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


faced with glazed bricks, and this was protected by a moat whose 
banks were also faced with brick. The city had twelve gates with 
pagodas at the four corners. It contained several thousands of fami¬ 
lies, and over a hundred Buddhist monasteries, with courts and 
rooms all decked with gold and silver. 

The detailed account of the Pyus, particularly their sincere 
devotion to Buddhism, social customs, trade and currency, arts, 
crafts and ornaments, and high proficiency in music proves that they 
had attained a high degree of civilisation and had imbibed a large 
measure of Hindu culture. The rise of the powerful Thai kingdom 
in Yunnan, known as Nan-chao or Mithila-rashtra, about A.D. 730 
has been noted above. 8 The frontier between this kingdom and that 
of the Pyus qn the west followed roughly the Sino-Burmese frontier 
of to-day. Nan-chao rapidly grew powerful, and its king Ko-lo-fong 
inflicted a defeat upon the Chinese in A.D. 754. He next turned his 
attention to his western neighbour and invaded his kingdom. The 
Pyu king submitted and henceforth Upper Burma was dominated 
by the Thais. When at the end of the eighth century the grandson 
of Ko-lo-fong acknowledged the suzerainty of China and sent em¬ 
bassies to the Imperial Court, the Pyu king also followed suit. Two 
more embassies were sent to China in A.D. 802 and 807. The former 
was led by the king’s brother (or son) Sunandana, governor of the 
city of Sri (perhaps Bhamo or Tagaung), who took some court musi¬ 
cians as a present to the Chinese emperor. 

The peace with Nan-chao, however, did not last long. In 
A D. 832 the ruler of Nan-chao invaded the Pyu kingdom, plundered 
the capital city, and took more than 3000 persons as prisoners. This 
was a severe blow to the Pyu power and marks the beginning of its 
decline. But it did not bring about a sudden end to the Pyu king¬ 
dom or its culture, as some scholars hold. For we find that even 
in A.D. 882 an embassy from this kingdom visited China. But little 
is known of its history after the ninth century A.D. It is probable that 
the Mons in the south grew powerful and conquered the southern 
part of the Pyu kingdom, forcing the Pyus to remove their capital 
further north to Pagan on the Ira wadi. Soon a new tribe, the 
Mrammas (Burmans), came into prominence in this region. Pressed 
by the Mons from the south and the Mrammas from the north the 
Pyus gradually lost their power and were ultimately absorbed by 
their two powerful neighbours. From the eleventh century A.D. 
the Mrammas ruled as the dominant power in Burma with Pagan 
as their capital. 

438 

A.I.K.—28 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


VI. CIVILISATION IN THE HINDU COLONIES IN 

SOUTH-EAST ASIA 

The Hindu culture in all its aspects permeated the life of the 
people in these colonies to an extent which it is difficult to convey 
fully within the short scope of this chapter. We shall therefore 
coniine ourselves to the delineation of a few prominent characteris¬ 
tics under the broad heads of society, religion, art, and literature. 

1. Society 

The caste-system,. which is the most distinctive characteristic 
of Hindu society, and may be regarded as its fundamental basis, was 
introduced in Java, Madura, Sumatra, Champa and other colonies. 
For we have not only references to “Chdiurvarnya” or four castes, 
but there is also specific mention of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, 
and ^udras, both in literature and inscriptions. This caste-system 
was not, however, as rigid as we find it in India to-day, but rather 
resembled what was in vogue here in ancient times. We can get 
some idea of the caste-system in these remote colonies by studying 
the main features which prevail even to-day in the island of Bali. 
Thus, as laid down in Manu-smriti, marriage among different castes 
is prevalent, but while a man may marry a girl of his own or lower 
caste, a woman may only marry one of equal or higher caste. The 
children of mixed marriages belong to the caste of the father, though 
they differ in rank and status according to the caste of the mother. 
The marriage of a woman with a man of lower caste is punishable 
with death. 

In Bali the ^udras are not despised or regarded as impure and 
untouchable. Nor are the castes tied down to specific occupations. 
Thus men of all castes take to agriculture, and the Sudras, in addi¬ 
tion, follow other arts and crafts. We also find another characteris¬ 
tic feature of ancient Indian caste-system, viz . inequality in the eyes 
of law which lays down, for the same offence, punishment in inverse 
ratio to the superiority of caste of the offender, and in direct ratio 
to that of the offended. 

In some places, as in Champa, although there was a theoretical 
division into the four castes, practically there was no sharp distinc¬ 
tion among the people outside the Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, and 
even these two formed classes rather than castes. Nor did the 
Brahmanas occupy a position of unquestioned supremacy. They en¬ 
joyed great dignity, and the murder of a Brahmana was regarded as 
a particularly heinous crime. But they did not dominate the king 
and the state to the same extent as in India. It is interesting to 
note that in many instances where the two classes are mentioned 


484 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

together, the Kshatriyas are placed before the Brahmanas, as we 
find in Buddhist and Jain texts in India. In Bali, even to-day, the 
ruling princes, be they of Kshatriya or' Vaisya caste, are regarded 
as superior to their Brahmana subjects, and although theoretically 
a prince is not allowed to marry a Brahmana girl, this is often done 
by the legal subterfuge of expelling a Brahmana girl and adopting 
her in the house of the prince. 

The position of woman in many of these colonies seems to have 
been much better than in India, at least so far as political rights are 
concerned. As noted above, 9 Gunapriya ruled in her own rights, 
and her name was placed before that of her husband. There are 
instances in later history of a daughter succeeding to the throne, 
although she had two brothers, and acting as regent for her mother 
although she had a grown-up son. Some ladies occupied the highest 
offices of state, and wives of officials are stated in inscriptions to have 
* received presents from the king along with their husbands on cere¬ 
monial occasions. The old literature as well as the present day 
customs in Bali indicate that there was no purdah system and women 
freely mixed with men. The system of burning the widow along 
with the dead husband was in vogue. Sometimes even the slaves 
and concubines of the dead perished with him. This is now for¬ 
bidden to the Sudras, and generally the Sati rite is confined to royal 
families. 

In addition to the social division into castes there was also dis¬ 
tinction between the aristocracy and common people. The two divi¬ 
sions were overlapping to a certain extent, and though the Brah¬ 
manas and the Kshatriyas formed the bulk of the aristocracy it cer¬ 
tainly included other people. The external symbols of aristocracy, 
as in India, were (1) special articles of dress and ornaments, (2) right 
to use special conveyances, such as palanquins and elephants, to the 
accompaniment of music, etc., and (3) the claim to be seated, near 
the king. 

As regards dress, the sculptures represent, as in India the upper 
part of the body above the waist as uncovered, both in the case of 
males and females. The Chinese accounts, too, refer to similar 
dress. As is well-known, in Bali, even to-day, the women do not 
cover the upper part of the body. So this seems to be an old prac¬ 
tice, at least in some of the colonies, and to judge from the sculptural 
representations, it was possibly not unknown even in India. 

2. Religion 

The Puranic religion had a strong hold on almost all the colo¬ 
nies, Although Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva were all worshipped, the 


485 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


cult of &iva was undoubtedly the most popular. Next came Vaish- 
navism. As in India, the worship of Brahma never attained great 
popularity. The images of Trimurti, i.e, the three gods combined 
together, as well as of the composite god &iva-Vishnu, are found in 
Java and Kambuja. As a matter of fact the entire Puranic pantheon 
was known in these countries, and we come across images of Hindu 
gods and goddesses in their innumerable names and forms as known 
in India. The mystic philosophy of the Upanishads, and even later 
outgrowths such as Tantrik rites, can also be traced. Indeed Hindu 
religion in all its aspects, both canonical and popular, appears in 
such fullness in these colonies, that to describe it in detail would be 
to recount at length the religious conditions in India. 

The study of Indian religious literature was a special feature of 
the religious life. In Java the period under review saw the begin¬ 
nings of that extensive Javanese religious literature, based on 
Indian texts, which will be noticed in the next volume. The inscrip¬ 
tions of Kambuja frequently refer to Brahmanas versed in Veda, 
Vedahga, Samaveda, and Buddhist scriptures, and kings and minis¬ 
ters- possessing a profound knowledge of the Dharmasastra. 
Arrangements were also made for the daily recitation of R&mayana, 
Mahahkarata , and the Puranas, and it was considered a pious act to 
present copies of these texts to temples. 

Buddhism was also popular, particularly in Suvarna-dvipa, i.e. 
East Indies. Although the Hlnayana form was prevalent in the 
seventh century, it was almost ousted in the eighth by Mahavana, 
which had a triumphal career in Java and Sumatra during the 
period of ^ailendra supremacy. It has left undying memorials in 
the famous stupa of Barabudur and several magnificent temples. 
As noted above, 10 Buddhist teachers from Bengal exerted consider¬ 
able influence in Java, and the ^ailendras were in close contact with 
the Pa la kings and such famous Buddhist centres in India as Nalanda. 
As in the case of Puranic religion, almost the entire hierarchy of 
the Mahayanist gods make their appearance in Java, not only in 
identical forms and names, but also with the familiar postures called 
mudrd. We possess also an interesting work Sang hyang Kamaka- 
yanikan, a somewhat free Javanese version of a Sanskrit original 
interspersed with a number of original Sanskrit verses, which gives 
an exposition of the sacred principles of Mahayana. 

Buddhism had also prevailed in Champa. Even as early as 
A.D. 605 a victorious Chinese general carried away 1350 Buddhist 
books from this country. From the eighth century A.D. we hear 
of many kings constructing Buddhist temples and monasteries and 
installing Buddhist images. The site of Dong Duong indicates the 


436 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

great hold of Buddhism in this country. For its ruins contain the 
remains of a Buddhist temple far greater in dimensions than the 
largest Brahmanical temple in Champa, and a fine standing image 
of Buddha, which is regarded as the most artistic representation of 
a god so far found in that country. 

The Sanskrit inscriptions of Kambuja, to which reference will 
be made later, throw a great deal of light on the religious develop¬ 
ments. These inscriptions reflect the life and society in Kambuja 
and testify to the thoroughness of the Indian cultural conquest of 
these far-off lands. They prove that the people fully imbibed the 
tenets and practices, the theology, rituals, and the iconography of 
the various religious sects of India. The numerous temples, images 
of gods and goddesses, and pious foundations show the powerful 
hold which religion had over the popular mind. But the inscriptions 
prove something more; they clearly show that there was in Kambuja, 
beyond the external forms of religion, that higher and deeper spiri¬ 
tual view of life which is the true essence of all religions and. form¬ 
ed such a distinctive characteristic of ancient Indian culture and 
civilisation. These inscriptions reveal a spirit of piety and renun¬ 
ciation, a deep yearning for emancipation from the trammels of 
birth and evils of the world, and longing for the attainment of the 
highest bliss and salvation by union with Brahman, the Ultimate 
Reality. These ideas, which form the keynote of Indian spiritual 
life, are frequently expressed with beauty and elegance, and in lan¬ 
guage at once stately and serene. 

Generally the true religious spirit is chiefly found among the 
common people. But in Kambuja even the kings, high officials, and 
the aristocracy were inspired by the high ideals portrayed above. 
This is probably due to a close association between secular and spiri¬ 
tual heads. The inscriptions tell us that the kings usually received 
their early education from eminent religious Acharyas and members 
of the family of hereditary royal priests. 11 There are also many 
instances of kings and members of the royal family becoming high 
priests and Acharyas. The intermarriage between royal and priestly 
families was also very common. The predominance of a family, 
whose members supplied royal priests for 250 years in unbroken 
succession, is both an index and the cause of the extreme religious 
outlook of the king and the people. 

At least two special circumstances may be pointed out as being 
mainly responsible for this growth of religious and spiritual life in 
Kambuja. The first is a constant and intimate contact with India, 
and the second is the establishment of a series of dsramas or hermi¬ 
tages. Both require some detailed notice. 


487 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Apart from the indirect evidence furnished by inscriptions, 
actual examples of contact with India, are recorded in Kambuja 
inscriptions. Reference has been made above to Agastya, a Brah- 
mana from India, who founded a royal family in Kambuja. Raja- 
lakshmi, the daughter of Rajendra-varman, was married to a Brah¬ 
mans, named Bivakara Bhatta, who is said to have been born on 
the banks of the river Kalindi sanctified by association with Krishna's 
early life. This undoubtedly implies that Divakara Bhatta was born 
in India on the banks of the Yamuna river and, having migrated to 
Kambuja, obtained a high position there. We have similar instances, 
both in earlier and later times, of learned Indian Brahmanas, noted 
for their spiritual powers, being invited to Kambuja and received 
with high honours. The Brahmana named Hiranyadama, who per¬ 
formed Tantrik rites for Jaya-varman II, lias been mentioned above. 12 
Another eminent Saiva Brahmana named Sarvajnamuni, versed in 
all the Vedas and Agamas, came from India, and his descendants 
occupied high offices. The people of Kambuja also visited India to 
acquire knowledge and spiritual instruction. The most important 
example is that of 6ivasoma f the guru (preceptor) of Indra-varman. 
It is stated in a contemporary record that he learnt the s&stras 
(sacred scriptures) from Bhagavat Sankara, who is undoubtedly the 
famous ^ankaracharya. 

Coming to the second factor, the asramas, these hermitages were 
the abodes of pious devotees who dedicated their lives to study and 
meditation, A large number of these institutions existed all over 
Kambuja. King Yaio-varman is said to have founded one hundred 
asramas , and this is supported by the actual discovery of a large 
number of inscriptions recording the foundation of individual 
asramas in different parts of the kingdom. These inscriptions are 
fairly long, and give detailed regulations for the management of the 
asramas and the conduct of persons visiting them or living therein. 
These regulations indicate the high moral and spiritual ideal which 
inspired these institutions, and the great humanitarian spirit in 
which their actual work was carried on. These asramas remind us 
of the hermitages in ancient India of which we get such a vivid 
picture in ancient Indian literature and on which they were evident¬ 
ly based. They formed powerful centres of Indian culture in Kam¬ 
buja, from which it radiated in all directions and gained in purity, 
strength, and stability. 

In conclusion it should be mentioned that there was a spirit of 
religious toleration in all the colonies. Although various Brahmani- 
cal sects flourished along with Buddhism, there was no animosity 
between their followers. On the other hand kings and people alike 


438 

$ 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

paid reverence to all religious sects. The same king endowed both 
Saiva and Buddhist religious establishments or installed images of 
different sectarian gods. In this respect the Indian colonists main¬ 
tained the best traditions of their motherland. 

3 . Art 

Every Hindu colony contains numerous monuments of artistic 
activity in the shape of temples and images which show distinct 
traces of Indian influence and inspiration in varying degrees. While 
some are close imitations, almost replicas, of Indian models, others 
show refreshing development of local styles by the addition of spe¬ 
cial, sometimes characteristic, features to Indian ideas. None excels 
in this respect the Indo-Javanese art which reached its high water¬ 
mark of glory and splendour during the period under review, and 
needs a more detailed treatment than the rest. 

(i) Indo-Javanese Art 

Art in Java, as in India and her other colonies, was the hand¬ 
maid of religion. The religious structures in Java are known by 
the general name Charidi, and most of them are temples, built on a 
more or less uniform plan with variations in details. Each temple 
consists of three distinct parts, viz. (1) a high decorated basement, 
(2) the square body of the temple with a vestibule in front and pro¬ 
jections on all other sides, and (3) the roof consisting of a series of 
gradually diminishing storeys each of which is a minor replica of 
the main temple with four turrets at four corners of the same design. 
The interior of the temple is a plain square chamber, whose vertical 
walls support a series of projecting horizontal courses of stone which 
form an inverted pyramid of steps and is terminated by a high and 
pointed hollow cone. 

The decorative ornaments consist of well-known Indian motifs, 
and one which occurs very frequently is known as Kala-Makara. 
Really Kala and Makara are two separate motifs though they are 
often found united. The first is a grotesque form of Indian Kirtti- 
mukha, and represents a conventional lion’s head with protruding 
eyes, broad nose, very thick upper lip, and two big projecting teeth 
on two sides. The Makara closely resembles its Indian prototype. 

The arches in these temples are constructed on the horizontal 
principle as in India, but columns and pillars are conspicuous by 
their absence. There is often a large group or cluster of temples 
formed by one or more big temples in the centre with numerous 
smaller temples surrounding them. 


439 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The earliest temples in Java are those on the Dieng plateau, 
which is 6,500 feet high and surrounded by hills on all sides. They 
are Brahmanical temples named after the heroes and heroines of the 
Mahahhtirata, and belong probably to the eighth century A.D. 
Although comparatively small in dimensions, these temples and the 
sculptures in them are characterised by a sobriety and dignity which 
is usually associated with Indian temples of the Gupta period. 

The Prambanan valley contains several groups of important 
temples. Among the Buddhist temples may be mentioned Chandi 
Kalasan, Chandi Sari, and Chandi Sevu. The first is a magnificent 
specimen of temple architecture, and was built by a 3ailendra king 
in A.D. 778 for the goddess Tara. The complex of temples known 
as Chandi Sevu contains no less than 250 temples with the main 
temple in the centre of a paved courtyard measuring about 600 ft. 
by 540 ft. 

Still more famous is the Lara-Jongrang group of Brahmanical 
temples. It consists of eight main temples, three in each row with 
two between them, with three rows of minor temples making a total 
of 156. The three main temples in one row contain images of Brahma, 
Vishnu, and &iva, the &iva temple in the centre being the most mag¬ 
nificent. Tlie balustrade round the temple contains a continuous 
series of relief sculptures in 42 panels, depicting the story of the Ra- 
mayana. These exhibit a high degree of skill, and may be reckoned 
among the very best to be found in Java. 

Midway between the Dieng plateau and the Prambanan valley 
stands the Kedu plain, which contains a number of fine temples, 
among which Chandi Mendut and Chandi Pavon deserve special 
mention as beautiful specimens of Indo-Javanese art. 

But by far the most magnificent monument in Java is the 
famous Barabudur, a colossal structure justly regarded as a veri¬ 
table wonder by the whole world. It is situated on the top of a 
hillock commanding a fine view across the plains of Kedu to the 
distant ranges of hills. This noble building consists of nine gradual¬ 
ly receding terraces, the six lower ones being square in plan, and 
the upper three circular. The whole is crowned by a bell-shaped 
stupa f which stands at the centre of the topmost terrace and is 
accessible from it by a series of circular steps. The three uppermost 
terraces are encircled by rings of stupas , each containing an image 
of Buddha within a perforated framework. The five lower terraces 
are each enclosed on the inner side by a wall supporting a balustrade, 
and the four successive galleries thus formed contain eleven series 
of sculptured panels depicting the life of Buddha and other Buddhist 


440 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


stories. The balustrade consists of a row of arched niches resembl¬ 
ing temples and containing an image of Buddha. There is a stair¬ 
case with a highly decorated gateway in the middle of each side of 
the gallery leading to the next higher one- 

The most notable feature of Barabudur is its massive propor¬ 
tions. It impresses the visitor with a feeling as if a hillock has sud¬ 
denly come to view. It is difficult to convey an $xact idea of this 
feeling by measurements alone., but still that is the only concrete 
way of expressing it. The lowest terrace, including projections on 
two sides, has an extreme length of nearly 400 ft., and the topmost 
one a diameter of 90 ft. The temple niches, each containing a fine 
image of Buddha, are 432 in number. The total number of sculptur¬ 
ed panels in the galleries is about 1500. 

These figures give some idea of the massive grandeur of Bara¬ 
budur which strikes a visitor v/hen it first comes to his view. But 
as he approaches closer to the structure, he is no less deeply im¬ 
pressed by the fine quality of its immense decorations, extensive 
relief sculptures, and the numerous images of Buddha. It is diffi¬ 
cult to name any product of art, either in India or anywhere else in 
the world, where such a high standard of excellence has been 
maintained over such an extensive range. This combination of 
massive quantity and fine quality invests Barabudur with a unique 
character. It has hardly any parallel in the world, and it may be 
truly remarked of its artists that “they conceived like giants and 
finished like jewellers.” 

The construction of Barabudur may be roughly dated towards 
the close of the eighth or the beginning of the ninth century A.D. 
when the &ailendras ruled in Java and were the dominant political 
power in Suvarna-dvipa. There is hardly any doubt that this great 
monument is the result of their patronage. 

Although Lara Jongrang and Barabudur have cast into shade 
all the other structures in Java, many of them are fine specimens 
of Indo-Javanese architecture, and some of the sculptures, such as 
those of Mendut and Banon, show perhaps even a greater degree 
of refinement and delicacy than those of the two justly famous 
monuments. 

(ii) Art in Indo-China 

The art of Kambuja may be broadly divided into two classes, 
the primitive and the classic. The latter, which is associated with 
Angkor and shows the high watermark of its glory, dates from 
about the tenth century and will be dealt with in the next volume. 


441 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


The primitive art began from the age of Fu-nan, and was developed 
by natural stages of evolution to the classical art. But as most of 
the monuments of Fu-nan were made of perishable materials like 
wood or brick, there are not enough remains to enable us to recon¬ 
struct the history of its art. The brick temples, roughly resembling 
those of Java, show some affinity with Gupta art, which is even 
more evident in some of the sculptures discovered both in Siam 
and Cambodia. It may be safely presumed, therefore, that the pri¬ 
mitive art of Kambuja and Siam was directly derived from India. 
Some scholars are even of opinion that the artists and craftsmen 
who built the temples and made the images of gods came from 
India. But be that as it may, there is no doubt that the primitive 
art of Kambuja was purely Indian, and from Fu-nan this Indian 
art of the Gupta age spread over a wide territory in Indo-China 
along with other phases of Indian culture. 

There are also a large number of temples in Champa. In addi¬ 
tion to many isolated examples there are three important groups 
of temples, viz. those of Myson, Dong Duong, and Po-Nagar, the 
second being Buddhist and the other two Saivite. These temples 
are generally built of brick and belong to one standard type. Their 
most characteristic feature is the roof which has three different 
forms. The first or the normal form consists of a series of four 
receding storeys crowned by a curvilinear pyramidal slab. The 
second form consists of two storeys, the upper one having the shape 
of an elongated arched vault with ogival ends. The third form con¬ 
sists of a curvilinear pyramidal dome, springing directly from the 
walls of the sanctuary and surmounted by an dmalaka such as we 
find in the iikharas of Northern India. All these forms or types are 
found in the rock-cut temples at Mamailapuram in Madras, and 
there can hardly be any doubt that the architectural style of 
Champa was derived from India. 

Although neither Champa nor Kambuja produced during this 
period any structure that can even make a remote approach to 
what we find in Java, there was a fair amount of artistic activity 
in vboth, full of future promise. In Champa, due perhaps to the 
political conditions, these promises never materialised. But in 
Kambuja the art developed in rapid strides after tenth century A.D. 
and produced some remarkable monuments which almost rivalled 
those of Java. 

4. Literature 

The Sanskrit inscriptions discovered in Kambuja, Champa, 
Malaya Peninsula, and Java leave no doubt that Sanskrit literature, 


442 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


in ail its branches, was highly cultivated in all the Indian colonies- 
As we have seen above, 13 we can trace its beginning to a much earlier 
period. But the large number of Sanskrit inscriptions—about 30 
in Champa and 70 in Kambuja—during the period under review, 
indicate very great progress in the study of Sanskrit. Reference 
has already been made above to religious literature, but even in 
secular literature the achievements were remarkable. Inscriptions, 
earlier than the ninth century A.D., refer to many of its branches 
such as grammar and philology, philosophy, political science (Artha- 
sastra), and Kavya. The literary accomplishments of king Indra- 
varman III of Champa and Yaso-varman of Kambuj a have been 
mentioned above. Yaso-varman’s minister was an expert in astro¬ 
logy. All these throw interesting light on the zeal and enthusiasm 
with which all classes of peopk igh and low, took to the study 
of Sanskrit. 

The cultivation of Sanskrit language and literature reached its 
highest development in Kambuj a during the ninth and tenth cen¬ 
turies A.D. This may be easily deduced from a careful study of 
the large number of Sanskrit inscriptions composed in beautiful 
and almost flawless Kavya style. Many of these run to great 
lengths. Four inscriptions of Yaso-varman contain respectively 50 
75, 93, and 108 verses each, and two inscriptions of Raj endra-varman 
contain respectively 218 and 298 verses. The authors of these in¬ 
scriptions give clear evidence of a thorough knowledge of alrhost all 
the Sanskrit metres and the most abstruse rules of Sanskrit rhetoric 
and prosody, intimate acquaintance with various branches of lite¬ 
rature such as Veda, Vedanta, Purana, Dharmasastra, Buddhist and 
Jain literature, different schools of philosophy, and Vyakarana, spe¬ 
cially the works of Panin! and Patahjali. Specific reference is made 
to Vatsyayana and Viialaksha as the authors respectively of Kama- 
sutra and a book on polity, to Manu-smriti, from which a verse is 
actually quoted, and to the famous medical treatise of Susruta. 
Both the form and contents of the inscriptions indicate a mastery 
of Sanskrit Kavya. An inscription of Eajendra-varman contains 
four verses which are evidently copied from Raghuvamsa with slight 
modifications. Some inscriptions of Yaso-varman refer to Pravara- 
sena and Mayura as the authors of Setubandha and Suryasataka ,, and 
to Gunadhya as a writer in Prakrit with an allusion to the legend 
about him contained in the KathdsariUsdgara. The inscriptions 
themselves are sometimes writtten in such a fine Kavya style as would 
do honour to a reputable Sanskrit poet of India. They certainly 
excel in literary merits the Sanskrit inscriptions so far discovered 
in India. As to the legends and mythology, derived chiefly from the 
Puranas and the epics, and the allusion, alliteration, and simile etc. 


443 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


which usually abound in Sanskrit Kavyas, they occur so frequently 
in these records that their authors seem to be saturated with them. 

Such a state of knowledge and proficienby clearly implies a close 
and constant contact between India and Kambuja. M. Qoedes,* while 
editing a Kambuja inscription, has pointed out that it so strikingly 
exhibits all the characteristic features of the Gauda style, that its 
author must have been either an inhabitant of Gauda (Bengal) or 
one who had lived in that country for a long time. As a matter of 
fact similar remarks may perhaps be made in respect of many other 
records. On the whole the series of inscriptions may be taken as 
a definite evidence of the flourishing state of literature in Kambuja 
and her intimate contact with India. 

VII. CHINA 

a 

The most active and fruitful period of intercourse between India 
and China came to an end with the eight century A.D. 14 The last 
century of T’ang rule (A.D. 618-907) was full of troubles, and the 
Arab incursions in Central Asia probably interfered with the free 
intercourse of the Buddhists between India and China. In any case 
we hear very little of the cultural or political relations with Ehdia 
about this time. But the Song dynasty (A.D. 960-1279) revived the 
old traditions and the active intercourse was resumed for another 
century. 

Kir 

In A.D. 972 forty-four Indian monks went to China. Next year 
Dharmadeva, a monk of Nalanda, was received by i:he emperor of 
China with great honours. He translated a large number of Sans¬ 
krit texts and died in China in A.D. 1001. A number of other Indian 
monks, including a prince of Western India named Manjusii, visited 
China between 970 and 1036. According to the Chinese chroniclers 
there were never so many Indian monks in the Chinese court as 
at the close of the tenth and the beginning of the eleventh cen¬ 
tury A.D. A large number of Sanskrit manuscripts were brought 
from India by these Indian monks as well as the Chinese pilgrims. 
In 982 the Chinese Emperor appointed a Board of Translators with 
three Indian scholars at the head. They translated more than 200 
volumes between A.D. 982 and 1011. 

A large number of Chinese pilgrims also came to India between 
A.D. 950 and 1033. In A.D. 964, 300 Chinese monks started for India, 
and this pilgrimage lasted for twelve years. Two years later the 
Chinese Emperor issued an appeal to the Buddhist monks, and 157 
of them went in pursuance of it to pay imperial homage to the holy 
places in India. They were furnished with letters patent ordering 


444 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


all the kings of Central Asia and Northern India to help them with 
guides. These monks were sometimes asked to carry out certain 
religious duties in India, on behalf of the Emperor. 

Five of these Chinese pilgrims have left short inscriptions at the 
sacred site of Bodh-Gaya. One of them records the visit of the monk 
Che-yi in A.D. 950- Three others, dated A.D. 1022, refer to the con¬ 
struction of stone stupas by three Chinese monks. The last inscrip¬ 
tion is more interesting. It is dated in A.D. 1033 and records the 
construction of a stupa in honour of Emperor T’ai-tsong by the 
Emperor and the Dowager Empress of the great Song dynasty. We 
are told that the Emperor and the Empress “respectfully charged 
the monk Huai-wen with the task of going to the country of Magadha 
in order to erect a stupa by the side of the Vajrasana dedicated to 
Emperor T’ai-tsong.” This inscription still remains as the last 
monument of the Chinese pilgrimage to India which began about 
a thousand years ago. 

The last Chinese piligrim left India shortly after A.D. 1033. and 
a group of nine Indian monks went to China in A.D. 1036. Only a 
single Indian monk is known to have visited China after that date, in 
A.D. 1053, and the official chronicle terminates its notice on India 
from A.D. 1036. This date, therefore, marks the close of the long 
and intimate cultural intercourse between India and China. The 
cause of this sudden end is not easy to determine, and it naturally 
led to a decline in the popularity of Buddhism. “The number of 
Buddhist monks and nuns in China in A.D. 1021 were respectively 
3,97,615 and 61,240; in 1034, 3,85,520 and 48,740; but in 1068, only 
2,20,660 and 34,030.” 16 

There was political relation between South India and China 
during the Song period. A Chola embassy visited the Imperial 
Court in A.D. 1015. Details of their journey are given in Chinese 
annals which show that it took, in all, 1150 days, though they were 
actually under sail for only 247 days. The Chola king is said to 
have sent as presents, among other things, 21,000 ounces of pearls, 
60 elephants’ tusks, and 60 catties of frankincense. The envoy added 
6600 ounces of pearls and 3300 catties of perfumes. In A.D. 1033 
and 1077 the Chola king sent two more embassies to China. 

The sea-borne trade between India and China continued through¬ 
out this period, but it is difficult to say how far the Indians took 
any share in it. The Song Annals do not include India among the 
countries whose merchants traded at Canton in A.D. 971. Chou 
Ku-fei, writing in 1178, refers to Quilon as an important centre of 
trade with China, but does not mention India among the countries 


445 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


engaged in that trade. It may be argued from these that the Arabs 
were gradually ousting the Indians from the Chinese trade. 16 But 
the discovery of 15 coins in Tanj ore District, representing practically 
the entire Song period, may be cited as an evidence that the com¬ 
mercial relations between South India and China, which flourished 
in the Tang period, 17 probably continued uninterrupted through¬ 
out the Song period. 18 


Yin. TIBET 

According to the chronicles of Tibet her kings exercised politi¬ 
cal domination over parts of India during the period A.D. 750-850. 
The Tibetan king Khri-sroh-lde-btsan, who ruled from A.D. 755 to 
797, is said to have subdued the frontier provinces including ‘China 
in the east and India in the south.’ His son Mu-Khri-btsan-po (or 
Mu-tig-Btsan-po) who ruled from A.D. 798 to 804 subjugated two 
or three (parts of) Jambudvipa and forced the Pala king Dharrna- 
pala and another Indian king to pay tribute. The next important 
king Ral-pa-can (A.D. 817-836) 19 conquered India as far as Gahga- 
sagara which has been taken to represent the mouth of the Gahga. 

How far these Tibetan claims of conquest and supremacy in 
the Indian plains can be regarded as historical, it is difficult to 
say. We have no reference in Indian sources to any military cam¬ 
paign of the Tibetans in India or to their exercising political suze¬ 
rainty in any part of the country. On the other hand, Chinese sour¬ 
ces confirm the great military strength and the aggressive military 
campaigns of the Tibetans both against China and India. One Chinese 
author says that some time about A.D. 787 the Emperor of China 
made an alliance with the Caliph of Baghdad and some Indian prin¬ 
ces, for security against the Tibetans. 20 It is also to be noted that 
both I§takhri and Ibn Haukal call the Bay of Bengal as Tibetan Sea, 
thus indirectly indicating the advance of the Tibetans to the heart 
of Bengal. While, therefore, there may be some foundation for these 
claims, we cannot come to any definite conclusion, until further evi¬ 
dence is available. 

It is interesting to note that the same period (A.D. 750-850). 
in which Tibetan domination in India is said to have reached its 
climax also witnessed the supremacy of Buddhism in Tibet. The 
king Khri-sroh-lde-btsan, mentioned above, was a great patron of 
Buddhism, and was regarded as an incarnation of Bodhisattva Man- 
juiri. He invited Santarakshita, the High Priest of the University 
of Nalanda, and appointed him the High Priest of Tibet. He 
made Buddhism the state-religion of Tibet in place of Bon, a sort 


446 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


of demon-worship. Santarakshita introduced the system of Bud¬ 
dhist monarchism which is now known as Lamaism in Tibet. He 
was helped in this onerous task of reorganising the religious sys¬ 
tem by another Indian monk named Padmasambhava. A scholar 
named Ananta from Kashmir also translated sacred texts and prea¬ 
ched Buddhism. At this time a Chinese Buddhist missionary visit¬ 
ed Tibet and preached doctrines which were different from those 
of &antarakshita and Padmasambhava. The latter, unable to refute 
him, induced the king to invite the great Buddhist philosopher of 
Magadha named Kamalasila. Kamalasila visited Tibet and, in the 
presence of the assembled court, came out victorious over the Chi¬ 
nese sage. The king of Tibet placed Kamalasila at the head of the 
metaphysical branch of the Buddhist church. The orthodox section 
of the people were at first hostile to the new religion, but all opposi¬ 
tion gradually died down. King Khri-sron-lde-btsan built the 
famous temple of Bsam-yas in imitation of the temple of Odanta- 
puri in Magadha. This temple still exists and is situated about 
35 miles from Lhasa. 

The names of a large number of Indian scholars who taught 
different aspects of Buddhism about this time in Tibet have been 
preserved. Among them may be mentioned Dharmakirti, Vimala- 
mitra, Buddhaguhya, and Santigarbha. They introduced Tantrik 
ritual and taught mysticism based on Buddhist Tantrism. 

But the names of Santarakshita and Padmasambhava are held 
in special veneration. The former introduced the observance of the 
“ten virtues.” Padmasambhava was the greatest teacher of Tantrik 
doctrines which spread all over the country. He became almost 
a legendary and mythical figure in Tibet. 

The reign of Khri-sron-lde-btsan thus saw the final triumph 
of Buddhism in Tibet. According to Tibetan chronicles “the Bon 
religion was suppressed and the holy religion was made to spread 
and flourished” during the lifetime of this king. They quote a 
verse mentioning gantarakshita, Padmasambhava, Kamalasila, and 
Khri-sron-lde-btsan as the four persons through whom “like sun¬ 
rise in the dark country of Tibet, the light of the holy religion spread 
as far as the frontiers.” “These holy men,” so the verse concludes, 
“all Tibetans will for ever reverently salute”. 

The successors of king Khri-sron-lde-btsan followed his policy 
of translating sacred books, erecting temples, and inviting Panditas 
from India. Ral-pa-can, mentioned above, was a great patron of 
Buddhism. As there were conflicting interpretations in the large 
number of Tibetan translations of sacred scriptures, he invited the - 


447 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Indian Panditas Jinamitra, Surendrabodhi, Silendrabodhi, Bodhi- 
mitra, and Dhanaslla to Tibet. He was a great lover of Indian 
culture and introduced even the system of Indian weights and 
measures in Tibet. All this provoked a reaction during the reign 
of his successor Glan-dar-ma who persecuted Buddhism. But he 
was murdered, probably by a monk, and his son, who owed the 
throne to the help of the Buddhist monks, restored the supremacy 
of Buddhism. This king (A.D. 842-70) and his successors invited 
Buddhist scholars from India, erected temples, and had sacred books 
translated into Tibetan. Eminent Tibetan scholars also visited 
India in order to learn the Buddhist doctrines. 21 

Tibetan Chronicles have preserved a most circumstantial 
account of the part played by an Indian scholar named Dipahkara 
Srljhana, called also Atisa. Even making allowances for natural 
exaggeration and somewhat romantic character of the story, it shows 
in a striking manner to what extent India was regarded as their 
spiritual home by the Tibetans. The story must be read in full in 
order to understand the reverential attitude of the Tibetans towards 
India. Here we can only give a summary. 

Dipahkara was born in Bengal in c. A.D. 980. After attaining 
proficiency in both Buddhist and Brahmanical philosophy and scrip¬ 
tures he went to Acharya Chandraklrti, the High Priest of Suvarna- 
dvipa, and studied with him for twelve years. On his return he 
was acknowledged as the hierarch of Magadha and, at the request 
of king Nayapala, accepted the post of High Priest of Vikramaslla. 

About this time Lha Lama Ye-ses-hod, king of Tibet, wanted 
to reform Buddhism which had become greatly debased by the ad¬ 
mixture of Tantrik and Bon mysticism. Accordingly he sent a 
number of young Tibetan monks to India to study Buddhist scrip¬ 
tures and to invite to Tibet renowned scholars like Dipahkara, Ratna- 
vajra and others. Out of the 21 Tibetan monks who thus came to 
India, only two survived and returned to Tibet after completing 
their studies. They made inquiries about Dipahkara, but were told 
that any invitation to him to visit Tibet would be premature. But 
the king, on hearing of his high renown and scholarship, sent an 
envoy to Magadha with one hundred attendants and a large quan¬ 
tity of gold. The envoy presented to Dipahkara the king’s letter 
with a large piece of bar-gold as a present from his -sovereign, and 
begged him to honour his country with a visit. Dipahkara declined 
the present and the invitation. The envoy wept bitterly, but could 
not change the decision of Dipahkara. 


448 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


Shortly after this the king of Tibet fell into the hands of an 
enemy and died in captivity. Before his death he sent a message 
which so touched the heart of. Dipahkara that he decided to visit 
Tibet. 

Atlsa was received with high honours at the frontier of Tibet. 
Four generals, with one hundred horsemen, received him and he 
was escorted in a procession carrying flags and playing various musi¬ 
cal instruments. His journey through the country was in the nature 
of a royal tour, and he was everywhere hailed by all classes of 
people. The king arranged a grand ovation for him in the capital. 
Dipahkara spent the remaining 13 years of his life in Tibet, preach¬ 
ing the pure doctrines of Buddhism and writing sacred texts. He 
reformed Buddhism in Tibet by eliminating Tantrik elements, and 
wrote about two hundred books. He was the spiritual guide and 
teacher of Bromton, the founder of the first grand hierarchy of 
Tibet. He died in A.D. 1053, and is even now remembered with 
deep veneration all over upper Asia or wherever the Buddhism of 
the Tibet variety prevails. 

Throughout the Pala period Tibet was in close touch with 
India, particularly with the great Universities of Nalanda and Vik- 
ramasila. She adopted many traits of Indian culture along with 
religion, such as the 60 years’ cycle system. Many Indian monks 
visited Tibet and preached the new developments of Buddhism. In 
particular the mystic schools of Buddhism like Vajrayana and Saha- 
jayana found great favour there. The vast literature of this reli¬ 
gion, now lost in India, has been preserved in Tibetan translations, 
in the two voluminous collections known as Bstan-hgyur and Bkah- 
hgyur. We possess only a bare knowledge of the names and gene¬ 
ral contents of the texts included in them, as most of them have 
not yet been studied in detail. But the systematic catalogue pre¬ 
pared by Csoma de Coros and Cordier, and works of several other 
scholars show that these works are very large in number and varied 
in nature. They furnish positive testimony to the intimate connec¬ 
tion between the two countries and the profound influence exer¬ 
cised by India upon the development of religious thought and lite¬ 
rature, as well as many other aspects of culture in Tibet. 

IX. WESTERN COUNTRIES 

We have abundant references to a very close contact between 
India and the Muslim world . 22 Baghdad was at this time the centre 
of Muslim world, and Indian culture reached it both directly as well 
as through Iran. Indian literature, at first translated into Persian, 
was later translated from Persian into Arabic, The most prominent 

449 

A.I,K.—2ft 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

example of this is furnished by the fables of Kalila and Dimna 
based on Panchat antra, 23 and probably the famous medical treatise 
Char a k as am h i td was first known to the Muslim court in this way. 

The direct intercourse between India and Baghdad is prominent¬ 
ly noticeable during the reigns of Al-Mansur (A.D. 754-75) and 
Harun Al-Raslhd (A.D. 786-809). As Sindh was under the actual 
rule of Al-Mansur, several Indian embassies came to his court. These 
embassies were accompanied by Indian scholars who taught the 
Arabs both mathematics and astronomy, as well as various other sub¬ 
jects. Al-Biruni tells us that the “star-cycles, as known through 
the canon of Alfazari and Ya’kub Ibn Tarik, were derived from a 
Hindu who came to Bagdad as a member of the political mission 
which Sindh sent to the Khalif Almansur, A.H. 154 (A.D. 771).” 2i 
Again, we learn from the same source, that the Hindu traditions re¬ 
garding the distances of the stars were communicated to Ya’kub 
Ibn Tarik by “the well-known Hindu scholar who, in A.H. 161 (A.D. 
778), accompanied an embassy to Bagdad.” 26 Two other Indian 
embassies are known, from other sources, to have visited Baghdad 
in the year 136 (A.D. 753) and 156 (A.D. 773). 26 

The scholars who accompanied these embassies brought seve¬ 
ral works on mathematics including the Brahma-sphuta-siddhcinta 
and the Khandakhadyaka of Brahmagupta. With their help these 
works were translated into Arabic by Arab scholars (Alfazari, per¬ 
haps also Ya’kub Ibn Tarik) and it was thus that the Arabs first 
became acquainted with a scientific system of astronomy. Both 
the works exercised a profound influence on the development of 
astronomy by the Arabs who learned from Brahmagupta earlier 
than from Ptolemy. It is probably also through these scholars that 
the Hindu numerals were first definitely introduced amongst the 
Arabs. It is well known how this new system, known as decimal 
notation based on the place-value of the first nine numbers and the 
use of zero, simplified and revolutionised the Science of Mathematics 
all over the v/orld. Whether Europe derived this knowledge direct¬ 
ly from India or through the Arabs is a disputed question, but there 
is a general consensus of opinion that the world is indebted to India 
for this epoch-making discovery. In this connection reference may 
be made to a remarkable statement by Severus Sebokht, a learned 
Syrian scholar who lived in a convent on the Euphrates about the 
middle of the seventh century A.D. He pays a very high compli¬ 
ment to the Indians for their “subtle discoveries in the science of 
astronomy, discoveries that are more ingenious than those of the 
Greeks and the Babylonians.” He then refers to their system of 
“computing that surpasses description” and remarks: “I wish only 


450 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


to say that this computation is done by means of nine signs. If those 
who believe, because they speak Greek, that they have reached the 
limits of science, should know these things, they would be convinced 
that there are also others who know something/’ 27 

Without going into further details we may conclude with the 
following expression of opinion by an eminent European scholar: 
“In Science, too, the debt of Europe to India has been considerable. 
There is, in the first place, the great fact that the Indians invented 
the numerical figures used all over the world. The influence which 
the decimal system of reckoning dependent on those figures has had 
not only on mathematics, but on the progress of civilisation in gene¬ 
ral can hardly be over-estimated. During the eighth and ninth cen¬ 
turies the Indians became the teachers in arithmetic and algebra of 
the Arabs, and through them of the nations of the West. Thus, 
though we call the latter science by an Arabic name, it is a gift we 
owe to India.” 28 

During the Caliphate of Harun Al-Rashld contact with India 
was further promoted chiefly by the efforts of the ministers of the 
Barmak family, then at the height of their power. The founder of 
this family was a Buddhist high-priest in the Naubehar (—Nava 
Vihara or New Monastery) in Balkh. Although converted to Islam 
they still had great leanings towards their old culture. They in¬ 
duced Indian scholars to come to Baghdad and engaged them to 
translate into Arabic Sanskrit books on medicine, pharmacology, 
toxicology, philosophy, astronomy, astrology, algebra, arithmetic and 
other subjects. Arab scholars were also sent to India in large num¬ 
bers to learn those sciences at first hand from Indian authorities. 

We learn from several Arab works written between the tenth 
and thirteenth century A.D. that a number of standard Hindu trea¬ 
tises on medicine, materia medica and therapeutics were translated 
into Arabic by order of the Caliph Harun Al-Rashid (A.D. 786-809). 
These included, among others, such famous works as the Charaka, 
the Susruta, the Niddna, and the Ashtanga of Vagbhata. The Su~ 
sruta was translated by an Indian whose name is written in Arabic 
as Mankh. He cured Harun Al-Rashid of a severe illness and was 
appointed by the grateful Caliph the head of the Royal Hospital. 

The names of a number of Indian scholars who visited Baghdad 
are preserved in Arabic works, but unfortunately it is hardly possi¬ 
ble, even in a single case, to restore the original Indian form from 
the Arabic transliteration. Sachau’s attempts in this direction are 
praiseworthy, but not convincing. Thus he suggests that the names 
of the authors of three books on ‘drinkables', ‘philosophy’ and ‘signs 


451 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


of swords’ are respectively Atri, Vedavyasa and Vyaghra. He also 
thinks that the Hindu physician who was director of the hospital 
of the Barmaks in Baghdad and is mentioned as the son of DHN, 
was probably named Dhanya or Dhanin, and connects it with Dhan- 
vantari, the mythological physician of the gods. 

Islam was influenced by India not only in literature and sci¬ 
ence, as noted above, but also in various other ways. Such influence 
has been traced even in religious ideas, notably in the growth and 
development of Islamic mysticism or Spufiism. As Titus has point¬ 
ed out, “here the contribution seems to be made in thought, religious 
imagery of expression, and pious practices, which come from both 
Buddhist and Vedantic sources.” 29 An earlier form of such influ¬ 
ence is manifested in Zuhd or asceticism, which is not identical with 
§ufiism, 30 “The Aghdni has preserved for us at least one portrayal 
of an unmistakable Buddhistic view of life, and the Zindlq monks 
described by al-Jahiz (ninth century A.D.) were either Indian sddhus, 
Buddhist monks, or their imitators.” 31 In any case, “the presence 
of wandering Indian monks was a factor of practical importance to 
the adherents of Islam as early as the time of ‘Abbasid Caliphate”. 32 
No doubt they were instrumental in preaching Indian ideas which 
influenced even Arab philosophers. One of them, Abu-al-‘Ala’ 
al-ma’arri (A.D. 973-1057), who is described as the “philosopher of 
poets and poet of philosophers”, was so much inoculated with Indian 
ideas that he adopted a vegetarian diet and a life of seclusion. 33 
It is known that Buddhist works were translated into Arabic dur¬ 
ing the ‘Abbasid period, specially in the reigns of Al-Mansur and 
Harun Al-Hashfd. 34 Even in building mosques they were indebted, 
both for craftsmen and architectural ideas, to India. 36 Early Arab 
geographers derived from India the notion of a world-centre, which 
they called Arin, a corrupt form of Uj jay ini, which was famous for 
its astronomical observatory 36 Many of their musical terminologies 
are of Indian origin. 37 

The Arab merchants visited India in increasingly large numbers, 
and many of them wrote interesting accounts of India, the earliest of 
them being dated about the middle of the ninth century A.D. 38 
There were Muslims settled in India for whom mosques were built 
by the Indian kings. 

We learn from Ibn Haukal (tenth century A.D.) that “several 
important cities in Western India had Jama Masj ids where the 
Muhammadan precepts were openly observed”. The same writer 
tells us that in the dominion of the Rashtrakutas “Musulmans lived in 
many cities and none but Musulmans ruled over them on the part of 

452 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


the ruling authority”. This is a remarkable concession to the foreign 
settlers. It does not appear, however, that the Muslim population 
was quite considerable in the friendly state of the Rashtrakutas. 
Even in Sindh, we are told, there was a large population of infidels. 39 


1. See above, Vol. Ill, p. 640. 

2. See p. 52. 

3. See above, p. 52. 

4. See above, p. 49. 

5. See above, Vol. Ill, p. 636. 

6. See above, p. 417. 

7. See above, Vol. Ill, p. 637. 

8. See p. 421. 

9. See p. 429. 

10. See p. 414. 

11. See pp. 414, 416. 

12. See p. 416. 

13. See Vol. in, p. 643. 

14. Vol. Ill, pp. 597-616. 

15. SIS, I. 164. 

16. Sastri: Foreign Notices, 23-25; SIS, II. 157. 

17. Vol. Ill, p. 612. 

18. SIS, I. 60. 

19. TTie date of Ral-pa-can is given on the authority of Petech (p. 81). Francke 
gives A.D. 804-816 as the period of his reign (p. 80). 

20. Sastri: Foreign Notices, 17. 

21. Petech holds the view that Buddhism practically disappeared from Tibet after 

the persecution of Glan.dar-ma and was revived after two centuries by Atisa 
(pp. 82-3). 

22. For a general treatment of the subject, cf. Sachau’s Eng. Tr. of Alberuni’s India. 
XXX ft. 

23. See Vol. IH, p. 314. 

24. Sachau: Alberuni’s India, II. 15. 

25. Ibid., II. 67. 

26. Ibid., II. 313. 

27. JA., II, 1910. 225-27. Also cf. History of Hindu Mathematics by B. Dutta and 
A. N. Singh, I. 95 ff; P. K. Hitti: History of the Arabs, 307-308, 573-4. 

28. Macdonell, HSL. 424. 

29. M. T. Titus, Indian Islam, 149. 

30. Ibid. 

31. Hitti, op. cit., 435; Goldziher, Vorlesungen iiber den Islam, Tr. by Seelye, 172-3. 

32. Titus, op. cit., 147. 

33. Hitti op. cit., 458-9. 

34. T. J. De Boer, History of the Philosophy of Islam, 9. 

35. Hitti, op. cit., 265, 417. 

36. Ibid, 384. 

37. Ibid., 428. 

38. These have been translated in HIED, I. 

39. HIED, I. 34, 38. 


458 


LIST OF BIBLIOGRAPHIES 

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


I. Original Sources: Literary Texts and Translations 

(1) Indian Sources: 

(A) Brahmanical: 

(i) Epics; 

(ii) Puranas; 

(iii) Philosophy; 

(iv) Dharmasastra; 

(v) Historical Works; 

(vi) Polity; 

(vii) Lexicons; 

(viii) Grammar; 

(ix) Astronomy, Astrology and Mathematics: 

(x) Medicine; 

(xi) Poetics, Dramaturgy and Metrics; 

(xii) Champu; 

(xiii) Anthology; 

(xiv) Belles-Lettres. 

(B) Buddhist: 


(i) Pali; 

(ii) Sanskrit. 

(C) Jain: 

(D) Works in Apabhraihsa: 

(E) Muslim: 

(2) Non-Indian Sources: 

(A) Arabic. 

(B) Tibetan. 

II. Original Sources: 

(1) Inscriptions. 

(2) Coins. 

III. Modem Works: 

(1) Histories of the Period. 

(2) Histories of Literature. 

(3) Religion and Philosophy. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Chapter I 
Chapter II 

>» 

Chapter XIV 


454 


Mahabhdrata 


JRamdyana 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. ORIGINAL SOURCES: Literary: 

Texts and Translations, 

(1) Indian Sources: 

(A) BRAHMANICAL: 

(i) EPICS: 

(Bom. Ed.), with the comm, of Nilakantha. 

Edited by R. Kinjawadekar. Poona, 1929-33. 
(CaL Ed.) Edited by N. Siromani and others. 
BI. Calcutta, 1834-39. 

(Kumbhakonam Ed.) Ed. by T. R. Krishna- 
charya and T. R. Vyasacharya. Bombay, 
1905-10. 

(Southern Recension) Ed. by P. P. S. Sastri. 
Madras, 1931 jff. 

(Critical Edition) I. Adiparvan. Ed. by V. S. 
Sukthankar Poona, 1927-33. 

II. Sabhaparvan. Ed. by F. Edgerton. Poona, 
1943-44. 

III, IV. Aranyakaparvan. Ed. by V. S. 
Sukthankar. Poona, 1941-42. 

V. Virataparvan. Ed. by Raghu Vira. Poona, 
1936. ' 

VI. Udyogaparvan. Ed. by S. K. De. Poona, 
1937-40. 

VII. Bhishmaparvan. Ed. by S. K. Belvaikar. 
Poona, 1945-47. 

VIII. Dronaparvan. Fasc. 25. Ed. by S. K. 
De. Poona, 1953 (in progress). 

IX. Karnaparvan. Ed. by P. L. Vaidya. 
Poona 1950-54 

XIII-XVI. 6antiparvan. Ed. by S. K. Bel- 
valkar. Poona, 1949-54 (in progress). 

Eng. trans. by K. M. Ganguly. Published by 
P- C, Roy. Calcutta, 1884-96; New Ed. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1926-32. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1895-1905. 
(Bengal Recension) Ed. by G. Gorresio. Turin, 
1843-67. 

(North-Western India) Ed- by Pandit Rama 
Labhaya and others. Lahore, 1923 ff. 

(North and South) Bombay, 1902. 

(South) Madras, 1933. 

(Critical Ed.) Ed- by Raghu Vira. First Fasc. 
Lahore, 1938. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta. 1892-94. 
Trans, into English verse, by R. T, H- Griffith. 
Benares, 1915. 


455 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Agni Purdna 


Bhdgavata Pur ana 


Bhavishya Pur ana 

Brahma Purdna 

Birahmarlda Purdna 
• • • 

Brihanndradiya 

Purdna 

Garuda Purdna 

Harivamsa 

Kurma Purdna 
• 

Linga Purdna 
Markandeya Purdna 

Matsya Purdna 


Padma Purdna 


Siva Purdna 
Vardha Purdna 
Vdyu Purdna 

Vishnu Purdna 


V ishnudharmot - 
tara Purdna 


(ii) PURANAS: 

Ed. by R. Mitra. BI. Calcutta, 1873-79. 

Ed. ASS. Poona, 1900. 

Eng. trans. M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1901. 

Ed, with French trans. by E. Burnouf, and con¬ 
tinued by Hauvette-Besnault and Roussel* 
5 Vols. Paris, 1840-98. 

Ed. by V. L. Pansikar. Bombay, 1920. 

Eng. trans. M. N- Dutt. Calcutta, 1895. 

Eng. trans. bv Swami Vijnanananda. SBH. 
Allahabad, 1921-23. 

Eng. trans. by S- Subba Rao. Tirupati, 1928. 
Eng. trans. by J. M. Sanyal. Calcutta, 1930-34. 
Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1910. 

ASS. Poona, 1895- 

Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1913. 

Ed. P. Hrishikesha Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 1891. 
Bombay, 1906. 

Eng. trans. M- N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1908. 

Ed. R. Kinjawadekar. Poona, 1936. 

Ed. Nilamani Mukhopadhyaya. BI. Calcutta, 
1890. 

Ed. J. Vidyasagara- BI. Calcutta, 1885. 

Ed. K. M. Banerjea. BI. Calcutta, 1862. 

Eng. trans. by F. E- Pargiter. Calcutta, 1904. 
ASS. Poona. 1907. 

Eng. trans. by a Taluqdar of Oudh. SBH. 2 
Vols. Allahabad, 1916-17. 

Ed- V. N. Mandlik. ASS. 4 Vols. Poona. 
1893-94. 

Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1895. 

Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay. 

Ed. P. Hrishikesa Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 1893. 

Ed. R. Mitra. 2 Vols. BI. Calcutta, 1880-88. 
ASS. Poona, 1905. 

Bombay, 1889. 

Eng. trans. by H. H. Wilson. 5 vols. London, 
1864-70. 

Eng. trans. by M- N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1894. 

Pub. Venkatesvara Press. Bombay, 1912. 

(iii) PHILOSOPHY: 

(1) Mimdmsd: 


Nyayakanika of Vachaspati 

See below under “Vidhiviveka”. 
Prakaranapanchikd of 6alikanatha 

Benares, 1904. 

Slokavdrttika of Kumarila Bhatta 

Ed. in Chowkhamba SS. Benares, 1898-9. 
Ed. in Pandit, NS, Vols. 3-4. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. BI. Calcutta, 1900 ff. 


456 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Tantravdrttika of Kumarila Bhatta 

Ed. in Benares SS. Benares, 1890. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. BI. Calcutta, 1903 fL 

Tuptikd of Kumar ila Bhatta 

Ed. Benares SS. Benares, 1903. 

Tattvabindu of Vachaspatimisra 

Benares, 1870. Ed. by V. A. Ramaswami Sastrk 
Annamalainagar, 1936. 

Vidhiviveka of Mandanamisra 

• • 

with the comm. Nyayakanikd by Vachaspati, 
Benares, 1907- 

(2) Nydya: 

NyayakusurnJi'njali of Udayana 

Ed. with comm, by K. Somasekhara Sastri, 
Tirupati, 1940. 

Eng. trans. by Swami Ravi Tirtha, Vol. I. 
Madras, 1946. 

Nydyamanjan of Jayanta Bhatta 

Ed- by Suryanarayana Sukla. Benares, 1936. 

Nyd-yaparisishta of Udayana 

Ed, with comm, by Narendrachandra Vedanta- 
tirtha. Calcutta, 1938. 

Nyayasara of Bhasarvajha 

Ed. by S. C. Vidyabhushana. Calcutta, 1910. 

Nydyavdrttikatatpocrya of Vachaspati 

Benares, 1898. 

Ed. with notes by Amarendra Mohan Tarka^ 
tirtha and Taranath Nyaya-Tarkatirtha- 
Calcutta, 1936. 

Ny&yav&rttikatatparyaparisuddhi of Udayana 

Ed. by Vindhyesvari Prasad Dvivedi and 
Lakshmana Sastri Dravida. BI, Calcutta^ 
1911-24. 

(3) Samkhya: 

Samkhyatattvakaumudi of Vachaspati 

Ed. with comm, by Sitaram Sastri Kelkar and 
Ramasastri Bhandari. Benares, 1919-22. 

Ed. by Ramesh Chandra. Calcutta, 1935- 

(3) Vaiseshika: 

Kiranavalt of Udayana 

Ed. with comm, by Siva Chandra Sarvabha- 
uma. BI. Calcutta, 1911-12. 

Lakshccndvali of Udayana 

Ed. in Pandit , NS., XXI-XXII. 

Nydyakandali of Sridhara Bhatta 

Ed. in VSS, No- 6. Benares, 1895. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha in Pandit , NS. XXV- 
XXXIV; Reprinted, Benares, 1916; 2nd Ed. 
with notes by H. D. Sharma. Poona, 1934. 


457 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 
(J) Vedanta: 

Bhdmati of Vachaspati 

Ed. BI. Calcutta, 1876-1880. 

Ed. by Bala Sastri. Benares, 1880. 

Ed. by Jivananda Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1891. 
Ed. with notes by Dhundiraj Sastri Nyayo- 
padhyaya. Benares, 1935-37. 

(Chatussutri ) Ed. with Eng. trans. by S. S. 
Suryanarayana Sastri and C- Kunhan Raja. 
Madras, 1933. 

Brahmasiddhi of Mandanamisra 

• 9 

Ed. with the comm, of Sahkhapani by S. Kup~ 
puswami Sastri. Madras, 1937. 

Brahmasutrabhashya of 6ahkaracharya 

Ed. with comm, by Narayana Sastri Eksam- 
bekar. ASS. Poona, 1900-1903. 

Eng. trans- (Vedanta Sutras with the comm, 
of &ankaracharya) by G. Thibaut. SBE. 
Oxford, 1890. 

Naishkarmyasiddhi of Suresvara 

BSS. Bombay, 1891; 2nd Ed. Ed. by M. Hiri- 
yanna. Poona, 1925. 

Panchapadikd of Padmapada 

Ed. VSS- Benares, 1891-2. 

Param&rthasara of Abhinavagupta 

Ed. with comm. Kashmir Series. Srinagar, 
1916. 

Ed. with comm. Benares, 1932. 

Samkshepasafiraka of Sarvajnatma 

Ed. with comm, by Bhau Sastri Vajhe. 
Benares, 1913. 

Ed- with comm, by S. N. Sukla. Benares. 
1936. 


(6) Yoga: 

E^jarnartanda of Bhoja 

Ed. and trans. by R. Mitra. BL Calcutta, 1883. 

Yogasutras with Rdj arnartanda and other 
comms. Ed. by Dhundiraj Sastri. Benares, 
1930. 

Tattvavaisdradi of Vachaspati 

Yogasutras with the comm, of Vyasa and the 
gloss of Vachaspati. Ed. by R. Bodas. BSS. 
Bombay, 1892; 2nd Ed. 1917. 

Ed. by Gosvami Damodara Sastri. Benares, 
1935. 

Eng. trans. by J. H. Woods. HOS. Cambridge 
Mass., 1914. 

Eng. trans. by Ramaprasada. SBH. Allaha¬ 
bad, 1910. 


458 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(iv) DH ARMA&ASTR A: 

Bdlakridd, of Visvarupa 

Y djnavalkya-smriti with the comm, of Vis- 
varupa. TSS. Trivandrum, 1922-24. 

Dharmas&stra-samigraha 

Ed. by J. Vidyasagara. 2 Vols. Calcutta, 1876. 
Manuhhdshya of Medhatithi 

Manu-smriti with the comm, of Medhatithi. 

Ed- by G. Jha. BI. Calcutta, 1932-39. 

Ed. by V. N. Mandlik. Bombay, 1886. 

Ed. by J. R. Gharpure. Bombay, 1920. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. Calcutta, 1922-29. 
Smntlndm Samuehchaya 

Ed. in ASS. Poona, 1905. 

Smriti-sandarbhah 
* * 

Vols. I-IIL Guruman^ala-granthamala. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1952. 

(v) HISTORICAL WORKS: 

Vikramdnkadevacharita. Ed. by G. BUhler. 
BSS. Bombay, 1875. 

Prithvirajavijaya. Ed. with the comm, of 
Jonaraja by S. K. Belvalkar. BI. Calcutta, 
1914-1922* 

Ed. by G. H. Ojha. Ajmer, 1941. 
Dvitiya-Rajatarangini 
Ed. P. Peterson. Bombay, 1896. 

Rdjataranginu 

Ed. Durga Prasad. Bombay, 1892- 
Eng. trans. by M. A. Stein. London, 1900. 

Eng, trans. by R. S. Pandit. Allahabad, 1935. 
Padmagupta alias Parimala 

Navasdhasdnkacharita . Ed. by V. S. Islampur- 
kar. BSS. Bombay, 1895. 

Sandhyakara Nandi 

Ramacharita. Ed. by H. P. Sastri. MASB, v. 
2nd Ed. Ed. by R. C. Majumdar, R. G. 
Basak and N. G. Banerji. Rajshahi, 1939. 

(vi) POLITY: 

Nitisara of Kamandaka 

Ed. by R. Mitra. BI. Calcutta, 1884. 

Ed. with the comm, of 6ankararya, by T. Gana- 
pati Sastri. TSS. Trivandrum, 1912. 

JVt tisdra of Sukra 

Ed. by G. Oppert- Madras, 1882. 

Eng. trans- by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1896. 

Eng. trans. by B. K. Sarkar. 2nd Ed. Allaha^ 
bad, 1923. 

Nitivakydmrita of Somesvara 

Bombay, 1887-88. 

Pub, MDJG Series, Bombay. 

459 


Bilhana 

Jayanaka 

Jonaraja 

Kalharta 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Bhanvantari 

Halayudha 

Kesava 

Kdtantra 

Sabddnusdsana 


Bhattotpala 
Mahavlrachary a 

Sridharaeharya 

Varahamihira 

Bhanvantari 

Indu 

Madhava 


Vrinda 


Abhinavagupta 


Anandavardhana 

Dhananjaya 

Jayaddman 


(vii) LEXICONS: 

See below under “Medicine”. 

Abhidhdnaratnamdld . Ed. by Th. AufrechL 
London, 1861. 

Kalpadrukosa. Ed. by Ramavatara Carina. 
GOS. 2 vols. Baroda, 1928, 1932. 

(viii) GRAMMAR: 

With the comm, of Durgasimha. Ed. by J. 
Eggeling. BI- Calcutta, 1874-78. 

of Sakatayana, with Prakriydsamgraha of 
Abhayachandra. Pub. by Jestharam Mu- 
kundji. Bombay, 1907. 

(ix) ASTRONOMY, ASTROLOGY AND 

MATHEMATICS: 

See below under “Varahamihira”. 

Ganitasdrasamgraha. Ed. with Eng. trans. and 
notes by M. Rangacharya. Madras, 1912- 

Ganitasdra or Trisatu Ed. by M. Ramanuja- 
charya and G. R. Kaye. Leipzig, 1913. 

Brihaj-jdtaka . With Bhattotpala’s comm. Ed. 
by Sita Ram Jha> Benares, 1934. 

(x) MEDICINE: 

Dhanvantariya Nighantu . ASS, No. 33. Poona. 
1896. 

Comm, on Ashtanga-samgraha. Ed. by Rudra 
Parasara. Trichur, 1913-24. 

Rugvinischaya or Madhavanidana. Ed. with 
comm, by Kaviraj S. C. Sen- 2nd Ed. 
Benares, 1932. 

Ed. with comms. by J. T. Acharya. Bombay, 
1920. 

Siddhiyoga. ASS, No. 27. Poona, 1894. 

(xi) POETICS DRAMATURGY, AND 

METRICS: 

Lochana. KM, 25. Bombay, 1911. 

German trans. by H. Jacobi. ZDMG, LVI and 
LVII. 

Lochana (VI). Ed. by S. K. De. Calcutta, 1923 
(JDL,_IX. 15-42). 

Dhvanydloka, with the comm. Lochana of 
Abhinavagupta. See above under “Abhi¬ 
navagupta”. 

Dasarupa. Ed. with the comm- of Dhanika. 
by F. E, Hall. BI. Calcutta, 1865. 

Eng. trans. G. C- O. Haas. New York, 1912. 

(Comprising Jayadevachchhandah, Chhan- 
donusdsanam of Jayaklrti and of Hemachan- 
dra, and Vrittaratndkarah of Kedara). Ed. 
with intr., iist and index of Sanskrit metres, 
etc. by H. D. Velankar. Bombay, 1949. 

460 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Mukulabhatta 

Rajasekhara 

Rudrata 

Sagaranandin 

Udbhata 

Utpala 

Vamana 


Abhidhdvrittimdtrikd. NSP. Bombay, 1916. 
Kdvyamimdmsa. Ed. by C. D. Dalai and R. A* 
Sastri. GOS. 3rd Ed. Baroda, 1934. 
Kavyalankdra. Ed. with the comm, of Nami- 
sadhu by Durgaprasada and K. P. Parab. 
KM, 2. Bombay, 1909. 

Nd^akalaksharuiratnakosa . Vol. I. Ed. by M. 
Dillon. London, 1937. 

Alankara-samgraha. Ed. with the comm- 
Laghuvritti of Pratiharenduraja. NSP. 
Bombay. 1915. 

Ed. by N. D. Banhatti. BSS. Poona. 1925 
Chhandahsdstra. Ed- by H. D. Velankar. Raja 
Comm. Vol. (pp. 148-152). 
Kdvydlankdrasutra. Ed. with Vritti by Durga- 
prasad and K. P. Parab. KM, 15. Bombay, 
1926. 

Ed- with a comm. Srirangam, 1909. 

Eng. trans. by G. Jha. Allahabad, 1912; 2nd 
Ed. Poona, 1928. 

Ed. with German trans. by C. Cappeller. Jena, 
1875. 


Sotfdhala 

Somadeva 

Trivikramabhatta 


(xii) CHAMPU: 

Udayasundarlkatha . Ed- by C. D. Dalai and 
E. Krishnamacharya. GOS. Baroda, 1920 
Yasastilakachampu. Ed. by Sivadatta and 
Parab. KM. Bombay, 1901-1903. 

Nalachampu or Damayantikathd , Ed. with 
comm- by N. K. Sarma. Benares, 1932. 

Ed. with comm. Bombay, 1885. 


Kavxndravachana - 
samuchchaya 


(xiii) ANTHOLOGY: 

Ed. with intr. and notes by F. W. Thomas. BI. 
Calcutta, 1912. 


(xiv) BELLES-LETTRES: 

(Note: References to most important works in Sanskrit are given 
here. Full details v/ill be found in the Histories of Sanskrit 
Literature by De and Das Gupta, Keith, Krishnamachariar, 
Wintemitz, etc.) 


Abhinanda 


Ananda 

Anandavardhana 

Anahgaharsha 

MatrarSja 

Bhallata 


Ktidambari-kathdsara. Ed- by Durgaprasad 
and K. P. Parab. NSP. Bombay, 1899. 

Eld. by Achintyaram Sarman., Lahore, 1900. 
Rdmacharita. Ed. with intr. by Ramaswami 
Sastri Siromani. GOS. Baroda, 1930. 
Mddhavanala-kathd. Ed. by Pavloni. OC, IX. 

1.430 ff; GSAI, XXII. 313 ff. 

Devisataka. Ed. Kdvyamdld , XI. 1-31. 
Tdpasavatsardja . Ed. by Yadugiri Yatiraja- 
Bangalore, 1928. 

Bhallatasataka. Kdvyamald , IV. 140 ff. 


461 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Budhasvamin 


Chaturbhdrn 


Hanumat 


Kshemlsvara 


Kulasekhara 


Murari 


Nltivarman 

Purantaka 

Rajasekhara 


Ratnakara 


Brihatkathd Slokasariigraha . Ed. with critical 
notes and French trans. by F. Lacote. Paris,. 
1908-29. 

(comprising Sudraka's PadmaprdbhritakCL, 
Isvaradatta’s Dhurta-vita-samvada, Vara- 
ruchi’s Ubhayabhisarika, and &yamilaka ! s 
Pddatdditaka) Ed. by M. Ramakrishna Kavi 
and S. K. Ramanatha Sastri. Patna. 1922. 
Hanuman-ndtaka (Devanagari nec.) of Damo- 
dara Misra with the comm, of Mohan Das. 
Bombay, 1860; 1868; etc. 

Maham^aka (Bengali rec.) of Madhusudana. 
Ed. with comm, by Jivananda Vidyasagara. 
Calcutta, 1890. 

Chandakausika. Ed. by Jaganmohan Tarka- 
lamkara. Calcutta, 1867. Ed. by J. Vidya¬ 
sagara. Calcutta, 1884- Ed. by Krishna 
Sastri Gurjara. Litho. Bombay, 1860. 
German trans. ( Kausikds* Zorn) by Ludwig 
Fritze. Leipzig, 1883. 

Mukundamald. Kdvyamald, I. 11 f. 

Ed. by K. Rama Pisharoti. Annamalainagar, 
1933. 

Anarghardghava . Ed. by Premchandra Tarka- 
vagis. Calcutta, 1860. 

Ed. by Durgaprasad and K. P. Parab. NSP. 
Bombay, 1890- 

Klchakavadha. Ed. by S. K. De. Dacca, 1929.. 
Sydmalddandaka . Kavyamala, I. 8 ff. 
Bdlabharata. Ed. by C. Cappeller- Strass- 
burg, 1885. 

Ed. by Durgaprasad and K. P. Parab. NSP. 
Bombay, 1887 (included in the Karptira- 
man j an). 

B&laramdyana. Ed. by Govindadeva Sastri. 
Benares, 1869. 

Ed. by J. Vidyasagar. Calcutta, 1884. 
Karpilramanjan. Ed. by Durgaprasad and 
K. P. Parab. NSP. Bombay, 1887. 

Ed. by Manomohan Ghosh. Calcutta, 1939. 
Ed. by Sten Konow, with Eng. trans. and 
notes, etc. by C. R. Lanman- HOS. Cambridge 
Mass-, 1901. 

Viddhasdlabhanjika. Ed. by B. R. Arte. 
Poona, 1886. 

Ed, by Varnanacharya in Pandit, VI-VIL 
Ed. by J. Vidyasagar. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1883. 
Ed. with comms. by J. B. Chaudhuri. Calcutta, 
1943. 

Eng. trans. by L. H. Gray. JAOS, XXVII. 1-71. 
Haravijaya. Ed. by Durgaprasad and K. P. 
Parab. KM. Bombay, 1890. 


462 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Kavyarakshasa or Rakshasakcivya. Ed. by A, 
Hoefer. Sanskrit-Lesebuch. Berlin, 1849. 
Ed. by K. P. Parab. NSP. Bombay, 1900. 
Italian trans. by F. Belloni-Filippi. GSAI, 
XIX, 1908. 83 ff. 

Nalodaya, accompanied with a metrical trans. 

by W. Yates. Calcutta, 1844. 
Asclidryachuddrnuni. Ed. by C. Sankararaja 
Sastri. Madras, 1926. 

Eng. trans. by C- Sankararaja Sastri. Madras, 
1927. 

Kapphindbhyudaya. Ed. by Gaurishankar. 
Lahore, 1927. 

Dutangada. KM. Bombay, 1891. 

Eng. trans. by L. H. Gray. JAOS, XXXII. 58 ft. 
Stotrdvali. Ed. by Vishnuprasad Bhandari. 
Benares, 1902. 

Yudhishthiravijaya. NSP. Bombay, 1897- 
Mudrarakshasa. Ed. K. T- Telang. BSS. 3rd 
revised Ed. Bombay, 1900. Ed. A. Hille- 
brandt. Breslau, 1912; New Ed. 1935. 

Ed. with Eng. trans- by K. H. Dhruva. 2nd 
Ed. Poona, 1923; 3rd Ed. Poona, 1930. 

Eng. trans. (The Signet Ring) with notes, etc, 
by R. S, Pandit. Bombay, 1944. 

(B) BUDDHIST: 

(i) PALI: 

(Note: Important references only are given here. Further parti¬ 
culars will be found in Geiger, Law, Winternitz, etc. given 
under “Histories of Literature” below.) 
Abhidhammatthasamgaha of Aniruddha 

Ed- by Rhys Davids. JPTS, 1894. 1 ff. 

Eng. trans. by S. Z. Aung. Ed. by Mrs. Rhys 
Davids. PTS. London, 1910. 

Andgatavaihsa of Kassapa 

Ed. by J. P- Minayeff. JPTS, 1886, 33 ff. 
Gandh’avams a Ed. by J. Minayeff. JPTS f 1886. 54-80. 

Mahabodhivamsa of Upatissa 

Ed. by S. A. Strong. PTS. London, 1891- 
Telakapdhagdtha Ed. by E. R. Goonaratne. JPTS, 1884. 49 ff. 

(ii) SANSKRIT: 

Abhisamayalankdrnloka of Haribhadra 

Ed, by Giuseppe Tucci- GOS, 62, Baroda, 
1952. 

Advayavajrasamgraha of Advayavajra 

Ed. by Haraprasad Sastri. GOS, 40. Baroda. 
1927. 

Arya-manjusrI-mulakalpa 

Ed. by T.* Ganapati Sastri. 3 Parts. TSS. 
Trivandrum, 1920-1925. 


Ravideva 


Saktibhadra 

Sivasvamin 

Subhata 

Utpaladeva 

Vasudeva 

Visakhadatta 


463 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Bauddha-stotra-samgraha 

Vol- I, consisting of Sragdhard-stotra of Sar- 
vajnamitra. Ed. by S. C. Vidyabhushaaja. 
BI. Calcutta, 1908. 

Guhyasamuja Tantra or Tathdgataguhyaka 

Ed. by B. Bhattacharyya. GOS, 53. Baroda, 
1931. 

Jndnasiddhi of Indrabhuti 

vSee “ V ajraydnagranthadvayam” below- 
Kaulajndnanirnaya Ed. by P. C. Bagchi. Calcutta, 1934. 
Maftpisrl-Mdlakalpa See “Arya-manjusri-mulakalpa” above. 
Prajnopayavinischqyasiddhi of Anangavajra 

See ‘‘Vajraydnagranthadvayam” below. 
Sddhanarnald Ed. by B. Bhattacharyya. GOS, 26, 41. Baro¬ 

da, 1925, 1928. 

Saktisangama Tantra Ed- by B. Bhattacharyya. GOS, 61, 91, 104. 

Baroda, 1932, 1941, 1947. 

See “Bauddha-stotra-samgraha” above. 

See ( ‘Guhyasamaja Tantra” above, 
of Santarakshita with the comm, of Kamala- 
sila. Ed. by E. Krishnamacharya with a 
Foreword by B. Bhattacharyya. GOS, 30, 
31. Baroda, 1926. 

Eng. trans- by G. Jha. GOS, 80, 83. Baroda, 
1937, 1939. 

comprising Prajnopayavinischayasiddhi of 
Anangavajra and Jndnasiddhi of Indrabhuti. 
Ed. by B. Bhattacharyya. GOS, 44. Baroda, 
1929. 

(C) JAIN: 

(Only important authors and works in Sanskrit and Prakrit are listed 
here. For full details reference may be made to Wintemitz, His¬ 
tory of Indian Literature, Vol. II, and Velankar, Jinaratnakosa 

Poona, 1944.) 

V ardhamdna-charita or Mahdwra-charita. 

Pub. with Marathi trans. Sholapur, 1931. 
Paiyalachchhl . Pub. Bhavnagar, V. S. 1973. 
Ed. by G. Biihler in Beitrage zur Kunde der 
Indoger . Sprachen, IV. 70 ff. 
Tilakamahjati-kathd . NSP. Bombay, 1903. 
Rdghava-Pandaviya or Dvisandhdna. Ed. 
with comm, by Sivadatta and K. P. Parab- 
KM. Bombay, 1895. 

Upadesamald (Prakrit). Pub. JDPS. Bhav¬ 
nagar, 1915; Uvaesamala. Ed- by L. P. Tessi- 
tori. GSAI y 25 (1912). 162-297. 

Uttarapurana (See under Jinasena I). 
Dhurtdkhyana (Prakrit). Ed. by A. N. Upa- 
dhye. SJS. Bombay, 1944- 
Samaruichchakahd . Ed. by H. Jacobi. BI. 
Calcutta. 1926. 


Asaga 

Dhanapala 

Dhanahjaya 

Dharmadasa 

Gunabhadra 

Haribhadra 


Sragdhard-stotra 

Tathdgataguhyaka 

Tattva^samgraha 


V ajraydnagran- 
thadvayam 


464 


Hastimalla 
Jinasena I 


Jinasena II 

Kanakasena 
Vadiraja * 
Mahesvara Suri 

Manatunga 


Nandisheiia 


Ravishena 

Sakatayana 
, Siddharshi 


^obhana 


Somadeva 

Svayambhu 

Vadiraja Suri 

Devasena 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Vikrantakaurava or Sulochand Ndfaka. Pub. 
MX)JG series. Bombay, V. S. 197 (=1916). 

Adipurdna; Published along with Gunabha- 
dra’s Uttar apurdna in Mahapurdna. Pub. 
Syadvada-Granthamala. Indore, V, S. 1973-5. 

Pdrsvabhyudaya. Ed. with comm. NSP. Bom¬ 
bay, 1909. 

Meghaduta as embodied in the Pdrsnabhyu- 
daya with the comm, of Mallinatha and a 
literal Eng. trans. by K. B. Pathak. Poona, 
1894. 

Harivamsapurdna . Pub. MDJG Series. Bom¬ 
bay, 1930. 

Yasodhara-charitra. Ed. by Gopinatha Rao. 
Tanjore, 1912. 

Jdanapanchamt-kathd (Prakrit). Ed. by A. S. 
Gopani. SJS- Bombay, 1949. 

Bhaktdmarastotra. Ed. with German trans. 
by H. Jacobi. IS, XIV. 359 ff. 

Ed. with the comms. of Gunakara, Megha- 
vijaya and Kanakakusala by H- R. Kapadia. 
DLP Series. Bombay, 1932. 

Ajitasantistava. Pub. in DLP Series, Bom¬ 
bay. 

Pub. by Venichand Surchand. Mehsana, 1915 
(in Pancha Pratikramariddi Sutrdni). 

Padmapurdna. Pub. MDJG Series. Bombay, 
1928, 29. 

See earlier under “Grammar”. 

TJpamitihhavCLprapanchdkathd. Ed. by P. 
Peterson and H. Jacobi. BI. Calcutta, 1899- 
1914; Pub. by Devchand Lalbhai. Bombay, 
1918-20. 

German trans. (Bks. I-III) by W. KirfeL Leip¬ 
zig, 1924 (Indische Erzahler, X). 

gobhanastuti or Tirthesastuti or Chaturvim - 
sati-Jinastuti. Pub. with the comm, of 
Dhanapala. Kavygjruild, VII. •» 132 ff.; Pub- 
in Agamodaya Samiti Series. Bombay. 
1926. 

Ed. and trans. in German by H. Jacobi. ZDMG , 
32. 509 ff. 

See earlier under “Champu”- 

Svayambhu-chhandas . Ed. by H. D. Velankar. 
JBBRAS, 1935; JUB , Nov. 1936. 

See above under “Kanakasena Vadiraja”. 

(D) WORKS IN APABHRAM&A: 

Savayadhatnma Doha . Ed. with intr., trans-, 
glossary, notes, and index by H. L. Jain. 
Karanja, 1932. 


A.I.K.—80 


465 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Bhavisayatta-kahd . Ed. by H. Jacobi. Mun 
chen, 1918- 

Ed. by C. D. Dalai and P. D. Gune. GOS, 20. 
Baroda, 1923. 

Sanakumara-chariu. Ed. with German trans. 

notes, etc. by H. Jacobi. Munchen, 1921. 
Paramappayasu. Ed. with Sanskrit comm., 
Hindi trans., critical intr., etc. along with 
Yogasara, critical text, Sanskrit Ciihaya, 
intr., etc., by A. N. Upadhye. Bombay, 1937 
Karakanda-chariu. Ed. with intr.. trans.. 

glossary, etc. by H. L. Jain. Karanja, 1934. 
Les chants mystiques. Les Dohd-kosa (en 
Apabhramsa avec les versions tibetaines) et 
les Caryd (en vieux-Bengali) avec introduc¬ 
tion, vocabulaires et notes edites et traduits 
par M- Shahidullah. Paris, 1928. 

Nayachakra . Pub. MDJG Series, No. 16. 
Bombay. 

Jasahara-chdriu. Critically edited with intr.. 
glossary, and notes by P. L. Vaidya. 
Karanja, 1931. 

Mahdpurtina. Critically edited by P. L. 

Vaidya. 3 vols. Bombay, 1937-41. 
Nayakumdra-chariu. Critically edited w T ith 
an intr., glossary, indices, and notes by H. 
L. Jain. Karanja, 1933. 

Pdhuda Doha, Critically edited with intr. 
trans., glossary, etc-, by H. L. Jain. Amraoti, 
1933. 

Vairdgyasdra. Ed. by H. D. Velankar. ABORl\ 
1928. 272-280. 

Paiima-chariu. Ed. by H. C- Bhavani. STS 
2 vols. Bombay, 1953 (in progress). 

(D) MUSLIM: 

Ashkdl ul-Bildd of ibn Hauqal 

Extracts trans. HIED, I. 31-40, 

Chach-rwma of Muhammad ‘All i. Hamid i. Abu Bakr Kufi 

Trans, by Mirza Kalich Beg Fredunbeg. Two 
vols. Karachi, 1900. 

Extracts trans. HIED, I. 131-211. 
Habib-us-Siyar of Khond Mir 

Bombay, 1857. 

Jdmi ‘ul-Hikdyat of Muhammad ‘Aufi 

Extracts trans. HIED, II. 155-203. 

Kitdb Futuh al Buldan of Ahmad ibn Yahya ibn-Jabir al-Baladhuri 

Eng. trans. by P. K. Hitti and F. C. Murgotten. 
Kitdb vl-Aqdlim of Ishtakhri 

Extracts trans- HIED, I. 26-30. 

Kitdb-uLHind and Athdr-al-Bdquia of al-Biruni 

Eng. trans. (Alberuni’s Indie.; by E. C. Sachau.. 
London, 1914. 


Dhanapala 

Haribhadra 

Joindu 

Kanakamara 
Khanha et Saraha 

Mailladeva 

Pushpadanta 

Ramasimha Muni 

Suprabhacharya 

Svayambhti 


466 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Mur&j-ul-Zahab of al-Mas’udi 

Text and French trans. by Barbicr de Mcynard. 
Paris, 1861. 

Extracts trans. HIED, I. 18-25. 

Rauzat-us-Safa of Mir Khond 
SVsiiat ut-Taurtrlkh of Sulayman 

Extracts trans- HIED, I. 1-7. 

Tabaqat-i-Akbarl of Nizamuddln 

Trans, by B. Dey. BI. Calcutta, 1913. 

Tabaqdt-i-Nlsin of Minhaj-ud-dln 

Trans, by H. G. Raverty. London, 1881. 

Taj-i:.l-Mansir of Hasan Nizami 

Ta'rikk4-Firi$hta Lucknow, 1905. Eng. trans- (Rise of the 

Mahomedan Power in India) by J. Briggs. 
Vols. MV. London, 1829. 

Ta'rtkh-i-Yanrini of Al-Utbl 

Ed. by Ali. 

Trans, by J. Reynolds. London- 
Extracts trans. HIED , II. 14-52. 

Tarkhan-ndma of Saiyid Jamal 

Extracts trans. HIED, I. 300 ff. 

Extracts trans. HIED , I. 253-281. 

Extracts trans- HIED , I. 212-252. 

History of India as told by its own Historians . 
8 Vols., London, 1866-77... .Vol. H. Re¬ 
printed with Introduction by Mohammad 
Habib, Commentary by S. H. Hodiwala, and 
Supplement by Khaliq Ahmad Nizami. 
Aligarh, 1952. 

Studies in Indo-MusUm History. Bombay, 
1939. 

(2) Non-Indian Sources: 

(A) ARABIC: 


Ta ' rihh-i-T dhiri 

Td'rikh-i-Ma'sumi 

Elliot, Sir H.M. and 
Dovrsox. John. 


HomvAU. S. II. 


Buzurg ibn Shahriyar 

Kitdb € Ajdyab-ul-Hind or Livre des Merveilles 
de L’Inde, Texte Arabe par P. A. Van der 
Lith; traduction Franchise par L- Mareel 
Devic. Leide, 1883-86. 

Eng. trans. (The Book of the Marvels of India) 

by L. Marcel t)evic. London, 1928. 

* » • * 

Ferrand Relations des Voyages et Textes G6ogra- 

phiques Arabes, Persans et Turks—Relatifs 
a V Extreme-Orient du VIII • au XVIII* 
siecles. 2 Vols. Paris, 1913-14. Voyage du 
Marchand Arabe Sulayman en Inde et en 
Chine—Redige en 851 suivi de remarques 
par Abu Zayd Hasan vers 916. Paris. 1922 


467 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


(B) TIBETAN: 

Tabanatha German trans. by F. A. von Schiefner (Geschi- 

chte des Buddhismus in Indien). St. Peters¬ 
burg, 1869, 

Eng. trans. (History of Buddhism in India) by 
U. N. Ghoshal and N- Dutt. 1HQ, III. 60-68; 
508-9; 803-7; IV. 530-3; V. 715-21; VI. 334- 
44; VII. 150-60; VIII. 247-52; X. 551-7; 
XXVII. 239-49; XXVIII. 41-50. 

Extracts trans. into English by W. L- Heeley. 
IA IV. 101-4; “Taranatha’s Account of the 
Magadha Kings” by E. Lyall. I A, IV. 361-7. 


II. ORIGINAL SOURCES: 


Aiyer. K. V. Subra- 
hmanya. 

Bhandarkar, D. R. 
Hultzsch, E. 

KrISHN AMAC1IAKLC. 

C. R. 

Ranchamukhi, R. S. 
Rangacharya, V. 
Rick, Lewis. 


( 1 ) Inscriptions: 

South Indian Inscriptions. 2 vols. (ASI, New 
Imperial Series, Vols. 52, 53). Madras, 1928, 
1933. 

“List of Inscriptions of Northern India’’. 

Appendix to El, XIX-XXIII. 

South Indian Inscriptions . 3 vols. (ASI, NIS, 

Vols. 9, 10 and 29). Madras, 1890-1929. 
Bombay-Karnataka Inscriptions. Madras, 1940. 

Karnataka Inscriptions . 2 vols. Dharwar, 1941, 
1951. 

Inscriptions of the Madras Presidency. 3 vols. 
Madras, 1919. 

Mysore and Coorg from Inscriptions. London, 
1909. 


Sastri, H. Krishna. South Indian Inscriptions. 2 vols. (ASI, NIS, 

Vols. 44, 49). Madras, 1924, 26. 

Sewell, R. and At- Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 
yangar, S. Krishna- Madras, 1932. 
swami. 

(Also Epzgraphia Indica, Epigraphia Camatica, etc.) 


Allan, J. 

Banerji, R. D. 
Brown, C. J. 
Cunningham, A. 


Elliot, W. 
Rapson, E. J. 
Singhal, C. R. 
Smith, V. A. 


(2) COINS: 

Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India (in the 
British Museum). London, 1936. 

Prachina M.udrd (Bengali). Calcutta, 1322 B.S. 
Coins of India. Calcutta^ 1922. 

Coins of Mediaeval India from the seventh 
century down to the Muhammadan Conquest. 
London, 1894. 

Coins of Southern India. London, 1896. 

Indian Coins. Strassburg,, 1897. 

Bibliography of Indian Coins. Bombav, 1950* 
Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta, including the Cabinet of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal. Vol. I. Oxford, 1906. 


468 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


III. MODERN WORKS: 
(1) Histories of the Period: 


Aiyangab, S. Krish- 
naswami. 

Altekar, A. S. 
Basak, R. G. 
Bhandarkar, R. G, 


Jouveau-Dubreuil, 

G. 

Majumdar, R. C. 
Majumdar, R. C. 
(Ed.). 

Majumdar, R.C. and 
Alteear, A. S. 
(Ed.). 

Masson-Oursel, P. 

and others. 

Ray, H. C. 

Sastri, K. A. Nila- 
k?>nta. 

Smith, V. A. 
Tripathi, R. S. 
Vaidya, C. V. 


Ancient India. Poona, 1941. 

Rdshprakutas and their times. Poona, 1934. 
History of North-Eastern India. Calcutta, 1934. 
Early History of the Deccan- BG, Vol. I, Part 
2. Bombay, 1896; 2nd Ed. CW, III. 1*198. 
Poona, 1927; 3rd Ed. Calcutta, 1928. 

Ancient History of the Deccan (trans. from the 
French by V. S. Swaminadha Dikshitar). 
Pondicherry, 1920. 

Ancient India. Banaras, 1952- 
History of Bengal. Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 

The Vakataka-Gupta Age (A New History of 
the Indian People, Vol. VI). Lahore, 1946; 
Reprint, Banaras, 1954. 

Ancient India and Indian Civilization (Eng. 

trans. from original French). London, 1934. 
Dynastic History of Northern India . 2 vols. 
Calcutta, 1931, 1936. 

History of India. Vol. I. Madras, 1950. 

Early History of India. 4th Ed. Oxford, 1924. 
History of Kanuaj. Benares, 1937. 

History of Mediaeval Hindu India. 3 vols 
Poona, 1921-1926. 


Das Gupta, S. N. 

(Ed.). 

De, S. K. 

Frazer, R. W. 
Geiger, W. 


Gowen, H. H. 
Kane, P. V. 

Keith, A. B. 


Krishnamachariar, 

M. 

Law, B. C. 


(2) Histories of Literature: 

A History of Sanskrit Literature. Classical 
Period. Vol. I. Calcutta, 1947. 

Sanskrit Poetics. 2 vols. London, 1923, 1925. 
Literary History of India. London, 1898. 

Pali Literatur und Sprache. Strassburg, 1916. 
Eng. trans. by B. K. Ghosh (Pali Literature 
and Language). Calcutta, 1943- 
History of Indian Literature. New York, 1931. 
History of Alahkara Literature. 2nd Ed. Bom¬ 
bay, 1923; 3rd Ed. (History of Sanskrit 
Poetics). Bombay, 1951. 

Sanskrit Drama. Oxford, 1924. Reprint, 1954. 
History of Sanskrit Literature. Oxford, 1928. 

Reprint, 1941, 1948, 1953. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature- 
Madras, 1937. 

History of Pali Literature. 2 vols. London, 
1933. 


Macdonell, A. A. History of Sanskrit Literature. London, 1900. 


469 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Winternitz. M. History of Indian Literature (Eng. trans. by 

Mrs. S. Ketkar). Vols- I and II. Calcutta, 
1927, 1933. 

Geschichte der indischen Literatur. Band HI. 
Leipzig, 1920. 


B HAND ARK All, 11. Ci. 


Bhattaoharyya, H. 
D. (E(l..). 

Has Gupta, S. N. 

Farqtjhar, J. N. 

Kane. P. V. 

Radhakrishnan, 8. 
Vidyadhuskana, 8.C. 
Zimmer, H. 


(3) Religion and Philosophy: 

Vaishnavism, Saivism and other minor Re! 
gious Systems. Strassburg, 1913; Indian 
Edition, Poona, 1938. 

The Philosophies. Cultural Heritage of India. 

2nd Ed. Vol- III. Calcutta, 1953. 

History of Indian Philosophy. 4 vols. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1932-49. 

An Outline of the Religious Literature of 
India. Oxford, 1920. 

History of Dharmasdstra. 4 vols. Poona, 
1930-53. 

Indian Philosophy. 2 vols. London, 1923, 1927- 
History of Indian Logic. Calcutta. 1921. 
Philosophies of India. Ed. by J. Campbell. 
London, 1953. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


{Note: In the Bibliographies to the different chapters, the Original 
Sources and Modern Works, mentioned earlier, are not 
repeated save in exceptional cases). 


Kalhana 

Nagavarma 

Nripatunga 

Pampa 

Somadeva 


CHAPTER I 

THE RASHTRAKUTA EMPIRE 
I. Original Sources: 

(i) LITERARY: 

See above, under “Historical Works” 
Karnd$akabhashabhushana. Ed- by L. Rice 
Bangalore, 1884. 

Kavirdjamdrga . Ed. by K. B. Pathak. 

V ikramdrjuna Vi jay a or Pampa Bhdrata. Ed. 

by L. Rice. Bangalore, 1898. 

See above, under “Chamou”. 


(ii) INSCRIPTIONS: 

Bhandarkar. T>. R. A List of the Inscriptions of Northern India 

roritten in Brahmi and its derivative scripts 
from about A.C. 300. Appendix to El, XIX- 
XXIII. 

Fleet,, J. F. The Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts of the 

Bombay Presidency. BG, I, ii. Bombay, 
1896. 

“Sanskrit and Old-Canarese Inscriptions” (deal¬ 
ing with the Rashfrakutas). IA, XI. 108-115; 
124-127; 156-163; XII.* 156-165; 215-225; 

247-258. 


470 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ItiKALAi.. Inscriptions in the Central Provinces and Berar. 

2nd Ed- Nagpur, 1932, 

Kick, L. See above, under ‘‘Inscriptions”. 

(iii) SOME IMPORTANT RASHTRAKUTA 

INSCRIPTIONS: 

1. Ellora Plates, 6.663 (=A.D. 741): El, XXV. 25. 

2. Samangad Grant, 6.675 (=A.D. 753-54): I A, XI. 108. 

3. Antroli-Chharoli Plates, 6.679 (=A.D. 757): JBBRAS, XVI. 106. 

4. Alas Plates, 6.692 (=A.D. 769): El, VI. 208. 

5. Bhandak Plates, 6.694 (=A.D. 772): El, XIV. 121. 

6. Bhor State Museum Plates, 6.702 (=A.D. 780): El, XXII. 176. 

7. Daulatabad Plates, 6.715 (=A.D. 793): El, IX. 195. 

8. British Museum Plates, 6.726 (=A.D. 804): I A, XI. 104. El. 

XXXIII 327 

9. Sisavai Grant, 6.729 (=A.D. 807): El, XXIII. 204. 

10. Wani Dindori Plates, 6.730 (=A.D. 808): IA, XI. 156. 

11. Radhanpur Plates, 6.730 (=A.D. 808): El, VI. 242; I A, VI. 59. 

12. Baroda Grant, $. 734 (=A.D. 812-13); IA, XII. 156. 

13. Lohara Grant, 6.734 (=A.D. 812): El, XXIII. 212. 

14. Surat Plates, 6.743 (==A.D. 821): El, XXI. 133. 

15. Navsari Plates, 6.738 (=A.D. 816): JBBRA.S, XX. 135. 

16. Kavi Grant, 6.749 (=A.D. 827-8): IA, V. 113. 

17. Barcda Grant, 6.757 (=A.D. 835-6): IA, XIV. 196. 

18. Nilgund Ins., 6.788 (=A.D. 866): El, VI. 98. 

19. Sirur Ins., 6.788 (=--A.D. 866): El, VII. 202; IA. XII. 218. 

20. Begumra Grant, 6.789 (=A.D. 867): IA, XII. 179. 

21. Sanjan Plates, 6.793 (=A.D. 871): El, XVIII. 235. 

22. Begumra Grant, 6.810 (=A.D. 888): IA, XIII. 65. 

23. Kapadvanj Plates, 6.832 (=A.D. 910): El, I. 52. 

24. Begumra Plates, 6.836 (=A.D. 914): El, IX. 24. 

25. Cambay Plates, 6.852 (=A.D. 930): El, VII. 26. 

26. Sangli Plates, 6.855 (=A.D. 933-4): I A, XII. 247. 

27. Deoli Plates, 6.862 (=A.D. 940): El. V. 190. 

28. Karhad Plates, 6.880 (=A.D. 959): El, IV. 278. 

29. Kurda Grant, 6.894 (=A.D. 972-3): I A, XII. 263. 

30. Gundur Ins., 6.896 (—A.D. 973-4): IA, XII. 270. 

31. Sravana Belgola Prasasti, 6.904 (=A.D. 982): Inscriptions at 

Srdvana Belgola. 53, No. 57. 

32. Dasavatara Cave Ins. (undated). A.SWI, V. 87. 

33. Jura Prasasti (undated). El, XIX. 287. 

n. MODERN WORKS: 

Altekar, A. S. “The Chronology of the Campaigns of Govinda 

III of the Rashtrakutas”. D. R. Bhandarkar 
Vol. 153-8. 

“New Light on the history of the Gujarat Rash¬ 
trakutas”. Ojha Comm. Vol. III. 3-7. 

“A Note on the date of the Manne plates of 
Stambha Ranavaloka”- El, XXIII. 293-4. 
Rashtrakutas and their times. Poona, 1934. 
Ayyae, A. S. R. “A Note on the Dates;' of three Rashtrakuta 

Kings’'. El, XXVI. 161-5. 


471 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Banerji, R. D. 

Bhandarkar, R. G. 
Das Gupta, N. N. 

Deoras. V. R. 


Elliot, H. M. and 
Dowson, John. 
Fleet, J. F. 


Gai, G. S. 

Ghani, M. A. 
Mibashi, V. V. 


Sastri, K. A. Nila- 
kanta. 


Sharma, D. 

Tripathi, R. S. 

V ENKATARAMAN A Y YA, 

N. 


‘‘Northern Conquests of Krishna III”. JBORS, 
XIV. 476-488. 

See above, under “Histories of the Period”. 

“On the reign of Krishna II, the Rashtrakuta” 
IA, LXII. 134-6.’ 

“Govinda III—-A Forgotten Emperor of Madhya 
Pradesh”- Annual Bulletin of the Nagpur 
Historical Society , No. 6. October, 1951, pp. 
60-75. 

See above, under “Muslim”. 

“The Family name of the Rashtrakutas of Mai- 
khed”. EI f VII. 214. 

“The Original Home of the Rashtrakutas of 
Malkhed”. Ibid - 223. 

“The Banners and Crests of the Rashtrakutas 
and Rattas of Saundatti”. Ibid. 227. 

“On the Date of the Eilora Plates of Danti- 
durga”. IHQ, XXVIII. 79-82. 

See below, under Ch. V (11) “Arabs in India”. 

“Dantidurga, the founder of the Rashtrakuta 
imperial power”. JOI, I. 31-38. 

“The Dates of the Eilora Plates of Dantidurga ’. 
JBBRAS , NS, XXVI. 163-7. 

“A further note on the date of Manne plates 
of Stambha Ranavaloka”. El XXIII. 295-7. 

“New Light on the Medieval History of Guja¬ 
rat”. D. R. Bhandarkar Vol., pp. 53-58. 

“Two copper-plate inscriptions from Berar”. 
EI } XXIII- 204-222. 

“Amoghavarsha and Karka Suvamavarsha of 
Lata”. PIHC, X. 210-4. 

“Did Dhruva abdicate?” JOR, XV. 9-12. 

“Krishna III and the Chedis”. JOR, XVI. 155-8. 

“The Imperial Pratiharas”, JIH, XXXVIII, 
605. 

See above, under “Histories of the Period”. 

“Rashtrakutas of Malkhed”. PIHC , VIII. 85-90 

See below, under Ch. II. 


CHAPTER H 

RISE AND FALL OF THE PRAT1HARA EMPIRE 

I. Original Sources: 

(i) LITERARY: 


Bappabhatti- 

charitam 

Harivamsapurdna 

Kumarapdlacharita 

Prabandhachinta- 

mani 

• 

Prabhdvakacharita 
V ikramarjuna 
Vi jay a 


Ed. by V. Krishnamacharya. JBBRAS, NS, IV. 
313-325. 

See above, under Jinasena II in “(C) Jain” — 
General Bibliography. 

See below, Ch. V (4) - 


See below, Ch- V (2). 
See below, Ch. V (4). 
See above, Ch. I. 


472 




GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(ii) INSCRIPTIONS: 

LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS, 
(See above, p. 40) 


Aiyangar, S.Krishna- 
swami. 

Ganguly, D. C. 


Haldeb, R. R. 

j 

Jain, H. L. 
Majumdab, R. C. 


Munshi, K. M. 

Ray, N. R. 

Raychaudhubi, H.C. 

Sastbi, K. A. Nila- 
kanta. 

Sen, B. C. 

Sarma, Dasaratha. 


Smith, V. A. 
Tripathi, R. S. 

V ENKATARAM AN A Y Y A, 

N. 


II. MODERN WORKS 

“The Bappa Bhatti Charita and the Early His¬ 
tory of the Gurjara Empire”. JBBRAS , NS, 
IV. 101-133. 

“The “Gurjaras” in the Rashtrakuta Inscrip¬ 
tions”. PIHC, III. 513-5. 

“The Pratiharas and the Gujaras”. JBORS. 
XIV. 221-230. 

“Who were the Imperial Pratiharas?” IA LVII. 
181-4. 

“The Chief Political Divisions of India during 
the Eighth Century.” 1C, XI. 161-170. 

“The Gurjara Pratiharas.” JDL, X. 1-76. 

“Some Problems concerning Gurjara-Prati- 
haras.” Munshi Diamond Jubilee Vol., 
Part II ( BV, X), 1-18. 

(Both these articles give full references to 
earlier literature on the subject). 

The Glory that was Gurjaradesa, Part III: 
The Imperial Gurjaras. Bombay. 1944. 

“A Note on the Chronology of the Later Prati¬ 
haras.” IA, LVII. 230-4. 

“A note on the Emperor Mahlpala of the Prati- 
hara Dynasty.” PIHC, IV. 153-5. 

“Mahlpala of the, Chandakausika.” JOR, VI. 
191-2. 

“Nagabhata II’s Operations against Dharma- 
pala and Chakrayudha.” PIHC, XL 141-7. 

“The Imperial Pratiharas—A Revised Study.” 
JIH, XXII. 93-105. 

“Chronology of the Reign of the Imperial Pra- 
tihara Nagabhata II.” IHQ, XX; 72-75. 

“A Supplementary Note on Vatsaraja Pratl- 
hara.” IHQ, XXIII. 43-4. 

“The Gurjaras of Raj put ana and Kanauj.” 
JRAS, 1909- 53 ff; 247 ff. 

See above, under “Histories of the Period”. 

“The Rashtrakuta king Krishna II and Gurjara 
Pratiharas of Kanauj.” PIHC, VI. 163-70. 


CHAPTER m 
THE PALAS 
I. Original Sources: 

(i) LITERARY: 

Brihat-Svayambhu Purdna 

Ed. by H. P. Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 1894-1900, 
Rdmacharita of Sandhyakara Nandi 

See above, in “General Bibliography” under 
“Historical Works”. 


473 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Taranatha See above, under “Tibetan”. 

Udayasundarxkatha of Soddhala 

See above, in “General Bibliography” under 

“Champa”. 

(ii) INSCRIPTIONS: 

List of important inscriptions of the Pala Dynasty 

Abbreviations 
CP Copper-plate 

I Image 

S Stone 

P Pillar 


Serial 

No. 

Year 

Find place 

Name of the 
king. 

Reference 

1 

26 

Bodh-Gaya-S 

Dharmapala 

JASB. IV. 101. 

2 

32 

Khalimpur-CP 

If 

El, IV. 243. 

3 

• • 

Nalanda-CP 

ft 

FJ.XXIII. 290. 

4 

33 

Monghyr-CP 

Devapala 

El,XVIII. 304. 

5 

35 (or 39) Nalanda-CP 

I 9 

El, XVII. 318; 

Monograph No. 1 of 
Varendra Research 
Society; 

JR asbl; VII. 215. 

6 

» • 

Ghoshrawa-S 

ft 

1A, XVII. 307. 

7 

3 

Bihar-I 

fiurapala 

JASB.IV.108. 

JR ASBL,IV. 390. 

8 

5 

Rajauna-S 


IHQ.XXIX.SOI, 

9 

17 

Bhagalpur-CP 

Narayanapala 

IA.XV. 304. 

10 

54 

Bihar-I 

ft 

7A.XLVII.110. 

11 

• » 

Badal-SP 

ft 

El, 11.160. 

12-14 

28,31.32 

Kurihar-I 

Rajyapala 

JBORSJ CXVI. 246. 

15 

• • 

Bhatuniya-S 

ft 

El, XXXIII. 150. 

16 

6 

Jajilpara-CP 

Go pala H 

J AS, L, XVII. 137. 

17 

VS. 1083 Sarnath-I 

Mahipala 

J A, XIV. 139. 

18 

3 

Baghaura-I 

)> 

EL XVII. 355. 

19 

9 

Bangarh-CP 

ft 

JASB.LXI.77. 

EI.XIV. 324. 

20 

5 

Belwa-CP 

tf 

El,XXIX, I ff. 

21 

48(?) 

Imadpur-I 

ft 

7A,XIV. 165 
(f.n.17). 

JRASBL, VII. 218; 

XVI. 247. 

22 

15 

Gaya-S 

Nayapala 

Pdlas of Bengal, 78. 

23 

15 

ft 

ft 

JPASB,LXIX. 190. 

23a 

11 

Belwa-CP 

Vigrahapala III 

E7,XXIX.9. 

24 

12 

Amgachi-CP 

ft 

E7,XV.293. 

25 

17 

Bangaon-CP 

ft 

E7,XXIX,48. 

26 

3 

Tetrawan-I 

Ramapala 

JASB,1V. 109. 

JRASBL, IV. 390. 

27 

42 

Chandimau-I 

ft 

Pdlas of' Bengal, 93. 

28 

8 

Manahali-CP 

Madanapala 

JPASB, LXIX Part 1,68. 

29 

14 

Jaynagar-I 

ft 

ASC,III.125; 

JRASBL, VII. 216. 


474 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


3© Saka 1083 Valgudar Madanpala JAS. L,XVII.27. 

$ 1 , XXVIII. 145. 


Inscriptions connected with the Bala Kings. 


31 

• • 

Dinajpur-P 


JASBy 11.619. 

32 

• • 

Irda-CP 

Nayapala 

E/,XXn.l50;XXIV.43. 

33 

4 

Kamauli-CP 

Vidyadeva 

Erjl.350. 

34 

4 

Bihar-X 

Mahendrapala 

A SJ,1923-4,p . 102. 

35 

5 

Paharpur-P 

D 

Memoir, ASJ, No. 55. 
p.75 

36 

9 

Gunariya 

9t 

JASB^KVI. 278. 

37 

19(?) 

Bihar 

tf 

Pdlas of Bengal, 64, 


Inscriptions Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 9,11, 17, 19, 23, 24, 28 and 33, along with a few other 
inscriptions of the Pala kings, have been edited in Gaudalekhamdla t a Bengali Work, 
published in B.S. 1319. 


H. MODERN WORKS: 


In English: 


Banbrji, R. D. 
Beattacharya, D C. 

Ghosh, J. C. 
Majumdar, R. C. 

Paul, P. L. 

Raychoudhuri, H.C, 

Sastrx, K. A. Nilfv 
kanta. 

Sen, B. C. 

Sharma, Dasarathft. 


The Palos of Bengal . MASB . V. 3. Calcutta, 
1915. 

“Bala Chronology.” JBORS, XIV. 489. 

“A Chronology of the Pala Dynasty of Ben¬ 
gal.” L4., XLIX, 189. 

“Pala Chronology (A reply to Prof. Banerji).” 
IRQ , VI. 153. 

“Caste and Chronology of the Pala kings of 
Bengal.” IRQ , IX. 479. 

History of Bengal, Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 

“Pala Chronology.” JBORS , XV. 643. 

“The Chronology of the Pala kings.” JASB, 
NS, XVII. 1. 

The Early History of Bengal. 2 vols. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1939, 1940. 

“Pala Expansion in the Far South of India.” 
POC, VIII. 537. 

“Rajendra Chola I and Mahlpala of Bengal.” 
7HQ, XIII. 149-52. 

“The Battle of Venbai”. India Antiqua (Ley¬ 
den, 1947), 254-256. 

Some Historical Aspects of the Inscriptions of 
Bengal. Calcutta, 1942. 

“The two white umbrellas secured by Dhruva,” 
IHQ, XX. 84-5. 


Banerji, R. D. 
Chanda, R. P. 
Majumdar, R. C. 
Roy, N, R. 


In Bengali: 

Bahgldr Itihdsa (3rd Edition). 
Gandarijamald (B.S. 1319). 

Bdngladeser Itihdsa (2nd Ed,, B.S- 1356). 
Bahgdlir Itihdsa (B.S. 1356). 


475 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


CHAPTER IV 

EASTERN INDIA DURING THE PALA PERIOD 

(1) NEPAL: 

Original Sources: 


Bendall, C. 


Bhagvanlal, Indraji. 
Levi, S. 

Sastri, H. P. 


Walsh, E. H. 
Wright, D. 


Catalogue of Buddhist Sanskrit MSS at Cam¬ 
bridge. Cambridge, 1883. 

Historical Introduction to H. P. Sastri’s “Cata¬ 
logue of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper MSS 
belonging to the Durbar Library, Nepal ” 
Calcutta, 1905. 

Journey in Nepal and Northern India. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1886- 

“On Some Nepalese Coins in the Library of 
the German Oriental Society. ,, ZDMG r 
XXXVI. 651-2. 

“Inscriptions from Nepal.” IA, IX. 163-194. 

“Anciennes Inscriptions du Nepal.” JA, 1907 r 
IX. 49-114. 

Catalogue of Palm-leaf and selected Paper 
MSS belonging to the Durbar Library 
Nepal. Calcutta, 1905. 

“The Coinage of Nepal.” JRAS, 1908 • 669- 
759; 1132-36. 

History of Nepal (translated from the Par - 
batiya). Cambridge, 1877. 


Buhler, G. 

Fleet, J. F. 

Kirkapatrick, Col. 

Lahdon, Percival. 
Levi, S. 

Majumdar, R. C. 

Ray, H. C. 
Taranatha 


Modem Works 

“Bhagwanlal Indraji’s Some Considerations 
on the History of Nepal.” IA, XIII. 411-28. 
“Chronology of the Early Rulers of Nepal.” 
IA, XIV. 342-351. 

An Account of the Kingdom of Nepal . London, 
1811. 

Nepal . 2 Vols. London, 1928. 

“Note sur la Chronologie du Nepal.” JA, 1894 r 
IV. 55-72. 

Le Nepal, Vols. I-III. Paris, 1905-1908. 
“Chronology of the Early kings of Nepal.” B. C. 

Law Volume, I- 626-41. 

DHNI, I, Ch. 4. 

See above, in “General Bibliography” under 
“Tibetan”. 


(2) KAMARUPA: 

(i) Original Sources: Inscriptions 

Bhattacharya, Kamarupasdsandvali (in Bengali). Rangpur, 

Padmanatha. 1931. 

List of important inscriptions has been given on p. 61. 

476 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Babua, B. M. 
Babua, K. L. 
Bhattasali, N. K. 
Dutta, K. 

Gait, E. A. 


(ii) Modern Works: 

“Common Ancestry of the Pre-Ahom Rulers 
etc.” IHQ, XXIII. 200-220. 

Early History of Kamarupa . Vol. I. Shillong, 
1933. 

“New Light on the History of Assam.” IHQ, 
XXL 19-28; 143 ff; XXII. 1 ff.; 112 ff.; 245 ft. 
“New Light on the Early History of Assam.” 
PIHC, XII. 154 ff. 

History of Assam . 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1926- 


(3) ORISSA: 

(i) Original Sources: Inscriptions 

Hibalal. See above, in Ch. I. 

“Outline of the History of Kalihga” and “Outline of the History 
of the Bhanja Kings of Orissa” by R. C. Majumdar, and Dynasties 
of Medieval Orissa by B. Misra contain complete lists of inscriptions. 
Inscriptions discovered subsequently are referred to in the footnotes 
and in IHQ, XXVIII. 225 ff. Some recent inscriptions are listed 
below. 

1. Angul copperplate of DharmamahadevL JAS, L, XVIII. 245-50. 

2. Baud plates of TribhuvanamahadevL 

3. Baud plates of Prithvimahadevi. 

4. Bonai copperplates of Udaya Varaha Deva .JBORS, XXXI. 

159-171. 

5. Brahmesvara Temple Ins. of Uddyotakesari. JASB,L , XIII. 

63-73. 

6. Jura da charter of Nefctabhanja. El, XXIV. 15. 

7. Khadipa^a image Ins. of the time of Subhakara. El, XXVI. 247. 

(Re-edited in No. 10 below). 

8. Madras Museum plates of the time of Narendra Dhavala. El, 

XXVIII. 44-50. 

9. Mandasa plates of Dharmakhedi JAHRS, VIII. 233-7. 

10. Orissa Museum image ins. of the time of Subhakara Deva. PIHC, 

Xn. 66-74. (See No. 7 above). 

11. Taltali plates of Dandimahadevl. IHQ, XXI. 218. 

12. Taltali plates of DharmamahadevL IHQ, XX. 213-220. 

13. Terundia plates of Subhakara II. El, XXVIII. 211-6. 

14. Two grants of Bhanja kings of Vanjulvaka. El, XXVIII. 272-283. 

15. Two Ins. from Jajpur. El, XXVIII, 179-185. 

16. Two plates of Devanandadeva. El, XXVIII. 325-334. 


Acharya, P. 

Banerji, R. D. 
Chakravarti, M. M. 

Chanda, R. P. 


(ii) Modern Works: 

“The Bhanja kings of Orissa.” JBORS, XII. 
92-102. 

History of Orissa . 2 Vols. Calcutta, 1930-31. 

“Chronology of the Eastern Ganga kings of 
Orissa.” JASB, 1903* 97-147. 

Bhanja Dynasty of Mayurbhanj and their an¬ 
cient capital Khiching. Mayurbhauj, 1929. 


477 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Das, M. N. 

Das Gupta, C. C. 


Riralal. 

Mahtab, H. 
Majtjmdar, R. C. 

Mazumdar, B. 0. 

Misra, B. 

Mitba, R. L. 
Ramp as, G. 
Rtrcar, D. 0. 


Glimpses of Kalinga History . Calcutta, 1949. 
“Some notes on Adi-Bhahjas of Khijjihga 
Kotta, earlier Bhanjas of Khinjali-Mandaia, 
Bhanjas of Bauda and later Bhafijas, of 
Khihjali.” ABORI, XIL 231-245. 

“Bhahja kings and their country.” J30RS r 
XVI. 113-116- 

The History of Orissa. Lucknow, 1949. 

“Outline of the History of Kalinga.” DUS, II, 

2.1 ff . 

“Outline of the History of the Bharija kings of 
Orissa.” DUS, III. 2. 138 ff. 

Orissa in the Making . Calcutta, 1925. 

“Sketch of the History of Orissa.” JBORS , 
VI. 348-60. 

Orissa under the Bhauma Kings . Calcutta. 
1934. 

Dynasties of Medieval Orissa . Calcutta, 1933. 
Antiquities of Orissa. 2 Vols. Calcutta, 1875- 
BO. 

“Suryavaihil King^ of Orissa.” JBRS, XXXI. 
172-94 

“The Bhanjas of K h m j all - M and ala-” IHQ y 
XXVIII, 225-231. 

“The Dhavala Ruling Family in Ancient 
Orissa.” P1HC , XXL 127-129. 

“Dominions of the Sulkis of Orissa.” JOR, 
XVIII. 45-48. 

“The Era of the Bhauma-karas *of Orissa.” 
IHQ, XXIX. 148-155. 

“Jajpur and the Bhauma-karas of Orissa” 
JAS,L, XVII. 15-17. 

“New Facts about the Bhauma-karas.” JOR. 
XVIII. 49 ff. 

“Some Minor Dynasties of Orissa.” OHRJ~ 
II, 2. 13-20. 


CHAPTER V 

CENTRAL AND WESTERN INDIA 
Original Sources 
(i) INSCRIPTIONS 

(Note: No lists of inscriptions have been attached to this chapter 
in view of the facts that they are few in number and that 
complete lists of inscriptions will be attached to the chapter 
in Vol. V, which is in continuation of this chapter.) 

(1) THE CHANDELLAS: 

Original Sources 
(i) LITERARY 

Prabodhcchandrodaya of Krishnamisra 

Pub. NSP. Bombay, 1924- 

Eng. trans. by J. Taylor. London, 1862. 


478 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CUNNINGHAM , A. 
Ganguly, D. C. 
Mttra, S. K. 

Majumdar, R. C. 
Ray, H. C. 
Smith, V. A 


Modem Works 

Archaeological Survey Reports, X. 

History of the Paramara Dynasty. Dacca, 1933, 
“A Note on the Status of the Early Chandella 
Rulers ” 1HQ, XXIX. 304-309. 

“The Gurjara Pratiharas”. JDL, X. 1-7R 
DHN1, II, Ch. 11. 

“Contributions to the History of Bundel- 
khand.” JASB, 1881, Vol. I. pt. 1, pp. 1-53- 
‘‘The History and Coinage of the Chandel 
(Chandella) Dynasty of Bundelkhand.” IA .. 
XXXVII. 114-148. 


(2) THE KALACHURIS: 

Original Sources: 

LITERARY 

Prahandhachint&mani of Merutuhga 

Ed. Ramachandra Dinanatha. Bombay, 1888- 
Ed. Muni Jinavijaya. SJS. Santiniketan, 1933. 
Eng. trans. by C. H. Tawney- Bl. Calcutta, 
1901. 


Banbrji, R. D. 

Cunningham, A. 
Hibalal. 


Ganguly, D. C. 


Kielhorn, F. 
Majumdar, R. C. 


Mirashi, V. V. 

Ray, H. C. 
Vaidya, C. V. 


Modern Works 

The Haihayas of Tripuri and their Monuments- 
MASI. Calcutta, 1931. 

Archaeological Survey Reports, IX. 

See above, in Ch. 1* 

“The Kalachuris of Tripuri.” ABOR1, IX. 
280-295. 

“The Early History of the Kalachuris of Chedi.” 
IHQ, XIII. 482-7. 

Eastern Chdlukyas. Benares, 1937. 

History of the Paramara Dynasty. Dacca, 1933- 
“Kalachuris of Tripuri.” El, II. 300-305. 

“The Gurjara Pratiharas.” JDL, X. 1-76. 

“The Kalachuri king Kokkalla I.” PlHC r 
XII. 123-126. 

“Yuvarajadeva I of Tripuri ” ABORl, XI. 361- 
373. 

DHNI, H, Ch. 12. 

History of Medieval Hindu India. III. 187-192. 
Poona, 1926. 


(3) THE PARAMARAS: 

Original Sources 
LITERARY 

Auchityavichara of Kshemendra 

Ed. KM, I. 115 if. 

Extracts JBBRAS, XVI- 167-179 (Peterson). 
Navas&hasarikacharita of Padmagupta 

Ed. by Vaman Sastri Islampurkar. BSS. Bom¬ 
bay, 1895. Extract Eng. trans. JBBRAS , 
XXVI. 153 f. 


479 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Puiyalachchhi of Dhanapala 

£d. G. Biihler- Gottingen, 1879. 
Prabandhachintdmani of Merutunga 

See above, under “Kalachuris.” 

Modem Works 
Bhojardja. Madras, 1931. 

“"Crber das Navasahasankacharita des Padma- 
gupta oder Parimala.” Kaiserliche Akade- 
mie der Wissenschaften, CXVI. 583-630. 
History of the Paramdra Dynasty , Dacca, 1933. 
Paramaras of Dhar and Malwa- Dhar State 
Gazetteer . Reprint, Bombay, 1908. 
‘‘Historical Data in Padmagupta’s Navasaha- 
sankacharita.” IA, LII. 101-107. 

“New Light on the History of the Paramara 
Dynasty/’ PIHC, V. 256-260. 

DHN1, II, Ch. 14. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan > Ed- by 
W. Crooke. Oxford, 1920. 

(4) THE SAINDHAVAS, CHAPAS, CHAULUKYAS, ETC. 

Original Sources 

Dvydsrayakdvya of Hemachandra 

Ed. by A. V. Kathawate. BSS. 3 Vols- Bombay, 
1900-1921. 

Kitdb Futuh al Buldan of al-Baladhuri 

See above in “General Bibliography” under 
“Muslim”. 

Kumdrapalacharita of Jayasimha 

Ed. by Kantivijaya Gani. NSP. Bombay, 1926. 
Prabandhachintdmani of Merutunga 

See above, under “Paramaras ” 

Prabandhakosa of Rajasekhara 

Ed. by Muni Jinavijaya. SJS . Santiniketan, 
1935. 

Prabhdvakacharita of Prabhachandra 

Ed. by H. M. Sarma. NSP. Bombay, 1909. 

Ed. by Muni Jinavijaya- SJS . Bombay, 1940. 

Rasa Mala by Forbes 

Ed. by H. G. Rawlinson. Vol. I. Oxford, 1924 
Vichdrasreni of Merutunga 

JBBRAS, IX. 

Pdtyalachchht of Dhanapala 

See above, under “Paramaras.” 

Modem Works 

History of Gujarat. London, 1886- 
Early History of Gujarat. BG, I. i. Bombay. 
1896. 

See above, under “Muslim” in “General Bibli¬ 
ography”. 


Bayley, 

Bhagwanlal Indraji 

Elliot, H. M. and 
Dowson, J. 


Ayyangab, P. T. S. 
Buhler, G. and 
Zachariae, Th. 

Ganguly, D. C. 
Lu^rd, C. E. and 
Lele, K. K. 
Mirashi, V. V. 


Ray, H. C. 
Tod, J. 


480 


GENERAL BIBLIOGEAPH¥ 


QaHGULY, D, C. 

Majdmbar, A. K. 
Majumdae, E, 0. 
Muhshi, K, M. 

Ojha s G. H. 

Bay, H. G 


History of the Paramdra Dynasty . Dacca, 
1933, 

a On the Pratihara MaMpala.” Munshi Dia¬ 
mond Jubilee Comm , Voh I. 194-201. 
Chaulukyas of Gujarat , Bombay, 1950, 

“The Gurjara Pratlharas.” JDh] X. 1-76. 

The Imperial Gurjaras. Bombay, 1944. 2nd 
Ed. Bombay, 1955. 

History of Rajputana (in Hindi). Ajmer, 
1936 ft 

DHNL H, Ch. 15. 


(5) THE CHAHAMANAS 


Original Sources 


LITERARY 

Bvy&srayakavya of Hemachandra 

See above, under “Samdhavas, etc.” 
Hammira^Mahdkavya of Nayachandra Suri 

Ed. by N. J. Kirtane. Bombay, 1879, 
Prabandhachintamani of Merutunga 

See above, under “Paramaras”. 

Prahandhakosa of Bajasekhara 

See above, under “Saindhavas, etc,” 
Pxithvirdjavijaya of Jayanaka 

See above, under “Jayanaka” in “Historical 
Works”, General Bibliography. 


Gakguly, D. C. 


Ojha, G. He 
Bay, H. C, 
Tod, J. 


Modem Works 

“A Forgotten Moslem Invasion.” lHQ i XIV 
813-816. 

“A New Light on the History of the Ch&ha- 
manas.” IHQ , XVI. 567-573. 

See above, under “Saindhavas, etc.” 

DHNI, II, Ch. 16. 

See above, under “Paramaras”. 


(6) THE GUHILAS 
Modem Works 

Bhandarkab, D. B. “Guhilots,” JPASB, 1909. 167 ff. 

Gahguly, D. G “Al-Biranfs Gujarat.” Islamic Culture, XXL 

“A Forgotten Moslem Invasion.” IHQ , XIV. 
813=816. 

“Gurjaras in the Rishfrakuta Inscriptions”. 
P1HC , III. 513-515. 

“History of the Gurjara Country,” IHQ, X. 
613-623, 

History of the Paramdra Dynasty . Dacca, 1933. 
Balder, B. B. .“The Guhila kings of Mewar.” LA, 1927. 169 ff. 

Mathub, M. L. “Early Rulers of Mewar and their Fights with 

the Arabs.” IHQ, XXIX. 315-331; XXX 
31-37. 


A.I.K.—81 


481 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Ojha, G, H See above, under “Saindhavas, etc-*’ 

Ray, H. C. DHNl, II,«Ch. 18. 

Eaychoudhuei, G. C. “Guhilot Origins.” D. R. Bhandarkav Vol, 

311-16. 

“A Note on the Early Home of the Guhilots.” 
IC III 219-22. 

“A Note on the Rise of the Guhilots in Chitor 
and its Neighbourhood-” PIHC, III. 813-7. 
Tod, J. See above, under “Paramaras.” 


(7) THE SHAHIS: 

Original Sources: 

LITERARY 

Jdmi’ul-Hikdydt of Muhammad ’AufI 

See above; under “Muslim” in “General Bib¬ 
liography.” 

Kitab-ul-Hind of Birum 

See above; under “Muslim” in “General Bib¬ 
liography.” 

Rdjatarangini of Kalhana 

See above, in “Historical Works” in “General 
Bibliography.” 

Tabaqdt-i-Akbari of Nizamuddln 

See above; under “Muslim” in “General Bib¬ 
liography.” 

Ta’rikh-i-Firishta 

See above; under “Muslim” in “General Bib¬ 
liography.” 

To’rikh^i-Yamxni of Utbi 

See above; under “Muslim” in “General Bib¬ 
liography.” 

Modem Works 

“The Hindu Kings of Kabul.” HIED, II, Note 
A, p. 403 f. 

“Hindu Reaction to Muslim Invasions.” Pot- 
dar Comm . Vol., 341-351. 

“The Hindu Sahiya Kingdom of Ohind” 
JRAS, 1927. 485 f. 

DHNl, I, Ch. 2. 

KASHMIR: 

Original Sources 

R&jatarangini of Kalhana 

See above, under “Historical Works” in “Gene¬ 
ral Bibliography.” 

Tabaqtit-i-Akbari of Nizamuddln 

See above; under “Muslim” in “General Bib¬ 
liography.” 

Ta>rtkh-i-Firishta 

See above, under “Muslim” in “General Bib¬ 
liography.” 


Elliot, H. M. and 
Dowson, J. 
Majumdak, R. C. 

Nazim, M. 

Ray, H. C. 


482 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Cunningham, A. 
Ghoshal, U. N. 

Ray, H, C. 

Stein, M. A. 

Hutchinson, J. and 
Vogel, J, Ph. 
Vogel, J. Ph. 

( 10 ) 

Atkinson, E. T. 

Gupte, Y. R. 
Kielhorn, F. 

Mitra, R. L. 

SmoAR, D. C. 


Arnold, Sir Thomas. 
Garter. 

Dhar, S. N. 

Ghani, M. A. 

Gibb, H. A. R. 
Majumdar, R. C. 


Muir, Sir William. 


Raverty, Maj. H. G. 
Le Strange, G. 

Tod, Lt. Col. James. 


Modern Works 

Ancient Coinage of Kashmir. London, 1843. 

“Dynastic Chronicles of Kashmir.” 1HQ, 
XVIII. 195-207; 302-341; XIX. 27-38; 158-72. 

DHNI, I, Ch. 3. 

“Notes on the Monetary System of Ancient 
Kashmir.” Num. Chr., XIX. 125-74. 

(9) CHAMBA: 

“History of Chamba State”. Journal of the 
Panjah Historical Society, X. ii- 5-70. 

Antiquities of the Chamba State. Part I. ASL 
N1S, 36. Calcutta, 1911. 

KUMAUN AND GARHWAL: 

N.W.F. Gazetteer, XI. ( The Himalayan Dis¬ 
tricts of the North-Western Provinces of 
India, II). 1884, pp. 469-85. 

“Two Talesvara copper-plates.” El, XIII. 
199 ff. 

“Pandukesvara Plate of Lalitasuradeva.” 1A, 
XXV. 177-184. 

“Copper-plate grant from Pandukesvar”. Proc. 
A.S.B., 1877. 71-75. 

“Some Ancient Kings of Kumaun and Garh- 
wal.” BV, XII. 149-152. 

(11) ARABS IN INDIA: 

The Caliphate. Oxford, 1924. 

A Short History of Sind. Karachi, 1926. 

“The Arab Conquest of Sind.” IHQ, XVI. 
596-604. 

“The Advent of the Arabs in Hindustan; Their 
Relations with the Hindus; and the Occupa¬ 
tion of Sindh.” POC, X. 403-10. 

Arab Conquests in Central Asia. London, 1923. 

“Chinese Records of the Arabs in Central Asia.” 
BSOS, II. 613-22. 

“The Arab Invasion of India.”. JIH, X, part 
1, Supplement (gives full references to 
authorities). 

Annals of the Early Caliphate. London, 1883. 

Caliphate, its rise, decline and fall. Revised 
by T. H. Weir. Edinburgh, 1915. 

Notes on Afghanistan. London, 1888. 

The Lands of the Eastefrn Caliphate . 1930. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan Ed. by 
William Crooke. Oxford, 1920. 


i 


483 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL* KAHAUJ 



CHAPTER VI 

THE DECCAN 

Original Sources: 

Inscriptions 


Rakgaohakya, V. 

Inscriptions of the Madras Presidency . 
Madras, 1919. 

3 Vols. 

Sbwsll, R. 

Historical Ins-cripiions of Southern 
Madras, 1932. 

India. 


(1) SELECT INSCRIPTIONS OF THE EASTERN CHALUKYAS: 

1, Prithivfpaliavapaffam ins, of ¥ishnuvardhana V, I A, XX, 186, 

2, Masulipatam plates of Vijayaditya III, ED V. 122. 

3, Guntur plates of Vijayaditya HI. ARSIE, 1912.84; JAHRS* 

V. 113.. 

4 , Attili ins. of Chalukya Bhima, ARS1E , 1918. 131. 

5, Be^wada plates of Chalukya BHima. El, V. 127. 

6, Anakapalie ins. of Chalukya Bhima. ARS1E, 1909,108. 

7, Adaxxki ins. of Chalukya Bhima. ED XIX. 275. 

8, Chevuru plates of Amma I. El, XXVII. 41. 

9, Pulivarra ins, of Amina. I. ARS1E , 1924,10, 98. 

10. Masulipatam, plates of Ammaraja II. ED XXIV. 268-78, 

11. Nandigama taluk plates of Amma !L AR1E, 1917,117, 

12. Maliyapundi grant of Amma II. El, IX. 47. 

13. Kaiuchumbarra grant of Amma II. EL VII. 177. 

14 . Anaparti grant of Ammaraja II. JAHRS , XX. 195-201. 

15. Vemalurpadu plates of Amma II. ED XVIII. 226-235. 

16. Arumbak plates ©f Bidapa. El 9 XIX- 146. 

(2) SELECT INSCRIPTIONS OF EASTERN GANGAS, GANGAS 

OF SVETAKA AND EASTERN KADAMBAS: 

1. Alamanda plates of Anantavarman. El, HI. 17-21. 

2. Tekkali plates ©f Raj endra varman’s son Devendravarman. EL 

XVIHc 311-313. 

3. Mandasa plates of Bajendravarman, Bh. List, No. 2051. 

4 . Sanskrit and Old Canarese Inscriptions. IA, XIV. 7-12. 

5. Cheedivalasa grant. JAS, L, XVIII. 77. 

6. Gala will, copper-plate ins. of Manujj endravarman. JAHRS L XX. 

161-170. 

7. Narasapatam plates of Vajrahasta III. Bh. List, No. 1090. 

8. Viiagapatam (Now Madras, Museum) plates of Anantavarman 

(Cho^agahgadeva). BK List f No. 1103. 

9. Nagari plates of Anahgabhima III ED XXVIII. 235-258. 

10. Falamgara grant of Anantavarman Chotfaganga. ARSIE. 1935- 

36.81-63. 

11. Santa Bommall plates of Devendravarman. Bh , List . No. 2053. 

(Edited in No. 14 below). 


484 




GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


12. Gara ins, of Devendravarman. ARSIE , 1932-33. 56-57. 

13. Paralakimedi plates of Vajrahasta. El, HI. '220-224. 

14. Simhapura copper-plate grant of Dharmakhedi. JAHRS , III. 

171-180. (See No. 10 above). 

(3) SELECT INSCRIPTIONS OF THE SOMAVAMSI8: 

1. Records of the Somavaihsi kings of Katak. EX, III. 323-359. 

2. Bhuvaneswar ins. JRASB , L, XIII. 74. 

3. Mallar plates of Mahasivagupta. El, XXIII. 113. 

4. Lodhia plates of Mahasivagupta. EL XXVII. 319. 

5. Balangir Museum plates of Mahasivagupta I Yayati IAS t L, 

XIX, 117-124. 

6. Two inscriptions from Kelga. EL XXVIII. 321-328. 


AlTEKLAK, A. S. 
Bhandabkab, R. G. 

C hikr avartt. M. M. 

Chhabba, B.Ch. 

Chhabba, B.Ch. and 
Rag, N. L. 

Fleet, J. F. 


Ganguly, X). C. 
Majumdab, R. C. and 
Altekab, A. 8. 
(Ed.). 

MirashIj V. V. 


Panohamukhi, R. S. 
Rao # Bo V. Krishna 


Rao, N. L. 
Babma, M. S. 


II. Modern Works 

Rashtrakutas and their times . Poona, 1934. 

See above, under “Histories of the Period;* in 
''General Bibliography 55 . 

"Chronology of the Eastern Ganga kings of 
Orissa-” ' JASB , 1903, Vol 72, pp. 97-147. 

"A Note on the Chronology of the Ganges of 
§ vet aka.” El, XXV. 240. 

"Ten Years of Epigraphy (1937-46).” Ancient 
India, No. 5, pp. 46 If. 

"Chronology of the Eastern Chainkya Kings-” 
lA y XX-XXI. 

"Dynasties of the Kanareee Districts.” EG , I, 
Part 2, 

Eastern Chalukyas . Benares, 1937. 

Vdk&taka-Gupta Age* Lahore, 1946; Reprint. 
Banaras, 1954. 

"An Ancient Dynasty of Mahakosala.” P1HC , 
III. 319-327. 

"Note on the Date of the SomavahnsI kings,” 
El, XXVI, 227 If. 

"Badami ins. of Chalukya Vallabhesvara.” EL 
XXVII. 4-9. 

"History of Rajahmundry.” JAHRS , III. 135- 
170; IV. 97-112. 

"Origin and Early History of the Chalukyas.” 
PIHC, III. 386-410. 

"Revised Chronology of the Eastern Chalukya 
Kings.” JAHRS, IX, iv. 1-32. 

"A Note on Siroda plates of (Bhoja) Deva- 
raja”. El, XXVI. 337-340. 

"Chronology of the Eastern Chalukyas.” JOR. 
IX. 17-42. 

"A Note on the Mandasa plates of Anasita- 
varman.” JAHRS , XII 21-28. 


485 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Sircar, D. C. 


Smith, V. A. 
Subbarao, R. 


SUBRAHMANIAN, K.R. 


Vk N K AT ARAM AN A Y Y A, 

N. 


‘‘Genealogy of the Vishnukun<Jins.’’ ABOR1, 
222-228. 

“Kesaribeda plates of Nala Arthapati Bhafta* 
,raka.” El, XXVIII. 12-17. 

“Kuntala and Asmaka.” IHQ, XXIII. 65-68. 
“Later Soinavamsls.” OHRJ, I. 289-300. 

“A note on the genealogy of the Somavaxh&s.” 
IHQ, XX. 76-82. 

“A note on the later Somavamsis.” IHQ , XXII. 
300-307- 

Successors of the Sdtavdhanas in the Lower 
Deccan. Calcutta, 1939. 

See above, under “Histories of the Period” in 
“General Bibliography”. 

“The Origin of the Eastern Gahgas.” POC, 
VHI. 573-580. 

“History of the Eastern Gahgas of Kalihga.” 
JAHRS , VI. 193-216; Vn. 57-64 (relating to 
this period). 

History of the Eastern Gangas of Kalinga . 
“Vijayaditya III, a famous Eastern Chalukyan 
King.” Rangaswami Aiyangar Comm . Vol.„ 
263-267. 

The Eastern Chdlukyas of Vehgi . Madras, 
1950. 


CHAPTER Vn 
SOUTHERN INDIA 
Original Sources 
(i) INSCRIPTIONS 

Ayyar, V. V. South Indian Inscriptions . Vol. XII. Madras, 

1943. 

Rangacharya, V. See above, under Ch. VI. 

Sewell, R. See above, under Ch. VI. 

South Indian Inscriptions . 

(1) IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS OF THE PALLAVAS: 

1. Velur Palayam Plates of Nandivarman III. SII II, Part V, 
No. 98. 

2. Triplicane inscription of Dantivarman. V. Venkappa, El, VIII, 
No. 29. 

3. Tiruvallarai ins. of Dantivarman. K. V. S. Iyer. El, XI. 156. 

4. Tillaisthanam ins. of Vijayanandi-Vikramavarman. Ins. No. 52 of 

1895. 

5. Sendalai Pillar ins. of Nandi-Pottaraiyar. Ins. No. 11 of 1899. 

6. Tiruvallam ins. of Vijayanandi-Vikramavarman. SII, III. 93. 

7. Ulagalanda Perumal Temple (Kahehl) ins. of Nandippottarasar 

who was victorious at Tellaru. Ins. 12 of 1895; V. Venkayya, 
M.C.C. Magazine , VIII. 102. " 

8. Tiruppalaitturai ins. Nandippottaraiyar, the victor at Tellaru. 

Ins. No. 180 of 1907. 


486 





GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


9. Gmjimallam B&pa ins. of Nandippotarasar. V. Venkayva. El, 
XL 224. 

10. Narattamalai ins. of Nripatungavarman. Ins. No. 365 of 1904. 

11. Bahur plates of Nripatimgavarman. E. Hultzsch. El, IV. 180. 

12. Tiruvalangadu ins. of Nripatungavarman. Ins. No. 460 of 1905. 

13. Koviladi ins. of Nripatungavarman. Ins. No. 300 of 1901. 

14. Kandiyur ins. of Nripatungavarman. Ins. No. 17 of 1895. 

15. Tirumukkudal ins. of Nripatungavarman. Ins. No. 179 of 1915. 

16. Gudimallam ins. of Nripatungavarman. IA, 1911.113. 

17. Two Ambur inscriptions. E. Hultzsch. El, IV. 182-3. 

18. Copper-plate inscriptions of the 6th year of Nripatungavarman. 

S^ivell’s List of Antiquities, II, No. 209, p. 30. 

(2) IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS OF THE CHOLAS: 

1. Tirukkalukkunrram ins. of Rajakesarivarman. V. Venkayya. El, 

III. 277-280.' 

2. Takkolam ins. of Rajakesarivarman (Adilya I). K. V. S. Iyer. 

El, XIX. 81-88. 

3. Tillaittanam ins. of Aditya. SII, III, No. 89. 

4. Tirupalanam ins. of Rajakesarivarman. SII, XIII, No. 304. 

5. Tondaiman Nad ins. Parantaka. SII, VIII, No. 529. 

8. Tiruvorriyur ins. of Parantaka I. SII, III, No. 108. 

7. Kllmuttugur ins. of Parantaka. E. Hultzsch. El, IV. 178-9. 

8. Two Tamil inscriptions at Ambur. E. Hultzsch. El, IV. 180-3. 

9. Tirukkalukkunram ins. Parantaka I. V. Venkayya. El, III. 

280-2. 

10. Uttaramallur ins. of Parantaka I. K. V. S. Iyer. EL XXII. 

145-150. 

11. A Chola ins. from Uttiramerur. K, A. N. Sastri. El, XXII, No. 

32. 

12. Tirukkalithaftai ins. of Sundarachola. K. V. S. Iyer. El, XII. 
121-126. 

13. Karikal ins. of Maduraikonda Rajakesari. E. Hultzsch. El, IV. 

331-332. 

14. Anbil plates of Sundarachola. T. A. G. Rao. El, XV. 44-72. 

15. Three Tamil inscriptions of Lalgudi. K. V. S. Iyer. El, XX. 

46-54. 

16. Sholinghur ins. of Parantaka I. E. Hultzsch. El, IV. 221-225. 

17. Museum Plates of Uttamachola. SII, III, No. 128. 

18. Konerirajapuram ins. of Sembiyan Madevi. SII, III, No. 146. 

19. Sembiyan Madevi ins. of Uttamachola. Ins. No. 494 of 1925. 

20. Tanjore ins. Rajaraja I. SII, II, No. 6. 

21. Melpadi ins. of Rajaraja I. SII, III, No. 14. 

22. Udaiyargudi ins. of Rajakesarivarman, A.D. 988. K. A. N. Sastri. 

El, XXL 165-170. 

23. Larger Leiden plates. K. V. S. Iyer. El, XXII, No. 34. 

24. Tiruvalangadu plates of Rajendra Chola I. SII , III, No. 205. 

25. Kanyakumari ins. of Vira Rajendra Deva. K. V. S. Iyer. El, 

XXV. 21-55. 

26. Charala plates of Vira Rajendra Deva, 6. 991. A. S. R. Iyer and 

V. V. Iyer, El, XXV, No. 25. 

27. Regulations of the Sabha from two Uttaramallur inscriptions. 

K. V. S. Iyer. EL XXV, No. 7. 


487 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


(3) IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS OF THE PANDYAS: 

1. Anaimalai ins. of Ne^unja$aiyan Pamntaka. K. V. S. Iyer. El, 

VIII. 317-321. 

2. Vejvikkudi Plates of Ne^lunj adaiyan Parantaka, H. K. SastrL 

El, XVII, No. 16* 

3. Madras Museum Plates of Neduhj adaiyan Panantaka. I A, XXXL 

69-75. 

4 . Four Pandyan Records of Ukkirankottai. A. S. R. Ayyar. El, 

.XXIII. 283-289. 

5. Ambasamudram ins. of Varaguna I. V, Venkayya. El, IX. 84=94. 

6. Manor ins. of Mar an Sadaiyag, K. A. N. Sastri. El, XXII. 5-11. 

7. TiruchchirappaJJi ins. of Miran Sa^aiyan. AS I for 1903- 

1904, p. 225. ’ 

8. Tillaisthanam ins, ©f Maran Badalyan*. SII, V, No. 608, 

9. Seridalai ins. of Maran Badalyan. SII, VI, No. 446. 

10. Sittannavasal ins. of Sri Mara &ri Vallabha. Ins. No. 388 of 

£904. 

11. Avanipasekhara Mangalam ins. of flri Mara &ri Vallabha. Ins. 

No, 155 of 1903. 

12. Alvar Malai ins, of Yaragunavarman. Ins. No. 705 of 1905. 

13. Tirchendur ins. of Varaguga Maharaja II. K. V. B. Iyer. El, 

XXL 101-116. 

14 . Sinnamanur Plates ©£ Rajasimha III. SII, IH, No. 206. 

15. Tiruppudaimarudur ins. of Vira Pandya. Ins. 122 of 1905. 

18. Suchlndram inscriptions of Vira Pagdya. TAS, IH, Nos. 22-26. 

17. Kilmattur ins. of Solanralaikonda Vira Pagdya. SII, V, No. 304. 

18. Ambasamudram ins. of Solanralaikonda Vira Bagdya. A. S. R. 

Ayyar, El, XXV. 35-42. " 

(4) IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS OF THE GANGAS: 

1. Javali Plates of ;&ri Purusha. EC, VI, Mg. 38. 

2. Islampur Plates of &ri Purusha. K, B. Pathak and Sten Konow. 

El, XII, No, 10. 

3. Hosur Plates of Sri Purusha. EC, X, Gd. 47. 

4 . Devarhalli Plates of ^ripurusha. EC, IV, Ng. 85. 

5. Manna (I) Plates of Marasimha Loka Trinetra Yuvamja. EC, 

IX, Ni. 60. 

8. Manne (II) Plates of Satyavakya Kohganivarman Rajamalla. 
MAE, 1910, 

7. Galigekere Plates of Ranavikramayya (Nitimarga I). EC, IV, 
Yd, 60. 

8. Narasapura Plates of Rajamalla IX Satyavakya. EC, X, Kl. 90. 

9. Gattavadipura Plates of Rajamalla II SatyaYakya and Nitimarga 
(Ereyappa). EC, XII, Nj. 269. 

10. Sudi Plates of Butuga. J, F. Fleet. El, III. 158-184, 

11. Keregodi Rahgapura Plates of Rajamalla II (or his brother 

Butuga II). MAR, 1918-1919. 

12. Kudlur Plates of Marasimha. MR A, 1920-1921. 

13. Alur Plates of Marasimha. MRA, 1923-1924. 

14. Udayendiram Plates of Frith ivlpati II. SII, II, No. 76. 

15. Takkolam ins. of Pjdthivlpati II. SII, V, No. 1368.. 

16. Atakur ins. Butuga, J. F. Fleet. El, VI. 50-57. 


488 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(5) IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS OF THE BAIBAS: 

1. Five Ba$a inscriptions from Gudinaallaxn. V. Venkayya. El t XI, 

222-240. 

2. Udayendiram Plates of Vikramaditya II. F. Kielhom. EI P III. 

74-77. 

3. Gu<Jimallam Plates of Rana Vikramaditya II. E. Hultzsch. El, 

XVII. 1-7. 


(6) IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS OF THE VAIDUMBAS: 

1. Three inscriptions of Vaidumba Maharaja Gan$a Tinetra. E. S. 
Panchamukhi. El, XXHI. 183-193. 


Aiyahgab, S. Krish¬ 
na swami. 

Aiyer, K. V. Subrah- 
manya. 

Abokiaswamx, K. 

Pith abba, B.Ch. and 
Rao, N. L. 

Dikshitak, V. R. R. 

Gopabab, R. 

Hebas, H. 

Jquveaij-Dtibrkuxl, 

G. 


Mahaiangam, T. V. 

Minakshi, C. 

Mobaes, G. M. 
Paihjarathar, T. V. 
Sadasiva. 

Rajamakikkam, M. 
Rao, R. V. Krishna. 

Rao, G. V. Srinivasa. 

Rao, M.V. Krishna. 
Rao, N. L. 

Rice, B. L. 

Saletorb, B. A. 


Modem Works 

Some Contributions of South India to Indian 
Culture. Calcutta, 1923. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 
1942. 

Historical Sketches of Ancient Deccan . Mad¬ 
ras, 1917. 

The Early History of the Velldr Basin. Mad¬ 
ras, 1954. 

See above, under Ch. VI. 

Studies in Tamil Literature and History. Lon¬ 
don, 1930. 

History of the Pallavas of Kanchi. Madras, 
1928. 

Studies in Pallava History. Madras, 1933. 
Ancient History of the Deccan (translated 
from the French by V. S. Swaminadha Dik- 
shitar). Pondicherry, 1920. 

Pallavas (translated from the French by V. S. 

Swaminadha Dikshitar). Pondicherry, 1917. 
The Bdnas in South Indian History. Madras, 

1952. 

Administrative and Social Life under the 
Pallavas . Madras, 1938. 

The Kadamba Kula. Bombay, 1931. 
Pirhalach-Cholar-Charittiram. Part I (in Ta¬ 
mil). Annamalainagar, 1949. 

Pdn^iydr Varaldru (in Tamil). Madras, 1950. 
Pailavar Varaldru (In Tamil). Madras, 1952. 
A History of the Early Dynasties of Andhra- 
desa. Madras, 1942. 

South Indian Inscriptions. VOL XIII. Madras, 

1953. 

The Gangas of Talkad. Madras, 1936. 

“Some New Facts about Chola History.” JOR r 
XIX. 148-151. 

See above, under “Inscriptions” in “General 
Bibliography” 

Ancient Karndfaka. Vol. I. Poona, 1936- 


489 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Sastbi, K. A. N. 


SlRCAR, D. C. 


Yenkayya, V. 


(See Dipavamsa 

Dathd-vatfisa 

Hatthavanagalla- 

vihdra-vamsa 

Attangalu-vamsa 

Daladapujavaliya 
Daladdtirita 
Nikdya Sahgraha 


Puj&valiya, Ch. 34 


Rajaratnakaraya 

R&jdvaltya 


Codrinoton, H. W. 

COOMARASWAMY, A. 

K. 

Geiger, W. 

GoPALAN, R. 
Hultzsch, E. 

Mendis, G 0. 

Muller, E. 

Parker, H. 

Pbxdham, C. 


Sewell, E. 


The Cholas. Vols. I, II, 1. Madras, 1925, 1937. 

History of South India. Bombay, 1952. 

The Pandyan Kingdom. London, 1929- 

Studies in Chola History and Administration. 
London, 1932. 

The Early Pallavas. Lahore, 1935. 

The Successors of the Sdtavdhanas in the 
Lower Deccan. Calcutta, 1939. 

“Five Bana Inscriptions from Gudimallam.” El, 
XI. 222-240. 

CHAPTER VIII 
CEYLON 
Original Sources 
(i) PALI: 

and Mahdvamsa in General Bibliography) 

Ed. and trans. by B. C. Law. Lahore, 1925. 

Ed. by James d’Alwis. 

(ii) SIMHALESE: 

Ed. by M. Kumaranatuhga. Colombo, B. E. 
2466. 

Ed. by K. M. Perera. Colombo, 1893. 

Ed. by E. S. Rajasekhara. Colombo, 1920. 

Ed. by D.M. de Z. Wickramasinghe. Colombo, 
1890. Trans, by C. M. Fernando with an intr. 
by W. F. Gunawardhana- Colombo, 1908. 

Ed. by M. Medhankara Thera. Eng. trans. by 
B. Gunasekara (A Contribution to the His¬ 
tory of Ceylon). Colombo, 1895. 

Ed. by Simon de Silva- Colombo, 1907. 

Ed. by B. Gunasekara. Colombo, 1911. Eng. 
trans. by the same. Colombo, 1900. 

Modem Works 

History of Ceylon. London, 1926. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art - London, 
1927. 

Ceylon. Wiesbaden, 1898. 

The Pallavas of Kanchi. Madras, 1928. 

“Contributions to Singhalese Chronology.’’ 
JRAS, 1913, pp. 517 ft. 

Early History of Ceylon. 9th Ed. Calcutta, 
1948. 

Ancient Inscriptions in Ceylon . London, 1883. 

Ancient Ceylon. London, 1909. 

Historical , Political and Statistical Account of 
Ceylon and its Dependencies. 2 Vols. Lon¬ 
don, 1849. 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 

Madras, 1932. 


490 





GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Smith, V, A. 

Tuenour, G. 

Wl JKBEMASINGHE. 

WuESEUHA, L. C. 

CHAPTER IX 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. 2nd 
Ed. Revised by K. de B. Codrington- Oxford, 
1930. 

An Epitome of the History of Ceylon . 1836. 

Archaeological Survey of Ceylon. Vol. I. 
Mahavamsa. Part I. Colombo, 1909' 


(A) SANSKRIT, PALI, PRAKRIT, AND APABHRAM&A: 


{Note: A select list of important texts in Sanskrit, Pali, Prakrit 
and Apabhramsa has been given in General Bibliography. 
Further accounts of individual texts and full bibliographical 
material will be found in the works of Das Gupta and De, 
Keith, Krishnamachariar, Wintemitz, Geiger, Law, and 
others mentioned under ‘‘Histories of Literature ,, in General 
Bibliography above). 

Alsdorf, A. Apabhrariisa-Studien. Leipzig, 1937. 

Ayyar, A. S. Rama- “Nalodaya and its author.” QJMS, XIV, 302- 
natha 311. 

Bagcki, P. C. (Ed.). Dohdkosa. Calcutta, 1938 (JDL, XXVIII). 

Bklyalkar, S. K. Systems of Sanskrit Grammar. Poona, 1915. 

Bhandarkar, R. G. Collected Works. Vols. I-IV. Poona, 1927-1933. 

Bhattacharyya , D. “Date of Vachaspati Misra and Udayana- 
C. charya.” JGJRI, II.* 349-356. 

Bhattanatha Svami “Mayuraja.” IA, XLI. 139-143. 

Bdhler, G. 


Chitrav, S. V. 


De, S. K. 


“The Indian Inscriptions and the Antiquity of 
Indian Artificial Poetry.” (Eng. trans. by 
V. S. Ghate) IA, XLH- 29-32; 137-148; 172- 
179; 188-193; 230-234; 243-249. 
Madhyayugina Charitra-Kosa (Dictionary of 
Biography in Medieval India) (in Marathi). 
Poona, 1937. 

History of Sanskrit Poetics. 2 vols. London, 
1923, 1925. 

“Bhamaha’s Views on Guna.” Pathak Comm. 


Vol. 353-358- 

“Mahanataka.” IHQ, VII. 629-643 (709-723). 

“The Problem of the Mahanataka.” IHQ , 
VII. 537-627. 

“Sanskrit Literature under the Pala Kings of 
Bengal.” NIA, II ( Ross Comm. Vol.) 263- 
282* 

“Visakhadatta.” B. C. Law Volume , I. 50-57. 

Devasthau, G. V. Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit and PrdkHt 

Manuscripts in the Library of the University 
of Bombay. Bombay, 1944. 

Introduction to the Study of Visakhadatta and 
his Mudra-Rdkshasa. Poona, 1948. 


491 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Bmsmr, B. B. 

ItesmTAB, V. B. B. 

Dutta, B. B. and 
SltfGH, A. K. 

WlUJLOZAT, J, 

Code, P. K. 

Haas, G. 

BL&sea, R. 0. 

A. F. B. 

Jadc, H. L. 


Jolly, X 
Kane, P. V. 


Kayi, M. B. 

Kays, G. R. 

Keith, A. B. 

Kesava 

Kohow, Stem 

KeISHNAMACHABIAB, 

M. 

tome, 8. 

Mmsm, V. V. 


Mooxsejss, S. 


Bharatiya Jyotisha Sdstra (History of Indian 
Astronomy) (in Marathi). 2nd Ed. Poona, 

1931. 

The Purttpa Index . 2 vols. Madras, 1951, 1952. 
History of Hindu Mathematics. Lahore-, 1935. 

La Doctrine Classique de la Medicine Indienne 
—Ses Origines et ses Paralleles Grecs. Paris, 
1940. 

"Date of Rakshasakavya or Kavyarakshasa— 
Before A.D. 1000.” JIH, XIX. 312-319. 

Daiarupaka. New York, 1912. 

Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites 
and Customs . Dacca, 1940. 

Studies in the Medicine of Ancient India . 
Oxford, 1907. 

“Apabhrazfr&a Bhasha am Sahitya” (Apafehra- 
ihsa Language and Literature) (in Hindi). 
NPP, L. 1-8; 100-121. 

"Apabhraihsa Literature.” AUS, I.. 157-185. 
"Svayamfehu and his two poems in Apabhra- 
rhsa.” NUJ. No. 1, 1935. 

Medicin, Strassburg, 1901 (Eng. trans. "Indian 
Medicine”, by C. G. Kashikar. Poona 1951). 

History of Alankdra Literature (Introduction 
to S&hityadarpana, 2nd Edition). Bombay 
1923; History of Sanskrit Poetics (Intr. to 
Sdhifyadarpama 3rd Ed.). Bombay, 1951. 
History of Dharmasdstra. Voi. I. Poona, 1930. 

"Bate of Sagaranandin.” NIA, II. 412-419. 

Hindu Astronomy. Calcutta, 1924. 

Hindu Mathematics* Lahore, 1889. 

Sanskrit Drama. Oxford, 1924; Reprint, Ox¬ 
ford, 1954. 

Kalpadrukosa. Ed. by Bamavatara Sarma, YoL 
I. GOB. Baroda, 1928. 

Das Indische Drama . Berlin und Leipzig, 
1920. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature. Mad¬ 
ras, 1937. 

be thidtre indien. Parle, 1890. 

"The Chronological -Order of Baja&ekhara’s 
Works.' n Pathak Comm. Vol . 359-366. 

"A dissertation on the identity of the author 
of the Dhvanyatoka” B. C. Law Voh I. 
179-193. 


49 $ 









GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Peterson, P. 


Bags ay a>i s V. 


B.AHXTLA SAMKRXTYA- 
YANA. 

Ray, P. C. 

Saema, Ramavatara 
Sastri, H. P. 

Sastri, P. P. S. 


Schuyler, M. 

Shahedullah, M. 
Tiros aut, G. 

Upadhye, A. N. 

Yxlankar, H. D. 


WlNTERNITZ, M. 


A third report of operations in search of Sans¬ 
krit mss , in the Bombay Circle, 1884*86. 
Bombay, 1887 ( =JBBRAS , XVIXI, Extra 
no. 45). 

A fourth report .... 1886-92 . Bombay, 1894 
(-JBBRAS, XVIII, Extra no. 49A). 

Three reports on a search for Sanslcrit mss. 
With an Index of books, Bombay, 1887. 

“Literary Notes. (IV) The Rasaratnakosa, the 
Natakaratnakosa and the Samgxta RijaV 
ABORI, XIV. 258-263. 

“Somadevasuri, author of Nitivdkyam^ita, 
Yasastilakachumpu, etc.” N1A, VI. 67-69. 

Pur&tattvanihandhkvalL Allahabad, 1937. 

History of Hindu Chemistry , etc. Calcutta, 
1887. 

KaIpadrukosa Intr. to (GOS, Baroda, 1928). 

Bauddha Gam o Doha (in Bengali). Calcutta 
1323 B.S. 

“Problems of Identity—Viivarapa, the author 
of Balakrida and Viivarupacharya alias 
Suresvaracharya,” Festschrift Kane, pp. 
405-407. 

Bibliography of the Sanskrit Drama. New 
York, 1908, 

“Buddhist Mystic Songs.” DUS , IV. 1 ff. 

Astronomic, Astrologie und Mathematic. 
Strasshurg, 1889. 

“Harishena*s Dharmapariksha in Apabhra- 
msa.” ABORI, XXIII. 592-608. 

Jinaratnakosa (An Alphabetical Register of 
Jain Works and Authors). Vol. I. Poona, 
1944. 

“Varahamihira and Utpala (in relation to 
Sanskrit metres,)” C. K. Raja Presentation 
Volume, pp. 141-152. 

Geschichte der indischen Literatur. Band III. 
Leipzig, 1920. 


(B) BE A VIDIAN: TAMIL AND KANNADA: 


Attangar (Iyengar) 
K. Srinivasa 
Aiyangar, S. Krishna- 
swam! 

Ayyar, 0 . V. Nara- 
yana 

Dxkshxtar, V. R. R. 
Hooper, J. S. M. 


Tamil Studies. Madras, 1914. 

Ancient India and South Indian History . Vol. 
II. Poona, 1941. 

Origin and Early History of Saivism in South 
India. Madras, 1938. 

Studies in Tamil Literature and History . 2nd 
Ed. Madras, 1936. 

Hymns of the Alvars. Calcutta, 1929. 


498 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Hymns of the Tamil Saiva Saints . Calcutta, 
1920. 

The Heritage of Karnataka. 

Kannada Sdhitya Charitra (in Kannada). My¬ 
sore, 1953. 

History of Kannada Language. Mysore, 1934 
History of Kannada Literature. 

Karnataka Kavi Charite (in Kannada). 


Tamil Literature. Tiimevelly, 1929. 

Studies in Saiva Siddhanta. Madras, 1911. 
Some Milestones in Tamil Literature. 

Kanarese Literature. Calcutta, 1918. 

Jainism and Karnataka Culture. Dharwar, 
1940. 

CHAPTER X 

POLITICAL THEORY, ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION , 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

Original Sources 

(i) LITERARY 

Balaknda of Visvarapa 

See above, under “Dharma&astra” in “Gene¬ 
ral Bibliography”. 

Brihaddharma Purdna 

Ed. by. H. P. Sastri, BI. Calcutta, 1887-1897. 
Mahdbhdrata See above, under “General Bibliography”. 

Manubhdshya of Medhlatithi 

See above, under “Dharmasastra” in “Gene¬ 
ral Bibliography”. 

Nxtivdkydmrita of Somesvara 

See above, under “Polity” in “General Bib¬ 
liography”. 

Puragas See above, under “General Bibliography”. 

Rajatarafiginl of Kalhana 

See above under “Historical Works” in “Gene¬ 
ral Bibliography”. 

(ii) INSCRIPTIONS 

List of Inscriptions (See above, under “Inscrip¬ 
tions” in “General Bibliography”) 

See above, under Ch. I. 

Gaudalekhamald. Rajshahi, 1319 B.S. 

See above, under Ch. VI. 

Modem Works 

Hindu Administrative Institutions in South 
India. Madras, 1931. 


Bhanjdarkar, D. R. 

HlKALAL. 

Maitreya, A. K. 
Sewell, R. 


Aiyangar, S. Krishna - 
swami 


Kingsbury & Phil¬ 
lips 

Mugali, R. S. 


Narasxmhacharya, 

R. 

Pxllai, M. S. Pnrna- 
lingam 

Pillai, Nallasvami. 
Pillai, Snndaram. 
Rice, E. P. 

Sharma, S. R. 


494 








GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Alteear, A. S. 

Beni Prasad 

Dikshttar, V. R. R. 

Ghoshal, U. N. 

Jayaswal, K. P. 

Majumdab, R. C. 
(Ed.). 

Sastri, K. A N. 

SUBBARAO, R. 

Trepatbi, R. S. 
Venkateswara, S. V. 


Rdshtrakutas and their times. Poona, 1934. 
State and Government in Ancient India . Barba¬ 
ras, 1949. 

The State in Ancient India. Allahabad, 1928. 
Theory of Government in Ancient India . 
Allahabad, 1927. 

Hindu Administrative Institutions. Madras, 
1929. 

History of Hindu Political Theories. London 
1923. 

Hindu Polity. Calcutta, 1924; 2nd Ed. Ban¬ 
galore, 1943. 

History of Bengal. Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 

The Pandyan Kingdom. London, 1929. 

The Cholas. Vol. II, Part 1. Madras, 1937. 
The Theory of pre-Muslim Indian Polity .. 
Madras, 1912. 

“The Administrative System of the Early 
Gahga Kings of Kalihga.” PIHC, III. 187- 
194. 

See above, under “Histories of the Period” in 
“General Bibliography.” 

Indian Culture through the Ages. Vol. II. 
Mysore, 1932. 


CHAPTER XI 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 
Original Sources: 

(See Epics, Puranas, Philosophy, Dharma-sastra, Buddhist, Jain 
under Original Sources and Religion and Philosophy under Modern 

Works in General Bibliography.) 

(A) GENERAL: 

Modern Works 

Barnett, L. D. Hindu Gods and Heroes. London, 1923. 

Barth, A. The Religions of India (Authorised Eng. trans. 

by J. Wood. London, 1882). 

Bhandarkar, R. G. Vaishnavism, gaivism and Minor Religious 

Systems. Strassburg, 1913; Indian Edition, 
Poona, 1928. 

Cultural Heritage of India 

Published by the Ramakrishna Mission Insti¬ 
tute of Culture, Calcutta 1937, 1953 etc. 
Eliot, Sir Charles. Hindtuism and Buddhism. 3 Vols. London. 

1921. New Edition, 1953. 

Farquhar, J. N. Outline of the Religious Literature of India. 

Oxford, 1920. 

Hopkins, E. W. The Religions of India. Boston, 1895. 


495 


TOE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Xohow, Stan end Religions of India. Copenhagen, 1949. 

Tuxen, Paul. 

Monies, Williams, M. Religious Thought and Life in India. 4th Ed. 

London, 1891. 


(B) BUDDHISM: 

Original Sources 

(See “Buddhist” under “Original Sources”, and “Religion and 
Philosophy” under “Modem Works” in “General Bibliography”.) 

Bunyiu Nanjio. The Chinese Buddhist Tripifaka . Oxford, 1883. 

Modem Works 


Avalon, Arthur 
Bagohi, P. C. 
Rhattacharyya, B. 


Boss, P. N. 
Bu-stoh. 


Goomaraswamy, A.K. 


Dahlke, P. 


Dasgupta, S. B. 

Davxd-Nkel, Ale¬ 
xandra. 


Durr, N. 


Gbunwedel, A. 
Keith, A. B. 


Kern, H. 


Mitra, R. I. 


Obkkmiller, E. 
Poussin, L. de la 
Valine 

Rhys Davids, Mrs. 
C. A. F. 


See below, under “Woodroffe, Sir John”. 
Studies in the Tantras. Calcutta, 1939. 

Indian Buddhist Iconography. Oxford, 1924. 
“Glimpses of Vajrayana.” POC, III. 133ff. 
“Origin and Development of Vajrayana.” IHQ, 

1927. 733-746. 

Indian Teachers of Buddhist Universities . 
Madras, 1923. 

History of Buddhism . Trans, by E. Obermiller. 
Heidelberg, 1932. 

Buddha and the Gospel of Buddhism. London, 

1928. 

Living Thoughts of Gotama the Buddha , 
London, 1948. 

Buddhism and its Place in the Mental Life of 
Mankind. London, 1927. 

Introduction to Tantric Buddhism. Calcutta, 
1950. 

Le Buddhisme, ses Doctrines et ses Methodes. 
Eng. trans. Buddhism, its doctrines and 
methods , by H. N. M. Hardy and Bernard 
Miall. London, 1939. 

Aspects of Mahaydna Buddhism and Its Rela¬ 
tion to Hinaydna. London, 1930. 

Early Monastic Buddhism. 2 Vols. Calcutta. 
See below, under “Taranatha: Edelsteinmine.” 
Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon . 
Oxford, 1923. 

Manual of Indian Buddhism. Strassburg, 1896. 
Histoire du Bouddhisme dans U-Inde. Paris, 
1901. 

Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1882. 

See above, under “Bu-ston.” ' . 

Bouddhisme. Paris, 1930. 

“Tantrism (Buddhist).” ERE , Xn. 193 f. 

Buddhism: Its Birth and Dispersal. London, 
1934. 


496 






GENERAL. BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Rhys Davids, T. W. 

BcRIEFNER, A. 

Sen, B. 0. 

Sumpa Mkilan Po 
Suzuki, B. L. 

Takakusu, J. 
Taranatha. 


Waddell, L. A. 
Woodroffe, Sir John 


History of Indian Buddhism. London, 1897. 

Early Buddhism. London, 1908. 

Buddhism: Its History and Literature. New 
Ed. London, 1926. 

See below, under “Taranatha: Geschichte.” 

Some Historical Aspects of the Inscriptions of 
Bengal. Calcutta, 1942. 

Pag-sam-jon-zang . Ed. by S. C. Das. Calcutta, 
1908. 

Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism. London, 
1907. 

Mahay ana Buddhism. London, 1938. 

Essentials of Buddhist Philosophy . Plonolulu, 
1947. 

Edelsteinmine, das Buch von den Vermittlern 
der siehen Inspirationen . A us dem Tibeti- 
schen libers, v. A. Griinwedel. Petrograd, 
1914. Trans, into English (Mystic Tales 
of Lama Taranatha) by B. N. Datta. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1944. 

Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indian. Aus 
dem Tibetischen libers, v. F.A. von Schief- 
ner. St. Petersburg, 1869. 

The Buddhism of Tibet or Lamaism. London, 
1895. 

Introduction to Tantra Shastra. 2nd Ed. Mad¬ 
ras, 1952. 

Principles of Tantra. 2nd Ed. Madras, 1952. 

Shakti and Shakta. 4th Ed. Madras, 1951. 


[Cl BibHographie Bouddhique published by Adrian Maisonneuve. 

Paris, 1937.] 


(C) JAINISM: 

(See “Jain” under “Original Sources” and “Religion and Philosophy” 
under “Modem Works” in “General Bibliography”.) 


Aiyanoar, S. Krishna- 
swami. 

Altekar, A. S. 
Ayyangar, M. S. 
Ramaswami and 
Rao, B. Seshgiri 
Barodia, U. D. 

Buhler, G. 


Desai, M. 


Modern Works 

“Jainism in South India.” Atmananda Cen¬ 
tenary Comm. Vol., 1936. 

R&shtrakutas and their times . Poona, 1934. 

Studies in South Indian Jainism, Madras 
1922. 

History and Literature of Jainism . Bombay, 
1909, 

Vber die indische Secte der Jainas. Vienna, 
1887. Eng. trans. (The Indian Sect of the 
Jainas) by J. Burgess. London, 1903. 

Jaina Sdhityano Samkshipta Itihdsa (in Guja¬ 
rati) (“Short History of Jain Literature”). 
Bombay, 1933. 


A.I.K.—81 


497 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Fabquhar, J. N 
Fleet, J. F. 

Glasbnapp, H. 
Guebxnot, A. 


Handiqui, K. K 

Hayavadanarao, C. 
Nahab, P.C. 

Nabasimhaohabya, 

R. 

Pabikh, R. 0. 

Rao, B, V. Kbishna. 

Rice, B. 

Saletobe, B. A. 
Sbabma, S. R. 

Stevenson, Mrs. S. 
Vabdya, C. V. 


See above, under “General”. 

“Sanskrit and Old Canarese Inscriptions.” IA> 
XI-XII. 

Der Jainismus. Berlin, 1926. 

Essai de Bibliographic Jaina. Paris, 1908. 
“Notes de Bibliographie Jaina.” JA, XIV. 
48-148. 

Repertoire. d’Epicfraphie Jaina. Paris, 1908. 
La religion Djaina. Paris, 1926. 

Yasastilaka and Indian Culture . Sholapur. 
1949. 

Mysore Gazetteer . Vol. II. 
Jaina-lekha-samgraha. 3 vols. Calcutta, 1918- 
1929. 

Epigraphia Camatica, II, Introduction. 

Kdvyanusdsana by Acharya Hemachandra. 

Vol. II,. Part 1. Intr. Bombay, 1938. 

“Jainism in Andhradesa.” JAHRS, XII. 185- 
196. 

Mysore and Coohrg from the Inscriptions. 
London, 1909. 

Mediaeval Jainism. Bombay, 1938. 

Jainism and Karnataka Culture. Dharwar, 
1940. 

The Heart of Jainism. Oxford, 1915. 

History of Medieval Hindu India. Poona, 
1921 ft. 


(D) VAISHNAVTSM: 

Original Sources 

(See “Epics and Puranas” under “Original Sources” and “Religion 
and Philosophy” under “Modem Works” in “General Bibliography”.) 

Modern Works 


Aiyangab, S. Krishna- 
swami 


Bhaxdabkar, R. G. 

Fabquhab, J.^N. 
Macnicol, N. 

Rao, T. A. G. 

R ayohaudhubi, H.C. 


Eahrly History of Vaishnapism in South India. 
London, 1920. 

£i% Rdmdnujachdrya . (Natesan) Madras. 
Vaishnavism, Saivism, etc , See above, under 
“General”. 

See above, under “General”. 

Indian Theism. London, 1915. 

History of &fi Vaishnavas. Madras, 1923. 
Materials for the Study of the Early History of 
the Vaishnava Sect. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1936. 


(E) &AIVISM: 

Original Sources 
(As in Vaishriavism above.) 

ABHiKAYAOtJPTA Pararmrthasara. Ed. with trans. and notes by 

L. D. Barnett. JRAS , 1910. 707-747. 
Adisbbha Paramarthasdra. Ed. by S. S. Suryanarayana 

Sastri. Adyar, 1941. 


498 





GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


AiyangaB, S. Krishna- 
swami 

Ayyab, C. V. Nara- 
yana 

Chattkkjee, J. C. 

Kingsbury, P. and 
Phillips, G. E. 

Pillai, S. Satchida- 
nanda 

Sastri, K. A. Nila- 
kanta 

SUBRAMANIAN, K. R. 


Modern Works 

Some Contributions of South India to Indian 
Culture . Calcutta, 1923. 2nd Ed. 1942. 
Origin and Early History of Saivisyn in South 
India. Madras, 1936. 

Kashmir Saivism. Srinagar, 1914. 

Hymns of the Tamil Saivite Saints. Calcutta, 
1921. 

“The Saiva Saints of Southern India.” Cult . 
Her., II. 235-247. 

“A Historical Sketch of Saivism.” Cult. Her., 
II. 18-34. 

Origin of Saivism and its History in the Tamil 
Land. Madras, 1941. 


(F) MINOR RELIGIOUS SECTS: 

Original Sources 

(See “Epics” and “Puranas” under “Original Sources”, and “Religion 
and Philosophy” under “Modem Works” in “General Bibliography”.) 


Banerji, R. D. 


Bhandarkar, R. G. 
Bhattasali, N. K. 

Chanda, R. P. 
Cousens, H. 


Fabqtjhab, J. N 

Hazra, R. C. 

Macnicol, N. 
Majumdar, R.C 
(Ed.). 

Payne, E. A. 
Sankalia, H. D 
Sastri, H. Krishna. 


Modern Works 

Eastern Indian School of Mediaeval Sculpture. 
ASI, NIS, No. 47. Delhi, 1933. 

The Haihayas of Tripuri and their Monuments. 
MASI, No. 23. Calcutta, 1931. 

Vaishnavism, Saivism etc . See above, under 
“General”. 

Iconography of Buddhist and Brahmanical 
Sculptures in the Dacca Museum. Dacca, 
1929. 

Mediaeval Indian Sculptures in the British 
Museum. London, 1936. 

Chalukyan Architecture of the Kanarese Dis¬ 
tricts. ASI, NIS, No. 42. Calcutta, 1926. 

Mediaeval Temples of the Dakhan. ASI, NIS, 
No. 48. Calcutta, 1931. 

Somanatha and other Mediaeval Temples in 
Kdtkidwdd. ASI, NIS, No. 45. Calcutta, 
1931. 

See above, under “Religion and Philosophy” 
in “General Bibliography”. 

Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites 
and Customs. Dacca, 1940. 

Indian Theism. London, 1915. 

History of Bengal. Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 

The Saktas. Calcutta, 1933. 

Archaeology of Gujarat. Bombay, 1941. 

South Indian Images of Gods and Goddesses^ 
Madras, 1916. 


i 


499 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Schrader, F. 0. 
Woodroffe, Sir John 

Benekfea, J. N. 

Baherji, R. I). 

BHATT ACH ARY A , B. C. 

Bhattacharyya, B. 
Bhat^asaxa, N. K. 

OOQMARASWAMY, A.K. 

Rougher, A. 


Grunwedel, A. 


Haveul, E. B. 

Jouveau-Bubreutl, 

G. 

Majumdar, R. C. 

(Ed.). 

Rao, T. A. Gopinatha 
Saras wati. S. K. 
Sastri, H. Krishna. 


Bendall, C. 
Geden, A. S. 


Introduction of the Pdhcharatra and the 
Ahirhudhnya Samhita. Adyar, 1916. 

See above, under “Buddhism”. 

(G) ICONOGRAPHY: 

Modern Works 

Development of Hindu Iconography. Calcutta, 
1941. 

“Vishnu and Surya—A Study in Cult Icons.” 

JISOA, XXIL 55-129; XIV. 1-74; XVI. 47- 

100 . 

Eastern Indian School of Medieval Sculpture . 
Delhi, 1933. 

Indian Images: Vol. 1. Brahmanic Icono¬ 
graphy. Calcutta, 1931; Vol. II. Jain Icono¬ 
graphy. Lahore, 1939. 

Indian Buddhist Iconography . Oxford, 1924. 

Ed. Sddhanamdla. GOS. Raroda, 1925, 1928. 

See above, under “Minor Religious Sects”. 

Dance of £iva. With an introductory pre¬ 
face by R. Rolland. Botnbay, 1948. 

The Beginnings of Buddhist Art and other 
Essays in Indian and Central-Asian Archae¬ 
ology. Revised by the author and trans. 
by L.A. Thomas and F.W. Thomas. Paris,, 
1917. 

LTconographie boundhique de V Inde. 2 vols. 
Paris, 1900, 1905. 

Buddhistische Kunst in Indien. Berlin, 1893 
(Eng. trans. “Buddhist Art in India”, by 
Agnes C.Gibson. Revised and enlarged by 
J. Burgess. London, 1901). 

Indian Sculpture and Painting. London, 1908; 
2nd Ed. London, 1928. 

Iconography of Southern India (Trans, from 
the French by A.C. Martin). Paris, 1937. 

History of Bengal. Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 

Elements of Hindu Iconography. 2 vols. 
Madras, 1914-1916. 

“Early Sculptures of Bengal.” JDL y XXX. 
1-85. 

See above, under “Minor Religious Sects.” 

(H) TANTRIK RELIGION: 

Modern Works 

Catalogue of Buddhist Sansknt Manuscripts 
in the University Library , Cambridge. 

Cambridge, 1883. 

“Tantras.” ERE, XII. 192-193. 


500 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Macnicol, N. 
Monier-Wiliiams, M. 
Sastri, H. P. 

Windisch, E. and 
Eqoemng, • J. 

WlNTERNITZ, M. 
WOODROFFE, Sir John 


Indian Theism. Oxford, 1915. 

Brahmanism and Hinduism. London, 1891. 
Catalogue of Palm Leaf and Selected Paper 
Manuscripts. Calcutta, 1905. 

Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 
Library of the India Office. Part IV.London, 
1894. 

History of Indian Literature. Vol. I. Calcutta. 
1927. 

See above, under “Buddhism”. 


(I) PARIS: 


Kopiyala ; S. H. 


Irani, M. S. 
Taraporewala , 


S. 


I. J. 


“Jadi Raxxa and the Kissah-i-Sanj an.” 

JBBRAS, XXIII. 349-370. 

Studies in Par si History . Bombay, 1920. 

“The Story of Sanjan.” POC, X. 68-85. 

“The Exact Date of the Arrival of the Parsis 
in India.” Festschrift Kane , pp. 506-514. 


(J) PHILOSOPHY: 
Original Sources 


(See under “Epics”, “Puranas” and “Philosophy” under “Original 
Sources” and “Religion and Philosophy” under “Modem Works” in 

“General Bibliography”.) 

Modem Works 


Bhattacharyya, H. 
D. (Ed.). 

Chatterjee, J. C. 
Das gotta, S. N. 

Deussen, P. 


Garbe, R. 

Ghate, V. S. 

Gro OSSET, R. 

Jha, G. N. 

Keith, A. B. 
Masson-Oursel, P. 
Max Muller, F. 

Radhakrishnan, S. 
Srinivasachari, P.N. 

Strauss, Otto. 


The Philosophies. Cultural Heritage of India. 

2nd Ed. Vol. HI. Calcutta, 1953. 

Kashmir &aivism. Srinagar, 1914. 

History of Indian Philosophy. 4 vols. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1932 ft 

Outline of the Vedanta System of Philosophy 
according to Sankara. Eng. trans.- by J. H. 
Woods and C.B. Runkle. 2nd Ed. Cam¬ 
bridge Mass. 1915. 

Philosophy of Ancient India . Chicago, 1897. 
The Vedanta . Poona, 1926. 

Le Philosophie Indiennes. Paris, 1931. 

The Prabhakara School of Purva Mimamsd. 
Allahabad, 1911. 

Purva Mimamsd in its sources. Benares, 1942. 
Indian Logic and Atomism. Oxford, 1921. 

Le Philosophie en Orient. Paris, 1938. 

Six Systems of Indian Philosophy. London, 
1889. 

Indian Philosophy. 2 vols. London, 1923, 1927. 
The Philosophy of Bhedabheda. 2nd Ed. 
Madras, 1950. 

Indische Philosophie. Munchen, 1925. 


501 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

CHAPTERS XII-XIII 
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC LIFE 
Original Sources 
(i) INDIAN: 

(See (iii) Puranasand (iv) Dharmasastra; Kalhana in (v) Historical 
Works; Halayudha in (vi) Lexicons; Kajasekhara in (xi) Poetics, 
&c. and in (xiv) Belles-Lettres;—all under (A) Brahmanieal; Sid- 
dharshi under (C) Jain; and Dhanapala under (D) Apabhramsa;— 

in “General Bibliography” above.) 

Brihadd harm a Purtina 

Ed. by H.P. Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 1887-1897. 
DharmakQ$d-Vyavahdrak&mda 

Vol. I, Parts MIL Wai, 1937-39. 
Krityakalpataru of Lakshmldhara 

Vyavahdra-hdyda. Ed. by K.V.R. Aiyangar. 
GOS. Baroda, 1953. 

Kuftarvimata of Damodara 

Ed. in KM, III. Bombay, 1899. 

Ed. with comm, by T.M. Tripathi. Bombay, 
1924. 

Ed. by Madhusudan Kaul. Calcutta, 1944. 
German trans. by J.J. Meyer. Leipzig, 1903. 
Pardsara-nuddhaviya Para£ara-smriti with the comm, of Sayana 

Madhavacharya. Critically Ed. by V. S. 
Islampurkar. 3 vols. BSS. Bombay, 1893- 
1919. 

Parasara-smriti with the gloss of Madhavachar¬ 
ya. Ed. with notes by M. Chandrakanta Tar- 
kalankara. 3 vols. BI. Calcutta, 1890- 
1899. 

Paribhdshdprak&sa (part of Viramitrodaya) of Mitramisra 

Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series. Benares, 1906. 
Ratirahasya of Kokkoka 

Ed. by Devidatta Sarma. 1902. 

Ed. with comm, and notes. Bombay, 1922. 
SaihskdraprakdSa (part of Viramitrodaya) of Mitramisra 

Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series. Benares, 1906. 
Smritichandrikd of Devannabhatta 

Ed. by L. Srinivasa chary a. 6 vols. Mysore, 
1914-21. 

Ed. by J.R. Gharpure. Bombay, 1918. 

Eng. trans. by J.R. Gharpure. Bombay, 1948 

ff. 

Smrityartha$ara of Sridhara 

Ed. by Ranganatha Sastri Vaidya. ASS- 
Poona, 1912. 

Ydjnavalkya-Smriti with the comm, of Apararka. ASS. Poona, 

1903-04. 

(ii) NON-INDIAN: 

(See Ferrand, Relations &c (in General Bibliography, “Arabic”) 
especially extracts from Abu’l Faraj Muhammad bin Ishak, Abu 


502 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Zaid f A1 Ljtakhrl, Ibn al-Fakih, Ibn Khordadbah, Ibn Rosteh, Khuwft- 
rizml, Mas’udi, Mutahhar bin Tahir al-Makdisx, Sulaiman and 
Ya’kubijalso, Elliot and Dowson, History of India &c., and Hodivala, 
= Studies in Indo-Muslim History, as given in General Bibliography, 

“Muslim”.) 

Original Sources 
INSCRIPTIONS: 


(See inscriptions in ARSIE, El, IA, MAR, SII, etc.) 

Modem Works' 


Axyangar, K. V. 

Rangaswami 
Altekar, A. S. 


Banerjee, G. 

Chaklajpar, H. C. 

I) as, S. K. 

Hopkins, E. W. 
Indra. 

Ghoshal, U. N. 

Gupta, K. M. 

Jha, Ganganatha 

Kane, P. V. 

Mackenzie, J. 

Pban Nath. 

-Sastbi, K. A. Nila- 
kanta 

Sank alia, H. D. 
Subba Rao, N. S. 

Vbnkateswara, S.Y. 

WARMINGTON, E. H. 

Yule, Col, Henry and 
Burnell, A. C. 


Aspects of Ancient Indian Economic Thought. 
Benares, 1934. 

Education in Ancient India. 4th Ed. Banaras, 
1951. 

Position of Women in Hindu Civilisation. Bern 
ares. 1938. 

Rashprakutas and their times. Poona, 1934. 

Hindu Law of Marriage and Stridhana. Tagore 
Law Lectures. Calcutta, 1896. 

Social Life in Ancient India. Calcutta, 1929. 

Educational System of the Ancient Hindus. 
Calcutta, 1930. 

Economic History of Ancient India. Calcutta, 
1925. 

Ethics of India. London, 1925. 

The Status of Women in Ancient India . 
Lahore, 1940. 

Contributions to the History of the Hindu 
Revenue System. Calcutta, 1929. 

The Agrarian System in Ancient India. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1030. 

The Land System in South India between c. 800 
A.D. and 1200 A.D . Lahore, 1933. 

Hindu Law in its Sources. Vol. I. Allahabad, 
1930. 

History of Dharma&astra. Vols. II-IV. Poona. 
1941, 1946, 1953. 

Hindu Ethics. (Religious Quest of India Series, 
Oxford University). London, 1922. 

A Study in the Economic Condition of Ancient 
India. London, 1929. 

The Cholas. Vol. II, Part I. Madras, 1937. 

The University of Nalanda. Madras, 1934. 

Economic and Political Conditions in Ancient 
India. Mysore, 1911. 

Indian Culture through the Ages. 2 vols. Lon¬ 
don, 1928, 1932. 

The Commerce between the Roman Empire 
and India. Cambridge, 1928. 

Hobson-Jobson. New Ed. by W. Crooke. Lon¬ 
don, 1903. 


508 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


CHAPTER XIV 

COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


Bagchi, P C. 


Bose, P. 

Chatterji, B. R. 
Coedes, G. 

Das, S. C. 

De Boer, T. J. 

Francke, A. H. 
Goldziher, I. 

Grousset, R. 

Hitti, P. K. 
Kouraiu, G F. 

Majumdar, R. C. 


Mukherji, P. K, 

Oakeshott, W. F. 
O’Leary de Laoy 
Petech, L. 


Sarkar, H. B. 


Modern Works 

India and China. Calcutta, 1944; 2nd Ed, 
Bombay, 1950. 

Le Canon Bouddhique en Chine . 2 vols. Paris, 
1927 1938 

“Sino-Indian Relations.” SIS, I. 65-84; 161- 
166. 

The Hindu Colony of Cambodia . Adyar, 1927, 

The Indian Colony of Champa. Adyar, 1926. 

Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1928. 

India and Java. Calcutta, 1933. 

Les Etais Hindouises DTndochine et DTndo- 
nesie, Paris , 1948. 

Inscriptions du Cambodge. Vols, I-V. Paris. 

Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow. Ed. by 
N. C. Das. Calcutta, 1893. 

“Contributions on the Religion; History, &c. of 
Tibet.” JASB, 1881, 187 ff; 1882, 1 ff; 87 ff. 

History of the Philosophy of Islam. London, 
1903. 

Antiquities of Indian Tibet . Calcutta, 1914-26. 

Vorlesungen ilber den Islam. Heidelberg, 
1910. 

The Civilisations of the East—-India (Eng. 
trans.). London, 1932. 

The Civilisations of the East—-China (Eng. 
trans.). London, 1934. 

History of the Arabs . 1937. 

Arab Seafaring in the Indian Ocean in ancient 
and early Medieval Times (Princeton Univ. 
Press, 1951). 

Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East . Vol. 
I: Champa. Lahore, 1927; Vol. II; Suvarna- 
dvipa. Parts 1 and 2. Dacca, 193.7, 38. 

Kambujadesa. Madras, 1944. 

Hindu Colonies in the Far East. Calcutta, 
1944. 

Inscriptions of Kambuja (As. Soc. Monograph). 
Calcutta, 1953. 

Indian Literature in China and the Far East. 
Calcutta, 1931. 

Commerce and Society. Oxford, 1936. 

Arabia before Muhammad. 

A Study of the Chronicles of Ladakh (Suppl. 
to IHQ, XIIX-XIV). Calcutta, 1939. 

Northern India according to the ShuuChing- 
Chu. Rome, 1950. 

Indian Induences on the Literature of Java and 
Bali. Calcutta, 1934. 


504 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


SASTEI, K. A. N. 


Titus, M. T> 
Wales, H. G. Q. 


Foreign Notices of South India. Madras, 1939. 
South Indian Influences in the Far East. 
Bombay, 1949. 

History of Srivijaya. Madras, 1949. 

Indian Islam . London, 1930; 

The Making of Greater India . London, 1951. 


505 


A.D. 

559-567 

605 

618-907* 

c.625 

637 

641 

662 

678 

704-774 

716 

717 
722 

725 

€.730 


c.730 


c. 730-756 
c.731-796 
732 


c. 733 
c. 733-758 
c. 738 

c. 739 

742-826 

c. 743 

745 

747 

c. 747-752 
749 

e. 750-c. 770 
-750-850 


c 752 


CHRONOLOGY 

Guhasena of Valabhi (p. 214). 

A victorious Chinese General carries away 1356 
Buddhist books from Champa (p. 436). 

Tang dynasty in China (p. 444). 

Rashtrakuta family immigrates from Lattalura 
to Ellichpur in Berar (p. 1). 

Defeat of Yazdagird III, the Sasanid king of 
Iran, at Qadisiyya (p. 353). 

Battle of Nahawand (p. 353). 

Jaths of Kikanan resist the Arabs (p. 127). 

Ravishena, author of Padmapurdna (p. 183). 

Amoghavajra, Tantrik teacher (p. 263). 

Settlement of the Iranians at Sanjan, acc. to 
Dastur Aspalidiarji Kamdin (p. 354). 

Kambuja sends an embassy to China (p. 410). 

Kambuja helps an Annamese chief against 
China (p. 416). 

Jim aid (p. 39). 

Rise of the Thai kingdom in Yunnan known as 
Nan-chao (Mithila-rashtra) (p. 433). 

Mithila-rashtra throws off the Chinese yoke (p. 

422). 

Na gab hat a (Pratihara) (p. 20). 

Nandivarman Pallavamalla (p. 168). 

Sahjaya, successor of Sannaha in Central Java, 
(p. 427), conquers Kambuja (p. 416). 

Accession of Dantidurga (p. 1). 

Dantidurga, Rashtrakuta (pp. 1, 3, 20). 

Battle near Navsari in which the Arabs were 
worsted (p. 2). 

Arabs of Sindh invade the kingdom of the Sain- 
dhavas (p. 99). 

Cheraman Perumal, last of the Perumals of Ke¬ 
rala (p. 165). 

Dantidurga accompanies the Chalukysf suzerain 
in his expedition against Kahchi (p. 2). 

Vanaraja Chapa builds Anahilapataka (p. 103). 

Death of Vikramaditya II (p. 2). 

Devendravarman II, E. Ganga (p. 140). 

‘Abbasids supplant the Caliphs of the Umayyad 
dynasty (p. 125). 

Gopala, Pala (p. 45). 

Tibetan kings exercise political domination in 
parts of India, acc. to Tibetan.Chronicles (p.. 
446 k 

Dantidurga overthrows the Chalukya emperor 

fo. 1 ). 


*The date 618-905 given on p. 60 should be corrected accordingly. 

500 





CHRONOLOGY 


753 

753 


753, 771, 773, 778 
754 

754- 775 

755- 797 

756 

c. 756 

757 


c. 757-860 
c. 758-773 
759-765 
c.762 
c.764 

c. 764-e. 799 
765-785 
c. 765-815 


768 

768-772 

760 

c.770 
c. 770-810 
771 

c. 772 


c. 773 
774 

775-785 

775-809 

c.776 


c.778 (orearlier) 
778 


778 


e, 780 
780-793 


Bappa, the Guhila, is said to have abdicated the 
throne (p. 109). 

Dantidurga becomes the master of the whole oi 
Maharashtra, and assumes imperial titles (p. 
2 ). 

Indian embassies to Baghdad (p. 450). 

King Ko-lo-fong of Nan-chao (Mithila-rashtra) 
defeats the Chinese (p. 433). 

Caliph Al-Man§ur (pp, 124, 125, 450). 

Khri-sroh-lde-btsan, Tibetan king (pp. 58, 446). 

Bhartrivad<Jha, Chahamana ruler, acknowledges 
Nagabha|a as suzerain (p. 20). 

Hisham appointed governor of Sindh (p. 99). 

Prithivindra-varman occupies the throne of 
Champa on the death of Rudra-varman (p. 
423). 

Dynasty of Pan^urahga in Champa (p. 423). 

Krishna I, Rashtrakuta (pp. 3, 102). 

Agrabodhi VII, Ceylon (p. 169). 

Accession of Vajraditya of Kashmir (p. 115). 

Death of Vijayaditya I, E. Chalukya (p. 133). 

Vishnuvardhana, E. Chalukya (p. 133). 

Mahendra II ^ilimeghavarna, Ceylon (p. 169). 

Nedimja<Jaiyan (also known as Jatilavarman, 
Maranj adaiyan, Pa ran taka, Varaguna I), 
Faniya (pp. 157,247). 

Krishna I, Rishtrakuta, encamps at Manne (p 
160). 

Hisham ibn 'Amr at-Taghlibl, governor of 
Sindh (p. 115). 

Caliph sends an expedition against Kabul (p. 
126). 

Accession of Jayapltfa of Kashmir (p. 116). 

Dharmapala. P5la (pp. 45, 50). 

Kambuja king visits imperial court in China 
(p. 416). 

Incorporation of the whole of the modem Hy¬ 
derabad State in the Rashtrakuta empire <p. 
3). 

Death of Krishna I. Rashtrakuta (p. 3). 

Javanese raiders burn the sacred temple in 
Champa and carry away the image (p. 423). 

Caliph Al-Mahdi (p. 127). 

Three Caliphates of ‘Abbasids (p. 126). 

Arabs send another expedition against Barada 
p. 99). 

Accession of Vatsaraja, Pratlbara (p. 22). 

Date of composition of Kuvalayamkld at Java- 
lipura (Jalor) (pp. 21/209). 

Erection of the temple of goddess Tara at 
Chandl Kalasan by a Sailendra king (p. 446). 

Accession of Dhruva, Rashtrakuta (p. 4). 

Dhruva, Rashtrakuta (p. 160). 


507 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


782 


783 

783 

783 

785- 790 

786- 809 
786 


787 
c. 787 


788-812 
c 788-820 
c. 790 


790-794 

793 


793- 814 

794- 795 

794-805 

795 


c.795 

c. 796-847 

798-804 
799'' 
c. 799 

c. 799-847 
c.800 
c. 800 


c.800 

c.800-c,1000 

801 

c.801 

802 


Bharanindra-varman, the ^ailendra king, has 
as his guru Kumaraghosha, inhabitant of 

Gau$a (p. 415). 

Completion of Earivamsapurdna by Jinasena 
at Vardhamanapura (pp. 21, 182). 

Indrayudha, the ruler of the North (p. 23). 

Jayavaraha, of Sauryaman^ala (p. 102). 

IJdava or Dappula II, Ceylon (p. 169). 

Caliph Harun Al-Rashld (pp. 127, 450, 451). 

Caliph sends second expedition against Kabul 
(p. 126). 

Another Javanese raid in Champa (p. 423). 

Chinese emperor makes an alliance with the 
Caliph of Baghdad and some Indian princes 
for security against Tibetans, acc. to a 
Chinese author (p. 446). 

^ivamara II, W. Gahga (p. 160). 

^ahkaraeharya (pp. 304, 358). 

Bhruva, Rashtrakuta, returns to the south from. 
Ms northern campaign laden with rich booty 
(p* 5). 

Mahendra III ^ilameghavarna, Ceylon (p. 169)'. 

Indra-varman of Champa renews diplomatic 
relations with CMna, and sends presents of 
rhinoceros and buffaloes to the emperor 
(p. 424). 

Govinda III, Rashtrakuta (pp. 8, 160). 

Conflict between Magabhata and the Rashtra- 

kutas (p. 26). 

Agrabodhi VIII, Ceylon (p. 169).. 

Chinese Emperor, Te-tsong, receives an auto¬ 
graphed Buddhist manuscript from the king 
of Wu-ch’a (Udra) (p. 64). 

Govinda III, Rashtrakffta, becomes the undis¬ 
puted overlord of the Deccan (p. 6). 

Dantiga-Danti-varman, V a j ramegha varman t 

Later Pallava (p. 168), 

Mu-Khri-btsan-po, Tibetan king (p. 446). 

Death of Vishnuvardhana IV of Vengl (p. 8). 

Vijayaditya II becomes king of Vengl (pp. 8. 
133). 

Vijayaditya II, E. Chalukya (p. 133). 

Durgasimha, grammarian (p. 190). 

Northern campaigns of Govinda III, Rashtra¬ 
kuta (p. 8). 

CMtra vahana II of Aluvakhe$a (p. 164). 

Dynasty of Pralambha in Kamarupa (p. 61). 

Arrival of Iranian emigrants at Diu, acc. to 
Quissa-i-Sanjdn fp. 353). 

Accession of Hari-varman, Champa (p. 424). 

Jay a-varman II becomes king of Kambuja (p, 
417), 


508 


CHRONOLOGY 


802 


c.802 


802, 807 
803 


€.804 

804- 816 

805- 821 
808 

€.810-850 

812 

c.813 

813- 833 

814 

814- 878 

815- 862 

815 


817 

817-836 

817-853 

c.820-860 

€.821 

821-824 

824-825 

824-844 

825 

829 

c.830 

c.830 

832 


832 

833 


Govinda III, Rashtrakuta, defeats the con¬ 
federacy of Paliava, Panglya Kerala, and 
Gahga rulers (p. 8). 

Govinda III, Rashtrakuta, defeats Vijayaditya 
II and puts Bhixna Salukki on the Vehgi 
throne (p. 8). 

Pyu king sends embassies to China (p. 433). 

King of Champa conquers the two Chinese 
districts of Moan and Ai, acc. to Chinese 
history (p. 424), 

Govinda III, Rashfrakufa, invades Kanchi 
(p. 151). 

Ral-pa-can, Tibetan king, acc. to Franeke 
(p. 79, n. 6). 

Dappuia II (or III), Ceylon (p. 169). 

Radhanpur grant (p. 133), 

Devapala, Pala (p. 50). 

Baroda plate (p. 102). 

Chippatajayapl^a of Kashmir killed through 
the intrigue of his maternal uncles (p. 116). 

Caliph Al-Ma’mun (pp. 106, 126, 127, 128). 

Death of Govinda III, Rashtrakuta (p. 134). 

Amoghavarsha, Rashtrakuta (pp. 8,11, 31,161), 
190). 

^rimara ^rivallabha, Pan$ya (p. 158). 

Ins. of Hari-varman of Champa mentioning 
invasion of Kambuja by him, and defeat of 
China (p. 418). 

Vijayaditya II of Vehgi heads a rebellion 
against Rashtrakuta Amoghavarsha' (p. 9). 

Ral-pa-can, Tibetan king (pp. 58, 79, n. 7, 446). 

Rajamalla I, W. Gahga (p. 161). 

Vikranta-varman III, Champa (p. 424). 

Amoghavarsha, Rashtrakuta, becomes a major 
and assumes reins of administration (p. 10). 

Agrabodhi IX, Ceylon (p. 169). 

Origin of the Kollam or Malayalam era (p. 
165. 

Sena gilameghavarpa, Ceylon (p. 169). 

Settlement of Iranians at Sanjan, acc. to 
Quissa-i-Sanjan (p. 353). 

Harjara-varman (p, 60). 

Amoghavarsha, Rashtrakufa, inflicts a signal 
defeat on Vijayaditya II of Vehgi (p. 9). 

Death of Karkka of the Gujarat branch of the 
Rashtrakutas (p. 10). 

King of Nan-chao (Mithila-ihshtra) invades the 
Pyu kingdom and plunders the capital city 
(p. 433). 

Charter by Jaika I, Saindhava king, gs regent 
of his brother (p. 100). 

Death of NagSvaloka (Nlagabhata II), acc. to 
Pr&hMmka»chaHiu (p. 27). 


509 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


836,862 
c. 841-842 

841 

842 


844-848 

844-879 

c.845 


c.845 

c. 845-880 
c.847 
c. 847-872 

c.848 

848-892 

850 

c. 850-871 

851 

c. 853 


853-870 

853- 880 

field 

854- 877 
c. 855-856 


855/56-883 

e.857 

c. 860 

c.860 


c. 860-895 
c. 860-985 
861 

862 

c. 862-880 
868-890 


The earliest and latest known dates of Bhoja r 
Pratinara (p. 32). 

King Lakshmanaraja of Dahala-ma^i^ala (p~ 
87). 

Index to the Nyayasutras by Vachaspati (p~ 
204). 

Chandamahasena, of a branch of the Chaha- 
irianas at Dhavalapuri (mod. Dholpur) (p~ 
108). 

Ibn Khordadbah (pp. 413, 419). 

Sena II, Ceylon (p. 170). 

Dhruva I of the Gujarat branch of Rashtra¬ 
kutas killed in war against Amoghavarsha 

(p. 10). 

Accession of Akalavarsha, Gujarat branch of 
Rashtrakutas (p. 10). 

Kokkalla I, Kalachuri (p. 30). 

Death of Yijayaditya II, E. Chalukya (p. 134). 

Tellarrerinda Nandivarman—Karripavarman P 

Later Pallava (p. 168). 

Death of Vishnuvardhana V, E. Chalukya, 
after a rule of 18 or 20 months (p. 135). 

Vijayaditya III, E. Chalukya (p. 135). 

Vigrahapala Narayanapala. 

Parakesari Vijiyalaya Choladeva (p. 153). 

Sulaim-an’s Arab account of India (pp. 32, 52 r 
255, n. 56, 413). 

Asaga composes eight works including Var- 
dhamdna-charita at Dharala in Choladesa 
(p. 183). 

Nitimiarga I, W. Ganga (p. 161). 

Ppfhvlpati I, collateral line of W. Gahgas (p. 
161). 

Death of Jay a-varman II, Kambuja (p. 418). 

Jaya-varman III, Kambuja (p. 418). 

End of the rule of the Karko^a dynasty in 
Kashmir, and the foundation of the Utpala 
dynasty (pp. 116-7). 

Avantivarman, Kashmir (pp. 117, 245, 369). 

Date of Jayasimhasuri’s Prakrit comm, on 
Upadeiamdld (p. 209). 

End of the war between Amoghavarsha and 
the Gujarat branch of Rashtrakutas (p. 10). 

Amoghavarsha, Rashfmkuta, marries his dau¬ 
ghter Chandrobalabbe to Butuga, a Ganga 
prince (p. 9). 

Indra-varman II, Champa (p. 425). 

Bhrigu dynasty of Champa (p. 424). 

Parabala, Rashfrakufa, rules in Central India 
(p. 49). 

Embassy from Pyu kingdom visits China (p^ 
433). 

Varagunavarman, Faniya (p. 159). 

Vikramaditya I, Bana (p. 163). 

510 


CHRONOLOGY 


c.870 

810 

870-907 
o. 871-907 
872-903 
872-913 
874 
c.875 


877-889 

c„878 


c.878 

878- 914 
879, Oct. 20 

879- 890 
879-900 

879- 926 
880 

c.880 

880- 900 


c. 880-900 
883 

883-902 

c.685 

886 

888 

890-907 

892-922 

893 

893 

c.893 

c. 896-905 
898, 910 

899 

c.900 

c.900 

c.900 


Ya’qub ibn Layth conquers Kabul and Zabul 
(pp. 112, 126). 

Jayaditya II of the Malayaketu dynasty of 
Yijayapura (p. 93). 

Rajamalla II, W.* Gahga (p. 161). 

Aditya I, Chola (p. 153). 

^affarids (p. 128). 

Njipatuhgavarman, Later Pallava (p. 168). 
R§naka II, Saindhava (p. 101). 

Ya’kubi (p. 419). 

Indra-varman II of Champa sends an embassy 
to China (p. 425). 

Indra-varman, Kambuja (p. 420). 

Banas and Vaidumbas defeat W. Ganges and 
Nolambas at the battle of Soremati (p. 163). 
Death of Amoghavarsha I, Riashtrakuta, and 
the accession of his son Krishna II (p. 11). 
Krishna II, .Rashtrakuta (pp. 11, 12, 31, 88). 
Epoch of the Newan era (p. 58-9). 

Udaya II (or I), Ceylon (p. 170). 

‘Amr ibn Layth (p. 113). 

Raghavadeva, Nepal (p. 59). 

Uddyotana becomes an Acharya (p. 296). 
Pallavas defeat Pandyas at &ripurambiyam 
near Kumbhakonam (pp. 152, 159). 
Marasimha II, collateral line of W. Gahgas 

(p. 161). 

Parantaka Viranarayaija Piaa^dya (p. 159). 
Death of Avantivarman, Kashmir (p. 117). 
Sankaravarman of the Utpala dynasty of 
Kashmir (p. 112). 

Death of Bhoja (p; 33). 

Agguka IV, Saindhava (p. 101). 

End of the reign of Guoaka-Vijayaditya, E. 
Chalukya (p. 88). 

Kasyapa IV Srlsahghabodhi, Ceylon (p. 170). 

inscription (p; 136). 

Chalukya-Bhlma X (p. 136). 

Earliest known date of Mahendrapala I, Pratl- 
hara (p. 33). 

Balavarman, the Chalukya, in Saurashfra (p. 

101 ). 

Aditya I, Cho}a, defeats Aparajita, Pallava ip. 
152). 

Jayasiihha-varman, Champa (p. 425). 

Known years of Balitung (Dharmodaya MahS- 
Samfehu), Java (p. 428). 

Avanivarman ruling as a vassal of Pratthfira 
Mahendrapala (p. 101). 

Raja§ekhara (p. 181). 

Talcher plate of Sivakaradeva (p. 77). 

Death of Ya^o-'varman, Kambuja (p. 421). 

511 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


c. 900-c. 920 
c. 900-925 
900-940 

902 

903 

904(or 905) 

904, 915 

905-910 

906 


907 

907 

907-917. 

907-935 

907-953 

c.908 

c. 911-971 
c .912 
914 

914 

914-922 

914 

914 

c.915 


c.915 


c.915 


915-916 
c. 915-935 
c.916 

916 

917 

917- 918 

918- 930 
c.920 

920 

921 

922 


Maravarman Rajasimha II, Pandya (p. 159). 

Harsha, Chandelia (p. 84). 

Brithvipati II, collateral line of W. Gangas (p. 
*161). 

Ibn al-Faklh (p. 413). 

Ibn Rosteh (p. 419). 

San-fo-tsi (Sailendra empire) sends an em¬ 
bassy to China (p. 414). 

Known dates of Jaika II, Saindhava (p. 101). 

Bhadra-varman III, Champa (p. 425). 

Queen Sugandha deprived of her power, and 
Partha, ten-year old son of Nirjitavarman, 
placed on the throne of Kashmir (p. 119). 

Accession of Parantaka I, Chola (p. 170). 

Last known date of Mahendrapala (p. 33). 

Kiasyapa V, Abhaya gilameghavama, Ceylon 
(p. 170). 

NStimiarga II, W. Gahga (p. 161). 

Parantaka I, Chola (pp. 154, 171). 

Death of Narayanapala, Bala (p. 53). 

Indra-varman III, Champa (p. 426). 

Accession of Mahipala, Pratlhara (p. 35). 

Death of Krishna III, Rashtrakuta, and acces¬ 
sion of Indra (p. 12). 

Queen Sugandha of Kashmir advances towards 
the capital to regain her power (p. 119)". 

Indra III, Rashtrakuta (pp. 12-13). 

Indra III, Rashtrakuta, performs iul&purmha 
(p. 399 n. 255). 

Dharanivaraha, the Chapa ruler (p. 103). 

Accession of Dakshottama in Mataram (p. 
428). 

Battle of Vejlur in which the Cholas defeat the 
Pandyas and the Sinhalese (p. 154). 

Parantaka Chola defeats the Vaidumbas of 
Renandu and uproots the Banas with the aid 
of Frithvipati XI, W. Ganga (p. 155). ‘ 

Visit of A1 Mas’udi to India (p. 35). 

^ivagupta, Somavamsf (p. 146). 

AM Zaid Hasan, Arab writer (p. 413). 

Destruction of Kanauj by Rashfrakufas (p. 
35). 

A great famine breaks out in Kashmir (p. 119). 

Dappula XII (or IV), Ceylon (p. 170). 

Dappula IV (or V), Ceylon (p. 170). 

Cholas defeat and expel Rajasimha II, Pandyp 
(p. 154). 

Traditional date of the death of Nathamuni 
(p. 312). 

Nirjitavarman of Kashmir deposes Partha and 
assumes royalty (p. 119). 

Death of Indra III, Rashtrakuta, and accession 
of Amoghavarsha II fp. 13). 


512 


CHRONOLOGY 


c.922 

c.922 

c.922 

c.922 end 

922-929 

923 

c.925 

c. 927-936 
c.928 
929 

929 

c.929 

930 

930-933 

930-936 

932 

933 

933-942 

935-946 

935- 970 
936 

936 

936- 939 

937 

937 

937 

939 

939 

939 

939 

939-948 


Death of Chalukya-Bhima I (p. 136). 

Vijayaditya IV' succeeds his father Chalukya- 
Bhlma I (p. 137). 

Death of Vijayaditya IV, E. Chalukya, after a 
reign of six months (p. 137). 

Amma I, alias Vishnuvardhana, succeeds his 
father Vijayaditya IV (p. 137). 

Amma I, E. Chalukya (p. 137). 

Death of Nirjitavarman after placing another 
son Chakravarman on the throne of Kashmir 
(p. 119). 

Accession of Yasovarman or Lakshavarman, 
son of Harsha, Chandella (p. 84). 

Govinda IV, Rashtrakuta (p. 137). 

End of the kingdom of Mataram, Java (p. 427). 

Rule of Tala Vikramaditya (II) and Bhima II, 
E. Chalukya (p. 137). 

Kanthika-Vijayaditya IV succeeds his father 
Amma I, E. Chalukya (p. 137). 

Accession of Sindok in Eastern Java (p. 430). 

Assassination of Bhima II after a rule of eight 
months (p. 137). 

Udaya II (or II), Ceylon (p. 171). 

Malia or Yuddhamalla (II). E. Chalukya (p. 
138). 

Munjala composes Laghumanasa (on mathe¬ 
matics) (p. 200). 

Devasena, author of Nayachakra and other 
works (p. 216). 

Sena III, Ceylon (p. 171). 

Period of the rule of Bhima II, Chalukya, 
according to a record (p. 138). 

Janamejaya Mahabhavagupta, Somavaihsi (p. 
147). 

Amoghavarsha III overthrows Govinda IV, 
and occupies the Rashtrakuta throne (p. 14). 
First Parsi settlement at Sanjan (p. 353). 

Amoghavarsha III, Rashtrakuta (pp. 13, 14, 
162). 

Butuga II ousts Rajamalla III, W. Ganga (p 
161). 

Death of Uddyotana (p. 296). 

Chakravarman of Kashmir loses life at the 
hands of robbers (p. 119). 

Unmattavanti of Kashmir places Suravarman 
II on the throne af cer declaring him as his 
son (p. 120). 

End of the Utpala dynasty in Kashmir (p. 120). 

Accession of Yasaskara, Kashmir (pp. 120, 
244). 

Death of Amoghavarsha and accession of his 
son Krishna III (p. 14). 

Yasaskara, Kashmir (pp. 120, 369). 

518 


.T.K.— 33 


939-967 

940 

941 

941 (or 942) 

942 
942 

942-950 

942-994/5 

c.943 

c.944 


946 

947 

948 

948-949 

949 


950 

950-953 

950-958 

950-1000 

951 

915, 953 

c.953 

953-954 

953-957 

953-968 

953-969 

955 
c.956 

956 
956 

957- 973 

958- 971 

958-972 


THE AGE? OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

Krishna III, Rashtrakuta (pp. 14, 15,* 139, 162, 
171, 190). 

Death of Prithvlpati II, collateral W, Ganga 
line (pp. i.55, 162). 

Pampa composes Adi Pur ana and Pampa Bhd - 
rata (p. 224). 

Harsha-varman succeeds his father Jaya-var- 
man IV, Kambuja (p. 421). 

Completion of Pasmaha-chariu by Padmakirti 
(p. 219). 

Bhatripatta, Guhila king (p. 109). 

Udaya III (or IV), Ceylon (p. 171). 

Mularaja, Chaulukya (p. 105). 

Krishna III, Rashtrakuta, and Butuga, Ganga, 
capture Kanchi and Tanjore (p. 14). 

Accession of Rajendra-varman and removal of 
the capital back to Yasodharapura, Kambuja 
(p. 421). 

Amma II succeeds his father Chalukya Bhlma 
II (p. 138). 

Last known date of Sindok, Eastern Java (p. 
430). 

Yasaskara of Kashmir poisoned by his atten¬ 
dants (p. 120). 

Devapala, Pratlhara (p. 37). 

Battle of Takkolam in which Cholas were de* 
feated and their crownprince Rajaditya was 
killed (pp. 14, 155, 159, 162, 163). 

Death of Parvagupta, Kashmir (p. 113). 

Sena IV, Ceylon (p. 170). 

Kshemagupta, Kashmir (p. 113). 

Dhanga, Chandella (p. 38). 

Indra-varman III of Champa sends an embassv 
to China (p. 426). 

Known dates of Allata, son of Bhartripatta, 
Guhila (p. 109). 

Death of Parantaka Chola (p. 156). 

Vinayakapala II, Pratlhara (p. 37). 

Gan^araditya, Chola (p. 157). 

Rashtrakuta interregnum in Tondamandalam 
(p. 156). 

Mahendra IV, Ceylon (pp. 171, 210, 212). 

Mahlpala II. Pratlhara (p. 36). 

Badapa, son of Yuddhamalla, drives out Amma 
II (p. 139). 

Krishna III, Rashtrakuta, places Badapa on 
Vengi throne (p. 15). 

Construction of the temple of Harshanatha by 
Simhanaja, Chahamana (p. 107). 

Sundara Chola or Parantaka II, Chola (p. 157). 

Indra-varman III of Champa sends seven em¬ 
bassies to China (p. 426). 

Abhimanyu, Kashmir (p. 114)* 

514 


CHRONOLOGY 


c 959 
960 
c.960 
960 

960-974 
960-1279 
916, 962 

c.963 

964 

965 

\ 

966 


c. 966 

.967 

968 


968 

969-979 

970 

c.970-1000 
971, 72, 74, 75 

971 
971 

971 
c.972 

972 


972 Sept. 
972-973 

972-979 

973 


973 


Somadeva composes Yasastilaka-champu (pp. 
188, 295). 

San-fo-tsi (Sailendra) sends an embassy to 
China (p. 414). 

Beginning of the rule of Song dynasty in China 
(p. 422). 

Maha Pumna by Pushpadanta (p. 198). 

Marasimha III, W. Gahga (p. 162). 

Song dynasty in China (p. 444). 

San-fo-tsi (Sailendra) sends embassies to China 
(p. 414). 

Second Rishtrakuta expedition led by Krishna 
III into northern India (pp. 15, 38). 

300 Chinese monks start for India on a twelve 
year pilgrimage (p. 444). 

Completion of Maha Purdna by Pushpadanta 
(p. 218). 

157 Buddhist monks pay imperial homage to 
the holy places in India in pursuance of the 
appeal by the Chinese emperor (p. 444). 

Bhattotpala’s commentary on BrihaUsamhitd 
(p.* 200). 

Accession of Khottiga, Rashtrakuta (p. 15). 

Dinh Bo Linh, Annamese chief, founds an in¬ 
dependent kingdom to the north of Champa 
(p. 426). 

Death of Rajendra-varman, and accession of his 
son Jaya-varman V, Kambuja (p. 421). 

Sena V, Ceylon (p. 171). 

Danamava slays his younger brother Amma II 
(p. i.39). 

Yayati Mahasivagupta, SomavaihsI (p. 147). 

San-fo-tsi sends embassies to China (p. 414). 

Chamimtjaraja of Jhalwar (p. 96). 

Regular shipping house opened at Canton (p. 
414). 

44th Indian monks visit China (p. 444). 

Taila II, Chalukya, puts an end to the Rashtra¬ 
kuta supremacy in Kuntala (p. 86). 

Death of Abhimanyu, Kashmir (p. 121). 

Slyaka, Paramara, captures and plunders the 
Rashtrakuta capital Malkhed (pp. 15, 96, 
218). 

Death of Khottiga, Rashtrakuta (p. 15). 

Dhanapala composes Paiyalachchhl (p. 187, 
218). 

Paramesvara-varman of Champa sends no less 
than six embassies to China (p. 426). 

Dharmadeva, a monk of Nalanda, received by 
the Chinese emperor with great honour (p. 

444). 

Vigraharaja II, Chahamana (p. 107). 


515 


973 

973 

973- 985 

974 
c.974 

974- 995 

974-985 

975 
975 

977 

977 

978- 1036 

978 

979 

979 

979- 1027 
c.980 

980 

980,83 

980- 1015 
982 


982 

982 

982-1011 

983 

984 

985 

985-1016 

985-1024 

987 

c.988 

989 


c.989 

990 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANABJ 

Taiia II, Chalukya, rebels against Karkka. 
Eashtraku|a (p. 16), 

Ja^a Choda-Bhima kills Danamava in battle 
and makes himself king of Vehgi (p. 139). 

Uttama Chola (p. 157). 

Taiia defeats Mhrasimha, Gahga (p. 16). 

Death of Marasimha, W. Gahga (p, 164). 

Composition of Mritasanjivini by Haiayudha 
in honour of Muhja, Paramara (p. 190). 

Rachamalla or Rajamalla IV, W. Gahga (p. 
162). 

Death of Tribhuvana, Kashmir (p. 121). 

Vijayasiihha composes Bhuvaruisundan-katha 
(p. 210). 

Saktikumara, Guhila (p. 109). 

Vajradaman (p. 86). 

Bhaskara Ravivarman (p. 165). 

Chamunda Raya composes charmindardya 
Parana (p. 162). 

Naval expedition of Paramos vara-varman of 
Champa (p. 426). 

Death of Dinh Bo Linh, Annamese chief (p. 
425). 

Mahendra V, Ceylon (p. 172). 

Birth of Dlpahkara (Atisa) (p. 448). 

Didda kills Bhlmagupta and ascends the throne 
of Kashmir (p. 121). 

San-fo-tsi sends embassies to China (p. 414). 

Vajrahasta Aniyankabhlma, Gahga (p. 143). 

Chinese emperor appoints a Board of Trans¬ 
lators with three Indian scholars at the head 
(p. 444). 

Le Hoan, Annamese chief, returns with an 
immense booty from Champa (p. 426). 

Chamunda Raya erects a basti at &ravana 
Bejgola (p. 162). 

Board of Translators translate more than two 
hundred volumes (p. 444). 

Chamunda Raya executes a colossal statue of 
Gomatesvara at ^ravana Belgola (p. 162). 

Udayana composes Tattvasuddhi and Laksha- 
ndvali (p. 205 ). 

Accession of Rajaraja I, Chola (p. 156). 

Rajaraja Chola (p. 144). 

Rakkasa Gahga, W. Gahga (p. 163), 

Dhamrnaparikkhd of Harishena (p. 220). 

Accession of Mahipala I, son of Vigrahapaia 
II, Pala (p. 55). 

Accession of Vijaya Hari-varman (II) at 
Vijaya (p. 427). 

Sabuktigln defeats the confederacy of Hindu 
chiefs near Lamghan (p. 86). 

Java invades San-fo-tsi (Sailendra) (pp. 415 
431). 


516 


CHRONOLOGY 


991 

991-1015 

992 

992 

993 

993 

995 

999 

999 

999 

999 

c. 999-1011 
c.1000 

c.1000 

c.1000 

c.1000 
c,1000 

1001 

1001 

1001 

1003 

1003 

1004 
1006 

1007 

1007 

1008 

1014 

1015 

1015 


&ridhara Bhatla composes Nydyakandali (p. 
205), 

Period of the literary activity of Abhinava¬ 
gupta (pp. 206, 301). 

Le Hoan, Annamese chief, releases a number 
of Cham prisoners (p. 427), 

Javanese envoy visits Chinese court (p. 431). 

Abhinavagupta composes Bhairava-stotra (p. 
194), 

Ranna composes Ajita Pur&na (p, 225). 

Close of the reign of Mularaja Chaulukya 
who abdicated the throne in favour of his 
son Chamundaraja (p, 105). 

Jayapala, Shahi, annexes the kingdom of 
Lohur (p. 114). 

Durlabharaja, Chahamana (p, 107). 

Rajaraja conquers Vehgl from Jata Choda- 
Bhlma (p. 140). 

gaktivarman becomes ruler of Vehgl (p. 140). 

Jsaktivarman, son of Danarnava (p. 140). 

Soddhala, author of Udayasundarlkatlm (p. 
189), 

End of the reign of Sindhuraja, Paramara . 
99). 

Bhatta Jagaddhara and Chhichhubhatta from 
Kashmir (p. 191). 

Ugrabhuti, grammarian (p. 190). 

Padmagupta alias Parimala, author of Nava- 
sdhasdnkacharita (p. 184). 

Death of Jaya-varman V, Kambuja (p. 421). 

Death of Sembiyan Mahhdevl, wife of Ganda- 
raditya Chola (p. 156). 

Death of Dharmadeva, a monk of Nalanda, in 
China (p. 444). 

San-fo-tsi (^ailendra) sends an embassy to 
China without any hindrance from Java (pp. 
414, 431). 

Death of Didda of Kashmir, and accession of 
Samgramaraja (p. 121). 

Cholas capture Talakad (p. 163). 

Destruction of Java by a great catastrophe 
according to a record of Airlangga (p. 432). 

Nirbhaya rules jointly with Rudra in Nepal 
(p. 59). 

Death of Dharmavamsa of Java (p. 432). 

Close of the reign of Chamundaraja, Chau¬ 
lukya, according to Gujarat chroniclers (p. 
105). 

Dharmaparlkshd of Amitagati (p. 220). 

Chola embassy visits the imperial court at 
China (p. 445). 

Abhinavagupta composes Pratyabhijndvimar - 
sini (p. 194). 

517 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


1015- 1016 

1016- 1019 
1019-1038 
1022 


1027-1039 

1031 

1033 

1033 


1036 

1036 

1038, April 9 

1039-1042 

1042-1046 

1046-1048 

1048-1054 

1053 

1054- 1055 

1055- 1110 
1069 

1077 

1079 

1080-1101 

1123-1140 

1159 

1178 


1210-1236 
c.1211 


Kamarnava, Ganga (p. 143). 

Gun^ama, Ganga (p. 143). 

Madhukamarpava, Ganga (p. 143, 144). 

Three Bodh-Gaya inscriptions refer to the con¬ 
struction of stone stupas by three Chinese 
monks (p. 445). 

Vikramabdhu, Ceylon (p. 173). 

Accession of Vyasa, Kalachuri (p. 94). 

Another Choja embassy to China (p. 445). 

Bodh-Gaya ins. recording the construction of 
a stupa in honour of emperor T’ai-tsong (p. 
445). 

Visit of nine Indian monks to China (p. 445). 

Close of the long and intimate cultural inter¬ 
course between India and China (p. 445). 

Coronation of Vajrahasta Anantavarman, 
Ganga (p. 141). 

Mahallnaklrti, Ceylon (p. 173). 

Jagatlpala, Ceylon (p. 173). 

Parakrama or Par§kramapan$ya, Ceylon (p. 
173). 

Lokesvara, Ceylon (p. 174). 

Death of Dipahkara or Atisa (p. 449). 

Kesadhatu Ka£yapa, Ceylon (p. 174). 

Vijayabahu I, Ceylon (pp. 174, 211). 

Namisadhu’s commentary on Rudrata’s Rcivya- 
lamkdra (p. 186). 

Chola embassy to China (p. 445). 

King Sodhadeva, Kalachuri (p. 94). 

Harsha, Kashmir (p. 113). 

Dhananjaya, Srutaldrti, author of Ndmamalq, 
(p. 184). 

Sarvananda, commentator of Amarako&a (p. 
190). 

Chou Ku-fei, Chinese author, refers to Quilon 
as an important centre of trade with China 
(p 445) 

Sultan Iltutmish (p. 114). 

Muhammad ‘Aufi (p. 113). 


518 


GENEALOGY 


1. Rashtrakutas of Malkhed 


Karkka I 


Indra I 2. Krishna I 


1. Dantidurga 3. Govinda II 4. Dhruva 


Stambha Karkka 5. Govinda III Indra (of 

Gujarat branch) 

6. Amoghavarsha I (or Sarva) 


7. Krishna II d. Chandrobalabbe (m. Butuga) 

' l ' 

Jagattunga 


8. Indra III 11. Amoghavarsha III 

l l 

I l l I l 

9. Amoghavarsha II 10. Govinda IV 12. Krishna III 13. Kho^iga Nirupama 

' l ' l 

X 14. Karkka II 

I 

15. Indra IV 


2. Rashtrakut a s: Gujarat Branch 


1. Indra 


2. Karkka Suvarnavarsha Govinda 

3. Dhruva I Dharavarsha 

l 

4. Akalavarsha 


5. Dhruva II 


l 

Govinda 


6. Dantivarman 


I 

7. Krishnaraja. 

519 














THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


3. The Pratlharas 

X 

t 


i 

1. Nagabhata I 


X 


2. Kakkuka 


3. Devaraja 


4. Vatsaraja 

5. Nagabhata II (or Nagavaloka) 

I 

6. Ramabhadra 


7. Bhoja (Prabhasa, Adivaraha, or Mihira) 


DehanagadevI 


9. Bhoja II 


= 8. Mahendrapala = MahldevI (or Mahldevl) 
(Mahendrayudha, 

Nirbhayanarendra, 
or Nirbhayaraja) 

10. Vinayakapala I 
(Mahlpala. Kshitipala or 
Herambapala) 


11. Mahendrapala II 12. Devapala 

13. Vinayakapala II 

14. Mahlpala II 

« 

15. Vijayapala 

♦ 

16. Rajyapala 

17. Trilochanap&la 
18 (?) Yasahpala. 

(N.B.—For the different views about the relationship of kings 
Nos. 13-15, cf. above, p. 37 f). 


4. The Palas 


Dayitavishnu 

I 

Vapyata 


. I 

2. Dharmapala 


1. Gopala 

l 


3. Devapala 


l 

Vakpala 

I 

Jayapala 

I 

4. Vigrahapala I 


520 










GENEALOGY 


5. Narayanapala 

6. Rajyapala 

l 

7. Gopala II 

I 

8. Vigrahapala II 

l 

9. Mahlpala I 

1. Salambha (or Pralambha) 

2. Harjara-varman 

l 

3. Vanamala-varman 

l 

4. Jayamala (Viravahu) 

I 

5. Bala-varman 
♦ 

(? Tyagasimha) 

1. Raghavadeva 

2. Jayadeva 

3. Vikramadeva 

4. Narendradeva 
♦ 

* 

5. Gunakamadeva I 
* 

* 

6. Udayadeva 

7. Nirbhayadeva and Kudradeva 

7. Karas of Utkala (See above, p. 63) 

8. Bhanjas of Khinjali (See above, p. 69) 

9. Bhanjas of Khijjinga (See above, p. 74) 

19. Sulkis (See above, p. 77) 


5. Kamarupa 


6. Nepal 1 


521 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

11. Tungas 

Raja Jagattuhga 
Salanatunga 

s 

Gayatfatunga 

12. Mayuravamsa 

Uditavaraha 

Tejavaraha 

Udayavaraha 


13. Nandas (See above, p. 78) 


14. Chandellas of Kharjuravahaka 

1. Nannuka 

l 

2. Vakpati 


3. Jayasakti (alias Jejjaka) 

l 

(d. Natta=m. Kokkalla I) 


. . —j 

l 

4. Vijayasakti (alias Vijjaka) 

I 

5. Rahila 

I 

6. Harsha 

l 

7. Yasovarman (alias Lakshavarman) 

8. Dhahga 

I 

9 Ganda 


15. Kalachuris of Tripurl 

1. Kokkalla (m. Natta, d. of Ch and ell a Jayasakti) 

I 

!- I ~~~ 1 

2. Sankaragana (alias Sankila) Arjuna d. (=m. Rashtrakuta Krishna II) 

l 

l ' I I 

3. Balaharsha 4. Yuvaraja I (alias d. (=m. Rash^rakuta 

Keyuravarsha) Jagattunga) 

l 

5. Lakshnianaraj a 

_ ! _ 

■ ■ ■■■■ ■ - . .— » - — ■ ■ —- - ■ - — ■ ■ I — ■ .1 .m.. . ■ 

6. 6ahkaragana EC 7. Yuvaraja II 

l 

8. Kokkalla II 


522 






GENEALOGY 


16. Kalachuris of Sarayupara. 2 

1. Rajaputra 

i 

2. &ivaraja I 

l 

3. Sahkaragsqia I 

l 

4. Gunambhodhideva (altos Guixasagara I) 


5. Ullabha 6. Bhamanadeva I 

I 

7. ^ankaragana II (alias Mugdhatunga) 

I 

8. Gunasagara II 


S. ^ivaraja II Bhamana 12. Vyasa 

I l 

10. Sahkaragana HI 13. So^liadeva 

I 

11. Bhlma 

17. Malayaketus of Vijayapura. 

1. Maharaj adhiraj a Jayaditya I 

l 

2. „ Bharmaditya 

l 

3. „ Jayaditya H 

18. Paramaras of Malava. 

1. Upendra (alias Krishnaraja) 

__I_. 

r i 

2. Vairisimha I Pambaraslmha • (ruled in Vaga$a) 

l 

3. Slyaka 1 

l 

4. V&kpati I 

I 

5. Vairisimha II ( alias Vajra^a) 

6. Slyaka II (alias Harsha) 

I l 

7. Munja (alias Utpala, 8- Sindh uraja (alias 

alias Vakpatiraja) KuinaranSrayaja, alias 

I ] Nav as a h aga n ka) 

I 1 i (, 

Arpoiaja Chandone #. Bhoja Dusala 

528 









THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


19. 


20 . 


21 . 


22 . 

23. 


Paramaras of Yagada. 

pambarasimha 

Dhanika 

0 

Kamka or Chachcha 
Chancapa 


Saindhavas of Saurashtra. 

1. Pushyadeva 

l 

2. Krishna raj a I 

'I 

3. Agguka I 

i 

4. Kanaka I 

i 

! I 

5. Krisknaraja II 7. Jaika 

l ‘ J 

6. Agguka II | 

8. Chamundaraja 

I 

11. Agguka IV 

i 

12. Jaika II 


Chalukyas of Saurashtra. 

X 


1. Kalla 

I 

3. X 

i 

4. Vahukadhavala 

l 

5. Avanivarman I 

l 

6. Baiavarman 

l 

7. Avanivarman II (alias Yoga) 


Varahas of Suryaman<Jala. 

Mahavaraha 

Jayavarlha 


2 . 


Chapas of Vardhamana. 

1. Vikramarka 


2. Ad^aka 

3. Pulakesi 



9. Agguka HI 

l 

10. Kanaka II 

! 

Yuvaraja Jaika 


Mah alia 


4. Dhruvabhata 


524 


5. Dharanivaraha 






GENEALOGY 


24. Chapas of Anahilapataka 

1. Vanaraja 

l 

2. Yogaraja 

I 

3. Ratnaditya 

I 

4. Kahemaraja 

l 

5. Aka^adeva 

6. Bhuyadadeva (alias Bhuyagadadeva. 
alias Samantasimha) 

25. Chaulukyas of Mattamayura 

1. Simhavarman 

l 

2. Sadhanva 

l 

3. Avanivarman 

! 

d. Nohala (=m. Kalachuri Yuvaraja I) 

26. Chaulukyas of Anahilapataka 

1. Mulara j a 

l 

2. Chamundamja 

._L__ 

I I 

3. Vallabharaja 4. Durlabharaja 

27 . Chaulukyas of Lata 

Barappa 

i 

Gongiraja 

28. Chahamanas of &akambhari 3 

1. Vasudeva 

2. Samanta 

l 

3. Piimatalla 

l' 

4. Jay a raj a 

l 

5. Vigraharaja I 

l 

7. Gopendraraja 


6. Chandra raj a I 

l 

8. Durlabharaja 


525 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


9. Guvaka (alias Govindaraja I) 

I 

10. Chandrarajja II (alias Sasinripa) 

i i 

11. Guvaka II d. Kalavatl (m. king of Kanauj) 

f 

I 

12. Chandana 

13. Vakpatiraja 

] 

14. Simharaja Vatsaraja Lakshmana (founder of the 

Naddula branch) 


15. Vigraharaja II 16. Durlabharaja ( alias Durlahghyameru) 

29. Chahamanas of Nad$u!a 

1. Lakshmana 

_L_1_ 

I ! 

2. ^obhita Vigrahapala 

3. Baliraja 4. Mahendra (alias Mahendu) 

I 

5. Asvapala Anahilla 

30. Chahamanas of Dholptir 

1. Isuka 

2. Mahisharama 

l 

3. Chan^amahasena 

31. Chahamanas of Partabgarh 

1. Govindaraja 

2. Durlabharaja 




3. Mahasamanta Indr ana j a 
520 












GENEALOGY 


32. Guhilas of Mewar 4 

1. Khommana I ( alias Bappa, alias Kalabhoja) 

2. Mattata 

3. Bhariripatta I 

4. Sixhha 

! 

5. Khommana II 

l 

6. Mahayaka 

l 

7. Khommana III 

l 

8. Bhariripatta II 

l 

9. Allata 

i 

10. Naravahana 

l 

11. §alivahana 

I 

12. Saktikumara 




Ambaprasada 6uchivarman Naravarman Anantavarman KIrtivarman 

33. Guhilas of Dhod 5 

Guhila I 

i 

1. Dhanika 

l 

2. Auka 

! 

3. Krishna 

I 

4. ^ahkaragana 

l 

5. Harsha 

l 

6. Guhila II 

I 

7. Bhatta 

I 

8. Baladitya 


34. Tomaras 

Jaula 

1. Vajrata 

! 

2. Jajjuka 


527 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Purnaraja Devaraja 3. Gogga 

« 

Rudrena 


35. Hindu Shahis 


1. Kallar (alias Lalliya Shahi) 


2. Samanta 

3. Toramana (alias Kamaluka) 


4. Bhlma 


Is ht a pa la 


5. Jayapala 


6. Anandapala 


36. Kashmir; Karkota Dynasty 


1. Lalitaditya Muktaplda 

_ ! _ 

I I 

2. Kuvalayapuja 3. Vajraditya Bappiyaka 

i ‘ i I 

4. Prithivyaplda I 5. Samgramaplda I 

l 

6; 8 Jayaplda (alias Vinayaditya) 

: I 

7. Jajja (usurper) 

_ l 

i i 

9. Lalitaplda 10. Samgramapida (alias Prithivyaplda) 

• • 

* 

11. Chippata Jayaplda (alias Brihaspati) son of 1) 

■ 

12. Utpalaka and 4 others (maternal 
uncles of 11) 

13. Ajitaplda (gr. son of 3) 

14. Anangaplda (son of 10) 

* 

15. Utpalaplda (son of 13) 

9 

* 

16. Avantivarman 
528 









GENEALOGY 


37. Kashmir: Utpala Dynasty 


Utpala (or Utpalaka) 

Sukhavarman 

— , 

1. Avantivarman Suravarman 

I I 

i i 

2. Sankaravarman (^=5. Sugandha) Sukhavarman 

_I__ l 

3. Gopalavarman 4. Samkata 7; 8 Nirjitavarman (alias Pahgu) 

i 

I 

r ■ ' i i 

6; 11 Partha 9, 12; 14 Chakravarman 10. Suravarman I 

I . i 

15. Unmattavanti 13. Sambhuvardhana (usurper) 

* 

a 

16. Suravarman II 

17. Yasaskara 


38. Kashmir: Yasaskara Dynasty 

Prabhakaradeva 

i 

■I 

1. Yasaskaradeva 

I 

I 

2. Sarhgramadeva 

3. Parvagupta 

39. Kashmir: Parvagupta Dynasty 

Abhinava 

I 

Sarhgramagupfca 

1. Parvagupta 

l 

2. Kshemagupta (=7. Didda) 

l 

3. Abhimanyu 

l 

5. Tribhuvana 6. Bhlmagupta 

I 

7. Didda (w. of No. 2) 

8. Samgramaraja (nephew of No. 7) 
529 


4. Nandigupta 


A.I.K.—‘>L 








THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


40. Kashmir: Kingdom of Darvabhisara and Lohara 6 


Khasa Nara 

i 

Naravahana 


Phulla 

i 

Satavahana 

l 

Chanda 

l 

Chanduraja 


Simharaja o£ Lohara 

[ 


Udayaraja 


Kantiraja 


Gopala 


d. Didda (m. Kshemagupta) 


41. Chamba: Mushana Dynasty 

1. Ajita-varman 

2. Suvarna-varman 

3. Lakshml-varman 

4. Mushana-varman 

5. Harhsa-varman 

6. Sara-varman 

7. Sena-varman 

8. Sajjana-varman 

8A. (? Mrityuhjaya-varman) 

9. Sahilla-varman 

! 

10. Yugakara-varman 

I 

11. Vidagdha-varman 

12. Dodaka-varman 

» 

Salavahana 

I 

Soma-varman 

I 

Asa^a 


530 





GENEALOGY 


42. 


43. 


44. 


Kumaun-Garhwal: Pauravas of Brahmapura. 


1. Vishnuvarman I 

'I 

2. Vrishavarman 

I 

3. Agnivarman 


4. Dyutivarman 

I 

I 

5. Vishnuvarman il 

Kings of Kumaun and Garhwal 

1. Nimbara (m. NasudevI) 

I 

i 

2. PMP Ish^aganadeva (m. Vegadevl) 

3. PMP Lalitasuradeva 

l 

4. Bhudevadeva 

1. Salonaditya (of a new dynasty) 


2. Ichchhatadeva 



3. Desatadeva 


Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi 


4. Padmatadeva 

l ' 

5. Subhiksharajadeva 


1. Vijayaditya I 

I 

2. Vishnuvardhana IV 


3. Vijayaditya II Bhima-Salukki Nripamdra 

I 

i 

4. Vishnuvardhana V (alias Kali Vishnuvardhana, etc.) 


5. Vijayaditya III Ayyaparaja Vikramaditya (I) Yuddhamalla I 

! I 

6. Chalukva Bhlma I 10. Tala (or Tadapa, etc.) 

_ j _ i 

I j 13. Malla or Yuddhamalla 

7. Vijayaditya IV 11. Vikramaditya (II) \ 


16. Badapa 17. Tala (II) 

8. Amma I 14. Chalukya Bhlma II 


9, Vijayaditya V 12. Bhlma II 19. Danarnava 15; 18. Amma II Kama 

: r 

20. Ja|a Choda Bhlma f 

l 

21. Saktivarman 

531 















THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


45. Eastern Gangas 

1. Devendravarman II 

2. Rajendravarman I 

! 

3. Anantavarman II 4. Devendravarman III 

__j__ 

i i 

5. Rajendravarman II 6. Satyavarman 7. Anantavarman III 

« 

8. Bhupendravarman Marasimha 

I 

9. Devendravarman IV 

46. Greater Gangas (Earlier Account) 

1. Gunamahamava 

I 

2. Vajrahasta 

_ ! _ 

I i i 

3. Gundama 4. Kamamava 5. Vinayaditya 

I 

6. Vajrahasta-Aniyankabhlma 

l 

f I I 

7. Kamamava 8. Gundama 9. Madhukamarnava 

• • • • 

47. Greater Gangas (Later Account) 

1. Virasimha 

! 

1 1 i i ,, i 

2. Kamamava I 3. Danamava Gunarnava I Marasimha Vajrahasta 

I 

4. Kamamava II 

! 

5. Ranamava 

l ' 

I 

6. Vajrahasta II 7. Kamamava III 

f 

8. Gunarnava II (Gunamahamava in the 
preceding account) 

___ ! _ 

r~. r i i. i 

9. Potankusa X 11. Gundama 12. Kamamava IV 13. Vinayaditya 

I I 

10. Kaligalahkusa 14. Vajrahasta III (Vajrahasta-Aniyankabhlma, 

No. 6 in the preceding account) 


532 














GENEALOGY 


48. Gangas of §vetak? 

Jayavarman 

Samantavarman 

* 

1. Mahmdravarmari 

I 

2. Prithvlvarman 

__j_ 

i I 

3. Indravarman 4. Danarnava 

K ailas a 

i 

Bhupendravarman 

* 

Devendravarman 

49. Kadambas of Jayantyapura 

Niyamava 

l 

Bhlmakhedi 

I 

Dharmakhedi 

l 

! I 

Udayaditya Bhlmakhedi 

50. Somavarrisls of Kosala 

6ivagupta 

l 

Janamejaya Mahabhavagup I 

! 

Yayati Mahasivagupta I 


51. Pallavas 7 


1. Nandi-varman II Pallavamalla 

i 

2. Danti-varman 

! 

3. Nandi-varman III Tellarrerinda 

l 

4. Nripatunga-varman 


5. Aparajita 

583 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


52. Chojas of Tanjore 

1. Vijayalaya 

2. Aditya I 

! 

i — I 

3. Parantaka I Kannaradeva 

1 _ 

l-1 —p—- - , _ 

Rajaditya 4. Gandaraditya Arikesari Uttamasili 5. Arinjaya 

7. Utiama Chola 6, Sundara Chola (or Parantaka II) 

i _I_ 

Madhurantaka Gandaraditya 

Aditya II 8. Rajaraja I 

53. Pandyas 8 

1. Maravarman Rajasimha I 

l 

2. Nedunjadaiyan (Parantaka, Ja^ila, or 

Maranj adaiy an) 

'I 

3. §rimara ^rivallabha 

' l 

4. Varaguna II 

5. Parantaka VIranarayana (brother of 4) 

I 

6. Maravarman Rajasimha II 

7. Vira Pandya 

54. Western Gangas: Main Line 

1. Srlpurusha 

_I_. 

i i n ~n „ 

2. Sivamara II Vijayaditya Duggs agella 

M.JL. .i., 

(Collateral line) 

4. I^Itimarga I 

_ A _ 

! 1 

5. Rajamalla II Butuga I 

I 

6. Nitimarga II 

I 

i ’ r a 

7. Narasimha 8. Rajamalla III 9. Bufiiga XI 

_ l 

i i . 

10. Maruladeva 11. Marasirhha III 

l 

12. Rachamalia (or Rajamalla IV) 

584 


13. Rakkasa Gahga 

















GENEALOGY 


55. Western Gangas: Collateral Line 

Sivaimra 

l " l 

Marasimha Prithivlpati I 

' ! 

Marasimha II 

i 

Prithivlpati II 

• %■ 

Butuga II of the Main. Line 

56. Barias 

Vikramaditya I Bana or Banavidyadhara 

Vijayaditya 

« 

e 

Vikramaditya II 
Vikramaditya III 

57. Nolambas 

Sihgapota 

X 

l 

Polachora 

l 

Mahendra I 

NItimarga II (Mahendrantaka) 

\ | 

X 

I 

X 

I 

Nanni Nolamba 

58. Vaidumbas 

Irigaya 

Ganda Trinetra 
' • 

gandayan Tiruvayan I 

Sandayan Tiruvayan II alias ^iikan^ha 


585 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


59. Ceylon 

1. Agrabodhi VI 

2. Agrabodhi VII (brother of 1) 

3. Mahendra II Silameghavarna (son of 1) 

I 

4. Udaya (or Dappula II) 

5. Mahendra III Silameghavarna 

6. Agrabodhi VIII (brother of 5) 

7. Dappula II (or III) (brother of 6) 

8. Agrabodhi IX 

9. Sena Silamegha (brother of 8) 

10. Sena II (nephew of 9) 

11. Udaya II (or I) Silameghavarna (brother of 10) 

12. Kasyapa IV Srisanghabodhi (brother of 11) 

13. Kasyapa V Abhaya Silameghavarna (son of 10) 

14. Dappula III (or IV) (probably stepbrother of 13) 

15. Dappula IV (or V) Silameghavarna (probably brother of 14) 

16. Udaya HI (or II) (nephew of 10) 

17. Sena III (probably brother of 16) 

18. Udaya IV (or III) 

19. Sena IV 

20. Mahendra IV Srisanghabodhi (probably brother of 19) 

21. Sena V 

22. Mahendra V (brother of 21) 

23. Vikramabahu 

24. Kirti 

25. Mahalanaklrti 

l 

26. Vikramapandya 

27. Jagatlpala 

♦ 

Parakramapandya (? son of 26) 

60. Kambuja 

1. Jaya-varman II 

! 

2. Jaya-varman III 

• 

3. Indra-varman 

I 

I 

4. Yaso-varman. 


5. Harsha-varman I 6. Isana-varman II 

7. Jaya-varman IV (husband of a sister of 4) 

8. Harsha-varman II 

9. Rajendra-varman (son of another sister of 4) 

! 

10. Jaya-varman V 

536 



GENEALOGY 


61. Champa: Dynasty of Panduranga 

1. Prithivlndra-varman 

* 

2. Satya-varman (sister’s son of 1) 

3. Indra-varman (brother of 2) 

» 

4. Hari-varman (sister’s husband of 3) 

I 

5. Vikranta-varman III 

62. Champa: Bhrigu Dynasty 

1. Indra-varman II 

# 

2. Jayasiihha-varman 

I 

3. Jayasakti-varman 

4. Bhadra-varman III 

I 

5. Indra-varman III 

6. Paramesvara-varman 

7. Indra-varman IV 

* 

8. Lu’u-Ky-Tong (Annamite usurper) 

9. Vijaya £rl Hari-varman II 

10. Yan Pu Ku Vijaya Sri 

63. Central Java: Kingdom of Mataram 

1. Sannaha 

2. Sanjaya 

c 

m 

3. Balitung (Dharmodaya Mahasambhu) 

4. Dakshottama 

5. Tulodong 

6. Wawa 

64. Eastern Java: Dynasty of Sindok 

1. Sindok (Sri Isana-Vikrama Dharmottungadeva) 

_ ' ! 

2. Sri fsanatungavijay^ (daughter of 1) 

I 

i 

3. Sri Makutavarhsa-vardhana 

m 

Dharmavamsa 

537 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


NOTES ON GENEALOGY 

1. Cf. Bendall’s Historical Introduction to Sastri’s Catalogue of Palm-leaf and 
selected nap er MSS belonging to the Durbar Library, Nepal, p. 21. 

2. According to Bh. List, p. 403, Vyasa (No. 12) was the son of Sankaragana III 
No. 10) and step-brother of Bhima (No. 11). 

3. Cf. DHNI, II. 1062, 1137. Contra, Bh. List, p. 381, where Purnatalla (No. 3) is 
omitted, and Vindhyanripati is inserted between Nos. 13 and 14. 

4. Cf. Bh. List, pp. 388-9. 

5. Cf. DHNI, II. 1208. Bh. List, pp. 390-1, shows no relationship between Nos. 2 
and 3. 

6. Cf. Stein, RT, I, Introduction, App. II, p. 145. 

7. Cf. K. A. N. Sastri, History of India, I. 300. 

8. Cf. op. cit., p. 299. 


538 


/ 


INDEX 


’Abbasid Caliphs, 125, 126, 127, 128, 152. 
Abboka, 205. 

Abhayadeva, 293. 

Abhayagirivihara, 175. 

Abhayakaragupta, 273. 

Abhidhamma, 210, 211, 212. 
Abhidhana-ratnamala, 189, 376, 377, 384, 
387, 389, 390, 400, 401, 405. 
Abhidharma, 274. 

Abhidhdvrttimatrika, 195. 

Abhimanyu (k. of Kashmir), 114,120, 121. 
Abhixianda, 183. 

Abhinanda (Gauda), 183, 184. 

Abhinava, 120. 

Abhinavagupta, 179, 182, 183, 191, 192, 
194, 195. 206, 231 (n), 301, 304, 363 (n). 
Abkhas, 91, 101, 102/104 213, 214, 215. 
Abliisamaydlankara, 271. 
Abhisamaydlankaraloka, 274. 
Abhisamayavibhanga, 268. 
Abhisarikdvanchitaka (or bandhitaka ). 
179. 

Abhisheka, 319. 

Abhitvaramdna, 243. 

Abu (Mount), 94, 97, 104, 108, 298. 
Abu-al-Ala’al-ma’arri, 452. 

Abu Zaid Hasan, 403, 405, 413. 414. 
Achalapura, 135, 220. 

Acharyas, 258, 259, 311, 313, 334. 

Addb ul Muluk wa Kijayat ul Mamluk, 
114. 

Adam’s Bridge—See also Setu, 1. 
Addaka, 103. 

A^danaka-desa, 103. 

Adhdrakarikds, 207. 

Adhikdrins, 246. 

Adhijakshas, 243. 

Adi-Bhanja, 74. 

Adi Buddha~See also primordial Buddha, 
Adinatha, Vajra, 262, 263, 266, 267, 
278. 

Adigamans (of Tagadur), 158, 164. 
Adinatha—See also primordial Buddha, 
Adi Buddha, Vajra, 262. 

Adinatha, Sri (Jain), 296. 

Adipurdna, 11, 183, 224. 

Adi-sakti, 310. 

Adisesha, 207 , 231(n), 301. 

Aditya(s) (god), 335, 336, 350. 

Aditya I (Chola k.), 12, 152, 153, 154, 
159, 164, 165, 167. 

Aditya II, 157, 159. 

Aditya Purdna, 366, 388, 409(n). 
Adityagrihas, 334. 

Adivaraha (Pratlhara. Bhoja I), 32. 
Advaita-Vedanta, 302, 304, 313, 360. 
Advayasiddhi, 269. 


Advayavdda, 266. 

Aeneid, 225. 

Afghanistan, 113, 115. 

Agama, 316, 317. 

Agamanta £aivism, 310. 

Agamapramanya, 206. 

Agamas, (Saiva), 308, 317, 324, 338, 349, 
438. 

Agamism, Tamil, 338. 

Agastya, 419, 428, 438. 

Agguka I, 99, 100. 

Agguka II, 100. 

Agguka III, 100. 

Agguka IV, 101. 

Aghani, 452. 

Aghata, 97, 109, 110. 

Aghora-murti, 308, 310. 

Agni, 237, 331, 336, 363(n). 

Agnikula, 39. 

Agni Purdna, 203, 238, 254(n), 255(n), 
332, 372, 376, 389, 399 (n), 401, 402, 
409(n). 

Agnita, 299. 

Agnivarman, 125. 

Agnivesa, 199. 

Agra, 111. 

Agrabodhi VI, 169. 

Agrabodhi VII, 169. 

Agrabodhi VIII, 169. 

Agrabodhi IX, 169. 

Ahar, 97, 110. 

Ahavamalla, 227, 377. 

Ahirnsd, 258, 294. 

Ahmadabad District, 105. 

Aihole caves, 329, 330, 332, 334. 

Airavata -mandala, 78. 

Airlangga, 432. 

Aiyangar, S. K. Comm. Vol 56(n). 
Aja-EIkapada, 311. 

Ajanta (sculpture), 176, 177. 

Ajapala, 148. 

Ajita, 210; 

Ajita Maitreyanatha, 271. 

Ajitanatha, 297. 

Ajitaplda, 116. 

Ajita Purdna, 225, 291. 

Ajita-Sdnti-stava, 210. 

Ajitasena, 290. 

Ajita-varman, 122. 

Ajmere, 27, 87, 108, 313. 

Aka^adeva (Chapa k.), 103. 
Akala-jalada, 180. 

Akalarika, 288, 293, 354, 264(n). 
Akalavarsha (Gujarat Rashfrakuta), 
10 . 

Akala-varsha (Krishna I), 3. 
Akalavarsha (Krishna II), 11. 
Akalavarsha (Krishna III), 14. 


589 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Akdsagarbkasutra, 275. 

Akruresvara - vishaya , 40 ( n). 

Akshapatala, 244. 

Aksharabhyasa, 366. 

Aksharasvikriti, 366. 

Akshobhya, ’281, 282, 283 , 284, 285, 288. 
Alaka, 183. 

Alakhana, 112, 118. 

Alakshml, 344. 

Alamkdra, 191. 

Alamkarasarasamgraka, 191. 
Alamkdrasarvasvo, 195. 

Alamkdrasastra, 191. 

Alas grant, 133. 

Alas plates, 18 (n.). 

Ala vi-rash tra, 422. 

Alheruni’s India, 453(n). 

Al-Birunl. 113, 131 (n), 200, 413, 450. 
Alfazari, 450. 

Algebra, 451. 

All, 424. 

At-Idrisi, 127. 

Alillaha —See also Pajjhatikd, 217. 

A1 Istakhrl, 18(n), 128. 

Al-Jahlz, 452. 

Alla 239, 241. 

Allahabad, 36. 

Allahabad pillar inscription, 124. 

Alla$a (Guhila k.), 109. 

Al-Mahdi, 127. 

Al-Ma’mun, 106, 126, 127, 128. 

Al-Mansur, 125, 126, 127, 450, 452. 

A1 Mas’udI, 17, 35, 128, 242, 255(n), 389, 
391, 392, 398(n), 402, 404, 405, 413, 
414. 

Almora, 123, 124, 125. 

Alor, 127, 128. 

Alptigin, 122. 

Altekar, Dr. A. S., 40(n), 41 (n), 43(n), 
105, 140, 177(n), 255(n), 288, 411(n) 
Alunganam, 249. 

Aluvakheda, 164. 

Alvars, 227, 228, 258, 292, 312. 

Alwar, 37. 

Ama, 290. 

Amalanathippiran, 227. 

Amara, 199, 316. 

Amaradatta, 189. 

Amarakosa, 189, 190, 199, 316. 

Amaravatl—See also ^ridhanyakataka, 
175, 262. 

Amdtyas, 241. 

Ambaprasada (Guhila), 110. 

Ambashthas, 372. 

Ambavadi-ris/iat/a (District), 143. 
Ambavalli (in Farlakimedi District), 143. 
Ambika, 299, 300, 340, 341. 

Ambur Inscription, 167. 

Amitabha, 279, 280, 281, 282, 287. 
Amitagati, 98, 220. 

Amma I (E. Chalukya k.), 13, 137. 
Amma (raja) II, 15, 138, 139, 291. 
Amoda (plates), 130(n). 

Amoghakalasa, 70. 

Amoghasiddha, 282, 284, 286. 
Amoghavajra, 263. 


Amoghavarsha I (or Sarva)—See also 
Nripatunga, 8-11, 12, 17, 28, 30, 31, 
51, 57(n), 87, 88, 95, 134, 149, 151, 
161, 166, 168, 190, 200, 223, 290, 291, 
294, 363(n), 407. 

Amoghavarsha II, 13, 18 (n), 137. 
Amoghavarsha III, 43-14, 89, 162. 
Amoghavarsha, (Munja), 97. 
Amoghavritti, 11, 190, 294. 

Amraoti District, 220. . 

‘Amr ibn Layth, 113. 

Amritabhanu, 183. 

Amritachandra, 294. 

Amrita*guhya, 274. 

Amritakara (monastery), 272, 
Amritakumbha, 270. 

Amru bin Jamal, 99. 

Amurtta-sadakhya, 310. 

Anahilanagara, 104. 

Anahilapataka, 91, 97, 102, 103, 104, 105. 
Anahilapattana, 104. 

Anahilapura, 104. 

Anahilavada, 104, 289, 290. 

Anahilla (Chahamana), 108. 

Anakapalie Inscription, 136. 

Ananda, 187, 193, 210, 211. 

Anandagarbha, 274. 

Anandagiri, 345, 365(n). 

Anandakathd, 193. 

Anandapala (Shahiya), 114. 
Anandavardhana, 117, 181. 185, 186, 191, 
193, 194, 195, 197, 198. 

Anangaplda, 116. 

Anangavajra, 266, 269. 

Ananta (scholar), 446. 

Ananta (Vishnu), 125, 142. 

Anantadeva, 354. 

Anantagochara, 107. 

Anantavarman, 110, 150. 

Ananta.-varman II, 140, 141. 
Ananta-varman-Chodaganga, 141, 142, 

145. 

Ananta-varman (also called Kolahala), 
142, 144. 

Anargha-rdghav a, 180, 181. 

Anartta, 24, 41 (n). 

Anehalagaehchha, 296. 

Andhaka, 183. 

Andhakasura, 309. 
Andhakasuravadha-murti, 309. 

Andhakavadha, 342. 

Andhra (desa), 24, 25, 86, 88, 138, 163, 
291 370. 

Ahgaj 9, 11,*53, 57(n), 86, 401. 

Ahgaddi, 70. 

Angas, 152. 

Ahgiras, 373, 395(n). 

Angirasas, 334. 

Angkor, 416, 417, 420, 421, 441. 

Angkor Thom, 417, 420. 

Angul, 68, 71. 

Angul plate, 67. 

Ahguiimalaparitta, 360 (n). 

Aninditapura, 416, 419. 

Aniruddha, 332. 

AnkidevI, 138. 


540 




INDEX 


Anklesvar taluk, 40(n), 

Annam, 414, 416, 422, 426. 

Antarala. 176. 

Antarvedi, 323. 

Antiquities of Tibet, 79(n). 

Antirigan CP., 81(n). 

Antroli-Chharoli plates, 41 (n). 
Anugraha-murti, 307. 

Anunyasa, 190. 

Anuradhapura, 172, 174, 175, 176. 
Anuruddha, 211. 

Anuttarayoga, 263, 265, 268. 
Anuttarayoga tantrOr-See also Yoga 
tantra , 260, 264. 

Aparajita (Pallava king), 153, 159, 166, 
167. 

Aparajita (Silahara k.), 98. 

Aparajita (Buddhist pantheon), 284, 287, 
345, 348. 

Aparanta, 99. 

Apararka, 203, 370, 392 (h), 393(n), 394 
(n), 395(n), 396(n), 398(n), 399(n), 
409(n). 

Apashmarapurusha, 306. 

Appar, 292. 

Arab account of India, 32. 

Arab Geographersf Knowledge of South¬ 
ern India, 56(n). 

Arab Governors of Sindh, 87. 

Arabia, 402. 

Arabic, 449, 450, 451, 452. 

Arabs, 19, 20, 21, 32, 40, 42(n), 52, 99,- 
100, 106, 109, 115, 125-9, 165, 171, 
352, 377, 380, 382, 386, 389, 391, 401, 
402, 403, 404, 405, 408, 413, 414, 415, 
419, 423, 444, 446, 451. 

Arabs in India, history of, 125-129. 
Arakan, 432. 

Arama, 147. 

Aramudi, 58, 116, 131 (n). 

Aranyaraja (Paramara), 97. 

Arapachana, 281. 

Arasalar, 152. 

Arathi, 79(n), 243. 

Arbuda, 323. 

Arcot Dt., 14, 142, 166, 312. 
Ardhamagadhi, 213. 

Ardhamantfapa, 176. 

Ardhanarlsvara, 305, 330, 332. 
Ardhanarlsvara-murti, 306. 

Arichit, 159. 

Arikesari, 224, 225. 

Arikesari Maravarman, 158. 

Arikesarin, 189. 

Arikesarin II (Chalukya king), 137. 
Arikulakesari, 155. 

Ann 452. 

Arihjaya Chola, 155, 157, 164, 165. 

Arisil, 152. 

Arithmetic, 451. 

Arjuna (legend), 307. 

Arjuna (Kalachuri prince), 89. 
Arjunacharita , 194. 

Arkonam, 335. 

Arokiaswami, M., 165(n). 


Arthasastra, 186, 443. 

Aruna, 350. 

Aryabhata II, 200. 

Arya-desa, 120, 369, 419 
Aryadeva, 359, 360(n) 

Aryamba, 304. 

Aryavarta, 35, 323. 

Asaga, 183. 

Asahaya, 204. 

Asana-Vishnu, 313. . 

Asanga, 259, 260, 266, 268, 360(n). 
Asapuri, goddess, 107. 

Asata, 123. 

Ascharya-Chuddmani (or Chuddmani), 
180. 

Ashta-Lakshml, 341. 

Ashtanga, 451. 

A <:hta settle 

Asia, Central, 261, 263, 405, 409, 444, 445. 
Asia, South-East, 409, 412. 

Asitahga, 308. 

Aska, 73. 

Asni Inscription, 40(n), 42(n). 

Asokanta Marlchl, 284. 

Asoka-srimitra, 274. 

Assam,—See also Uddiyana, 50, 53, 58, 
60-61, 323, 335, 361(n), 404. 

Asutosh Museum, Calcutta University, 
277, 352. 

Asvaghosha, 215, 360(n). 

Asvapala (Chahamana k.), 108. 

Atakur Inscription, 156. 

Atanadyaparitta, 360(n). 

Athmallik State, 71. 

Atichandika, 344, 364 (n). 

Atiriktanga Bhairava, 308. 

Atlsa, 448, 449, 453(n). 

Atisaya-dhavala (Amoghavarsha I), 8. 
Atkinson, E. T., 132(n) 

Atmatattvaviveka , 205. 

Atreya gotra, 141. 

Atri, 142, 373, 395(n), 452. 

Attili Inscription, 136. 

Attimebbe, 292. 

Attock, 112. 

Auka, 110. 

Aurangabad Dist. (Mulaka), 17(n). 
Ausanasa-smriti, 373, 395(n). 
Avalokitesvara, 176, 187. 261, 262-263, 
277, 278, 279, 280, 281, 311, 341, 
361 (n). 

Avalon, 326, 361 (n). 

Avanijanasraya, 2. 

Avani-naranan, 151. 

Avanisulamani, 158. 

Avanivarman I, 101. 

Avanivarman II, (Yoga), 101, 102, 103. 
Avanivarman Yogaraja II, 96. 
Avanivarman (Chaulukya k. of Mat- 
tamayura), 90,. 104. 

Avanti, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 46, 95, 106, 
213, 323, 390, 

Avanti, 213. 

Avunti-bhubhrit, 21. 

Avantisundari, 180, 368. 


i 


541 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


- A vanti-carman (k. of Kashmir), 116, 
117, 119. 178, 182, 183, 187, 193, 195, 
206, 245, 363 (n), 369. 

Avantivarman (Maukhari), 178. 
Avatdras, 258. 

Awadh (Oudh), 32, 33. 

Ayodhya, 173. 

Ayogava, 373. 

Ayo-vel, 158. 

Ayuktas, 255 (n). 

Ayyaparaja, 135. 

Ayyappa (k.. of Nolamba-rashtra), 137, 
138. 

Ayyar, V. Venkatasubba, 165(n), 184. 

B 

Babylonians, 450. 

Badal Pillar Inscription, 55. 

Badami caves, 329, 330, 331, 313, 332. 
Badami Chalukyas—See Chalukyas of 
Vatapi. 

Badapa (k. of Vengl), 15, 139, 140. 
Baddega, 135, 136, 137. 
Baddhapadmdsana, 276, 277, 281. 
Baden-Powell, 241. 

Badnawar, 22, 41 (n). 

Badulla Buddha, 176. 

Badyema-Maharaja, 140. 

Bagala, 344. 

Bagchi, Dr. P. C., 216, 231 (n). 

Bagenad, 14. 

Bagesvar, 123. 

Bagesvar inscription, 123, 124. 

Baghdad, 35, 128, 446, 449, 450, 451, 452. 
Baghelkhand, 90. 

Bagmati (river), 47. 

Bahlika, 405. 

Bahraich, 93, 94. 

Bahugrama, 369. 

Bahur (place), 156, 369. 

Bahur Plates, 152. * 

Baihaki, 113. 

Baijnath (city), 123. 

Bairhatta, 334. 

Bakarganj Dt., 54, 330. 

Balabhadra, 200. 

Balabharata, 180, 181. 

Balabodhihi, 191. 

Baladeva (deity), 341. 

Baladeva (king), 205. 

Baladliikrita, 240, 244, 245. 

Baladhyaksha, 243, 244. 

Baladhuri, 127. 

Baladitya (Guhila k.), 111. 
Bala-Ganapati, 345. 

Balaghat District, 88, 135. 

Balaharsha (Kalachuri k.), 89. 

Balakrida, 203. 

Balaprasada, 131 (n). 

Balaputradeva, 52, 274, 413, 415. 
Balarama, 331, 332. 

Bdlardmayana, 180, 181. 

Balarjuna, 150. 

Balasore, 61, 69. 

Balavarman, 101. 


Balavarman (k. of Kamarupa), 60, 61. 
Balavatdratarka., 275. 

Balesvar, temple of, 124. 

Balhara, 17. 

Balharas of Manklr, 171. 

Balhikd, 213. 

Bali, 332, 430, 431, 434, 435. 

Balipura, 291. 

Baliraja (Chahamana), 97, 108. 

Balitung, 428. 

Balkh, 405. 

Ballaha-raya, 17. 

Ballaladeva Velabhata, 139. 

Balmer, 97. 

Bamra, 78. 

Bana, 183, 185, 186, 187, 209, 217, 316, 
398(n). 

Banadhiraja, 155, 161. 

Banaras, 8, 36, 86, 105, 403. 

Banaras CP. cf Kama, 110. 

Banas, 151, 152, 155^ 161, 163, 164, 166, 
256 (n). 

Banavasi, 14, 92, 162, 225, 255(n), 291. 
Banavidyadhara—See also Vikramaditya 
I (Bana), 163, 166. 

Banda District, 83, 130(n). 

Banerjee, P., 80(n). 

Banerji, R. D., 76, 80(n), 81(n), 362(n), 
363(n). 

Bangadh Grant of Mahlpala, 55. 
Bahkeya, 10. 

Bankura District, 331. 

Banswara, 95. 

Ba Phnom hill, 416. 

Bappa, 109.' 

Bappabhatti, 185, 293. 

Barabhum, 297. 

Barabudur, 416, 436, 440, 441. 

Barada (Barda), 99. 

§arah, 28, 29. 40(n), 41(n). 

Baramula, 118. 

Barappa, 97, 98, 99, 104, 105. 

Barbara, 370. 

Barda hills, 99, 100. 

Bargaon, 79(n). 

Bari Kot, 114. 

Barmak family, 451, 452. 

Baroda plates, 18(n), 41(n), 102. 

Barton Museum, 102. 

Barua, B. M., 362(n). 
Barupunandu-Vis/iaya, 139. 
Basantanadeva, 123. 

Basav/anal, Prof. S. S., 231 (n). 

Bashar, 106, 109, 128. 

Basra, 402, 405. 

Bastar State, 98, 135. 

Basti, 94. 

Battambang, 417. 

Baud, 69, 71, 149. 

Baud copper plate, 73, 81(n). 

Baud plates of Tribhuvana-MahadevI II 
(alias Prithvlmahadevi), 19(n), 148. 
Bauddhachdra, 323. 

Ba\iddhudhikkdra, 205. 

Bauddha Gan O Doha, 231 (n). 

Bauddhas, 373. 


542 





INDEX 


Bauka (Pratihara k. of Jodhpur), 27, 
29, 30. 

Ba’urah, 242. 

Bavan, 113. 

Bayana Inscription, 43(n), 397(n). 
Begumra Grant of Indra III No. I, 42(n). 
Begumra Grant of Krishna, 42(n). 
Begumra plates, 11, 42 (n). 

Belgaum district, 221, 330. 

Belgola, 295. 

Belvalkar, 230(n). 

Belvola, 14. 

Benares, 130 (n). 

Bendall, 59. 

Bengal—See also Bhangala, Vanga 

Vangala, 22, 23. 31, 33, 42(n), 44-57. 
61, 62, 65, 85, 91, 106, 178, 183, 191, 
205, 242, 244, 257, 288, 270, 271, 273, 

274, 276, 279, 286, 287, 289, 296, 297, 

300, 306, 307, 308, 314, 315, 328, 329, 

334, 336, ,339, 340, 343, 344, 346, 347, 

348, 349, 35^ 360(n), 361 (n), 364(n), 
390, 400, 404, 410(n), 412, 415, 436, 
448. 

Bengal Asiatic Society’s CP. of Vina- 
yakapala, 40 (n). 

Bengal, Bay of, 403, 446. 

Berar, 1, 2, 12, 46, 47. 

Berhampore, 73. 

Besnagar Garudadhvaja, 314. 

Betwa (River), 85, 96. 

Bezwada, 139. 

Bhadda, 217. 

Bhadra, 114. 

Bhadrakall, 344. 

Bhadra-varman III, 425. 

Bhaga, 274. 

Bhagalpur, 49, 86, 401. 

Bhagalpur Copper Plate, 55. 
Bhagavad-gita, 304. 

Bhagavatl, 28, 32, 257. 

Bhdgavati Samhita, 335. 

Bhagavritti, 190. 

Bhaglratha, 307. 

Bhaglrathl, 20, 140. 

Bhaguri, 189. 

BhagyadevI, 54. 

Bhairava, 320. 

Bhairava (s), 302, 305, 308. 

Bhairava-murti, 308. 

Bhairava-stotra, 194. 

Bhairavi, 320, 344. 

Bhaja, 333. 

Bhakamisra, 91. 

Bhaktamarastotra, 185, 229(n). 

Bhakti, 258, 296. 

Bhallata, 186. 

Bhallaiasataka, 186. 

Bhamaha, 191, 192, 196, 214, 217. 
Bhamanadeva (Kalachuri k. of Sarayu- 
para), 36, 93, 94, 95. 

Bhamatl, 204, 205, 230(n). 

Bhamo, 433. 

Bhana, 182. 

Bhandagarika, 245. 

Bhandak Plates, 3. 


Bhandarkar, D. R., 37, 41 (n), 43(n), 
80(n), 81(n), 102, 132(n), 230(n). 
Bhcmdarkar’s List, 80(n), 81(n). 

Bhandi, 22, 41(n). 

Bhangala, See also Vangala, Vanga, 
Bengal, 45, 268. 

Bhanja, 149. 

Bhanjabhum, 74. 

Bhanjabhumi, 74. 

Bhanja families, 73. 

Bhanjas, 62, 68, 69, 76, 78. 

Bhanjas of Khijjinga, 75-76. 

Bhanjas of Khinjali, 69-74. 

Bhanjas of Vanjulvaka (Khinjali), 
81(n). 

Bharadvaja gotra, 151. 

Bharasaha, 63. 

Bharat, 114. 

Bharata, 179, 192, 196, 213, 214, 217, 218, 
224, 397(n). 

Bharataguru, 184. 

Bharata-Natyasastra, 363(n). 
Bharata-varsha, 224. 

Bharcitavarsha (Bengali Journal), 57(n). 
Bhdratavenbd, 151. 

Bharatiya Jyotisha Sdstra, 230(n). 
Bharatpur, 333, 397(n). 

Bharavi, 178, 182. 

Bharhut, the stupa of, 315, 330. 
Bhatripatta I (Guhila k.), 109. 
Bhartripatta II, 109, 131 (n). 
Bhartrivaddha, 20. 

Bharuchi, 204. 

Bhasa, 215, 381. 

Bhasantanadeva, Sri, 123. 

Bhasarvajna, 205. 

Bhashyas, 354. 

Bhaskaracharya, 200, 360, 365 (n). 
Bhaskaradatta, 178. 

Bhaskara Ravivarman, 165. 
Bhaskara-varman (k. of Kamarupa), 60, 
63. 

Bhasvat, 85. 

Bhatinda, 112. 

Bhatta (Guhilot k.), 36, 111. 

Bhatta (Poet), 116. 

Bhaitacharya, Dr. D. C., 230(n). 
Bhattacharya, P., 255(n). 

Bhattacharya, V., 231 (n). 

Bhattacharya, Dr. Benoytoshi 265, 323, 
361(n), 262(n). 

Bhatta Halayudha, 98. 

Bhatta Mimamsa, 204. 

Bhattanathaswami, 229 (n). 

Bhattanayaka, 194, 195. 

Bhatta-Pedi, 148. 

Bhaitaputras, 397(n). 

Bhatta Somesvara DIkshita, 91. 
Bhattasali, N. K., 347, 348, 362(n), 363 
(n), 264(n). 

Bhattenduraja, 194. 

Bhattis, 41 (n). 

Bhaitotpala, 200. 

Bhaumas of Orissa, 63, 69. 

Bhdva, 320. 

Bhavabhadra, 273. 


543 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Bhavabhuti, 181, 193, 204. 

Bhavagana (Chalukya princess), 17 (n). 
BhavanI, 185. 

Bhava-varman, 416. 

Bhavisayatta, 393 (n). 

Bhavisayattakahd s 219, 367, 395(n). 
Bhavishya Pur ana, 254(n), 335, 409(n). 
Bhavnagar, 102. 

Bhayaharastotra, 229(n). 

Bhavyaklrti, 273. 

Bheddbheda doctrine, 360. 

Bheraghat, 342, 343, 346. 
Bhiksha$ana-murti, 305, 308, 363(n). 
Bhilladitya, 20. 

Bhillamaia, 19, 97. 

Bhilsa, 85, 97. 

Bhlma (or Bhimata), 179. 

Bhlma (E. Chalukya k.), 12, 133, 134, 
138. 

Bhlma II (son of Amma I), 137. 

Bhlma (Kalachuri k. of Sarayupara), 
94. 

Bhima (legendary), 186, 226. 

Bhlma (Shahi k.), 113, 114, 120. 
Bhlmagupta (Kashmir k.), 121. 
Bhimakesvara, 113. 

Bhimakhedi (son of Dharmakhedi), 143, 
145. 

Bhlma Salukki, 8, 133, 134. 

Bhlmasena, 116. 

Bhima-varman, 168. 

Bhinmal, 97, 108. 

Bhishak, 372. 

Bhlshana, 308. 

Bhogapati, 243. 

Bhoja (Poet), 179, 181, 184, 205. 

Bhoja (country), 46. 

Bhoja (Paramara k.), 99, 105, 185. 

Bhoja I (Pratlhara k.), 10, 11, 12, 27, 28- 
32, 33, 36, 39, 40(n), 42(n), 51, 53, 
82, 87, 93, 107, 108, 110, 111, 130(n), 
240, 241, 290. 

Bhoja II (Pratlhara k.), 13, 33, 34, 35, 
37. 

Bhojakas, 334. 

Bhopal, 7, 13. 

Bhor State Museum Plates, 18(n). 

Bhota, 85. 

Bhrigu Dynasty, 424-426. 
Bhrigukachchha, 105, 107. 

Bhrikutl, 262, 279, 280. 

Bhringl, 340. 

Bhudevadeva, 124. 

BhudevI, 285, 314. 

Bhuktis, 240, 243, 245. 

Bhumara temple, 330. 

Bhumat District, 110. 

Bhumi—See also Prithiv! and Vasu- 
dhara, 283. 

Bhumili, 99. 

Bhumilika, 99. 

Bhumisparsa-mudra, 346. 
Bhupendra-varman (son of Kailasa), 
145. 

Bhupendra-varman Marasiriiha, 141. 
Bhunas, 63. 


Bhurisresh^hi, 205. 

Bhiisparsa (mudra ), 276, 277. 
Bhusukupada, 1 266. 

Bhutambilika, 99, 100, 101. 
Bhuvanaditya, 103. 

Bhuvanakosa, 180. 

Bhuvanasundarikathd, 210. 

Bhuvanesvara temples, 337, 352. 
Bhuvanesvan, 344, 347. 

Bhuvaneswar Inscription of Uddyota- 
kesarin, 147. 

Bliuyadadeva, 103. 

Bnuyagadadeva, 103. 

Bihar, 33, 47, 51, 53, 55, 57(n), 257, 270, 
276, 279, 296, 307, 328, 334. 

Bija, 103. 

Bija, 326. 

Bija-mantra, 324. 

Bijapur Dist., 16, 221, 397(n). 

Bijja, 138. 

Bijoli Rock Ins., 131(n). 

Bilaspur District, 88, 146, 330. 

Bilhari, 90, 91. 

Bilhari inscription, 89, 90, 130(n). 
Binh-Dinh, 427. 

Binka, 147. 

Biyah (River), 114. 

Bkah-hgyur, 449. 

Boddiya, 139. 

Bodh-Gaya, 211, 276, 278, 333, 445. 
Bodhibhadra, 273. 

Bodhicharyavatara, 265, 275. 

Bodhichitta, 261, 265, 266. 

Bodhimitra, 448. 

Bodhisattvas, 265. 

Bodhisattvas (images), 175, 261, 262, 264, 
278, 279, 281, 282. 

Bodhivamsa —See also Mahabodhivarhsa, 
211 . 

. Bogra, 315. 

Bolyasaka, 118. 

Bombay, 47, 352, 353, 403. 

Bombay Gazetteer, 140. 

Bon religion, 446, 447, 448. 

Bonai, 77, 78. 

Bonai Grant (No. 1), 77, 82(n;. 

Bonai Grant (No. 2), 77, 82(n). 
Bonthadevi (Kalachuri princess), 91. 
Boston Museum, 176. 

Brahma, 237, 239, 276, 280, 299, 308, 311, 
313, 318, 329, 330, 331, 332, 335, 336, 
338, 339, 342, 343, 345, 347, 350, 
364(n), 418, 435, 436, 440. 

Brahma Prajapati, 399. 

Brahma Parana, 332, 376, 387, 388, 

396(n). 

BrahmacharinI, 343, 364(n). 

Brahmadeya, 152. 

Brahmagupta, 200, 450. 

Brahman, 263, 318, 337, 358, 359, 360, 
437. 

Brahmanabad, 127. 

Brahmanddhikara , 244. 

Brahmananda, 362(n). 

Brahmanas, 374. 

Brahmdncla Parana, 373. 


544 







INDEX 


BrahmanI, 340. 

Brahmapala (k. of Kamarupa), 61. 
Brahmapura, 122, 125. 

Brahmaputra (River), 61. 
Brahmaputra-mandak, 123. 
Brahma-Sarasvati, 338. 

Brahmcisiddhi. 204. 
Brahmasirasclihedaka-murti, 308. 
Brahma-sputa-siddhanta, 450. 
Brahmasutras, 204, 206, 304, 360. 
Brahmaur, 122. 

Brahmavaivarta Purana, 203. 

Brahma-Vishnu-Siva-Surya, 332. 

Brdhmx, 222. 

Brdhmx Samhitd, 335. 

Brantas, 430. 

Brihaddharma Furdna, 237, 238, 254(n), 
255(n), 372. 

Brihad-Gachchha, 185. 

Brihanmanasa, 200. 

Brihannaradiya Purana, 203. 

Brihaspati (Chippatajayapl^a), 116. 
Brihaspati (deity), 352. 

Brihaspati (writer), 205, 370, 373. 
Brihat-Gautamxya Tanira, 322. 
Brihat-kathd, 187. 

Brihat-kathd-mahjarx, 187. 
Brihat-samhitd, 125, 198, 200, 316, 340, 
351. 

Brihat-srayambhu-purana, 272, 362(n). 
British Museum, 177, 331. 

Broach, 8, 20, 40(n), 41 (n), 105. 
Bromton, 449. 

Bsam-yas, temple of, 447. 

Bstan-hgyur, 449. 

Buddha (s), 287, 258, 260, 263, 266, 267, 
276, 277, 322, 355, 356, 361 (n). 
Buddha (image), 175, 261, 264, 277, 278. 
Buddha Dipamkara, .211. 

Buddhaghosha, 212, 231(n). 
Buddhaguhya, 272, 447. 

Buddhajnanapada, 271, 272, 273, 275. 
Buddhakapala-tantra, 268. 

Buddha, Kasyapa, 278. 

Buddha, primordial—See also Adi Bud¬ 
dha, Adinatha, Vajra, 262, 
Buddhasanti, 273. 

Buddha, ManushI, 278. 

Buddha Vairochana, 262, 266, 267. 
Buddha, Vajrdsana, 277, 278. 

Buddhism, 49, 52, 162, 169, 172, 257, 
259-288, 319, 327, 338, 346, 354, 355, 
364(n), 420, 421, 425, 453(n). 
Buddhism, Tantrik, 263, 264. 

Buddhism of Tibet, 362(n). 

Buddhists, 322, 330. 

Buddhist temple, 331. 

Buddhodaya, 268. 

Budha, 352. 

Budhasvamin, 187. 

Biihler, 229(n), 363 (n). 

Buliasa, 118. 

Bumzu, 113. 

Bundelkhand, 7, 14, 15, 38, 83, 84, 351. 
Burdwan, 348. 

Burgess, 330. 


Burma, 332 , 406, 410(n), 422, 432-433. 
Burmans, 433. 

Bu-ston, 270. 

Butuga (Pr. of Gahgavadi), 9, 14, 15, 
290., 292. 

Butuga I, 161. 

Butuga II (the Western Gahga Chief), 
155, 156, 161, 162. 

C 

Caliph, 100, 446. 

Cambay, 134, 403, 410(n). 

Cambodia, 317, 404, 405, 416, 442. 

Canton, 402, 414, 431, 445. 

Central India, 296, 297, 330. 

Ceylon, 8, 157, 159, 169-177, 210. 
fine arts, 174, 177. 
political history, 169-174. 

Ceylonese sculpture, 175. 

Chachcha (Paramara Kurhka), 96. 
Chahamanas, 43 (n), 83, 84, 106-109, 128, 
180, 241, 395 (n). 

Chahamanas of Broach, 19, 20, 40(n). 
Chahamanas of Dholpur, 108. 
Chahamanas of Lata, 106. 

Chahamanas of M§lava, 84. 

Chahamanas of Na^dula, 97, 108, 109. 
Chahamanas of Partabgarh (S. Raj- 
putana), 31, 37, 108. 

Chahamanas of Sakambharl, 22, 27, 38. 

39, 104, 105, 106-108, 111, 112. 
Chaidyas, 148. 

Chakra, 243. 

Chakradharpur (Daspalla) CP. of 
Ranabhanja, 81 (n). 

Chakrakufa (city of), 135. 
Chakrapanidatta, 199. 

Chakrasambara man&ata, 268. 

Chakra-varman, 119, 120. 

Chakrayudha, 6, 7, 24, 25, 26, 46, 47, 
56(n). 

Chaiukya-Bhlma I, 136. 

Chalukya-Bhlma II, 137. 
Chalukya-Chandra (£aktivarman), 140. 
Chalukyakulalamkara, 2, 
Chalukya-Narayana (Saktiyarman), 140. 
Chalukyarjuna, 133. 

Chalukyas, 440. 

Chalukyas, The Eastern, 11, 12, 16, 86, 
88, 89, 133-140, 142, 149, 150, 161, 
247, 290, 291, 328. 

Chalukyas of KalyanI, 16, 91, 92, 223, 
245, 328. 

Chalukyas of Le (Ve) mulava^a, 140. 
Chalukyas of Saurashtra, 25, 99, 101-102, 
162-241. 

Chalukyas of Vatapi (Badami), 1, 2, 3, 
16, 17(n), 245. 

Chalukyas of Vemulavatfa, 13, 35. 
Chalukyas, the Western, 377, 297 (n). 
Chalukya temples, 345. 

Chamba (country), 122. 

Chamba, the Hill States of, 122-3. 
Chambal (River), 108, 128. 

Chameka, 139. 


A.I.K.—3 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Champa, 289. 

Champa, 402, 413, 414, 418, 419, 420, 421, 
422, 423-427, 431, 434, 436, 437, 442, 
443. 

Champaner, 289. 

Champu, 178, 188. 

Chamunda, 339, 340, 344, 348. 
Chamundaraja, 96, 298. 

Chamundaraja (Chaulukya k), 92, 99, 
105, 106. 

Chamundaraja (Saindhava k.), 100, 101. 
Chamunda Raya, 162, 290. 

Chamunda Raya Purdna, 162. 

Chamundl 340, 348. 

Chanaka, 360(n). 

CliEnslcyci 279 

Chanda (iconography), 308, 344, 364(n). 
Chanda (Khasa k.), 117. 

Chanda District, 98. 

Chan^aghanta, 343. 

ChandaJkausika, 181. 

Chandalas, 372, 373. 

Chandalas, 213. 

Chandamhasena (Chahamana k.), 108. 
Chandana (Chahamana k.), 107, 112. 
Chandana (Paramara k.), 97. 
Chandanayika, 344, 364(n). 

Chandapa (Paramara k.) 99. 
Chandarupa, 344, 364(n). 

Chandavatl, 344, 364(n). 

Chandellas, 36, 37, 38, 42(n), 43(n), 53, 
57(n), 83-87, 88, 89, 130(n), 241, 242, 
328, 399(n). 

Chandellas of Bundelkhand, 32, 35. 
Chanderi (Narwar), 36. 
Chandesanugraha-murti, 307. 
Chandesvara, 398(n). 

Chandgan, 149. 

Chandi Banon, 441. 

Chandi Kalasan, 440. 

Chandi Mendut, 440, 441. 

Chandi Pavon, 440. 

Chandi Bari, 440. 

Chandi Sevu. 440. 

Chandi temples, 439. 

Chandi, 339, 347. 

Chandi, 339. 

Chandika, 340, 341, 344, 387. 

Chandimau, 307. 

Chandisataha, 185. 

Chandogra, 343, 364(n). 

Chandra (deity), 352. 

Chandra (Poet), 219. 

Chandra Kings of Bengal, 54, 91. 
Chandraditya, 166, 167. 

Chandradvipa (Bakarganj Dt.), 54. 
Chandraghanta, 364(n). 

Chandragrama, 149. 

Chandraguhyatilaka, 271. 

Chandragupta, 7. 

Chandragupta II, 178, 179. 

Chandrahah (River), 114. 

Chandrakirti, 259, 448. 

Chandrapida, 245. 

Chandraprabha, 281, 297. 

Chandraraja I (Chihamana k.), 106. 


Chandraraja II, 107. 

Chandrasena, 219. 

Chandratreya (Chandella k.), 83. 
Chandrehi, 90. 

Chandrikd, 194. 

Chandrobalabbe, 9, 161. 

Chanduraja (Khasa k.), 85, 117. 
Changal inscription, 427. 

Chanpaka 122, 123. 

Chapas, 102-103, 241, 289. 

Chapas of Anahilapataka, 103. 

Chapas of Vardhamanapura, 25, 99, 100, 

101 . 

Chapis, 102. 

Chapotkatas, 103. 

Charaka-samhita, 199, 450, 451. 
Charmanvatl (River), 108. 

Charydpadas, 266. 

Charyds, 259, 262, 264, 266. 

Char yd, tantra, 268. 

Chatsu, 111. 

Chatsu Inscription of Baladitya, 40(n), 

111 . 

Chatura, 306. 

Chaturanana Pandita, 165. 

Chaturbhdni, 182. 

Chaturbhuja temple, 85. 
Chaturddasa-gana, 152. 

Chaturmukha, 220. 
Chaturvarga-chintdmani, 339. 
Chaturvimsatimaia, 203. 
Chaturvamsati-Jinastuti —See also Tir- 
thesastuti and Sobhanastuti, 185. 
Chaturviiiisati-murtis, 305. 

Chauddagram, 334, 339. 

Chauhans (See Chahamana). 

Chaul, 386. 

Chauiukyas of Anahilapataka,—See 

Chaulukyas of Gujarat. 

Chauiukyas of Gujarat, 38, 39, 91, 99, 
103, 104, 105, 344. 

Chauiukyas of Lata, 97, 99, 105-106. 
Chauiukyas of Mattamayura, SO, 91, 104. 
Chaumuha, 217. 

Chaupdi-Doha, 217. 

Chauroddharanika, 243. 

Chausant Yoginl temple, 342. 

Chavadas, 102. 

Chavotkatas, 102. 

Chavunda Raya, 225. 

Chdvundaraya Purdna , 225. 

Chedi (country), 84, 85, 87, 90, 92, 104, 
340. 

Chedis, 11, 13, 14, 18(n), 31, 36, 148, 189. 
Cheedivalasa grant, 141. 

Chenab, 112, 117, 118. 

Chera, 154, 155, 158, 304. 

Cheraman Perumal, 165. 

Chevur, 159. 

Che~yi, 445. 

Chhandahsutra, 190. 

Chhandombudhi, 224. 

Chhandonusasana , 198. 

Chhatarpur State, 83. 

Chhatrdvali, 175. 

Chhattisgarh, 135, 146. 

546 






INDEX 


Chhaya, 349. 

Chhdyd-ndtaka, 182. 

Chhichhubhatta, 191. 

Chhinnamasti, 287, 344. 

Chicacole Grant, 144. 

Chidambaram, 155, 157, 165, 306, 313, 
332, 350, 363 (n). 

Chikmagaiur inscription, 223. 

China, 60, 260, 281, 382, 397(n), 402, 
404, 405, 409, 413, 414, 415, 416, 419, 
420, 422, 424, 425, 426, 431, 433, 444- 
446.^ 

Chlnamsuka, 384, 405. 

Chinese annals, 414, 415, 416, 422, 424. 
Chinese silk, 385, 405. 

Chingleput Dist., 14. 

Chippataj ayapi^a, 116. 

Chitaldrug, 163, 164. 

Chitor, 110, 220. 

Chitorgadh, 310. 

Chitra kavya, 196. 

Chitrakuta, 14, 37, 77, 110, 130(n). 
Chitrav, 230 (n). 

Chitravahana II, 164, 

Chittagong, 54. 

Chittalaparvata—See also Situlpahuva, 
174. 

Chittamdtra —See also Vijnaptimdtratd, 
266. 

Chitta-vajra, 265, 266. 

Chittralekha, 397 (n). 

Chodagafiga, 150. 

Chok Gargyar, 421. 

Chola bronzes, 401. 

Choiaraja, 170. 

Choias, 12, 14, 15, 16, 51, 135, 138, 139, 
140, 144, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158, 
162, 163, 165, 166, 167, 170, 171, 
172, 174, 176, 177 (h), 247, 248, 312, 
328, 329, 374, 396(n), 406, 408, 415, 
445. 

Choias, 165(n), 256(n), 411(n). 

Choias of Tanjore, 153-157. 

Choias of Uraiyur, 153. 

Chou Ku-fei, 445. 

Christianity, 165. 

Chronicles of Ladakh, 58. 

Chuddmani, (or Ascharya-Chud&mani). 
180. 

Chulla Dhammapala, 210-211. 

Chukhala, 194. 

Coedes, M., 410(n), 444. 

Coimbatore, 154, 158, 164, 343. 

Colair lake, 139. 

Coleroon, 153. 

Colombo Museum, 175, 176. 

Comilla, 54. 

Conjeeveram Inscription, 143. 

Comorin, Cape, 8, 155, 337, .340. 
Coomaraswamy, A. K., 307, 343, 362(n), 
363 (n). 

Cordier Catalogue, 269, 449. 

County -gavunda, 246. 

Cousens, 333. 

Cowell, 363(n). 

Cranganore, 165. 


Csoma de Coros, 449. 

Cuddappa, 142. 

C unbum, 149. 

Cunningham, 58. 

Cutch, 104. 

Cuttack, 62, 68, 79 149, 285, 362(n). 
Cuttack Museum Ins. of 6ubhakara, 64. 

D 

Dacca, 345, 348, 349. 

Dacca Museum, 280, 283, 285, 307, 308, 
347. 

Dadu. 216. 

Dagaba, 175, 176. 

Dah Parvatiya, 335. 

Dahala, 7, 135, 146, 148, 242. 

Dahala -may4ala, 87, 89, 90. 

Dai-co-viet, 422. 

Dakinls, 316. 

Daksha, 378, 430. 

Dakshindchdra, 320, 323. 
Dakshindchdra-tantraraja, 322. 
Dakshina-Gahga, 134. 

Dakshina-Kosala, 88, 148. 
Dakshina-Muhammadpur—See also Tip- 
perah, 330. 

Dakshina-murti, 305, 306. 

Dakshinaradha, 205. 

Dakshina-Tosala, 148, 149. 

Ddkshinatyd, 213. 

Dakshinyachihna—See also Uddyotana- 
suri, 209. 

Dakshottama, 428. 

Damara, 317. 

Damaras, 117, 119, 120, 121. 
Damayantikathd —See also Nalachampu, 
188. 

Dambarasirhha, 95, 96. 

Damila, 172. 

Damilas, 173. 

Damodara, 181. 

Damodaragupta, 116, 186. 

Damshtrasiva, 169. 

Dana (Danamava), 140. 

Danarnava, 138, 139, 140. 

Danamava (son of PrithvI-varman), 
145. 

Danamava (Brother of Kamamava, son 
of Virasiihha), 142, 143. 

Danasila, 274. 

Dance of £iva, 363 (n). 

Danda, 336. 

Dan^aka, 103. 

Dandaka (composition), 185. 
Dandandyaka, 240, 244, 245, 255(n). 
Dandtapasika, 240, 241, 243. 

Dantfasakti, 243. 

Dantfl, 336, 349. 

Dandika, 243. 

Dandi-Mohadevi, 64, 68. 

Dan^in, 192, 196, 214, 217, 224. 
Dantapura, 143. 

Danti, 217. 

Dantidurga, 1-3, 17(n), 18(n), 20, 21, 23, 
41(n), 99, 151, 167, 168, 399(n). 


547 




THE AGE .OP IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Dantiga, 6, 168, 

Dantila, 397(n). 

Dantivarman—See Dantidurga 
Daniivarman (PaHava k.) 4, 151, 152, [ 

166, 167, 4 

Dantura, 341, 348, 364(n) 

Dappula, 189, 

Bapnula II—See also tldaya, 189, 177(n). 
Dappula HI, 169, 170, 177 (n). 

Dappula fV $§ilameghavarna, 170, 171. 
Dappula V Silameghavama, 170, 171. 
Darads, 112. 

Darbhapani, 50, 56(n). 

Darduka, 180, 

Darika, 268, 361(n). 

Darvabhisara, 112, 118, 122 
Das, S. C., 323. 

Dasabhuja-sita-MarTchi, 338. 

Dasagrdmika , 243. 

Da&a-Mahavidyas, 344. 

D&sapamdhika, 243. 

Dasapura, 108, 

Dasarathi Rama, 332, 

Dasama, 323. 

Dasairupaka, 179, 196, 

Dasavaiara. Cave inscription of Ellora, 1, 
Dasavaiara temple, 330, 331, 332. 

Das Gupta, Dr. S. N., 365 (n). 

DaspalJ.a plates of J^atrubhanja, 150. 
Dathanaga, 212. 

Dattaka, 397 (n). 

Dallas, 147, 148, 

Dattatreya, 313, 331, 363(h). 

Dattha, 212, 

Da’ud, 106, 

Dauhsadhasadhanika , 243. 

Daulatabad Plates, 18(n). 

Daulatpura Copper-plate of Bhoja, 29, 
40(n), 41 (n), 

Daybul, 405, 

Dayitavishnu, 44, 

De, S. C., 80(n), 193. 

De„ S, K,, 288{n), 229(n), 230(n), 231 (n). 
Debal, 401, 402. 

Be Boer, T. J., 453 (n). 

Deccan, 25, 27, 35, 45, 48, 51, 88, 91, 92, 
m f 97, 111, 133, 160, 257, 288, .290, 
306, 313. 

Decimal notation, 450. 

Dehanagadevi, 33 34. 

Delhi, 4, 85, 111,' 112. 

Delmal. 331, 332, 

Deogarh, 83, 297. 

Deoil Plates, 43(n), 57(n). 

Desafadeva, 124, 

DesI, 213. 

Best Bhdshds, 213, 

Devabhadra, 187, 

Desigana, .291. 

Deul-Sind, 410(n). 

Devabhadra, 293, 

Devabhahja, 73. 

Devadatta, 275. 

Devaditya, 230(n)„ 

Devales, 176, 177, 

Devananda I, 78, 82(n). 


Devananda II (Vilasatuhga), 78 
Devapala (Pala k.) 9 , 27, 28, 30, 39, 48, 
49, 50-52, 54, 56(n), 60, 67, 68, 76, 
83, 84, 270, 274, 361(n), 395(n), 412. 
Devapala (Pratihara k.), 33, 34, 37, 84, 
85, 107, 109. 

Devapaladeva, 415. 

Devaraja, cult of, 417, 41.8, 421. 

Devaraja (Pratihara), 21, 28. 

Devaraja (Tomara), 111. 

Devarashtra, 138, 

Devarddhi, 296. 

Devasamgha, 189. 

Devasena, 216. 

Devasena, 344. 

Devasena-Kalyanasundara-murti, 349. 
Devasimha, 428. 

Devasthali, 228(n) f 230(ni). 

Devasuri, 205. 

Devata kotuva , 175. 

Devavatara, 276. 

Devayana, 344. 

Devendra Chakravartl (Title of Paran- 
taka), 155. 

Bevendragani, 293. 

Devendra-varman (gvetaka king), 144. 
Devendra-varman II, 140. 
Devendra-varman III, 141. 
Devendra-varman IV, 141. 
Devendra-varman (son of Vairahasta 
Aniyahkabhlma), 144. a 
DevI~~S.ee also Sakti. 320, 328, 330, 339, 
345, 347, 348. 

Devlchandragupta, 179. 

Devi Gosvamini, 67. 

Devikavacha, 364(n). 

Devl-mahatmya , 339, 364(n)» 

I Devisataka, 185. 193, 2S0(n). 

Dewai, 113. 

Dhahila, 219. 

Dhaj aggaparitta, 360(n). 

Dhakkada-Bani, 395(n), 

Dhalaga’ 138. " 

Dhalbhum, 79. 

Dhamma-Parikkhd, 220, 

Dhanahjaya (poet), 98, 179, 181, 182, 184, 
187, 196. 

Dhanahjaya ^rutaklrti, 184, 

Dhanapaia, 185, 187, 188, 219, 290, 293, 
394(n), 395(n). 

Dhanapalapanchdsikd, 230 (n). 

Dhanapati, 393(n). 

Dhanaslia, 448. 

Dhanasrldvlpa, 274. 

Dhanesvarasuri, 290. 

Dhahga, 38, 85, 87, 399(n). 

Dhanika (Guhila), 110, 

Dhanika (Paramara). 96. 

Dhanika (poet), 192, 196. 

Dhanin, 452. 

Dhanva, 117. 

Dhanvantari, 199. 

Dhanvantari (god), 452, 

Dhanvantari Nighantu ,—See also Ni~ 
ghantu, 189, 190, 

Dhanya, 452, 


548 










INDEX 


Dhar, 94, 

Dhara, 36, 93, 94, 95, 185, 187, 190, 218, 
Dharadatta, 147, 

Dharadatta II, 148. 

Dharala, 183, 

Dharanldhara, 412, 

Dharanlndra-varman, 415, 

Dharanis—See also Mantrapadas, 261- 
262, 289, 279, 326. 

Dharanivaraha, 101, 103, 104, 131 (n). 
Dharasiva, 218, 

Dharavarsha (Rashtrakuta Dhruva), 4. 
Dharesvara, 254, 

Dharma (k.), 25, 56(n), 101. 
Dharmachakramudra, 278, 277, 281. 
Dharmadasagani, 209. 

Bharmadeva, 444. 
Dhaima-dharrn.i~vinisch.aya , 275. 
Dharmaditya (Malayaketu k.), 93. 
Dharma-Kandarpa (another name for 
Janamejaya Mahabhavagupta), 147. 
Dharmokara, 274. 

Dharmakaradatta, 272, 

Dharmakhedi, 73, 143, 144, 145. 
Dharmakirti, 194, 259, 267, 268. 360(n), 
447. 

Dharma-MahadevI, 64, 68, 69. 

Dharma maharaja, 246, 

Dharmamitra, 268. 

Bharmapala, 4, 5, 6, 7*, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 32, 39, 45-50, 51, 52, 56(e), 93, 
101, 106, 110, 127, 242, 271, 272/273, 
274, 335, 361 (n), 395(n), 412, 421, 446. 
Dharma-Pariksha, 220. 

Dharmapuri, 158. 

Dharmasana, 248. 

Dharmasantighosha—See also &antarak- 
shita, Pan^ita Bodhisattva, 271. 
Dharmasastra, 152, 436, 443. 

Dharma-setu, 412. 

Dharma-srlmitra, 272. 

Dharma-sutras, 371. 

Dharmavaloka, 189. 

Dharma-vamsa. 431, 432. 

Dharmodaya Mah&sambhu, 428. 
Dharmottamd; 194, 

Dhar mottara T 364(n). 

Dhar war district, 221, 391. 

Dhatri, 296, 350. 

Dhdtupdtha, 190. 

Dhdtupradipa, 190. 

Dhauli Dhar, 122, 

Dhavagarta, 87, 110, 130(n). 

Dhavala, 294. 

Dhavala (Rashtrakuta k, of Hastikimdi ), 
97, 103, 105, 107,“ 131 (n). 
Dhavalabhumi, 79, 

Dhavala kings of Orissa, 79. 

Dhavalapuri, 108, 

Dhenkanal (State), 68, 78, 82(n). 
Dhenkanal plate. 67. 

Dhillika, 111. 

Dhod, 86, 110. 

Dholpur, 108, 333. 

Dhora (Prakrit form, of Dhruva), 4. 
Dliritipura, 71,. 145, 149. 


Dhrivananda, 82(n), 

Dhruva (Rashtrakuta k), 3-6. 15, 16, 
23, 24, 26, 31, 32, 39, 45, 51, 56(n), 
133, 135, 151, 360, 168. 

Dhruva I (Gujarat Rashtrakuta), 10, 30, 

31 . 

Dhruva XI (Gujarat Rashtrakuta), 10. 
Dhruvabhata, 103. 

DhruvadevI, 179. 

Dhruvananda (Vilasatunga), 78, 82(n). 
Dhumar Lena Cave—Ellora, 330. 
Dhumavatl, 344. 

Dhumrakali, 344, 

Dhurtakhycilia, 208, 220, 293, 
Dhurtavitasariivdda , 182, 

Dhvani, 191. 

Dhvanydloka, 181, 185, 191, 193, 194, 197. 
Dhyana, 284. 

Dhyam-Bodhisattvas , 278, 279, 280, 281. 
Dhyani-Buddhas, 267, 278, 280, 281, 282. 

284, 285, 287, 

Didda, 113, 114, 120, 121. 

Didwana, 106. 

Dieng Plateau, 440, 

Digambara Canon, 288. 

Digambaras, 290, 295, 299, 300, 

Digbhanja, 10, 74 
Diggajas, 346. 

Digha Nikdya, 260. 

Dikshd, 319. 

.Dikshit, 230(n), 364 (h). 

Dilwara temples, 298. 

Dinajpur, 54. 297, 332, 335, 344, 347, 349, 
351. 

Dinaya, 428. 

Dinh Bo Limb, 426 
Dirmaga, 259. 

DIpahkarabhadra, 273. 
Dipahkara-Srljhana, 273, 448, 449. 
Dipavamsa und Mahdvarhsa, 231 (n). 
Disabhahja, 70, 74. 

Disabhahja, of Sitabhinji, 74, 75, 81 (n). 
Diu, 353, 

Divakara Bhatta, 438, 

Divya, 330, 

Divyabhdva, 319. 

Djawaga, 402. 

Doab, 4, 5, 7. 

Dodaka-varman, 123, 

Doha, 216. 

Dolmkosa, 216, 268, 361 (n). 

Dohas, 266, 

Dompara Eaj, 79, 

Dong Duong, 436, 442. 

Draksharama inscription, 145. 

DraupadI, 226. 

Dravida, 15, 50, 51, 370, 

Dravidas, 213. 

Drdvidi, 213. 

Dravidian languages and literature, 219- 
228, 

Dravidians, 221. 

Dravidian sculpture, 177, 
Dravyakirandvalt, 205, 

Dridhabala, 199, 

1 Droharjuna, 136. 

549 







( 


THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Duggamara (son of &rlpurusha)» 160. 
Duhsasana, 226. 

Dula-Deo, 332. 

Dul-va, 274. 

Dungara (country), 122. 

Dungarpur, 95. 

Durga/s, 153, 286, 318, 329, 330, 331, 334, 
335, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 344, 347. 
Durgaprasada, 229(n). 

Durgaraja, 139. 

Durgas, the nine, 364(n). 

Durgd-saptasatl, 341. 

Durgasimha, 190, 191. 

Durjanaehandra, 273. 

Durjayabhahja (of Khihjali), 73. 
Durjayabhahja I ( alias Digbhanja of 
Khijjihga), 75. 

Durjayabhahja II (of Khijjihga), 75. 
Durlabharaja (Chahamana of Parta- 
garh), 108. 

Durlabharaja I (Chahamana k. of 
Sakambharl), 22, 106. 

Durlabharaja II (Chahamana k. of 
J§akambharl), 107, 108. 

Durlabharaja (Chaulukya k.), 105. 
Durlanghyameru (Chahamana Durla¬ 
bharaja II), 107. 

Durvasa, 90. 

Durvimta, 223. 

Duryodhana, 225, 226. 

Dusala (Paramara), 97. 

Duta, 243. 

Dutangada, 182. 

Dutta, B., 453(n). 

Dutta, K., 79(n). 

DutthagamanT, 175. 

Duval —See also Ghatta, 217. 
Dvadasaditya, 350. 

Dvapara yuga, 423. 

Dvaraka, 46. 

Dvdrapati, 244. 

Dvaravatl, 432. 

Dvcsharati, 266. 

Dvisandhdna —See also Raghava-pan$a- 
vlya } 184, 

Dynastic History of Northern India, 140. 
Dyutivarman, 124. 

E 

Early Sculpture of Bengal, 364(n). 
Eastern Indian School of Mediaeval 
Sculpture, 276. 

Edgerton, F., 231 (n). 

Egypt, 129, 162, 260, 339. 

Ekadasa-Rulras, 311. 

Ekajata, 284, 285, 341. 

Ekdngas, 119, 120, 244. 

Ekapada-trimurli, 331, 332. 

Ekavira, 158. 

Eklingaji (country), 110. 
Elamahchi-Kalihgadesa, 136, 139. 
Elephants, 306, 309, 310, 332, 337. 
Ellichpur, 1, 10, 135, 220, 

Ellora (Elura), 3, 10, 17, 306, 307, 308, 
309, 328, 330, 331, 332, 333, 337, 344, 
347, 348, 349, 364 (n). 


Ellora plates of Dantidurga, 17 (n), 
18(n), 40(n) 

Elphinstone, 128. 

Esotericism, growth of, 260. 

Euphrates, 450. 

Europe, 260. 


Fardaghan, 113. 

Far East, the, 314. 

Faridpur, 350. 

Farquhar, 363 (n). 

Ferrand, 396(n), 397(n), 410(n). 

Firishta, 86, 112, 114, 131(n). 

Five M’s, 321. 

Fleet, J. F., 41(n). 42(n), 70, 134, 136, 
140, 245, 363(n). 

Food and Drink, 387-389. 

Francke, 78(n), 453(n). 

Fu-nan, 416, 442. 

Fyzabad Museum, 298. 

G 

Gachchhas , 288, 296. 

Gada-Yuddha —See also Sahasa-Bhlma 
Vijaya, 225, 226, 227. 

Gadhinagara, 86. 

Gadun, 113. 

Gaharwa ins., 91. 

Gajalakshnu, 146, 330, 341, 344, 345, 347. 
Gajapura, 393(n). 

Gajasataka, 160. 

Gajasura, 309. 

Gajasurasamhara-murti, 309. 

Gajayana, 428. 

Gamagamika, 243. 

Gambhiravajra, 268, 274. 

Ganapati, 284, 330, 344, 346, 347, 410(n). 
Ganapatyas, 322, 345, 349. 

Ganas, 251. 

Gandak (river), 93, 94. 

Ganda—Mahendra, 138. 
Gandamartan^aditya (Temple of), 14, 
15. 

Gandanarayana, 139. 

Gandaraditya, 155, 156, 157, 158. 

Ganda Trinetra, 164. 

Gandhani inscription, 296. 

Gandhara, 46, 111, 333. 

Gandharadhi, 149. 

Gandharvas, 260. 

Gdndharva (marriage), 375. 

Gandhata, 70, 149. 

Gandhatapatl, 149. 

Gandhavamsa, 210. 

Ganesa, 286, 324, 329, 330, 331, 335, 337, 
'338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 345, 346, 
348-349, 352. 

GanesanI, 341. 

Ganesvarl Samhita, 335. 

Ganga (goddess), 142, 305, 307, 330, 341, 
343. 

Ganga * (River), 5, 6, 22, 27, 35, 36, 49. 
56(n), 58, 84, 95, 213, 272, 446. 


550 






INDEX 


Ganga chiefs, later, 163. 
Gangadhara-murti, 305. 

Gangadvara, 20. 

Ganga Era, 73. 

Gangaikondacholapuram, 152, 312. 
Ganga-Pallavas, 369. 

Gangaridae, 150. 

Gangas, The, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 
15, 16, 26, 38, 51, 57 (n), 134, 135, 159, 
_ 167, 246, 290. 

Gangas, Eastern, 62, 140-141. 

Gangas, Greater, 141-144. 

Gangas of Kalinga, 66, 68, 89, 136. 
Gangas, Later Eastern, 140. 

Gangas of Orissa, Eastern, 142. 

Gangas of Svetaka, 62, 66, 76, 144-145. 
Gangas of Talkad, 165(n). 

Gangas, Western, 138, 152, 154, 155, 159, 
160-161, 163, 164, 292. 

Gangas of Mysore, Western, 142. 
Ganga-sagara, 106, 446. 

Gangavadi, 4, 5, 6, 13, 14, 133, 142, 160, 
161, 162, 163, 246. 

Ganga-Yamuna Doab, 23, 34, 45. 
Gangdhar inscription, 316, 348. 

Garigeya, 142. 

Ganita, 366. 

Ganitasdra, 200, 

Ganitasdrasamgraha, 11, 200, 291, 294. 
Ganitaskandha, 200. 

Ganjam District, 62, 66, 68, 69, 71, 72, 
73, 142, 149. 

Ganjam grant of Jayavarmadeva, 66, 63, 
80(n), 81(n). 

Ganjam plate cf Dandi-MahadevI, 
80(n). 

Ganjam plate of Sasanka, 65, 8Q(n). 
Gara inscription, 145. 

Garbhagriha, 176. 

Garga, 56(n), 392(n), 395(n) 

Gargya, 371. 

Garhwal, 47, 123, 124, 125. 

Garhwal, history of, 123-125. 

Garu^a (Iconography), 146, 299, 313, 
314. 

Garuda Purdna, 203, 237, 238, 254(n), 
255 (n), 310, 335. 

Gauda (country) (desa), 85, 89, 91, 92, 
93, 106, 111, 115, 116, 183, 189, 273, 
322, 323, 390, 415, 444. 

Gauda Abhinanda, 206, 323. 
Gauda-Kayastha, 395(n). 
Gaudalekhamald , 55(n). 

Gaudapada, 364(n). 

Gaudas, 11, 22, 23, 25, 45, 48, 53, 54, 
55(n), 57(n), 85. 

Gaudasamgha, 189. 

Gaulmika, 243. 

Garni (deity), 347. 

Gaurl (Kara Queen), 64, 68. 

Gautama, 252, 276, 277, 278, 377. 
Gavunglas, 246. 

Gayada I, 64, 67, 77. 

Gayadatunga, 77. 

Gedige, 176. 


Geigfer, 173, 177(n), 212. 

Genesis, Book of, 225. 

Geschichte des Buddhismus, 360 (n). 
Ghassan, 128. 

Ghate, 229(n). 

Ghatika, 152. 

Ghatiyala, 346. 

Ghatnagar, 351. 

Ghattd ,—See also Duval. 217. 

Ghazni, 86, 113, 115, 128. 

Ghontavarshika, 108, 109. 

Ghosh, A., 81 (n). 

Ghosh, J. C., 41(n). 

Ghoshal, U. N., 255(n). 

Ghoshrawa Stone Ins., 56 (n). 

Ghotarsi, 108, 109. 

Ghumli, 99, 100. 

Gilgit, 261. 

Gilgit Manuscripts, 361 (n). 

Girnar-tlrtha, 290. 

Gita, 312. 

Gltagovinda, 181, 198. 

Gltd-Samgraha, 206. 

Glan-dar-ma, 448, 453(n). 

Godavari (river), 98, 140, 221. 

Godavari District, 139. 

Gode, 230(n). 

Gogga (Tomara k.), Ill, 112. 
Goggahakahd, 217. 

Goggahana, 217. 

Gogra, 93, 94. 

Gojjiga (Rashtrakuta k.), 137. 

Gokarna, 47, 56(n). 

Gokarnasvamin, 142. 

Gokarnesvara, 142. 

Golaki-matRa, 90. 

Gcldziher, 453(n). 

Gomati (river), 123. 

Gomedha, 299, 300. 

Gomma^esvara, 162, 225, 290, 295, 298. 
Gomukha, 299. 

Gond tribe, 78. 

Gonda District, 297. 

Gondamas, 77, 78, 79, 82(n). 

Gond^svar^, 335. 

Gondrama, 78. 

Gongiraja, 99, 106. 

Gop, 333. 

Gopagiri, 86. 

Gopala (Khasa k.), 117. 

Gopala I (Pala k.), 44-45, 49, 55 (n), 65, 
242, 244, 267, 270, 271, 361(n). 
Gopala II, 53, 55, 57(n), 85, 89. 

Gopalan, R., 165 (n). 

Gopalavarman (Kashmir k.), 113, 118, 
131(n), 132(n). 

Gopendraraja, 106. 

Goplnatha DIkshita, 391 (n). 

Gorakhpur District, 31, 93, 94. 
Gorakshanatha, 346. 

Gotama (Buddha), 211. 

Gough, 363 (n). 

Govardhana, 184. 

Govinda, 180. 

Govinda II (Rashtrakuta k.), 3-4, 18(n), 
133, 160. 


551 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Govinda III, 5-8, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16, 18(n), 
24, 26, 27. 30, 39, 41(n), 48, 51, 56 
(n), 86. 94, 95, 110, 134. 151, 155, 166, 
168. 

Govinda IV, 13-14, 18(n), 137, 138, 

399 (n). 

Govindaraja (Chahamana of Par tab- 
garh), 108. 

Govindaraja I (Chahamana k. of ^akam- 
bhari), 106, 107, 

Govindaraja (Rashtrakuta), 333. 
Grahamatrika, 287. 

Graharipu. 91, 101, 102, 104. 

Grahayaga, 351. 

Grdmakutas, 246, 247, 255(n). 

Grama mahattar as, 255 (n). 

Grdmapati, 243. 

Great Temple, 337, 401. 

Greek/s, 450, 451. 

Grihastharaindkara, 398 (n)„ 

Grihya-sutras, 371. 

Gudimallam, 166, 334. 

Gudjra, 404, 

Guha (or Gab as), 63. 

Guhadeva-pataka, 63, 69. 

Guhasena, 214. 

Guhesvara-pataka, 63, 69. 

Guhila II. 31, 42(n), 111. 

Guhilas, 25, 30, 31, 36, 38, 43(n), 87, 97, 
109-111, 396(n). 

Guhilas of Dhod, 110-111. 

Guhilas of Mewar, 109-110. 

Guhilots,—See Guhilas. 

Guhya, 265. 

Guhyakas, 351, , 

Guhyasamuja 282, 263, 265-266, 267, 269, I 
271, 361 (n). 

Guhyasidahi, 269. 

Guilds, 251. 

Gujarat, 2, 7. 10, 21, 24, 31, 41(n), 89, 91; 
96. 99. 107, 134, 135, 162, 208, 245, 
246, 331, 332, 334, 336, 338, 342, 344, 
345, 401, 402, 403, 408. 

Gujarat Chroniclers, 103, 105. 

Gujarat (Punjab), 117, 118. 

Gumli, 338. , 

Gunabhadra, 180, 183, 291, 294, 
Gunachandra, 179. 

Gunadhya, 187, 443. 

Gunaka-Vijavaditya II (Eastern Cha- 
lukya k.), 88 
Gunakama, 59. 

Gunakamadeva, 59. 

Gunakiranavall, 205. 

Gunamahalnava, 141, 142, 143. 
Gunambhodhideva (Kalachuri k. of 5a- 
rayupara), 31, 93. 
Gunapriya-dharmapatni, 430, 435. 
Gunarnava (brother of Kamamava and 
son of Virasirhha), 142. 

Gunarnava (son of Kamamava), 143. 
Gunasagara I (Kalachuri k, of Sarayu¬ 
para ), 93. 

Gunasagara II (do.), 94, 

Gunavarma I, 224. 

Gunijama (son of Vajrahasta), 142. 


Gundama (brother of Fotahkusa), 143, 
'145. 

Gundaya, 136. 

Guntur, 136. 

Gupta dynasty, 44. 

Gupta empire, 39 
Gupta sculpture, 176. 

Guptas (Imperial), 71, 244, 245, 311, 314, 
Guptas, later, 182. 

Gurgaj, 344. 

Gurgi, 90, 344, 

1 Gurjara country, 92. 

| Gurjara country (Punjab), 118. 

I Gurjara Prat'iharas, 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 
13, 16, 19~43, 45, 46, 47, 48; 50, 51, 
53, 56, 57(n), 83, 84, 86, 87, 93, 95, 
101, 107, 108, 112, 127, 128, 129, 
130(n), 131 (n), 135, 189, 240, 241, 

273, 290, 328, 396(n), 404. 

Gurjaratra (C. and E. Rajputana), 29, 

30. 

Gurjaras, 1, 11, 19-41, 48. 50, 52, 84, 91, 

110 , 112 . 

Gurjaras of Nandipuri, 2, 19, 40(n). 
j Guru, 269. 

Guvaka I (Chahamana k. of {§akam- 
bhari), 27, 106, 109, 

Guvaka II (do.), 87, 108, 112. 

Gwalior, 27, 28, 38, 43(h), 8S s 86, 240, 
242, 290. 

Gwalior Inscription of Rhoja, 21, 22, 24, 
25, 40(n), 135. 

Gwalior Inscription of Bhoja dt. v, 933, 
40(n), 56(n). 

Gwalior State, 331. 

H 

Haddaia Copper Plate, 42(n). 

Hah, 114. 

Haidarabad (Smdh), 127. 

Haihaya monuments, 338, 341. 

Haihaya Salve temples, 345. 

Haihayas, 87, 133, 242, 

Haiyungathal CP., 61, 79(n). 

ITakam, 127. 

Halayudha, 187, 189, 190. 

Halebid, 295. 

Hamirpur District, 84. 
Hammira-Mahukdvya^ 131(n). 
Hamsa-varman, 122, 

Harhsesvara temple, 81 (n). 

Hamvira, 86. 

Handiqui, Dr., 363 (n). 

Handrat, 114, 

Hansi Fort, 333. 

Hansot plates, 40(n). 

Hanuman, 333. 

Hanuman-nataka, 181. 

Haraha Ins. 77. 

Haras Stone Inscription. See Harsha 
Stone Inscription. 

Haravarsha Yuvaraja, 183. 

Haravijaya, 179, 183, 

Haribhadra (Buddhist author), 49, 271, 

274, 


552 














INDEX 


Harihhadra (Jain), 207. 208, 209 s 219, 220, 
288, 293, 296. 

Hariehandra, 19. 

Haridra-Ganapati, 345, 

Hari-Hara, 258, 305, 330, 332, 
Hariharalaya, 417, 418, 
Hari-Hara-Pitamaha, 313, 
Hari-Hari-Harlvahanodbhava Lokesvara, 
279 

Harikela, 54, 88, 

Harinigamesi, 349, 

Harischandra (legendary), 181. 
Harischandra (writer), 216. 

Harisena, 42(nj. 

Harishena, 187, 220. 

Harltl, 300, 342. 

Iiarivamsa, 182, 224, 316. 

Hari-varman, 418, 424. 

Harivamsa Pur ana , 217, 218, 219, 294. 
Harivilasa, 180. 

Hariyadevi, 109. 

Hariyana, 111, 112. 

Harjara (k. of Kamarupa), 53, 60, 61, 
79 (n), 

Harjara-varman, see Harjara, 

Harkand, 403. 

Harmikd, 175. 

Harpocrates, 313. 

Harsha (Haras) stone Inscription, 40(n). 
Harsh a, ad versary of Kokkalla I, 130 (n). 
Harsha (Chandella k.), 36, 84, 111, 

130 (n), 179. 

Harsha tk. of Kamarupa), 60. 

Harsha (Siyaka II, Paramara), 95. 
Harsha-charita, 41 (n). 

Harshadatta (father of Simhadatta), 148, 
Harshanath, village, 107. 

Harshanatha, temple of, 107, 

Harsharaia (Guhila k.), 30, 31, 36, 87, 
110, l30(n). 

Harsha-vardhana, 4, 22, 23, 39, 182, 186, 
217, 

Harsha-varman I, 421. 

Harsha-varman II, 421, 

Harsola grant, 94. 

Harun Al-Rashld, 127, 450, 451, 452. 
Haruppesvara, 61. 

Hasan district, 298. 

Hastikundi, 97, 103. 

Hastimaila, 155, 161, 180. 

Hastinapura, 225, 

Hataras kotuva, 175. 

Hatha-yoga, 266, 

Ha veil, E. B,, 362(n), 363(n). 

Hayagrlva, 279, 280, 283, 

Hayagrlva avatdra (image), 313, 314, 
364(n). 

Hayagrlva, Saptasatika, 282, 283. 

Hazara, 118. 

Hazra, R. C,, 230(n). 

Helios-Mithra, 333. 

Hemachandra, 180, 192, 195, 198, 208, 
215, 216, 293, 

Hemadri, 339, 340, 343. 

Henjeru (Hemavati), 164, 
Heramba-Ganapati, 346, 349. 


j Herambapala (Pratihara k.), 33, 34, 85, 
I Heruka, 273, 274, 282, 283, 286, 287. 

I Hetutattva-upadesa, 275, 

! Hevajra-tantra, 268, 268, 
j Hillebrandt, 179, 

j Himalaya, 7, 24, 26, 33, 41(n), 47, 50, 51. 

57(n), 90,, 93. 
j Himavat, 213, 

1 HInayana Buddliism, 259. 264, 267, 273, 
436. 

j Hind, 17, 

! Hindagaie, 177. 

\ Hindol, 68. 

; Hindol plate, 64. 

| Hindu numerals, 450. 

! Hindu Revenue System, 255(n). 

Hindu Rites and Customs, Studies in the 
Puranic Records on, 230(n). 
i Hiranyadama, 417, 438. 

! Hiranyagarbha (ceremony), 1, 2, 20. 
Hiranyakasipu, 311, 

Hiranya-varman, 168, 

Hisham, 99, 126. 

Hisham ibn 'Ami' at-Taghlibl, 115. 
Hissar District, 333. 

Historical Inscriptions of South India, 
140, 165 (n). 

History of Hindu Chemistry, 230(n). 
History of Hindu Mathematics, 453 (n). 
History of Medieval Hindu India, 363(n). 
History of the Arabs, 453. 

History of the Philosophy of Islam , 
453(n). 

Hitopadesa , 181. 

Hitti, P. K., 453(n). 

Hiuen Tsang, 19, 125, 360(n). 
i Hoan, 424, 

Hob son-Job son, 410(n). 

Hodivala, 353, 354, 364(n), 395(n), 

396(n), 397(n). 
i Hoernle, 79(n). 

] Homa, 264, 

: Hooghly District, 82 (n). 

! Hoysala, 164, 223, 

| Hridayadarpana , 195, 

| Hridayasiva, 91. 

I Hridaya-sutra, 326. 

Huai-wen, 445, 

Hultzsch, 173, 177(n), 229(n), 
Huna-mandala, 96, 97, 99, 101. 

Hunas, 50,'51, 97, 109, 374. 

Hunter, 76. 

I Hushkapura, 119. 

Hyderabad State, 1, 3, 10, 133. 
Hyderabad Western, 221, 

I 

I Ibn al-Faklh, 386, 3&9, 397(n), 404, 
410(n), 413, 423. 
i Ibn Haukal, 386, 401, 446, 452. 

’ Ibn Khaldun, 392. 

) Ibn Khordadbah, 391, 397(n), 398(n), 

493 404 412 419 

| Ibn Rosteh, 397 (n), 398 (n), 403, 413, 419. 
s Ibn Said, 405, 

558 


A.I.K. -8G 








THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Ibrahim Shah, Nawab, 219. 

Ichchha-sakti, 310. 

Ichchhatadeva, 124. 

Iconography oj Buddhist and Brahmani - 
cal Sculptures in the Dacca Museum, 
362(n), 363(n). 

Ida, 325. 

Idar State, 331. 

Ikshvaku, 142. 

Illusion, 359. 

Iltutmish Sultan, 114. 

Indaparaja, 137. 

Indian Historiography, The Beginnings 
of, and other Essays, 255(n). 

Indian Islam, 453 (n). 

Indian Logic, 361 (n). 

Indian Museum, Calcutta, 276, 280, 285, 
286, 297, 307, 334, 344, 346, 349. 
Indian Review, 365(n). 

Indian Sculpture and Painting, 362(n), 
363(n). 

Indian Sect of the Jainas, 363 (n). 

Indies, East, 52, 414. 

Indo-China, 414, 422, 423. 

Indo-China, Art in, 441-442. 

Indo-Javanese Art, 439-442. 

Indonesia, 281, 286, 432. 

Indonesian art, 282. 

Indra (god), 237, 418. 

Indra (s. of Dhruva), 5, 7, 9, 10. 

Indra (grandson of Krishna III), 16. 
Indra (Guparat Rashirakuta k.), 24, 26, 
Indra (writer), 217. 

Indra I (Rashprakuta), 1, 17(n). 

Indra HI (Rishtrakuta), 12-13, 15, 16, 
18(n), 35, 36,' 56(h), 84, 89, 95, 111, 
137, 188, 399(n). 

Indra IV, 162. 

Indra'-bhadresvara, 424. 
Indra-bhogesvara. 424. 

Indrabhut^ 266, 268, 269, 270, 361(n). 
IndradevI, 419. 

Indradityadeva, 109, 131(n). 

Indragiri, 298. 

IndranI, 340. 

Indra-paramesvara, 424. 

Indra-prasadaka, 420. 

Indrapura, 417, 425, 427. 

Indraraja (k. of Kanauj), 23, 116. 
Indraraja (Chahamana of Partabgarh), 
108, 109. 

Indra-tataka, 420. 

Indra-varman, 145, 365(n), 419, 420, 421, 
422, 423, 424, 438. 

Indra-varman, H, 424, 425. 

Indra-varman HI, 425, 426, 443. 
Indra-varman IV, 426. 

Indra-vimanaka, 420. 

Indra-yana, 420. 

Indrayudha, 4, 21, 22, 23, 25, 46. 
Indukara, 199. 

Indumitra (Indu), 190. 

Inscriptions of Bengal, Some Historical 
Aspects of the, 255(n). 

Inscriptions of Kambuja, 364(n). 

Iran, 352, 353, 354, 449. 


Iranians, 352, 353, 354. 

Irawadi, 433. 

Irda CP., 57 (n.). 

Isa (6iva), 143. 
isana, 310. 

Isanadayah, 310. 

Isanatungavijaya, Sri, 430. 

Isanavarman (Maukhari k.), 77 
Isana-varman II, 421. 
isana-Vikrama Dharmottungadeva, Sri, 
430. 

Ishtadevata, 326. 

Ishtaganadeva, 123. 

Ishtapala, 114. 

Ishtpal, 114. 

Islam, 17, 126, 165. 

Istakhrl, 446. 

isuka (Chahamana), 108. 

Isurumuniya, 174, 176. 

Isvara, 299. 

Isvaradatta, 182. 

isvara-Kesava-Samarottunga, 428. 
Isvara-Kesavotsavatunga, 428. 
Isvarakrishna, 204. 

Isvara-varman, 166, 167. 

J 

Jabala, 323. 

Jabalipura, 97. 

Jacobi, Dr. Hermann, 179, 219, 393 (n). 
Jatfi Rana, 354, 

Jaffna—See also Ceylon and Nagadvipa, 
171. 

Jagaddhara Bhatta, 191. 

Jaganmata, 318. 

Jagannatha (Pan^ita), 194, 197, 198. 
Jagannathamahgalam, 172. 

Jagannatha temple, 315. 

Jagatlpala—See also Virasilamegha, 173. 
Jagattunga (Govinda III), 6. 

Jagattunga (Rashirakuta pr.), 13, v 18(n), 
53, 89. 

Jagattunga (Tunga k.), 76. 

Jagesvara, 344. 

Jahazpur District, 110. 

Jaika (Saindhava k.)", 100. 

Jaika II (Saindhava »k.), 101. 

Jain gurus, 289. 

Jain, H. L., 41(n), 363(n). 
Jaina-lekha-sarhgraha, 363 (n). 

Jaina Siddhanta Bhaskara, 363(n). 
Jainism, 162, 257, 288-300, 319, 326, 328, 
336, 364(n), 

Jainism and Kamatak Culture , 363(n). 
Jains, 373. 

Jaipal (Shahi k.), 114. 

Jaipur, 46, 106, 107, 108, 111. 

Jaipur (Dhenkanal), 78. 

Jajilpara CP., 57(n). 

Jajja, 115, 116. 

Jajjapa, 96, 101. 

Jajjuka (Tomara k.), 111. 

Jajpur, 68, 81 (n), 340. 

Jakkiabbe, 292. 


554 





INDEX 


Jakkisundarl, 292. 

Jala, 323. 

Jalandar, 114, 122. 

Jalandhara—See also Jala, 323. 

Jalauka, 244. 

Jalhana, 184, 394(n). 

Jalendra, 269. 

Jalor, 19, 21, 97, 108. 

Jama Masjids, 452. 

Jambhala, 176, 282, 283, 285. 

Jambudvlpa, 58, 446. 

Jambumali (river), 102. 

Jammu, 122. 

Jdnakiharana, 196. 

Janamejaya Mahabhavagupta I (son of 
Sivagupta), 147, 150. 

Janapadsi, 417. 

Janjgir, 340. 

Jantavura (Dantapura or Jayantya- 
pura?), 143. 

Janavallabha (Govinda III), 6. 

Jan gull, 284. 

Japa , 264, 269. 

Japan, 44, 260. 

Jara, 83 (n). 

Jarta-desa, 102. 

Jasahara-chariu, 218. 

Jatacharya, 209. 

Jata-Choda-Bhima, 139, 140, 143, 149. 
Jataka, 230(n). 

Jatakamald , 188. 

Jaths, 127. 

Jatila (another name for Nedunja- 
daiyan), 157. 

Jatilavarman (another name of Nedunja- 
daiyan), 157, 158. 

Jatila Par an taka, 247. 

Jaula (Tomara k.), 111. 

Jaunpur, 219. 

Java, 288, 412, 415, 416, 417, 419, 423, 
425, 427-432, 434, 436, 439, 440, 441, 
442. 

Javalipura (Jalor), 21. 

Javanese sculpture, 281, 282. 
Jayabandhu, 223. 

Jayabhadra, 273. 

Jayabhanja, 72. 

Jayadeva (poet), 184, 198. 

Jayadeva II (k. of Nepal), 58. 

Jayadevi 116. 

Jayadhavala 294. 

Jayaditya I (Malayaketu k.), 93, 333. 
Jayaditya II (do), 93. 

Jayadratha dynasty, 99. 

Jaya Indra-varman Maharajadhiraja, 
grl, 425. 

Jayamala (k. of Kamarupa), 61, 79(n). 
Jayananda, 79. 

Jayanta, 183. 

Jayanta (k. of Pundravardhana), 58, 
115. 

Jayanta (writer), 205, 364(n). 
Jayantabhatfa, 183. 

Jayantyapura, 143 ; 145. 

Jayapala (cousin of Pala k. Devapala), 
50, 131 (n). 


Jayapala (Shahi k.), 86, 114, 115. 

Jayapida (k. of Kashmir), 58, 115, 118, 
131(n), 183, 186, 187, 191, 193. 
Jayapura, 78. 

Jayaraja (Chahamana k.), 106. 

Jayarama, 220. 

Jayasakti, (Chandella k.), 83, 88. 

Jayasi, 217. 

Jayasimha (Orissa feudatory), 77. 
Jayasirhha III, 291. 

Jayasiihhasuri, 209. 

Jayasirhha-varman, 425. 

Jaya-stambha, 78. 

Jaya-varaha (or Varaha), 21, 102. 
Jayavarman, 66, 68, 145. 

Jaya-varman II, 414, 416-419, 421, 423, 
438. 

Jaya-varman, III, 416-419. 

Jaya-varman IV, 421. 

Jaya-varman V, 421. 

Jeja, 83. 

Jejabhukti, 83. 

Jejakabhukti, 242. 

Jejjaka, 83. 

Jelklabad, 52, 113. 

Jetarl, 275. 

Jetavana, 211. 

Jetavanarama, 175. 

Jethwai grant, 133. 

Jews, 165. 

Jeypore (Visakhapatnam Dt.), 77. 
Jhaiawar State, 96, 97. 

Jhansi District, 7, 13, 33, 83, 297. 

Jhelum, 112, 114, 117, 340. 

Jhota, 20. 

Jhusi Copper Plate, 43(n). 

Jimutavaihana, 204. 

Jina, 258, 296, 297, 298. 

Jinabhata, 207. 

Jina-Kanchl, 299. 

Jinamitra, 274, 448. 

Jinarakshita, 272. 

Jinaratnakosa, 229(n), 230(n). 

Jinasena (author of Adipurana ), 11, 294, 
363(n). 

Jinasena (Harivarhsa Purana), 21, 22, 
182, 219, 291, 294, 363(n). 
Jinendrabuddhi, 190. 

Jndna, 259. 

Jhanagarbha, 267. 

Jnana-murti, 306. 

Jndnapanchamikathd, 209. 

Jnanasakti, 310. 

Jnanasiddhi, 269, 361 (n). 

Jnanasrimitra, 273, 274. 

Jodhpur, 19, 20, 25, 27, 97, 105, 107, 108, 
110, 333, 346. 

Jodhpur Inscription, 29, 40(n). 

Jodhpur Pratiharas, see under Pratl- 
haras of Jodhpur. 

Jogasaru , 216. 

Joindu, 216. 

Jouveau-Dubreuil, 152, 165(n). 
Jubbulpore, 84, 85, 87, 89, 91, 135, 146, 
148, 342. 

Junagadh, 91, 101, 102. 


A.I.K.—37 


555 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Junaid, 20, 39. 

Jura, 38. 

Jura stone inscription, 89. 

Jurada grant, 72, 73. 

Juzr, 32, 242. 

Jyeshtha, 344. 

Jyeshthakayastka, 243. 

Jyotihsastra , 200. 

K 

Kablr, 216. 

Kabul, 46, 112, 124, 126. 

Kabulistan, 113. 

Kachchha, 102, 104, 107, 270, 323. 
Kachchhapagh§tas, 38, 242, 

Kadamba chief, 73, 143, 144, 145. 
Kadamba Udayaditya, 145. 

Kadamhari, 183, 184, 187, 209, 398(n). 
K&dambari-Kathasara, 183. 

Kadambas, 145, 151, 290, 291, 340. 
Kadambas of Jayantyapura, 141, 145, 246. 
Kadaroli Temple, 330. 

Ka^ava, 158. 

Kadavaha, 217. 

Kadeyaraja, 135. 

Kadungon, 158. 

Kaduvetti Muttarasa, 164. - 
Kadvar, 330, 332. 

Kahla Plate of Kalachuri Sodhadeva, 
40(n). 

Kahlur, 114. 

Kailasa, 145. 

Kailasa temple, 17. 

Kailasanatha temple, 337. 

Kaira Dist., 17(a), 31, 32, 96, 105. 
Kaithal, 336. 

Kajaragrama—See also Kata r a gam, 174. 
Kakatlyas, 291. 

Kakka (Pratlhara of Jodhpur), 25, 29. 
Kakkuka, 21, 30. 

Kala (motif), 439. 

Kala—-See also Yama, 283, 309, 340. 
Kalabhadra, 344. 

Kalabhairava, 330. 

Kalabhoja, 109. 

Kalabhras, 158. 

Kdlachakra tantra, 268, 275. 
Kalachumbaru (Inscription), 138. 
Kalachuris, 30, 34, 38, 43(n), 53, 83, 87- 
94, 130(n), 133, 135, 146, 148, 180. 
Kalachuris of Gorakhpur, see Kala¬ 
churis of Sarayupara. 

Kalachuris of Sarayupara, 32, 36, 87, 
93-94. 

Kalachuris of Tripling 87-92, 94, 97. 
KSladi, 304. 

Kala-Gandika, I31(n). 

Kalah, 4i£ 

Kalaha (or Kanada)-stambha, 77. 
Kalahandi State, 150, 343. 

Kalahasti, 154. 

Kaiah-bar, 403, 413. 

Kalaketu, 347. 

Ka)akkad, 158. 

Kala-Makara, 439; 


Kalambas, 323. 

Kalanjara, 14, 27, 29, 37, 41(n), 43(n), 
84, 89. 

Kalanjara, lords of, 85. 
Kalanjara-mandala, 41 (n), 83. 

Kalani Tissa, 212. 

Kalantaka-murti, 283. 

Kalapa—See also katantra grammar, 190. 
Kalaratri, 343, 364(n). 

Kalari, 283. 
i Kalari-murti, 309. 

Kala (Kamala) varman (Shahi k.), 113. 
Kalavatl, 107. 

Kalhana, 113, 115, 116, 131 (n), 191, 193, 
244 245 

Kali, 286, 308, 344. 

Kali age, 316, 366, 375, 388. 

Kali, Dakshina, 329. 

Kali-Bit^arasa, 135. 

Kalidasa, 183, 184, 185, 186, 191, 216. 
Kaligalankusa, 143. 

Kalighatta, 96. 

Kalika, 321, 344. 

Kalila and Dimna, 450. 

Kalindas, 323. 

Kalindl (River), 85, 438. 

Kalinga, 1, 7, 11, 24, 25, 35, 51, 57(n), 63 ; 
74, 76, 89, 136, 139, 141, 142, 144, 159 s 
322 415. 

Kalihganagara 140, 143, 145. 

Kalingas, 66, 171, 174. 

Kalingatluparani, 145. 

Kalin jar, 83, 130(n). 

Kali varman, 139, 

Kali-Vishnuvardhana, 135. 

Kaliya, 91. 

Kali-yuga, 320. 

Kalki, 351. 

Kalla, 101. 

Kailar, 112. 

Kailasa, 195, 206, 301, 363(n). 

Kalluri, 369. 

Kalpa, 317. 

Kalya, Svetavaraha, 317. 

Kalpadrukosa, 230(n). 

Kalya-kramas, 269. 

Kalpi, 13. 

Kalugahga, 173. 

Kalutara, 173. 

Kalyanakalasa I, 70. 

Kalyanakalasa H, 70. 

Kalyana-kataka, 103. 

Kalyanamandira, 229(n). 
Kalyana-rajadeva, 123. 

Kalyana-rakshita, 272. 

Kalyana-sundara-murti, 305, 306, 336, 
349. 

Kalyana-varman, 200. 

Kalyaniya Thera, 212. 

Kama, 138. 

Kamadeva—See also Pradyumna, 314. 
Kamakandala, 187. 

Kamakhya, 323. 

Kamalarakshita, 273. 

Kamalaslla, 272, 364(n), 447. 
Kamalavardhana, 120. 

556 




INDEX 


Kamalatmika, 344. 

Kamalu, 112, 131 (n). 

Kamaluka (Shahi k.), 113, 118. 
Kamandaka, 232. 

Kamantaka-murti, 309. 

Kamamava (son of Danamava), 143. 
Kamarnava (brother of Potankusa), 143. 
Kamarnava (son of Ranarnava, 143. 
Kamarnava (son of Vajrahasta-Ani- 
yafikabhlma), 142. 

Kamarnava (son of Virasimha), 142. 
Kamarnava (son of Vajrahasta), 142. 
Kamarupa, 58, 61-62, 63, 80(n), 243, 322, 
323, 403, 404. 

Kamarupasasanavali, 255(n). 

Kamasutra, 386, 443. 

Kambakaya Grant, 145. 

Kambala, 268, 323. 

Kamban, 228. 

Kambay, 386, 402. 

Kambha (or Stambha) Ranavaloka, 5, 
168. 

Kambojas, 50, 51, 54, 85, 323, 405. 
Kambuja, 414, 415, 416, 423, 424, 425, 427, 
432, 436, 437 , 438, 441, 442, 443. 
Kambuja of the land, 416. 

Kambuja of the water, 416. 

Kambupurl, 420. 

Kamdin, Dastur Aspandiarjl, 353. 
Kamka (Paramara), 96, 99. 

Kampanesa, 244. 

ICampa-varman, 166, 167. 

Kampheng Phet, 422. 

Kanada (or Kalaha)-stambha, 77. 
Kanakabhanja, 73. 

Kanakamanjarl, 397(n). 

Kanakamara, 218. 

Kanakasena Vadiraja, 183. 

Kanara, 221. 

Kanarese, 11, 35, 38, 136, 145. 

Kanarese Literature , 231 (n). 

Kanauj, 4, 5, 7, 13, 22, 23, 25, 27, 32, 33, 
35, 38, 46, 47, 49, 51, 56 (n), 86, 90, 95, 
103, 110, 173, 187, 200, 241, 290, 390, 
404. 

Kanchana-stambha, 77. 

Kanchl (puram), 1, 4, 8, 14, 15, 86, 133, 
135, 139, 151, 152, 156, 157, 167, 337, 
369. 

Kanchuka, 84. 

Kanda, 316.. 

Kandahar, 125. 

Kandarage, 255(n). 

Kandar-athithan, 227, 228. 

Kane, 230(n), 256(n). 

Kandy, 176. 

Kane Festschrift, 230(n). 

Kangra (valley), 46, 85, 118, 122, 340. 
Kanhapada, 216. 

Kanheri caves, 353. 

Kanhu, 266. 

Kahkala-murti, 305, 308, 363(n). 
Kannada (country), 245, 246, 391. 
Kannada (language), 160, 162, 220-227, 
288, 290, 292, 294. 

Kannada Language, History of, 231 (n). 


Kannada origin of the Rashtrakutas, 
17(n). 

Kanna^as, 221. 

Kannara (Chola pr.), 12. 

Kannara (Krishna I, Rashtrakuta k.), 
18(n), 

Kannara (i.e. Krishna III, Rashtrakuta 
k.), 138, 173.' 

Kannaradeva, 154, 156. 

Kantha, 104. 

Kanthika-Vijayaditya (or Kanthika- 
Beta), 137, 138. 

Kanthakot, 104, 107. 

Kantideva (k. of Vahga), 54, 88. 
Kantipura, 59. 

Kanvayana (Gotra), 142. 

Kanyakubja, 27, 29, 38, 41(n), 42(n), 116, 
390. 

Kanyakubja- hhukti, 41(n). 

Kapardin II (^ilahara king of Konkan), 
88 

Kapila, 176, 374. 

Kapilabala, 199. 

Kapisa, 405. 

Kapisayana, 405. 

Kapphanabhyudaya, 182. 

Kara Dynasty, 147. 

Kara Inscription, 43(n). 
Karakanda-chariu, 218. 

Karall, 344. 

Karana, 372, 374, 395(n). 

Karana-kdyastha, 395(n). 

Karariatilaka, 200. 

Karandai Plates, 167. 

Karandavyuha, 261, 262, 263, 361 (n). 
Karatoya (river), 61. 

Karavandapuram, 158. 

Karas, 62, 63-69, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 77, 
78, 80(n), 81(n), 82(n), 148, 149. 
Karavlrapur#,-124. 

Kar-gyu-pa sect., 275. 

Karhld plates, 18 (n), 89. 

Karikala, 153. 

Kdrikds, 194. 

Karitalai, 91. 

Karivarsha (Sahilla-varman), 122. 

Karka II (Gujarat Rashb*akuta), 41(n). 
Karkka, 2, 134. 

Karkka (Gujarat Rash^rakuta), 8, 10, 26, 
41 (n), 95. 

Karkka II, 15-16. 

Karkota dynasty, 115-7. 

Karma, 258. 

Karman, 312. 

Karma-sadakhya (-sadatattva), 310. 
Karmastkdnas, 244. 

Karma tantra, 264. 

Karmukarjuna, 139. 

Kama (Kalachuri k.), 91. 

Kama (Rashtrakuta k.), 139. 

Kama! District, 110, 384. 

Karnapa, 117. 

Karnataka (army), 1. 

Kamata (k, ka) (country), 3, 16, 24, 101, 
109, 130(n), 136, 221, 293, 295, 323, 
411(n). 


557 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Karnataka, The Heritage of, 231(h). 
Karnatas, 90, 172. 

Karpuramanjari, 180, 386, 391, 396(n). 
Kartripura, 124. 

Kartri-sadikhya, 310. 

Karttikeya, 264, 324, 329, 330, 331, 341, 
342, 343, 344, 345, 349, 364{n). 
Karttikeyanl, 340, 344. 

Karttikeyapura, 123, 124. 
Karuna-srimitra, 274. 

Karunatar, 221. 

Kasara, 331. 

Kashgarh—See also Utftfiyana, 323. 
Kashipuri temple, 336. 

Kashmir, 58, 85, 90, 91, 112, 113, 115- 
121, 126, 131 (n), 186, 187, 191, 193, 
195, 200, 206, 244, 245, 258, 259, 268, 
270, 272, 273, 274, 304, 333, 337, 345, 
360(n), 369, 396(n), 404, 447. 
Kashmir, History of, 115-121. 
Kashmirian Poets, 183, 186. 

Kasika (Banaras), 86. 

Kdsikdvritti, 315, 425. 

KasikhaTufa, 371, 

Kasmirl warriors, 85. 

Kasyapa (writer), 199. 

Kasyapa I, 176. 

Kasyapa IV Srlsahghabodhi, 170. 
Kasyapa V Abhaya £ilameghavarna, 170. 
Katak&dhUa, 247. 

Katantra grammar—See also Kalapa, 
190. 

Kataragam—See also Kajaragrama, 174. 
Kathai, 118. 

Kathasaritsdgara, 187, 443. 

Kathiawar (d), 22, 25, 32, 33, 35, 36, 
41 (n), 46, 99-103, 296, 330, 333, 342, 
353, 374. 

Katisama, 306. 

Katmandu, 60. 

Kaftirai, 166, 167. 

Katyayana, 232, 370. 

Katyayana-Smriti, 366. 

Katyayaiu, 339, 340, 343, 364(n). 

Katyur, 124. 

Katyuri king, 124. 

Kaula, 322, 373. 

Kauldchdra, 320, 321, 323. 
Kaalajhanardirnaya, 322. 

Kaulam Malaya, 403. 

Kaumari, 339, 344. 

Kaun^inya, 416. 

Kau&ambl, 41 (n). 

Kautilya, 186, 239. 

Kavanur, 156. 

Kaveri (region), 151, 152, 153, 158. 
Kaveri (river), 4, 221, 403. 

Kavi, 333. 

Kavindravachana- samuchchaya, 187. 
Kaviparamesh{hi, 223. 

Kaviprasasti, 395(n). 

Kavirahasya, 190. 

Kaviraja, 180. 

Kavirdjamarga, 11, 221, 222, 223, 224, 294. 
Kaviratna, 291. 

Kdvya, 182. 


Kavyadarsa, 224. 

Kdvyakautuka, 194, 195. 

Kdvydlamkdra, 186, 191, 192, 214. 
Kdvydlamkarasutravritti, 193. 
Kdvyamtmdihsd , 180, 181, 195, 385, 389, 
400, 403, 404, 405. 

Kavyanaya, 194. 

Kdvyardkshasa —See also Rakshasa - 

kdvya, 186. 

Kayasthas, 118, 372, 374, 395(n). 
Kayasthas of Bengal, 395(n). 

Kayotsarga, 297, 298. 

Kedara, 47. 

Kedaramisra, 50. 

Kedu (plain), 440. 

Keith 182, 184, 186, 193, 228(n), 229(h), 
230(n). 

Keonjhar, 68, 74, 75, 76, 77. 

Kerala, 8, 35, 154, 155, 157, 158, 164, 165, 
170, 172, 322, 323, 390. 

Kesadhatu Kasyapa, 174. 

KesinI, 281. 

Ketu, 297, 352. 

Keyuravarsha (Yuvaraja I, Kalachuri 
k,), 89. 

Khadgatunga, 82 (n). 

Khadgavaloka, 2. 

Khadi-mandalor— See also Twentyfour 
Pergannas, W. B., 279. 

Khadipada Ins., 64, 81 (n). 

Khajuraho (Khajraho), 83, 85, 130(n), 
313, 328, 331, 332, 333, 334, 343. 
Kliajuraho Ins., 42 (n), 90. 

Khajuraho Inscription of Dhahga, 43(n). 
Khalimpur copper plate, 45, 55. 
Khandagiri, 333. 

Kharuiakliddyaka, 450. 

Khandaraksha, 243, 255(n). 

Khandesh. 2. 

Khandhaparitta, 360(n). 

Khanfu, 402. 

Khan-hoa, 421. 

Kharagiri, 159. 

Kharasan—-Mandali, 354. 
Kharataragachckhapatfdvali, 296. 

Khari, 336. 

Kharjuravahaka, 83. 

Kharparadeva, 123. 

Khasarpana, 279. 

Khasas. 85, 116, 118, 120. 

Khatiknattara, 401. 

KJhed-Brahma, 331. 

Khema (Elder), 211. 

Khemappakarana—See also Paramattha - 
dipa, 211. 

Khera, 331. 

Khe^aka (Kaira Dist.), 17(n), 31, 32, 96, 
105. 

Khichiiig, 70, 76, 334, 337. 

Khijjihga, 69, 74. 

Khifijali, 69. 

Khihjali, Lord of, 71. 

Khmer, 404, 417, 419, 423. 

Khola, 243, 255(n). 

Khommana I (Guhila K.), 109. 
Khommana II (Guhila K.), 106, 109. 

558 





INDEX 


Khommana III, 109. 

Khorasan, 354. 

Khottiga (deva), 15, 96, 218. 
Khri-Sron-lde-btsan, 58, 79(n), 271, 446, 
447. 

Khulna, 330. 

Khumm&na-Rdso, 106. 

Klchaka, 186. 

Kichakavadha, 186. 

Kielhorn, 80(n), 81(n), 112, 130(n), 

131(n). 

Kikanan, 126. 

Kim river, 21, 40(n), 41(n). 
Kinderkheda, 333. 

Kinjili, 73. 

Kinsukad, 14. 

Kira (country), 46, 47, 90, 122. 

Kiradu, 97. 

Kiranapura, 88, 89, 135. 

Kiranavall, 205. 

Kiranpur, 135. 

Kiras, 122. 

Kirata, 24, 25, 56(n). 

Kiratarjuna, 307. 

Kirilin, 93. 

KIrti, 173, 174. 

Klrtilata, 219. 

KIrtisena, 182. 

Klrtisirhha, 219. 

Klrtivarman II (Chalukya), 2, 3. 
KIrttimukha, 439. 

Kirttinarayana (Govinda III), 6. 
Kirttinartiyana (Indra III), 13. 
Klrttivarman (Guhila), 110. 
Klrtyagrabodhi, 170. 

Kishanganga valley (Kashmir), 112. 
Kochchatfaiyan, 158. 

Kodalaka (Kodaloka), 82 (n). 
Kodan^arama, 154. 

Ko^umbalur, 154. 157. 

Koh Ker, 421. 

Koil-ndnmanimdlai, 228. 

Kokkalla I, 11, 30, 34, 35, 83, 87, 88, 93, 
107, 110,130(n). 

Kokwalla II, 91, 105. 

Kolahala (also called Ananta-varman), 
142. 

Kolahalapura, 142. 

Kolanu, 139. 

Kolar, 142, 161. 

Kollam era, 165. 

Ko-lo-fong, 433. 

Konarak, 334, 352. 

Korigoda, 62, 66, 68. 

Kongudesa, 152, 154, 158, 159, 164. 
Konkan, 3, 88, 189, 246. 

Konkana, 323, 370. 

Konow, 180, 182, 229(n). 

Konur, 330, 

Ko-Perunjinga, 153. 

Koppana, 292, 295. 

Koranganatha, 329. 

Kosala, 1, 7, 62, 86, 88, 91, 105, 135, 146, 
148, 149, 276, 323. 

Kotalipada, 350. 

Kotaragama, 176. 


Kotas. 291. 

Kojtabhanja, 75. 

Kottapdla, 240, 243. 

Kovils, 176, 177. 

Kra, Isthmus of, 413, 422. 

Kratha, 86. 

Krishna (god), 314, 331, 332, 360, 438. 
Krishna (Guhila k.), 110. 

Krishna (river), 137. 

Krishna I (Rashtrakuta), 3, 18(n), 102. 
131(n), 133, 160. 

Krishna II(do), 10, 11-12, 18(n), 31, 34, 
35, 53, 57(n), 88, 89, 130(n), 135, 136, 
149 155 291. 

Krishna III (do),'14-15, 16, 37, 38, 43(n), 
(n), 84, 89, 95, 110, 139, 155, 156, 
162, 171, 173, 188, 218, 292, 369, 
397 (n). 

Krishnacharin, 268. 

Krishnadeva Raya (of Vijayanagar,) 163. 
Krishna District, 57 (n). 
Krshnamachariar, 229(n), 230(n). 
Krishnadeva Agamavaglsa, 362(n). 
Krishnaraja (Gujarat Rashtrakuta), 11, 
12 . 

Krishnaraja (or Upendra, Paramara k.), 
94. 

Krishnaraja I (Saindhava k.), 99. 
Krishnaraja II (Saindhava k.) 100. 
Krishnraja HI, 190. 

Krishnarshi, 209. 

Krishnasamayavajra, 273, 275. 

Krishna vena, 133. 

Krishnayamari-tantra, 268, 269. 
Krishnesvara (temple of), 14, 15 
K’ri-sron-lde-btsan, 79,(n). 

Krittikas, 342. 

Krittivnsa, 309. 

Krityakalpataru, 236. 

Kriya-sakti, 310. 

Kriyas, 259, 262, 264, 266. 

Kriya tantra, 264, 268, 271, 272. 

Krodha, 308. 

Krodharajas, 264. 

Kshemagupta (k. of Kashmir), 113, 114, 
119, 396(n). 

Kshemankaradeva, 63. 

Kshemaraja (Chapa k.), 103. 
Kshemendra, 182, 184, 187, 195/ 229(n). 
Kshemlsvara, 181. 

Kshetrapa, 243. 

Kshlra (scholar), 116. 

Kshlrasvamin, 190. 

Kshitigarbha, 290. 

Kshitipala (Pratlhara k.), 33, 34, 36, 37, 
84. 

Kualu, 82(n). 

Kubera (—Vaisravana), 237, 283, 299, 

300, 342. 

Kudamukku, 152, 159. 

Kukkanur, 343. 

Kukkuri, 268. 

Kukku^apada-giri, 278. 

Kula, 251. 

KuIcCkundalinx, 325. 

Kulalikdmnaya, 323. 

559 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Kulanayika, 320. 

Kularnava Tantra, 321. 

Kulasekhara, 184, 185, 

Kula-stambha, 77, 82 (n). 

Kulottunga, 145, 

Kulu (country), 122. 

Kuluta (country), 122. 

Kulutas, 35. 

Kumara, ,299. 

Kumaraghosha, 415. 

Kumara-gupta I, 348. 

Kumaralabdha, 360(n). 

Kumar andrdyana (Paramara Sindhu- 

raja), 98. 

Kumarapala, 208. 

Kumarasambhava, 191. 

Kumarila, 204, 259, 312, 329, 354, 357. 
Kumarpur, 334. 

Kumaun, 123-125. 

Kumayun, 344. 

Kumbha, 230. 

Kumbhakonam, -152, 159, 167. 

Kumurang plate, 68. 

Kundahar, 126. 

KundakadevI (Kalachuri princess), 89. 
Kundakunda, 294. 

Kundavvai, 161, 163. 

Kun^i, 336, 349. 

Kundur, 255(n). 

Kuhjaramalla (title of Parantaka), 155. 
Kun Pandya, 292. 

Kuntaka (poet)—See also Kuntala, 191, 
194, 195, 197, 198. 

Kuntala (country), 86. 

Kuntala (poet)—See also Kuntala, 182, 
191. 

Kuntalas, 35, 92. 

Kuppanayya (son of Makariyaraja), 139. 
Kuppanayya (s. of Turkkiya-Yajvan), 
139. 

Kurma Purana, 203, 332, 335, 367. 
Kurnool District, 149. 

Kurram, 247. 

Kuru, 46, 47. 

Kurukshetra, 85, 122, 323, 336. 

Kurukulla, 341. 

Kurukullasadhana, 269. 

Kuruna^u, 158. 

Kurus, 85. 

Kushmanda, 343, 364 (n). 

Kushmandini, 299. 

Kusumahiura I, 63, 67. 

Kusumahara II, 64. 

Kusumanjali —See also Nydyakusuman- 
j ali 206. 

Kutch, 102. 

Kuttanxmatam, 186, 367, 380, 381, 382, 
385, 389, 397(n), 398(n). 
Kuvalayamald, 21, 209. 

Kuvalayaplda, 115. 

Kuvera, 176. 

L 

Lacote, ,187. 

Lad Khan’s temple, 334. 

La^ahachandra, 185. 


Lagaturman, 112. 

Laghman, 115. 

Laghumanasa, 200. 

Laghuvritti, 191. 

Laghu-Vyasa, 367, 371. 

Lahara District, 117. 

Lahora, 289. 

Lahore, 114, 131 (n). 

Lakha, 104. 

Laksha, 102, 104. 

Lakshandvall , 205, 231 (n). 

Lakshavarman (Chandella Yasovarman), 
84. 

Lakshmana (Chahamana), 107, 108. 
Lakshmana (a general), 148. 

Lakshmana (Kachchhapaghata), 86. 
Lakshmanagupta, 194. 

Lakshmanaraja (k. of Dahala-mandala), 
87. 

Lakshmanaraja (Kalachuri k.), 91, 105, 
130(n), 147. 

Lakshmanasena, 347. 

Lakshmi—see also Sri, 283, 314, 318, 329, 
338, 340, 341, 342, 344, 362(n). 
Lakshmi (Kalachuri princess), 89. 
Lakshmldhara, 236. 

LakshmI-Ganapati, 345, 346. 

Lakshmlkara, 64. 

Lakshmlihkara, 269, 270. 
LakshmI-Narayana, 338. 

Lakshmlndra Bhumlsvara Gramasvamin, 
Sri, 425. 

Lakshmi-varman, 122. 

Lalullsa, 337. 

Lala Bhagat, 333. 

Lalatatilaka, 306. 

Lalita, 306. 

Lalita, 344. 

Lalitaditya-Muktaplda, 58, 115, 117, 126, 
183 244 

Lalitahara I, 64, 67. 

Lalitahara II, 64. 

Lalitapl<^a, 116. 

Lalitasuradeva (king), 123, 1224. 
Lalitasuradeva (poet), 184,. 

Lalitavajra, 268, 269, 362(n). 

Lalitavistara, 261, 360(n). 

Lalliya Shahi, 112, 113, 118. 

Lalmai Hills, 54. 

Lama ism, 447. 

Lamghan, 86, 115. 

Lanka—See Ceylon. 

Lankapurl, 269. 

Laiikesvara cave, 333. 

Laos, 416, 418. 

Lara Jongrang, 428, 440, 441. 

Lata, 1, 11, 19, 20, 24, 90, 91, 97, 104, 
105, 109, 136, 189, 323. 

Latas, 90. 

Lattalura, 1. 

Laugakshi-Smriti , 366. 

Lauhitya (river), 61. 

Laukayatikas, 373. 

Lavanabhara II, 64, 68. 

Lavapurl, 422. 

[ Law, B.C., 211, 228(n), 230(n). 

560 





INDEX ' 


Layahachandra, 54. 

Le Hoan, 426, 427. 

Le Nepal 56(n), 60, 79(n). 

Leiden (plates), 159, 248. 

Lemulavada, 189. 

Levi, S., 56(n) 58, 59, 60, 65, 80,(n), 

131(n), 323. 

Leyden Museum, Holland, 282, 286. 

Lha Lama Ye-ses-hod, 448. 

Lhasa, 447. 

LiladevI, 103. 

Lllavajra, 270, 273, 362(n). 

Lildvati, 200, 206. 

Limbdi, 103. 

Lihga Parana, 203, 392. 

Lihgayats, 288, 323. 

Loehana, 183, 193, 195. 

Lochana, 262, 266. 

Lohamahaseya—See also Lohaprasada, 
175. 

Lohara, 85, 113, 117, 120. 

Lohaprasada—See also Lohamahaseva, 
175. 

Lohrin, 85, 113, 120. 

Lohur, 114. 

LckamahadevI, 138. 

Lokanatha, 279, 280, 282, 285 (n). 
Lokapala, Sri, 430. 

Lckasena, 183. 

Lokayatikas, 373. 

Lokesvara, 174, 280,-292, 362(n). 
Lokesvara Khasarpana, 60. 

Loiei, 417. 

Lonabhara I, 64, 67, 68. 

Lova-Bikki, 138. 

Lucknow Museum, 287, 297. 

Luh avur, 131 (n). 

Lui-pa (Lui-pada), 266, 268, 361(n). 
Lu’u-Ky-Tong, 426. 

M 

Macdonel, 453 (n). 

Machchhaveha, 218. 

M add lasdchampii, 188. 

Madaun, 332. 

Madhavacharya, 363 (n). 

Madhavakara, 199. 

Madhavanala, 187. 

Madhavanala-Kamakandald-Katha, 187. 
Madhava-niddna —See also Nidana and 
Rugvinischaya , 199. 

Madhavasena, 219. 

Madhukamarnava, 142, 143, 144. 
Madhukesa (name of Siva), 143 
Madhurakavi, 158. 

Madhurakavi (title), 154, 160, 
Madhurantaka Gandaraditya (son of 
Uttama Chola), 157. 

Madhusudana, 181. 

Madhya Bharat, 94. 

Madhyadesa, 109, 323. 

Madhyamika, 266, 271. 
Madhyamika-Karikd, 361 (n). 

Madhya Pradesh, 2, 3, 87, 88, 98. 
Madhyastha, 249. 


Madkyayuglna Charitra Kosa, 230{n). 
Madra, 46, 47. 

Madras, 151, 152, 299, 307, 334, 335, 442. 
Madras Museum Plates, 158. 

Madura, 154, 159, 169, 170, 173, 344, 434. 

Maduraikond a > 154. 

Maduraiyum ilamuni Konda, 154. 
Magadha, 9, 11, 33, 49,' 51, 53, 57(n), 
85, 159, 272, 274, 289, 323, 360(n), 
i 445, 447, 448. 

Magadha (caste), 373. 

Mdgadhl, 213, 215. 

Magama, 174, 175. 

Magas, 334, 

Magha, 178, 182, 183, 193. 
Mahdbaladhikrita, 244. 

Mahabalipuram, 152. 

Mahdbhandgdrika, 244. 

Mahdhhdraia, 217, 218, 225, 236, 237, 238, 
243, 316, 332, 341, 371, 436, 440. 
Mahdbhashya, 213, 420. 

Mahabhavagupta, 91. 

Mahdbodhivamsa, 211, 212. 

Mahachlna—See Tibet. 

Mahachina-Tara, 284. 

Mahddandanayaka, 243. 
Mahadauhsadhasadhanika, 243. 
Mahadeva, 185, 425. 

MahadevI (or MahidevI, q. of Mahen- 
drapala, Pratihara k.), 33, 34. 
Mahadvaradhipatya, 244. 

Maha-Ganapati, 345. 

Mahagaurl, 343, 364(n). 

Mahagrama—See Magama. 

Mahajanas, 289. 

Mahajanas, 246, 247. 

Mahakala, 136. 

Mahakala (Hin pantheon), 304, 345. 
Mahakali, 185, 330, 339, 344. 

M ahdkdrtdkritika, 243. 

Mahakshapatalika, 243. 
Mahdkumdrdmdtya, 243. 

Mahalakshml, 11, 339, 340, 344, 348. 
Mahalanakirti, 173. 

Mahalingam, T. V., 165 (n). 
Mahalingesvara, 330. 

Mahalla, 101. 

Mahamahattaras, 243. 

Mahdmdtya, 244. 

Mahdmdyd, 268, 348. 
Mahamayuri-dharani, 260. 
Mahdmdyiirl-vidydrdni, 261. 
Mahameghavana, 174. 

Mahamudras, 262. 

MahanadI (river), 1, 63, 70, 148. 
Mahanama, 211. 

Mahdndtaka, 181. 

Mahdnirvdnatantra , 310, 317. 

Mahapadma (lake), 117. 

Mahapala, 275. 

Mahdparinirvana , 275, 276. 
Mahdprabandha, 180. 
Mahaprachandadandanayaka, 245. 
Mahapratlhara , 240, 244. 

Mahdpraiyangird-d.hdrani, 263. 
Mahdp'urana, 198, 218. 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Mahapurusha-Nirnaya, 206. 
Maharajashanda (Amoghavarsha I), 8. 
Maharashtra, 2, 180, 245, 246, 323. 
Maha-Rattavaihsa, 137. 

Mahasabhi, 156. 

Maha-Sadasiva-murti, 305, 309, 310. 
Mahasadhanabhaga, 244. 

Mahasainyapati, 244. 

Mahasamanta, 247, 255(n). 
Mahasdndhivigrahika, 243, 244, 245. 
Maha-Saras vati, 339. 

Mahasena, 329. 

Mahasena (deity), 344. 

Mahasena (king), 175. 

Mahasenapati, 243. 

Mahasivagupta (Kesarin) Somavamsi, 
146. 

Mahasivagupta Yayati, 71, 147, 148, 149. 
Mahastambha 273. 

Mahasvasala, 244. 

Mahasveta, 334, 350. 

Mahattamas, 243. 

Mahattaras, 243, 246. 

Mahattara Yak ini, 207. 

Mahavamsa, 212. 

Mahavaraha, 102, 131 (n). 

Mahavidyas, 287. 

Mahavihara, 175, 211. 

Mahavlra, 11, 200, 224, 288, 290, 322, 355. 
Mahdmracharitor—SeQ also Vardhamana- 
charita and Sanmitracharita, 183. 
Maha virachar ya, 11, 291, 294. 

Mahayaka (Guhila), 109. 

Mahayana Buddhism, 259, 262, 264, 266, 
267, 273, 274, 280, 281, 282, 283, 284, 
285, 286, 287, 288, 300, 332, 338, 346, 
360(n), 415, 436. 

Mahay ana-sutras, 260, 261, 268. 
Mahayana texts, 266. 

Mahdi (Caliph), 100. 

Mahendra (Ceylon prince), 169. 
Mahendra (Chiihamana), 107, 108. 
Mahendra (i.e. Chalukya-Bhlma II), 
138 

Mahendra (hill), 63, 142, 144. 

Mahendra (place), 332, 335. 

Mahendra I (or Mahendradhiraja) 
(Nolamba), 163, 164. 

Mahendra II, gilameghavama, 169, 
177(n). 

Mahendra HI, 6ilameghavama, 169. 
Mahendra IV, 6iisahghabodhi, 171. 
Mahendra V. 172, 173, 177(n). 

Mahendra-Bnauma, 64. 

Mahendradatta, 430. 
Mahendramatalisanjalpa, 189. 
Mahendrantaka, 164. 

Mahendrapala I (Pratlhara k.), 31, 32, 
33, 34, 35, 39, 42(n), 53, 57(n), 90, 
101, 111, 112, 118, 241, 396 (n). 
Mahendrapala II (Pratlhara k.), 31, 37, 
40(n), 43(n), 84, 95, 131(n), 189, 241. 
Mahendraparvata, 417. 

Mahendra-varman, 292. 

Mahendrayudha (Mahendrapala I, Pra¬ 
tlhara k.), 33. 


Mahendri, 340. 

Mahendu, 108. 

Mahesa, 332. 

Mahesa-murti, 305, 310. 

Mahesvara, 262. 

Mahesvarapasa, 330. 

Mahesvarasuri, 209. 

Mahesvarl, 340. 

Mahesvarl Samhita, 335. 

Mahl (river), 1, 96. 

Mahidev! (or Mahadevi), 33, 34, 42(n). 
Mahimabhatta, 194, 195. 

Mahinda, 211. 

Mahinda IV, 210, 212. 

Mahlndrapala (Mahendrapala I, Pratl¬ 
hara k.), 33, 42(n). 

Mahlndra-varman (6vetaka king), 145. 
Mahlpala I (Pala k.), 55, 242, 361 (n). 
Mahlpala I (Pratlhara k.), 13, 33-37, 
42(n), 84, 86, 90, 92, 94, 95, 101, 103, 
107, 111, 181. 

Mahlpala II (Pratlhara k.), 37. 
MahishamardinI, 331, 335, 339, 343. 
MahishamardinI mandapa, 329. 
Mahishapala, 42(n). 

Mahisharama (Chaihamana k.), 108. 
Mahishasuramardinl, 340, 344, 347. 
Mahishika, 63. 

Mahishmatl, 180. 

Mahmud Sultan, 38, 39, 115, 409. 
Mahoba, 84, 279. 

Mahodaya, 29, 390. 

Mahotsava-nagara, 84. 

Maihar, 38, 89, 340. 

Mailla-dhavala, 216. 

Mainamati Hills, 54. 

Maithilikalyana, 180. 

Maitrakas, 374. 

Maitreya, 277, 278, 280. 

Maitreya, Akshaya Kumar, 55(n). 
Maitreyarakshita, 190. 

Maitrl-srimitra, 273. 

Majumdar, N. G., 362(n). 

Majumdar, R. C., 40, 76, 83, 130 (n), 
364(n), 365(n). 

Makara (motif), 439. 

Makaras, the five, 267. 

Makariyaraja, 139. 
Makutavaihsa-vardhana, 430, 431. 
Malabar, 165, 170, 172, 390, 401, 403. 
Malalasekera, 211, 212. 

Malang, 428. 

Malava, 1, 5, 7, 9, .10, 24, 40(n), 45, 84, 
85, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 101, 104, 105, 
110, 133, 162, 185, 296. 

Malava (river), 96. 

Mala^r (Peninsula), 403, 412, 413, 414, 
416, 422, 423, 427, 442. 

Malaya (country), 89, 176. 

Malaya Hill, 403. 

Malaya Mountains, 57 (n). 

Malayagiri, 293. 

Malayaketu (dynasty), 93. 

Malayalam, 222. 

Malayalam era, 165. 

Malayasia, 415. 


562 





INDEX 


Maliyapundi grant of Amma II, 8, 138. 
Malkhed (Manyakheta), 10, 13, 15, 133, 

13? 

Malla, 57(n), 137. 

Malladatta, 147. 

Mallagambhlra, 70, 81 (n). 

Mallai, 152. 

Mallapa (or Yuddhamalla), 137. 
Mallappa, 292. 

Mallesvarasvami temple, 138. 

Malliya, 138. 

Malwa, 2, 4, 15, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 31, 32, 
35, 36, 46, 47, 242, 289, 390. 

Mamaki, 262, 266. 

Mamallapuram, 307, 329, 330, 332, 333, 
338, 442. 

Mammata, 192, 198. 

Mana (tribe), 98. 

Manabharana, 173, 174. 

Manadeva, 210. 

Manasa, 300, 342. 

Manasara, 344. 

Manatunga, 185, 229(n). 

Mana-varman, 176. 

Manda, 332. 

Mandahukur, 131 (n). 

MandakinI, 77. 

Mandal, 105. 

Mandalachdrya } 264. 

Mandalas, 259, 262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 269. 
Mandalesa, 244. 

Mandali, 105. 

Mandalis, 240. 

Mandanamisra—See also Suresvara, 204, 
312, 359, 365(n). 

Mandapa, 176. 

Mandapika (Mandu), 31. 

Mandasa grant, 143, 144, 145. 

Mandasor stone inscription of the time 
of Nara-varman, 362(n). 

Mandhuk Ins. of Gopala II, 57(n). 
Mandoil, 330. 

Mandu (Mandapika), 31, 37. 

Mangala, 352. 

Mahgalaraja, 70. 

Mangalore, 158. 

Mahgi, 135. 

Marti, 361(n). 

Manidhara, 279. 

Manigramarn, 406, 411 (n). 
Manikkavasagar, 158. 

ManikyanadI, 294, 364(n). 

Mahjughosha, 281, 282. 

Mahjusri, Black, 345. 

Mahjusri (prince), 444. 

Mahjusri, the Bodhisattva, 262, 270, 281, 
282, 446. 

Manjusrikrodha, 271. 

Manjusrimulakalpa , 262, 263-264, 270, 

361(n), 362(n). 

Manjuvara, 281, 282. 

Mankh, 451. 

Mankha, 179, 190. 

Mannargudi, 312. 

Manne, 160. 

Manoratha, 194. 


Mansura, 127, 128. 

Mantai—See also Matota, 172. 
Mantracharyas, 268. 

Mantra cult, 264. 

Mantrapadas —See a^o Dhdranis } 261, 
262. 

Mantras, 260, 264, 265, 266, 269. 
Mantra-treatises, 273. 

Mantrayana, 81 (n), 360(n). 

Manu-~See also Manu-smriti, 200, 203, 
232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 243, 249, 251, 
253, 254, 254(n), 255(n), 256, 366, 

368, 370, 371, 372, 377, 378, 379, 381, 
383, 387, 388, 392(n), 393(n), 394(n), 
395(n), 396(n), 397(n), 399(n), 405, 
406, 407, 408, 409(n), 410(n), 411(n). 
Manujendra-varman, 141. 

Manuscripts belonging to Durbar Lib¬ 
rary of Nepal, A Catalogue of Palm- 
leaf and selected paper , 79(n). 
Manu-smriti ,—See also Manu, 204, 232, 
239, 252, 256(n), 434, 443. 
Manyakheta (Malkhed), 10, 96, 105, 133, 
137, 218, 294. 

Manyapuram, 3. 

Mara, 276. 

Marai temple, 340. 

Maranjadaiyan, 157. 

Marasarva (or Sarva), 7. 

Marasirhha (brother of Kamarnava and 
son of VIrasimha), 142. 

Marasirhha I, 160. 

Marasirhha IT, 15, 16, 38, 96, 160, 161, 290. 
Marasirhha III, 162, 164. 

Maratha girls, 390. 

Maravarman Rajasirhha I, 157, 158. 
Maravarman Rajasirhha II, 159. 
Maravarman Rajasirhha III, 170. 
Maravada (Marwar), 104. 

Mdrga, 320. 

Marichl, 287, 336, 362(n). 

Marlchi, Ashtabhuja, 287. 

Markandeya, 216, 283, 309. 

Markandeya, Purdna, 181, 332, 339, 340, 
341,'351, 364(n). 

Mar-pa, 275. 

Marriage rules, 374. 

Marshall, John, 313. 

Martanda, 113. 

Martanda, temple, 333. 
Martanda-Bhairava, 332, 334, 335, 351, 
364(n). 

Maru country, 268. 

Marudur, 158. 

Maruladeva, 162. 

Maruti, 333. 

Marwar, 97, 104, 107. 

Maryddddhurya, 241. 

Masantanadeva, 123. 

Mas-udI—See A1 Mas-udi. 
Matamatasirhha, 122. 

Matanga—See also Srlsaila, 323. 
Matangajadhyaksha , 247, 256(n). 

Matangi, 344. 

Mataram, 427-428, 429. 
v Mathanadeva, 38. 

563 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Mathura, 46, 215, 290, 333. 

Mathura, 215. 

Mati-vamsa, 63. 

Matota-See also Mantai, 172. 

Matricheta, 268. 

Matrika, 348. 

Matrikanydsa, 366. 

Matrikas, 336. 

Matsya, 24, 25, 46. 

Matsya Purdna, 238, 254(n), 255(n), 307, 
334, 335, *368, 370, 378, 380, 381, 390, 
392, 394(n), 396(n), 409(n). 
Mattamayura, 90, 91, 104. 

Mattata, .109. 

Maukhari, 77. 

Maya, 276, 318, 359. 

Maya sakti, 337. 

Maydjala, 271. 

Mayapandya, 158. 

Mayavada, 360. 

Mayilai, 152. 

Mayura, 185, 186, 192, 198, 443. 
Mayurakhin^i or Morkhind (Nasik Dt.), 
10 . 

Mayurasataka, 185, 192. 

Mayura-vamsa, 77. 

Mayurbhanj, 69, 74, 76, 77. 

Mecca, 165. 

Medapata, 97, 109, 110. 

Medhatithi, 203, 204. 232, 233, 234, 235, 
236, 249, 250, 253, 254, 256(n), 366, 
367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 374, 
375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 383, 
384, 387, 388, 389;, 390, 391, 393 (n), 
394(n), 395(n), 396(n), 397(n), 400, 
401, 404, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409 (n), 
410 (n). 

Medieval Jainism, 363(n). 

Medinikosha, 395(n). 

Meds, 127. 

Meghaduta, 183. 

Mekalas, 35. 

Mekalasuta (river), 90. 

Mekong, 416, 422. 

Melanba, 137. 

Melpa^i, 14. 

Menam, 420, 422. 

Menikganga, 174. 

Merutunaga, 96, 105, 187. 

Mewar, 87, 220. 310. 

Middle East, 260. 

Midnapur district, 297. 

IVlihintale, 174. 

Mihira (Pratlhara Bhoja I), 28-32. 
Milindapanha. 260, 360(n). 

Mimamsas, 152, 259, 357, 365(n), 425. 
Mirashi, V. V., 17(n), 18(n), 130(n), 

229 (n). 

Misra, B., 69, 77, 79(n), 80(n), 81(n), 
82(n), 150. 

Mitdkshara, 203, 204. 

Mithila, 85. 

Mithila-rashtra, 422, 433. 

Mitramisra, 400. 

Mlechchha, 19, 102, 108, 115, 128. 
/Vflfodhera, 290, 331, 333. 


Moggalana (I or III), 211. 

Moharati, 266. 

Mons, 432, 433. 

Monghyr, 25, 26, 47, 48 401. 

Monghyr Copper Plate, 51, 55. 

Monism, 300, 359. 

Mookerjee, Dr. Satkari, 193. 

Moon, 237. 

Moplahs, 165. 

Moraparitta, 360 (n). 

Morkhind (Mayurakhirujli, Nasik Dt.), 

10 . 

Mother-and-child images, 336. 

Mothers, Seven, 330, 344. 

Mrammas, 433. 

Mrichchhakatika , 215. 

Mrigankagupta, 184. 

Mritasanjivini, 190. 

Mrityunjaya-varman, 122. 

Mudrarakshasa, 178, 179. 

Mudrds, 259, 262, 264, 266, 269. 

Mudwara sub-division, 91. 

Mugali, R\ S., 231 (n). 

Mugdhatunga (6ankaragana Kalachuri 
k. of Dahala), 88, 146. 

Mughal empire, 36. 

Muhammad ‘Aufi, 113. 

Muhammad bin Mansur, 114. 

Muhammad ibn-Qasim, 127. 
Muhammadans—See also Muslims 18(n), 
32. 

Mu-Khri-btsan-po (Mu-tig-Btsan-po), 
446. 

Muktakana, 117. 

Muktimandapa, 340. 

Mukulabhatta, 195. 

Mukundamdla , 185. 

Mulaka (Aurangabad Dist.), 17(n). 
Mularaja I. 91, 92, 96, 97, 99, 102, 103, 
104-5, 106, 107, 131(n). 

Multan, 35, 115, 126, 128, 129, 333, 403, 
405. 

Mummu^i-Chola-mandalam, 172. 
Mummuniraja, 189. 

Munja, 92, 94, 96, 97, 98, 105, 106, 108, 
109, 190, 196. 

Munjala, 200. 

Muralas, 35. 

Murari, 179, 180. 

Mursinga, 147. 

Murtta-sadakhya, 310. 

Murtyashtakas, 311. 

Muruga, 344. 

Musa, 128'. 

Musalmans, 18(n). 

Muscat, 403. 

Mushana (dynasty), 122,. 
Mushana-varman, 122. 

Musi, 3.33. 

Muslims,—See also Muhammadans 25, 
32, 35, 46, 86, 99, 106, 113, 115, 125-9, 
352, 353, 409, 449, 452, 453. 
Muttaraiyar, 153. 

Muyalaka, 306. 

Muzaffarabad, 118. 

Mylapore, 152, 165, 292. 

564 







INDEX 


Myson, 442. 

Mysore, 16, 92, 132, 142, 164, 221, 223, 
298. 

Mysore and Coorg, 165(n), 363(n). 
Mystic Tales of Lama Tardngtka, 361 (n). 


N 

Ndda, 324. 

Nadanta, 306. 

Naddula, 107, 108. 

Nadol, 97, 108. 

Nadu, 247. 

Naga, 98, 135. 

Nagabhata I, 19-21, 40(n), 127. 
Nagabhata II, 6, 7, 10, 24-28, 29, 32, 35, 
40, 41(n), 47, 48, 50, 51, 56(n), 83, 94, 
95, 100, 101, 103, 106, 109, 110, 127, 
135, 290. 

Nagadeva, 292. 

Nagadevlpa—See also Ceylon and Jaffna, 
171. 

Naga kings, 277. 

Nagara (city), 143. 

Nagara Bramanas, 374, 395 (n). 
Nagaradhipa, 244. 

Nagarahara (Jelalabad), 52. 

Nagarapatis —See also purapatis, 246. 
Nagarattar, 411(n). 

Nagarjuna, 199, 259, 265, 266, 269, 286, 
360(n). 

Nagarjunikonda, 175. 

Nag as, 261. 

Nagas (images), 175. 

Nagavaloka, 27, 40(n), 41 (n), 106. 
Nagavarma I, 224. 

Nagila Kaula, 210. 

Nagod State, 330. 

Nahar, 363(n). 

Nainar, S. M. H., 56(n). 

Nairatma, 288. 

Naishadhdnanda, 181. 

Naiskkarmyasiddhi, 365(n). 

Naishthika, 366. 

Naiyayikas, 267, 272.. 

Nala, 186, 188. 

Nalachampu, —See also Damayantikatha, 
188. 

Nalagiri, taming of, 275, 276. 

Nalanda, 176. 

Nalanda, 44, 49, 52, 268, 269, 271, 272, 
274, 335, 341, 344, 369, 415, 436, 444, 
446, 489. 

Nalanda Copper Plate, 56(n), 411. 
Nalanda monastery, 270, 275. 

Ndldyira Prabandham, 227. 

Ndl-gdvundas , 245, 292. 

Nalodaya, 184, 186. 

Namamdla, 184. 

Ndma-rupa-samdsa, 211. 
Namaskfira-mudrd, 279, 314. 
Nambi-Andar-Nambi, 227. 

Nambi, Purushothama, 227. 

Namisadhu, 186, 192. 

Nammalvar, 312. 


Nanadesa-Tisaiyayirattu-Ainnurruvar, 

406, 411 (n). 

Nanak, 216, 

Nan-Chao, 422, 433. 

Nanda, 277. 

N and as (of Orissa), 78. 

Nandi, 307, 329. 

Nandigupta, 121. 

Nandikampa, 166. 

Nandikkalambakam, 151. 

Nandimath, Dr. S. C. 231 (n). 

Nanllpurl (Nandod), 2, 19, 21, 40(n). 
Nandishena, 210. 

Nandivardhana, 397(n). 

Nandi-varman II, Pailavamalla, 151, 163, 
166, 167, 188. 

Nandivarman III, 139, 151, 152, 159. 
Nandod Nandlpurl, 2. 

Nanduna, salt mines of, 114. 

Nanni Nolamba, 164. 

Nannuka, 83. 

Nara. 116, 117. 

Narada, 251, 252, 376, 406. 
Ndradiyamahapurdna, 391. 

Ndradiya Parana, 203, 335, 366, 375. 
Naraka (dynasty), 60, 63, 80(n), 
Narasimha (iconography), 331, 332, 311. 
Narasimha (a feudatory of Indra III), 
135. 

Narasimha (son of Nltimarga II), 161. 
Narasimha II (Chalukya), 13, 35, 36. 
Narasimhacharya, R., 222. 
Narasirhha-varman, 166, 167. 

NarasimhI, 340. 

Naravaliana (Guhila k.), 97, 109. 
Naravahana (Kashmir minister), 121. 
Naravahana (khasa k.), 117. 

Naravarman (Guhila), 110, 269. 
Narayana, 186, 332, 341, 350. 
Narayanpala (KLamboja k.), 54. 
Narayanapala (Pala k.), 31, 53, 57(n), 
111, 242. 

Narendrabhahja I, 75. 

Narendrabhanj a II, 75. 

Narendra-dhavala, 79. 

Narendramrigcwdja, 133. 

Narmada (River), 5, 7, 10, 15, 31, 40(n), 
90, 95, 97, 98, 102, 104, 107, 323, 342. 
Naropa, 273, 274. 

Narwar, 36. 

Nasik, 10, 335. 

NasudevI, 123. 

Na^a, 323. 

Ndtakaratnakosa (Nataka-lakshanxi- 
ratna-kosa), 196, 230(n). 

Natana Sabhd, 306. 

Nataraja, 155, 

Nataraja type of 6iva images 177, 306. 
Nathamuni, 206, 258, 312, 313. 

Nathists, 322. 

Nattii, 83. 

N attar, 248. 

Natyadarpana , 179. 

Natyasastra, 179, 196, 213, 214. 
Ndvddhyaksha, 243. 

Naubehar, 451. 


565 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Nava-Durga, 343, 344, 347. 
Navagraha-chakra, 337. 

Navagrahas, 297, 298, 336, 337, 340, 346, 
351-352. 

Navalakha temple, 338. 

Navalirigas, 343. 

Navanlta-Ganapati, 346. 
Navasahasanka-charita, 98, 184. 
Navasahasdnka Sindhuraja, 98, 184. 

Navsari, 2. 

Navsari Ins., 134, 188. 

Navsari plates of Puiakesin, 18(n). 

Nayachakra, 216. 

Nayachandra Suri, 131 (n). 

Nayagadh State, 71. 

Navakumdra-chariu , 218. 

Nayanars, 227, 228, 292. 

Nayanmars, the three, 311. 

Nayapala (Kamboja k.), 54. 

Nayapala (Pala), 242, 448. 

Nedumbai, 292. 

Neduhjadaiyan Pandya (son of Mara- 
varman Rajasimha), 157, 158, 164. 
Negarnesa, 349. 

Nehawand, 353. 

Nellura (Nellore), 135, 136, 142, 155. 
Nelveli, 158. 

Nemaditya, 188, 290. 

Nemichandra, 290, 294. 

Nemindha-chcuriu, 219. 

Neminatha, 299, 336. 

Nemindtha Parana —See also Harivarnsa, 
224. 

Nepal, 47, 58-60, 115, 131 (n), 270, 279, 
281, 311, 323, 346, 360(n), 390. 
Nettabhahja I, 70, 72 
Nettabhahja If, 70. 

Nettabhahja Tribhuvanakalasa, 71. 
Nettabhahja of Baud grant, 72. 
Nettabhahia of Jurada grant, 72, 73. 

Neiilpur plate, 64, 66, 67, 80(n), 81,(n). 
Newari era (epoch of), 58. 

Ngan-nan, 422. 

Niddna —See also Rugvinischaya and 
Mddho.va-niddna, 199, 451. 
Nidanakathd, 212. 

Nidaya-Stambha, 78. 

Nidusanti (clan), 142. 

Nigama, 316. 

Nighaniu, —See also Dhanvantari 
Nighantu, 199. 

Nikayasamgrata, 211, 361(n). 

Nikshubha, 349. 

Nilakantha, 279, 280. 

Nilgund plates* of Amoghavarsha, 18(n). 
Nimbara, 123. 

Ninnaya, 289. 

Niravaayapura, 136. 

Nirbhaya (k. of Nepal), 59, 181. 
Nirbhayanarendra (Mahendrapala 1, 
Pratihara k.), 33, 181. 

Nirbhayaraja (Mahendrapala I, Prati¬ 
hara k,), 33. 

Nirgranthas, 289. 

Nirjitavarman (Pangu), 119. 

Nirupama (Rashtrakufa pr.), 15. 


Nirupama Kali-vallabha, 4. 

Nishada, 371. 

Nissahkamalla (Sahilla-varmatn), 121. 
Nisumbha, 340. 

NItimarga I, 161, 290. 

Nitimarga II, 161, 164. 

Nitisara, 232. 

Nitivakydinrita, 186, 189, 232, 238, 294. 
Nitivarman, 186. 

Nityavarsha (Indra III), 13. 

Nivritti Kula, 210. 

Niyama, 264. 

Niyamatpur, 334. 

Niyarnama, 73. 

Niyarnava, 145. 

Niyuktaka, 246. 

Niyuktas, 255(n). 

Nohala (Kalachuri q.), 90. 
Nolarnbakuldntaka, 162, 164. 
Noiamba-Pallavas, 152, 163/ 
Noiamba-rash^ra, 135, 137, 138. 

Noiambas, 12, 153, 161, 162, 163, 164. 
Nolamba Singapota, 160. 

Noiambavadi, 153, 163, 164. 

Nona, 194. 

Non-dualism, 300. 

North Arcot District, 151. 

North, India, 331. 

North Kan&ra District, 47. 

North Pennar, 155. 

North-West Frontier Province, 50, 115, 
Nowgong, 330. 

Nowgong, CP. of Bala-varman, 78(n) 
Nriga, 205. ' 

Nripakama, 139. 

Nriparudra (born of Haihaya or Kala- 
. churi Princess), 133. 

Nripatunga—See also Amoghavarsha J, 
8, 167, 221, 223, 224. 

Nripatunga-varman- (son" of Nandivar- 
man III), 152, 159, 166, 168. 

Nritya Ganapati^ 346, 349. 

Nritya-murti, 305. 

Nydsa (placing), 325, 326. 

Nydsa , 190. 

Nyaya, 152. 

Nydyakandali, 205, 206, 395(n). 
Nyayakanikd, 204. 

Nydyakusumdnjali ,—See also Kusuman- 
jali, 206. 

Nyaya-madhyamika, 270. 

Nydyamanjari, 183, 205. 

Nydyaprisishta, 205. 

Nydyasdra , 205. 

Nydyasuchinibandha, 204. 

Nyayasutra, 204, 205. 

Nydyasutroddhdra, 204. 

Nydyatattva, 206, 312. 

Nyaya-Vaiseshika, 206, 356, 357, 364(n). 
Nydyavdrttikatatparya, 204. . 
Nydyavdrttikatatjparyatikd, 204, 205. 

O 

i 

! Odantapurl (monastery), 49, 270, 275, 
i 447. 


566 






INDEX 


Odivisa—See also Orissa, 268, 360(n). 
Odiyana, 323. 

Odra, 71, 91, 147, 370. 

Odras, 213. 

Oertel, 279. 

Ojha, 41 (n). 

Oldenberg, 230(n). 

Oman, 402, 414. 

Orissa—See also Odivisa, Ud$iyana, 53, 
58, 62, 82, 91, 147, 150, 268, 285, 296, 
323, 334, 337, 345, 352, 362(n), 370, 
395(n). 

Orissa, Dynasties of Mediaeval, 77, 
79(n). 

Orissa under the Bhauma Kings, 69, 
8l(n). 

Osia, 41 (n), 333. 

Osmanabad, 1, 218. 

Oudh (Awadh), 32, 33. 

P 

Paddgra, 244. 

Padalipta, 209. 

Padariya, 177 (n). 

Pddatdditaka, 182. 

Padma, 300. 

Padmagupta, (Parimala), 94, 95, 98, 184, 
187. 

Padmakaraghosha, 272. 

Padmakirti, 219. 

Padmapada, 365(n). 
Padmapani-Avalokitesvara, 278. 
Padmapmbhritaka, 182. 

Padmapura (Kashmir), 119. 

Padma Purdna, 183, 336, 341. 
Padmasambhava, 447. 

Padmafadeva, 124. 

Padma Tantra, 332. 

Padmavajra, 266, 268, 269. 

Padmdvata, 217. 

Padmavatl (Jain iconography), 300, 341. 
Padmavatl (Princess), 179. 
Padminl-vidya, 362(n). 

Pagan, 433. 

Pag-sam-jon-zang, 362(n). 

Paharpur, 49, 57(n), 273, 329, 331, 352. 
Pahlavi, 353. 

Pahuda-Doha, 216. 

Paiyalachchhi, 187. 
Pcuyalachchhi-ndma-mala, 218. 

Pajjhatika —See also Alillaha, 217. 

Pala administration, 255 (n). 
Palakapyasarahitd, 367. 

Palas of Bengal, 4, 7, 9, 11, 16, 22, 23, 24, 
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 44-57, 58, 
63, 67, 71, 72, 76, 85, 86, 89, 93, 181, 
242, 243, 257, 270, 274, 289, 306, 307, 
326, 328, 331, 341, 360(n), 395(n), 
404, 410(n), 415, 436, 446, 449. 

Palas of Bengal, 57(n). 

Palas, rise of the, 44-45, 130(n). 
Palasakupika, 109. 

Palembang, 412. 

Pali, 88, 146. 

Pali Language and Literature, 231 (n). 


Pali literature, non-canonical, 210-212. 
Pali literature of Ceylon, 177(n). 
Pallagambhlra, 81(n). 

Pal Lahara, 68, 77. 

Pallava architecture, 329. 

Pallava kingdom, 292. 

Pallava sculpture, 338. 

Pallavamalla, 139. 

Pallavas, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 51, 135, 142, 151, 
154, 155, 158, 159, 161, 163, 164, 167, 
176, 246, 292, 328, 329, 335. 

Pallavas, 165(n). 

Pallavas, the Later, 168. 

Pallavas of Kanchi, History of the, 
165(n). 

Pallava sculpture, 176. 

Pammava, 139. 

Pampa (Kannada Poet), 136, 224, 225. 
Pampa Bhdrata, 35, 136, 224, 227. 

Panara dynasty, 138. 

Panchabrahmas, 310. 

Panchakshari mantra, 203. 

Pahchala women, 379. 

Pdnchalas, 390. 

Panchali, 213. 

Panchamakara, 321. 

Panchapadika, 365 (n). 

Pancharatra system, 310, 312, 313, 356. 
Pdnchardtra, 215. 

Pahcharatrins, 309. 

Panchasar, 289. 

Pahchasara-caitya, 289. 

Pancliatantra, 450. 

Panchatattva, 321. 

Pancha-vdra, 247. 

Pahchika, 300. 

Pandaranga, 136, 139. 

Pandarathar, T. V. Sadasiva, 165 (n). 
Pandaravasini, 262, 266. 

Pandava tale, 294. 

Panday, 81 (n). 

Pandita Bodhisattava— See also 6anta- 
rakshita, Dharmasantighosha, 271. 
Panditavatsala (title of Parantaka), 155, 
' i.58. 

Pandiyar Varalaru, 165(n). 

Pandudasa, 205, 395(n). 

Pandukes var, 123. 

Panduranga (country), 423, 424. 
Panduranga, (E. Chalukya general), 9, 
88, 135. 

Panduvarhsa, 146. 

Pandy a Empire, the First, 157. 

Pandya kingdom, 292, 374, 404. 

Pdndya kingdom, 165(n), 256(n). 
Pandyas, 8, 51, 91, 135, 151, 152, 153, 
154, 155, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 163, 
164, 165, 167, 169, 170, 171, 173, 247, 
248, 411 (n). 

Pangu (Nirjitavarman), 119. 

Pangudvipa, 274. 

Panini, 185, 190, 425, 443. 

Parabala (Rashtrakuta k.), 49. 
Parachakrakolahala, 158. 

Parakesari (title), 153. 


567 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Parak<ssari-^arman (title of Parantaka), 

155. 

Parakesari Vijayalaya Clioladeva. 153. 
Parakramapandya—See also Sri-val- 
labha-madanara j a, 173. 
Paiamabrahmanya, 136. 
Pardmappapaya.su, 216. 

Paramaras, 15, 36, 43(g), 111, 241, 290. 
Paramaras of Malwa, 38, 39 f 84, 92, 93, 
94, 99/185, 242. 

Paramarthasdra , 208, 301, 363(n). 
Paramatman, 325. 

Paramattha-dipa -~-See also Khemappa - 
karana, 211. 

Parames vara-var man, 166, 426. 
Paramesvariya-hasta, 240. 

Parananda, 78. 

Parantaka. (another name for Neduh- 
jacfaiyanj, 157, 158. 

Parantaka I (Chela k.), 12, 14, 154, 155, 

156, 159, 161, 163, 164, 165, 167 170, 
171, 248, 249, 396(n), 397 (n), 408. 

Parantaka II, 158, 157, 171. 

Parantaka Ylranarayana, 159. 

Para-s&kti, 310. 

Parasara, 387, 370, 378, 379. 

Parasurama, 332, 333. 

Parasuramesvara, 334. 
Paratrhfr&kavivarana, 134. 

Paravas, 158. 

Parbatiya. Plate, 79(n). 

Parbatsar, 107, 108, 

Paribh&shaprahcLsa, 400, 409(n). 
Farichchhadi Pasupati rulers, 291. 
P&richchhedins, 137. 

Pariharas (Pratiharas), 38. 

Parl&kimedi, 143, 145. 

Pamasavari, 284, 288. 

Pamotsa country, 121. 

Par si Prakasa, 364(n). 

Parsis—See also Zoroastrianism, 352-354. 
Parsv&bhyudaya-kavya, 182, 183. 
Parsvanatha, 289, 297, 300. 

Pratabgarh, 108, 109, 110. 

Partabgarh Inscription (S. Rajputana) 
31, 32, 40(n), 42(n), 131(n). 

Partha (k. of Kashmir), 119. 
P&rthasarathi, 151, 365 (n). 

Parvagtipta, 85, 113. 

Parvata, 100. 

Parvatakara, 125. 

Parvatt, 184, 263, 306, 318, 318, 329, 330, 
335, 338, 344/347. 

Pasa, 319. 

Pdsanaha-chariu or Pasapux&nu, 219. 
Paseiiaddesa, 403. 

Pasu t 319, 320. 

Pasupatas, 373. 

Pasupatastra, 307. 

Pdsupaia-vrata , 203. 

Pasupati (City), 56(n). 

Pasupati (God), 60, 360. 

Pa$aHputra, 29, 49, 

Patan (Gujarat), 91, 103. 

Pa tan (Nepal), 60. 


Patanjali, 200, 204, 205, 213, 214, 231(n), 
293; 420, 443. 

Patavidhana, 264. 

Pathak Comm. Vol., 229 (n). 
Patharghata, 49. 

Pathari Pillar Ins., 41 (n). 

Pathasukha, 81 (n). 

Pathira Giriar, 228. 

Patiala, 112. 

Patisambhidamagga, 211. 

Patna Museum, 280, 362(n). 

Patna State, 147. 

Pattadakal, 334. 

PattavardhinI (family), 139. 

Patfcinathar, 228. 

Pattin! Devi, 177. 

Patuyas, 361 (n). 

Paiimachariu , 217, 218. 

Paumgsirt-chariu , 219. 

Pauranikas, 324. 

Paurava Line of kings, 125. 

Pauravas of Brahmapura, 124-5. 

Pawars (See under Paramaras). 

Pegu, 410(n). 

Peheva, 384. 

Pehowa, 111, 112. 

Pembabbe, 292. 

Pemiagadam, 158, 159. 

Persia, 126, 128, 352, 405. 

Persian wheels, 401. 

Perumais, 165. 

Perundevanar, i51. 

Petech, 79(h), 80(n), 453(n). 

Peterson, 229(n), 230(n). 

Phalguna, 120, 121. 

Phnom Bakhen, 420. 

Phnom Kuien, 417. 

Phuila (Khasa k.), 117. 

Piers Plowman, 228. 

■Pindawara, 336. 

Pihgala (iconography), 336. 

Pingala (Poet), 190, 217. 

Pingald , 325. 

Pingala-Ganapati, 345, 346. 
Pirkalach-Cholar-'Charittiram, 165(n). 
Pischel, 181, 182, 229(n). 

Pisharoti, 184 

Plihapuram Ins., 57 (n), 89. 

Pito, 268, 275. 

Polalchora, 164. 

Polonnaruva—See also Pulatthinagara, 
172, 174, 176, 177. 

Po Nagar, 421, 425, 426, 442. 

Pondicherry, 3.52, 156, 369. 

Ponduru grant, 143. 

Forma, 224, 225, 292. 

Poona—See also Puniagiri, 233. 
Porbandar, 99. 

Porsha, 344. 

Potalaka, 262. 

Potahkusa (son of Gunarr^ava), 143. 
Po$tI Katyur, 123. 

Prabandhachintamani, 188. 
Prabandhakosa f 106. 

Prabandhas, the Jain, 289, 290. 
Prabhachandra, 294, 354, 364(n), 


568 




INDEX 


Prabhakara, 113, 118, 120. 

Prabhakara (dialectician),. 272, 312. 
Prabhahkara, 29S. 

Prabhasa (Chandella minister), 87, 
Prabhasa (Pratlhara Bhoja I), 32. 
Prabhasa (lirtka), 102. 
Frabhdvaka-charita, 27, 28, 185, 383(n). 
Prabhavasiva, 90. 

Prabhudevi, 394(n). 

Prabhutavarsha (Govinda II), 3. 
Prabhutavarsha , (Govinda XXX), 6. 
Praehanda, 343, 384(n). 

Prachandapanelava, 229 (n). 

Prachi (kings of), 93. 

Prdchyd, 213. 

Pradyumna, 314, 332. 

Pradyumnasuri, 290. 

Pragjyotisha (Assam), 50, 61. 

Prajna ( Pr a j ha -paramita), 283. 
Prajhakaramati, 273. 

Prajnapdramiid, 281, 286. 
Prajndparamitd-navasloke-pinddrtha 268. 
Prajnaparamitd-sutras, 271, 272. 
Prajnopdya-vinischaya-siddhi, 269. 
Prakasatman, 365(n). 

Prakrita-sarvasva, 231(n). 

Prahriti, 318, 338. 356. 

Pralambha, 60, 79(n). 

Pramdna, the theory of, 358. 

Pra manaviv ischaya, 194. 

Pramdiri , 243. 

Prambanan (valley), 428, 440. 
Pranayama, 325. 

Prdntapdla, 243. 

Prasannardghava, 180. 

Prasantamitra. 272. 

Prasastapada, 205. 

Prasenajit, 182, 276. 

Prasiddhadhavala (Sahkaragana, Kala- 
churi k. of Dahala), 88. 
PrasnotXCLramdlika, 294. 

Pratibhdchanahya, 179. 

Pratihdra, 244. 

Pratlharas—See Gurjara-Pratmaras. 
Pratlharas, the Imperial, 242, 257. 
Pratlharas of Jodhpur, 29, 30. 
Prailharenduraja, 191, 192, 193, 194, 196, 
197. 

Pratimalakshanam, 364 ( n). 

Pratishfhana, 323. 

Pratyabhijna , 300, 301, 302, 303, 304. 
Praiyabhijndsdstra, 206. 
Pratyabhijndsutra, 206. 
Pratyabhijndvimarsini , 194, 206. 
Pratyahgira, 344. 

Pratyekabuddha, 218. 
Pravachanamroddhara, 299. 

Fravarasena, 443. 

Prayaga, 115, 116. 

Prinsep, 58. 

Prithivl—See also Bhumi and Vasud- 
hara, 283, 285, 334. 

Prithivichandra (k, of Trigarta), 118. 
Prithivlndra-varman, 423. 

Prithivyaplda, 115. 


Friihivyaplda (Samgramapida II), 116. 
Prithu, 178. 

Prithu (legendary), 238. 

Prithudaka, 111, 384. 

Prithusvami. 200. 

Frithvibhanja (of Khijjihga), 75. 
Prithvibharvja (of Khihjali), 71. 
Pnthvlmabadevl (Kara queen), 148, 149. 
Prithvlpala (k. of Rajapurl), 121. 
Prithvlpati I, 159, 160, 161, 163, 167. 

[ Prithvipati I (Western gaga), 152, 160. 
j Prithvlpati II, 154, 155, 160, 161. 
Prithvivallakha (Dantidurga), 2. 
Prithvlvallabha (Muhja), 97. 
Prithvlvallabha (Pulakesin), 2. 
Prilhvi-varman (son of Mahlndra- 
varman), 145. 

Priyahgu, 54. 

Proliragala, 122. 

Prome, 432. 

Ptolemy, 450. 

Pudukkottai, 152. 154, 166. 

Pujyapada, 223. 

Pukkasas. 372. 

Pulakesi'(Chapa), 103. 

Pulakesin (Gujarat Chalukya), 2. 

PulaUh in again—See also Polonnaruva. 
172. 

Pulinadu, 164. 

Pulivaru Inscription, 137. 

Puliyur, 158. 

Pulligoda Galkomde, 177. 

Punch, 113, 120. 

Pundra, 400. 

Pundravardhana, 45, 115. 

Punjab, 32, 33. 46. 47, 85, 110, 111, 112, 
115, 117, 370, 404. 

Punyaklrti, 268. 

Purana (s), 152, 308 , 313, 316. 339, 34C. 

436, 443. 

Purantaka, 185, 

Purapara image, 306. 

PurapatisSee also nagarapatis, 246. 
Purdah, 382. 

.Puri, 62, 69, 315. 

Purigere, 14, 255(n). 

Pijrna (-giri)—See also Poona,, 323. 
Pumaraja, 111. 

Purnatalla (Chahamana k.), 106. 
Purnavardhana, 272. 

Purusha, 263. 

Purusharthasiddhyupaya, 294. 

Purvadesa, 403„ 404. 

Purva-rmmdmsd , 312, 358, 359. 
Purvarashtravishaya, 77. 

Pushkara-tlrtha, 107, 108. 

Pushpadanta, 198, 218, 220, 294. 

Pushti, 314. 

Pushyadeva, 99. 

Pyus, 432, 433. 

Q 

Qadisiyya, 353, 

Qissa-i-Sanjdii, 353, 354. 

Quilon (or Kollam), 165, 403, 410(n), 445. 

569 






THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


R 

Rabban, Joseph, 165. 

Radha (goddess), 318. 

Radha (place), 53, 66, 81(n), 86. 
Radhanpur grants, 133. 

Radhanpur plates of Govinda III, 18(n), 
41(n). 

Ragacharya, 265. 

Rdgarati, 266. 

Raghavadeva (k. of Nepal), 59. 
Raghavan, 230 (n). 

Raghava-pandaviya —See also Dvi- 

sand hana, 184. 

Raghu, 35, 130(n). 

Raghuvamsa, 186, 443. 

Rahada (Kalachuri q.), 91. 

Rahappa, 3. 

Rahila, 84. 

Rahila-varma, 84. 

Rahilya, 84. 

Rahilya-sagara, 84. 

Rahma, 404, 410(n). 

Rahu, 352. 

Rahulabhadra, 81 (n), 272. 

Rahula Sankrityayana, 216. 

Raipur District, 146. 

Raja, C. K., Comm. Vol. 230(n), 
Rajabhanja, 75. 

Raja-Bhima, 138. 

Rdjadharma, 232, 236. 

Rajadhiraja, 173, 174. 

Rajadhiraja Vishnu, 412. 

Rajaditya (Chola crown-prince), 14, 155, 
156, 162, 165. 

Rajagriha, 275, 276. 

Rajaguru, S., 81(n). 

Rajakesari (Title), 153. 

R'ajalakshmi, 438. 

Rajamahendra, 137, 139. 
Rajamahendrapura, 139. 

RajamahendrI (City), 139. 

Rajamalla (k. of Gangava^i), 14, 162, 
163. 

Rajamalla (Naga chief), 67, 68. 

Rajamalla I (Vijayditya son), 161, 164, 
165 (n). 

Rajamalla IH, 161, 162. 

Rajamartanda, 205. 

Rdjamartanxjia (Indra III), 13, 138. 
Rdjamdtya , 243. 

Rajamayya, 138. 

Rajanaka Ratnakara, 183. 

Rdjanyas, 241. 

Rajaona, 307. 

Rajapurl, 121, 122. 

Rajaputra (author), 397(n). 

Rajaputra (Kalachuri k. of Sarayu- 
p^ ra ) 93# 

Rajaraja, 14o’ 141, 144, 150, 156, 157, 159, 
160, 172, 179,(n), 248, 397(n), 402, 409, 
409(n), 410(n). 

Rajarajanarendra, 291. 

Rajarajapuram, 172. 

Rajarajesvarl, 344. 

Rajarash^ra, 172, 173. 


I Rajasa, 319. 

| Rajasekhara (Poet), 33, 35, 41, 42(n), 90, 
91, 180, 181, 183, 192, 193, 195, 229(n), 

368, 369, 382, 384, 385, 386, 388, 389, 
390, 394(n), 395(n), 396(n), 404. 

Rajasiriiha II, 154, 158, 159. 

Rajasimha period, (architecture), 329. 
Rajasimhesvara temple, 369. 
Rajasthdulyas, 241, 244, 255(n). 
Rdjataranginx, 33, 58, 112, 114, 126, 244, 
255(n), 363(n). 

Rajauri (Hill State), 121. 

Rdjavarttika, 294. 

Rajendra, 144, 163, 167, 172, 173, 174, 312, 

369. 

RajendradevI, 419. 

Rajendra-varman (of Kambuja), 421, 
425, 438. 

Rajendra-varman (another name for 
Manujendra-varman, 141. 
Rajendra-varman I, 140. 
Rajendra-varman II, 141. 

R'aji, 103. 

Rajhi, 349. 

Rajor Inscription, 37, 40(n). 

Rajorgarh, 37. 

Rajputana, 4, 7, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 30, 37, 
45, 47, 87, 94, 97, 241, 296, 331, 313, 
336, 337. 

Rajputana, Eastern, 20. 

Rajput Clans, 83, 111. 

Raishahi District, 49, 330, 332, 339, 351. 
Rajshahi Museum, 306, 314, 315, 334, 344, 
349, 364(n). 

R'ajyapala (Kamboja k.), 54. 

Rajyapala (Pala k.), 53, 54, 57(n), 89. 
Rajyapala (Pratihara k.), 38. 

Rajayapura (Rajor), 37. 

Rakka, 121. 

Rakkasa Gahga, 162, 163. 

Rakshasa, 179. 

Rdkshasa (form of marriage), 17(n). 
Rdkshasakavya —See also Kavyarak - 

skasa , 186. 

Rdkshasas, 261. 

Ral-pa-can, 58, 79(n), 274, 446, 447. 
Rama (historical), 184. 

Rama (legendary), 180, 333. 

Ramabhadra (Pratihara k.). 28, 29, 38, 
51, 241. 

Ramachandra, 179, 180, 184. 
Ramachandran, T., 74. 

Ramachariia , 45, 183, 395 (n). 
Rdmacharita-Manasa , 217. 
Ramajanardana, 237. 

Ramakantha, 301. 

Ramanhadesa, 422. 

Ramanuja, 206, 312, 323, 360. 

Ramapala (Pala k.), 28, 55(n). 
Ramasimha Muni, 216. 

Ramathas, 35. 

Ramatirtham, 291. 

Ramayana, 181, 217, 236, 436, 440. 
Rambha, 347. 

Rameses, 162. 

Ramesvaram, 14, 15, 16, 51, 156. 


570 





t 


INDEX 


Rami, 413. 

Ramnad, 170. 

Rampal, 345. 349. 

Ranabhanja (of Khijjiiiga), 75, 76, 

81(n). 

Ranabhanja (of Khinjali), 70, 71, 72, 73, 
145. 

Ranabhanja (son of Satrubhahja), 149. 
Ranahastin (Pratihara Vatsaraja), 21. 
Kanaka I (Saindhava k.), 100. 

Ranaka II (do), 100. 

Rana Mokalji’s temple 310. 
Ranaranga-simha, 162. 

Ranarnava (son of Kamarnava), 143. 
Rana-siambha, 77, 82(n). 

Ranasura, 86. 

Ranavigraha (Sahkaragana, Kalachuri k. 

of Dahala), 88, 90. 

Rahganathacbarya. 312. 

Ranipur-Jural, 343. 

Ranna, 224, 225, 226, 290, 291. 

Rannadevi, 49. 

Rao. B. V. Krishna, 140, 149. 

Rac, M. V. Krislina, 165(n). 

Rao, N. L. 43(n). 

Rao, T. A. G., 306, 308, 310, 315, 363(n), 

364(n). 

Fasaratndkara, 199. 

Rasavdhini. 212. 

Rdshiragrdmamahatlaras , 255(n). 
Rashtrakuta, 247. 

Rashtrakutas, 1-17, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 
27, 28, 30, 31. 34. 35, 36, 37, 38, 41(n >, 
43(n), 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 
56, 57, 84, 86, 87. 88, 89, 91, 93, 94, 
95, 96. 97, 101, 105, 134, 135, 136, 137, 

138, 149, 151, 155, 156, 157, 160, 161, 

162, 163, 164, 166, 167, 171, 173, 188, 

189, 200. 218, 223, 245, 246, 247, 290, 

291, 292, 294, 296, 328, 333, 369, 

397(n), 399(n), 403, 407, 453. 
Rashtrakutas and their Times, 140, 177 
(n), 255(n). 

Rashtrakutas, Bodh-Gaya branch of the, 
189. 

Rashtrakutas of Lata, 11, 12, 105. 
Rashtrakutas, origin, 17(n). 
Rdshtramahattaras, 255(n). 

Rashlrapati, 246. 

Rasosittana-mandala, 107. 

Ratanasutta, 360 (n). 

Ratanpur, 88, 146. 

Rati, 314. 

Ratilalita, 387. 

Ratirahasya , 377, 387, 390. 

Ratnaditya (Chapa k.), 103. 

Ratnagiri, 285. 

Ratnakara, 117, 179. 

Ratnakarasanti, 273. 

Ratnapala, 79(n). 

Ratnaprabha (suri), 205. 209. 

Ratnapura, 176. 

Ratnasambhava, 282, 285. 

Ratnavajra, 273, 448. 

Ratnavardhana, 117. 

Ratra, 316. 


Ratta (Rashtrakuta), 134, 135, 136. 
Rattakandarpa (India III), 13. 

RaudrI, 340. 

Ravananugraha-murti, 307. 

Ravi (planet), 352. 

Ravi (writer), 184. 

Ravideva, 186. 

Ravishena, 183, 209. 

Rawalpindi District, 112. 

Ray, H. C., 140. 

Ray, N., 37, 40(n). 

Ray, P. C., 230(n). 

| Ray, Tridiva Nath, 397(n), 398(n). 

Raya, 163. 

Rayabhanja, 70. 

Raychaudhuri, H. C., 42(n). 

Renandu, 155, 164. 

Reva (princess.), 151, 168. 

Revaka (princess Reva), 151, 162. 

Reva (river), 1, 323. 

Revanta, 351. 

-ReWa, 41 (n), 90, 338. 

R'ice, B. L., 165(n), 363(n). 

Rice, E. P., 231(n). 

Rishabha, 183, 224, 289, 296, 329. 
Rishabhanatha, 297, 298, 299. 
Rishabhapanchasikd , 188. 

Rishika, 401. 

Ritasiddhi, 136. 

Riti , 191. 

Rohang, 169, 170, 171, 172 ; 173, 174, 175. 
Rohitagiri, 54, 77. 

Rohitasva, 76. 

Rohtasgadh, 54, 77. 

Ross Com. Vol., 230(n), 231 (n). 

Rudra (Hindu pantheon), 305, 309, 311, 
360. 

Rudra (k. of Nepal), 59. 

Rudrabhatta, 192. 

Rudrachanda, 344, 364(n). 

Rudraditya (minister of Munja), 98. 
Rudrata, 186, 191, 192, 195, 196, 214, 
Rudra-varman II, 423. 

Rudraydmala, 326. 

Rudrena (Rudra?), (Tomara), 107, 112. 
Rugvinischaya —See also Madhavani- 

ddna and Niddna, 199, 

Ruhavi, 331, 338. 

Ruhmi, 52, 404. 

Rukminl, 314, 

Rupamandana, 347. 

Rupavidya, 341, 348. 

Ruru, 308. 

Ruyanavaliseya, 175. 

S 

Sahara chiefs, 138. 
gabaraditya, 142. 

Sabaras, 213. 

§abarasvamin, 312. 

Sabarmati (River), 96, 97, 105. 
Sabdanusdsana, 190. 

Sahhd, 249, 406, 411(n). 

Sabhdpati, 191. 

Sabuktigln, 86. 


A.I.K.—88 


571 








THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Sacharas, 213. 

Sachau, 451, 453 (n). 

Sachchasankhepa, 210, 211. 
Sadasiva-murti, 305, 309, 310. 
Saddhammappakasim, 211. 
Saddhamma-ratnakara, 211. 

Saddhamma-Samgaha. 210, 231 (n). 
Saddharmapundarika, 261, 361 (n), 
Sadhakas, 260. 

SadhanamaId, 269, 277, 279, 280, 281, 285, 
323, 361 (n), 362(n). 

Sadhanva, 104. 

Sadiya, 340. 

Sadyojata, 310. 

Saffarid dynasty, 112, 113, 126, 128. 
Sagara, 176. 

Sagaramegha, 272. 

Sagaranandin, 196. 

Saguna-Brahman, 302. 

Sahaja-siddhi, 269. 

Sahaja-yana, 269, 449. 

Sahas a Bhlma Vi jay a —See also Gada- 
Yuddha, 245. 

Sdhasdnka (Sahilla-varman), 122. 
Sahasrdra, 325. 

Sahasrarjuna (Kalachnri k.), 89. 

Sahi (k. of Kira), 85. 

Sahilla-varman, 122. 

Sahni, Daya Ram, 114 
Sahrdaya, 193. 

Saidabad, 345. 
gailaputri, 343, 364(n). 
gailendras, 52, 274, 412, 414, 415, 423, 
427, 428, 429, 431, 432, 436, 440, 441. 
gailodbhavas, 53, 62, 63, 74. 

Saimur, 386. 

Saindhavas, 24, 25, 99-101, 374. 
Saindhava-sravakas, 273, 274, 275. 
gaiva, 322. 

gaiva Agamas, 323, 338. 
gaiva ascetics, 90. 
gaiva Deities, 337. 
gaiva monastery, 90. 
gaiva philosophy, 301. 

Saivachara, 320, 323. 
gaivagamas, 305. 
gaivas, 153, 338, 373. 
gaiva teachers, 91. 

gaivism, 257, 258, 289, 291, 292, 300-310, 
316, 324, 328, 338, 358, 360, 420, 421, 
425. 

gaivism, Kashmir, 300, 304, 338, 360. 
Saivism, Tantrik, 418. 
gaivite Sakti, 341. 

Sajjana Upadhyaya, 209. 

Sajjana-varman, 122. 
gakadvlpl Brahmanas, 334. 
Sakcda-dakshina-dig-adhipati (Krishna 
HI), 15. 

gakambharl, 22, 87, 104, 107, 109. 
gakas, 179, 374. 
gakatayana, 11, 190, 294. 

Sakawand, 113. 
gakra, 276. 

gakta Tantras, 323, 338. 
gaktas, 322. 


gakti/s—See also Devi and gaktism, 
262, 263, 266, 287, 302, 303, 305, 308, 

316, 318, 320, 322, 324, 326, 328, 332, 

337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 343, 344, 345, 

346, 347-348, 361 (n). 

Saktibhadra 180. 
gakti-Ganapatis, 345. 

gaktikumara (Guhila k.), 97, 109, 110, 
396(n). 

Saktis, 321. 

gaktism—See also gakti, 288, 289, 316, 
318, 324, 337-346. 
gaktisvamin, 183. 

Salambha (k. of Kamarupa), 60, 61, 
79(n). 

Salanatuhga, 77. 

Salastambha (dynasty), 60, 243. 
Salastambha (k. of Kamarupa), 61. 
Salavahana 123. 

Salavana (Tomara), 107, 112. 

Salem, 154, 158, 164. 

Saletore, 363(n). 
galibhadra, 192. 
galivahana (Guhila k.), 109. 

Sallekhana, 16, 162, 290, 292. 

Salonaditya, 124. 

Salsette, 337. 

Salt Range, 404. 

Salva, 323. 

Salween, 420. 

Samagra type of dramatic composition, 
182. 

Samah Kora Ray, 114. 

Samaria, 213. 

Samangad Plates, 1, 18(n). 

Samanta (Chahamana), 106. 

Samanta (Shahi k.), 113, 118. 

Samanta Bhadra, 223, 354. 
Samatapdsddika, 212. 

Samantasimha (Chapa k.), 103. 
Samantasubha, 268. 

Samanta-varman (gvetaka king), 145. 
Samar adit ya- kathd —See also Samaraich- 
cha-kathd, 208. 

Samaragravlra, 412, 413. 
Samastabhuvanasraya, 139. 

Sdmaveda, 436. 

Samayachlryas, 227. 

Samayatara, 262, 266. 

Samayins, 322. 
gamba, 332. 

Sambalur, 146, 150. 

Sambandar, 292. 

Sambhala, 269. 

Sambhar, 106. 
gambhu, 301, 302. 
gambhupura, 416, 417, 419. 
gambhuvardhana, 119. 

Sambor, 416. 

Samgha, 405, 406. 

Samgxtamja, 230(n). 

Samgrama (Dtoara), 119. 
Samgramadeva (k. of Kashmir), 85, 120. 
Samgramagupta, 120. 

Samgramaplda 1,115. 

672 




INDEX 


Samgramapida II, 116. 

Samgramaraja, (k. of Kashmir), 121. 
Samhara, 308. 

Samhita, (s, Vaishnava), 316, 317, 335, 338. 
Saihjna, 349. 

Samkarshana, 309. 

Sarhkhya system, 316, 324. 
Sdmkhyakdrikd, 204. 

Samkhshepasdriraka, 206. 

Samoli, 110. 

Savnpuia-tilaka, 268. 

Samskdraprakdsa, 392(n), 393(n), 

394(n). 

Samskdraratnaradla, 392 (n). 
Samudra-gupfca, 124. 

Samudrasuri, 210. 

Sanakumnra-chariu, 219. 

Sanaphulla, 3. 

Sanatkumara Samhita, 335. 

Sanchl, 175. 

Sanchor, 105. 

Sandayan Tiruvayan I, 164. 

Sandayan Tiruvayan II, 164. 

Sander a, 331. 

Sandhi-nirmochana-sutra, 261, 361(n). 
Sdndhivigrahika, 241, 246. 

Sandhya Bhasha, 216, 231 (n). 

San-fo-tsi, 414, 415, 431. 

Sarigam Age, 153. 

Sang hyang Kamahdyanikan, 436. 
Sahgramadhanafijaya, 412. 

Sani, 352. 

Sanjan, 353, 354, 403. 

Sanjan plates of Amoghavarsha, 7, 
17(n), 18(n), 40(n), 41(n), 56(n), 

87. 

Sanjana, Rahman Kaykobad, 353. 

Sahjava, 416, 427, 428. 

Sankalia, 333. 

Sankara (acharya) (Bhagavat), 185, 204, 
206, 258, 259, 304, 313, 328, 329, 337, 
355, 357, 358, 359, 363(n), 365(n), 438. 
Sankara, the Philosophy of, 358-360. 
Sahkarabandha, 307. 

Sankardchdrya, &ri, 365 (n). 

Sahkaragana (Guhila k.), 25, 30, 110. 
Sahkaragana (Kalachuri k. of Dahala), 

88 . 

Sahkaragana (Kalachuri k. of Sarayu- 
para), 87, 93, 135. 

Sahkaragana II (Kalachuri k.), 91, 92. 
Sahkaragana EE Mugdbatuhga (Kalachuri 
k. of Saravupara), 94. 

Sahkaragana III (do.), 94. 

Sahkaravarman (Kashmir k.), 33, 112, 
113, 117, 118, 183, 186, 205. 

Sahkarl Samhita, 335, 

Sahkarites, 323. 

Sahkarshana, 332. 

Sahkasya, 275, 276. 

Sahkata (k. of Kashmir), 118. 

Sahkha, 151, 166, 168. 

Sahkhya, 365(n). 

Sdnkhya-Kdrika, 365 (n). 

Sahkhya-Yoga, 356, 357. 


Sahkila (Sahkaragana, Kalachuri k. of 
Dahala), 88, 89, 135. 

Sanku (town in Nepal), 60. 

Sankula (Poet), 195. 

Sahkuka (Sahkaragana, Kalachuri k. of 
Dahala), 88, 135. 

SanmitracharitaSee also Mahdvlra - 
chcrita and Vardhamanacharita, 183. 
Sannaha, 427. 

Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the 
Library of the University of Bom¬ 
bay, Descriptive Catalogue of, 
23G(n). 

Santa-Bommali Charter, 144, 145. 
Sanskrit, Champu, 188-189. 

Sanskrit, Drama, 178-182. 

Sanskrit, Kavya, 182-187. 

Sanskrit, Romance, 187-188. 

Sanskrit, Scientific Literature, 189-201. 
Sanskrit, Religious and Philosophical 
Literature, 202-207. 

Santana Ganapati, 346. 

Santarakshita—See also Pandita Bodhi- 
sattva, Dharmasantighosha. 271, 364 
(n), 446, 447. 

Santi, 210. 

Santideva, 259, 275, 361 (n). 

Santigarbha, 447. 

Santikaradeva I, 63, 66. 

Santikaradeva II, 64. 

Santikaradeva 133, 64, 67. 

Santinatha, 297, 298, 336. 

Santi Purdna, 225, 292. 

Santisoma, 267. 

Santisuri, 290. 

Sapadalaksha, 106, 290. 

Sagadalaksha Brahmanas, 374. 
Saptamatrika, 300, 330, 339, 340, 346, 348. 
Saptasatx, 339. 

£arabhanga, 243. 

Sarabhapuriyas, 146. 

Sarabhesa-murti, 311. 

Sdradaiilaka Tantra, 334, 347, 351, 364(n). 
Saraha, 266, 268. 

Sarahapada, 216. 

Sarangarh, 331. 

Saras, 139. 

Sarasvata-mandala, 103, 104. 

Sarasvati (goddess), 281, 287, 314, 315, 
329, 336, 338, 340, 341, 342, 344. 
Sarasvati (River), 104, 111. 

Saraswati, S. K., 364(n). 

Sdrdvali, 200. 

Sara-varman, 122. 

Sarayu (River), 93, 94. 

Sarayupara, 93. 

Sarbhon (in Broach Dt.), 7. 
Sdriputraprakarana, 215. 

Sarju (River), 123. 

Sarma, Dasaratha, 41(n). 

Sarma, Ramavatara, 330. 

Sarnath; 277, 279, 287. 

Sarnath Museum, 282. 

Sdrthavdha, 240. 

garva—See Amoghavarsha. 

&arva (or Marasarva), 7, 18(n). 


578 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Sarva-darsana-samgraha, 363 (n). 
Sarvadeva, 187. 

S-arvajnadeva, 274. 

Sarvajhamitra, 259, 263, 272, 362(n). 
Sarvajnatmamuni, 206, 365(n), 438. 
Sarvalokasraya, 135, 136, 137, 138. 
Sarvalokasraya Jinavallabha (temple 
of), 139. 

Sarvananda, 190. 

6arvanl, 339. 

Sarvastivadins, 260, 267. 

Sarvatomukhi, 343. 

Sasanadevata, (s)—See also Yakshinis, 
298, 299, 338, 341, 342. 

Sasanids, 353. 

6asanka, 44, 48. 

6asiprabha, 98, 184. 

Sdstranaya, 194. * 

Sastri, H. P., 79(n), 82(n), 216, 231(n). 
323. 

Sastri, K. A. N., 18(n), 56(n), 165, 
177(n), 365(n), 411(n), 453(n). 
Sastri, Krishna, 363(n), 364 (n). 
6atananda, 183, 192. 

Satapatha Brahmana, 313, 364(n). 
6atarudrlya, 309. 

Satatapa, 370, 337, 395(n). 

Satavhhana, (Khasa p.), 117. 

Satavahana (writer), 209. 

^athakopa, 312. 

Satkaryavada, 357. 

6atrubhahja (of Khijjinga), 74, 75. 
Satrubhahja (of Khinjali), 69, 70, 81 (n), 
145. 

6atrubhanja I Gandhata (Bhanja 
dynasty), 70. 

6atrughnadeva, 112. 

6 a trun jay a, 296. 

Sattaka, 180. 

Sattvika, 319. 

Satyaki (a branch of Yaduvamsa), 
17(n). 

Satyasraya (Chalukya k.), 92, 291, 397(n). 
Satyavallata, 139. 

Satya-varman (of Champa), 423. 
Satya-varman (son of Devendra-var- 
man), 141. 

6auchachara, 264. 

Saulkika, 243. 

Saumatikas, 122. 

Saumya type of 6akti, 347. 

Sauras, 21, 322. 

6aurasenl, 213. 

Saurashtra (Kathiawad), 36, 96, 99, 103, 
104, 401. 

Saurikathodaya, 184. 

Saurl Samhita, 335. 

Sautrantika, 268. 

Sauvlra, 213. 

S&vayadhamma-Doha, 216. 

SaycL-svairam — svairam-dadau , 123. 
Schiefner, A., 55(n), 360(n), 361 (n). 
Seelye, 453(n). 

Sejakpur, 342. 

6eliyas (Pandyas), 160. 

6embiyan Mahadevi, 156, 157. 


6embiyan Mavalivanarayan, 155, 161. 
Sen, Benoy Chandra, 255(n), 362(n). 
Sena, 172. 

Sena II, 170, 171. 

Sena III, 171. 

Sena IV, 171. 

Sena V, 171. 

Senanl, 247, 

Sendpati, 243, 247. 

Senasangha, 182. 

Sena 6ilamegha, 169, 169. 

Senas of Bengal, 29, 273, 310. 
Sena-varman, 122. 

6endalai, 153. 

6endan, 158. 

6enthanar, 227. 

Setu—See also Adam’s Bridge, 1. 
Setuhandha , 443. 

Severus Sebokht, 450. 

Sewell, R., 140, 165(n), 177(n). 
Shadaksharl Lokesvara, 279. 

Shadaksharl Mahavidya, 279. 
Shadaksharl-Mahdvidydrdjnl, 262. 
Shadapur, 127. 

Shadardha-sastra, 363 (n). 
Shad-darsana-samuchchaya, 293, 296. 
Shahidullah, Dr., 216. 

Shahis, 112, 115, 118, 122, 126, 129. 
Shahiyas—See Shahis. 

Shahrdyan, 354. 

Shah-rayas, 354. 

Shaikhawati, 107. 

Shanmukha Yakshas, 299. 
Shannavatiprakarana, 189. 

Sharma, D., 40(n), 363(n). 
Shashthddhikrita, 242, 243. 

Shastri, H. P.‘, 181. 

Shatchakra, 325. 

Shattrimsanmata, 203, 373. 

Shilharayan, 354. 

Shimoga taluk, 92. 

ShodasI, 344. 

Sholapiu*, 10. 

Shtran, 315. 

Siam, 422, 432, 442. 

Siam, Gulf of, 422. 

Siddhaikavlra, 281, 282. 

Siddhdntachdra, 320, 321, 323. 

Siddhas ; 346. 

Siddhasena Divakara, 207, 229(n). 
Siddha-Yogesvarl, 341, 348. 

ShasthI, 342. 

Siddhidatrl, 343, 364(n). 

Siddhitraya, 206. 

Siddhiyogcir—See also V rindamddhava, 
199. 

Sigiriya—See also Sirhhagiri, 176, 177. 
Sijistan, 125, 126. 

Sikar, 107, 108. 

Sikarpur, 330. 

SiksJidsamuchchaya, 275, 361 (n). 

Sila, 264. 

6ilabhanja (grandfather of Ranabhanja 
of Khinjali), 145. 

&ilabhahja I, 70, 71, 73, 79. 

6ilabhanj a-pati, 71. 

574 





INDEX 


Sllabhattarika, 3, 185, 394(n). 

Sllacharya, 210. 

Sllagunasuri, 289. 

Sllaharas, 3, 218, 245, 354. 

Sllaharas of Thana, 98. 

SllamahadevI, 133, 134, 135. 

Sllahka, 293. 

Sllapalita, 267. 

Silappadikaram, 221. 

Silavati, 180. 

Sllendrabodhi, 448. 

Sllpa-sastras, 336. 

Slluka, 19, 29. 

Simha (Guhila k.), 109. 

Simhadatta, 148. 

Simhagiri—See also Sigiriya, 176. 
Simhaketu, 63. 

Simhala (dvipa), 86, 273, 274 ; 275. 
Simhanada, 279. 

Sirhhanada Lokesvara, 279. 

Simhapura (Punjab), 46. 

Simharaja (Chahamana), 107, 109, 112, 
Simharaja (Khasa k.), 113, 118, 120. 
Simhavarman (Chaulukya k.), 104. 
Siiiiha vishnu, 168. 

Sindan, 127, 403. 

Sindh, 17, 20, 39. 87, 99, 106, 115, 125, 126- 
9, 401, 402, 403, 405, 408, 410(n), 450, 
453. 

Sindhu, 213, 273, 405. 

Sindhu (River), 46, 52, 110, 112, 117, 118, 
128, 402. 

Sindhuraja (Paramara k.), 96, 97, 98, 99, 
105. 

Sindok, 430. 

Sihgapota, 164. 

Singh, A. N., 453(n). 

Sinnamanur Plates, 158, 159, 170. 

Sinnar, 335. 

Siraf, 402, 414. 

Sirala, 339. 

Sircar, D. C. 74, 75, 80(n), 81(n), 82, 
(n), 362(n). 

Sirhind, 145, 

Sirihatta—See also Sylhel, 323. 

Sirkap, 313. 

Sirohi, 108, 333, 336. 

Siromani, 185. 

Sirpur, 145. 

Sirsa, 111, 112. 

Sirur Plates, 9, 18(n), 57(n). 

Sisavai Grant, 41 (n). 

Sishyahitanyasa, 190. 

Sitabhihji, 74. 

Si tala, 342. 

Situlpahuva—See also Chitialaparvata, 
174. 

Siva, 3, 8, 28, 61, 90, 107, 151, 154, 155, 

158, 184, 185, 239, 257, 258, 264, 278, 

279, 280, 282, 283, 286, 299, 301, 302, 

303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310, 

311, 313, 316, 318, 320, 324, 325, 328, 

329, 330, 331, 332, 334, 335, 366, 337, 

338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 

346, 347. 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 360, 

363(n), 364(n), 418, 435, 436, 440. 


Siva Chandrasekhara, 305, 

Siva, Mukhalinga of, 423. 

Siva, Nritya-murtis of, 306. 

Sivadasapura, 81 (n). 

Sivadharmottara, 373. 

§ivadnshti, 206, 301. 

SivadutI, 340. 

Sivagella (son of Srlpurusha), 160. 
Sivagupta, 91, 146, 147. 

Sivagupta (Mahasivagupta) Balarjuna, 
146. 

Sivaguru, 304. 

Sivakaivalya, 417. 

Sivakaradeva I, 63, 65 
Sivakaradeva II, 63, 67. 

Sivakaradeva III, 64. 

Sivakotyacharya, 222. 

Sivalihga, 347, 348. 

Sivamara (Gahga pr.), 4, 6. 

Sivamara II, 160, 161, 164, 165(n). 
Sivananda, 79. 

Siva-Parvatl, 338, 340. 

Sivaraja (Chahamana), 111. 

Sivaraja (Kalachuri K. of Sarayupara), 93. 
Sivaraja II Bhamana (Kalachuri k. of 
Sarayupara), 94. 

Siva-sadakhya, 310. 

Siva-Sakti cult, 338, 341. 

Sivasamudram, Gahga Raja of, 163, 
Sivasoma, 365 (n), 438. 

S ivasutra (s), 206, 301. 

Sivasvamin, 117, 182. 

Siva temple, 123. 

Siva-Vishnu, 436. 

Siwan, 336, 

Siyadoni Inscription, 40(n), 42(n), 241. 
Slyaka I, 95. 

Siyaka H, 15, 84, 95-97, 102, 105, 187, 
218. 

Skanda, 305, 336, 338, 340. 

Skandamata, 343, 364(n). 

Skanda Purdna, 42 (n), 335, 370. 
Slokasamgraha, 187. 

Slokavarttika, 204. 

Smart, 228. 

Smasanapati, 268. 

Smritichandrika, 256(n), 

Smritis, 316. 

Smritisamgraha, 249, 253-254, 256(n). 
Sobhana, 185, 187, 293. 

Sobkanastuti—See, also Chaturviihsati- 
Jinastuti and Tirthesastuti, 185. 
Sobhavyuha, 272. 

Sobhita, 108. 

Sodamandala (district), 143. 

Soddhala,' 56(n), 181, 189. 

Sodhadeva (Kalachuri k. of Sarayu¬ 
para), 94. 

Sohagpur, 338. 

Solanabhanja, 74. 

Solahkis (See under Chaulukyas of 
Gujarat). 

Solar Cult, 333-337. 

Soma, 330, 352. 

Soma, 416. 


575 




THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Somadeva (Suri), 181, 184, 186, 187, 188, 
189, 232, 238, 239, 240, 294, 295, 296. 
Somananda, 206, 301. 

Somanathapattana, 91, 102, 103, 333. 
Somapura (rl) (Vihdra), 49, 274, 275, 331. 
Somaskanda figures, Pallava, 329. 
Somaskanda-murti, 305. 

Soma-varman, 123. 

Somavarhsa, 91, 146. 

Somavaihsis of South Kosala, 62, 69, 71, 
74, 81 (n) 85, 86, 88, 99, 146, 150. 

Some Historical Aspects of the Inscrip¬ 
tions of Hengal, 362(n). 

Somesvara (God), 91, 92. 

Somesvara (writer), 195. 

Sonarang, 346. 

Song dynasty, 422, 444, 445, 446. 

Song to David, 228. 

Sonpur, 70, 72, 147. 

Sonpur, State 147. 

Sonpur C. P. of 6atrubhanja, 82 (n). 
Sooloobunjan, 10. 

Sopakas, 372. 

Sopara, 431, 403, 410(n). 

Sorab taluk (Mysore State), 16. 

Soremati (or Soremadi), 163, 164. 

South India, 257, 305, 306, 308, 309, 310, 
312, 331, 349, 374, 403, 406, 407, 408, 
411 (n), 415. 

South Indian Gods and Goddesses, 363 
(n), 364(n). 

South Kensington Museum, 334. 

South Kosala, 146, 147. 

Spanda, 300, 301. 

Spandakarika, 206. 

Spanda-sarvasva, 301. 

Spandasdstra, 206. 

Sragdhara-stotra, 263, 272, 362(n). 
Srauta-siitras, 260, 316. 

Sravaka sects, 360(n). 

6avakayanists. 360 (n). 

S§ravana Belgola, 162, 223, 225, 290, 292, 
295, 298. 

gravastl, 182, 276, 297. 

Jlravastl, the Great Miracle of, 277. 

&reni, 251. 

&reshthxs, 240. 

S§rl—See also Lakshml, 283, 314, 347, 362 
(n). 

6n (city), 433. 

6n-Aingim, 346. 

Sribhagavadahhisamaya, 268. 

6rlbhavana (Sarbhon in Broach Dt.), 7. 
Sribuza, 413. 

Srichakra , 322. 
gjrlchandra, 54. 

grldhanyakafaka—See also Amaravati. 
262 

Sridhara (Buddha Acharya), 273. 
Sridhara (poet), 188, 200, 392(n), 364- 
(n), 395(n). 

gridhara Bhatja, 205, 206. 

Srlgupta, 267. 

^rlharsha, 198. 

Srikakulam (District), 140. 

Srlkantha, 164, 360. 


Ankara, 204. 

6rlkshetra, 432. 

Srlmala, 97, 104. 

6ri-Mara SrI-Vallabha, 51, 158, 159, 170. 
£rinagara, 119. 

Sringdratilaka, 192. 

&rlparvata, 264. 

Tripura, 146. 

Srlpurambiyam, 152, 153, 159, 161, 167. 
&rlpurusha Muttarasa (Ganga k.), 4, 
160. 

Srlrajya (another name of &rlpurusha), 
160. 

6rlrangam, 312, 315. 

Sri-Saila—See also Matanga, 1, 323. 
Srishti-Khanda, 336. 

6rI-Teramva, 343. 

Srlvaishnava, 312. 
grlvallabha (Munja), 97. 

&ri-Vallabha (Rashtrakufa Dhruva), 4, 

21 . 

SrI-vallabhamadanaraja—See also Para- 
kramapandya, 173. 

&rlvatsa, 206. 

6rI-Vijaya (country), 412, 413. 

Srlvijaya (-writer), 223. 

Sri Vinayaka, 342.. 

Sron-tsah-gam-po, 271. 

Sruta-DevI, 336. 

Stambha (or Kambha) Ranavaloka, 5, 6, 
134, 166, 167, 168. 

Staves, 259. 

Stein, A., 58, 255(n). 

Sthanu Ravi (Chera king), 154, 165. 
Sthavira-vadins, 275. 

Sthirachakra, 281, 282. 

Stotras, 259. 

Stotrdvali, 185. 

Strl-rajya, 116. 

Strong, 212. 

Stuart-Bridge Collection, 331. 

Studies in Par si History, 364(n). 
Stuparama, 175. 

Subandhu, 182. 

Subhadra 394 (n). 

Subhadrdharana, 180. 

&ubhakara V, 64, 66. 

5§ubhakaradeva I, 63, 64, 66, 81 (n). 
Subhakaradeva II, 63, 66.. 
^ubhakaradeva III, 64. 

&ubhakaradeva IV, 64. 

£ubhakaragupta, 273. 

Subhamitra, 268. 

Subhahkara, 299. 

Subha ta, 181. 

Subhatunga (Krishna I), 3. 

Subhatunga (Krishna II), 11. 
Subhikshapura, 124. 

Subhiksharajadeva, 124. 

Subrahmanya, 299, 329, 344, 349. 
Suchimukha, 280. 

Suchiyarman (Guhila), 110. 
£uddha-6aiva doctrine, 309. 
Sudhanakumara, 279. 

^udraka, 182, 381. 

Sudraka, 224. 


576 




INDEX 


&udras, 318, 370, 371, 372. 

Sufi ism, 452. 

Sugandha, 118, 119. 

Sugata, 258, 296. 

Sukharaja, 118. 

Sukhasana-murti. 305. 

Sukhavarman (Karkota dynasty), 116, 
117. 

Sukha-varman (Utpala dynasty), 117. 
Sukii, 82(n). 

6ukra, 352. 

Suktimuktavali, 394(n). 

Sulaiman, 32, 42(n), 52, 56{n), 255(n), 
380, 386, 389, 397(n), 398(n), 404, 
413. 

Sulikas, 78. 

6ulkikaihsa, fanfily, 78. 

£ulkis, 78. 

Sulochand Nataka (or Vikrdnta-kaura- 
va), 180. 

Sumahgala-vilasirii, 212. 

Sumantu, 370. 

Sumatra, 403, 406, 412, 416, 423, 427, 434, 
436. 

Kumbha, 285, 340. 

Sun, temple of the, 333, 352. 

Sunak, 342. 

Sunandana, 433. 

Sundara, 172. 

Sundara Chola, 157, 158 s 164, 248, 397 

(n). 

Sundara Parantaka II, 157. 

Sun-god, 108, 109, 122, 128, 257. 

Sunyata, 265, 266. 

Suprabhacharya, 216. 

Suprabhedagama, 305. 

Sura, 116, 117. 

Sura (desa), 323. 

6ura (dynasty), 86. 

Surada, 343. 

Surananda, (poet), 90, 180. 

Surashtra, 42(n), 213. 

Surasulamwni (title of Parantaka), 155. 
Sura-varman, 119. 

Sura-varman, I (k. of Kashmir), 119. 
gura-varman II, 120. 

Surendrabodhi, 448. 

Suresvara—See also Mandanamisra, 204. 

206, 359, 3S5(n). 

Suresvara temple, 333. 

Surohor, 297. 

§urparaka, 401. 

Surya, 28, 287, 313, 329, 330, 331, 333, 334, 
335, 336, 343, 345, 346, 347, 349-351, 
364 (n). 

Surya-Brahma, 332. 

Surya-Narayana, 332, 335, 351, 364(n). 
Suryaprabha, 281. 

Suryasataka, 443. 

Surya varhiis, 173. 

Sushumna, 325. 

Susruta, 316, 443. 

Susruta, 451. 

Suta, 373. 

Sutara (raka), 262, 341. 

Suta Samhita, 335. 


Sutlej, 112. 

Sutrapada, 333. 

Sutras, 260, 365 (n). 

Suvarchasa, 350. 

Suvamadvipa, 274, 413, 414, 415, 436, 441, 
448. 

Suvarnaprabhasa-sutra, 261, 361(n). 
Suvarnapura, 147. 

Suvarna-varman, 122. 

Suyya, 117, 245. 

Svabhjivatuhga, 148. 

Svandmdnka Kdvya, 180. 
Svapnadasdnana, 179. 

Svarna-Ganapati, 346, 
Svasamvedanaprakrita-sastra, 268, 269. 
Svastyayana, 351. 
Svatantrika-madhyamika, 271. 
Svayambhu, 210, 217, 218, 220. 
Svayambhuchhandas, 198, 210. 
Svayambhudeva, 217. 

Svayambhu-Purdna , 47. 

Svetd, 262. 

gvetaka (the Ganga House), 141, 145. 
Svetakas, 62, 81 (n). 

Svetambaras, 289, 300. 

Swat (valley)—See also Utftfiyana, 114 
*323. 

Swing Festival, 386. 

£ yavialadavdaka, 185. 
gyamilaka, 182. 

Sylhet—See also Sirihatta, 54, 395(n). 

T 

Ta$a, 137. 

Tadapa (E. Chalukya k.), 13, 137. 
Tadayuktaka , 243. 

Taga^ur, 158. 

Tagaung, 433. 

Taila II, 16, 17, 86, 91, 92, 97, 98, 104, 
162. 

Tailapa II, 291, 292. 

Tai-tsong, 445. 

114 

Takka (country), 109, 112, 118, 370. 
Tafckl, 216. 

Takkolam, battle of, 14, 155, 156, 159, 162, 
163, 164, 171. 

Tala II, 139. 

Talaikonda, 159. 

Talakad, 154, 163. 

Taiapa, 137. 

Taiasamsphotita, 306. 

Talcher, 68, 77. 

Talcher Plate of 5§ivakaradeva, 66, 77. 
Talesvar, 124. 

Talmul plates, 79. 

Taltali plate, 67, 81 (n). 

Tdmasa, 319. 

Tamil, 220, 221, 222, 227-228, 307. 

Tamil country, 292, 311, 370. 

Tamil 6aiva literature (Tamil Veda), 316. 
Tamil-Grantha, 222. 

Tamilian Vaishnavism, 312. 

Tamils, 51, 151, 157, 165. 

Tamin, 20. 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAU-T 


Tamradvipa, 274. 

Tamraparni, 404. 

Tan, 315. 

Tana, 410(n). 

Tdntjlavalakshanam, 363 (n). 

Tang dynasty, 59, 426, 444, 446. 

Tanjore, 14, 153, 156, 158, 160, 170, 172, 
337, 397(n), 401, 402, 409, 411(n), 
446. 

Tanka, 1. 

Tantra, 316, 317, 338. 

Tantra, Principles of, 326, 361 (n). 
Tantrdloka, 206. 

Tantra-mudra, 264. 

Tantrapala, 241. 

Tantrapala, 107. 

Tantrapradipa, 190. 

Tantras, 315, 316, 317, 318, 320, 322, 323, 
324, 332. 

Tantras , 260, 261, 268. 

Tantras, Buddhist, 317. 

Tantras, the later, 341. 

Tantrasara, 362 (n). 

Tantrayana—See also Vajrayana, 262, 
264 274. 

Tantrik cult, 258, 308, 322, 323. 

Tantrik Buddhist texts, 263. 

Tantrik emblem, 343. 

Tantrikism (Tantrik Religion), 260, 266, 
268, 273, 275, 315-327, 344, 346, 349, 
417 436 438 447 

Tantrik’Teachers’ 266-267, 272, 323. 
Tantrin troops, 119, 120. 

Tantumatl 179. 

Tapagachha, 296. 

Tapti (River), 96, 97. 

Tara (princess) 412, 413. 

Tara (deity), 261, 262-263, 264, 266, 279, 
280, 282, 284, 285, 322, 323, 341, 344, 
362(n), 440. 

Tara, Dhupa, 285. 

Tara, DIpa, 285. 

Tara, Gf -*.dha, 285. 

Tara, Khadiravani—See also 6yama- 
Tara, 282, 284, 287. 

Tara, Mahachlna, 282, 284. 

Tara pushpa, 285. 

Tara, £yama—See also Khadiravanl- 
Tara, 284. 

Tara, Ugra, 284, 330, 344. 

Tara Vajra, 282, 285. 

Tarala, 180. 

Taranatha, 45, 49, 50, 55, 65, 260, 264, 267, 
268, 269, 270, 271, 273, 274, 275, 360 
(n), 361(n) 362(n). 

Tarapati, 242. 

Taraporewala, I. J. S., 364(n). 
Tardrahasya. 362(n). 

Tara-stotras, 263. 

Tardavadi (Bijapur dist.), 16. 

Tarika, 242. 

Tarinl, 341. 

Tarkasdstra, 189. 

Tata-Bikki, 138. 

Tata-Vikramaditya, 138. 


Tata-Vikyana, 138. 

Tathagata, 361 (n). 

Tathagata-guhya, 265. 

Tathagatarakshita, 273. 

Tatparyaparisuddhi —See also Tattva - 

suddhi, 205. 

Tatpurusha, 310. 

Tattaka, 240. 

Tattvabindu, 204. 

Tattvacharya, 209, 

Tattvakaurnudi, 204. 

Tattvdloka , 194. 

Tattvarthasara, 294. 

Tattvasarhgraha, 271, 362(n). 
Tattvasamikshd, 204. 

Tattvasaradi, 204. 

Tattvasuddhi —See also Tdtparyapari- 

suddhi, 205. 

Tattvavaisaradi, 230(n). 

Tauta, Bhatia, 194, 195. 

Tavasaka-maridala, 123. 

Tejahpala, temple of, 298. 

Tejavaraha, 77. 

Tekkali-Chicacole (area), 143. 

Tekkali plates of Satrubhahja, 70, 71, 73, 
81(n). 

Tel (River), 73. 

Telakapahagatha, 212. 

Tellarrerinda Nandi-varman, 151, 166, 
'167,‘168. 

Tellaru, 151, 159, 166. 

Teiugu, 222, 223. 

Telugu country, 370. 

Telugu-Cholas, 140. 

Telugus, 221. 

Tehgi, 268. 

Terapur, 218. 

Te-tsong, 65. 

Tevar, Karur, 227. 

Tevar, Tirumalika, 227. 

Tevaram, 227. 

Tewar, 87, 342. 

Tezpur, 61, 79(n), 335. 

Thai kingdom, 416, 422, 432, 433. 
Thailand, 422. 

Thakkana, (Shahi k.), 114, 121. 

Thakki, 215. 

Thakkiya family, 112, 118. 

Than, 333. 

Thana, 403. 

Thaneswar, 46, 112. 

Thaton, 332. 

Theravada, 267. 

Thomas, Dr. F.W., 79(n), 182, 230(n). 
Tibet, 49, 52, 54, 58, 59, 85, 131(n), 270, 
271, 272. 274, 275, 279, 284, 311, 323, 
402, 409, 446-449, 453(n). 

Tibetan Catalogue, 268. 

Tibetan Chronicles, 448. 

Tibetan Sea, 446. 

Tibetan traditions, 266. 

Tilakamanjarl, 187. 

Tillopada—See also Tilopa, 216. 

Tilopa (Tillipa), 274. 
Tipitaka-pariyattidhara, 211. 


578 







INDEX 


Tipperah—See also Dakshina-Muham- 
madpur, 330, 334, 339, 395(n). 
Tlrthankaras, 298, 299. 

TirthesastutC-See also Chaturvimsati- 
Jinastuti and Sobhanastuti, 185. 
Tiruchirapalli (District), 153, 158, 170. 
Tiru-isaippa, 227. 

Tirukalukkunram, 154, 156. 

Tirumalai, 292. 

Tirumalpuram, 167. 

Tirnmurais, 227. 

Tirune^ungalam, 153. 

Tirunelveli, 158, 170. 

Tiruppanalvar, 227. 

Tirupparankunram, 349, 364(n). 
Tirupparuttikunram—See Jina-Kahchi. 
Tiruppurambiyam, 152. 

Tiruttani, 334. 

Tiruvachakam, 227. 

Tiruvalangadu Plates, 159, 165(n). 
Tiruvallam (N. Arcot Dt.), 12, 155, 

Tiruvekampa-mdlai, 228. 
Tishyamaharama, 175. 

Tista (River), 61. 

Titus, M.T., 452, 453(n). 

Tomaras, 85, 107, 111-112, 241. 
Tondaiman Arrur-tunjina-udaiyar, 167. 
Tondamandalam, 14, 152, 153, 154, 155, 
156, 157. 

Tonkin, 414, 416, 422, 426. 

Toramana (Shahi k.), 113, 118. 

Tosail, 68. 

Totala, 347. 

Traikutaka-vihara, 271, 274, 275. 
Trailokyachandra, 54, 91. 
Traipurushadeva temples, 334. 
Travancore, 158. 

Trayastriuisa heaven, 275, 276. 
Tribhandapura, 112. 

Tribhuvana (Kashmir k.), 121. 
Tribhuvanadhavala (Govinda III), 6. 
Tribhuvanagiri, 290. 

Tribhuvanakalasa, 70. 
Tribhuvana-MahadevI I, 63, 67, 68. 
Tribhuvana-MahadevI II, 63, 80(n), 148. 
Tribhuvanankusa, 134, 136, 138, 139. 
Tribhuvanapaia, 182. 

Tribhuvanarajadeva, 123. 
Tribhuvana-Svayambhu, 218. 
Trichinopoly, 329, 333. 

Trigarta, 117, 122. 

Trika system, 300, 301, 360. 

Trikalayogin Siddhantadevamuni, 291. 
Trikalinga, 136, 147. 

Trikdndasesha, 395(n), 402, 410(n). 
Trilihga, 150. 

Trilochanapala (Pratlhara k.), 38. 
Trimurti, 310, 330, 331, 334, 351, 436. 
Trimurti Surya, 332. 

Trimurti-temple, 331. 

Tripathi, R.S., 37, 40(n), 41(n), 42(n), 
74, 93. 

Tripitaka, 262. 

Triplicane, 151. 

Tripura, 322, 347. 

Tripura-Bhairavl, 348. 


Tripuradahana, 184. 

Tripurantaka-murti, 309, 335. 
Tripurasundarl, 344. 

Tripuri, 18(n), 84, 87, 90, 92, 97, 146. 
Trisahku, 370. 

Trisha, 314. 

Trisrota (River), 61. 

Trivikrama, 331, 332, 336. 
Trivikramabhatta, 188. 

Tuars, 111. 

Tukhara, 268. 

Tukharistan, 127. 

Tulasldasa, 217. 

Tulodong, 428. 

Tumbagi inscription, 397 (n). 

Tummana, 88. 

Turiga (Khasa), 121. 

Tuhga (Rashtrakuta), 53, 189. 

Tuhgas of Orissa, 77, 78, 79. 

Turagapati Vahali, 93. 

Turkestan, Eastern, 261, 360(n). 
Turkestan, Tibetan Literary Texts and 
Documents concerning, 79(n). 
Turkkiya-Yajvan, 139. 

Turks-—See also Turushkas, 122. 
Turushkas—See also Turks, 24, 25, 87, 
112, 122, 127, 130(n), 405. 

Turvasu, 142. 

Tushita heaven, 278. 

Twenty four Pergannas, W.B.—See also 
Khadi- mandala, 279, 336, 337. 
Tyagasiihlia, 6i. 

U 

Ubhaydb hisarika, 182. 

Uchchangi, 162, 163. 
Uchchhishta-Ganapati, 345. 

Udaipur, 97, 109, 110. 

Udaya—See also Dappula II, 169. 

Udaya (writer), 223. 

Udaya II £ilameghavama, 170. 

Udaya III, 171. 

Udaya IV, 171. 

Udayaditya, 145. 

Udayagiri inscription of Chandra-gupta 
II, 147. 

Udayakhedi,— 145. 

Udayana, 179, 364 (n), 430. 

Udayana (writer), 205, 206, 231 (n). 
Udayaraja (k. of Lohara), 121. 
Udayasundari-katha, 56(n), 189. 
Udayavaraha, 77, 82(n). 

Udayendiram Plates, 161, 167. 
Udabhanda, 112, 113, 118, 120. 

Udbhata (poet), 116, 181, 191, 192, 193, 
194, 196. 

Uddiyana—See also Kashgarh, Swat- 
valley, Orissa, W. Assam, 323. 
Uddyotana, 288, 296. 

Uddyotanasuri—See also Dakshinya- 
chihna, 209. 

Udepur Prasasti, 95. 

Uditavaraha, 77, 82(n). 

Udra, 65. 

Udyana (Place), 268, 269, 270. 

579 



THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Ugra type o£ Sakti, 347. 

Ugrabhuti, 190. 

Ugrachanda, 343, 364(n). 

Ugrakhedi, 145. 

Ugrakopan, 151. 

Ujjain—See Ujjayinl. 

Ujjayini, 1, 2, 19, 20, 22, 31, 37, 41(n), 
95, 189, 268, 304, 452. 

Ujjvaladatta, 180. 

Ukkal 156. 

Ullabha (Kalachuri k. of Sarayupara), 
93. 

Ultimate Reality, 358, 359, 437. 

Uma, 262, 264, 266, 305, 308, 338, 344, 347. 
Uma-Mahesvara-rnurti, 305, 343, 348. 
Umayyad dynasty, 125, 126, 127. 

Una, 101. 

Und, 112. 

Undavilli, 330. 

Unmdi vilakkam, 307. 

Unmatta-Bhairava, 308. 

Unmattakesarl, 66, 67. 

Unmattasimha, 63, 64, 65, 66. 
Unmatta-Uchchhishta variety of Ganesa, 
349. 

Unmattavanti, 119. 

Unmattavarman, 68. 

Upadesamdla, 209. 

Upadhyaya, Pandit B., 365(n). 

Upadhye, 363(n). 

Upakesini, 281. 

Upakurvana, 366. 

Upamitibhavaprapanchakathd, 374, 376., 
377, 380, 384, 385, 387, 390, 391, 400, 
401, 405. 

Upananda, 277. 

Upanishads, 301, 304, 321, 329, 337, 356, 
357, 358, 436. 

Uparikas, 241, 243. 

Upasad, 251. 

Upasaka (s)—See also Yakshas, 298, 299. 
Upasena II, 211. 

Upatissa, 211-212. 

Upayuktas, 255(n). 

Upendra, 332. 

Upendra (Paramara k.), 94, 95. 

Upper Orissa, 149. 

Ur, 406, 411 (n). 

Uraiyur, 153. 

Urasa, 118. 

Urddhva-Ganapati, 335, 346. 
Ur-gdvundas, 246. 

Uruvasa-vihara, 275. 

Usanas, 372. 

Ushnlshavijaya, 285. 

Utkala (country), 58, 62-82, 147. 

IJtkalas, 50. 

Utpala, 206, 301. 

Utpala (Paramara Munja), 97. 
Utpaladeva, 185, 194, 198. 

Utpala dynasty, 117, 120, 244. 

Utpalaka, 116. 

Utpalaplda, 116. 

Utpatti-krama-sadhana , 269. 

Uttama Chola, 156, 157, 384, 410(n). 


Uttamaslli, 155. 

Utfara-girikataka, 93. 

UttarCL-kalpa, 425. 

Uttara-hdmikdgama, 310. 
Uttaramanthiparivena, 211. 

Uttaramantri, 158, 247, 256(n). 

Uttaramerur, 156, 249. 

Uttar Mlru&rhsa, 358. 

Uttarapatha, 50, 404. 

Uttar apurdna, 183. 

Uttar Pradesh (U.P.), 47, 83, 84, 87, 93, 
94, 297, 333. 

Uttejana, 428. 

Uttungadeva, 428. 


V 

Vachaspatimisra (Vachaspati), 204, 205, 
206, 364 (n), 365 (n). 

Vachissara Mahasami, 211. 

Vadall, 287. 
j Vadavavaktra, 314. 
j Vadnagar Prasasti, 103. 

Vagada, 95, 96, 99. 

Vagbhata, 451. 

Vagisvarl, 340, 344. 

■ Vahukadhavala, 24, 25, 101. 

' Vahur, 152. 

Vaibhajyavadin, 268. 

Vaidumbas, 142, 144, 155, 156, 163, 164. 
Vaidya, 363(n). 

Vaid.ya lineage, 374. 

Vaidyanatha (Almora), 123. 

Vaidyanatha (monastery of), 91. 
Vaidyanatha Mahadeva, 340. 

Vaigai (river), 151. 

Vaijayanti, 395(n). 

Vaikhanasa-Smartasutra, 372, 384(n). 
Vainya-gupta, 395(n). 

Vairagyasdra, 216. 

Vairamegha, 167. 

Vairisixiiha I, 95. 

Vairisimha II (Paramara), 93, 185. 
Vairochana, 263, 287, 332, 336. 
Vairochanabhadra, 271. 
Vairochana-mdydjdla-tantra , 269. 

Vaisall, 276, 277. 

Vaiseshikas, 205. 

Vaiseshikasutra, 205. 

Vaishnava/s, 322, 338. 

Vaishnava icons, 305, 315. 

Vaishnava Samhitas, 323. 
Vaishjuivdchdra, 320, 323. 

Vaishnavi, 340. 

Vaishnavi 6akti, 341. 

Vaishnavism, 257, 258, 259, 292, 305, 311- 
315, 316, 324, 338, 358, 360, 436. 
Vaisya, 367, 401. 

VaitaranI, 340. 

Vaivahika-murti, 306, 336. 

Vajirasthana, 114. 

Vajjada-deva, 354. 

Vajra (mod. Wairgarh), 98. 

Vajra, 262, 266. 


580 





INDEX 


Vajra, 265. 

Vajra School, 361 (n). 

Vajracharyas, 266, 272, 273. 

Vajradaman (Kachchhapaghata chief), 
38, 43(n), 86. 

Vajraditya Bappivaka, 115, 116. 
Vajraghanta, 285. 

Vajrahasta .(brother of Kamarnava and 
son of Virasimha), 142. 

Vijrahasta (son of Ranarnava), 143. 
Vajrahasta III, 144. 

Vajrahasta V, 144. 

Vajrahasta-Ananta-varman, 141, 142, 

143, 145. 

Vajrahasta Aniyankabhlma, 141, 142, 143, 

144, 145. 

Vajramrita, 268. 

Vajrankusa, 98. 

VajrankusI, 285. 

Vajrapani, 280. 

Vajrapasi, 285. 

Vajrarati, 266. 

Vajrasana, 445. 

ajrasattva-sadhana, 268. 

Vajrasphotl, 285. 

Vajrata (Tomara k.), 111. 

Vajrata (Vairisimha II Paramara), 95. 
Vajravarahl, 287, 362(n). 

Vajrayana—See also Tantrayana, 264, 
265, 287, 288, 449. 

VajrayoginI, 287. 

Vakkuta, 185. 

Vakpala (brother of Dharmapala), 50, 52. 
Vakpati (Chandella), k.), 83. 

Vakpati I (Paramara), 95, 131 (n), 187. 
Vakpati-Muhj a, See Muhja. 

Vakpatiraja, 181, 187. 

Vakpatiraja I (Chahamana k.), 107. 
Vakpatiraja II (Munja), 97. 

Vakrokti, 191. 

Vakroktifivita, 195. 

Vakroktipanchasika, 183. 
Vakula-MahadevI, 64, 68. 
Valabha-Kayastha, 395(n). 

Valabhl. 214, 333, 369, 374. 

Valagamba—See also VattagamanI 
Abhaya, 175. 

Vallabha (Acharya), 360. 

Vallabha (lord of all kings), 1. 

Vallabha (Rashtrakuta kings), 88, 90, 
138, 171. 

Vallabha Kayastha, 189. 

Vallabharaja (Chaulukya k.), 105. 
Vallabha-raja (Rashtrakuta kings), 17. 
Vallala (Tiruvallam in N. Arcot Dt.), 12, 
155. 

Valll, 344. 

Vamachara, 320, 323. 

Vamadeva, 310. 

Vamana, 191, 193, 196, 197, 331, 332. 
Vamana Purana, 203, 335. 

Vamanasthall, 102, 104. 

Vamuka, 192. 

Vanacharas , 213. 


Vanai-mandala, 77. 

Vanamala (Yuvaraja), 19(n). 
Vanamala-varman (k. of Kamarupa), 61. 
Vanaraja, 103, 289. 

Vanaryasatru, 82(n). 

Vanavan MahadevI, 159. 

Vanayu, 405. 

Vahga—See also Vangala, Bengal, 

Bhahgala, 7, 9, 24, 25, 45, 47, 54, 
57(n), 87, 88, 130(n), 401. 

Vangala—-See also Vahga, Bengal, Bhah¬ 
gala, 53, 91, 274. 

Vangasena, 199. 

Vangiya Sahitya Parishat Museum, Cal¬ 
cutta, 276, 282, 306, 336, 348, 349. 
Van Guliq, 364(n). 

Vanjulvaka (See Vijaya-Vanjulvaka). 
Vanthali, 102. 

Vanuvanmadevi isvaramu^aiyar, 176. 
Vapyata, 44. 

Varaguna I, 151, 157. 

Varaguna II, 152, 159, 167, 170, 411 (n). 
Varaha (iconography), 331. 

Varaha (or Jaya-varaha), 21. 

Varaha (or Mahavaraha), 102. 

Varaha temple, 330. 

Varahagupta, 194. 

Varahamihira, 125, 198, 332. 
VarahamukhI, 287. 

Varaha Purana, 203, 368, 370, 393(n), 
394(n). 

Varaha SvamI, 333. 

Varahas of Saurya-Mandala, 102. 
Varahavartam (District), 143. 

Varahl, 340, 348. 

Varalx, 287. 

Varamudra, 282. 

Vararuchi, 182, 186, 189. 

Varatuhgan, 151. 

Vardhamana, 100, 179, 184. 

Vardhamana temple, 299. 
Vardhamana-bhukti, 54. 
Vardhamdnacharita ,—See also Maha- 

vnracharita and Sanmitracharita, 183. 
Vardhamanapura, 21, 22, 54. 

Varendra, 49. 

Varendra Research Society’s Museum, 
Rajshahi, 300. 

Varendri (N. Bengal), 45. 

Variyams, 248, 249. 

Varma-setu, 412. 

Vamata, 120. 

Varttall, 287. 

Varuna, 299. 

Vasishtha, 75, 76, 94, 407. 
Vasishtha-Smriti, 386. 

Vaso-Boya, 136. 

Vasubandhu, 259, 265, 266, 360(n). 
Vasudeva (Chahamana), 106. 

Vasudeva (iconography), 309, 332, 341. 
Vasudeva (poet), 184, 185, 186. 

Vasudeva-Vishnu, 309. 

Vasudhara—See also Bhumi and Pri- 
thivl, 283, 285. 


581 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Vasugupta, 206, 301, 363(n). 

Vatesvara (Vittesvara), 200. 
Vatesvaradatta, 178. 

Vatsa, 24, 25, 41 (n). 

Vatsaraja (Chahamana), 107. 

Vatsaraja (Prathlhara), 4, 5, 6, 19, 21-24, 
28, 29. 32, 35, 40, 45, 46, 47, 55(n), 
56(n), 106, 110, 290. 

Vatsyayana, 382, 383, 386, 397(n), 443. 
VattagamanI Abhaya—See also Vala- 
gamba, 175. 

Vayiramegha-varman, 166, 167. 
Vedachara, 320, 323. 

Vedanga, 436. 

Vedanta, 300, 318, 357, 358, 359, 360, 
365(n), 443. 

Vedanta-sutras, 356, 358. 

Vedantists, 358, 359. 

Vedas, 28, 152, 314, 316, 318, 352, 355, 357, 
358, 367, 381, 436, 438, 443. 

Vedavyasa, 452. 

Vedavyasa-Smriti, 372. 

Vedeha, 212. 

Vedic epithets, 309. 

Vedic sacrifice, 313. 

VegadevI, 123. 

Vega Varisa (Sultan), 106. 

Velanandu, 57(n), 13S. 

Velankar, 229(n), 230(n), 363(n). 
Veiayudha, 344. 

Vellangumaran, 165. 

Veilar, 153. 

Vellar Basin, The Early History of the, 
165 (n). 

Vellore Dist., 14, 

Vellur, 154. 

Veiurpalaiyam, 151. 

Velvikudi (grant), 157, 158. 

Vemulavatfa, 13, 135. 

Vena, 238. 

Venad, 158. 

Vengl, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 15, 31, (57(n), 
133, 134, 135, 136, 247. 

Vengimandala, 134. 

Venkataramanayya, N. 140, 149. 
Venkayya, V., 165(n). 

Vessagiriya, 174. 

Vetdlapahchavimsatika., 187. 

Vetravati, 96, 213. 

Vibharatta. 270. 

Vibhasha—See also VibhrcLshta, 213, 214. 
Vibhramatuhga I, 75. 

Vibhramatuhga II, 75. 

Vibhrashta —See also Vibhasha, 213, 214. 
Vichdrasrenl, 105. 

Vichitrasagara, 423. 

Vidagdha (an epithet of Mahendrapala 
II, Prathlhara k.), 43(n), 131(n). 
Vidagdha-varman, 122, 123. 

Vidarbha, 17(n), 24, 25. 
Viddhasdlabhahjikd, 90, 180, 391. 
Vidhiviveka, 204. 

Vidyabhogam, 152. 

Vidyabhusana, 361(n). 

Vidyadevls, 336. 


Vidyadharabhanja, 70. 

Vidyadhara Bha^a, 187. 
Vidyadharacharya, 323. 

Vidyadharas, 261. 

Vidyadharas, 98. 

Vidyakaraprabha, 274. 

Vidyananda, 288, 294, 354, 364(n). 
Vidyapati, 219. 

Vidyarajhi, 261, 262. 

Vidyarambha, 366, 392(n). 

Vidyasthana, 152. 

Vidyesvaras, 311. 

Vighnantaka, 286. 

Vighnas, 286. 

Vigrahapala (Chahamana), 108. 
Vigrahapala I (Pala k.), 52. 

Vigrahapala II (Pala k.), 53, 55, 57(n), 

86 . 

Vigrahapala III, 242. 

Vigraharaja (nephew of Didda), 121. 
Vigraharaja I (Chahamana k.), 106. 
Vigraharaja II (Chahamana k.), 40(n), 
104, 106, 107, 131 (h). 

Vigraharaja III Visaladeva Chahamana 
k.), 112. 

Vijamba (Kalachuri princess), 89. 

Vijaya (Chandella k.), 83, 84. 

Vijaya (Bhahja queen), 73. 

Vijaya (place), 427. 

Vijayabahu I ^rlsanghabodhi, 174, 
177(n), 211. 

Vijayaditya, 134, 149. 

Vijayaditya (Badapa styled as), 139. 
Vijayaditya (Son of §rlpurusha), 160, 
161. 

Vijayaditya I (E. Chalukya), 133. 
Vijayaditya II (Bana), 163. 

Vijayaditya II, (E. Chalukya k.), 8, 9, 
41(n), 133, 134, 135, 395(n). 
Vijayaditya III (Eastern Chalukya k.), 
12, 88, 89, 135, 136, 141. 

Vijayaditya IV, 136, 137, 138. 

Vijayaditya V, 137. 

Vijayakoshtha (or Vijayaprakoshtha), 
181. 

Vijayalaya (Chola king), 153, 406. 
Vijayanagar, 221, 223. 

Vijayanandl, 200. 

Vijayanka, 394(n). 
Vijaya-Nripatungavarman, 369. 

Vijayapala (Pratihara k.), 37, 38, 40(n). 

86 . 

Vijayapura, 93. 

Vijayasakti, 83. 

Vijayasinha,* 210. 

Vijaya Hari-varman II, 427. 

Vijaya-Vahjulvaka, 72, 74, 149. 
Vijayavatika, 139. 

Vijayawada, 138, 291. 

Vijjaka, 83. 

Vijjaya (of Panara dynasty), 138. 

! Vijnanabhikshu, 205. 

1 Vijhanesvara, 203, 204, 249, 253, 254, 378, 
i 394(n), 395(n). 

582 




INDEX 


Vijnaptimdtrata —See also Chittamatra, 
265, 266. 

Vijaya (Mahadevi), 145. 

Vikatanitamba, 394(n). 

Vikkiyanna (son of Prithvlpati II), 162. 
Vikrama (Govinda III), 7. 

Vikramab&hu, 173. 

Vikramaditya, 136, 161, 181, 187. 
Vikramaditya (alias of 6ulki k. Ka- 
laha-stambha), 77. 

Vikramaditya (another name for Vik¬ 
kiyanna), 162. 

Vikramaditya I (Bana)—See also Bana- 
vidyadhara, 163, 166. 

Vikramaditya I (Chalukya), 135. 
Vikramaditya II (Bana), 163. 
Vikramaditya II (Chiilukya), 2, 137. 
Vikramaditya III (Bana), 163. 
Vikramaditya IV (Chalukya), 91. 
Vikramapandya, 173. 

Vikramapura, 29. 

Vikramarjuna Vijaya —See also Pampa 
Bhdrata, 136, 224, 225. 

Vikramarka (Chapa k.), 100, 103. 
Vikramaslla (Dharmapala), 49, 183. 
Vikramaslla monastery (vihara), 49, 271, 
272, 273, 274, 275, 369, 448, 449. 
Vikramorvasiya, 216. 

Vikrampur, 280, 348. 

Vikranta-kaurava (or Sulochana Ndta- 
ka ), 180. 

Vikranta-varman III, 424. 

Vilasatunga Devananda II, 78. 
Vilasatunga Devananda II, 78. 

Vilinam, 158. 

Village assemblies in South India, 383. 
Vimala, temple of, 298. 

Vimala (writer), 223. 

Vimaladitya, 291. 

Vimalamati, 190. 

Vimalamitra, 447. 

Vim&na, 176. 

Vmadhara-dakshina-murti, 306. 

Vinaya, 274. 

Vinayadisarman, 135. 

Vinayaditya (Jayapida), 115. 

Vinayaditya (brother of Potankusa), 143. 
Vinayaditya (son of Vijrahasta), 142. 
Vinayakapala I (Pratihara k.), 33, 34, 
36, 37, 40, 43(n). 

Vinayakapala II (Pratihara k.), 37, 43 
(n). 

Vinayakas, 345. 

Vinayamahadevi (wife of Kamamava), 
142. 

Vinaya-Pitaka, 260. 

Vindhyanripati, 131 (n). 

Vindhyas,' 7, 33, 50, 83, 213. 
Vindhvavasinl, 344. 

Vingavalli, 134. 

Vinitadeva, 267. 

Vinitapura, 147, 148. 

Vinitatuhga II, 77, 78. 

Viniyuktaka, 243. 


Vipranarayana, 139. 

Vipula-srimitra, 274. 

Vtra, 319, 320. 

Vlra Banajigas, 289. 

Virabhadra, 339, 340, 348. 

Virabhadra Ganadanda, 75, 76. 
VIrabhadra-murti, 308. 

Virachara, 323. 

Virahanka, 207. 

Viraja, 69. 

Virajakshetra, 340. 

Virajapuri, 137. 

Virajas, 66, 68. 

Viraja temple, 81 (n). 

Viraviartanda, 162. 

Viramgam Taluk, 105. 

Viran, 118. 

VIranaka, 118. 

Vira-Ndrdyana (Amoghavarsha I), 8. 
Virandrayana (title of Parantaka), 155. 
Viranarayanapura, 3121 
Viranesvara, 125. 

Vlra Fandya, 157, 159. 

Virarajendra, 174. 

Virasaivas, 323. 

Virasena, 182, 294. 

Virasilamegha—See also Jagatlpala, 173, 
174. 

Virasimha (k. at Kolahalapura), 142. 
Viratesvara temple, 338. 

Viravahu, 61, 80(n). 

Virochana, 142. 

Virochana (legend), 332. 

Virupa, 270. 

Virupaksha-murti, 308. 

Visakhadatta, 178, 179, 228(n). 
Visakhadatta and his Mudra-Raksliasa, 
Introduction to the study oj t 228 (n). 
Visakhadeva, 228(n). 

Visakhapatnam District, 78, l? e ' ,0ft 
Visakhila, 397(n). 

Visakhsha, 443. 

Visavada, 333. 

Vishmabanalila, 194. 

Vishamasiddhi, 135. 

Vishayakaranas , 244. 

Vishayamahattaras, 255(n). 

Vishayapati, 243, 246. 

Vishayas, 240, 243, 244, 247. 
VishayavyavahdrinSf 243. 

Vishnu, 28, 85, 91, 92, 125, 158, 185, 224, 
237, 238, 239, 257, 278, 282, 283, 285, 

296, 305, 308, 311, 313, 314, 316, 328, 

329, 330, 331, 332, 334, 335, 336, 337, 

338, 339, 341, 342, 343, 344, 347, 350, 

351, 360, 418, 435, 440. 

\ishnu, temple of, 111, 113. 
Vishnudharmottara, 237, 238, 254(n), 

255(n), 388, 400. 

Vishnu-krishna, 314. 

Vishnu Pur ana 63, 64. 

Vishnudeva Duraiarasan, 144. 
Vishnuvardhana (Chalukya Bhima II), 
136, 137, 138. 

Vishnuvardhana (6aktivarman), 140. 
583 


© 


o 





THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 


Vishnuvarclhana (Tala II), 139. 

Vishnuvardhana IV (E. Chalukya k. of 
Vengl), 3, 4, 6, 8, 133. 

Vishnuvarclhana V, 135, 137. 

Vishnu vardhana Hoysala, 163. 
Vishnuvarman I, 125. 

Vishnuvarman II, 125. 

Vishvaksena, 308. 

Visishtadvaita, 312. 

Visvakarmavatara Sdstra, 350. 

Visvanatha, 188. 

Visvamitra, 94. 

Visvtapadm a, 277, 

Visvarupa (avatara), 313, 314. 

Visvarupa (Smrifci commentator), 203. 
204, 232, 233, 236, 249, 250, 256 (n)', 
370, 372, 375, 378, 379, 388. 396 (n). 
Visvavarman, 348. 

Vitaputra, 397 (n). 

Vitasta (River), 117. 

Vitasta valley, 118. 

Vizianugaram, 291. 

Vodda-aradhana , 222. 

Vogel, 122. 

Vopalita, 189. 

Vorlesungen ilber den Islam , 453(n). 
Vrachada, 215. 

Vratas, 264. 

Vriddha-Hdrita, 370, 373, 394 (n). 
Vrinda, 199. 

Vrindamddhava —See also Siddhiyoga. 
199. 

Vrindavana, 360. 

Vrishabha-lahchhana (bull crest), 142. 
Vrishavarman, 125. 

Vulur (River), 117. 

Vyadhapura, 416, 419. 

Vyaghra. 452. 

Vyaghresvara, 123. 

Vydkhydnamudrd, 282, 286. 
Vyakhvana-murti, 306. 

Vyaktiviveka, 195. 

Vyasa, 205, 217, 225. 

Vyasa (Acharya), 367. 

Vyasa (Kalachuri k. of Sarayupara), 94. 
Vyasabhashya, 204. 

Vyavahdrikas, 244. 

Vyomasekhara, 206. 

Vyomavati, 206. 

Vyxiha doctrine, 309, 332. 


W 

Waddell, 32V362 (n). 

Wadhwan (Kathiawad) (origin of name), 
22, 102, 103. 

Wairagarh, 98, 99. 

Wandiwash, 166. 

Wani Grant of Govinda III, 41(n). 
Waters, 360 (n). 

Wawa, 428, 429. 

Waziristan, 114. 

West Bengal, 82 (n), 86. 

Western Ghats, 403. 

Western Hill States, 47. 


Wickremasinghe, 212. 

Winternitz, 184, 186, 193, 212, 229(n), 
230(n), 231 (n), 354, 361(n). 

Women, the position of, 377-382. 
Wu-ch’a, 65 


Y 

Yadavas, 46. 

Yadu, 46. 

Yadu, Rashtrakutas descended from, 17 
(n). 

Yaduvarhsa, 17 (n). 

Yajhapurusha—See also Yajnesa, 313. 
Yajhavalkya, 203, 233, 249, 250, 256(n), 
368, 370, 376, 378, 406, 407. 
Yajnavalkya-smriti, 203. 

Yajnesa—See also Yajhapurusha, 313. 
Yajurveda, 309. 

Yakshas—See also Upasakas, 204, 299, 
342. 

Yakshas, 260, 261. 

Yakshinls—See also Sasanadevatas, 264. 

299, 300. 

Ya’kubI, 419. 

Ya’kub ibn Layth, 112, 113, 126. 

Ya’kub ibn Tarik, 450. 

Yama, 237, 283, 309, 331, 367. 

Yamagarta, 77, 82(n). 

Yamaia, 317. 

Yamantakas, 264. 

Yamantaka-siddhi, 272. 

Yamari, 282, 283. 

YamI, 340. 

Yamini, 86. 

Yamuna, 5, 13, 23, 35, 56(n), 84, 85, 86, 
330, 341, 343, 438. 

Yamunacharya, 206. 

Yamanua-Gahga Doah—See Ganga-Ya¬ 
muna Doab. 

Yan Pu Ku Vijaya Sri, 427. 

Yasahpala (Pratiiiara k.), 43 (n). 
Yasaskara, 85, 120, 244, 245, 369, 396, (n). 
Yasastilaka and Indian Culture, 363(n). 
Yasastilaka champu, 186, 188, 189, 230 
(n), 294, 295. 

Yasobhanja, 72. 

Yasodeva, 189. 

Yasodhara, 121, 189. 

Yasodharacharita, 183. 

Yasodhara-pura, 420. 

Yasovarman, 42(n), 84, 85, 86, 89, 90, 96, 
186. 

Yaso-varman, 420, 421, 422, 438, 443. 
Yathasukha, 70, 81 (n). 

Yava-bhiimi, 412. . 
i Yavadvlpa, 274, 419. 

| Yavana, 46, 128. 

! Yayati, 142. 

| Yayatinagara, 148. 

I Yayavara, 180. 
j Yazdagird III, 353. 

! Yellamanchili, 136, 139. 

I Yoga, 365 (n). 


584 





INDEX 


Yoga, 263, 265, 266. “ | 

Yogabadari, 123. 

Yogabhashya , 205. 

Yogachara, 266. 

Yoga-murti, 306. 

Yogarahasya, 206. 

Yogaraja, 96. 

Yogaraja (Chapa K.), 103. 

Yogaraja II (Avanivarman), 96. 

Yogasana, 277. 

Yogas&rasaihgraha, 205. 

Yogasutra, 200, 204, 205. 

Yoga system, 356. 

Yoga tantra —See also Anuttarayoga 
tantra,' 264, 271, 272. 

Yogavarttika, 205. 

Yogavasishtha, 184. 

Yogavasishthasara, 206. 

Yogesvarl, 340. 

Yogic system, 259. 

Yogini, 320. 

Yoginls, 308, 342, 243. 

YoginlsamchaTya, 268. 

Yogloka, 204. 

Yuddhamalla (father of Badapa), 139. 


, Yuddhamalla I, 135, 137. 
i Yuddhamalla II, 137, 138. 

Yudhish^hira, 184, 

Yudhishthiravijaya, 184, 185, 186. 
Yugakara-varman, 122. 

Yukta , 246. 

Yuktichintamani, 189. 

Yunnan, 416, 4i8, 419, 420, 422, 432, 433. 
Yuvaraja I (Kalachuri k.), 84, 89-91. 
Yuvaraja II, 91, 92, 97, 105. 


Z 

Zabag (Zabaj), 410 (n), 413, 414. 

Zabul, 125, 126. 

Zabulistan, X13, 126. 

Zaid, Abu, 377, 380, 382, 386, 391, 397 
(n), 403, 405, 413, 414. 

Zarathoshti Abhyasa, 364 (n). 

Ziarat, Muslim, 113. 

Zindlq, 452. 

Zoroastrianism—See also the P arsis, 
352, 353. 

Zoroastrian literature, 354. 

; Zuhd, 452. 




585 














'I 




































THE HISTORY AND CULTURE 

OF THE 

INDIAN PEOPLE 


This is the first history of India, written 
exclusively by her own people, bringing to bear on 
the problems a detached and truly critical 
appreciation. A team of over sixty scholars of 
repute presents herein a comprehensive and up-to- 
date account of the political, socio-economic and 
cultural history of the Indian people. 

VOLUME I 
THE VEDIC AGE 
(up to 600 B.C.) 

VOLUME II 

THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 
(600 B.C. to 320 A.D.) 

VOLUME III 
THE CLASSICAL AGE 
(320—750 A.D.) 

VOLUME IV 

THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 
(750—1000 A.D.) 

VOLUME V 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 
(1000—1300 A.D.) 

VOLUME VI 

THE DELHI SULTANATE 
(1300—1526 A.D.) 


VOLUME VII 
THE MUGHAL EMPIRE 
(1526—1707 A.D.) 


VOLUME VIII 

THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 
(1707—1818 A.D.) 

VOLUME IX 

BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 
RENAISSANCE (1818—1905 A.D.) PART I 

VOLUME X 

BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND INDIAN 
RENAISSANCE (1818—1905 A.D.) PART II 


VOLUME XI 

STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM (1905—1947) 


VOLUME I: THE VEDIC AGE 

"This history unlike its predecessors is first and foremost a history of India and of 
her people rather than a history of those who have from time to time invaded her.... The 
standard, in a word, is very high...." 

The Times Literary Supplement, London 

"....Distinguished historians contribute and they are not only learned but also very 
readable .... It contains much new information...." 

The Manchester Guardian, Manchester 

VOLUME II : THE AGE OF IMPERIAL UNITY 

"....It is safe to say that these volumes will transform the study of Indian history in 
our times; their authors are not only writing history, they themselves are making history, a 
whole new history of knowledge and education...." 

The Illustrated Weekly of India, Bombay 

VOLUME III: THE CLASSICAL AGE 

"....It maintains the leading trait of the series viz. to devote more attention to the 
social and cultural aspects of the story than to the purely political side, and the narrative of 
dynastic struggles and wars.... The political history is generally complete and up-to-date 
and a great amount of authentic information on social and economic history has been 
culled and presented systematically for the first time...." 

K. A. Nilakanta Sastri in Journal of Indian History 

VOLUME IV : THE AGE OF IMPERIAL KANAUJ 

"....This is a magnificent piece of exact and unbiased scholarship.... Its pages are 
alive with the spirit of the modern Indian Renaissance; freedom has animated Indian 
learning and this is one of its finest achievements....this new Indian history is not 
concerned merely, or even mainly, with war and politics. Two thirds of the book deal with 
cultural and social matters...." The Statesman, Calcutta 

VOLUME V : THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

"....Like all the preceding volumes its treatment.... is detailed and comprehensive 
and is based upon the highest standards of scholarship. The contributors .... have made the 
best use of all the available source material and the important previous works on the 
subject....From every point of view it will be accepted as the standard and authoritative 
work on the history of India in the age of transition from ancient to medieval times...." 

The Hindustan Times, New Delhi 

VOLUME VI : THE DELHI SULTANATE 

"....Voluminous publication....piecing together all relevant material....easily stands 
out as one of the most outstanding and comprehensive treatises so far brought out on this 
period of Indian history....surpasses them all....being written....from an entirely new angle 
of vision....is indeed a significant contribution....this comprehensive and detailed work is 
really a very valuable addition to the existing literature on the subject...." 

The Pioneer, Lucknow 

VOLUME VII: THE MUGHUL EMPIRE 

"....A comprehensive and balanced history of a momentous period; an exacting task 
ably fulfilled....A notable volume in a notable series, the work is a finely integrated ar 
well brought-out history of a remarkable time...." Nagpur Times, Nagp. 

VOLUME VIII: THE MARATHA SUPREMACY 

"....The editors have done a commendable job in bringing out this volume in which 
the political history of the period has been dealt with in a scholarly manner...." 

Tne National Herald, New Delhi 

VOLUME IX : BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND 
INDIAN RENAISSANCE, PART I 

"....The volumeris an exhaustive study of the British rule....Its impact on the 
cultural, social and educational life in the country....This is an important publication for 
students of Indian history...." The Hitavada, Nagpur 

VOLUME X : BRITISH PARAMOUNTCY AND 
INDIAN RENAISSANCE, PART II 

"....This volume, like its predecessors, is a mine of information and brings to light 
numerous significant facts and developments in the last century....It maintains the high 
standards set by the earlier volumes...." Sunday Standard, Bombay 

VOLUME XI: STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM 

"....The present volume covers the momentous period 1905-1947. It gives a detailed 
account not only of political developments, but also of such other essential topics as 
administration, education, art and literature...." 

"Unique in the annals of modern Indian scholarship...." 

Sunday Standard, Bombay 

ISBN-978-81-7276-431-9 



