MINISr/f,, 


BHARATIYA VIDYA BH AVAN’S 
HISTORY AND CULTURE OF THE INDIAN PEOPLE 
VOLUME V 




Jt 



THE 

STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




WOH»i° 



THE 

STRUGGLE FOR 
EMPIRE 


FOREWORD BY 

K. ML MUNSHI 

B.A., D.LITT., LL.D. 

President, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

GENERAL EDITOR 

R. C. MAJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D., F.A.S., F.A.S.B. 

Professor of Ancient Indian History and Culture 
Nagpur University 

Ex-Vice- Chancellor and Professor of History 
Dacca University 

Hon. Head of the Department of History 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

ASSISTANT EDITOR 

A. D. PUSALKER 



M.A., LL.B., PH.D. 

Assistant Director and Head of the 
Department of Ancient Indian Culture 



BOMBAY 


BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 


FIRST PUBLISHED IN MAY 1057 
All rights reserved by the Publishers 



PRINTED IN INDIA 
BY P. H. RAMAN 

AT THE ASSOCIATED ADVERTISERS AND PRINTERS LIMITED 


505, ARTHUR ROAD, TARDEO 
BOMBAY 7 

AND 

PUBLISHED BY 

S. RAMAKRISHNAN, REGISTRAR, BHARATIYA VIDYA BHAVAN 
OHAUPATTY ROAD 

BOMBAY 7 


D. C. GANGULY 

M.A., PH.D. (LONDON) 

Secretary and Curator, Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta ; formerly Reader in History, 

Dacca University \ r* 

*' ! 

R. C. MAJUMDAR 

M.A., PH.D., F.A.S., F.A.S.B. 

Professor of Ancient Indian History and Culture, Nagpur University 

PARAMATMA SARAN 

M.A., PH.D, (LONDON) 

Reader in History, University of Delhi 

A. B. M. H A B IB U L L A H 

M.A., PH.D. (LONDON) 

Professor of Islamic History and Culture, University of Dacca ( Pakistan) 

D. C. SIRCAR 

M.A., PH.D, 

Government Epigraphist for India, Ootacamund 

Late Dewan Bahadur 

S.KRISHNASWAMI AIYANGAR 

M.A., PH.D. 

Retired Professor of Indian History and Archaeology, University of Madras 

R, S ATHI ANATH AIER 

M.A.. L.T, 

Professor of History and Politics, Annamalai University 

U. N.GHOSHAL 

M.A., PH.D. 

Formerly Professor of History, Presidency College, Calcutta 

M. A. MEHENDALE 

M.A., PH.D. 

Reader in Sanskrit, Deccan College Post-graduate and Research Institute, Poona 

A. D. PUSALKER 

M.A., LL.B., PH.D. 

Assistant Director and Head of the Department of Ancient Indian Culture , 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay 


H.D.VELANKAR 

M.A. 

Joint Director, Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan;formerly 
Professor of Sanskrit, Wilson College, Bombay 


R. G.HARSHE 

B.A. (TILAK), D.LITT, (PARIS) 

Formerly Registrar, Deccan College Post-graduate and Research Institute , Poona 



CONTRIBUTORS 


<SL 


S. K. CHATTERJI 

M. A. (cal.), D.LITT. (LONDON) 

President , Legislative CouncilWest Bengal; Emeritus Professor of Comparative Philology 

University of Calcutta 

K. R. SRINIVASA IYENGAR 

M.A., D. UTT. 

Professor and Head of the Department of English , Andhra University 
H. C. BHAYANI 

M.A., PH.D. 

Professor and Head of the Department of Gujarati , Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan , Bombay 

N. N. DAS GUPTA 

M.A. 

Lecturer in Ancient Indian History and Culture , University of Calcutta 

H. L. J AIN 

M.A., LL.B., D.LITT. 

Director , Prakrit Jain Institute , Muzajfarpur 

T. M. P. MAHADEVAN 

M.A., PH.D. 

Professor and Head of the Department of Philosophy , University of Madras 

U. C. BHATTACHARJEE 

M.A. 

Formerly Professor of Philosophy, Presidency College , Calcutta 

M. W. MIR2A 

M.A., PH.D. (LONDON) 

Professor and Head of the Department of Arabic , Lucknow University 

S. K. S ARAS W ATI 

M.A. 

Reader in Ancient Indian History and Culture , University of Calcutta 


NIHAR RANJAN RAY 

M.A., D.LETT. & PHIL. (LEYDEN) 

Bagiswari Professor of Indian Art and Culture , University of Calcutta 


foreword 

By Hr. K. M. Mvxshi 


One of the objects of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, the Institution 
which sponsors this Series, is the “study of the forces, movements, 
motives, ideas, forms and art of creative energy through which it 
expressed it (Indian Culture) in different ages as one continuous 
process”. An attempt has, therefore, to be made, consistently with 
this object, to present a view of the Age in flowing time. 

I do so in all humility. I fully realise my inadequacy to do so; 
for, I have to rely upon whatever little study I have made and what¬ 
ever I have observed, during the last fifty years, of the collective 
responses of our people to the events, movements, customs, institu¬ 
tions and values as also to men who have, through their hie and 
teachings, evoked the unseen forces which have shaped the life of 
India, 

The most crucial Age in Indian history began in A.D. 998, when 
the Turkish conqueror, Mahmud, captured Ghazni; it ended in A.D. 
1292, when the Khalji Chief, Jalal-ud-din, proclaimed himself the 
Sultan of Delhi. It can, however, be conveniently divided into two 
periods, the first ending in A.D. 1193, when Mu‘izz-ud-dln Ghuri 
defeated Prithviraja Chahamana of Ajmer in the Battle of Tarain 
or Taraori and opened the gates of Madhya Pradesh to the foreign 
invader; the second ending in 1299. 

This period, in my opinion, has not yet been studied from India’s 
point of view; from the point of view of the trials she passed 
through; of the sufferings she underwent when foreign elements 
forced their way into her life-blood; of the manner in which she 
reacted to the situation; of the means which she found to meet, or 
to mitigate, the dangers that confronted her; of the ways in which 
she reconstructed, achieved and fulfilled herself. 

Such a study is difficult for two reasons. First, the chronicles 
written by the proteges of the invaders or their successors throw a 
dubious but concentrated light on the narrow sector of life which 
their patrons dominated. This generally leads to the unconfessed 
impression that the vastly broad Sector, which lies in obscurity for 
want of historical material, either did not exist or does not matter as 
much. 


vii 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Secondly, the magnificence of Akbar’s achievements in the six¬ 
teenth century, by an illusory retrospectivity casts a reflected 
glamour on the period of the Sultanate. Because the Mughal Em¬ 
pire was an experiment in a national monarchy presided over by a 
Muslim monarch, one comes to assume, by an easy transition, that 
the Muslim-dominated Sultanate was the chrysalis from which it 
spx-ang. 

Unless, therefore, the period is viewed from a right perspective, 
its true picture cannot possibly emerge; nor would it be possible to 
assess the factors which, coming into existence during this period, 
affected the life of the people through the intervening Centuries, and 
which still confront it with unsolved problems. 


The year A.D. 1000 was a fateful year for India. In that year, 
Mahmud of Ghazni first invaded it. That event, in my opinion, 
divides Ancient from Medieval India. 

For over 2000 years before this event, that is, from before the days 
of king Janamejaya Pariksftita, referred to in the Brahmanas, the 
culture of the dominant classes, developing in almost unbroken conti¬ 
nuity, had brought large sections of the people within its fold. It 
was, however, disturbed on occasions, for instance, by the raids of 
Alexander; by the influx of the Bactrian Greeks, the Kushluas 
and the Sakas; by the invasion of the Hunas; by the Arab incursions 
in Sindh. But these inroads were only temporary episodes; the vita¬ 
lity of the culture and social organization found it easy to absorb 
most of the alien elements which were left behind in the country 
after they were closed. 

This continuous vitality is a phenomenon, without appreciating 
which it is difficult to study the epochs of Indian history in conti¬ 
nuous time. Several factors have maintained it. Of them, perhaps 
the most important was the ‘Aryavarta-consciousness’ which threw 
up values and institutions of great vigour and tenacity. 

It was based on the faith that Bharatavarsha, in its ideal aspect 
often referred to as Aryavarta, was the sacred land of Dharma, 
‘the high road to Heaven and to Salvation’; where ‘men were nobler 
than the Gods themselves; ' where all knowledge, thought and wor¬ 
ship were rooted in the Vedas, revealed by the Gods themselves; 
where the Dharmasastras prescribed the fundamental canons of per¬ 
sonal life and social relations; where Chaturvarnya, the divinely- 


1. Vishnu, fit, 3, 4. 




MIN/Sr^ 


FOREWORD 



ordained four-fold order of society, embraced all social groups; 
where, whatever the dialect of the people, Sanskrit, the language of 
the Gods, was the supreme medium of high expression/ 

The Dharrnasastras—and by that is meant not only the Smritis 
beginning with the Manu-smriti , but the Mahabharata 2 —have play¬ 
ed a very big role in the life of the country. Particularly Manu- 
smriti, as the Dharmastistra of divine origin, has had an all-pervading 
influence from the time historical memory could reach back to 
moulding the mind and the life of men, not only in India but in the 
India beyond the Seas, in Burma, Siam, Annam, Cambodia, Java 
and Bali, 

With the Mahabharata and the Ramayana , it has provided a 
background of continuity to the social and moral life; modified 
customary laws of tribes and communities in different stages of 
civilization; and built up the Collective Unconscious of our people, 
that subconscious source of integrative vitality which keeps a people 
together, leads them to feel and react as one in the face of certain 
circumstances, and provides the urge to collective action of a re¬ 
curring character. 

Century after century, the system, first formulated by the Manu- 
smriti, was accepted throughout the country, never by force of arms, 
less by royal fiats than the'sanction implied in the belief that ‘God 
gave it and the ancestors obeyed it’. It was found so acceptable 
because it had a revealing basis of reality: of a frank recognition 
of the temperamental inequalities of man; of the predominance of 
hereditary influences over environments; of the need for a synthetic 
framework for widely differing social groups in a vast country where 
culture had been staggered from not only region to region, but often 
from one group of villages to another. Its fundamental aim was toy. 
produce a synthetic urge towards human betterment, which treated 
economic, social, material, and ethical and spiritual well-being as 
indivisible; an aim which has yet to be improved upon by any other 
system, 

These values gave continuity to the way of life of even those 
sections who did not accept the divine origin of the Vedas or Chdtur- 
varnya. They also provided homogeneity to widely differing com¬ 
munities and religious cults and forms. The universal urge which 
they provided to go on a pilgrimage, generation after generation, to 
the mountains, rivers, towns of ancient fame, and holy spots and 
shrines which were conceived as the physical manifestations of the 

2. Sankara and Ramanuja both treat Bkagavadgltd as a smriti. ~~~ 


IX 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Land of Dharma, also kept alive an emotional awareness of unity 
and sanctity. 

The ‘Aryavarta-consciousness’ was mainly religio-cultural in 
content. Its political significance which, though often belied in prac¬ 
tice, exercised considerable influence with the kings of an earlier 
age in North India when they faced foreign invasion; it is summed 
up by Medhatithi thus: “Aryavarta was so called because the Ary as 
sprang up in it again and again. Even if it was overrun by the 
mleehchhas, they could never abide there for long”. 3 The tradition 
also had it that whenever a crisis arose, a chakravartin, a world- 
emperor, would rise in the land and re-establish Dharma. South 
India, however, which accepted the religio-cultural aspects of 
‘Aryavarta-consciousness’ and Manu’s system, knew no such signi¬ 
ficance, for it had never to face the problem of the mleehchhas till 
the fourteenth century. 

The consciousness in its political aspect had all but disappeared 
during the few decades which preceded A.D. 1000 on account of the 
recurring upheavals in North India. The empire of Kanauj, which 
had stabilised North India for wellnigh 150 years and supported the 
Shahi kings of the North-West 4 , has disintegrated. Now Raghu- 
kulabhUchakravarti, ‘the World-Emperor of Raghu’s race’, was 
merely a symbol of a vanished greatness, ruling over a small terri¬ 
tory around Kanauj on the sufferance of his erstwhile feudatories. 
Some of them, however, like the Chandellas of Jejakabhukti, the 
Kalachuris of Dahala and the Paramaras of Malava were engaged 
in struggling to found an empire on the ruins of old one, but with 
little success. 


In Eastern India, the Palas, the Chandras, the Varmans and the 
Gahgas fought each other with fluctuating success, struggling to re¬ 
tain whatever they had or to filch what they had not. 

The Rashtrakutas, the rivals of the Pratihara-Gurjaresvaras, had 
faded away; their empire, which for well-nigh two centuries had 
dominated most of South India, had also been dissolved. The Para¬ 
maras of Malava and the Western Chalukyas, both feudatories of the 
Rashtrakutas, at one time or the other, were locked in a life and death 
struggle, while Rajaraja Chola (A.D. 985-1014), who ruled over the 
extreme South, was just emerging as a powerful and wise monarch. 
/ 

At the turn of the tenth century, therefore, there was no gene¬ 
rally accepted national focus in the country, as Kanauj had once 


3. Medhatithi on Manu: II, 22, 

4. Munshi, Imperial Gurjaras, p. 86. 


x 





mtSTfiy 


FOREWORD 




been, and no military power in North India strong enough to keep 
the warring kings in check, or to co-ordinate their activities against 
any foreign invader. Thus, when Mahmud began his raids, India 
was ill-equipped for successful resistance. 


Ill 

After the Hiinas had been repulsed in the sixth century, the 
country had been free from any serious foreign visitation for about 
two centuries. The Arab conquest of Sindh in the eighth century 
had only been a frontier episode and the Pratxharas in the ninth 
century appear to have reclaimed some parts which had been 
overrun by the Arabs. The Indian mind, thus lulled into self-com¬ 
placency, was indifferent to, if not unaware of, the vast shifts of 
power which were taking place across the frontier. 

When the Sarmnid Princes, Turks recently converted to Islam, 
had grown weak, Alptigin, a slave of one of them, established him¬ 
self at Ghazni on the borders of India as a quasi-independent, chief¬ 
tain. His successor, Sabuktigln (A.D. 977-997), when he was safely 
entrenched in power, began nibbling at the possessions of the Shahi 
kings, which included parts of Afghanistan, North-West Frontier 
Province and the Punjab. 


On Sabuktigin’s death, his son Mahmud, with swift audacity, 
captured Ghazni, which his father had left to another son. He was 
a military leader of the highest order, gifted with a rare personality. 
Developing a marvellous striking power, by A.D. 1000, he extended 
his sway over considerable parts of Central Asia, Iran and Seistan. 
Then he turned to India, giving her people a foretaste of total war 
with which they had not been familiar since the days of the Hunas. 


/The Indian kings, all of whom accepted, at any rate in theory, 
the law of the Dharmasastras as inalienable, waged wars according 
to certain humane rules. Whatever the provocation, the shrine, the 
Brahmana and the cow were sacrosanct to them. War being a special 
privilege of the martial classes, harassment of the civilian population 
during military operations was considered a serious lapse from the 
code of honour. The high regard which all the Kshatriyas had for 
the chastity of women, also ruled out abduction as an incident of 
war. 

The wars in Central Asia, on the other hand, were grim strug-^ 
gles for survival, for the destruction of the enemies and for appro¬ 
priating their womenfolk. No code circumscribed the destructive 
zeal of the conqueror; no canon restrained the ruthlessness of their 


XI 



misr/fr 


THfi STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRg 



hordes. When, therefore, Mahmud’s armies swept over North India 
it saw torrents of barbarians sweeping across its rich plains, burn¬ 
ing, looting, indulging in indiscriminate massacre; raping women, 
destroying fair cities, burning down magnificent shrines enriched 
by centuries of faith; enforcing an alien religion at the point of 
sword; abducting thousands, forcing them into unwilling marriage 
or concubinage; capturing hundreds of thousands of men, women 
and children, to be sold as slaves in the markets of Ghazni and other 
Central Asian markets. 

Delhi, Kanauj, Jejakabhukti sent men and money to help the 
Shahi kings to defend their frontiers. But the invader swept every¬ 
thing before him. All that the three generations of the Shahis, 
‘men of noble sentiments and noble bearings’, who, according to Al- 
Biruni, ‘in their grandeur never slackened in the ardent desire of 
doing that which is good and rich’, could do was, like heroes of frus¬ 
trated destiny that they were, fight and die bravely. 

Mahmud annexed the Punjab, thereby opening the way to the 
hungry men from the steppes of Central Asia to descend upon this 
rich and fertile land in search of plunder. Nothing would with¬ 
stand the Central Asian raiders eager to plunder and destroy. In a 
few years, Thaneswar, Mathura, Kanauj and Prabhasa Pattana were 
smoking ruins. The ruler of Kanauj accepted submission on abject 
terms. The raids of the Turk were, however, halted in the east by 
Vidyadhara Chandella at Kalanjara and in the south-west, where 
after destroying the temple of Somanatha, Mahmud had to beat a 
hasty retreat through the desert of Sindh for fear of the federated 
armies of ‘Paramadeva’, whom I would identify with Bhoja Para- 
mara of Dhara (A.D. 1000-1055). 5 

In spite of the havoc worked by the raids of Mahmud, life re¬ 
turned to normal as soon as their pressure disappeared. For in¬ 
stance, within five years of the invasion, in the course of which 
Mahmud destroyed the temple of Somanatha, Gujarat, richer and 
more powerful than before, had not only rebuilt the temple on a 
more magnificent scale, but created the artistic wonders of the Dil- 
wara temple. About the same time, the neighbouring kingdom, 
which included Malwa and parts of Gujarat, was enjoying great 
prosperity associated with enthusiastic pursuit of learning, litera¬ 
ture and art. 

5. Munshi, Imperial Guv jams , p. 139. 

xii 





FOREWORD 



IV 

However, the destruction and the humiliation inflicted by Mah¬ 
mud’s raids shocked India’s sense of ancient superiority, bringing 
into play several political, social and psychological factors. With 
the Yaminls, the successors of Mahmud, firmly established in the 
Punjab, the ‘Aryavarta-consciousness’ lost whatever significance 
it had. The belief that Chtiturvanxya was a divinely appointed 
universal order, characteristic of the land, was shaken; for now a 
ruling race in the country not only stood outside it, but held it in 
contempt and sought its destruction. 

Nationalism, familiar to the modern mind, is a non-religious 
group sentiment. It is associated with a fierce possessiveness over 
one’s own land however vast it may be, entertained by a people who 
have willed themselves into a quasi-organic solidarity. Naturally, 
the Indian kings could not develop it, because the country was too 
vast and the times unfavourable to the development of a non-reli¬ 
gious group sentiment of this nature. Five more centuries had to 
elapse before nationalism became a force in Europe and two hundred 
more years had to pass before it was to become a human value in 
Asia. 

The storm that blew in the wake of Mahmud’s armies was 
sudden and overwhelming. It came before any of the feudatories of 
Imperial Kanauj could win the race for an unchallenged hegemony; 
when it blew over none was left strong enough to win it. The kings 
of South India, where the political aspect of the ‘Aryavarta-conscious- 
ness’ had been so much as penetrated, also presented too persistent 
a menace to enable them to combine against a foreign enemy from 
the North-West. In the result, loyalties came to be confined to one’s 
own region, accelerating the trend to social and political 
particularism. 

During this Age, the dvijas had long ceased to be a compact, 
social group created by anuloma marriages and a common education 
received from Brahmana preceptors. The Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas 
and the Vaisyas were now separate castes to which was denied the 
dynamic fluidity throughout the country which it had under the 
earlier social order. To this was added another factor. The dynas¬ 
tic pride, always a great factor in stiffening the morale of royal 
houses, had deteriorated into vaingloriousness which grew in pro¬ 
portion as the kingdoms shrunk in extent. A king, instead of 
being the only source of power, was no more than the first 
among the equals, the head of inter-related overlordships, never in a 
position to overrule the wishes of his feudal lords. 


xm 


MINlSr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

the loyalties of the Kshatriyas became rooted 
in the region over which they and their king held feudal sway. 
This rendered annexation, the only possible source of establishing 
the core of an empire, extremely difficult. Even after a smashing 
victory, a conqueror sometimes seems to have found it expedient 
to restore the vanquished enemy or a member of his family to the 
throne in order not to alienate the local chieftains; but no sooner 
was his back turned, than they, more often than not, declared 
independence. 

Under these conditions, scarcely any king could leave his realm 
for any length of time exposing it to the greed of his neighbours. 
He was always hard put to save his own kingdom and, on accession, 
had to make peace even with a foreign invader and divert his at¬ 
tention to his neighbour. In this way, social stagnancy and regio¬ 
nal consciousness led to what has been called ‘small-state-minded- 
ness’, the sure forerunner of political disintegration. 


V 

About the middle of the twelfth century, the Turks, then in 
occupation of parts of Central Asia, were forced first westwards and 
then eastwards by the pressure of their enemies. In A.D. 1175, the 
Turkish chief, Mu‘izz-ud dln Muhammad, the nephew of the ferocious 
‘World-Burner’ of Ghur, invaded India. The impact of the invasion 
was borne by three powerful princes: Prithviraja Chahamana of 
Ajmer, Jayachandra Gahadavala of Kanauj, and Mularaja II, 
Chaulukya of Gujarat. Each one of them was powerful enough to 
defeat the invader singly; Mularaja drove him back in 1178; Prithvi¬ 
raja, in A.D. 1191; but no two of them would combine. When, the 
brave Prithviraja lost the second Battle of Tarain in 1192, the turn¬ 
ing point of history came. When Jayachandra G§ha$avala, next 
to be vanquished, died fighting, the Turkish cavalry swept over the 
plains of the Gahga. 

In A.D. 1206, Qutb-ud-dln Aibak, who succeeded Mu‘izz-ud-clln, 
Muhammad, established the Turkish Sultanate' of India at Lahore! 
It was transferred later to Delhi. The Sultanate was foreign in per¬ 
sonnel and outlook, for “The forty” as the leading Turkish chjqfS; 
originally the slaves of Mu‘izz-ud-dln, were called, owned it in fee. 
Its principal concern was loot and conquest; and the slogan of jehad, 
supported by the ‘Ulama, came in useful to ’maintain the fanatic'zeal 
of the army. To these invaders nothing was sacred. The descrip¬ 
tion given by Padmanabha in Kahnada&e PrabandUa (c. A,DM456) 

> ■■ ’ v /V * • .. V ' xiv, ■ " v V,V- yV,v 


mj 


of what the armies of ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji did, would equally apply to 
the campaigns of the Turks: 

“The conquering army burnt villages; devastated the land, 
plundered- people’s wealth, took Brahmanas, children and 
women of all castes captive, and flogged them with thongs and 
raw hide, carried a moving prison with it, and converted the 
prisoners into obsequious Turks.” 

In the days of Mahmud of Ghazni, in the words of ‘Utbi, “the 
blood of the infidels flowed copiously and apostasy was often the 
only way of survival.” On the testimony of so liberal a Muslim of 
this Age as Amir Khusrav, “the land had been saturated with the 
water of the sword and the vapours of infidelity ( i.e. Hindus) had 
been dispersed.” Will Durant, in his Story of Civilization, aptly 
says: “The Mohammedan conquest of India is probably the bloodiest 
story in history. It is a discouraging tale, for its evident moral is 
that civilization is a precarious thing, whose delicate complex of 
order and liberty, culture and peace may at any time be overthrown 
by barbarians invading from without or multiplying within”. And 
neither the ferocity nor the persistence of the invader could lead 
the Indians to develop the military organisation or the ruthlessness 
needed to match the opposing savagery. 

The conquests so exultantly referred to by the court chroni¬ 
clers of the Sultanate had an Indian side of the picture. It was one 
of ceaseless resistance offered with, relentless heroism; of men, from 
boys in teens to men with one foot in the grave, flinging away 
their lives for freedom; of warriors defying the invaders from fort¬ 
resses for months, sometimes for years, in one case, with intermis¬ 
sion, for a century; of women in thousands courting fire to save their 
honour; of children whose bodies were flung into the wells by their 
parents so that they might escape slavery; of fresh heroes springing 
up to take the place of the dead and to break the volume and mo¬ 
mentum of the onrushing tide of invasion. 

About the middle of the thirteenth century, the Mongols had 
already established themselves in Afghanistan. In A.D. 1254, they 
had taken Lahore; in A.D. 1255 they had entered Sindh. With his 
retreat to the original homeland thus cut off, the Turk, compelled 
to look to India as his permanent home, clung to the precariously 
held kingdom of Delhi with tenacity. However, in spite of military 
operations conducted for a century, the core of the Sultanate only 
comprised the central military base of Delhi and the surrounding 
districts within a radius of about 250 miles of it. The frontier dis¬ 
tricts were no better than garrison outposts from which the Turkish 

zv 





Ml NlSTfy 


%L 

THE STRUGGLE TOE EMPIRE 

satraps carried on raids against the Indian chiefs, who held the rural 
areas. But even when the resistance was overcome, the satraps had 
to administer the conquered areas with the aid of hereditary Indian 
chiefs and officers, who were always on the look out for an oppor¬ 
tunity to revolt* Some of the Indian chiefs carried their expedi¬ 
tions to the walls of Delhi and even across the Yamuna into the 
Doab. From the Indian point of view, therefore, the territory of 
the Sultanate in the thirteenth century was only an arena of resist¬ 
ance which neither wavered nor tired. 

VI 

This resistance was nowhere more characteristically symboli¬ 
sed than in the epic heroism associated with the Chahamanas of 
Ranthambhor. From A.D. 1192, when Prithviraja Chahamana lost 
the battle of Tarain, till A.D. 1301 when his descendant, the heroic 
Hammiradeva, fell fighting in the battlefield and the fortress fell 
to ‘Ala-ud-din Khaljl, they defied the Sultanate year after year and 
generation after generation. And so did the Katehrs who were no 
less unyielding in their resistance. 

The Indian kings, steeped in their tradition of tolerance, could 
scarcely envisage the danger to which their policies towards Islam 
exposed them. In spite of what was happening in North India, Indian 
kings permitted foreigners to settle freely in their kingdoms and 
granted them free exercise of their religious pactices. Even before 
the Turkish invasion, some sects of Islam had drifted into the country 
and their religious and proselytising activities had not been inter¬ 
fered with. Jayasimha Siddharaja of Gujarat (A.D. 1094-1143) 
punished some of his subjects for interfering with the worship of 
Muslims. Proselytising activities were freely carried out in the 
days of the Yadavas by a Sufi teacher, Mumin ‘Arif, % who settled 
near Devagiri in the South, and by Jalal-ud din Ganjrawan (died 
in A.D. 1254) another Sufi from Iran. Sarangadeva (A.D. 1294-1297) 
of Gujarat gave a grant for a masjid to the local Muslim community 
of Prabhasa Pattana with the blessings of the high-priest of Soma- 
natha when, for decades, the Turks had been destroying thousands 
of temples in Varanasi and other sacred places. 

Once the Turkish Sultanate was installed at Delhi and Islam 
came to be enthroned in political power, wherever the writ of the 
Sultans ran, the proselytising activities of Islam became active; the 
Hindus were denied the right to public worship and were subjected 
to civil disabilities and other indignities; and many communities, 
particularly in the lower strata of society, took to the new faith in 

xvi 



FOREWORD 



order to escape these hardships. This led to the emergence of a 
distinct element in the population of the country, termed ‘Mussal- 
mans’. This community comprised the Turkish conquerors and their 
retainers; the foreign mercenaries pressed into their service from 
time to time; the divines, scholars and adventurers who migrated 
to India from foreign lands; the men taken prisoners in war or for¬ 
ced into slavery; the converts who sought the new faith to secure 
royal favour or protection; the Hindu women captured in war or ab¬ 
ducted and their progeny. 

This element in the population, which had behind it the politi¬ 
cal and military support of the Sultanate and its governors, slowly 
acquired the conquistador spirit of the Turks. Ever on the increase, 
it began to look down upon the people from whom most of its mem¬ 
bers had come, as infidels to be despised and converted or killed, 
and in any event to be fought and overcome. It was this element 
that in opposition to the ruling Turkish ‘Forty’, supported the Khal- 
jis, who were not considered pure Turks, to capture the Sultanate 
in A.D. 1290. 

The aggressive attitude of this new element in the population 
led to the religious, cultural and psychological resistance on the part 
of the people of the country, who, in contra distinction to it, came 
to be referred to as ‘Hindus’. The Hindus fought the conquistador 
spirit of the Muslims by developing a challenging superiority com¬ 
plex. They made compromises with the rulers when compelled to 
do so; they served them when they could not help doing so. But 
they would not let them defile the sanctity of their homes or castes, 
social and religious observances by encouraging indiscriminate con¬ 
tact with the Muslims. 

The people while countering the invader by armed resistance 
to the best of their ability succeeded in confining his authority 
wherever he had acquired it, within the narrowest limits. They 
also tried to protect religion, culture and social order, rebuilding 
on the old foundations wherever they could. The Dharmasastras were 
given a higher sanctity ; the edge of social ostracism was sharpened. 
Women were segregated in their homes; infant marriages became 
almost universal. Self-immolation by heroic women on the funeral 
pyre, when their husbands lost their life in battle, became the 
supreme form of martyrdom, which kept a sense of religious and 
cultural superiority at white heat. Caste divided and sub-divided, 
but remained unmixed. Even the process of social betterment 
through which lower castes were progressively raised to a higher 
status was slowed down or halted. 

xvii 


8.E.— B 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

At the same time, the conflicts and tensions, bitter and persist¬ 
ent though they were, provided areas of contact, and therefore of 
adjustment. The slaves captured in war and women acquired as 
wives or mistresses, were Muslims only in name. The new converts 
and their children wore Islam more as an official badge, rarely 
giving up all the inhibitions and practices of the Hindus. Even the 
Sultan or his satrap, however intolerant, had to adjust himself to 
his Hindu feudal chiefs and officials, and, in spite of frequent pro¬ 
tests from the ‘Ulamci , framed his policies so as not to create strong 
disaffection among them. 

Rebels from either camps sought refuge with the other. There 
was intercourse between the two communities in courts, fairs and 
festivals. Hindu artists, musicians and dancers thronged the courts 
and the camps of the Sultans and their governors and reaped a rich 
harvest. Hindu and Muslim saints, not unoften, had a common appeal 
to both the communities, and the sects of both the religions, by way 
of action and re-action, and sometimes by challenge, influenced each 
other. The Mahanubhava sect, a non-idolatrous Krishpa Cult, 
founded by ChakradharasvamI (died in A.D. 1272) about the time 
the first Sufi saints settled in Aurangabad, is an instance in point. 

The Hindus remained in the spheres of trade, commerce and 
banking. The Muslims, however intolerant, therefore, had to treat 
the Hindu mercantile community with consideration, though it was 
inspired by self-interest and often grudging. The foreign trade, 
on which the Sultanate depended, was mostly in the hands 
of Hindus of the west coast, who traded with Persia and Arabia. 
The extravagant young Muslims also found it impossible to indulge 
in a life of gaiety without the money, which the Hindu banker was 
not unwilling to provide in order to secure freedom from harass¬ 
ment or indignity. 

These areas of contact would have hastened far-reaching ad¬ 
justments had not the perennial streams of Muslim adventurers and 
divines continued to flow through the North-Western passes. To 
feed their rapacity or fanaticism these immigrants kept alive viru¬ 
lent antagonism for the people whom they had come to exploit. 

Except for a few buildings like the. Qutb-minar, there is no¬ 
thing to relieve the dreary military character of the thirteenth cen¬ 
tury Sultanate. It made no contribution to the sphere of culture, 
except a little in the field of historiography and Persian literature. 
Some of the Sultans, it appears, encouraged some new ideas and 
modes in architecture, paving the way for the Indo Saracenic style 

xviil 




FOREWORD 

of the future. They also made some crude experiments in adminis¬ 
trative policies as well as the fiscal revenue and currency systems. 
In self-interest they also began to build a line of defence against the 
Mongols in the North-West, halting their irresistible march. But the 
harvest of whatever little they sowed was to be gathered in the next 
Age in the reigns of ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji and Muhammad bin Tughluq. 

i vn 

Even within the areas in which Turkish armies operated, the 
India of the Age belonged to the heroes of resistance; outside this 
area lay considerable parts of the North and the whole of the 
South—in fact, three-fourths of the country, where India followed its 
unbroken way of life, where the Dharmasastras were honoured and 
obeyed and where Hinduism flourished unobstructed. 

Where the Indian kings ruled, their regional pride, exaggerated 
though it was, had its compensatory feature. They vied with each 
other in making their courts brilliant centres of art, learning and 
literature. They gave generous grants to the poor and the learned, 
built beautiful temples and lavished patronage on poets. People 
lived within the regulated, order which, though circumscribed by 
ancient customs, was in no way oppressive. 

In North India, girdling the area of military resistance, were the 
old kingdoms of Dahala, ruled by the Kalachuris (11th century to 
1212); Jejakabhukti, ruled by the Chandellas (9th century to 1315); 
Malwa, ruled by the Paramaras (10th century to A.D, 1305); and 
Gujarat, ruled by the Chaulukyas and Vaghelas (A.D. 940-1299), the 
most opulent and powerful of them all. 

In the South, the Western Chalukyas (A.D. 973-1189), the Yada- 
vas (A.D. 1185-1317), the Kakatiyas (c. A.D. 1050-1322), the Eastern 
Chalukyas (A.D. 999-1271) and later, Pan^yas (A.D. 11th to 14th 
centuries) and Hoysalas (c. A.D. 1106-1343) ruled over flourishing 
kingdoms and in the middle of the thirteenth century the Papqyan 
conqueror Jatavarman Sundara Panidya established hegemony over 
several of them. Some of these kingdoms, at one time or the other, 
were more powerful than the Sultanate except perhaps during the 
reign of Iltutmish and Balban. If the prosperity and welfare of the 
people, the patronage of art and literature provide any test, most of 
them were decidedly great. 

But the most important of them in extent and power—not ex¬ 
cluding the Sultanate at its best—and the most brilliant in cultural 
achievements, was the empire of the Cholas of Tanjore (A.D. 985- 

xix 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


1250). When North India was being raided by Mahmud, Rajaraja 
Choja (A.D. 985-1014), one of the greatest rulers in Indian history, 
was laying the foundations of an empire. A pious man, he conquer¬ 
ed far and wide, set up an efficient administration and ruled his 
people wisely and well. A great patron of art and literature, he 
built the Brihadisvara (or Rajarajesvara) temple at Tanjore, the most 
beautiful of Tamil edifices in the country. His empire at his death in¬ 
cluded tthe whole of South India up to the Tungabhadra, the Maldives 
and a part of Ceylon, with Andhradesa in feudatory alliance. 

Under his son, Rajendra Chola Gahgaikonfla (A.D. 1012-1044), 
the empire reached its zenith, comprising, besides the territories 
that had been acquired by Rajaraja, parts of what is at present 
Madhya Pradesh, the whole of Andhra, Ceylon, and parts of Orissa, 
Bengal and Bihar. The Chola Emperors were the first to recognise 
the value of naval power. Their navy controlled the Bay of Bengal, 
which became a ‘Chola-Lake’, and won a colonial empire which 
embraced Ceylon, the Nicobar Islands, the Malay Peninsula and 
Sumatra. Their administrative organisation had a strong centra¬ 
lised machinery and an efficient system of audit. They constructed 
the famous anicuts across the Kaveri in the Tanjore District; had 
land surveys made of their territories; built magnificent temples; 
established schools of Vedic and Sanskritic learning. Under them 
literature blossomed and art flourished and the south contributed 
valuable works in the field of philosophy, Dharmasastras, Saivism, 
dramaturgy, music and dancing. 

During this period, the Hindu kingdoms of Suvarnadvlpa, 
which comprised the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, Java, Bali, Borneo, 
kingdom of the gailendras, Pagan and Kambuja in South-East Asia, 
formed part of Dvipantara-Bharata, ‘India beyond the Seas’. They 
had close contacts with India, and South India and Bengal influenced 
them considerably. 

Within fifty years of the conquest of the great Sailendra empire 
of Malaya by the Chola conquerors, the royal dynasty re-established 
its power to some extent, which came to an end only about A.D. 1264. 
The empire of Kambuja (Cambodia) reached its zenith in the twelfth 
century, when Suryavarman II built the great temple of Angkor 
Vat, reckoned as one of the wonders of the world. At the end of the 
twelfth century, the Hindu kingdom of Champa (Indo-China) under 
Jayavarman VIII, extended from the Bay of Bengal on one side to 
the Sea of China on the other; it continued to flourish till A.D. 1312 
when the Emperor of Annam reduced it to vassalage. Java also 
continued to be a powerful Hindu kingdom till the fifteenth century. 



FOREWORD 



When overpowered by the Muslims, the Hindu rulers, rather tharl 
renounce Hinduism, migrated with a large number of people to the 
small island of Bali, which had already been colonised by the Hindus. 
Hinduism flourishes in Bali even now.. Several massive monuments 
like Angkor Thom in Kambuja and Barabudur in Java attest to the 
grandiose art of this glorious period of Dvipantara-Bharata. 

In A.D. 1044, the Hindu king, Aniruddha, ruling from Pagan or 
Arimardanapura in Burma, brought the whole country, excluding 
Tenasserim, under his rule. One of his successors, Narasimhapati, 
in A.D. 1271, defied Kublai Khan for many years, till about the end 
of the thirteenth century, a grandson of Kublai Khan marched to 
Pagan which ‘perished amidst the blood and flame of the Tartar’s 
terror’. 

As a result of the resilience of the social order as had been 
developed under the influence of the Dharmasastras, most of the 
social activities were in the hands of autonomous groups outside 
the sphere of royal authority. The king waged wars. He lost bat¬ 
tles or died fighting. His army was massacred. But the villages, 
more or less self-sufficient economic and social units, continued to 
lead their own life; the local panchayats continued to dispense 
justice; the Brahmanas, to impart education and direct religious rites 
and duties; the Kshatriyas, to give protection; and the autonomous 
castes, to provide social security and to safeguard human relations. 

During this age, therefore, in spite of the ravages of the Turks, « 
India was still the land of great achievements. 

VIII 

By the end of the tenth century, Hinduism, with its vigorous 
cults inculcating the worship of Siva, Sakti and Vishnu, had absorb¬ 
ed Buddhism; asserted its universal supremacy; re-interpreted its 
popular doctrines, charging them with high philosophy, and thrown 
up vast movements of the spirit. 

The Brahmanas continued to exercise tremendous influence in 
the mind and faith of the people. In the main devoted to learning, 
rituals, worship, they led the renaissance, which can appropriately 
be called Puranic. Sanskrit, which remained their passport to a 
semi-divine status and their instrument of unifying the country, conti¬ 
nued to be the language of religion, philosophy and sciences; of the 
courts where learning was lavishly patronised; of the Universities 
where the Sastras were studied and re-interpreted. The Indian kings 
of the period, whatever their other faults, never failed to promote 


xxi 


misr/fy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



or to honour learning. But by the end of the thirteenth century, 
intellectual expansion of North India halted abruptly. This can only 
be traced to the vast destructions of the Universities and centres of 
learning in North India by the Turks. 

In spite of the destruction of some great shrines and Universi¬ 
ties in North India, literature in Sanskrit flourished in most parts 
of India. Whatever of it has come down to us includes mah&kavyas 
and k&vyas, lyrical, didactic, satirical and historical poems; dramas) 
of different varieties; prose romances and champus; tales, romantic 
and didactic; treatises on metrics, poetics and dramaturgy, on poli¬ 
tics, mathematics, medicine, astronomy, architecture and philosophy. 

It was the age of polymaths: of Kshemendra, Bhoja and Hema- 
chandra. Though Kalidasa’s Raghuvamsa and Meghaduta and Bana’s 
Kadambari provided the model for many of the creative works, they 
tended to be learned, rather than living. The fashion of the time 
required that even epics should be so composed that every word had 
a double or treble entendre. For instance, every verse of the 
Dvyagraya-mahakavya of Hemachandra illustrates rules of grammar 
as also the history of the Chaulukyas. 

Though most of the kavyas were second-rate, Naishadhiya, can 
stand comparison with the best of them. Kalhana’s Rajatarangini is 
the best work on history in Sanskrit. The greatest creative work 
of the period—Jayadeva’s Gita-govindu —in which sound, sense and 
emotion have been mingled in exquisite harmony, and the beauty 
of words is invested with the intensity of erotic emotions, is a unique 
poem in the literature of the world, rare and exquisite, though op¬ 
pressively scintillating. 

IX 

In the tenth century the castes were comparatively fluid and 
reconversion to Hinduism not impossible. But in this Age the 
fundamental values of Dharmasastras were readjusted not 
only to restore continuity and stability to the social order, 
but to provide defensive ramparts in order to present a solid 
front to an aggressive alien culture and religion. The 
dynamic outlook of Medhatithi and Devala-smriti, therefore, gave 
place to a conservative outlook. 

During this period, the great Dharmasastra texts —Mitdksharu, 
Dayabhaga, Smriti-chandrika and Apartirka tlkg. —reinterpreted the 
regulatory canons of life laid down by the earlier texts. Their autho¬ 
rity, as judicial decisions show, held good till yesterday when in parts 

xxix 


FOREWORD 



it was superseded by the amendments of the Hindu Code. Chcitur- 
vartiya, as envisaged by these texts, was the ideal pattern for the 
society to conform. Lapses might be many and varied, but provision 
was made to condone or remedy them by appropriate rituals. These 
law-texts, universally accepted as authoritative, more than any single 
factor, helped to conserve the social structure and the pattern of 
conduct in all human relations, which were held traditionally sacro¬ 
sanct from the days of Manu. 

XI 

Sanskrit had been placed on a pedestal of scholarship and sanc¬ 
tity, assuming a more learned character. Prakrit and Apabhramsa 
had receded in the background. Some of the dialects of the regions— 
desabh&shas —thereupon had become the vehicles of the living 
thought and emotions of the people. This Age saw the literary acti¬ 
vities in these dialects which laid the foundation of the modern 
Indian languages and their literature, including Marathi, Bengali, 
Tamil, Kannada and Telugu, as also Old Gujarati, sometimes called 
the Western Rajasthani, of which modern Gujarati, Jaipuri, Marwari 
and Malvi are the descendants. 

With miraculous adaptability Brahmanas and non-Brahmanas 
also carried to the masses the vision and the hope of the Epics and 
the Puranas, through the media of these languages. This brought 
about the later phase of the Puranie Renaissance, which kept ancient 
ideals and traditions through the deSabhashas. This movement 
spread over many parts of the country. To the poets it gave fresh 
inspiration; to the Pauranikas, the readers of the Puranas, a new 
vocation; to the philosophers, a new outlook; to the village sects, 
something to live for. It made the glamour of the past, of which 
the people, were already proud, live again. It displaced cumbrous 
ritual and abstruse doctrine, to make way for the bhakti —devotion— 
associated with joy, dance and prayer. 

Before the rise of Sarikar-acharya, the Vaishnava mystics and 
saints, known as Alvars in the South, had invested bhakti with the 
attributes of earthly love. When the Bhagavata Parana, one of the 
literary masterpieces of the world, recreated Sri Krishna as the 
supremely loveable child, youth, lover—God Himself— Sri Krishnas- 
tu Bhagamn svayam, out of the statesman, World Teacher and 
avatdra of the Epic and the earlier Puranas, it was accepted as the 
gospel of bhakti throughout the country. 

During this period, an aspect of bhakti also received a new 
emphasis. After A.D, 1000, Yamunacharya began his apostolic 

xxiii 


miSTfty 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



career under the Chola kings. He propagated prapatti “Surrender 
to God”. Ramanujacharya, who succeeded him, not only developed 
the doctrine by providing it with a philosophic background, but 
raised it to the level of a monotheistic religion. In this bhakti school 
of thought, which challenged the supremacy of the Vedanta of 
Sankara, living dedication to God became the master idea giving the 
powerful emotional content to the bhakti. 

When Radha came to be associated with Sri Krishna in the 
popular imagination, the bhakti movement received a still more 
powerful impetus. About A.D. 1150, Nimbarka founded a new school 
in Andhradesa, stressing the bhakti both of Sri Krishna and Radha. 
“We worship”, he says, “Radha, the daughter of Vrishabhanu, the god¬ 
dess who joyfully adorns the left lap of the great deity Sri Krishna, 
as beautiful as Sri Krishna Himself, surrounded by thousands of 
damsels. She is the one who fulfils all desires”. Madhva in Karnatak 
laid the foundation of a yet more vigorous Vaishnava cult. 

These Acharyas were not merely philosopher saints. They were 
ardent evangelists, with an inspired sense of their mission. They 
and their followers travelled from one place of pilgrimage to ano¬ 
ther; worshipped at holy places or well-known shrines, particularly 
those associated with Sri Krishna; established contacts, composed 
philosophic treatises, held discourses and made disciples who wander¬ 
ed from countryside to countryside, singing the praises of the Lord. 

The concept of bhakti , to which shape had been given 
by Sri Krishna in the Bhagavad-gita, and by the early found¬ 
ers of the Pancharatra doctrines, had alreadly contributed 
a vital element in the Puranic renaissance. Later romantic 
and emotional elements were added to it by the devotional songs of 
the Alvars, the human appeal of the Bhdgavata and the glamour of 
the Radha-Krishna sports of Gita-govinda. setting the imagination of 
the people aglow. Slowly, it penetrated, though often unperceived, 
into the dark undergrowth of frustration which had been taking 
possession of the Collective Unconscious of the people. Ever a 
vibrant force., in a hundred and fifty years, it was to blaze forth as 
the Bhakti Renaissance to give India the raptures of a fresh joy, 
which enabled her to save her soul. 

XI 

We have a fairly reliable picture of the economic condition of 
Gujarat in the ample materials which are available. Similar condi¬ 
tions are likely to have prevailed in some other parts of the country 
where the Turkish armies did not operate. The evidence shows that 


XXIV 


wnist^ 


FOREWORD 



the soil of Gujarat was fertile; its people adventurous, hard-working 
and well-behaved. Agriculture yielded bountiful harvests; indus¬ 
tries flourished; internal trade and maritime commerce was brisk 
and profitable. In general, the masses in the country lived simply 
but well, drawing sustenance from a rich soil. The middle classes 
lived in comfort; the upper classes in wealth, plenty and pomp. Im- 
porant shrines and Universities were richly endowed. 

By the end of the thirteenth century, the textile industry of 
Gujarat had reached its high-water mark; Baroji and Kambayali, 
manufactured in Broach and Cambay respectively, are referred by 
Marco Polo and Al-Newayri as the outstanding varieties of textile. 
It was also famous for its tanning and leather industries. “What 
more shall I tell you”, writes the astonished Marco Polo, “you must 
know in very truth that in this kingdom are made the best and finest 
leather goods in the world and the most costly.” 

No less important were its industries of manufacturing gur and 
sugar, and the building industry. The flourishing condition of the 
latter is evidenced by the large residential quarters in the cities like 
Aiiahillapafaka, Dholka, Cambay and Broach; by the magnificent tem¬ 
ples of Somanatha, Abu and Modhera; by the forts, the remnant of 
one of which can still be seen at Dabhoi; by the elaborate step-wells 
of the period which still survive. The use of iron implements of 
extreme fineness is also indicated by the exquisite stone carvings. 

Trades were organised into guilds with a department of the 
State to look after them. Broach and Cambay, the two ports of 
Gujarat, carried on a large international trade. Idrisi speaks of the 
residents of Broach as being rich and engaged in trade. “They freely 
enter upon speculations and distant expedition,,.. It is a port for 
vessels coming from China and is also for those of Sind” Spices, 
dyes, leather goods and textiles formed the principal items. of ex¬ 
port; and so were locally made perfumes, which had a world wide 
demand. Imports comprised gold, silver and other commodities, 
paiticularly horses, of which 10,000 are recorded as passing annually 
through the port of Cambay alone. Prabhasa was also an entrepot 
and its religious importance invested it with great prominence. 

Large part of the overseas trade of Gujarat was controlled by 
Indians, though merchants of Arabia settled in different parts of the 
land had also a share in it. Jagadu, a merchant of international 
renown, is stated to have traded regularly with Persia and trans- 


XXV 




ft 

ported goods to and fro in his ships. A brisk trade was carried 
on with Sumatra and Java. The wealth brought from the latter coun¬ 
try has passed into a proverb: “He who goes to Java never returns; 
but if he does, he brings so much wealth that his grand-children’s 
grand-children will not be able to exhaust it.” Al-Idrlsi testifies 
that Indian merchants were known for justice, good faith, honesty 
and fidelity to their engagements. Merchants of Lafa (South 
Gujarat) received special encomium from Marco Polo, who says: “I 
assure you that these Brahmapas are among the best and most trust¬ 
worthy merchants in the world; for nothing on earth would they tell 
a lie and all that they say is true.” 

There is also evidence, though not so complete, of the conditions 
in other parts of the country. Date and cocoanut trees grew at 
Sandan and the latter were found in abundance at Saymur. 
Magadha was rich in rice, and Kalinga produced its best varieties 
suitable for the royal kitchens. Ginger and cinnamon came from 
the Papdya kingdom; camphor, from the mountain slopes between 
Quilon and Madura; cardamom and pepper, from Malabar. Bengal 
produced spikenard and other spices, ginger, sugar and cotton. The 
Malaya hills supplied sandal-wood, while from Kashmir came 
yellow sandal, saffron and grapes. Indigo of a fine quality was pro¬ 
duced im Quilon. The Chola-mandala abounded in ivory. 

The textile industry also flourished in Vanga, Kalinga, the 
Chola-mandala and Multan. Malwa provided large quantities of 
cotton cloth; Malabar manufactured “very beautiful and delicate 
buckrams;” Warangal, fine cotton fabrics and carpets; cotton stuffs 
with coloured silk threads formed part of the products of Chola- 
mantfala. The temples at Bhuvanesvara, Puri and Konarak testify 
to the skill of the ironsmiths in manufacturing iron-beams of un¬ 
wrought ’ - on. The iron pillar at Dhara is reputed to ha ve been the 
highest pillar of its kind in the world. Palnad in South India 
specialised in iron manufactures including arms. 

Malabar had important centres of pearl fisheries. Warangal pro¬ 
duced diamonds of large size in abundance. At many centres in the 
country, articles of gold and silver of high artistic value were manu¬ 
factured, and the art of jewellers had reached a high degree of 
specialised skill. 

Malabar also had international centres of trade, visited by ships 
from the Persian Gulf, the Arabian Sea as also from South China. 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


xxvi 



fts imports included metals, textiles, fabrics, frankincense, etc. 
Spices, precious stones, pearls, cloths of silk and gold, and 
ivory figured among the exports. Horses constituted by far the 
largest item among the imports. Chau Ju-Kua refers to the Arabs 
taking their horses to Quilon for trade. The merchants of Quilon 
and the officials of the Chola government employed in the port have 
been praised for their integrity by the Jewish traveller Benjamin 
of Tudela. 

XII 

The pall of the purdah had not yet descended upon the land. 
Men and women, simply dressed but richly ornamented, moved 
about freely. Fairs and feasts were held in plenty. Flowers were 
in general use as personal ornaments. Dance, drama and music, 
vocal and instrumental, were very popular. So was wrestling and 
duel. Fights between birds and quails were often staged to popular 
delight. Large temples, built by kings or the pious rich were com¬ 
munity centres where the humbler folk gathered, received instruc¬ 
tions, held their fairs and festivals; where dramatic performances 
were held. Apart from the Sanskrit dramas, there were also enter¬ 
tainments of a popular variety. Hemachandra tells us that some¬ 
times during such entertainments “even the sophisticated townsmen 
were impelled to laugh like villagers, at fat men, men with project¬ 
ing teeth, lame men, hunchbacks, flat-nosed men, men with dis¬ 
hevelled hair; by ash coloured men, by men with buttock-bells, by 
the musicians of the armpit and the nose, by dancers of the ear and 
brow, by imitators of the speech of other people.” 

After the Classical Age, this Age was the most glorious epoch 
of Indian art, particularly in the spheres of architecture and sculp- 
tuie, though their traditions had grown up in the earlier period. 
This was India’s great age of temple-building. In several parts of 
North India, remnants of some of the magnificent temples of the 
period survive; many of the important ones in the South are still 
intact. More than anything else, they bear eloquent testimony to 
the faith and opulence of the times; to the high degree which artistic 
execution had attained in the country; above all, to the inspiring and 
conditioning factors in the social and emotional life of the people 
which nourished such a great art. 

At the close of the Age, or perhaps a decade or two later, when 
the armies of the lurkish and Khaljl Sultans overran the country, 
the creative vitality in terms of plastic art came to an end. 

xxvii 


WNIST/fy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



These remains also indicate the vigour of the religious move¬ 
ments which sustained the life of the people. Though the worship 
of Vishnu was popular among the well-to-do and the intellectual 
classes, the worship of Siva and Sakti, more than any other cult, 
exercised the most active influence and claimed the devotion of the 
bulk of the people. Most of the great temples of this Age, which 
survive to-day, are dedicated to Siva. Perhaps the shrines of the 
twelve jyotirliiigas, to the deity, as the guardian deity of the 
universe, situated in different parts of the country, began to com¬ 
mand the veneration of the whole country during this period. Any¬ 
way two of them—the one of Somanatha at Prabhasa, and the other 
of Mahakala at Ujjain—were shrines held in such veneration before 
Mahmud of Ghazni invaded the country. Temples dedicated to Siva 
also abounded on the banks of most of the rivers and in villages; for, 
he was the god whom the poor universally loved. 

Siva and Barvati, with their colourful family, entered into the 
life of the people as devoted lovers, as affectionate parents, as dread 
destroyers, as the defenders of the righteous. As the destroyers of 
the demons Tripura and Mahishasura, they were not only the powers 
who supported the righteous in their crusade against the wicked, but 
were the presiding deities of conflict, whether of attack or defence. 

Siva, as the wielder of the mighty trident, therefore, had an 
unchallenged place in the Indian heart not only in these three 
centuries but in the preceding and the succeeding centuries as well. 
His name was a challenging refrain in all heroic appeals. From 
before the medieval period, the warriors generally went to battle 
with his name on their lips. And they were to do so not only through¬ 
out the Era of Resistance, which began with this Age, but even till 
1857, when Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi and her heroic followers, in 
their fight against the British, courted martyrdom with ‘Hara Hara 
Mahadev’ on their lips. 

XIII 

My thanks are due to Dr. R. C. Majumdar, the General Editor, 
and Dr. A. D. Pusalker, the Assistant Editor, for their indefatigable 
and conscientious labours, and to the scholars who have contributed 
the different sections in this volume. My thanks are also due to 
the Director-General of Archaeology, New Delhi; Mr. C. W. E. Cotton, 
London; Mr. S. Roerich, Kalimpong; Prof. S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta: 
the authorities of the Archaeological Department of Kashmir, Sri- 


XXVIII 


minis 


FOREWORD 



nagar; British Museum, London; Cleveland Museum of Art, U.S.A.; 
Colombo Museum; Dacca Museum, East Pakistan; Indian Museum, 
Calcutta; Lucknow Museum; Madras Museum; Musee Guimet, 
Paris; Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, U.S.A.; Museum Van Asiatische 
Kunst, Amsterdam; Patna Museum; Rajputana Museum, Ajmer; 
Rajshahi Museum, East Pakistan; Shikar Museum, Rajputana; 
Worcester Art Museum, US. A.; Asiatic Society, Calcutta; and Bharat 
Kala Bhavan, Hindu University, Banaras, who have supplied photo¬ 
graphs for the different illustrations in this volume. Details of the 
materials lent by them are given in a separate “Acknowledgments” 
column. I am specially indebted to Messrs. Associated Advertisers 
& Printers Ltd., Bombay, who have seen the volume through the 
press, and to the staff of the Bhavan and the Press who looked after 
the preparation and printing of this volume with care and zeal. It 
is difficult to express adequately the deep debt of gratitude which 
the Bhavan owes to Shri G. D. Birla, the Chairman, and other mem¬ 
bers of the Board of the Krishnarpan Trust who have so liberally 
financed the preparation of this series. 


xxix 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


We are indebted to the following institutions and individuals for permission to 
reproduce illustrations noted against each. While expressing our sincere thanks 
for such courtesies, we should add that reproduction in each case is prohibited 
without the permission of the authority concerned, the copyright being reserved. 

1. Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi: Nos. 1-90,93, 101-106, 114-116, 
118, 121-124, 134-135. 

2. Archaeological Department of Kashmir, Srinagar: No. 123. 

3. British Museum, London: Nos. 100, 108, 117. 

4. Cleveland Museum of Art, U.S.A.: No. 131. 

5. Colombo Museum: No. 132. 

6. Dacca Museum, East Pakistan: Nos. 92, 97. 

7. Indian Museum, Calcutta: Nos. 96, 111. 

8. Lucknow Museum: No. 119. 

9. Madras Museum: No. 129. 

10. Musee Guimet, Paris: No. 133. 

11. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, U.S.A.: Nos. 110, 126, 128. 

12. Museum Van Asiatische Kunst, Amsterdam: No. 127. 

13. Patna Museum: No. 94. 

14. Rajputana Museum, Ajmer: No. 120. 

15. Rajshahi Museum, East Pakistan: Nos. 98-99. 

16. Shikar Museum, Rajputana: No. 112. 

17. Worcester Art Museum, U.S.A.: No. 107. 

18. Asiatic {Society, Calcutta: Nos. 137, 138. 

19. Bharat Kala Bhavan, Hindu University, Banaras: No. 136. 

20. Mr. C. W. E. Cotton, London: No. 130. 

21. Mr. S. Roerich, Kalimpong: No. 140. 

22. Prof. S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta: Nos. 139, 142. 

Our grateful thanks are also due to the following institutions and individuals 
for helping the publication by supplying the photographs for the illustrations as 
under: 

1. Archaeological Survey of India, Eastern Circle, Calcutta: Nos. 70-73. 

2. Office of the Government Epigraphist, Ootacamund: No. 100. 

3. Prof. N. K. Bose, Calcutta: Nos. 42-47, 49, 54-58, 12,3-124. 

4. Prof. S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta: Text figures Nos. 1-57, Illustrations 
Nos. 1-14, 48, 50-53, 59-69, 74-89, 91-99, 101-122, 125-142. 

We are further indebted to Sri A. Ghosh, Director General of Archaeology in 
India, New Delhi, for helping the publication by lending the block for No. 90. 


XXX 



CONTENTS 


Foreword by Dr. K. M. Munshi 
Acknowledgments .. . . .. .. .. 

hist of Maps 

Preface by the General Editor 
List of Illustrations 
Abbreviations 

CHAPTER. I 
GHAZNAVID INVASION 
By D. C. Ganguly, ma., ph.D. (London), 

Secretary and Curator, Victoria Memorial Hall, Calcutta: 
formerly Reader in History, Dacca University 

1. The Rise of the Ghaznavids 

2. Sabuktigln 

3. Sultan Mahmud 


Page 

vii 

xxx 

xlii 

xliii 

li 

lv 


1 

2 


CHAPTER II 

NORTHERN INDIA DURING THE ELEVENTH AND 
TWELFTH CENTURIES 


By D. C. Ganguly 

The Palas 

1. Mahipala 

2. Successors of Mahipala 

3. Ramapala 

4. Successors of Ramapala 
Bengal after the Palas 

1. The Yadavas of Vanga 

2. The Senas of Bengal 

3. The Royal Family of Pattikera 

4. The Deva Dynasty of Samatata and Vanga 
Assam 
Nepal 
Bihar 

1. The Karnataka Dynasty of Mithila 

2. The Guptas of Jayapura 

3. The Senas of Pith! 

4. Khayaravala Dynasty of Japila 

Kanau j .. 

1. The Rashtrakutas L- 

2. The Gahadavalas 
The Yaduvaihix Kings of Bayana-Srlpatha 
The Kachchhapaghatas 

IX \ The Chandellas. 

X. The Kalachuris 

1. The Kalachuris of Tripuri 

2. The Kalachuris of Ratanpur 


K 


II. 


III. 

IV. 
V. 


VI. 


VII 

VIII 


24 

24 

27 

29 

31 

33 

33 

35 

41 

42 
42 
45 
47 

47 

48 

49 

49 

50 
50 
50 

55 

56 
5,8 
61 
61 
64 


XXXI 








THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


xl. \h e Paramaras 

1. The Paramaras of Malava 

2. Minor Branches of the Paramaras in Raj putana 
(i) Mt. Abu (ii) Vagada, 

(iii) Jalor, (iv) Bhinmal 

XII. v The Chaulukyas of Gujarat 

XIII. \The Chahamanas 

1. The Chahamanas of Sakambhari 

2. The Chahamanas of Ranastambhapura 

3. The Chahamanas of Na^iol 

4. The Chahamanas of Jabalipura (Jalor) 

5. The Chahamanas of Satyapura (Sachor) and 

Devada 

XIV. The Guhilas of Mewar 
XV. The Punjab under the Yamini Dynasty 

XVI. Kashmir . 

1. First Lohara Dynasty 

2. Second Lohara Dynasty 

3. Advent of the Muslim Rule 

CHAPTER III 

THE AGE OF PRITHVIRAJA III 

By D. C. Gangtjly 
T he Age of Prithviraja III 

CHAPTER IV 

THE TURKISH CONQUEST OF NORTHERN INDIA 
By Paramatma Saran, m.a., ph.n.. (London), 

Reader in History , University of Delhi 
and 

R. 0. Majctmdar, m.a., ph.n., f.a.s., f.a.s.b., 

Professor of Ancient Indian History and Culture, 
Nagpur University 

The Muslim States in the East 
The Ghurids 

Qutb-ud-din Aibak’s Conquests 
Ikhtiyar-ud-dln Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 


End of the Ghurl Dynasty 
Causes of the Collapse of Hindu Rule 



CHAPTER V 

THE MAMLUK SULTANS OF DELHI 
By A. B? M. Habibullah, m.a., rh.D. (London), 

Professor of Islamic History and Culture , University 
of Dacca (Pakistan) 

Qutb-ud-din Aibak and Iltutmish 

Weak Successors of Iltutmish . . .. . * 

Internal Disorder 




Page 

66 

66 

72 

73 

74 
81 
81 
83 
86 

87 

88 
89 
92 
97 
97 
99 

101 


104 


116 

117 

118 
122 

124 

125 


130 

136 

140 


xxxii 





miSTfiy 


CONTENTS 



Mongol Raids 

Revival of Hindu Power 

Balban Restores the Authority of Sultanate 

The End of Balban’s Dynasty 


<SL 


Page 

142 

144 

148 

156 


CHAPTER VI 


LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KALYANA 

By D. C. Ganguly 

Taila II (A.D. 973-997) . 161 

Satyairaya (A.D. 997-C.1008) .. .. 164 

Vikramaditya V (c. A.D. 1008-1014) .. .. 166 

Jayasiihha II (A.D. 1015-1043) .. .. 166 

Somesvara I (A.D. 1043-1068) . . .. 167 

Somesvara II (A.D. 1068-1076) .. .. 173 

Vikramaditya VI (A.D. 1076-1126) .. .. 174 

Somesvara III (A.D. 1126-1138) . . .. 177 

Jagadekamalla (A.D. 1138-1151) and Taila III 

(A.D. 1151-1156) 178 

The Kalachuri Usurpation (A.D. 1156-1181). 179 

Somesvara IV (A.D. 1181-C.1189), the last 
Chalukya ruler .. .. .. .. 182 

APPENDIX 
THE SILAHARAS 
By R. C. Majumdar 


1 . 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 

11 . 


The Silaharas 


CHAPTER VII 
-THE YADAVAS OF DEVAGIRI 

By D. C. Ganguly 


I. 

II. 

III. 


CHAPTER VIII 

DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 
I-III By D. C. Ganguly 
IV-VIII By D. C. Sircar, m. a., vh. d., 
Government Epigraphist for India, Ootacamund 

The Kakatiyas . . .. . 

The Eastern Chalukyas 
The Eastern Gahgas 


184 


1. 

Bhillama V . 



185 

2. 

Jaitugi 



187 

3. 

Singhana 



188 

4. 

Krishna 



192 

5. 

Mahadeva 



193 

6. 

Ramachandra 



194 

7. 

Sahkaradeva and Harapaladeva 



196 


198 

203 

205 


XXXlll 


S# E<—-C 

















misr/f,. 


The struggle for empire 



<sl 


IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 


The Somavamsis 
The Nagas or Chhindakas 
The Cholas or Telugu Chodas 
The Rashtrakutas ' .. 

The Tailapavamils 

CHAPTER IX 


Page 

209 

214 

219 

221 

223 


THE HOYSALAS 

By the late Dbwan Bahadur S. Krishnaswami Aiyajsgar, M.A., Ph. 

Retired Professor of Indian History and Archaeology, 
University of Madras 
and 

R. C. Majumdar 


1. 

2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 


Origin of the Hoysalas 

Early Kings .. .. |' 

lii ttiga or Vishnuvardhana 

Ballala II, the first independent king . 

Narasimha II and the Hoysala Empire 

Fall of the Hoysalas 

CHAPTER X 


II. 


2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 


Fiscal, judicial 


226 

227 

228- 

230 

231 

232 


THECniOLAS 

By R. Sathianathaier, m.a., l.t., 

Professor of History and Politics, Annamalai University 
I. Political History 

1. Rajaraja the Great (A.D. 985-1014) ’. 

Rajendra I, Gangaikonda Chola (A.D. 1012-1044) 

I0I8 ' 1052) a " d R5Jendra ' 
•5fSrs. a D i i ( oi 8 D 7o, 1063 10,o) and AdRil 

Kulottunga I (A.D. 1070-1120) 

M SgA^nsl 1 ) 18 - 1135 ' a “ rt Ku1 »* L 
njSueMi™, 1146 - 1173 * and 

Kulottunga III (A.D. 1178-1216) 
(A.D^meYif 0 - 12161246) and Kendra III 
Kop-Peruhjihga 

Political Organisation ‘ ’ ‘ ] 

1. Central Government 

2 ' ^he C Variyam 0Vernment: the Mah5sabh§ 

3. Functions of the Mahasabha- 
and Minjstrant 

xxxiv 


234 

234 

236 

240 

241 

242 

245 

245 

246 

247 

248 

249 
249 

252 

253 


L. 






CONTENTS 


CHAPTER XI 

THE LATER PANDYAS 

By R. Sathianathaier 

1. Interval between the First and the Second 
Empire 

2. Maravarman Sundara Randya 

3. Jatavarman Sundara Papdya I 

4. Maravarman Kulasekhara Paiidya 

CHAPTER XII 

CEYLON 

By D. C. Sircar, m.a., pIi.d. 

Ceylon 

CHAPTER XIII 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
ORGANISATION 

By U. N. Ghoshal, m.a., ph.n., 

Formerly Professor of History, 

Presidency College, Calcutta 


Page 


256 

256 

257 
259 


261 


I. 

Political Theory , . .. .. 

269 

II. 

Administrative Organisation—North India 

274 


i. 

The Kalachuris 

274 


2. 

The Chandellas 

275 


3. 

The Paramaras 

275 


4. 

The Gahadavalas 

276 


5. 

The Senas 

276 


6. 

The Chahamanas 

277 

III. 

Administrative Organisation—South India 

278 


1. 

The Chalukyas . 

278 


2. 

The Cholas 

281 


3. 

The Yadavas 

282 


4. 

The Hoysalas 

283 


5. 

The Paijdyas 

284 


CHAPTER XIV 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


By U. N. Ghoshal 

I. North India . 287 

II. South India .. .. .. .. 290 











1 . 

2 . 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

CHAPTER XV 
LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 
A. Sanskrit 

By M. A. Mehejs-dale, m.a., ph.n.. 

Reader in Sanskrit , Deccan College Post-graduate 
and Research Institute, Poona 

and 

A. D. PuSALKER, M.A., LL.B., Ph.D., 

Assistant Director and Head of the Department of 
Ancient Indian Culture , Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 

Introduction 
Belles-Lettres 


II. 


III. 

IV. 


(B) 

(C) 

(D) 

(E) 

(F) 


4. 


5. 


Kavya 

(A) Mahakavya 

(B) Shorter Poems 

(C) Historical Poems 
Drama 

(A) Legendary Plays 
Court Comedies 
Erotic and Farcical Plays .. 
Prakaranas and Semi-historical 
Allegorical Drama 
. . Irregular Drama 
Prose Romances and Champus 
Story Literature 

(A) The Brihatkatha and its Later 

(B) Romantic Tales 
(C.) Didactic Tales 

(D) Fables .. . . , ] 

Scientific Literature 
I. Lexicography 

Grammar 

Poetics and Dramaturgy 

(1) Poetics .. .. 

(2) Dramaturgy . . 

Metrics (By H. D. Velankar, M.A., Jt. 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay) 

Politics and Practical Life 
Medicine 

Mathematics and Astronomy 
Music 

Ancillary Sciences 

Religious and Philosophical Literature 
I. Puranas 

H. Dharmasastra: Commentaries, Nibandhas 
Ritual Literature 
III Philosophy 
General Review 


■’lays 


Versions. 


II. 

III. 


IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 


Director, 


and 


<SL 


Page 


297 

298 
298 
298 
302 
306 
309 

309 

310 

311 

311 

312 
312 

312 

313 

313 

314 

315 

316 

317 
317 
319 
321 
321 
325 

325 

327 

328 

328 

329 

329 

330 
330 

330 

336 

337 


xxxvi 





Page 


B. Sanskritic 
I. PALI 

By M. A. Mehkndale 


1. 

Language 

• . 

339 

2. 

Non-canonical Literature ., 


,, 340 

II. 

THE JAIN MAHARASHTR1 AND OTHER PRAKRITS 

By M. A. Mehf.ndale 

1. 

Narrative 


344 

2. 

Stotras and Didactic Works .. 

• • 

346 

3. 

Grammars .. 

. # 

346 

4. 

Language .,' .. 

III. APABHRAMSA 

By M. A. Mehendale 


347 

1. 

Literature 

# # 

348 

2. 

Language . . .. .. .. 


350 


IV. MARATHI 

By R. G. Harshe, b.a. (Tilak), d.litt. (Paris), 

Formerly Registrar, Deccan College 
Post-graduate and Research Institute, Poona 
Marathi .. . . . . . . .. 351 

V. BENGALI 

By S. K. Chatterji, m.a. (Gal.), d.litt. (London), 

President, Legislative Council, West Bengal; Emeritus 
Professor of Comparative Philology, University 
of Calcutta 

1. Language .. .. .. .. .. .. 357 

2. Literature . . . . .. .. .. .. 358 

C. Dravidian 

By K. R. Srinivasa Iyengar, m.a., d.litt., 

Professor and Head of the Department of English, 

Andhra University 

I. TAMIL 

1 . Poetry 

2. Saiva Siddhanta Literature 

II. KANNADA 

1. Virasaiva Literature 

2. Jain Writers . . 

III. TELUGU 

1. The Origin 

2. Desi and Margi 

3. Telugu Mahabharatam 

4. The Eleventh and Twelfth Centuries 

5. The Thirteenth Century 


361 

365 


367 

370 


372 

373 

374 

376 

377 


Xxxvii 




0 f \NDIA 



1. 

2 . 


II. 


III. 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 


I. 

II. 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

D. Nishada and Kirata 

By S. K. Chatterji 

Nishada and Kirata 

APPENDIX 
(B) Sanskritic 
VI. GUJARATI 
By H. C. Bhayaiti, m.a., ph.D., 

Pi ofessor and Head of the Department of Gujarati, 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Bombay 

Language . 

Literature .. 

CHAPTER XVI 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

(A) GENERAL REVIEW 
By R. G. Majumdar 
General Review 

(B) BUDDHISM 

By N, N. Das Gupta, m.a., 

Lecturer in Ancient Indian History and Culture 
University of Calcutta 
Doctrinal Changes 

1. Tantrik Buddhism . i 

2. Vajra-yana 

3. Kalachakra-yana 

4. Sahaja-yana 
Sphere of Influence 

1. Pala Kingdom (Bengal and Bihar) 
l. Kashmir 

3. Madhyadesa . . 

4. South India 
The Last Phase 

(C) JAINISM 

By H. L. JAItf, M.A., LL.B., D. LITT. 

Director, Prakrit Jain Institute, Muzaffarpur 
Jainism in Gujarat 

Jainism in the Deccan and South India ! ' 

Ascetic Organisations and Succession Lists 
Literature 

(D) VAISHNAVISM 
By D. G. Sircar 

dX th India (FirSt paragra P h b y Dr - B- c. Majum- 
Srivaishnavas 

1. Yamunacharya 

2. Ramanuja 

3. Ramanuja’s Followers 

4. Nimbarka 

5. Madhva or Anandatirtha 

xxxviii 


§L 

Page 

377 


389 

391 


398 


404 

404 

404 

412 

413 

414 

415 
419 
421 

424 

425 


427 

429 

431 

434 


435 

436 

437 

437 

438 

440 

441 








mtsrfy 


CONTENTS 



(E) SA1V1SM 
By T. M. P. Mahadevan, m.a., ph.D., 

Professor and Head of the Department of Philosophy, 
University of Madras 

I. Royal Patrons of Saivism 

II. Vxrasaivism .. . 

III. Saiva-Siddhanta 

IV. Sivadvaita 

V. Kapala and Kalamukha sects (By R. C. Majumdar). 

(F) GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 
By U. C. Bhattaohabjee, m.a., 

Formerly Professor of Philosophy, Presidency College, 
Calcutta 


Page 


I. 

II. 

III. 


IV. 

V. 

VI. 


442 

445 

450 

455 

458 


Impact of other Civilizations—the Theistic Urge. 459 

Ramanuja (eleventh-twelfth century A.D.) . . 460 

Other Vaishnava Commentators of Vedanta . . 461 

(i) Nimbarka (twelfth century A.D.) . . . . 461 

(ii) Madhva (thirteenth century A.D.) ... .. 461 

(iii) Vallabha . . .. . . .. ■ . 462 

Non-Vaishnava Vedantists . . .. . . 462 

The Other Systems . . . . .. . . 463 

Later; Syncretism .. .. .. .. .. 465 

(G) ISLAM v 

By M. W. Mirza, m.a., ph.D. (London), 

Professor and Head of the Department of Arabic, 
Lucknow University 

Islam .. . . . . .. .. .. 467 

CHAPTER XVII 

SOCIAL CONDITION ^ 

By IT. N. Ghoskal 


1. 

Social Divisions 

474 

2. 

Marriage . . . . 

478 

3. 

The Position of Women 

481 

4. 

Food and Drink 

484 

5. 

Dress and Toilette 

486 

6. 

Standard of Living . . . . .. 

487 

• 7. 

Popular-and Royal Amusements 

489 

8. 

Popular Beliefs and Superstitions 

492 

9. 

Manners and Customs . 

493 

10. 

General Estimate of Character .. ... 

496 

11. 

Hindu-Muslim Relations (By R. C. Majumdar) 

497 

12. 

Muslim Society in India (By M. W. Mirza) . . 

xxxix 

503 












THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


CHAPTER XVIII 

EDUCATION 

\j/ By U. N. Ghoshal 

I. Primary and Higher Education . 

II. Private and Public Endowments for Promotion of 
Learning . 


Page 

508 

510 


CHAPTER XIX 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 
y ' By U. N. Ghoshal 

I. The Village and the City 
II. Agriculture, Industry and Trade . . 

Ill. The Organisation of Industry and Trade 


515 

516 
524 


CHAPTER XX 

ART 

I. ARCHITECTURE 
By S. K. Sabaswati, m.a., 

Reader in Ancient Indian History and Culture, 
University of Calcutta 

1. Formation of the Traditional Temple Styles 

2. Nagara style . 

A. Orissa 

B. Central India .. ’ ’ 

C. Rajputana .. . ’ ’ * 

D. Gujarat and Kathiawar ] 1 

E. Deccan 

F. Sindhu-Ganga Valleys 

3. Dravida Style 

4. Chllukyan Style ,. 

5. Exotic Types .. , ’ 

II. SCULPTURE 

By Nihar Ranjan Ray, m.a., d. lett. & phil. (i/eydex), 
Bagiswari Professor of Indian Art and Culture 
University of Calcutta 

1. General Review 

A. Growth of Regional Schools 

B. Mediaeval Trend 

C. Cult-images and Canonisation “ 

D. Non-iconic Figure Sculptures .. 

2. Eastern India 

A. Bihar and Bengal 

B. Orissa 

3. Ganga-Yamuna Valley 

4. Central India . . ’ ’ 

5. Vindhya and Madhya Pradesh 

xl 


530 

534 

535 
557 
576 
583 
597 
604 
609 
622 
634 


640 

640 

641 

642 
644 
646 
646 
650 

655 

656 
659 










CONTENTS 



6. Rajputana . 

7. Gujarat . 

8. Punjab Hill States 

9. Kashmir, Nepal and Tibet .. .... 

10. Deccan 

11. South India . 

12. General Conclusions 

III. PAINTING 
.By Nihab Ranjan Ray 

1. The “Mediaeval” Factor 

2. Ellora (c. A.D. 750-800) . 

3. South India (c. A.D. 1100-1300) .. 

4. Western India (c. A.D. 1100-1300) 

5. Eastern India (Bengal, Bihar), Nepal and Tibet . 

Text Figures 

CHAPTER XXI 

COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

By R. C. Majumuah 

1. Decline and Fall of the Sailendra Empire .. 

2. Decline and Fall of the Kambuja Empire .. 

3. Fall of Champa 

4. Java 

5. Bali . 

6. Burma 

7. Siam 

8. Culture and Civilisation 

(1) Religion 

(2) Social and Economic Condition 

(3) Literature 

(4) Art . 

1. Kambuja 

2. Other Colonies 

List of Bibliographies 

General Bibliography 

Genealogy 

Chronology 

Index 

Maps and Plates 



Page 


660 

662 

663 

665 

668 

669 

674 


676 

680 

684 

687 

690 

700 


730 

736 

742 

749 

753 

755 

758 

762 

762 

765 

767 

769 

769 

772 

775 

776 
845 
868 
880 

at end 


xli 


















LIST OF MAPS 

1. India in A.D . 1236 . 

2. South India, A.D. 1000-1300 . 


xlii 



PREFACE 

By Dr. R. C. Majum.da.ii 
General Editor 

This volume covers the period, roughly speaking, from A.D. 1000 
to 1300. But there has been a slight departure from these limiting 
dates both at the beginning as well as at the end. In the First Chapter 
the rise of the Ghaznavids has been traced from the very beginning 
in the latter half of the tenth century A.D. In Chapter V the history 
of the Delhi Sultanate is brought to a close with the accession of 
Sultan Jalal-ud-din Firuz Shah in A.D. 1290. In both the cases the 
departure has been made with a view to giving a complete account 
of the Ghaznavids in this volume and of the Khaljis in the next. 
For a similar reason the history of some Hindu ruling dynasties has 
been brought down to the fourteenth century A.D. when they were 
incorporated in the Delhi Sultanate. The most notable instances 
are the Yadavas of Devagiri, the Kakatiyas of Warangal, and the 
Hoysalas and the Papdyas of South India. But only a very brief 
outline is given in this volume of their history after A.D. 1300. More 
detailed account will be given in the next volume in connection with 
their Muslim conquerors. In some cases all controversial issues 
have been omitted in this volume and reserved for the next. For 
instance, the current and generally accepted views of the date of the 
first invasion of Devagiri by ‘Ala-ud-dln Khalji and the name of 
the crown-prince who opposed him have been stated, but different 
views on both these points will be discussed fully with reference to 
authorities in the next volume. 

This volume deals with the transition period that marks the 
.. end of independent Hindu rule and the beginning of the dominance 
of Turkish tribes over a large part, if not the whole, of India. Such 
dominance of foreign peoples, even from the same region in Central 
Asia, was no new thing in Indian history. Successive waves of Tur¬ 
kish hordes submerged a great portion of Northern India during 
the period that intervened between the fall of the Maurya and the 
rise of the Gupta Empire. And all these, like the later Turkish 
invaders, came to stay in this country. Nevertheless, they did not 
mark any turning-point in the history of India, nor any sudden break 
in the continuity of her history and culture. For they slowly and 
silently merged themselves into the population of the country, and 
became one with them in all respects without leaving any trace of 
their separate entity. This was, however, not the case with the 

xliii 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


later invaders. They not only kept severely aloof, and formed a 
distinct unit, politically, socially and culturally, but drew into its 
vortex a considerable number of indigenous people to swell their 
ranks. The result was the emergence of a new element of consi¬ 
derable power and magnitude, having hardly anything in common 
with the old, excepting the land which they adopted as their own. 

This was solely due to the religious faith, Islam, professed by 
these peoples, which fundamentally differed from the religion they 
found in India. Al-Blrunl, who flourished at the very beginning of 
the period under review, tersely, but very correctly, observed: “The 
Hindus entirely differ from us in every respect. We believe in noth¬ 
ing in which they believe, and vice-versa This radical difference 
in religion and social usages and customs operated as an almost in¬ 
surmountable barrier between the two which even nine hundred 
years’ residence as close neighbours failed to break down. Hence¬ 
forth this difference constitutes the underlying thread which wove 
the Indian history into an altogether new pattern. 

The intrusion of Islam and its existence as a separate unit in 
India introduced, for the first time, the generic name Hindu. The 
alien Muslim conquerors used this name, along with Kafir (infidels), 
to denote the conquered peoples of India as a separate unit distinct 
from them. It bore the same connotation as the term ‘non-Muham¬ 
madan’ used in the Indian constitution during the last days of Bri¬ 
tish rule. The use of the term Hindu in a narrower sense, to denote 
the followers of orthodox Brahmanical faith, belongs to a later date. 

The efforts of the Muslim Turks to obtain a permanent footing 
in India and the resistance which the Hindus offered, or failed to 
offer, to avoid this great catastrophe, forms the principal subject- 
matter of this volume in so far at least as Northern India is con¬ 
cerned. 

The first Muslim invasion, ending in the conquest of Sindh, was 
merely a passing phase, which hardly affected the history of India. 
The triumphant progress, which marked the career of Islam in other 
regions of the world, was checked by the powerful rulers of India 
at this frontier state for more than four hundred years, and even 
then the Arab rule in Sindh was more nominal than real. But the 
advance of the Turks from Ghazni, with which this volume opens, 
led to a very different result. They had their base much nearer to 
India and were led by two distinguished generals of considerably 
more than average military skill and ability. On the other hand, 
India lacked any powerfully organised empire like that of the Pra- 
tlharas and the Rashtrakutas. The Shahi rulers, who guarded the 
frontier ot India, offered heroic resistance to the foreign invaders 

xliv 


PHEFACE 



and were loyally supported by the Indians from the interior But 
nothing availed against the repeated and stubborn onslaughts o 
Sabuktigln and Mahmud. The resistance collapsed, and then the 
horrors of barbarian invasions, fired with the fanatic zeal for emo- 
lishing idols and temples, born of the crusading spirit of Islam, were 
let loose on the fair plains and cities of Hindusthan. It is not possi¬ 
ble to recount fully the sad tales of those dark and evil days, as we 
have no record from the side of the Indians; but the picture depic e 
by the victors themselves enables us to get a faint echo of 
great tragedy which befell India during the first quarter of the 
eleventh century A.D. It was a tragedy big with future conse¬ 
quences. Not only was India drained of enormous wealth and man¬ 
power, but, what was far worse, the Muslims obtained a perma¬ 
nent footing in the Punjab which cbmmanded the highway to her 

interior. . . 

But a still more sublime tragedy was the comparative indiffer¬ 
ence of the Indian chiefs to this growing menace and the fancied 
security in which they chose to repose during the period interven¬ 
ing between the death of Mahmud and the next invasion by the 
Ghuris. Some Indian kings defeated the Muslims, and checked 
their further aggressive campaigns. One of them even claims to 
have exterminated the Mlechchhas (Muslims) so that Aryavarta 
again became true to its name, i.e. abode of the Aryas. But this 
rare evidence of a sense of national consciousness makes it ail the 
more a matter of surprise, that instead of uttering such vain boast 
the Indian chiefs should not have taken concerted action m remo¬ 
ving the thorn in their flesh by driving the Turkish conquerors out 
of India. Innumerable opportunities offered themselves to^ render 
this task a comparatively easy one. The kingdom of Ghazni passed 
through critical days and was overtaken by many dangers, botn in¬ 
ternal and external, till the nemesis overtook it, and its beautiful 
capital city, built on the ruins and plunder of India, perished m 
flames. But the powerful Indian chiefs, far from taking advantage 
of any such opportunity during the long period of a century and a 
half, were more intent upon aggrandising themselves at the cost of 
their neighbours than turning their whole-hearted attention to the 
great national task of freeing the Punjab from the yoke of the 
foreigners of an alien faith. 

An attempt has been made to delineate the essential features 
of the political history of India during this eventful period on the 
basis of reliable data. But our sources of information are scanty, 
and the picture is necessarily incomplete. Enough remains, how¬ 
ever, to make this history a painful reading to every Hindu. In¬ 
stances are not wanting that when a Hindu state was invaded by 

xlv . 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


rfS - «ov t 


Muslims, a neighbouring Hindu ruler seized the opportunity to in¬ 
vade it from the rear. It may appear ungracious to emphasise this 
humiliating and degrading aspect of Hindu character, but no nation 
can hope to survive if it seeks to avoid truth or fears to face it, and 
fails to learn the lessons of history. A genuine endeavour has been 
made to tell the unvarnished truth of the past, and to point to the 
morals that history teaches us, though it may appear unpalatable 
to some. The haze of glory in which Pfithviraja lives in Indian memo¬ 
ry is considerably dimmed, if one realizes the effect of his failure to 
take full advantage of his great victory at Tarain for removing the im¬ 
minent danger which involved him and his country in a common 
ruin within a year. But it is the noble, though somewhat painful, 
task of history to demolish the false in order to enthrone the true. 

On account of the vast size of India, its history cannot always 
be brought within one general category. The same period that saw 
the debacle of North India before the hammering blows of the Ghaz- 
navids, witnessed the rise of a great power in full glory in the 
South. The Cholas established a vast empire that stretched along 
the eastern coast of India from the banks of the Ganga to Cape 
Comorin, and even beyond to Ceylon. But they did more than this. 
They fitted out a naval expedition that crossed the Bay of Bengal 
and laid low the mighty empire of the Sailendras in Malay Penin¬ 
sula and Indonesia. Such an oversea campaign by an Indian ruler 
against a powerful foe is an achievement of outstanding importance, 
with immense possibilities for the future, but unfortunately it re¬ 
mains a unique event, almost a passing episode in the history of 
India, that has left no trail behind. It adds one more to the num¬ 
ber of puzzles or insoluble riddles of Indian history. 

It appears to us as passing strange that India, south of the Vin- 
dhyas, seems to have lived in a world apart from the rest of the 
country. Undisturbed by the ominous tidings of Muslim aggress¬ 
ion, the ruling powers in the Deccan and South India were as busy 
as before with their petty domestic quarrels and dissensions, and 
military campaigns of aggrandisement against one another. During 
the hundred years that kept the Muslims fully engaged in conso¬ 
lidating their power in the North, the South went on in fancied 
security, as if nothing had occurred to disturb its equanimity or 
threaten the continuity of its history and culture. So little was the 
Muslim danger thought of even in the region immediately to the 
south of the Vindhyas that the powerful Yadava rulers of the 
Deccan attacked from the south the Chaulukyas of Gujarat at the 
very moment when they were engaged in a life and death struggle 
with the Muslim invaders from the North. Such incidents give a 
rude shock to the idea of fundamental unity of India. 

xlvi 



PREFACE 

But the fact has to be clearly recognised that India south of the 
Vindhyas was under Hindu rule during the thirteenth century. 
f Even in North India, during the same century, there were powerful 
kingdoms, not yet subjected to Muslim rule or still fighting for 
their independence. As has been clearly shown in Chapter V, even 
in that part of India which acknowledged the Muslim rule there was 
continual defiance and heroic resistance by large or small bands 
of Hindus in many quarters, so that successive Muslim rulers bad 
to send well-equipped military expeditions, again and again, against 
the self-same region, though the patriotic Muslim chroniclers cons¬ 
trued every one of them as a decisive victory against the infidels. As 
a matter of fact, the Muslim authority in Northern India, almost 
throughout the thirteenth century, was tantamount to a military 
occupation of a large number of important centres without any 
effective occupation, far less a systematic administration, of the 
country at large. 

In view of all this, we feel justified in including the history of 
the Mamluk or Slave Dynasty in this volume, rather than rele¬ 
gating it, in conformity with the normal convention of the histo¬ 
rians of India, to the next volume which deals with the Muslim 
period of Indian history. Even the long-standing usage and practice 
can hardly make the epithet Muslim appropriate to a period of 
Indian history in which the Muslims had no hold over more than 
half of India, and exercised a very limited political authority over 
only a part, however large, of the rest of the country. 

The period covered by this volume is marked by the unsuccess- 
fur efforts of the early Turkish invaders in North India, of the 
Chalukyas in the Deccan, and of the Cholas in South India, as well 
as of individual rulers both in the north and in the south, to found 
an empire in India. Hence the title ‘Struggle for Empire’ has been 
adopted for this volume. It closes with the accession of the Khal- 
jis to power. Though the new dynasty was a short-lived one, it 
was destined to establish the first all-India Muslim empire on the 
ruins of the Hindu kingdoms, and usher in a new era in Indian 
history in which the Muslims played the dominant role for more 
than four hundred years. That era had its own glory and triumph, 
in full measure, as will be described in the next two volumes. 

The three centuries dealt with in this volume witnessed not 
only the gradual decay of the political authority of the Hindus, but 
also a definite set-back in the progress of their culture. Except in 
the domain of art, particularly the temple architecture, we find a 
steady process of decline and decadence, which had already set in 
in the preceding period, in almost all spheres of cultural activity, 




xlvii 





"The process was perhaps accelerated by the intrusion of Islam as 
a new element. The effect of the impact of aggressive Islam on 
Hindu religion and society cannot be clearly perceived dur. j the 
period under review; at least our sources of information do not in¬ 
dicate that any great change took place in Hindu society and reli¬ 
gion. Nevertheless, the destruction of temples and other seats of 
culture, and the proselytising activities of the Muslims, of which we 
have clear evidence, must have had their repercussion on the minds 
of the Hindus, and henceforth their main energy was directed to 
conserve rather than to create. But, on the whole, the picture of 
Hindu civilization given in this volume represents its final phase 
before it came into close contact with, or was affected by, Islam. 

The progress of temple architecture is an index of the effect 
of aggressive Islam on Indian culture. The period under review 
witnessed the most brilliant epoch in the development of this art. 
But, as will be shown in Chapter XX, so far as extant monuments 
indicate, this art flourished mostly in those regions which were at 
a safe distance from centres of Muslim power, viz., in India south 
of the Vindhyas, and in Orissa and territories ruled over by the 
Chandellas and Chaulukyas who resisted the Muslim invasion till 
the end of the period under review. It is not merely an accident 
that the rich valleys of the Sindhu, the Ganga and the Yamuna, 
dominated by the Muslims, have nothing to show that could bear 
any comparison with the temples built in the regions just men¬ 
tioned. The temples that existed there were ruthlessly destroyed, 
and the Hindus evidently did not feel inclined to build new temples 
which they were unable to protect. The obvious inference, which 
holds equally true for succeeding centuries, may be stated in the 
form of a general statement that the progress of temple architecture 
was in inverse ratio to the establishment of effective Muslim autho¬ 
rity in any particular region in India. 

Although the period dealt with in this volume is, generally 
speaking, one of decline and decadence, still it serves a very useful 
purpose in the study of Indian history. It holds out before us a 
complete picture of Indian culture and civilization just before it 
came into contact with Islam. If we compare it with the culture 
of the Hindus before the impact of Western influence gave it a new 
character, we can form a reasonable idea of the extent to which it 
has been influenced by Islam. Such a comparison alone would 
enable us to answer the question whether there is any such thing 
in present-day India which we may regard as ‘Hindu’ culture, or 
the present culture should more properly be called an ‘Indian’ cul¬ 
ture which is neither Hindu nor Muslim, but a composite of both. 

xlviii 



The Muslims, generally, are under no illusion in this respect-, and 
they speak of Islamic culture in India as a distinct entity, separate 
from Hindu culture. It is for the Hindus to judge, in a dispassio¬ 
nate manner, free from prejudice or conventions engendered by 
recent politics, how far the main aspects of Hindu culture, viz. re 1 - 
gion and philosophy, social conditions, art, language and literature, 
law and legal institutions etc., as described in this volume, were left 
intact at the end of the Muslim rule. Of course, additions or altera¬ 
tions in non-essential features, and among restricted groups of peo¬ 
ples or in limited localities, should be regarded as negligible fac¬ 
tors when we think broadly of Hindu culture in India, as a whole. 
The result of such a comparison is of great value in determining 
whether the Hindu culture, such as it was towards the end of the 
thirteenth century A.D., continued substantially in the same form, 
with normal evolutions, till it came under the influence of Western 
civilization, or lost itself by the impact of Islam into an all-embrac¬ 
ing Indian culture. From this point of view the present volume is 
bound to be of absorbing interest to every student of Indian history. 

For reasons, already explained in the Preface of Volume IV 
(p. xxxvii), the Chapter on Art in this volume contains the survey 
of the whole period from A.D. 750 to 1300. As this period is the 
most important so far as the temple architecture is concerned, the 
subject has been treated at some length with the result that this 
volume has been much bigger in size than any of the preceding ones. 
The Muslim architecture of the thirteenth century A.D. has not 
been included in this chapter as it will be more convenient to^treat 
the Muslim art from the very beginning to the end of the oulta- 
nate in the next volume. 

The policy and the principles of editing referred to in the pre¬ 
ceding volumes remain unchanged. I am grateful to the contribu¬ 
tors for their sincere co-operation. I have to record, with deep 
regret, that one of our most valued contributors, Prof. H. D. Bhatta- 
charyya, passed away while this volume was in the press. His pro¬ 
found knowledge of Indian philosophy and religion is evident in the 
sections which he has contributed to the different volumes of this 
history. His death has left a void in Indian scholarship which will 
be difficult to fill up. Death has also snatched away another eminent 
scholar, Dr. I. J. S. Taraporewala. He contributed the section on 
the Parsis in the preceding volume and promised to continue their 
history in the subsequent volumes. He was a great scholar in Com¬ 
parative Philology and his death is a distinct loss to Indian scholar¬ 
ship. I take this .opportunity to place on record my deep sorrow 

xlix 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


the death of these two scholars and my appreciation of the great 
services rendered by them to the cause of Indian history. 


My esteemed colleague Dr. A. D. Pusalker, who has been work¬ 
ing as Assistant Editor since the conception of the plan of this His¬ 
tory, has intimated his desire to retire after the publication of this 
volume. I take this opportunity of placing on record my deep obli¬ 
gations to him for the valuable assistance which he has rendered 
to me in preparing the first five volumes of .this series. His indus¬ 
try, scholarship, honesty, and amiable temper have not only been 
of inestimable value but rendered our close association in this work 
a source of great pleasure to me. On behalf of the Bharatiya Vidya 
Bhavan and on my own behalf I offer my most cordial thanks to 
him, and have no hesitation in saying that whatever success The 
History and Culture of the Indian People has attained is, to a large 
extent, due to his valued co-operation. 


In conclusion I beg to thank the editors of the various journals 
for their appreciative reviews of the preceding volumes. I also ex¬ 
press my gratitude to those who have helped us by lending photos 
and blocks for illustration. Reference has been made in details 
separately under ‘acknowledgments’. 


I 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

(1) TEXT FIGURES (Pages 700-729) 


1. Bhuvanesvara, ftajaranl temple: Plan. 

2. Bhuvanesvara, Lihgaraja temple: Plan. 

3. Nurpur fort, Temple: Plan. 

4. Khajuraho, Devi Jagadamba temple: Plan. 

5. Khajuraho, Kandarya Mahadeo temple: Plan. 

6. Khajuraho, Kandarya 1 Mahadeo temple: Section. 

7. Khajuraho, Brahma temple: Plan. 

8. Khajuraho, Mritang Mahadeo temple: Plan. 

9. Chandrehe, Circular temple: Plan. 

10. Ranlpur Jharial, Circular Yogini temple: Plan. 

11. Khajuraho, Chaunshat Yogini temple: Plan. 

12. Dilwara, Vimala’s temple: Plan. 

13. Villesvara, 6iva temple: Plan. 

14. Villesvara, Siva temple: Elevation. 

15. Sutrapada, Sun temple: Elevation. 

16. Miani, Ganapati and Mahadeva temples: Plan & Elevation. 

17. Sunak, Niiakantha Mahadeva temple: Elevation. 

18. Kasara, Triple-shrined temple: Plan. 

19. Modhera, Sun temple: Plan. 

20. Ghumli, Navalakha temple: Plan. 

21. Sejakpur, Navalakha temple: Plan. 

22. Somanathapattana: Somanatha temple: Plan. 

23. Gimar, Triple-shrined temple: Plan. 

24. Aihole, Temple No. 9: Elevation. 

25. Patfadakal: Papanatha temple: Plan. 

26. Ambaranatha, 6iva temple: Plan. 

27. Balsane, Temple No. 1: Plan. 

28. Balsane, Temple No. 1: Elevation, 

29. Patna, Mahesvara temple: Plan. 

30. Sinnar, Gondesvara temple: Plan. 

31. Uda'yapura, Nllakanthesvara temple: Plan, 

32. Kahchlpuram, Kailiisanatha 1 temple: Plan. 

33. Kahchlpuram, Kailasanatha temple: Section. 

34. Kahchipuram, Vaikuntha Perumal temple: Plan. 

35. Kahchlpuram, Vaikuntha Perumal temple: Elevation. 

36. Kahchipuram Vaikuntha Perumal temple: Section. 

37. Pattadakal, Virupaksha temple: Plan and Elevation. 

38. Tanjore, Brihadisvara temple: Plan. 

39. Tanjore, Brihadisvara temple: Elevation. 

40. Kukkanur, Kallesvara temple: Plan. 

41. Kukkanur, Kallesvara temple: Elevation. 

42. Lakkundi, Jain temple: Plan. 

43. Chauddadampur, Muktesvara temple: Elevation. 

44. Haveri, Siddhesvara temple: Elevation. 

45. Lakkundi, Kaslvisvesvara temple: Plan. 

46. Ittagl, Mahadeva temple: Plan. 

47. Khiruvatti, Mallikarjuna Temple: Plan. 

48. Kuruvatti, Mallikarjuna Temple: Elevation. 

49. Gadag, Somesvara temple: Plan. 

50. pambal, Dodda Basappa temple: Plan. 

51. Somnathpur, Kesava temple: Plan. 

52. Belur, Chenna Kesava temple: Plan. 

53. Halebid, Hoysalesvara temple: Plan. 

54. Martand, Sun temple: Plan. 

55. Martand, Sun temple: Section. 

56. Avantipura, Avantisvara temple: Elevation. 

57. Paharpur, Great temple: Plan. 


li 


MIN isr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOE EMPIRE 



Plate Fig-. 


(2) PLACES (At the end) 

I. Architecture 

Description 


<SL 


I. 


II. 

III. 

IV. 


1 . 
2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

V. 9. 

10 . 

VI. 11. 

12 . 

VII. 13. 
14. 

VIII. 15. 
16. 
17. 

IX. 18. 

19. 

20 . 

X. 21. 

22 . 

, XI. 23. 
^ 24. 

XII. 25. 
26. 

XIII. 27. 

XIV. 1: 
30. 

XV. 31. 

XVI. 33* 
34. 

XVII. 35. 

r 36. 
XVIII, 37. 
38. 

XIX. 39. 
40. 

XX. 41. 
42. 

XXL 43. 
44 

XXII. 45! 
46. 

XXIII. 47. 

48. 

49. 

XXIV. 50. 
51. 

XXV. 52. 
53. 

XXVI. 54. 
XXVII. 55. 
XXVin. 56. 

57. 

58. 

XXIX. 59. 
60. 

XXX. 61. 


XXXI. 


62. 

63. 


Bhuvanesvara, 6atrughnesvara Temple: View from front. 
Bhuvanesvara, Old Temple by Vindusarovara. 
Bhuvanesvara, Parasuramesvara Temple: General View. 
Bhuvanesvara, Muktesvara Temple: General View. 
Bhuvanesvara, Muktesvara Temple: Torana . 

Bhuvanesvara, Muktesvara Temple: Bho. 

Bhuvanesvara, Siddhesvara Temple, General View. 
Bhuvanesvara, Brahmesvara Temple: General View 
Bhuvanesvara, Rajarani Temple: General View. 
Bhuvanesvara, Rajarani Temple: Detail of Sikhara. 
Bhuvanesvara, Lingaraja Temple: General View. 
Bhuvanesvara, Lingaraja Temple: Detail of Sikhara. 
Bhuvanesvara, Ananta-Vasudeva Temple: General View. 
Konarak, Sun Temple: View from front. 

Konarak, Sun Temple: Side View. 

Konarak, Sun Temple: Gaja-Sirhha. 

Konarak, Sun Temple: Chariot Wheel. 

Bhuvanesvara, Vaital deul. 

Yagesvara, Navadurga Temple. 

Gwalior, Teli-ka-mandir. 

Baroli, Sikhara Temple. 

Amarkantak, Patalesvara Temple. 

Khajuraho, Vamana! Temple. 

Khajuraho, Adinatha Temple. 

Khajuraho, Kunwar Math Temple. 

Khajuraho, Ramachandra or Chaturbhuja Temple. 
Khajuraho, Devi Jagadamba Temple. 

Khajuraho, Visvanatha Temple. 

Khajuraho, Parsvanatha Temple. 

Khajuraho, Kandarya Mahadeo Temple. 

Khajuraho, Kandarya Mahadeo Temple: Detail of Sikhara 
Chandrehe, Circular Temple. 

Khajuraho, Ghantai Temple. 

Osia, Temple No. 1. 

Osia, Temple No. 7. 

Kumhharia, Neminatha Temple. 

Kumbharia, Parsvanatha Temple: Interior. 

Dilwara, Tejahpala’s Temple: Interior. 

Dilwara, Vimafa’s Temple: Cloister. 

Dilwara, Tejahpala’s Temple: Side Chapel. 

Dilwara, Tejahpala’s Temple: Ceiling. 

Pindara, Temple of Gop type. 

Gop, Old Temple. 

Kalsar, Temple of Gop type. 

Harshadmata, Temple of Gop type. 

Rhoda, Sikhara Temple. 

Pashthar, Sikhara Temple. 

Wadhwan Ranik Devi Temple. 

Ghumli, Sikhara Temple. 

Sunak, Nilakantha Mahadeva Temple. 

Vadnagar, Kirti-Torana. 

Khandorna, Hingolji Mata Temple. 

Asoda, Jaisalnatha Mahadeva Temple. 

Modhera, Sun Temple: General View. 

Modhera, Sun Temple: Detail of side view 
Modhera, Sun Temple: Detail of sabha-mandapa. 

Modhera, Sun Temple: Shrine on steps of the tank 
Modhera, Sun Temple: Ceiling of rnandap<i. 

Mahakufesvara, Sangamesvara Temple. 

Paftadakal, Papanatha Temple. 

Alampur, Visva-Brahma Temple. 

Balsane, Temple No 1. 

Udayapura, Nilakanjhesvara Temple: Detail of wall- 
lii 




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

XLI, 

XLII. 

XLIII. 

XLIV. 


64. Sinnar, Gon<$esvara Temple: General View. 

65. Sarnal, Galtesvara Temple. 

66. Ratanwa$i, Amritesvara Temple. 

67. Udayapura, Nilakanthesvara Temple. 

68. Udayapura, Nilakanthesvara Temple: Detail of Sikhara. 

69. Bajaura (Kulu), Mahadeva Temple. 

70. Barakar, Temple No. IV. 

71. Sat Deuliya, Sikhara Temple. 

72. Bahulara, Siddhesvara Temple. 

73. Simderbuns, Jatar deul. 

74. Mamallapuram, Shore Temple. 

75. Kahchipuram, Kailasanatha Temple. 

76. Pattadakal, Mallikarjuna Temple. 

77. Ellora, Kailasa Temple: Elephants. 

78. Ellora, Kailasa Temple: General View. 

79. Ellora, Kailasa Temple: Vimana. 

80. Tanjore, Brihadlsvara Temple. 

81. Ittagi, Mahadeva Temple: General View. 

82. Ittagi, Mahadeva Temple: Detail. 

83. Lakkundi, KasI vis ves vara Temple: Door Jamb. 

84. Gadag, Somes vara Temple. 

85.. Pambal, Dodda Basappa Temple. 

86. Halebid, Hoysalesvara Temple; Plinth details. 

87. Halebid, Hoysalesvara Temple: Plinth details. 

88. Somnathpur, Kesava Temple. 

89. Halebid, Hoysalesvara Temple. 

90. Paharpur, Great Temple. 

91. Prambainan (Java), Chandi Loro Jonggrang. 


XLV. 92. 

93. 

94. 

XLVI. 95. 

96. 

97. 

98. 

99. 

100 . 

XLVn. 101. 
102 . 

XL VIII. 103. 

104. 

XLIX. 105. 
106. 
L. 107. 
108. 
109. 
LI. 110. 

111 . 
LII, 112. 

113. 

114. 
LIII. 115. 

116. 
117. 
LIV. 118. 

119. 

120 . 
LV. 121. 

122 . 
LVI. 123. 

124. 

125. 

126. 


II. Sculpture 

Ujani, Buddha (Dacca Museum) East Pakistan. 

Nalanda, Avalokitesvara. 

Kurkihar, Tara (Patna Museum). 

Kantabenia, Parsvanatha. 

North Bengal, Kartikeya (Indian Museum, Calcutta). 

Sankarbandha, Dancing &iva (Dacca Museum, East Pakistan). 
Chapra, Surya (Hajshahi Museum, East Pakistan). 

Deopara, Ganga (Rajshahi Museum, East Pakistan). 

Jaynagar, Devi (British Museum, London). 

Bhuvanesvara, Parasuramesvara Temple: Stone grille. 

Bhuvanesvara, Old Temple: Siva; 

Bhuvanesvara, RajaranI Temple: Varuna. 

Bhuvanesvara, Lihgaraja Temple: Teacher, 

Konarak, Sun Temple: Nayika. 

Bhuvanesvara, Lihgaraja Temple: Wall decoration. 

Uttar Pradesh, Navagraha slab (Worcester Art Museum, US.A.)/' 
Uttar Pradesh, Twelve-armed goddess (British Museum, London). " 
Nokhas, Rukrnim. 

Uttar Pradesh, Head of a female figure (Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston, U.S.A.). 

Khajuraho, Lady writing letter (Indian Museum, Calcutta) 
Harshagiri Dancers and Musicians (Shikar Museum, Rajasthan). 
Central India, A Chedi head. 

Khajuraho, Kandarya Mahadeo Temple: Jdngha sculptures. 
Khajuraho, Kandarya Mahadeo Temple: Jdngha sculpture. 

Khajuraho, Ardhanarisvara. 

Dhara, Vidya Devi (British Museum, London). 

Dilwara, Tejahpala’s Temple: Part of a ceiling. 

Mahoba, Simhanada Lokesvara (Lucknow Museum). 

Harshagiri, Lingodbhava Murti (Rajputana Museum, Ajmer). 
Dilwara, Tejahpala’s Temple: Part of a ceiling. 

Halebid, Hoysalesvara Temple: LakshmI-Narayana. 

Modhera, Sun. Temple: Pillar sculptures. 

Temple sculpture. 

Avantipura, AvantlsvamI Temple: Sculpture. 

Nepal, Padmapani (Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, U.S.A.). 

liii / - 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


L.VII. 127. South India, Siva Nataraja (Museum van Asiatische Kunst. 
Amsterdam). 

128. South India, Devi (Museimi of Fine Arts, Boston, U.S.A.). 

129. South India, 6iva Nataraja. TTT _ N 

LVIII. 130. South India, Saiva devotee (G. W. E. Cotton collection, U.K.). 

131. South India, Parvatl (Cleveland Museum of Art, U.S.A.). 

132. South India, Sundaramurtisvarnl (Colombo Museum). 

133. South India, 6iva Vinadhara (Musee Guiniet, Paris). 

III. Painting 

LIX. 134. Eliora, Kailasa Temple: Ceiling painting. 

135. Tanjore, Brihadlsvara Temple: Painting on wall. 

T,X, 136. Painting in a MS. of Ganfiavyuha, e. 11th century A.D. (Collection 
S. Roerich, Kalimpong). 

137. Vasudhara: Painting in Vredenburg MS. of Ashfasxihctsrika 
P ycl j ncLpa/YaYYii ta . 

LXI. 138. Tara: Painting in a MS. of Ashfasahasrika Prajndparamitd copied 
in year 4 of Ramapala (Collection Bharat Kala Bhavan, Hindu 
University, Banaras). , , _ _ . 

139. Mahasii Tara: Painting in a MS. of Ashtasahcisrika Prajnaparamita 
copied in N. S. 191/A.D. 1071 (Collection Asiatic Society, Calcutta, 
No. A. 15). , t ^ _ . 

LXII 140. Buddha: Painting in a MS. of Ashtasahasrika Prajnapararmta 
copied at Nalanda in year 6 of Mahipala I (Collection Asiatic 
Society, Calcutta, No. G. 4713), 

141. Nativity of Buddha: Painting in above MS. 

142. Tara: Painting in a MS. of Ashtasdhasrikd Prajnaparamitd: c. 11th 
century A.D. (Collection S. K. Saraswati, Calcutta). 


AAI. 

AANG. 

■ AAWI. 

Abh. 

ABIA. 

ABORL 

AG. 

AIOC. (also 
PAIOC). 
Apar. 

Ap.-p. 

AR. 

ARSIE. 

ASC. 

ASI. 

ASS. 

ASWI. 

AUS. 

BDCRI. 

BEFEO. 

BG. 

Bh. List. 

BI. 

BISM Quarterly. 

Br. I.A. 

Briggs. 

B.S. 

BSOS. 

BSS. 

BV. 

CAKD. 


ABBREVIATIONS 

Art and Architecture of India, by Benjamin Row¬ 
land. London, 1953. 

Architectural Antiquities of Northern Gujarat, 
by Jaynes Burgess . London, 1903. 

Architectural Antiquities of Western India, by 
Henry Cousens. London, 1926. 

Abhidhana-chintdmani of Hemachandra. 

Annual Bibliography of Indian Archaeology, 
Leyden. 

Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, Poona. 

Archaeology of Gujarat (including Kathiawar), 
by H. D. Sankalia. Bombay, 1941. 

All-India Oriental Conference, Proceedings and 
Transactions of. 

Apardrka. 

Aparajita-Pariprichchha (MS. in S. K. Roy 
Collection). 

Rdshpakutas and their Times, by A. S. Altekar. 
Poona, 1934. 

Annual Report on South Indian Epigraphy . 

Archaeological Survey of India, Reports by Sir 
Alexander Cunningham. 

Archaeological Survey of India (Annual Report). 

Anandasrama Sanskrit Series, Poona. 

Archaeological Survey of Western India. 

Allahabad University Studies. 

Bulletin of the Deccan College Postgraduate and 
Research Institute, Poona. . 

Bulletin de Vtcole Frangaise d’Extreme Orient, 
Hanoi. 

Bombay Gazetteer. 

A list of Inscriptions of Northern India, by D. R. 
Bhandarkar (Appendix to El, XIX-XXIII). 

Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta. 

Bharat Itihas Samshodhak Mandal Quarterly , 
Poona. 

Indian Architecture, Buddhist and Hindu, by 
Percy Brown. 2nd Ed. Bombay, 1949. 

Ta’rikh-z-Firishta , Eng. trans. by J. Briggs. 

Bengali Samvat. 

Bulletin of the School of Oriental (and African) 
Studies , London. 

Bombay Sanskrit (and Prakrit) Series, Bombay 
(and Poona). 

Bharatiya Vidyd, Bombay. 

Chalukyan Architecture of the Kanarese Dis 
tricts, by Henry Cousens. Calcutta, 1926. 

hr 


misTfy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



CII. 

COS. 

CP. 


Cult. Her. 
CW. 


DHNI. 

DU Series. 

DUS. 

EC. 

EHD. 

EHI. 

El. 

EIM. 

— EISMS. 

EZ. 

-FAS. 

GIL. 

GOS. 

GSPP. 

- - HAL. 

HAS. 

^ HBR. 

—- HCSL. 

....... HIEA. 


HIED. 

HIIA. 

HIL. 


^ HISI. 


<SL 


Cambridge History of India , VoL 111, Ed. by 
Wolseley Haig . Cambridge , 1928. 

Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, Banaras. 

Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. 

Calcutta Oriental Series, Calcutta. 

Copper-Plate. 

Cultural Heritage of India. Published by Rama - 
krishna Mission Institute of Culture, Calcutta . 
Collected Works of R. G. Bhandarkar, Published 
by Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute , 
Poona. 

Dynastic History of Northern India, by H. C. Ray . 

2 vols. Calcutta, 1931, 1936 . 

Seth Devchand Lalbhai Jaina Pustakoddhara 
Series, Bombay. 

Dacca University Studies. 

Epigraphia Carnatica. 

Early History of the Deccan, by R. G. Bhandarkar . 
3rd Ed. Calcutta , 1928. 

Early History of India, by V. A. Smith. 4th Ed. 

Oxford, 1924 . 

Epigraphia Indica. 

Epigraphia Indo-Moslemica. 

Eastern Indian School of Mediaeval Sculpture, 
by R. D. Banerji. Delhi, 1933. 

Epigraphia Zylanica. 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon, by V. A. 

Smith . 2nd Ed. Oxford, 1930. 

Geschichte der Indischen Literatur, by M. 

Winternitz. 3 vols. Leipzig, 1905, 1909, 1920. 
Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, Bcroda, 

Gujarati Sahitya Parishad Patrika, Bombay . 
History of Alankdra Literature, by P. V. Kane. 
Bombay, 1923. 

Hyderabad Archaeological Series. 

History of Bengal, Vol. 1, Ed. by R . C. Majumdar . 
Dacca, 1943, 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature , by M. 

Krishnamachariar. Madras, 1937. 

History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, by 
J. Fergusson. 2nd Ed. Revised by J. Burgess 
and R. P. Spiers. London , 1910. 

History of India as told by its own Historians. 

Trans, by H. M. Elliot and J. Dowson. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art, by A. K. 

Coomuraswamy. London, 1927. 

History of Indian Literature, by M. Winternitz. 
Eng. trans. by Mrs. S. Ketkar. Calcutta Uni¬ 
versity . 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India, by R. 
Sewell. Ed. by S. Krishnaswayni Aiyangar. 
Madras, 1932. 

Ivi 




Hodivala 

HOS. 

HPL. 

HSI. 

HSL. 

HSP. 

HTB. 


IA. 

IB. 

IC. 

ICPB. 

IHQ. 

IMP. 


IND. 


ISGDP. 

IT. 

JA. 

JAHRS. 

JAOS. 

JAS. 

JASB. 

JASS. 

JBBRAS. 

JBORS. 

JBRS. 

JBTS. 

JDL. 

JGIS. 

JGRS. 

JIH. 

JISOA. 

JKHRS. 

JOR. 


ABBREVIATIONS 

Studies in Indo-Muslim History,, by S. H. Hodi¬ 
vala. Bombay, 1939 , 

Harvard Oriental Series. 

History of Pali Literature, by B. C. Law . 2 vols. 
London, 1933. 

History of South India, by K. A. Nilakanta Sastri. 
Madras, 1955. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. 

History of Sanskrit Poetics . 

Buddhist Records of the Western World. Trans¬ 
lated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsang, by 
Samuel Beal. London, 1906. 

Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

Inscriptions of Bengal, Vol. Ill, by N. G. Majum- 
dar. Rajshahi, 1929. 

Indian Culture, Calcutta. 

List of Inscriptions in the Central Provinces and 
Berar, by Hiralal. 2nd Ed. Nagpur, 1932. 

Indian Historical Quarterly, Calcutta. 

A Topographical List of the Inscriptions of the 
Madras Presidency, by V. Rangacharya. 3 vols. 
Madras, 1919. 

A collection of the Inscriptions on copper-plates 
and stones in the Nellore District, by A. Butter- 
worth and V. Chetty. 3 vols. Madras, 1905. 

Isanasiva-guru-deva-paddhati of Isanasivaguru- 
deva Misra. 

Indian Thought, Benares. 

Journal Asiatique, Paris. 

Journal of the Andhra Historical Research 
Society, Rajahmundry. 

Journal of the American Oriental Society. 

Journal of the Asiatic Society, Calcutta. 

Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Calcutta. 

Jain Atmananda Sabha Series , Bhavnagar. 

Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asia¬ 
tic Society, Bombay. 

Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, 
Pa.tna. 

Journal of the Bihar Research Society, Patna. 

Journal of the Buddhist Text Society. 

Journal of the Department of Letters, University 
of Calcutta. 

Journal of the Greater India Society, Calcutta. 

Journal of the Gujarat Research Society, Bombay . 

Journal of Indian Histoi'y. 

Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art, Cal¬ 
cutta. 

Journal of the Kalinga Historical Research 
Society, Balangir. 

Journal of Oriental Research, Madras. 
lvii 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


JPASB. 

JPTS. 

JRAS. 

JRASB, L. 

JSML. 

JUB. 

Kashi SS. 
K.E. 

KHDS. 

KHT. 

KIS. 

KL. 

KM. 

KRT. 

KSS. 

MAR. 

MASB. 

MASI. 

Mhvs. 

M.S. 

MTD. 

NGGW. 

NIA. 

NIS. 

NPP. 

NS. 

NSP. 

NUJ. 

OHRJ. 

OS. 

PAIOC. 

(also AIOC.) 
PIHC. 

PRASI, WC. 

PTS. 

Pud. Ins. 


Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal, Calcutta. 

Journal of the Pali Text Society. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great 
Britain and Ireland, London. 

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 
Letters, Calcutta. 

Journal of the Saraswati Mahal Library, Tanjore . 

Journal of the University of Bombay, Bombay. 

Kashi Sanskrit Series, Banaras. 

Kalachuri Era. 

History of Dharmasdstra, by P. V. Kane. 4 voIs. 
Poona, 1930-53. 

Hindu Temple, by Stella Kramrisch. 2 vols. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1946. 

Indian Sculpture, by Stella Kramrisch. Calcutta, 
1933. 

List of Inscriptions of Southern India, by F. 
Kielhorn (Appendix to El, VII-VI1I). 

Kavyamala NSP, Bombay. 

Rajatarahgini of Kalhana. Ed. and trans. by M. A. 
Stein. 

Kathasaritsagara of Somadeva, NSP, Bombay. 

Annual Report of the Mysore Archaeological 
Department. 

Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Cal¬ 
cutta. 

Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India. 

Mahdvamsa. 

Maharashtra Sdrasvata (in Marathi) by V. L. 
Bhave. 

Mediaeval Temples of the Dalchan, by Henry 
Cousens. Calcutta, 1931. 

Nachrichten Gottingischer Gesellschaft der Wis- 
senschaften. 

New Indian Antiquary, Bombay. 

New Imperial Series. 

Nagari Pracharinl Patrika (in Hindi), Banaras. 

New Series. 

Nirnaya Sagara Press, Bombay. 

Nagpur University Journal, Nagpur. 

Orissa Historical Research Journal, Bhubanes¬ 
war. 

Old Series. 

Proceedings and Transactions of the All-India 
Oriental Conference. 

Proceedings of the Indian History Congress. 

Progress Report of the Archaeological Survey of 
India, Western Circle. 

Pali Text Society, London. 

Inscriptions of the Pudukkottai State, 1929. 

lviii 


ABBREVIATIONS 



SBE 

SBH 


SSG 


T 

THK 


TN. 


vT* 


v.s. 

WZKM. 


Yaj. 

ZDMG. 


<SL 


Princess of Wales Saraswati Bhavana Text 
Series , Banaras. 

Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society, Banga¬ 
lore. 

Sacred Books of the East, Oxford. 

Sacred Books of the HindusAllahabad. 
Smriti-chandrika of Devannabhatta. Mysore, 1914. 
Stone-Inscription. 

South Indian Inscriptions. 

Sino-Indian Studies , Calcutta. 

Singhi Jain Series. 

Somnath and other Mediaeval temples of Kathia- 
tcad, by Henry Cousens. Calcutta, 1931 • 
Sariskrit Poetics . 

Silpa-ratna of Kumara. 

Sanskrit Series. 

Systems of Sanskrit Grammar, by S. K. Belval- 
kar. Poona, 1915. 

Sanskrit Sdhitya Parishad, Calcutta. 
Tabaqdt-i-Akbari of Nizam-ud~din Ahmad. 
History of Kanauj, bij R. S. Tripathi. Benares, 
1937. 

Tabaqat-i-Ndsiri of Minhaj-ud-din bin Siraj. 
Trivandrum Sanskrit Series. 

Vaijayanti of Yddavaprakasa. 

Vijnanesvara. 

Vividha-jndna-vistara (in Marathi),, Bombay. 
Varendra Research Society. 

Vaishnavism, £aivism and Minor Religious Sys¬ 
tems, by R. G. Bhandarkar. 

Vikrama Saihvat. 

Wiener Zeitschrift filr die Kunde des Morgen - 
landes. 

Ydjnavalkya. 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft . 


lix 




CHAPTER 1 


GHAZNAVID INVASION 

1. THE RISE OF THE GHAZNAVIDS 

It has been shown in the preceding volume that the conquest of 
Sindh by the Arabs was merely a passing episode in the history of 
Islam. The Arabs established one or more principalities in this re¬ 
gion at the beginning of the eighth century A.D. and maintained a 
precarious hold over them for nearly three hundred years. But 
Islam, which had conquered a large part of the world from the 
Pyrenees to the borders of China, had not extended much beyond 
the Sindhu, and had an uncertain footing even in the valley of that 
river. But what even the mighty ‘Abbasid Caliphs failed to achieve 
was accomplished by petty Turkish dynasties that arose from the 
ruins of their empire. In order to understand this properly it is 
necessary to pass in rapid review the great political changes that 
took place in the eastern regions of the Caliphate since the beginning 
of the ninth century A.D. 

The powerful ‘ Abbasid Caliphate, founded in A.D. 749, began to 
show signs of decline even before the end of the first quarter of 
the ninth century A.D. Tahir, the trusted general of al-Ma‘mun 
(A.D. 813-833), was rewarded in 820 wi th t he governorship of 
Khurlsan, which comprised all the territories east of Baghdad.. He, 
however, soon assumed independence for all practical purposes, and 
his successors extended their dominion to the frontiers of India. 

In A.D. 872 the Tahirids were superseded by a new dynasty 
founded by Ya'qub ibn-Layth al-§affar who started life as a copper¬ 
smith in Sijistan. His conduct as the head of a band of brigands 
attracted the attention of the local governor who placed him in 
command of his troops. Saffar succeeded his patron as governor 
and soon ruled over almost the whole of Persia. He also conquered 
Kabul, Zabul and Sindh as already mentioned above. 1 

Towards the close of the ninth century A.D. the Samanids of 
Transoxiana rose into importance. They were descended from 
Saman, a Zoroastrian noble of Balkh, and in A.D. 903 seized Khurasan 
from the Saffarids. During the reign of Nasr II (A.D. 913-43) the 
Samanid empire embraced Sijistan, Karman, Jurjan, Tabaristan, 
Transoxiana, and Khurasan. Though nominally vassals of the 
‘Abbasids, the Samanid rulers were virtually independent; The 

l 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


iflnids finally brought the whole of Transoxiana under Muslim 
rule, and their capital Bukhara, together with the city of Samarqand, 
rivalled and sometimes almost eclipsed Baghdad, the renowned 
capital city of the Caliphs, as centres of learning and culture. 

The mighty kingdom of the Samanids experienced the usual 
fate. In the last decade of the tenth century A.D. two Turkish 
families divided it between themselves. The Ilak Khans of Turkistan, 
who captured Bukhara in 990 and nine years later gave the final 
blow to the Samanids, became masters of all their territories lying 
to the north of the Oxus. The portion of the Samanid kingdom lying 
to the south of that river passed into the hands of the Yaminl 
dynasty, better known to the modern students of history as the 
Ghaznavids. As it was the rulers of this dynasty that repeatedly 
invaded India and paved the way for the final Muslim conquest of 
the country, their history requires a fuller treatment. 


2. SABUKTIGIN 

The Yamlni dynasty claimed descent from Yazdijurd-i-Shahryar. 
the last of the Persian monarchs. During the Caliphate of ‘Usman 
Yazdijurd-i-Shahryar lost his-life at the hands of his enemies in a 
water-mill in the vicinity of the town of Marv. The family of the 
deceased fled to Turkistan and settled in the district of Nakhistan. 
They intermarried with the people of that country, and after two or 
three generations the descendants passed as Turks. While residing 
there, Sabuktigin, the founder of the Yamlni dynasty in Ghazni, 
then only twelve years old, was taken prisoner by a neighbouring 
tribe. He was sold as a slave to a merchant named Nasr, the Haji, 
who after three or more years’ time brought him to Bukhara. There 
he was purchased by Alptigin, the Lord Chamberlain of the Samanid 
ruler of Khurasan, who took a fancy to him. Sabuktigin accompani¬ 
ed his new master to Tukharistan and Khurasan of which places the 
latter was governor. Subsequently Alptigin quarrelled with the 
Samanids and left Tukharistan. He seized Zabulistan together with 
its capital Ghazni from the Amir Abu Bakr Lawik in c. A.D. 963, 
and there established an independent kingdom. He raised Sabukti¬ 
gin to the position of a general. According to an authority quoted 
by Firishta 2 Sabuktigin was engaged in frequent wars with the 
Indians and defeated them during the fifteen years’ rule of Alptigin. 
But as the latter did not rule for more than a year, the statement 
about frequent raids into India by Sabuktigin can only refer to the 
interval between the death of Alptigin and his own accession to the 
throne which really covers a period of 15 years. Dr. Nazim says that 
Alptigin conquered a part of the kingdom of Kabul, 3 but quotes no 

2 



authority. It may be presumed from subsequent events that the 
Shahi kingdom did not suffer any material loss before the reign of 
Sabuktigin. 


Alptigin died in A.D. 963, and was succeeded by his son Is-haq. 
After the death of Is-haq, in A.D. 966, Balkatigin, the com¬ 
mander of the Turkish troops, succeeded to the throne. Sabuktigin, 
who had married the daughter of Alptigin, served both Is-haq and 
Balkatigin. When the reign of Balkatigin came to an end in 
A.D. 972, Pirai, 4 a slave of Alptigin, succeeded to the throne. Pirai 
was a cruel king. So the people invited Abu ‘All Lawik, son of 
Abu Bakr Lawik, to invade Ghazni. The Shahis of India, whose 
kingdom extended up to the Hindu Kush, and who looked with dis¬ 
favour upon the establishment of a powerful Muslim kingdom just 
on the border of their own, made a common cause with Abu ‘All 
Lawik against Pirai. The Shahi king, who in all probability was 
Jayapala, sent his son with an army to assist his ally in the invasion 
of Ghazni. When the allied forces reached near Charkh, a place on 
the east bank of the Lohgar river on one of the routes from Kabul 
to Ghazni, they were suddenly attacked by Sabuktigin who killed 
a large number of them and took many prisoners to Ghazni together 
with ten elephants. This victory greatly enhanced his prestige. 
Misdeeds of Pirai brought about his downfall in A.D. 977, and Sabuk¬ 
tigin was raised to power. Sabuktigin’s accession received approv¬ 
al from the Samanid king Nuh II of Bukhara. Sabuktigin obviously 
enjoyed an independent political status, though perhaps he nominal¬ 
ly acknowledged the supremacy of the Samanids. 6 

Shortly after his accession Sabuktigin added to his kingdom 
Bust, Dawar, Qusdar, Bamiyan, Tukharistan, and Ghur. He also led 
frequent expeditions against the kingdom of the Shahis of Udabhanda, 
which, as has already been noted, extended as far as the Kabul 
Valley. ’Utbi regards these military campaigns as holy wars for 
the propagation of Islam. Sabuktigin plundered forts on the tops of 
hills in the outlying provinces of the Shahi kingdom, captured many 
cities, and acquired immense wealth. The Shahi Jayapala obviously 
could not ignore these incidents. He organised his forces, which 
included huge elephants, and set out to punish Sabuktigin. At some • 
place between Lamghan and Ghazni he met with Sabuktigin and 
his young son Mahmud. The battle between the two armies con¬ 
tinued for several days. 6 According to Muslim chroniclers the Hindu 
army was rapidly gaining ground, and so Sabuktigin took recourse 
to unchivalrous means. There was near Jayapala’s camp a lofty 
mountain, called the ‘Ukba Ghuzak, in one of whose ravines there 
was a fountain of water. There was a popular superstition that if it 


a 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

was contaminated with any filth, “black clouds collected, whirlwinds 
arose, the summits of the mountains became black, rain fell, and the 
neighbourhood was filled with cold blasts, until red death superven¬ 
ed.” At the instance of Sabuktigin his men secretly threw dirty 
substance into the fountain and the dreadful consequences followed. 
There were hail storms, blast, and thunder; black vapour collected 
around the Hindu army impeding their progress, and many of them 
perished in the cold. Jayapala saved himself by concluding an 
ignominious treaty with the Amir. But as soon as he safely reached 
his own country he repudiated the treaty. Enraged at this trea¬ 
cherous conduct of the Shahi king, Sabuktigin forthwith led an army 
against him. After a strenuous fight Sabuktigin defeated his enemy, 
and succeeded in establishing his authority as far as the city of 
Lamghan, which was famous for its immense wealth and strong 
fortifications. Jayapala decided to make a determined effort to re¬ 
establish his control of it, and collected an army consisting of more 
than one hundred thousand troops. Firishta states that the Rajas 
of Delhi, Ajmer, Kalanjara, and many other neighbouring countries 
supplied contingents to help the Shahi king on this occasion. This 
statement of Firishta is very important, as a confederacy of Indian 
rulers, united in opposition to foreign invasion, is a rare event in 
Indian history. If Firishta’s statement could be accepted as true, it 
would go a long way in absolving the Indian rulers of the charge 
commonly levelled against them that they could not unite even in 
the face of a common danger threatening the safety of their mother¬ 
land. Unfortunately, we have no independent testimony corroborat¬ 
ing Firishta’s statement, and, meagre as it is, it does not enable us 
to identify the rulers who joined Jayapala in defending their mother¬ 
land against the onrush of Islam. The three capital cities mentioned 
by Firishta seem to suggest that the Tomaras, Chahamanas and the 
Chandellas sent troops to the aid of Jayapala. Even though we do 
not know the names of any of the “many other neighbouring coun¬ 
tries” which joined the holy war against Islam, it is legitimate to 
conclude from Firishta’s statement that Northern India was fully 
aware of the grave peril caused by the menace of Islam, and her 
people gave practical evidence of their love for their country and 
religion by willingly offering to sacrifice their lives in the bleak hills 
of far distant Afghanistan which was almost a terra incognita to 
them. 

On receiving news of the advance of the Hindu army Sabuktigin 
stationed his troops in a strategic position on a lofty hill near 
Lamghan. Having jnade a general survey of the countless forces 
of Jayapala from his post, he divided his soldiers into batches of five 
hundred men, and sent them in succession to attack a particular point 

4 




MIN ISTfty 


ghaznavbd invasion 



of the enemy line. Soon a confusion arose in the Hindu camp, and 
then all these detached squadrons made a united attack. There 
followed a close fight in which only swords could be used, and Hindus 
were killed in large numbers. After a short resistance the Hindu 
army fled in utter confusion leaving behind their property, arms, 
provisions, elephants, and horses. This is the account handed down to 
us by the Muslim historians, and we have no means to check it by 
comparing it with the version of the other side. Sabuktigln annexed 
the whole of the territory between Lamghan and Peshawar and 
introduced Islam among the people of this region who were probably 
followers of Buddhism. 

During the reign of the Samanid king Nuh II, son of Mansur, 
Abu ‘Ali-i-Sunjur, governor of a part of Khurasan, revolted. Nuh II 
succeeded in putting down the revolt with the help of Sabuktigln and 
the latter’s son Mahmud. In recognition of this service the Samanid 
king conferred the title Nasir-ud-dln wa’d-Daulah on Sabuktigln and 
Saifu’d-Daulah on Mahmud. Mahmud was made the captain-general 
of the forces of Khurasan, and his headquarters were fixed at 
Nishapur. In A.D. 995 Abu ‘Ali-i-Sunjur made a fresh attempt to 
capture Nishapur, but Sabuktigln and Mahmud succeeded in repuls¬ 
ing the attack. 

Sabuktigln died on the Balkh frontier in A.D. 997 at the age of 
fifty-six. He was a king of great valour, and ruled his kingdom with 
equity and moderation. He left behind him four sons, Mahmud, 
Isma'il, Nasr, and Yusuf. Before his death he was prevailed upon 
by Isma'il, who was living with him, to nominate him as his successor. 
Isma'il declared himself king, and lavished wealth upon the 
soldiers to gain their support against his brother Mahmud. Hearing 
of this news of Isma'il’s assumption of the royal power, following 
the death of his father, Mahmud wrote a letter to him proposing that 
he should give up his claim to the throne as he was inexperienced in 
the art of government, and that he could be given charge of the 
administration of the provinces of Balkh and Khurasan if he so 
desired. Isma'il rejected the proposal and advanced towards Ghazni, 
but was defeated by Mahmud. He was subsequently taken prisoner 
and was kept in confinement till his death. He ruled only for seven 
months. 

3. SULTAN MAHMUD 

Mahmud ascended the throne of Ghazni in A.D. 998. He was 
born in A.D. 971, and in his youth received education in sacred lite¬ 
rature and in the art of warfare and government. It has already 
been mentioned that he fought under his father against Jayapala and 



5 




THE STRUGGLE FOE EMPIRE 

Abu ‘Ali-i-Sunjxir. After his accession Mahmud consolidated his 
position in Herat, Balkh, and Bust, and was engaged in a conflict with 
the Samanid king ‘Abd-ul-Malik and his associates in order to re¬ 
establish his authority over Khurasan, pe achieved his end by 
defeating his enemies in two successive engagements, and in A.D. 999 
was recognised as the sovereign of all these countries by the Caliph 
al-Qadir Billah, who sent him a robe of investment and conferred on 
him the titles of Yamln-ud-Daulah and Amin-ul-Millah.^ Mahmud is 
said to have made a vow to lead an expedition against' India every 
year, and there is a general consensus of opinion that he had no less 
than twelve such expeditions to his credit. But the actual number is 
difficult to determine on account of the conflicting evidence of the 
different authorities.^ 

In A.D. 100 0 he led the first expedition against Indi a, and seized 
some fortresses, which seem to have been situated in the neighbour¬ 
hood of Peshawar. In the following year Mahmud again advanced 
with an army consisting of 15,000 picked cavalry, men, and officers, 
and encamped in the outskirt of the city of Peshawar. On receipt 
of this news Jayapala marched with 12,000 horsemen, 30,000 foot 
soldiers, and 300 elephants to resist the invader, and pitched his camp 
near that city. He avoided taking direct action for some time await¬ 
ing the arrival of more troops from the tribal area. Mahmud realised 
the situation and attacked the enemy without further delay. The 
cavalry and elephant forces of Jayapala, amidst beat of drums, plung¬ 
ed themselves into the thick of the battle, but before noon the Hindus 
were routed and 5,000 of them lost their lives. Jayapala was captur- 
ed to gether with his sons and grandsons, and they were detained at 

*a*place known as ^iran(i ^Mahmud obtained a huge booty, and sue- 

ceedecTTn conquering the province around Peshawar, which was 
larger and more fertile than Khurasan. He next advanced on 
Waihind, which is to be identified with Udabhanxja, the capital of the 
Shahis, and pitched his tent near that city. At his approach the 
Hindus retreated to the passes in the neighbouring hills and the 
forests and jungles. While they were devising plans for an effective 
resistance, Mahmud despatched an army against them, and dispersed 
them with a great deal of slaughter. He released Jayapala on his pro¬ 
mise to pay 250,000 dinars and to deliver 25 elephants, and detained a 
son and a grandson of his as hostages for the fulfilment of the condi¬ 
tions of the treaty. After Jayapala’s return to his own kingdom his 
son Anandapala, who was at that time residing somewhere to the east 
of the Sindhu, sent the stipulated sum of money and elephants to 
Mahmud, and secured the release of the Shahi princes. But Jayapala, 
having suffered three successive defeats at the hands of the Muslims, 
considered himself unworthy of the throne and burnt himself on a 


* 







GMAZNAViD INVASION 

funeral pyre, which he is said to have kindled with his own hands. 
Anandapala succeeded him shortly after A.D. 1001.] 

Mahmud devoted the greater part of A.D. 1002 and A.D. 1003 to 
the war in Sistan and during these two years India enjoyed a respite 
from his attacks. 

(in A.D. 1004 Mahmud renewed his invasion of India. He 
passed through Walishtan, modern Sibi, in Baluchistan, crossed the 
Sindhu near Multan, and reached Rhatiya. The city was surrounded 
by a wall of unusual height and a moat of great depth and breadth. 
It possessed enormous riches and was well-equipped with armaments 
and troops. The place has been variously identified with Rhera 
under the Salt Range, Uch, and Bhatinda, but none of these identi¬ 
fications can be regarded as certain. It was at this time ruled by 
BajI Ray. Firishta says that Baji Ray, who was a vassal under 
Anandapala, antagonised the latter by refusing to pay him tribute. 
He is said to have also enraged Mahmud by his hostile activities 
against the Muslim governors, whom the latter appointed to rule his 
Indian possessions. But these informations are not supplied by the 
early authorities. Baji Ray was a brave general. He came out of 
the walls of the city with his elephant forces and took the aggressive. 
The battle continued for three days and nights. The Muslims lost 
heavily and were on the verge of defeat, when, on the fourth day, 
the Sultan made a last desperate attack, and succeeded in capturing 
some elephants which were defending the centre of Baji Ray's forces. 
Baji Ray resisted at every point, but by the evening was forced to 
withdraw into the fort. Mahmud forthwith occupied the gates of 
the city, filled up the moat, and widened the entrances. When Baji 
Ray realised that the city could not be defended any longer, he fled 
to a forest on the bank of the Sindhu, and took refuge on the top of 
a hill with a few of his followers. As soon as Mahmud learnt of the 
enemy’s flight, he sent off a contingent in hot pursuit. Baji Ray was 
soon taken by surprise, anc( surrounded by the Muslim army. As 
there was no way out of this impasse left for him, he put an end to 
his life by plunging his dagger into his heart, and his attendants fell 
fighting bravely with the enemy. Mahmud took Bhatiya easily by 
storm, and pillaged the city. All the wealth there, together with 
hundred and twenty elephants, fell into his hands. He stayed there 
for some time, making arrangements for the permanent annexation 
of the country and for the conversion of the Hindus to Islam with the 
help of some competent teachers. He started for Ghazni in A.D. 1005 
during the rainy season. As the rivers of the Punjab were full and 
surging at that time, he lost almost all his booty while crossing them. 
His passage was also obstructed from time to time by his enemies in 
the mountainous country. ] 

r 

4 




MIN/Sr^ 



: °S 


o 

z 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



In A.D. 1005-6 Mahmud resolved to lead an expedition against 
Multan to punish its ruler Abu-’l-Fath Daud for his heretical 
activities. Baud's grandfather Shaikh Hamid Lodi had entered into 
a friendly relation with Sabuktigin, and the alliance between the 
two families was maintained for some time. But Daud’s acceptance 
of the doctrine of the Isma‘111 sect made him hostile to Mahmud, who 
was a zealous defender of the Islamic faith. Mahmud, as he marched 
towards Multan, found the Sindhu in a flooded condition after the 
rain, making it difficult for his cavalry to cross it. So he requested 
Anandapala to allow him a passage through his kingdom. Ananda¬ 
pala, who was an ally of Daud, refused to comply with the request. 
This led to a battle near Peshawar in which Mahmud severely defeat¬ 
ed Anandapala who fled to the Kashmir hills. The Sultan now found 
an easy route to Multan through the Shahi kingdom. Daud lost all 
courage to meet the Sultan when he heard that a powerful king like 
Anandapala had failed to cope with him. The Sultan reached Multan 
without encountering any opposition, besieged the city for seven 
days, and forced the defenders to capitulate. The people, who had 
endured extreme hardship, were forced to pay 20,000,000 dirhams. 
Baud was, however, allowed to rule over the kingdom on his promise 
to pay an annual tribute of 20,000 golden dirhams, and to follow the 
tenets of Islam. 

About this time the Sultan received news of the invasion of the 
northern part of his kingdom by the Turks under their leader flak 
Khan. He left Sukhapala, grandson of Jayapala, who was formerly 
converted to Islam under the name of Nawasa Shah, to look after the 
affairs of Hindustan, and himself rushed to Khurasan to meet the 
invader. When he was engaged in fighting with flak Khan, Nawasa 
Shah declared independence, dismissed all the Muslim officers, re¬ 
nounced Islam, and made an alliance with the Indian chiefs. After 
the termination of his battle with the Turks in A.D. 1007 the Sultan 
marched to India to punish the rebel. Nawasa Shah fled to the hills, 
but was captured. The Sultan took possession of his treasures, 
amounting to 400,000 dirhams, and after settling affairs in Hindustan 
returned to Ghazni. 

{In the following year (A.D. 1008) Mahmud led an army against 
Anandapala to punish him for his conduct during the invasion of 
Multan. Mahmud was opposed on the bank of a river near Waihind 
(Udabhanda) by Brahmapala, son of Anandapala. The Shahi army 
was well equipped with white swords, blue spears, yellow coats of 
mail, and huge elephants. According to Firishta many Rajas of 
Hindustan despatched, on the appeal of Anandapala, big contingents 
to his aid, as they did, about thirty years earlier, during the reign of 


8 


GHAZNAVID INVASION 



<SL 


his father, on a similar occasion. The Khokars or the Gakkhars of the 
Punjab also joined the Shahis in full strength^ The contending parties 
did not engage in any struggle for forty days. Mahmud did not 
think it wise to take the offensive, and wanted his enemies to attack 
his entrenchments. He engaged six thousand archers to incite them 
to make the first move, and his plan met with success. The Khokars, 
30,000 in number, with various weapons advanced swiftly against 
the enemy line and made a vigorous attack on it. In the dreadful 
battle that ensued 5,000 Muslims lost their lives within a short space 
of time, and it seemed as if the Sultan was on the point of losing the 
battle with disastrous consequences. But suddenly the battle took a 
different course, when a number of the Sultan’s personal guards 
attacked the rear of the invading Hindu army. There was confusion 
and the Hindus fled in panic. Firishta says that an untoward inci¬ 
dent led to the final defeat of the Hindus on this occasion. The ele¬ 
phant, which carried the leader of the Hindu army, i.e. Anandapala, 
was struck by arrows showered by the enemies, got out of control, 
and fled from the battlefield with its riders. This was taken as the 
signal for flight by the Hindu army, which then deserted the battle¬ 
field in confusion. The same authority relates that ‘Abdullah Ta’I 
with 6,000 horse and Arsalan Jazib with 10,000 soldiers pursued the 
Hindus and killed 20,000 of them. The Sultan himself joined in the 
pursuit, and followed the remainder of the fleeing Hindu army up to 
Bhimnagar, also known as Nagarkot, modern Kot Kangra. The fort 
of Bhimnagar was built on the top of a steep and lofty hill surround¬ 
ed by deep water. Great riches, presented by neighbouring chiefs 
and devotees from different parts of India during, successive genera¬ 
tions, had been accumulated there. Such an immense quantity of 
gold, silver, precious stones, and pearls was not to be found in the 
treasury of any king in India. The Sultan besieged the fort and made 
a vigorous onslaught with his archers, The Hindus inside the fort 
lost heart at the sight of the vast host of Muslims spreading over the 
spurs of the hills. After three days’ resistance they surrendered and 
threw open the gates of the citadel. The Sultan entered it without 
any opposition, and seized control of the treasury which consisted of 
70,000,000 royal dirhams, gold and silver ingots, 7,00,400 mans in 
weight, jewelleries, and precious stones. Among the booty were 
superfine, soft, and embroidered cloths and garments, a house of white 
silver, 30 yards in length and 15 yards in breadth, parts of which 
could be disjoined at will, a canopy made of fine linen, 40 yards in 
length and 20 yards in breadth, provided with two golden and two 
silver poles, and a very costly throne. The Sultan himself took 
charge of the jewels and placed his two chamberlains Altuntash and 
Asightigln in charge of the gold, silver and other valuables. He 


9 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



appointed one of his reliable officers to take charge of the fort, and 
returned to Ghazni carrying the booty and the treasure on the backs 
of camels. He could not keep Nagarkot under his control for any 
length of time. But on this occasion he succeeded in annexing all 
the territories to the west of Sindhu including the Sliahi capital 
Udabhanda. On reaching Ghazni he held an exhibition of the jewels, 
pearls, rubies, emeralds, diamonds and other articles, seemed fiom 
Nagarkot, in the court-yard of the royal palace. Even ambassadors 
from Turkistan and other foreign countries came to see this fabulous 
wealth which he had acquired. 

In A.D. 1009 Mahmud led an army against Narayan, situated in 
the heart of Hind. The place is identified by Cunningham with 
Narayanpur, in the old Alwar State, Rajputana. The king of Narayan 
fought bravely in defence of his country, but was defeated. The 
Sultan broke the idols and returned to Ghazni with his booty, the 
captured elephants and horses. In the following year Mahmud 
invaded the small country of Ghur, situated between Ghazni and 
Herat, took its ruler Muhammad bin Suri prisoner, and placed on its 
throne the latter’s brother Abu-‘Ali. 

In the latter part of A.D. 1010 Mahmud had to lead an expedition 
against Multan to bring it finally into a state of subjugation. Daud, 
the ruler of the country, had turned hostile again, and the Isma'ili 
sect was increasing in popularity. The Sultan killed a large number 
of the heretics, took Daud prisoner, and re-established his authority 
over that country. 

(These successive victories of Mahmud made Anandapala realise 
the futility of carrying on further wars against him. He entered 
into a treaty with the Sultan agreeing to send him annually 50 big 
elephants, laden with valuables, and accompanied by 2,000 men for 
service at the court of GhaZnI. The Sultan on his part promised not 
to lead any more invasion against the Shahi kingdom. Both parties 
strictly observed the conditions of the treaty till Anandapala’s death. 
The relations between the two kingdoms became so cordial during 
this period that the caravans moving between Khurasan and Hind 
enjoyed full security.) 

(Mahmud received information that Thaneswar possessed ele¬ 
phants of Ceylon breed, which were very useful, for military purposes. 
There was also an idol in a temple there, which was held in high 
veneration by the people of Hindustan. In A.D. 1011 Mahmud start¬ 
ed with his army from Ghazni with a view to plundering that city. 
Anandapala, in accordance with the treaty he had concluded, allowed 
Mahmud a safe passage through his kingdom, though the latter 
rejected his fervent appeal to spare the sacred city of Thaneswar 


10 


ghaznavid invasion 




from plunder in return for adequate compensation. The Sultan, in 
course of his march, reached the bank of a river, where he was 
opposed by a Raja named Rama, the chief of Dera, who was also 
anxious to save the sacred city from pillage. The river, which is 
identified by some with the Sutlej, flowed swiftly through a mountain 
pass. Its banks were precipitous and its bottom was full of large 
stones. Rama, together with his elephants, cavalry, and infantry, 
took up his position in the ravines. At the Sultan’s command two 
contingents of the Muslim army forded the river at two points and 
attacked the enemy on both sides. While the battle was in progress 
a third contingent marched up the stream, crossed the river, and 
attacked the vital position of the enemy. The fight continued fierce¬ 
ly till evening, when the Hindus fled from the battlefield leaving their 
elephants behind. After gaining complete victory over his enemies, 
the Sultan resumed his march. On receipt of the news of Mahmud’s 
advance, the Raja of Delhi, in whose kingdom Thaneswar was situat¬ 
ed, sent messengers to other chiefs of Hindustan requesting them to 
join him in defence of the sacred city. It was emphasised that if the 
invader was not checked at Thaneswar, the whole of Hindustan would 
be overwhelmed by the Muslims. But before the Hindus could rally 
their forces, Mahmud reached Thaneswar, plundered the city, and 
broke a large number of idols, sparing the principal one, which was 
carried to Ghazni and placed in a public square for defilement. 7 
He intended next to invade Delhi, but had to abandon this project as 
he could not rely fully on the co-operation of Anandapala. So he 
marched back to Ghazni, and on his way received due hospitality 
from the Shahi chief.) 

(After the death of Anandapala (c. A.D. 1012) Mahmud renewed 
his hostility against the Shahis, whose capital at this time was Nan- 
dana, in the Salt Range. In the winter of A.D. 1013 Mahmud advanced 
with his army towards Nandana to crush the power of Trilochanapala, 
son and successor of Anandapala. As soon as he reached the border 
of Hind his passage was blocked by a heavy fall of snow. The roads, 
passes, and valleys were all lost under the snow drifts. He had to 
wait there until spring, securing additional supplies and army from 
the neighbouring provinces. After two months’ troublesome 
journey over the hills and dales, and across torrential and deep 
rivers, the Sultan reached the vicinity of Nandana. He now divided 
his cavalry into three groups placing Amir Nasr, Arsalan Jazib, and 
Abu ‘Abdulla Muhammad in charge of each of them. The central 
part of the army was placed under the leadership of Altuntash. 
Trilochanapala, who was not prepared for this sudden invasion, put 
the whole of his army under the command of his son Bhimapala, 
and sent invitations to his vassals to join him with their forces. 


11 


MiN/sr** 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Bhlmapala posted himself together with his forces behind large blocks 
of stone in a narrow mountain pass, barring the entrance with ele¬ 
phants and awaiting the arrival of the vassals. On learning the 
design of the enemies, Mahmud all on a sudden attacked them in that 
position with his Dailamite warriors and Afghan spearmen. The 
battle continued without a break for several days. But the Sultan 
could not dislodge the Shahis from their strategic position. At this 
time Tonga, the general of the Lohara king Samgramaraja of Kash¬ 
mir, who was sent with an army to help Trilochanapala, suffered a 
defeat at the hands of the Sultan for his injudicious movement. As 
soon as reinforcements came, Bhlmapala left the pass and came out 
into the plain to give battle against the Muslims. The elephant 
forces under him made a violent attack on the enemies, but were 
repulsed by the showers of arrows. Abu ‘Abdullah Muhammad, 
while fighting bravely in the midst of the enemies, received, many 
wounds in his head and body, but was rescued by the Sultan’s per¬ 
sonal guard. An all-round battle continued for some time, and 
though the Shahis fought bravely and contested every inch of ground, 
they were ultimately routed. A large number of them lost their 
lives on the slopes of the hills and in the valleys and ravines, and 
a host of elephants, which protected their defence lines, fell into the 
hands of the Muslims. Rhimapala, along with his father, withdrew 
to the valley of Kashmir, leaving a strong garrison behind for the 
defence of the capital. The Sultan readily marched to the capital 
and besieged its fort. Having failed to capture it by ordinary means, 
he ran mines under the walls and forced the defenders to Sur¬ 
render. He then entered into the fort without opposition, seized 
the treasure and other valuable articles, and appointed Sarugh as 
its Superintendent. The western and central portions of the Shahi 
kingdom were annexed to the Empire of Ghazni. ) 

From Nandana Mahmud marched towards the Kashmir valley 
where Trilochanapala had rallied his surviving forces. Trilochana¬ 
pala resisted him but, when he was defeated, he fled to the Eastern 
Punjab, probably Sirhind. Mahmud plundered the Kashmir valley, 
took many prisoners, converted some to Islam, and returned to 
Ghazni with a large amount of booty. On this occasion he carried 
with him such a large number of Indians as prisoners that they were 
sold as slaves at a very cheap price in Ghazni. Men, who occupied 
high positions in India, were seen to serve the shopkeepers there as 
slaves. 

In A.D. 1015 Mahmud came back to the Kashmir valley in order 
to put down some refractory chiefs, and also to capture some forts 
which he could not conquer on the previous occasion. The hill-fort 
of Lohkot, modern Loharin, on the southern slopes of the central 


12 


GHAZNAVID INVASION 


Pir Pantsal, was his first objective. The fort was famous for its 
invincibility. The Sultan made a fruitless effort to capture it before 
the end of the summer season. The situation became worse for the 
Muslim army when, as winter approached, there was a heavy fall 
of snow. In the mean time the Kashmirians made their position 
stronger by fresh reinforcement of troops. In this circumstance the 
Sultan had no other alternative but to raise the siege and retreat 
towards Ghazni. On his return journey he suffered incalculable 
miseries. Once, his guides misled him and his army into a big marsh, 
and a large number of men were lost. After struggling hard for 
several days he succeeded in extricating the surviving portion of 
his troops. 

Mahmud could not lead any expedition against India in A.D. 1016 
and 1017 as he was engaged in putting down revolt in Khvarazm. 
As soon as he was free from that trouble he formulated a plan to 
penetrate further into the heart of Hindustan, and to attack the 
imperial city of Kanauj. For this ambitious enterprise he raised a 
big army of 100,000 horse, and 20,000 foot, recruited from Turki- 
stan, Mawarau-n nahr, Khurasan, and other neighbouring provinces. 
Towards the end of A.D. 1018 he started from Ghazni and, march¬ 
ing through the Punjab, crossed the Sindhu, Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, 
Beas, and Sutlej. The chiefs of the countries through which he 
passed submitted to him. JankI, 8 son of Shahi, grandson of 
who controlled the southern passes leading into Kashmir, offered 
his services to the Sultan as a guide. The Shahi Trilochanapala, who 
was ruling in the Eastern Punjab, refused to pay allegiance to the 
Sultan, and fled to the Paramara kingdom of Malava. After a long 
and tedious journey through forests and jungles, the Sultan reached 
the Yamuna and crossed it on 2nd December 1018. Having 
overcome some hill-forts on the way he reached Baran, modern 
Bulandshahr, in U.P. The ruler of the place, Hardat, who was filled 
with alarm at his approach, did not put up any resistance against 
him. ’Utbl states that Hardat surrendered to Mahmud with 10,000 
men and was even willing to embrace Islam to save them from 
disaster. GardizI and Nizam-ud-din Ahmad, however, relate that 
Hardat fled away, leaving the fort in charge of his followers. The 
garrison found their position untenable and purchased peace by pay¬ 
ing the Sultan 1,000,000 dirhams and 30 elephants. From Baran 
Mahmud advanced to attack Mahaban, on the Yamuna, in ^ the 
Mathura District. It was at that time ruled by a chief named K.ula- 
chand, who owned a large number of forts and maintained a strong 
army. Many neighbouring rulers had to submit to his military 
power. It is known from some epigraphic records that in the eleventh 
and twelfth centuries Mahaban and its environs were ruled by the 

18 


MiNisr^ 



Yadu dynasty, and Kulachand was possibly a member of this family. 
As soon as Mahmud invested Mahaban, Kulachand, along with his 
army and elephants, retreated to a fort in a dense forest, and kept 
every thing ready for battle. The Sultan, after a careful search, 
discovered the fort where Kulachand had concentrated his forces. 
A hand to hand fight with swords and spears ensued between the 
two armies. The Hindus, having failed to defend their position, 
jumped into the Yamuna and tried to cross it over in search of 
safety. Kulachand, finding no other way to escape, killed his wife 
first and then killed himself. Nearly 5,000 Hindus lost their lives, 
and the Sultan secured a large booty together with 185 war 
elephants. 9 

, The Sultan next directed his attacks against the sacred city of 

Mathura. The city was surrounded by a massive stone wall, in 
which were two lofty gates opening on to the river. There were 
magnificent temples all over the city and the largest of them stood 
in the centre of it. The Sultan was very much struck by its gran¬ 
deur. In his estimate it cost not less than 100,000,000 red dinars, 
and even the most skilful of masons must have taken 200 years to 
complete it. Among the large number of idols in the temples, five 
were made of pure gold, the eyes of one of them were laid with two 
rubies worth 100,000 dinars, and another had a sapphire of a very 
heavy weight. All these five idols yielded gold weighing 98,300 
miskals. The idols made of silver numbered 200. The city is said 
to have been within the kingdom of the Raja of-Delhi, but the Sultan 
captured it without meeting any opposition. He seized all the gold 
and Silver idols and ordered his soldiers to burn all the temples to 
the ground. The idols in them were deliberately broken into pieces. 
The city was pillaged for 20 days, and a large number of buildings 
were reduced to ashes. 

I 

From Mathura the Sultan marched on Kanauj. On his way he 
conquered many forts and obtained much booty. Sometimes he 
encountered strong resistance from the Hindus, but he triumphed 
over them. Kanauj, which served as the capital of so many suc¬ 
cessive imperial ruling dynasties, was a well fortified city, defended 
by seven lofty forts, and contained 10,000 temples. At Mahmud’s 
approach king Rajyapala of the Pratihara dynasty fled to the other 
side of the Gahga, and took refuge in a place known as Bari. Kanauj 
was deserted by a large number of its citizens, who were anxious 
to save themselves from the fury of the Muslims, and in the absence 
of any strong resistance, all the seven forts fell easily into the hands 
of the Sultan. At his command the city was plundered, the inha¬ 
bitants put to the sword, and the idols destroyed. 

14 


GHAZNAVID INVASION 


After plundering Kanauj Mahmud invaded Munj, which is 
identified by some with Manjhawan, 10 miles south of Kanpur 
(Cawnpore), and by others with the place of this name, 14 miles 
north-east of Etawah. It was known as the fort of the Brahmans. 
The garrison resisted the invader for 25 days, but it was of no 
effect. At last a large number of inhabitants threw themselves into 
fire together with their wives and children. Some sallied forth 
from the fort and dashed towards the enemy, only to be killed by 
the latter. Others threw themselves down from the battlements to 
embrace death. It was eventually found that not a single soul sur¬ 
vived in the fort. Mahmud took possession of all the valuables there 
and then advanced towards Asi, which is identified with Asni, 10 
miles north-east, from Fatehpur. The fort of Asi was surrounded by 
a wide and deep moat, and around it lay dense jungle full of venom¬ 
ous reptiles. Its ruler, Chandrapal Bhur, was one of the most power¬ 
ful chiefs of Hindustan, and earned a great reputation as a military 
leader by inflicting defeats on many kings. He even succeeded in 
repulsing an attack of the Pratlharas of Kanauj after a prolonged 
fight. But his courage failed when Mahmud invaded his fort, and 
he fled, leaving it to the mercy of the latter. At the Sultan’s order 
the fort was plundered and demolished, and the inhabitants were 
put to death. The Sultan next marched with his army to Sharva, 
which is identified by Cunningham with Sirsawa to the east of the 
Yamuna, near Saharanpur. The fort there, made of massive stone, 
was of immense height. Its chief, Chand Rai, held a high position 
among the rulers of Hindustan. Hearing the news of Mahmud’s 
advance, Chand Rai stealthily went out of his fort with his army 
and treasure, withdrew to a lofty hill, and hid in a thick forest. The 
Sultan plundered the fort of Sharva, and then pushed his way 
through the jungle, in pursuit of Chand Rai. After covering a dis¬ 
tance of 15 parasangs he succeeded in detecting the place where the 
enemy was residing. In the action that followed a large number 
of Hindu soldiers lost their lives. Chand Rai seems to have fled 
away leaving his treasure behind. The Sultan secured for himself 
a huge amount of gold, silver, and pearls worth 3,000,000 dirhams, 
and many elephants, A large number of Hindus, rich and poor, 
were carried off as slaves, and eventually sold to the merchants of 
Mawarau-n nahr, ‘Iraq, and Khurasan. After his victory over Chand 
Rai, which took place in January, 1019, Mahmud returned to Ghazni 
with a huge booty and a large number of war prisoners. The ex¬ 
pedition against Kanauj made the Sultan master of wealth amount¬ 
ing to 20,000,000 dirhams, 53,000 prisoners of war, and 350 elephants. 
Firishta states that after this glorious expedition the Sultan founded 
at Ghazni the famous Jami Mosque, which was universally known 



MINIS?*,, 



as ‘Celestial Bride.’ Adjacent to this mosque the Sultan established 
a University well equipped with books in various languages, and a 
Museum full of natural curiosities. 


Before we resume the story of Mahmud’s invasion of India we 
may refer briefly to his great adversary, the Shahi king Trilochana¬ 
pala, whose dominions were now confined to the Eastern Punjab, As 
Kalhapa says, he “displayed great resolution even after he had fallen 
from his position, and relying on his force of elephants, endeavoured 
to recover victory.” In his new retreat at Sirhind, Trilochanapala 
secured a respite from Muslim invasion for about five years. But 
during this period he had to fight a series of battles against Chand 
Rai, ruler of Sharva, mentioned above. These engagements resulted 
in a heavy loss of men and warriors on both sides. A peace was 
ultimately concluded between the two kings and, in order to make 
it a lasting one, Trilochanapala sought the hand of his rival’s 
daughter for his son Bhlmapala. As soon as the Shahi prince reached 
Sharva for marriage, Chand Rai put him into prison and demanded 
retribution for the losses he had to suffer in the previous engage¬ 
ments. Trilochanapala could not lead any big expedition against 
Chand Rai lest any serious harm was done to his son. Stray battles, 
however, took place from time to time between the two kings, until 
Mahmud, on his way to Kanauj, reached that part of the country in 
A.D. 1018. Trilochanapala left his kingdom and took shelter with 
the Paramara Bhoja of Malava. 

As mentioned above, Mahmud, after plundering Kanauj, return¬ 
ed to Ghazni in A.D. 1019. But in A.D. 1020-21 he again came to 
Hindustan to chastise the Chandella Vidyadhara, who had attacked 
the Pratlhara king Rajyapala and killed him for his cowardly submis¬ 
sion to Mahmud. On .that occasion Trilochanapala made an alliance 
with the Chandellas. So, when in A.D. 1020-21, the Sultan advanced 
with his army to punish Vidyadhara, and after some time reached 
the banks of a big river, he was opposed by the Shahi Trilochanapala. 
’Utbi mentions the name of this river as Rahib, and Firishta and 
Nizam-ud-din Ahmad call it Yamuna. Trilochanapala camped on 
the eastern bank of the river with his infantry and elephants, and 
showed grim determination to fight. The Sultan hesitated to make 
an attempt at crossing the river as it was very deep and its bottom 
full of mud. He ordered eight men of his camp to swim over to the 
other bank on inflated skins. As these men were approaching, Tri¬ 
lochanapala sent a contingent with five elephants to prevent them 
from landing. But these few Muslim soldiers succeeded in forcing 
their way through, throwing their enemies into wild confusion as 
they discharged their arrows. When the Sultan’s plan had achieved 
this result, he ordered his troops to follow the same process. The 

16 


MINfST^ 



MOV Wtt 


GHAZNAVTD INVASION 


Muslims readily jumped into the river and reached the other bank 
without any loss of life. Trilochanapala attacked them with all his 
forces, but being defeated, fled from the battlefield. Many Hindus 
lost their lives in the encounter, and 270 elephants fell into the 
hands of the Sultan. Trilochanapala now made an attempt to join 
Vidyadhara, but, on his way, was killed by some Hindus. His son 
Bhlmapala, who had obviously effected his escape from Sharva at 
the time when Mahmud plundered the fort in A.D, 1019, survived 
him for five years without holding any royal position. The entire 
Shahi kingdom now formed a part of Mahmud’s dominions. 

The Shahis bravely resisted the Muslims for more than twenty- 
five years. The collapse of their power made a deep impression upon 
the minds of the people of that age. Al-Biruni remarks with a note 
of pathos: “The Hindu Sahiya dynasty is now extinct, and of the 
whole house there is no longer the slightest remnant in existence. 
We must say that, in all their grandeur, they never slackened in the 
ardent desire of doing that which is good and right, that they were 
men of noble sentiment and noble bearing.” The same sentiment 
is also echoed by Kalhana in the twelfth century in his book Rajata- 
rangini. 

After defeating Trilochanapala Mahmud advanced towards 
Bari, where the Pratiharas had shifted their capital after the sack 
of Kanauj. But before the Sultan reached that place the Pratxhara 
Trilochanapala, son and successor of Rajyapala, fled away in fear. 
The Muslims entered into the city without any opposition, and at 
the Sultan’s command razed it to the ground. 



After the capture of Bari Mahipud directed his attack against 
Vidyadhara who was ready to meet him on the border of his king¬ 
dom with 45,000 infantry, 36,000 cavalry, and 640 elephants. 10 The 
Sultan sent an envoy to Vidyadhara asking him either to embrace 
Islam or to agree to pay an annual tribute, but the Chandella king 
rejected both the proposals with scorn. The Sultan, before issuing 
order for the attack, went to an elevated place to make an estimate 
of the strength of the enemy. His courage failed when he saw the 
vast gathering of Vidyadhara’s army, and he repented of undertak¬ 
ing this perilous expedition. In his despair, he fell flat on the ground, 
praying to the Almighty for assistance. In the evening there was a 
skirmish between Mahmud’s general Abu ‘Abdullah Muhammad 
at-Ta’I and a detachment of the Hindu army, in which the latter 
suffered a reverse. Greatly disheartened by the defeat, Vidyadhara, 
being panic-stricken, fled away with his army during the night under 
cover of darkness, leaving his bags and baggages behind. On the 
following morning the Sultan was surprised to hear that his enemies 


S.E.—2 


17 


■ Go ^*X 

r ,, n$f I I r 

k, 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

had fled. At first he suspected foul play, but when no trace of the 
enemy could be discovered in the neighbourhood, he entered the 
deserted camps and seized everything of value including elephants 
numbering 580. 

Shortly after his return to Ghazni the Sultan led expeditions 
against Qxrat and Nur, places situated between the borders of India 
and Turkistan. Elliot identifies these places with Swat, Bajaur, and 
part of Kafiristan. The inhabitants of these places, along with their 
rulers, were worshippers of idols. The chief of Qirat surrendered to 
Mahmud without a struggle, and adopted Islam. Mahmud’s general 
Amir ‘All overcame the ruler of Nur, sacked his territory, demolish¬ 
ed a Hindu temple of great antiquity, and forced the people to 
embrace Islam. Shortly afterwards, in A.D. 1021, the Sultan led an 
army against Lohkot, in Kashmir, which he had failed to capture 
on a previous occasion. However, he did not fare better this time. 
After making a fruitless attempt for a month to take possession of 
it, he raised the siege. 

In A.D. 1021-22 Mahmud again launched an expedition against 
the Chandella Vidyadhara. On his way he attacked the fort of 
Gwalior, which was then in possession of the Kachchhapaghatas. The 
chief of the Kachchhapaghata dynasty, who seems to have been 
Kirttiraja, after successfully defending his position for four days, 
lost courage and sued for peace. The Sultan received some valuable 
presents and 35 elephants from his adversary, and then resumed his 
march. He soon reached his destination and laid siege to the fort 
of Kalanjara. The siege had continued for a long time when Vidya¬ 
dhara sent an emissary to the Sultan with the proposal for peace. 
He offered 300 elephants and other valuable presents for raising the 
siege. Hearing that the Sultan agreed to his terms Vidyadhara, to 
test the bravery of the Muslim soldiers, let loose the elephants, 
without riders, outside the gate of the fort. At the Sultan’s com¬ 
mand his Turkish soldiers brought them all under control and mount¬ 
ed them. The Hindus in the fort were amazed at this-bold feat of 
their opponents, and no longer had any desire to fight. Vidyadhara 
sent over to the Muslim camp a verse in the Indian language in 
praise of the Sultan, who was very much pleased with the compli¬ 
ment paid him. He reciprocated this friendly gesture by bestowing 
on the Chandella king the government of 15 fortresses, and returned 
to Ghazni. It would appear from the above account in the Muslim 
chronicles that Mahmud came all the way from Ghazni to Kalanjara 
only to be satisfied with a few hundred elephants and some rich 
presents. It would be more rational to hold that his invasion of 
Kalanjara was not a great success, and possibly a failure. 



18 



GHAZNAVrD INVASION 


India enjoyed respite from, the invasion of Mahmud in A.D. 1023 
because the Sultan in that year was busy fighting in Transoxiana. In 
the following year (A.D. 1024) be resumed his expedition against 
Hindustan. (The object of his attack this time was the famous temple 
of Somanatha on the sea-shore, in Kathiawar, containing a Siva- 
linga. The temple stood on huge blocks of stone, and its roof was 
supported by 56 wooden pillars “curiously carved and set 'with pre¬ 
cious stones”. The pyramidal roof was made of 13 stories, and was 
surmounted by fourteen golden domes. The girth of the linga was 
4 feet 6 inches, and its height above the base was 7 feet 6 inches. 11 
A portion of the linga, 6 feet in height, was hidden beneath the 
base. Adjacent to it under its pedestal there was the treasury con¬ 
taining many gold and silver miniature idols. The canopy over it 
was set with jewels and was decorated with rich embroidery. The 
dark chamber in which the linga was installed was illumined by 
jewelled chandeliers. In front of the chamber there was a chain 
of gold, 200 mans in weight, attached to a bell, which was rung by 
shaking the chain from time to time for specific purpose. One thou¬ 
sand Brahmanas were appointed to perform the worship of the 
linga and for conducting the devotees into the temple. There were 
three hundred barbers for shaving the heads and beards of the pil¬ 
grims. Three hundred and fifty persons, both male and female, were 
employed to sing and dance before the linga every day. All these 
people received daily allowances from the temple funds. The in¬ 
come of the temple was derived from the 10,000 villages endowed to 
it, and from the offerings of the devotees. The temple possessed vast 
wealth in gold, silver, pearls, and rich jewels, which had been accu¬ 
mulated in course of centuries. 

The Hindus entertained a belief that Mahmud could demolish 
so many idols in Northern India simply because these deities had 
forfeited the sympathy and support of Somanatha. It is stated that 
when Mahmud heard of this belief of the Hindus he decided to des¬ 
troy Somanatha with a view to striking at the root of their faith 
in the divinity of their chief idol. Mahmud marched from Ghazni 
to Multan at the head of 30,000 cavalry and a multitude of volun¬ 
teers. Thence he decided to advance along the desert route to reach 
his destination. Soldiers were provided with food, water, and forage 
for many days. Two hundred camels were employed to carry addi¬ 
tional water and provisions to meet any contingency. In course of 
his wearisome journey the Sultan first reached Ludrava, modern 
Lodorva, 10 miles north-west of Jaisalmer, which was defended by 
a strong citadel and a body of brave soldiers. The Sultan captured 
it, and then, after a prolonged march through Mallani, reached the 
Chikudar (?) hill, which is identified with Chiklodarmata hill, 17 


MINISr^ 



miles north of Palanpur, in Gujarat. Next he advanced towards 
Nahrwala, identical with Anahillapataka, the capital of Gujarat. At 
the sudden and unexpected appearance of the Sultan, the king of 
the country, Bhima I, who belonged to the Chaulukya dynasty, fled, 
probably to Kanthakot, 16 miles north-east of Anjar, in Kutch 
(Cutch). The Sultan occupied the city and collected fresh provi¬ 
sions there. From this place he marched to Mundher and thence to 
Dewalwara, modern Delvada, 40 miles east of Somanatha. In the 
course of his advance through the desert between Mundher and 
Dewalwara, he had to fight his way through 20,000 enemy troops. 
He also met with stiff resistance at Dewalwara, which he succeeded 
in breaking down after a short encounter. The people of the place 
were put to the sword and their temples demolished. 

Mahmud reached Somanatha in the middle of January, 1025, 
and found there a strongly defended fortress on the sea-shore. The 
Hindus, who assembled on the rampart of the fort, were passing 
their time in merry-making, fondly believing that Somanatha had 
drawn the Muslims there only to annihilate them for the sins they 
had committed in demolishing idols elsewhere. Their morale was 
high even though their leader had fled away in cowardice with his 
family to a neighbouring island. The following day the Sultan 
began the assault, and forced the Hindus to leave their position on 
the wall by discharging showers of arrows at them. The Muslims 
then speedily placed a ladder and climbed up to the battlements. 
This action was followed by a fierce fight in which a large number 
of people lost their lives. But before the Muslims could consolidate 
their position they were attacked violently by a fresh batch of 
Hindus, who came out of the temple of Somanatha after a prayer 
for strength and courage. The Muslims were unable to withstand 
this onslaught, and were forced to retreat from the city. Next day 
the Sultan renewed the operation with greater intensity, against 
which the brave resistance offered by the Hindus was of no avail. 
Having failed to check the enemy’s advance, they all crowded in 
front of the gate of the temple of Somanatha. The Muslims pursued 
them there, and then followed a terrible carnage. Bands of Hindus 
in succession entered the temple to pray with all their hearts for 
victory, and then coming out of it rushed against their enemies, only 
to be killed. In this way more than 50,000 Hindus sacrificed their 
lives to defend the honour of their deity. The few survivors, who 
attempted to escape by sea, were pursued by the Muslims and put 
to the sword. The Sultan made a triumphal entry into the temple, 
broke down the Siva -linga into pieces, and took possession of the 
vast wealth it contained, said to have been worth 20,000,000 dirhams. 
The temple was then razed to the ground. The fragments of /the 


20 


Wmr/iy. 


GHAZNAVID INVASION 



Siva -linga were carried to Ghazni, where they were made to serve 
as steps at the gate of the Jami Mosque—an act of profanity imitated 
by later Muslim rulers. 

Mahmud halted at Somanatha for a fortnight. He was very 
much concerned about a safe return journey to Ghazni with the vast 
wealth he had acquired. The iconoclastic zeal which he showed at 
Somanatha deeply wounded the religious susceptibility of the neigh¬ 
bouring chiefs, who,, under the leadership of Paramadeva, were now 
ready to obstruct him en route. So, to avoid any major clash, he decid¬ 
ed to follow the way through Kutch and Sindh. In the course of his 
homeward march he arrived at an inlet of the sea between Kathiawar 
and Kutch. He forded it where it was shallow, at the risk of being 
submerged, and came in front of the fort of Kandahat, identified 
with Kanjhakoj, in Kutch, where the Chaulukya Bhima I had taken 
shelter. 13 Bhima fled when he heard the news of the Sultan’s advance. 
The Sultan took over the fort and continued his march through 
Kutch. 13 He crossed over to Sindh, and engaged a guide to conduct 
him safely over the desert. The guide, who was a devotee of Soma¬ 
natha, and was looking for an opportunity to avenge himself of the 
wrong done to his god, led the Muslim army to a dreary part of the 
desert where there was no water available for miles around. The 
treachery was immediately detected, and the guide was put to death. 
The Sultan, in despair, resumed his march praying to the Almighty 
for deliverance, and luckily reached a place where he got the neces¬ 
sary supply of water. He proceeded from that place to Mansurah, 
about 43 miles north-east of Haidarabad, defeated its ruler Khafif, 
an apostate Muslim, and then, following the upper course of the 
Sindhu, advanced towards Multan. On his way thither he was 
greatly troubled by the Jats. His long and perilous journey ended 
in A.D. 1026 when he reached Ghazni. Countries far and near 
showered praise on him for his success at Somanatha. The Caliph 
sent him a congratulatory letter, and conferred titles on him and on 
his two sons and brothers. He further communicated to him that 
whoever among his sons would be nominated by him as his successor 
to the throne of Ghazni would receive his recognition. 

In A.D. 1027 Mahmud again came to India to punish the Jats, 
who gave him so much trouble on his return journey from Soma¬ 
natha. As soon as he reached Multan he realised that a strong navy 
was necessary to overcome these enemies. So he ordered 1,400 boats, 
each to be provided with three projected iron spikes, one in the 
prow and one at either -side. These iron bars were fixed up in order 
to smash into pieces the enemy’s boats making an attempt to strike 
against them. Twenty soldiers with bows and arrows were placed 
in each boat. The Sultan advanced with this flotilla in the Sindhu 


21 


MIN/Sr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


to attack his enemies. The Jats also made great preparations to 
meet the invader. They sent their women and children to the islands 
for safety, and themselves boldly came forward with 4,000 boats, each 
filled with valiant fighters. The battle between the two armies 
began with terrible intensity. Almost all the boats of the Jats were 
broken into pieces as they dashed against those of the Sultan. A 
large number of Jats were drowned in the river, and those who sur¬ 
vived were killed by the Muslim archers. The Sultan next plundered 
the islands where the families of the Jats were kept with their 
valuables, and then returned to Ghazni. This was the last expedi¬ 
tion of Mahmud launched against India, and he died three years 
later, in A.D. 1030. 

i^The Muslim chronicler^ naturally regard Mahmud as one of their 
greatest kings and a great champion of Islamic faith. His well- 
deserved title to fame rests on the great military skill he displayed 
on innumerable occasions. Even making allowances for the flattery 
of the court historians, his repeated invasions of India, carried out 
with consummate ability and success, and his brilliant victories mark 
him out as the greatest general of his age, comparable with the 
military leaders of the first rank that have appeared in the world 
from time to time. His patronage of art and literature in his own 
kingdom also distinguishes him as a great king. But his iconoclastic 
zeal and avarice, beyond measure, which figure so conspicuously in 
his Indian expeditions, inevitably loom large in Indian eyes, and all 
his great qualities pale into insignificance. By his ruthless destruc¬ 
tion of temples and images he violated the most sacred and cherish¬ 
ed sentiments of the Indian people, and his championship of Islam 
therefore merely served to degrade it in their eyes such as nothing 
else could. He drained India of enormous wealth and destroyed 
much of India’s manpower by his repeated expeditions. This ex¬ 
haustion of economic resources and manpower told upon the future 
political destiny of India. In particular the destruction of the Shahi 
kingdom, which barred the gates of India against foreign invaders, 
dealt a severe blow to its future independence. The inclusion of the 
Punjab and Afghanistan in the kingdom of Ghazni made the Islamic 
conquest of India a comparatively easy process. It was no longer a 
question of whether, but when, that mighty flood would overwhelm 
the country as a whole?) 


22 


GHAZNAVID INVASION 



1. Vol. IV, p. 125. 


2 , 


Briggs, I. 23. 

The Life and Times of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazna by M. Nazim, p. 26. 

This is the form of the name according to CHI, III. 11, but according to Dr. 
Nazim it should be Pirl or Piritigin (op, cit, p. 27). 

5 - Muslim chronicles differ regarding the history of Ghazni as given above. 
Cf. WED, edited from Aligarh (1952), pp. 264 ff; Hodivala, Studies in Indo- 
Muslim History, p. 190, and the authorises cited therein. 

6. The battle probably took place about A.D. 986-7 (Nazim, op. cit., p. 29). 

7. ’Utbi gives an incomplete description of Mahmud’s conquest of Thaneswar after 
narrating his invasion of Nandana, which took place in 404 A.H. = A.D. 1013. 
Ibnu’l-Athlr puts the date of Mahmud’s conquest of Thaneswar in 405 A H. = 
A,D. 1014. But Gardlzi, a contemporary authority, fixes the date of this inva¬ 
sion in 402 A.H. = A.D. 1011. According to this authority the invasion of 
Thaneswar took place three years prior to that of Nandana. This finds corro- 
boration in the chronicles of Firishta and Nizam-ud-din Alimad. Elliot, W. Haig, 
ana M- Nazim accept the chronology of Mahmud’s invasion as given by ’Utbi. 
W. Haig, however, points out that “al-’Utbi’s topography is faulty, and he 
appears ito be confounding this (i.e. Thaneswar) expedition with another” (CHI, 
ill, 18 in,). That Utbi had a confusion in his mind on this particular matter 

suggested by the fact that he abruptly closes his narrative after describ¬ 
ing Mahmud’s victory over Rama, a chief of the Punjab, on his way to Thane¬ 
swar. So the chronology of Mahmud’s invasion as given by Gardlzi, Firishta 
and Nizam-ud-dm Ahmad, mentioned above, has been adopted. 

8. Nazim, op. cit, p. 106. Elliot calls him Sabli (HIED, II, p. 42). 

9. The names Hardat and Kulaehand evidently stand for Haradatta and Kula- 
chandra. 

10. According to Firishta. Nizam-ud-dln gives the number of infantry as 145,000 
and that of elephants as 390 (Bib. Ind., p. 12). But according to some manu¬ 
scripts of this work the numbers are respectively 105,000 and 640. 

11. The description of the temple is based on Muslim chronicles which differ 
in details. On the ruins of the particular temple destroyed by Mahmud several 
others were erected by later kings, as often as they were demolished by the 
fury of the Muslims. Steps are now being taken to erect a magnificent temple 
on the same spot. Cf. Somanatha, the Shrine Eternal, by K. M. Munshi. The 
description of the temple broken by Mahmud, as given here, is based on the 
views of M. Nazim (op. cit, pp. 209 If.). 

12. Nazim, op. cit., p. 119. The site is described as an island in CHI, 111. 25. 

13. The Muslim chroniclers give conflicting accounts, both of Mahmud’s march to 

Somanatha and of the part played by Bhima. Thus Firishta states that Mahmud 
came to Somanatha by way of Ajmer (Sambhar), and returned to Ghazni via 
Anahillapataka, where he went from Kanthako*. W, Haig has accepted this 
view (CHI, IH. 23, 25). r 

£ firishta also says that Bhima joined in the fight against Mahmud in front 
. at Somanatha. But this is not corroborated by any other autho¬ 

rity. There are, however, reasonable grounds to believe that Bhima, after 
leaving the capital city, organised his forces to resist Mahmud, and it was 
mainly to avoid him that Mahmud chose for his return journey a shorter and 
less frequented, but more difficult, desert route. The army which opposed 
Mahmud at Kanfhakot was perhaps sent by Bhima for this purpose, but it is 
doubtful whether Bhima was there in person ( DHNI , II. 953 ff). 


23 


CHAPTER II 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING THE ELEVENTH 
AND TWELFTH CENTURIES 

I. THE PALAS 
1. Mahipala 

When Mahipala I ascended the throne after the death of his 
father Vigrahapala II a bout A.D. 988, the once mighty empire of the 
Palas had been shattered to the dust, and the territory ruled over by 
them was confingd_to_M a£adh a or South Biha r. By a strange irony 
of fate they had lost their ancestral kingdom in Bengal and were 
forced to seek refuge outside its border. This is frankly admitted in 
the JBangarh Grant which extols Mahipala for having recovered hjs_ 

paternlil~t^fhgd o nrwlnctrv yas^m rpg dd^othergr^Wlio~tTiesTusurpers 
were the inscription does not tell us, but other evidences indicate, as 
noted above, 1 that the rulers belonging to Kamboja family were in 
possession of North and West Bengal, and the Chandras were ruling 
in South and East Bengal. 

The details of the struggle by which Mahipala recovered Bengal 
or at least a large part of it are not known to us. An inscription 
r f found on an image in a village in the Tippera District is dated in the 
year 3 of the reign of king Mahipala. There are good grounds to 
identify this king with Mahipala I, though there is no conclusive 
evidence in support of it. But if we accept this identification we 
must hold that Mahipala re-established his authority in East Bengal 
during the first two or three years of his reign. It also indirectly 
proves his hold over North Bengal before that time, for without it 
he could not have proceeded to East Bengal from his base in South 
Bihar. His possession of North Bengal is, however, definitely proved 
by his Bangarh Grant dated in his 9th regnal year. But although 
we are thus on sure grounds in respect of the recovery of Northern 
and Eastern Bengal by Mahipala, we cannot estimate the amount of 
success gained by his endeavour, if any, to reassert his authority 
over the other parts of Bengal. On the other hand, it would appear 
from the account of the Chola invasion, referred to below, that 
Mahipala had no hold over either South or West Bengal except per¬ 
haps a portion of the latter. 

But Mahipala was more successful in his attempt to re-establish 
Pala suzerainty outside Bengal. His inscriptions have been found 



24 











NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES ^ 

in North Bihar while those of his three predecessors have been found 
only in South Bihar. It may be concluded, therefore, that he also 
recovered North Bihar. We learn from an inscription dated 
A.D. 1026, found at Sarnath near Banaras, that Mahipala built and 
repaired many sacred structures in that holy site of the Buddhists. 
It has been inferred from this record that Mahlpala’s kingdom 
extended up to Banaras. It may be argued that Banaras or Sarnath, 
being sacred places of almost international reputation, the construc¬ 
tion of sanctuaries therein does not necessarily imply political 
control over them. But as the whole of Bihar was certainly included 
within the kingdom of Mahipala, it is not an unreasonable assumption 
that the neighbouring region in the West up to Banaras was also 
part of it, so long as we do not find any evidence to the contrary. 

It was during the reign of Mahipala that Rajendra Chola invad¬ 
ed Bengal. This Chola invasion has been dealt with more fully in 
Chapter X. It appears that the Chola kin g 

Dharmapala of Da ndabhukti, R ap asu ra of Southern Radha and 
Govindachand r a of Vahgala, a n d then f ought wit h Mahipala and 
conquer ed Northern R a dha . Dandabhukti corresponds roughly to 
the present district of Midnapore, and Radha, the rest of the Burdwan 
Division. Vahgala denotes Southern, and probably also a part of 
Eastern, Bengal where two inscriptions of Govindachandra have been 
found. The Choja records seem to indicate that Dandabhukti, 
Vahgala, and Southern Radha were independent kingdoms at the 
time of the Chola invasion (c. A.D. 1021), but Northern Radha form¬ 
ed a part of Mahlpala’s dominions. 


The object of Rajendra Chola’s invasion was to take sacred 
water of the Ganga in order to purify his own country. According to 
some Chola records the vanquished kings of Bengal were made to 
carry the water of the Ganga on their heads. As Prof. N. Sastri has 
observed, this is probably a mere boast without any foundation. He 
seems to be also correct in his assumption that Rajendra Chola’s 
campaign “could hardly have been more than a hurried raid across a 
vast stretch of country.” In any case there is no reason to suppose 
that it made any deep impress upon the political condition of the 
country. Towards the close of his reign Mahipala had to face the 
invasion of another powerful enemy, the Kalachuri ruler Gangeya- 
deva. The latter claims to have defeated the ruler of Anga who 
cannot be any other than Mahipala I. This claim is indirectly sup¬ 
ported by a statement of the Muslim writer BaihaqI, that when 
Ahmad Niyaltigln invaded Banaras in A.D. 1034 it was in possession 
of Gang, who has been plausibly identified with the Kalachuri king 
Gangeyadeva. As noted above, Mahipala was probably in possession 


25 








MINIS 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

of Banaras in A.D. 1026. It may be reasonably inferred, therefore, 
that the conflict between Mahipala I and Gangeyadeva, resulting in 
the conquest of Banaras region by the latter, took place some time 
between A.D. 1026 and 1034. 

As we have seen above,, the reign of Mahipala I coincides with 
the period of repeated incursions of the Ghaznavid rulers against 
India. Mahlpala’s name, however, does not figure in the confederacy 
of Hindu rulers organised by the Shahi kings to defend their country 
against the Muslim onslaught. Some writers have severely criticised 
Mahipala for this lack of patriotism, or indifference to the cause of 
Hinduism on the part of a Buddhist ruler. But such criticism does 
not take into account the difficulties he had to confront almost 
throughout his reign. His early life was spent in recovering his 
ancestral dominions, and before he had completed this task, he had 
to face invasions of his territory by two most powerful rulers of 
India of his time. Threatened by disruption within and invasion 
from abroad, Mahipala can hardly be blamed for not frittering away 
his strength and energy by sending a military expedition to the 
distant corner of the Punjab or North-West Frontier. 

Nobody can dispute the fact that Mahipala not only saved the 
Pala kingdom from impending ruin, but also restored to a large 
extent the old glory and power of the Palas, and that this was achiev¬ 
ed against tremendous odds. His success in this great task is highly 
creditable, and it is idle to regret that he had not done more. His 
achievements are remarkable and he rightly takes his rank as the 
greatest Pala Emperor since Devapala. It is not without reason that 
of all the Pala Emperors his name alone figures in popular ballads 
still current in Bengal. 

Indeed Mahipala may justly be regarded as the founder of the 
second Pala Empire. This revival of the glory of the Palas was fit¬ 
tingly demonstrated by Mahipala by constructing and repairing a 
large number of religious buildings in such important places as 
Banaras (including Sarnath) and Nalanda. We learn from contem¬ 
porary records that “hundreds of pious works” were made and some 
old famous Buddhist monuments of Sarnath were repaired by the 
orders of Mahipala. Further we hear that two temples were con¬ 
structed at Bodh-Gaya, and several monuments at Nalanda, after 
they were damaged or destroyed by fire, were repaired and restored 
during the reign of Mahipala. His name is also associated with a 
large number of tanks and towns in Bengal. The long reign of 
Mahipala extending over nearly half a century was thus a memorable 
period in the history of Bengal. 

26 



MINIS/*.,, 


^* fc ’ G0| W\ 

• I NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 
2. Successors of Mahlpdla 

After the death of Mahlpala I in c. A.D. 1038 his son Nayapala 
ascended the throne. Nayapala’s kingdom extended on the west up 
to Magadha, beyond which lay the kingdom of the Kalachuris of 
Tripuri. He is referred to as the king of Magadha in the Tibetan 
record. The Kalachuri Gangeyadeva’s son Kama cherished an ambi¬ 
tion for pushing the boundary of his Empire further to the east at 
the cost of the Palas. This involved the Kalachuris and the Palas 
in a protracted war. Kama marched his army into Magadha and 
tried to capture a city, which may be taken as identical with 
Uddandapura, modern Bihar, in the Patna District. Having failed to 
achieve his end he sacked the Buddhist monasteries in the open 
country, and destroyed the foodgrains. Nayapala soon rallied his 
forces and inflicted a crushing defeat on the invading army. At this 
time Dxpahkara Srijfiana, also known as Atlsa, the Rector of the 
Vikramasxla monastery, was residing in the Mahabodhi monastery at 
Vajrasana. He gave shelter to Kama and his vanquished forces and 
made arrangements for their safe departure to their own country. 
The great Buddhist teacher, who was in indifferent health, took the 
risk of travelling into the Kalachuri kingdom to the west of a great 
river more than once in order to establish peace between the two 
kings. A treaty was eventually concluded on condition of mutual 
restitution of the captured articles and payment of compensation 
except for the foodgrains which were destroyed. This battle between 
Karxia and Nayapala took place in the early part of the reign of the 
former. In this battle Nayapala seems to have been materially help¬ 
ed by a Brahmana named Sudraka. Probably in recognition of this 
service he conferred on him the charge of the Gay a-mandala. 

Mahasivagupta Yayati, a Somavarixsi king of Kosala, who 
flourished in the second quarter of the eleventh century, raided 
Gauda and Radha. His adversary in Gauda seems to have been 
Nayapala. Nayapala ruled at least for fifteen years, and was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Vigrahapala III in c. A.D. 1055. 

During the reign of Vigrahapala the Kalachuri Karpa renewed 
hostility with the Palas. He invaded Gauda but was ultimately 
worsted by the Pala king. A treaty seems to have been concluded 
between the Palas and the Kalachuris in accordance with which 
R arna~gave his daughter Yauvanasri in marriage to Vigrahapala III. 
Shortly before A d 7 1068 Vigrahapala had to suffer a defeat at the" 
hands of the Chalukya Vikramaditya VI, who invaded Gauda on 
behalf of his father Somesvara I, king of the Deccan. 




27 








MINISr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Inscriptions of Vigrahapala’s reign prove that he was in posses¬ 
sion of both Gauda and Magadha, and that he ruled for more than 
thirteen years. Besides the Kalachuri princess he had another 
queen, who was the sister of the Rashp-akuta Mathanadeva, chief of 
Ahga. He had three sons, Mahipala II, Surapala II, and Ramapala. 
Ramapala is known to have been born of the Rashtrakufa princess. It 
is not unlikely that Mahipala II was the son of the Kalachuri princess. 
Vigrahapala died in c. A.D. 1070, and was succeeded by Mahipala II. 


Mahipala II ascended the throne at a time when the foundation 
of the Pala kingdom had been shaken by the successive foreign inva¬ 
sions. Taking advantage of the weakness of the central authority 
the feudatories became very powerful. One of them was Visvaditya, 
son of Sudraka, the ruler of Gaya -mandala. The other seems to have 
been isvaraghosha, the chief of Dhekkari. The situation became 
worse when Mahipala took some drastic measures against his two 
younger brothers. Mahipala was on the whole a good and a generous 
monarch, and was at first affectionate towards Surapala and Rama¬ 
pala. But on the report of some mischievous people that his brothers 
were conspiring against him, and without verifying the truth of it, 

. he threw them into prison and made them suffer all sorts of indigni¬ 
ties. Thus Mahipala, “heedless of protecting truth and polity,” 
deprived himself of the support of his brothers which he needed very 
badly in that critical period. When he was thus embroiled in his 
domestic affairs, a large number of vassals formed a confederacy and 
advanced to crush his power. Disregarding the advice of his com¬ 
petent ministers, he advanced with a small body of ill-equipped 
soldiers to meet the rebels, but had to pay very dearly for this im¬ 
politic action. The rebels inflicted a crushing defeat upon him. It 
follows from Sandhyakaranandi’s Rama-charita, which deals in detail 
with the history of the Palas of this period, that this invasion of the 
feudatories was part of a general revolt and not undertaken in pro¬ 
test against the incarceration of Surapala and Ramapala. Mahipala’s 
suffering, however, did not end with his defeat. An officer of the 
State named Divya, who was a Kaivarta by caste, and “who took to 
fraudulent practice as a vow,” brought about the death of the forlorn 
king, and occupied Varendri (North Bengal). Divya, obviously 
to screen his nefarious action, put forward the pretension that he 
undertook the heavy responsibility of the State from a paramount 
sense of duty. During this period of disorder and confusion, Surapala 
and Ramapala succeeded in escaping from the prison. After the loss 
of Varendri the Pala kingdom was limited to Northern and Central 
Bihar. Surapala ruled there for about a couple of years, and was 
succeeded by his younger brother Ramapala in c. A.D. 1077. 


28 


MiNisr^ 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 



3. Ramapala 

Divya ascended the throne of Varendrl in c. A.D. 1075. He could 
not assert his supremacy over any other part of the Pala dominions, 
though he made violent attacks on Ramapala, apparently iox the 
extension of his kingdom. He was himself attacked by Jatavaiman 
of the Yadava dynasty of East Bengal, who claims to have won a 
victory over him. Divya was succeeded by his brother Rudoka, and 
the latter by his son Bhlma. The fact that the three kings of the 
Kaivarta family ruled Varendrl one after the other indicates that 
they succeeded in consolidating their power and position there. 
Even Sandhyakaranandx, who was inimical to the Kaivartas, candidly 
confesses in his book that Varendrl became prosperous under the 
happy rule of Bhima. The poet further states that Bhlma maintain¬ 
ed excellent cavalry and elephant forces, and possessed great wealth; 
he was a man of learning, properly rewarded the virtuous men, and 
was a sincere devotee of Siva. Bhima, however, could not enjoy his 
prosperity for long. The Paramara Lakshmadeva invaded his 
country. Ramapala was not also inactive. The Pala king realised 
that the army, which he commanded, was not strong enough to cope 
with Bhima.' Moreover he was confronted with a fresh danger, 
probably due to the establishment of a new Karnataka dynasty in 
Mithila in the northern border of his kingdom. So he approached 
his feudatories, who were virtually independent, for military assis¬ 
tance. The most important of these allied chiefs was his maternal 
uncle Mathanadeva, ruler of Anga, who joined him with his two sons 
Kahnaradeva and Suvarnadeva and his nephew Sivarajadeva. The 
other allied chiefs were— 

1. Bhlmayasas, king of Pithi, and lord of Magadha. 

2. Viraguna, king of Kotatavl, in the south. 

3. Jayasimha, king of Dandabhukti. 

4. Vikramaraja of Devagrama. 

5. Lakshmlsura, the lord of Apara-Mandara, and the head- 
jewel of the circle of feudatories of the forest. 

6. Sura pala, ruler of Kujavatl. 

7. Rudrasikhara, ruler of Tailakampa. 

8. Bhaskara or Mayagalasiriiha, king of Uchchhala. 

9. Pratapasimha, king of Dhekkarlya. 

10. Narasimharjuna, king of Kayangala-maruZala. 

11. Charvdarjuna of Sankatagrama. 

12. Vijayaraja of Nidravall. 

13. Dvorapavardhana, ruler of Kausambl. 

14. Soma of Paduvanva. 


29 


Ml UlSTfiy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Of all the places mentioned above Magadha (Central Bihary, 
Anga (Bhagalpur), Dandabhukti (Midnapore District), and Kayahgala 
or Kajangala (south of Rajmahal) can be definitely identified. The 
other places, though they cannot be located with certainty, were in 
all probability situated to the south of the Gahga. It was no doubt 
a great humiliation for Ramapala to beg help from his own feuda¬ 
tories, but the result was highly satisfactory. All the chiefs readily 
agreed to help the Pala king and sent their forces to fight with the 
Kaivartas. After making a preliminary survey of the enemy’s posi¬ 
tion with the help of Sivaraja, Ramapala, along with the main body 
of his army, crossed over to the northern bank of the Gahga in 
Varendri. Then followed a severe battle between the forces of 
Ramapala and Bhima. The two kings fought with each other at close 
quarter, and Ramapala ultimately succeeded in taking Bhima pri¬ 
soner. This unnerved thousands of Bhrma’s soldiers who became 
panicky and fled, but Hari, a friend of Bhima, rallied the Kaivarta 
forces, and made a violent attack on Ramapala. Ramapala’s son won 
Hari over to his side and this completed his victory. Bhima, with all 
his relations, was killed, and Varendri, after a long time, again pass¬ 
ed into the hands of the Palas. 

After the re-conquest of Varendri, Ramapala undertook the 
work of reconstruction of the houses which were destroyed by the 
enemies. It is not unlikely that the city of Pundravardhana was also 
considerably damaged. This might have prompted him to found a 
new capital city, which was named Ramavatl after him. Ramapala 
relieved the people of Varendri from oppressive taxes, which were 
imposed on them by the Kaivarta rulers, and normal cultivation of 
lands was resumed under his patronage. He honoured Hari by rais¬ 
ing him to a position of great influence. 


After consolidating his position at home Ramapala tried to 
restore the former glory of his family by launching expeditions 
against the neighbouring states. He pressed heavily on the 
Varmans (Yadavas) of East Bengal. The Varman king, who appears 
to have been Harivarman, surrendered to him chariots and elephant 
forces, and thereby saved his country from devastation. Ramapala 
sent an allied chief, who seems to have been Timgyadeva, to conquer 
the countries in the east. Timgyadeva conquered Kamarupa, and was 
made the governor of that country. Ramapala despatched an 
elephant force against the Gahadavalas of Kanauj some time between 
A.D. 1100 and 1109, but it was repulsed by the Gahadavala prince 
Govindachandra. Ramapala wanted to assert his supremacy over 
Utkala where two rival factions were quarrelling for power. One 
of them was backed by Anantavarman Chodagahga of the Gahga 


30 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 

dynasty, and the other was supported by the Pala king. Karnakesarl, 
who seems to have been supported by the Garigas, and who was once 
defeated by Ramapala’s feudatory Jayasimha of Dan<jabhukti, 
appears to have secured the throne by superseding the claim of his 
rival, who belonged to the Somavarhsa. Ramapala took up the cause 
of the latter arid placed him on the throne after defeating Ananta- 
varman. But he could not maintain his influence there for long. 
Some time before A.D. 1112 Anantavarman succeeded in re-instating 
either Karnakesarl or his successor on the throne of Utkala. Rama¬ 
pala gave protection to a king of the Naka dynasty, who was harassed 
by the Nagas. He is said to have even captured the Naga capital. 
The Nagas, referred to, might have been those of the old Bastar State, 
whose capital was Chakrakota (Chakrakotta). 

In the latter part of his reign Ramapala entrusted the cares of 
the government to his son Rajyapala. On hearing the news of the 
death of his maternal uncle Mathanadeva, who was very dear to 
him, Ramapala committed suicide by drowning himself into the 
Gahga near Monghyr in c. A.D. 1120. 

Such was the tragic end of an eventful and remarkable career. 
We are indebted to the Rama-charita of Sandhyakaranandl for sup¬ 
plying these details of Ramapala’s reign. He had passed through 
strange vicissitudes of fortune, but like Mahlpala I he succeeded 
in restoring the fallen fortunes of the Palas. The circumstantial 
narrative of how he did it fills our mind with admiration for his 
strength of mind, resourcefulness and wonderful personality. He 
had to struggle hard with adversity and tasted the bitter cup of 
humiliation to the full. But nothing daunted him or swayed him 
from his grim resolve to recover the dominions and restore the 
glory of his forefathers. His long life was full of military cam¬ 
paigns, but it was crowned with success. His romantic death was 
a fitting end to a career which is more suited to a drama than mat¬ 
ter-of-fact history. 

4. Successors of Ramapala 

Ramapala was succeeded by his son Kumarapala, and it is pro¬ 
bable that Rajyapala, who had acted as his father’s deputy, pre¬ 
deceased him. At the time of Ramapala’s death his kingdom com¬ 
prised a large part, if not the whole, of Bengal, together with Bihar 
and Assam. But the signs of disintegration were already visible. 
Some petty chiefs of Magadha assumed the position of independent 
monarchs. One of them was Yakshapala, son of Visvaditya of 
Gaya-mandala. Another was Varna man a, who is described as the 
lord of Magadha, and whose son Rudramana is known to have been 




31 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


ruling in A.D, 1138, Nanyadeva, king of Mithila, claims to have 
defeated the king of Gau$a, who might have been Kumarapala. 
Western Magadlia up to Dinapore sub-division passed into the hands 
of the Gahadavala Govindachandra before A.D. 1124. In their fight 
with the Palas the Gahadavalas were helped by their allies, the 
Kalachuris of Tumma^a. Vallabharaja, a feudatory of the Kalachuri 
Ratnadeva II (c. A.D. 1114-1141), is said to have reduced the king 
of Gauda. Anantavarman Chodagahga invaded South and West 
Bengal. Vaidyadeva, the minister of Kumarapala, resisted the in¬ 
vader for some time, but had to hurry to Kamarupa in order to put 
down the revolt of Timgyadeva. Taking advantage of his absence 
Anantavarman conquered all the territories up to Hooghly on the 
bank of the Ganga. Vijayasena of the Sena family, who allied 
himself with Anantavarman Chodagahga, grew very powerful in 
Radha. Vaidyadeva, after putting down the revolt of Timgyadeva, 
became the governor of Kamarupa, and subsequently, probably in 
the next reign, became independent. Kumarapala, who was 
obviously a weak ruler, was thus engulfed in a sea of troubles, and 
when he died in c. A.D. 1125, he left a tottering kingdom to his son 
Gopala III. Gopala III, who ruled for more than fourteen years, 
died an unnatural death, but the exact details of the incident are not 
known. He was succeeded by his uncle Madanapala, the youngest 
son of Ramapala, in A.D. 1144. 

Madanapala tried to save the Pala kingdom, but failed. Until 
the third year of his reign, his kingdom extended up to the Bihar 
Hill, but some time before A.D. 1146, the Gahadavalas under Govin¬ 
dachandra conquered all the territories up to Monghyr. Madana¬ 
pala, however, reconquered Monghyr from the Gahadavalas before 
the 14th year of his reign, i.e. before A.D. 1157, with the help of 
his relation Chandradeva, son of Suvarnadeva, and the grandson 
of the R&shtrakuta Mathanadeva, who was a Mandaladhipati of 
Anga. Madanapala also destroyed the power of Govardhana, who 
cannot be identified, but was probably a rebellious feudatory. 
Madanapala carried on hostilities with the Gangas of Kalinga and 
Orissa, who occupied a large portion of Radha. It is known from 
the Rama-charita 2 that he was looking for an opportunity to crush 
the power of the Snake king of Kalinga (Kalinga-Phanahhujam, ie. 
Ananta, the lord of serpents), who may be identified with Ananta¬ 
varman Chodaganga. Madanapala manfully struggled against all 
these neighbouring rulers. But his greatest enemy was inside Ben¬ 
gal. The growth of the power of the Senas of Radha, who had al¬ 
ready made themselves masters of East Bengal, became a menace 
to the very existence of the sovereignty of the Palas. Madanapala 
fought a severe battle near the Kalindi river, in the Malda District, 


32 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


<SL 


with an enemy, presumably the Senas under Vijayasena. He suc¬ 
ceeded in pushing the enemy to the Kalindl river but, some time 
after the eighth year of his reign, he had to surrender VarendrI 
to Vijayasena. After being deprived of his home dominion, which 
never came back to the Palas, Madanapala withdrew to the Anga 
country where he ruled till c. A.D. 1161. He is the last known 
king of the family of Gopala and Dharmapala. 

A king named Govindapala, who calls himself the lord of Gauda, 
is known to have been ruling in the Gaya District in the sixth de¬ 
cade of the twelfth century. He was probably related to Madana¬ 
pala, but nothing is definitely known. His power seems to have 
collapsed in A.D. 1162. The colophons of some manuscripts and 
stone inscriptions bear dates which appear to have been the number 
of years counted, not from the beginning of the reign, but from 
the destruction of the kingdom of Govindapala. Thus the Pala 
dynasty, which at one time rose to the rank of the foremost im¬ 
perial rulers of India, lost its sovereign power after a rule of nearly 
four hundred years. 


II. BENGAL AFTER THE PALAS 
1. The Yadavas of Vanga 

Govindachandra of Vangala, who was defeated by Rajendra 
Chola, was probably the last ruler of the Chandra dynasty. 3 After 
the fall of the Chandras, the Varmans came to power in East Ben¬ 
gal, in the second quarter of the eleventh century. The Varmans 
claim to have belonged to the Yadava race, which was graced by 
the birth of Krishna. The Belava copper-plate of Bhojavarman 
states that the Varmans dominated Simhapura. This has led some 
scholars to suggest that Simhapura was the original home of the 
Varmans wherefrom they came to East Bengal. Attempts have 
been made to identify the place variously with Simhapura near Salt 
Range in the Punjab, referred to by Hiuen Tsang, Simhapura in 
Kalinga mentioned in the epigraphic records, and Simhapura in 
Radha mentioned in the Ceylonese Chronicle Mahavamsa and iden¬ 
tified with Singur in the Hooghly District, which bears ancient 
ruins. But none of these identifications has gained general accept¬ 
ance. The earliest known member of the Varman dynasty is Vaj- 
ravarman, who is said to have been “the welfare (itself) of the vic¬ 
torious war expedition of the Yadava armies, and the god of Death 
to his enemies.” This seems to be referring to the conquest of 
East Bengal by the Varmans under his leadership. It cannot be 
ascertained from the Belava inscription, the only record mention¬ 
ing the name of Vajravarman, whether he was a royal personage. 


S.E.—3 


33 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


*8L 


epigraphic record does not also mention the successors of Vaj- 
ravarman definitely as kings in the introductory portion. In the 
prose portion only Bhojavarman, the author of the inscription, and 
his father Samalavarman are given the title Maharajadhiraja. The 
fact that Vajravarxnan belonged to a royal dynasty of Siinhapura 
and that he led successful expeditions against his enemies suggest 
that he occupied royal position. Some scholars, however, think 
that the Varmans occupied East Bengal after the death of Vajra- 
varman, and that his son Jatavarman was the founder of the great¬ 
ness of the family. It was probably during the reign of Jatavarman 
that the Kalachuri Kama invaded Vaiiga and conquered it. As 
Karria is known to have given his daughter VirasrI in marriage to 
Jatavarman, it may be presumed that a treaty was eventually con¬ 
cluded between the Kalachuris and the Yadavas. During the reign 
of Jatavarman there was a great political upheaval in North Ben¬ 
gal, which, as noted above, led to the accession of the Kaivarta 
Divya on the throne of that country. Jatavarman led an expedi¬ 
tion against Divya and won a victory over him. The Vangala 
army which, according to a Nalanda inscription, sacked the Bud¬ 
dhist monastery at Somapura, modern Paharpur, in the Rajshahi 
District, was in all probability the army led by Jatavarman on 
this occasion. Jatavarman’s victory over Divya brought him to the 
border of the Anga country, which was then ruled by the Rashtra- 
kuta Mathanadeva or his predecessor. Jatavarman is said to have 
succeeded in asserting his supremacy over the Anga country. 
Though he won victory over Divya and Mathanadeva he could 
not permanently annex their territories to his kingdom. The 
anti-Buddhist propaganda carried on by Govardhana, the father 
of Bhatta-Bhavadeva, in East Bengal, was probably responsible for 
the persecution of the Buddhists by the Vahgala army in Varen- 
drl. Jatavarman invaded Kamarupa and defeated its king, who 
may be identified with Harshapala. Prithu and Govardhana, who 
had to yield to the forces of Jatavarman, cannot be identified. 

Jatavarman issued an inscription from Vikramapura which 
appears to have been the capital of the Varmans. He had two sons 
Harivarman and Samalavarman by the Kalachuri princess, and the 
former succeeded him on the throne. 


Harivarman’s minister of peace and war was Bhatta-Bhava¬ 
deva, who had the curious epithet Bala-Balabhl-bhujanga. Bhat^a- 
Bhavadeva’s grandfather Adideva was minister of the king of Vahga, 
who may be identified with Vajravarman. Bhatta-Bhavadeva stu¬ 
died Siddhiinta, Tantra, Ganita, and Astrology and wrote books on 
Horoscopy, Dharmasastra, and Mtmamsd. He rose against Buddh- 


34 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


ism and enhanced the cause of the Brahmanical religion in Vanga. 
He built a temple of Ananta, Narayana, and Nrisirhha. There is 
now good ground for rejecting the view, unanimously held for a 
long time, that this temple is identical with that of Ananta-Vasu- 
deva at Bhuvanesvara, in Orissa, on whose wall was fixed the slab 
containing the inscription. It must have been carried there from 
Bengal. 


As noted above, Harivarman was probably subjugated by Rama- 
pala. It seems that during his reign Nanyadeva of Mithila raided 
Vanga. Harivarman ruled for more than forty-six years, and pro¬ 
bably died at the end of the first quarter of the twelfth century 
A.D. He had a son, whose name is not known, but was succeeded 
on the throne by his younger brother Samalavarman. 

Samalavarman had a number of queens, the chief of whom was 
Malavyadevi, the mother of Bhojavarman. Bhojavarman, who suc¬ 
ceeded his father, ruled for more than five years from the city of 
Vikramapura. He or his successor was overthrown by Vijayasena 
of the Sena dynasty in the middle of the twelfth century A.D. 
Varmans are not known to have asserted their supremacy on any 
country beyond East Bengal. 


A number of Kulapanjis (genealogical books) of the Vaidika 
Brahmanas mention that a remote predecessor of their family set¬ 
tled in Bengal in 6. 1001 (= A.D. 1079) during the reign of Samala¬ 
varman. A single manuscript, however, states that it took place 
during the reign of Harivarman. 


2. The Senas of Bengal 

The Senas of Bengal call themselves Karnata-Kshatriya, Brah- ( 
ma-Kshatriya, and Kshatriya. They claim their descent from the 
mythical Virasena and others, who are said to have been the kings 
of Dakshiniapatha. It may, therefore, be held that the original 
home of the Senas was in the Kannada speaking region in the south. 
There was in the Dharwar District, Bombay State, a family of Jain 
teachers, who belonged to the Sena family (Senanvaya). It cannot 
be ascertained whether the Senas of the Dharwar District had any 
connection with those of Bengal. Nor do we know how and when 
the Senas came to Bengal from Dakshinapatha. It is known from 
the records of the Palas that the kings of this dynasty, from Deva- 
pala downwards, appointed as officers many foreigners among whom 
were also the Karnatas. It may be that a remote predecessor of 
the Senas of Bengal, hailing from the Deccan, accepted service under 
the Palas, and then his successors gradually rose to power and set¬ 
tled in Radha. It is not also unlikely that the founder of the Sena 


85 



lamiiy accompanied one of the Chalukya rulers who invaded Ben¬ 
gal, and ultimately settled there. 


The earliest known member of the Sena dynasty of Bengal is 
Samantasena, who is said to have been born in the family of the 
Rajaputras, who adorned Radha. Rajaputra means a prince, but 
also designates an office, and generally scholars have taken the 
word Rajaputra to mean prince in this case. Samantasena, whose 
home was obviously Radha, is said to have defeated, in the southern 
quarter, an enemy who plundered the resources of the Karnata 
country. It is generally assumed that Samantasena fought this bat¬ 
tle in the Deccan on the side of the Chalukyas against the Cholas. 
Some are, however, inclined to think that Samantasena defended 
his adopted country against the incursion of the southern king 
Rajendra Chola who, after vanquishing the Chalukya Jayasimha, 
king of the Karnata country, and many others, invaded Bengal. In 
his old age, Samantasena devoted his time to religious practices, 
and frequented the sacred hermitages in the forests on the bank 
of the Gahga. Though he is not definitely known to have assumed 
royal position, he may be taken to have been a ruling chief in Radha. 
He was succeeded by his son Hemantasena, who is given the title 
Maharajadh irtija in the record of his successor. Hemantasena 
seems to have consolidated his position in Radha during the trou¬ 
blous times that followed the occupation of that country by the 
Kalachuri Karrta. The epithet, “the skilful protector of kings,” 
given to Hemantasena in the record of his son, may have some 
reference to. his giving shelter to Surapala and Ramapala after their 
escape from the prison of Varendri. He was succeeded by his son 
Vijayasena in c. A.D. 1095. 


Vijayasena was the greatest king of the Sena dynasty. In the 
early part of his life he married VilasadevI, a princess of the 
Sura family, who gave birth to his son Vallalasena (Ballalasena). 
This Sura family may be identified with the Sura dynasty which 
ruled in Apara-Mandara about this time under its king Lakshml- 
sura. 4 It seems that when the disintegration of the Pala kingdom 
began after the death of Ramapala, Vijayasena made a bid for the 
conquest of the whole of Bengal. He strengthened his position by 
making an alliance with Anantavarman Chodagahga, king of Kalin- 
ga, who extended the boundary of his kingdom up to the Hooghly 
District. Vijayasena’s ambitious military scheme soon brought him 
into conflict with a number of rulers, and he defeated them all. 
He subdued Vira and Vardhana, who may be identified respective¬ 
ly with Vlraguna of Kotatavl and Dvorapavardhana of Kausambi, 
the allies of Ramapala mentioned above. 5 He led a naval expedi- 


36 


MiN/sr^y. 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 

tion in the west along the course of the Gangs, probably against 
Govindachandra of the Gahadavala dynasty of Kanauj. Most likely 
it was on this occasion that he invaded Mithila and inflicted a de- 
feat on its king Nanyadeva. About the middle of the twelfth cen¬ 
tury he overthrew Bhojavarman of Vikramapura and conquered 
East Bengal. He also invaded VarendrI, which was then ruled by 
Madanapala. Though he seems to have suffered a reverse near 
the Kalindi, he eventually succeeded in wresting North Bengal 
from the Palas. The Deopara, Barrackpore, and Paikore inscrip¬ 
tions of his reign prove his supremacy over Gauda, Vahga and 
Radha. On the south his kingdom comprised KhMi-mandala in 
the 'fwenty-four Parganas. He invaded Kamarupa and drove away 
its king, but could not establish his supremacy over that country. 
His adversary was probably Rayarideva, king of Kamarupa, who is 
said to have resisted the elephant forces from Vahga in battle. 
Vijayasena, who was friendly to Anantavarman Chodaganga of 
Kalinga, became hostile to his family after his death. In the latter 
part of his reign he invaded Kalinga and defeated Raghava, the 
second son of Anantavarman. Vijayasena thus established a power¬ 
ful kingdom in Bengal and made his influence felt in the neigh¬ 
bouring countries. He assumed the title Ariraja-vrishabha-Sankara 
and built a temple of Pradyumnesvara Siva in the Rajshahi District. 

1 he poet Umapatidhara lived in his court and composed the famous 
eul °gy (Deopara Prasasti) from which we know the details of his 
reign. His queen VilasadevI performed the Kanaka Tulapurusha 
Mahadana ceremony in the royal palace at Vikramapura, which was 
one of the capitals of the Senas. The other one was Vijayapura, 
which seems to have been identical with Nadiya. Vijayasena was 
succeeded by his son Vallalasena in c. A.D. 1158. 

Vallalasena assumed the title Nihsanka-Safikara. He claims to 
have defeated the king of Gauda, which probably means that he 
put an end to the rule of Gaudesvara Govindapala 6 in A.D. 1162. 

It is known from literature of a later period that he invaded Mithila 
during the reign of his father Vijayasena, and that his kingdom 
comprised Vahga, Radha, Bagdi, VarendrI, and Mithila. It is also 
recorded that Gaudapura, Vikramapura, and Suvarnagrama were 
the three capitals of this king. The authenticity of these reports 
cannot be verified. But an inscription, dated in the ninth year of 
Vallalasena, found at Colgong, on the Gahga, in Bihar, proves that 
the neighbouring region was comprised in his dominions. 0 * Val¬ 
lalasena was a man of learning. He learnt all the Puranas and 
omptis under the guidance of his preceptor Aniruddha, and' was an 
au hor of repute* He completed his book Danasagara in 1091 ( — 
A.D. 1169), and had begun the composition of another book named 




37 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


- 1 AMhutasagara one year before that. He died before he could 
finish this book, and it was completed by his son Lakshmanasena. 
Tradition, ascribes the introduction of the social system, known as 
Kulinism, in Bengal to Vallalasena, but this does not find corrobo¬ 
ration in any contemporary record. Vallalasena married Rama- 
devi, the daughter of a Chalukya king, who may be identified with 
the Chalukya Vikramaditya VI. Vallalasena was a Saiva, though 
he was inclined towards Vaishnavism. In his old age he handed 
over the reins of administration to his son Lakshmanasena, and re¬ 
tired along with his queen to a place known as Nirjarapura on the 
Triveni. 

Lakshmanasena ascended the throne in A.D. 1178 and assumed 
the title Ariraja-Madana-sankara. Altogether seven copper-plate in¬ 
scriptions of his reign have been found in different parts of Bengal. 
Five of them, which were executed within six years after his acces¬ 
sion, were issued from Vikramapura. The Madhainagar Grant, 
the date of which cannot be restored, and the Bhawal plate, which 
is dated in the 27th year of his reign, were issued from Dharya- 
grama. It seems that Lakshmanasena passed the early part of his 
career mostly at Vikramapura, and later resided at Dharyagrama. 
His inscriptions prove that he succeeded in maintaining his supre¬ 
macy over Gauda, Vanga, and Radha during the early part of his 
reign. Before the sixth year of his reign, probably out of adminis¬ 
trative necessity, he separated northern Radha from the Vardha- 
mana-Bhukti, and placed it within a newly constituted Bhukti 
named Kankagrama. 

Lakshmanasena was a great military leader and the contem¬ 
porary records give an account of his victories. While he was still 
very young he defeated the king of Gauda, which probably means 
that he participated in the battle which was fought by Vijayasena 
with the Pala Madanapala. He is also said to have defeated the 
king of Kalihga in his youth, and it is not unlikely that he fought 
this battle also under the leadership of his grandfather. During 
his reign he entered into a war with the king of KasI, who must 
be the Gahadavala Jayachandra. Some time between A.D. 1183 
and 1192 Jayachandra succeeded in pushing the eastern boun¬ 
dary of his kingdom at least up to Bodh-Gaya in Magadha. By de¬ 
feating him Lakshmanasena seems to have succeeded in checking 
the eastward progress of the Gahadavalas. He also invaded Prag- 
jyotisha or Kamarupa, and won a victory over its king. The in¬ 
scriptions of the successors of Lakshmanasena refer to the king’s 
victory over the rulers of Kalihga and Kail, and add that Laksh¬ 
manasena set up pillars commemorating his military victory at 


miSTHy 



Northern iNdia during nth aNd 12 th centuries 


Puri, Kasi and Triveni (Allahabad). This may be an exaggeration 
of the facts mentioned in the Madhainagar and Bhawal copper-plates 
of Lakshmanasena. These two inscriptions, one of which was issued 
long after the close of Lakshmanasena’s career of conquest, do not 
mention any thing about his conquest of Allahabad. 

The kingdom of the Senas began to disintegrate in the closing 
years of the twelfth century. Khadi-mcmdttla was under the sway 
of Lakshmanasena in the early part of his reign. But in or before 
A.D. 1196 one Dommanapala set up an independent kingdom in 
this region. While the Sena power was weakened by disruption 
within, it had to face the invasion of the Muslims who had by this 
time overrun the greater part of Northern India. Muhammad 
Bakhtyar Khalji, a Turkish officer, conquered the city of Bihar, and 
entered Bengal with a large army. According to the account given 
by Minhaj-ud-dm in his Tabaqat-i-Nasin, the news of the advance 
of Muhammad Khalji created such a panic into the minds of the 
citizens of Nadiya, the capital city of Lakshmanasena, that most of 
them took to flight, but the king stayed on in the almost deserted 
city. Muhammad Khalji, at the end of his march, advanced with 
only eighteen soldiers a little forward from the main body of the 
army, and entered Nadiya without any opposition, as the guards 
and inhabitants of the city took them to be horse-dealers. By the 
time Muhammad reached the royal palace, the main body of his 
soldiers also got into the city, and Muhammad forced his way through 
the palace-gate with a drawn sword. The royal guards being 
attacked unawares, raised a hue and cry which reached the ears 
of Lakshmanasena, when he was taking his mid-day meal. The 
king at once fled by the back door, and proceeded to Vahga. 
Minhaj does not say from whom he heard this narrative, but it is 
clear that he had no reliable source of information. The whole 
story, however, reads like a romance and is hardly credible. It is, 
for example, very difficult to believe that though Lakshmanasena 
knew that the Muslims were advancing against him, he awaited 
their arrival in the capital without making any proper arrangement 
for its defence, or that a body of Muslim horsemen would be ad¬ 
mitted into the city without any question. That Nadiya was con¬ 
quered by Muhammad Khalji by defeating Lakshmanasena admits 
of no doubt, but the details of the conquest, as given by Minhaj, 
cannot be accepted as the whole truth. Even if we accept his story, 
we must admit that Lakshmanasena showed great bravery by not 
deserting his capital in the company of the other panic-stricken 
citizens long before the actual attack by the Muslim army, and con¬ 
sidering the circumstances which forced him to leave the city, we 
can hardly blame him or regard it as an act of cowardice. 


39 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Muhammad Khalji conquered Nadiya in c. A.D. 1202, and 
shortly afterwards wrested North Bengal from Lakshmanasena. But 
East Bengal, and probably also South Bengal, remained under the 
control of the Senas. In the 27th year of his reign (A.D. 1205), i.e. 
three years after the loss of Nadiya, Lakshmanasena granted lands 
in the Bhawal Pargana, of the Dacca District. 

Lakshmanasena changed his ancestral faith and became a de¬ 
vout Vaishriava. He was not only a distinguished soldier, but also 
a great poet, and some verses composed by him found place in 
gridharadasa’s Saduktikarmmrita. It has already been noticed 
that he completed the text of Adbhutasagara, which was begun by 
his father. His court was graced by a number of famous poets such 
as Jayadeva, the author of Gitagovinda , and Dhoyi, the author of 
Pavanaduta, as well as scholars like Halayudha, the author of Brah- 
manasarvasva , and Sridharadasa, the son of the Mahdsdmanta - 
chudamani Vatudasa. Srldharadasa himself was Mahamandaiika 
under Lakshmanasena. The great writer Halayudha was his chief 
minister, and Sankaradhara, the minister for peace and war. 
Lakshmanasena had a number of queens, viz., Sriyadevi, Kalyanadevi 
and Chandradevi and two sons, Visvarupasena and Kesavasena. 

An era which was in use in Bihar after the downfall of the Senas 
is associated with the name of Lakshmanasena. Different records 
yield different dates, ranging from A.D. 1108 to 1119, as the initial 
year of this era. If Lakshmanasena was the founder of this era, it is 
curious that he did not use it in his own records. Moreover, 
Lakshmanasena was probably not even born in A.D. 1119. For 
Minhaj states that at the time of the Muslim invasion of Nadiya 
Lakshmanasena was eighty years old, and this fixes the date of the 
king’s birth in c. A.D. 1122. Laghubharata, a late work, states that 
Vallalasena received the news of Lakshmanasena’s birth when he 
was marching against Mithila. If there is any truth in this statement, 
Lakshmanasena was obviously born after the death of Ramapala in 
c. A.D. 1120 when alone Vallalasena could have led an expedition 
against Mithila. As a matter of fact the origin of the Lakshmanasena 
era cannot be ascertained now. 

Lakshmanasena probably died shortly after A.D. 1205, his last 
known date. He was succeeded by Visvarupasena, who assumed the 
title Vrishabhanka-Sahkara. Visvarupasena granted lands in the 
region of Vikramapura from his victorious camp at Phalgugrama. 
Minhaj states that about this time the Muslims ruled Ra$ha and 
Varendri from their capital Lakhnawati, and in A.D. 1226 Ghiyas-ud- 
din Twaz, the Sultan of Lakhnawati, made an abortive attempt to 




10 


northern india during iith and 12 th centuries 

conquer Vanga. This is corroborated by the Sena records according 
to which Visvarupasena defeated the Yavanas, i.e. the Muslims. He 
had two sons Kumarasena and Purushottamasena, but these princes 
are not known to have ever ruled. Visvarupasena ruled for more 
than 14 years and was succeeded by his younger brother Kesavasena 
who assumed the title Asahya~Sahkara® b He also granted lands in 
the region of Vikramapura from Phalgugrama. Minhaj relates that 
Malik Saif-ud-dm (A.D. 1231-1233) sent an expedition to Vanga 
where he captured some elephants. Kesavasena, in all probability, 
succeeded in repulsing this invasion, for he is also stated to have won 
a victory over the Yavanas. The descendants of Lakshmanasena 
thus frustrated successive attempts of the Muslims to assert their 
supremacy over Vanga. How long Kesavasena ruled cannot be as¬ 
certained. It appears from Minhaj that the Senas occupied the throne 
of Vanga at least up to A.D. 1245, if not up to A.D. 1260. They were 
supplanted in Vanga by Danujamadhava Dasarathadeva of the Deva 
family not long after the middle of the thirteenth century. Both 
Visvarupasena and Kesavasena were devotees of Surya. But a king 
known as Madhusena, who was a devotee of Buddha, is known to 
have been ruling in some part of Bengal in A.D. 1289. His relation 
with the Senas of Vikramapura is not known. 

3. The Royal Family of Pattikera 

The Varmans and the Senas are not known to have ever asserted 
their supremacy over that part of Bengal which lay to the east of the 
Brahmaputra. From the eleventh century onward the capital of this 
region seems to have been Pattikera, the extensive ruins of which 
have been discovered on the Mainamati Hills, in the Tippera Dis¬ 
trict. All memory of this kingdom is lost, but even now there is a 
Pargana named Patikera, or Paitkera which extends up to the Maina¬ 
mati Hills. A miniature label in a Nepalese manuscript, copied in 
A.D. 1015, mentions the city of Pattikera. According to the Burmese 
chronicles, the kingdom of Burma, under Anoratha (A.D. 1044-1077), 
was bounded on the west by Patikkara. These Burmese sources 
narrate romantic stories which indicate that there was a close and 
intimate contact between the rulers of Pattikera and Burma in the 
eleventh and twelfth centuries. Unfortunately the Burmese annals 
do not mention the name of any king of Pattikera. We learn from an 
inscription, discovered in the Mainamati Hills, that a king known as 
Harikaladeva Ranavahkamalla ascended the throne of Pattikera in 
A.D. 1202-1203, and ruled there at least up to A.D. 1219. Harikala¬ 
deva or his successor was overthrown by the Deva dynasty. 




41 


MINI ST# 



THE STRUGGLE TOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


4. The Deva Dynasty of Samatata and Varlga 


The earliest known member of the Deva family is Purushottama, 
who was a headman of a village (gramanz), possibly under the royal 
dynasty of Paftikera. His son Madhusudana, also known as Madhu- 
mathana, is described as a king (nripati), and seems to have founded 
an independent principality in the southern part of the kingdom of 
Pattikera. His son and successor was Vasudeva, who was again 
succeeded by his son Damodara. Damodara, who claims to have 
been the overlord of all kings, issued inscriptions dated A.D. 1234 
and 1243. He granted the village Mehara (now in the Chandpur sub¬ 
division of the Tippera District) in the Samatata-manclala, and seems 
to have put an end to the rule of Harikaladeva’s family in Pattikera. 
King Danujamadhava Dasarathadeva of the Deva family, who issued 
an inscription from Vikramapura, was the son and successor of 
Damodara. He claims to have obtained the kingdom of Gauda 
through the grace of Narayana. This probably means that he wrest¬ 
ed Vanga from the Senas, who claimed to have been the lords of 
Gauda even long after its conquest by the Muslims. As will be 
noted in Chapter V, Sultan Balban came to Sonargaon (now a Par- 
gana, in the Narayanganj sub-division, Dacca District) in A.D. 1283 
and entered into an agreement with Danuj Rai to guard against the 
flight of Tughril Khan by water. There is no doubt that this Danuj 
Rai is identical with Danujamadhava Dasarathadeva. The Ta’rikh-i- 
Mubarak Shdhz mentions an interesting episode connected with the 
meeting of Balban with Danuj Rai at Sonargaon. After the reign 
of Dasarathadeva in the latter part of the thirteenth century A.D. 
the kingdom of the Deva dynasty passed into the hands of the 
Muslims. 


III. ASSAM 

It has been mentioned above 7 that after the death of king 
Tyagasimha, the last ruler of the Salambha or Pralambha dynasty, 
towards the close of the tenth century A.D., the people elected his 
kinsman named Brahmapala as the king of Pragjyotisha. The 
capital of this newly established dynasty was at Durjaya, which is 
identified by some with Gauhati. Brahmapala may be placed in the 
first part of the eleventh century. He was succeeded by his son 
Ratnapala who granted lands in Uttarakula, which seems to be 
referring to the north bank of the Brahmaputra river. He is said to 
have fought successfully with the kings of Gurjara, Gauda, Kerala, 
and Dakshinatya, and with the Bahikas and Taikas. This seems to 
be a hyperbole. The kings of Gurjara, Gauda, and the Deccan about 
this time were respectively the Chaulukya Bhima I of Gujarat, 


42 


MINlSr^ 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 



Nayapala, and the Chalukya Somesvara I. Bhima I-Jind Nayapala 
are not known to have led any expedition against Assam, but 
Somesvara I’s son Vikramaditya VI is known to have led a successful 
expedition against Kamarupa shortly before A.D. 1068. Ratnapala 
ruled for more than twenty-six years. His son Purandarapala, who 
was a poet, predeceased him. So after the death of Ratnapala 
Purandarapala’s son Indrapala ascended the throne. He is described 
in his own inscription as the light of the East (Prdcht-pradipa). It 
was probably during his reign that Jatavarman of the Yadava 
dynasty of East Bengal invaded Kamarupa. Indrapala was succeed¬ 
ed by his son Gopala, who was again succeeded by his son Harsha- 
pala. Harshapala’s son and successor was Dharmapala, who may be 
taken to have flourished in the first quarter of the twelfth cen¬ 
tury A.D. Dharmapala is mentioned as the king of Kamarupa- 
nagara, which was probably identical with Durjaya. He was a man 
of learning, and composed a part of his own inscription discovered 
on the bank of the Pushpabhadra. He was the last ruler of the family 
founded by Brahmapala and seems to have been overthrown by Tirii- 
gyadeva, in the reign of Ramapala of Gau$a. As already mentioned, 
Timgyadeva revolted and was defeated by Vaidyadeva, who subse¬ 
quently ruled Kamarupa as an independent king. Whether he was 
succeeded by his brother Budhadeva is not known. 

A copper-plate inscription from Assam mentions that in the 
Chandravaihsa there was Bhaskara, whose son was the king Rayari- 
deva Trailokyasimha. Rayarideva is said to have vanquished the 
king of Vanga, who may be identified with Vijayasena. He was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Udayakarna Nih^ankasimha, and the latter by his 
son Vallabhadeva, one of whose known dates is A.D. 1185. It is 
probable, therefore, that the three kings Rayarideva, Udayakarna 
and Vallabhadeva ruled in Kamarupa after Vaidyadeva. Vallabha¬ 
deva was probably the king who suffered defeat at the hands of 
Lakshmapasena. 

Minhaj states that in A.D. 1205 Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji 
advanced with an army via Bardhankot along the bank of the Beg- 
mati river (identified with Karatoya) for the conquest of Tibet. 
Before ten days had elapsed he had to cross a stone bridge within 
the territory of the king of Kamrud (Kamarupa). While returning 
from the Tibetan expedition he found the bridge broken by the 
Hindus of Kamrud and, realising the gravity of the situation, order¬ 
ed his army to take shelter in a neighbouring temple. The ‘Rae 
of Kamrud’ attacked the Muslims and killed a large number of 
them. Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji, with a few followers, jumped 
into the river and swam to the opposite bank. Mr. Blochmann 


43 


THfi STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



places this bridge near Darjeeling. An inscription on a rock at 
Kanaibarshi, a mile to the north-east of North Gauhati, states that 
in A.D. 1205 the Turushkas, who came to Kamarupa, were slain. 
There is a broken old stone bridge on the channel of the Barnadi, 
eleven miles to the west of Kanaibarshi. Some scholars are in¬ 
clined to identify this bridge with that mentioned by Minhaj. This 
view does not seem to be convincing as Gauhati lies far off from 
the normal route to Tibet from Lakhnawatl. As a matter of fact 
the genuineness of the Kanaibarshi inscription may be doubted. 
There is, however, no doubt about a conflict between Muham¬ 
mad Bakhtyar Khaljl and the king of Assam in which the former 
suffered severe losses. It cannot however be said definitely whe¬ 
ther Vallabhadeva or his successor was the adversary of Muham¬ 
mad Bakhtyar Khalji. 

The chronology of the Kamarupa kings after Vallabhadeva 
cannot be definitely determined, but their conflict with the Muslim 
rulers continued. In A.D. 1227 Ghiyas-ud-din ‘Iwaz of Lakhna¬ 
watl made an abortive attempt to conquer Kamarupa. In A.D. 1257 
Ikhtiyar-ud-dm Yuzbak Tughril Khan invaded Kamarupa and at 
first obtained some success. Subsequently the Sultan was defeated 
and captured. He died of his wounds and his army was destroyed. 
The invasion of Kamarupa by Mahmud Shah in A.D. 1337 also ended 
in disaster for the Muslim army. 

In the first half of the eleventh century the Mahamandalika 
Isvaraghosha was ruling at Dhekkari. He granted land after bath¬ 
ing in the Jatoda river in the Gallitipyaka-mshaya of the Piyolla- 
mandala . The Kalilcd Pur ana mentions that the Jatoda flows 
through Kamarupa. The river now passes through Jalpaiguri and 
Cooch-Behar. Isvaraghosha ruled for more than thirty-five years, 
and was either a feudatory under the Palas of Gauda or a vassal 
under Ratnapala of the Pala dynasty of Kamarupa. 

In the eleventh and twelfth centuries a line of kings ruled 
in the kingdom of Srlhafta. There were kings Kharavana, Gokula- 
deva, Naraya^a, Kesavadeva, and Isanadeva, each being the son of 
his predecessor. Isanadeva ruled for more than seventeen years. 
Srlhatta or Sylhet was conquered by Sikandar Khan Ghazi in 
A.D. 1303 during the reign of the Sultan Firuz Shah. 

The Ahoms, a branch of the Shan tribe, started under their 
leader Sukapha from Maulung in A.D. 1215, and crossed the hilly 
country of Patkai. They came in course of their wandering march to 
Eastern Assam, and settled at Charaideo in A.D. 1253. Sukapha 
was succeeded by his son Suteupha, during whose reign the Kach- 
aris gave the country to the east of the Dikhu river to the Ahoms. 


44 


mtSTfiy 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


Suteupha, who died in A.D. 1281, was succeeded by his son Subin- 
pha, and the latter by his son Sukhanghpha in A.D. 1293. During 
this period the Ahoms carried on a protracted war with the Raja. 
of Kamata which was concluded by a treaty. Sukhanghpha mar¬ 
ried Rajani, the daughter of the Rcija of Kamata, and died in A.D. 
1332. The Ahoms, who thus consolidated their kingdom in the 
thirteenth century, gave the name Assam to the country which was 
called Kamarupa and Pragjyotisha in ancient days. 


In the thirteenth century the Kacharis also founded a kingdom 
along the south bank of the Brahmaputra from Dikhu to Kallang. 
It also included the valley of Dhansiri and the North Kachar sub¬ 
division. 


IV. NEPAL 

As we have seen above, 8 the dynasty of Gunakama was ruling 
in Nepal at the beginning of the eleventh century A.D. and king 
Nirbhaya was ruling jointly with Rudra in A.D. 1007. Rudradeva 
was succeeded by Bhoja. It appears from a palm-leaf manuscript, 
dated A.D. 1015, that when Bhoja was ruling, half the kingdom was 
enjoyed by Lakshmxkamadeva. Some take this to mean that Bhoja 
and Lakshmikama ruled conjointly. But an undated manuscript refers 
to the reign of Bhoja only, and another manuscript, dated A.D. 1039, 
mentions the name of Lakshmikama alone. According to the Tibe¬ 
tan sources, when Dlpahkara AtI6a visited Nepal in c. A.D. 1039, 
on his way to Tibet, the king of the country was Grags-pa-mtha-yas, 
which is restored as Anantakirtti. The relation between Ananta- 
klrtti and Lakshmikama is not known. Lakshmikama’s successor 
was Jayakama, also known as Vijaya. Jayakama revived the wor¬ 
ship of Naga. The tradition runs that he had no issue, and after his 
death the Thakuris of Nayakot elected one of them, named Bhaskara- 
deva, as king. 

Bhaskaradeva is known to have been ruling in A.D. 1046. He 
is stated to have “repaired his paternal crown,” which probably 
means that his remote predecessors were royal personages. He 
was succeeded by Baladeva, also known as Balavantadeva, who was 
ruling in A.D, 1059. Baladeva’s successor Pradyumnakamadeva, 
also known as Padmadeva, is known to have been on the throne in 
A.D. .1064 and 1065. Pradyumnakamadeva was followed in suc¬ 
cession by Nagarjunadeva and Sankaradeva. The known dates of 
Sahkaradeva range from A.D. 1068 to 1077. Vamadeva of 
the Thakuri family of Patan, a remote descendant of Amsuvarman, 
overthrew the Thakuris of Nayakot in the latter part of the eleventh 
century A.D. 


45 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Vamadeva is known to have been ruling in A.D. 1081. He 
may be taken as identical with Vamadeva, son of king Yasodeva, 
whose inscription on the pedestal of an image of Surya, found at 
Lalitapattana, is dated A.D. 1083. Vamadeva’s successor Harsha- 
deva was ruling in A.D. 1090 and 1093. The Vctmsavali of Nepal 
mentions a date of Harshadeva as N.E. 219 (— A.D. 1098), which 
Bendall takes as the year of the king’s death. After Harshadeva 
the throne was occupied by Sivadeva. The Vaihsavali, discovered 
by Bendall, mentions him as the son of Sankaradeva. This shows 
that the Thakuris of Nayakot again came to power. The known 
dates of Sivadeva’s reign range from A.D. 1118 to 1123. The tradi¬ 
tion relates that he built a city named Kirttipura near Kantipura 
and Lalitapattana. He secured a large amount of gold by raiding 
the neighbouring countries and built with it a new roof for Pasu- 
patinatha. He introduced a new coin, made of copper and iron, 
and marked with the figure of a lion. His son and successor Indra, 
also called Mahendra, is known to have been ruling in A.D. 1128. 
The next king was Manadeva. An inscription of the Rajddhiraja 
Manadeva, dated A.D. 1139, has been found near Katmandu. He 
was associated in the government with his son Narendradeva 
(Narasimha), the known dates of whose reign are A.D. 1134 
and 1141. Narendradeva’s successor Anandadeva is known to 
have been ruling in A.D. 1146 and 1166. Anandadeva is mentioned 
as the son of Sihadeva who may be taken as identical 
with Narasimha (Narendradeva). Anandadeva was succeeded by 
Rudradeva who, according to the chronicle, abdicated his throne, 
after seven years’ reign, in favour of his son, and devoted himself to 
religious practices. Wright’s chronicle mentions the name of this 
son of Rudradeva as Mitradeva. Bendall’s chronicle, however, 
states that Amritadeva, who was the other son of Sihadeva (Nara- 
simhadeva), succeeded Rudradeva. Amritadeva (A.D. 1176) was 
followed in succession by Ratnadeva (A.D. 1183) and Somesvara- 
deva, son of Mahendra. After Somes vara ruled Gunakamadeva II 
(A.D. 1187), Lakshmlkamadeva (A.D. 1193), Vijayakamadeva 

(A.D. 1196, 1197), Arimalladeva (A.D. 1201, 1216), Ranasura 
(A.D. 1221) and Abhayamalla (A.D. 1223-1252) one after the other. 
It is probable that Arimalla, referred to above, was the founder of the 
Malla dynasty in Nepal. During the reign of Abhayamalla there 
were frequent earthquakes and a famine in Nepal. Wright’s chronicle 
mentions that Abhayamalla had two sons, Jayadevamalla and Anan- 
damalla. Anandamalla founded a city named Bhaktapura (Bhat- 
gaon), and established his headquarters there. He also founded 
seven more towns, viz . Banapur, Panavati, Nala, Dhankhel, Khadpu, 
Chankot, and Sanga. Jayadevamalla (A.D. 1255, 1257), who ruled in 


46 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 

and Kantipura, was followed in succession by Jayabhima 
1260), Jayasaha(slha)malladeva, and Anantamalla (A.D. 
1307). Tradition relates that during the reign of Anantamalla 
the Khasas and the Magars of the western mountains, under the 
leadership of Jayatari and Mukundasena, led a series of invasions 
against Nepal, some time between A.D. 1287 and 1290, and carried 
on depredations and plunder. A pestilence, which broke out there 
about this time, forced the invaders to withdraw. Anantamalla 
was followed in succession by Jayanandadeva (A.D. 1318) and 
Jayarudramalla (A.D. 1320, 1326). Jayarimalla was a co-regent of 
Jayarudramalla, who died in A.D. 1326. Some time before his 
death Nepal was invaded by Harisimha of the Karnataka dynasty 
of Simraon. Henceforth Harisimha and his successors were the 
supreme rulers of the Nepal valley, and Jayarudramalla’s succes¬ 
sors, Jayarajadeva (A.D. 1347-1355) and Jayarjunamalla (A.D. 
1363-1376), ruled Nepal as their subordinates. 

V. BIHAR 

1. The Karnataka Dynasty of Mithila 

The Palas of Gauda, as we have seen above, held sway over 
Magadha and Tirabhukti for a long time. Tirabhukti (modern Tir- 
hut), which was also known as Mithila, was bounded by the Gan- 
dak, Kosi, Himalaya, and the Gahga. Some time about A.D. 1097 
Nanyadeva of the Karriataka dynasty established his supremacy over 
this region, probably with the help of the Chalukya Vikramaditya 
VI, who is known to have invaded Nepal shortly before A.D. 1068. 
Sylvain Levi, thinks that Nanyadeva at first accepted service under 
an unknown king and, taking advantage of the weakness of his 
master, wielded the sovereignty. It has already been noted that 
the Palas of Gauda had under them many Karnata officers. It is 
not unlikely that Nanyadeva was an officer under the Palas, and 
established a kingdom in Tirabhukti during the Kaivarta revolt. 
“A new danger” which confronted Ramapala on the eve of his fight 
with the Kaivarta Bhlma, mentioned in the Rama-charita, may be 
referring to this incident. The capital of the Karnataka dynasty 
was at Simaramapura, modern Simraon, within the border of Nep&l 
north of the Champaran District. 

Nanyadeva came in conflict with kings of Gauda and Vanga, 
who seem to have been respectively the Pala king Kumarapala and 
the Yadava ruler Harivarman. Vijayasena of the Sena dynasty of 
Raclha invaded Mithila and won a victory over Nanyadeva. Tradi¬ 
tion relates that Nanyadeva conquered Nepal. If it be true, he 
could not certainly keep the conquered country under his control 
for a long time. For the contemporary king of Nepal, Sivadeva, 




47 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


and his successors are known to have assumed the title Rdjddhifdja. 
According to tradition Nanyadeva ruled for fifty years. He was 
succeeded by his son Gangadeva. A manuscript of Rdmdyana 
was copied in Tirabhukti in Sam. 1076 during the reign of the 
Mahardjddhirdja Gahgeyadeva of the Soma family. Bendall, re¬ 
ferring the date to Vikrama Samvat, takes it as equivalent to A.D. 
1019, and identifies Gahgeyadeva with the king of this name belong¬ 
ing to the Kalachuri dynasty of Tripurl. Dr. R. C. Majumdar, by 
referring the year to Saka era, identifies Gahgeyadeva with Gahga- 
deva, successor of Nanyadeva. Tradition assigns forty-one years 
reign to Gangadeva. He was succeeded by his son Nrisirhha, who is 
said to have ruled for thirty-one years. Nrisimha’s son and successor 
Ramasimha is assigned thirty-nine years’ rule. Ramasimha’s suc¬ 
cessor Saktisirhha, after a rule of fifty-eight years, was succeeded 
by Bhupalasimha. Bhupalasimha was succeeded by Harisimha, 
also known as Harasimha. 

The famous jurist Chandesvara. his father Vlresvara, and his 
grandfather Devaditya served Harisimha as ministers of peace and 
war one after the other. Devaditya’s second son Gapesvara also 
acted as a minister under the same king. Ziya-ud-din Barani 
states that in A.D. 1324 Ghiyas-ud-din Tughluq invaded Tirhut, 
whose king submitted without any fight. Firishta relates that after 
conquering Tirhut Ghiyas-ud-din Tughluq handed it over to Ahmud 
Khan. But it is known from other contemporary sources that 
Harisimha and his minister Chandesvara succeeded in repulsing the 
attack of the Suratrana (Sultan). It seems, therefore, that Hari¬ 
simha was able to resist the Muslims for some time. Chandesvara 
claims that he conquered Nepal for his master and then performed 
the religious gift of Tuldpurusha in A.D. 1314; but the traditional 
date of the conquest of Nepal by Harisimha is A.D. 1324. Hence¬ 
forward the chiefs of Nepal ruled their territory as vassals of Hari- 
simha’s family. Tradition relates that Harisimha established him¬ 
self at Bhatgaon and ruled Nepal from that city. This indicates 
that, having failed to defend Tirhut along with Simraon against 
the incursion of the Muslims, he transferred his capital to Bhat¬ 
gaon. That Tirhut was lost to the Karna^akas is proved by the fact 
that Ghiyas-ud-din Tughluq’s son Muhammad Tughluq issued coins 
from the mint of Tirhut. The Vawri&avali of Nepal mentions Hari- 
simha’s successors as rulers of Nepal. 

2. The Guptas of Jayapura 9 

In the twelfth century A.D., a Gupta dynasty ruled from Jaya¬ 
pura, identified with modern Jaynagar, near Lakhisarai, in the 


48 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 31th AND 12th CENTURIES 



Monghyr District. King Yajnesagupta, alias Jaya, was succeeded 
by Damodaragupta, also known as Chamundaraja, whose son and 
successor was king Devagupta. These three kings, who may be 
taken to have flourished in the first half of the twelfth century, 
were obviously feudatories of the Palas, for, as mentioned above, 
Monghyr formed a part of the Pala kingdom up to the middle of 
the twelfth century, though for a short period in the fourth decade 
of that century it was occupied by Gahadavala Govindachandra. 
Devagupta was succeeded by his son Mahdrdjadhirdja Maham-anda- 
lika Rajadityagupta. It appears from these titles that after the 
decline of the power of the Palas Rajadityagupta assumed indepen¬ 
dence. His son Rajaputra Krishnagupta seems to have predeceased 
his father. Rajadityagupta was succeeded by his grandson Maha- 
rajadhirdja MahcLmandalika Samgramagupta, the son of Krishna¬ 
gupta. Samgramagupta may be taken to have been a contem¬ 
porary of Lakshmanasena, as the inscriptions of both have been 
referred on palaeographic grounds to the same period. He ruled 
for more than seventeen years. The power of the Guptas seems to 
have been destroyed by Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji. 


3. The Senas, of Pithi 


A Sena dynasty is known to have ruled in Pithi, which included 
the region round Gaya. Names of only two kings of this family 
are known. They are Buddhasena and his son Jayasena, who are 
to be placed in the second half of the thirteenth century. 


4. Khayaravala Dynasty of Japila 


The Khayaravala dynasty ruled in the Shahabad District, which 
formed part of Magadha, in the twelfth century A.D. Sadhava is 
the earliest known member of this family. His son was king 
Ranadhavala, whose son Pratapadhavala is referred to as a Maha- 
nayaka of Japila. Stone inscriptions of Pratapadhavala dated 
A.D. 1158 and 1169 have been found in the Shahabad District. He 
acknowledged the supremacy of the Gahadavala Vijayachandra. 
Pratapadhavala’s son and successor was king (narapati) Sahasa. 
He had two sons Vikrama and Indradhavala who occupied the 
throne of their father in succession. Indradhavala, who is known 
to have been ruling in A.D. 1197, is mentioned as a great king 
(maha-nripati) and Japilya. Nothing definite is known of the fa¬ 
mily after Indradhavala. A king named Pratapa, who is knowi^ 
to have been ruling in the Shahabad District in A.D. 1223, might 
have been a successor of Indradhavala. 


49 



MiN/sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


VI. KANAUJ 
1. The Rdshtrakiitas 


As we have seen above, 10 the Imperial Pratlharas ruled Kanauj 
up to A.D. 1019, and Rajyapala was the last king of this dynasty 
to be associated with that city. After the invasion of Mahmud of 
Ghazni Rajyapala and his successors ruled from Bari, about 30 miles 
to the east of Kanauj, which was in ruins even when Al-Biruni 
visited it some time before A.D. 1030. But an inscription of the 
Chaulukya dynasty of La$a, dated A.D. 1050, associates a Rashtra¬ 
kuta dynasty with Kanauj. Another inscription, found at Budaun, 
gives some account of a Rashtrakuta dynasty ruling in the Pah- 
chala country in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Ihe fourth 
king of this dynasty Gopala is mentioned as the ruler of Gadhipura 
i.e. Kanauj, and it may be assumed that the early members of this 
Rashtrakuta family were all associated with this imperial city. The 
first known king of this family is Chandra, who seems to have esta¬ 
blished his supremacy over Kanauj during the period of disorder 
that followed the invasion of Mahmud of Ghazni. He was succeed¬ 
ed by his son Vigrahapala, and the latter by his son Bhuvanapala, 
who may be taken to have flourished in the third quarter of the 
eleventh century A.D. During this period Chalukya Somesvara I 
of the Deccan and the Chola Virarajendra of South India invaded 
Kanauj. Bhuvanapala’s son and successor was Gopala, who, as has 
already been noticed, is referred to as the king of Gadhipura. It 
was apparently during the reign of Gopala that Mahmud, son of 
the Sultan Ibrahim of Ghazni, conquered Kanauj. After this dis¬ 
aster the Rash^rakutas appear to have settled at Vodamayuta or 
modern Budaun which soon grew into importance. Hasan Nizami 
states that Budaun is “one of the mothers of cities, and one of the 
chiefest of the country of Hind.” Gopala was succeeded by his 
eldest son Tribhuvana. Tribhuvana’s younger brother and succes¬ 
sor was Madanapala, who was ruling in A.D. 1119, and whose king¬ 
dom extended up to Sahet Mahet, in the Gonda District. Madana¬ 
pala repulsed an attack of Sultan Mas’ud III of Ghazni. He was 
succeeded by his youngest brother Devapala. By the year A.D. 
1128 Sahet Mahet passed into the hands of the Gahadavalas. Deva¬ 


pala was followed in succession by Bhimapala, Surapala and Amri- 
tapala, each being the son of his predecessor. Amritapala was suc¬ 
ceeded by his younger brother Lakhanapala, who ruled in the clos¬ 
ing years of the twelfth century. In A.D. 1202 Qutb-ud-din con¬ 
quered the kingdom, probably from Lakhanapala, and made Iltut- 
mish its governor. In the early years of the thirteenth century 
the Mahasdmanta Bharahadeva of the Rashtrakuta dynasty ruled 


50 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 

somewhere in the country of Kanyakubja (Kanyakubja-desa). He 
might have been a successor of Lakhanapala. The Gahadavala 
Adakkamalla was probably his overlord. 

2. The Gahadavalas 

In the latter part of the eleventh century a dynasty known as 
(rah ad aval a came to power in Kanauj. No authentic evidence has 
hitherto been discovered to support the theory that the Gahada¬ 
valas are identical with the Rashfrakutas or the Rathors. Yasovi- 
graha, the earliest known member of the family, is said to have [ 
flourished when the kings of the Solar race departed from this 
world. His son Mahlchandra, also known as Mahitala and Mahl- 
yala, is described as a king, and ruled in some part of Uttar Pradesh. 
Mahichandra’s son and successor was Chandradeva, during the early 
part of whose reign there was a great upheaval in the kingdom of 
Kanauj. After the invasion of Northern India by Ahmad Niyal- 
tigin in A.D. 1034 the Muslims did not launch any military cam- 
paign against Hindustan for some time. The cause of this inactivi¬ 
ty on their part is not far to seek. During this period the Para- 
mara Bhoja and Kalachuri Kama, who occupied dominant position 
in Northern India, struck terror into the minds of the Muslims by 
their military power. Both are known to have led expeditions even 
into the heart of the Muslim territory of the Punjab. 11 After the 
death of Bhoja (c. A.D. 1055) and Karpa (c. A.D. 1072) the Muslims 
again cast their greedy eyes on Hindustan. Some time between 
A.D. 1086 and 1090 prince Mahmud, the governor of the Punjab, 
plundered Kanauj and Kalanjara and invaded Ujjain. 12 On that 
occasion he found an ally in Kanauj named Chand Rai, who may 
be identified with Chandradeva. During the troublesome period 
that followed the departure of Mahmud from Northern India Chan- 
diadeva seized the throne of Kanauj from the Rashtrakuta ruler 
Gopala, mentioned above. The inscriptions of the Gahadavalas, 
dating from A.D, 1090, mention a tax called Tumshkadanda. Some 
suggest that it was an impost on the subjects of the Gahadavalas to 
meet the expenses of resisting the invasion of the Muslims. Others 
think that the Gahadavala kings realised this tax from the people 
in order to make annual payment of tribute to the Sultans of 
Ghazni. If Chandradeva really got some political advantage from 
J a mud, the latter view seems preferable. It was probably to en¬ 
force the regular payment of this tribute that the Muslims' led ex¬ 
peditions against Northern India from time to time. 

Chandradeva is said to have defeated the Gajapati, Narapati, 
irisankupati, and the ruler of Panchala. The ruler of Panchala 
v as o viously the Rashtrakuta ruler Gopala, Chandradeva claims 

51 





M! HtSTfiy 


<SL 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

to have protected the holy places of Kuiika (Kanauj), Kail, Uttara- 
Kosala (Ayodhya) and Indrasthana. His further progress towards 
the east was checked by Bh'imayasas, ruler of Magadha. The in¬ 
scriptions of Chandradeva, the dates of which range from A.D. 1090 
to 1100, prove that he was in possession of Kanauj, Banaras, 
and Ayodhya. He conquered all the countries from Allahabad to 
Banaras from the Kalachuri Yasahkarna, king of Dahala. Banaras 
(Kasi) was made the second capital of the Gahadavalas. Some are 
inclined to identify Indrasthana with Indraprastha or Delhi, and 
take it as the western boundary of Chandradeva’s kingdom. But 
this is hardly likely, as about this time the Tomaras were ruling 
independently in Delhi. There was a city named Indrapura, mo¬ 
dern Indor, in the Aramshahar sub-division of the Bulandshahar 
District. Indrasthana may be identified with this, but no definite 
conclusion is possible. Chandradeva was succeeded by Madana- 
chandra, also known as Madanapala, some time between A.D. 1100 
and 1104. 

Madanachandra’s inscriptions bear dates A.D. ll(te and 
1109, and prove that he was in possession of Banaras, Bithaur sub¬ 
division of the Etawah District, and a part of the ancient Pahchala- 
country. According to Muslim chroniclers Ala-ud-Daulah Mas’ud 
III (A.D. 1099-1115) invaded Hindustan, the capital of which was 
Kanauj. He took Malhi, king of Kanauj, prisoner, who purchased 
his release by paying a large sum of money. 13 Malhi is evidently 
identical with Madanachandra. Govindachandra, son of Madana- 
chandra, is known from Indian records to have defeated the Mus¬ 
lims during the lifetime of his father. It is not unlikely that he 
forced the Muslim chief to release his father. 14 Govindachandra, 
who was the de facto ruler of the country during the reign of his 
father, also repulsed an attack of Ramapala of Gauda. Pie ascended 
the throne of his father before A.D. 1114. 

About forty-two inscriptions of Govindachandra’s reign, bear¬ 
ing dates extending from A.D. 1114 to 1154, have been dis¬ 
covered. They prove that his kingdom extended at least up to 
Banaras, Fatehpur and Kanpur Districts on the south, Kanauj on 
the west, Gonda and Gorakhpur Districts on the north, and Dina- 
pur, in the Patna District, in Bihar, on the east. Shortly after 
C f A.D. 1143 he conquered all the countries up to Monghyr from 
Madanapala. But he had to surrender Monghyr to this Pala king 
some time before A.D. 1158. He conquered the Gonda District 
from the Rashtrakuta Madanapala 16 or his successor before 
A.D. 1129. 

52 



MIN/Sr/Jy 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


<SL 


The Prakrita-paihgalam states that the king of Kasi fought 
successfully with the kings of Gauda, Vanga, Kalinga, Telanga, 
Maharashtra, Saurashtra, Champarana, Nepala, Bhota, China, Loha- 
vara (Lahore), Odra, and Malava. There are good grounds to be¬ 
lieve that the king of Kasi, referred to, is Govindachandra. That 
Govindachandra came into conflict with most of the kings men¬ 
tioned above can be proved by other evidence. His wars with the 
Palas of Gauda and the Muslims of Lahore have already been notic¬ 
ed. The king of the West against whom Vijayasena advanced 
through the upper course of the Gahga was in all probability 
Govindachandra. It is not unlikely that Govindachandra checked 
the westward progress of Anantavarman Cho^agahga, king of Ka- 
linga and Orissa, who conquered the countries up to the bank of 
the Gahga. Nanyadeva of Mithila was the immediate neighbour of 
Govindachandra, and there might have been a clash between these 
two kings. Somesvara III, the Chalukya king of the Deccan, who 
invaded Magadha, must have come into conflict with Govindachan¬ 
dra. It cannot be ascertained whether Govindachandra came into 
clash with the Kakatiyas of Telihgana. It may be mentioned in 
this connection that the Kalachuri Jajalladeva, king of Dakshina- 
Kosala, to the south-west of which lies the Telihgana country, pro¬ 
udly asserts that he was honoured with fortune on account of his 
prowess by the king of Kanyakubja. This king of Kanyakubja 
was evidently Govindachandra. Nayachandra’s Rambhamcinjarl 
states that Govindachandra conquered Dasarna (Eastern Malava) 
on the day of the birth of his grandson Jayachandra. Dasarna was 
in the possession of the Chandella Madanavarman (A.D. 1129-1163), 
who is known to have been at war with the king of Kasi. Saura- 
shfra formed a part of the kingdom of the Chaulukyas of Anahilla- 
pataka. Jayasimha-Siddharaja of this dynasty is stated to have 
sent a diplomatic agent to the court of Jayachandra, king of Bana- 
ras, which seems to be an error for Govindachandra in view of the 
fact that the Chaulukya king closed his reign in c. A.D. 1143. The 
statement that Govindachandra invaded Nepala, China, and Tibet 
is obviously an exaggeration. It will appear from the above obser¬ 
vations that Govindachandra came into conflict with the Palas, 
Senas, Gahgas, Kakatiyas, Chalukyas, Chandellas, Chaulukyas, the 
Muslims, and the Karnatakas of Mithila. 


Govindachandra sent his ambassador Suhala to the court of 
king Jayasirhha of the Lohara dynasty of Kashmir. An incomplete 
inscription at Gahgaikondachola-puram, the capital of the Imperial 
Cholas, which was executed shortly after A.D. 1111, draws the 
genealogy of the Gahadavalas from Ya£ovigraha to Chandra. It 
seems that the inscription was issued by a Gahadavala princess, 


53 


MINIS T$y 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


who was married to a king or a scion of the Chpla dynasty, with 
a view to record some grants made by her. This reminds us of the 
inscriptions of the Vakataka queen Prabhavatldevi, who took 
scrupulous care to mention in them the names of her father, grand¬ 
father, and great-grandfather. Gold and copper coins of Govinda- 
chandra have been found. The king was acquainted with the 
various branches of arts. He had a number of queens one of whom 
was Buddhist KumaradevI, the daughter of Devarakshita, king of 
Pith! and daughter’s daughter of the Rashtrakuta Mathanadeva, 
maternal uncle of Ramapala. Govindachandra had three sons, 
Asphotachandra, who was appointed a Yuvaraja, Vijayachandra, 
and Rajyapala. Asphotachandra seems to have predeceased his 
father, and Vijayachandra succeeded to the throne some time after 
A.D. 1154. 


The known dates of Vijayachandra are A.D. 1168 and 1169. 
Pratapadhavala of the Khayaravala dynasty was his vassal in 
western Magadha. Vijayachandra repulsed an attack of the 
Muslims, which was probably led by Khusrav Malik. He was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Jayachandra in A.D. 1170. 

The inscriptions of Jayachandra bear dates ranging from 
A.D. 1170 to 1189. They prove that his kingdom included the 
Gaya District besides the Doab, Allahabad, Banaras and Patna. The 
Gaya District is known to have been ruled by Govindapala up to 
A.D. 1162. 16 Probably in his attempt to extend the boundary of 
his kingdom further east Jayachandra was opposed by Lakshmana- 
sena of Bengal. The Sena king claims to have defeated the king 
of Kasx, who was obviously Jayachandra. The bards narrate a 
romantic story about the marriage between Jayachandra’s daughter 
Samyogita and the Chahamana Prithviraja III of Ajmer, but its 
authenticity has rightly been doubted by modern scholars. Jaya¬ 
chandra was a patron of poets, and according to some scholars, 
Srlharsha, the author of Nctishadha-charita , lived in his court. 
Jayachandra ruled his kingdom peacefully for more than two decades, 
but in the latter part of his reign he met with a severe disaster. 
Mu‘izz-ud~dm Muhammad Ghiirl, after conquering Delhi and Ajmer 
from the Chahamanas, advanced with a large army against Jaya¬ 
chandra in A.D. 1193. Jayachandra opposed him with all his forces 
in the vicinity of Chandawar in the Etawab District. In the battle 
that followed Jayachandra lost his life when seated on an elephant, 
and the Gaha^avala army was totally defeated. The Muslims next 
captured the fort of Asni (in the Fatehpur District) where the 
treasure of the king of Banaras was deposited. They then proceed¬ 
ed to Banaras and plundered the city. The government of the 


54 


MiNisr^ 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 



country was entrusted to a responsible officer, but the Muslims 
could not keep their hold on the newly conquered territory for a 
long time. As Harischandra, son of Jayachandra, who was only 
18 years old at the time of the battle of Chandawar, was in possession 
of Kanauj, Jaunpur, and Mirzapur Districts in A.D. 1197, it is 
obvious that he succeeded in wresting his paternal kingdom from 
the hands of the Muslims. The Chandella king Trailokyavarman 
won a victory over a king of Kanyakubja, who may be identified 
with Harischandra. Adakkamalla, who belonged to the Gahadavala 
dynasty, seems to have been Harischandra’s successor. During the 
reign of Iltutmish one Bartu was the ruler of Awadh. Bartu fought 
with Iltutmish and is said to have killed one hundred and twenty 
thousand Muslim soldiers. He was overthrown and killed by 
Malik Nasir-ud-dln Muhammad Shah, the eldest son of Iltutmish, 
in A.D. 1226. Bartu might have been a feudatory of Adakkamalla, 
and it is not unlikely that he is identical with Bharahadeva of the 
Rashtrakuta family. 17 Kanauj was finally conquered by Iltutmish. 
After being deprived of his paternal kingdom Adakkamalla settled 
in the Nagod State, Central India. His feudatory Mahamandadeva 
is known to have ruled there in V.S. 1294 (= A.D. 1237). The name 
of the successor of Adakkamalla is not known. 


VII. THE YADUVAM6! KINGS OF BAYANA-SRlPATHA 

Tradition relates that a Yadu dynasty ruled in Bayana, the 
modern Bayana, in the old Bharatpur State, Rajputana, the ancient 
name of which was Sripatha. The traditional list of kings of this 
dynasty, as given by the bards, is partly verified by the epigraphic 
records. These records prove that the kingdom of this dynasty 
comprised the old Bharatpur State and the Mathura District. The 
king Jaitapala of the traditional list may be placed in the first half 
of the eleventh century. His successor was Vijayapala, who may 
be identified with the king Vijaya of the Bayana inscription, dated 
A.D. 1044. Vijayapala’s successor was Tahanapala who, according 
to tradition, built the fort of Tahangarh, 14 miles south of Bayana. 
Tahanapala was followed in succession by Dharmapala, Kunwarpala 
and Ajayapala. Cunningham suggests that there is a chronological 
error in placing Kunwarpala before Ajayapala. It is known from 
the Mahaban prasasti, found near Mathura, that Maharajadhivaja 
Ajayapala was ruling in A.D. 1150. The tradition mentions Hari- 
pala as the son and successor of Ajayapala. An inscription of 
Haripala, dated A.D. 1170, has been found at Mahaban. Hari- 
pala was succeeded by Sohapala. An image inscription of the reign 
of Sahanapaladeva, dated A.D. 1192, has been discovered at Aghapur, 


55 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


The traditional list describes Ananga 
of Sohapala or Sahr~—™ 
to have been KunwarpaJ 
was the predecessor of Ajayapala. 
in A.D. 1196 Mu‘izz-ud-din Muhamm<*u 
warpala, the Rai of Thangarh (Tahangarh), and hand<^ 
over to Baha-ud-din Tughril. Anangapala may be taken xu 

the throne after Kunwarpala. Anangapala was followed 
in succession by Prithvipala, Rajapala and Trilokapala, the last of 
whom may be placed at the end of the thirteenth century A.D, 


VIII. THE KACHCHHAPAGHATAS 

The Kachchhapaghatas are generally taken to be the pre¬ 
decessors of the Rajput clan Kachwaha, but this assumption is not 
based on any historical evidence. Three branches of the Kachchhapa- 
ghata family are known. They ruled in Gwalior, Dubkund, and 
Narwar. 

The earliest known chief of the Gwalior (ancient Gopadri) 
branch is Lakshmana, but the territory over which he ruled is not 
known. Gwalior was under the sway of the Chandella Dhahga, a 
feudatory of the Pratlhara Vinayakapala of Kanauj, in the third quar¬ 
ter of the tenth century A.D. In or before A.D. 977 Maharajadhiraja 
Vajradaman, son of Lakshmana, established his supremacy over 
Gwalior by defeating the king of Gadhinagara (Kanauj), who may be 
identified with the Pratlhara Vijayapala. 18 Vajradaman was followed 
in succession by Mangalaraja and Kirttiraja. Kirttiraja repulsed 
an attack of the king of Malava, who may be identified with the Para- 
mara Bhoja. It is probably Kirttiraja who surrendered to Mahmud 
of Ghazni when the latter invaded Gwalior in A.D. 1021. He was 
succeeded by Muladeva, Devapala and Padmapala, one after the 
other. Padmapala probably had no son and, after his death, his 
brother (cousin?) Mahipala, son of Suryapala. ascended the throne. 
Suryapala was probably a brother of Devapala. Mahipala, who is 
known to have been ruling in A.D. 1093, was succeeded by his son 
Ratnapala some time before A.D. 1104. Names of the successors of 
Ratnapala are not known. In A.D. 1196 the Muslims conquered 
Gwalior after repeated assaults extending over a year, as will be 
related later. 

During the weak rule of Aram Shah (A.D. 1210-11), son of 
Qutb-ud-dln, the Pratlhara chief Vigraha established the supremacy 
of his family in Gwalior by defeating the Muslims. His son and 
successor Malayavarman, who is known to have been ruling in 
A.D. 1220, married the daughter of the Chahamana Kdhana of 


56 


muisT/fy 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES ^ 

add. Cunningham ascribes some coins, the dates of which extend 
from A.D. 1223 to 1230, bearing the name Malayavarman, to 
this king, Iltutmish conquered Gwalior by defeating Dewbul 
(Devavarma?), probably the successor of Malayavarman. It was 
probably during the rule of Rukn-ud-din, son of Iltutmish, that 
Gwalior was reconquered by Nrivarman (Naravarman), brother of 
Malayavarman, who is known to have been ruling in A.D. 1247. 
Naravarman’s successor seems to have been Hariraja, who suffered 
a defeat at the hands of the Chandella Vlravarman. Balban con¬ 
quered Gwalior in A.D. 1258 and placed Malik Nusrat-ud-dm in 
charge of it. 

A branch of the Kachchhapaghata family ruled apparently 
from the city of Cha^obha, which is to be identified with Dubkund, 
on the Kunu river, 76 miles south-west of Gwalior. The earliest 
known ruler of the family is Arjuna, the son of Yuvaraja, and a 
feudatory of the Chandella Vidyadhara. He killed the Pratlhara 
Rajyapala of Kanauj, and his son and successor Abhimanyu was an 
ally of the Paramara Bhoja. Abhimanyu was succeeded by his son 
Vijayapala, who was again succeeded by his son Vikramasimha, the 
known date of whose reign is A.D. 1088. 


A third branch of the Kachchhapaghata family ruled in Narwar, 
the ancient Nalapura. Three generations of kings of this family 
are known to us. They are Gaiigasimha, his successor &aradasirhha, 
and the latter’s successor Virasimha, who issued an inscription from 
the Nalapura -durga (fort) in A.D. 1120. 


In the first half of the thirteenth century the Yajvapala or 
Jajapella dynasty established its supremacy over Narwar. The 
earliest known chief of this dynasty is Ya(Pa)ramadiraja, whose 
son was Chahadadeva. Chahadadeva captured Narwar and 
established his supremacy there. He was the greatest of the kings 
in the region of Gwalior, Chanderi, Narwar and Malava during this 
period. He had 5000 cavalry and 200,000 footmen. He built a 
fortress among the defiles and passes near Narwar. and inflicted a 
severe defeat on Malik Nusrat-ud-dm Tayasal, a general of Iltutmish, 
on the bank of the small river Sindh in A.D. 1234. Tayasai is said 
to have never shown his back to the enemies in Hindustan except 
on this occasion. In A.D. 1251 during the Sultanate of Nasir-ud-dln 
his general Balban inflicted a defeat on Chahadadeva and plundered 
his fort but could not establish his supremacy there. Chahadadeva’s 
coins bear dates extending from A.D. 1237 to 1254. He was 
succeeded by his son Nrivarman, who was again succeeded by his 
son Asalladeva. Asalladeva ruled from A.D. 1254 to 1279 and 
was succeeded by his son Gopala, Who suffered a defeat at the hands 


57 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



of the Chandella Vlravarman. The reign of Gopala’s son Ganapati 
covers the period A.D. 1291 to 1298. Ganapati conquered Kirttidurga, 
which is identified with Deogarh, in the Jhansi District. Nothing 
is known of the family after Ganapati. 

IX. THE CHANDELLAS 

The Chandella king Dhahga, who raised his family to the rank 
of the principal ruling dynasties of the age, was succeeded by his 
son Ganda some time after A.D. 1002. Ganda’s son and successor 
was Vidyadhara whose feudatory, Kachchhapaghata Arjuna, killed 
the Pratlhara Rajyapala. Once in A.D. 1019, and again in A.D. 1022, 
Mahmud of Ghazni invaded Kalanjara, but could not plunder it. 
He received a large amount of money from Vidyadhara, and 
established a friendly relation with him. Vidyadhara fought success¬ 
fully with the Paramara Bhoja, and Kalachuri-chandra, who seems 
to have been no other than Kokalla II of Tripun. Vidyadhara’s son 
and successor Vijayapala won a victory over the Kalachuri Gahgeya- 
deva. Vijayapala was succeeded by his son Devendravarman, who 
is known to have been ruling in A.D. 1050. After Devendravarman 
his younger brother Kirttivarman ascended the throne some time 
before A.D. 1073. In the early part of his reign the Kalachuri Karna 
defeated him and occupied his kingdom for some time. But 
eventually Gopala, the chief of the vassals of Kirttivarman, 
succeeded in defeating Karna and reconquering the country for 
his master. Some time before A.D. 1090 Kirttivarman fought 
successfully with Mahmud, governor of the Punjab under the 
Ghaznavids, who invaded Kalanjara. Kirttivarman, who is described 
as the crest-jewel of PItasaila, and who is known to have resided 
for some time in the Pita mountain, fought a battle there with an 
enemy, who was probably Vapullaka, a general of Kalachuri Karna. 
His minister Vatsaraja wrested from the enemy the whole of the 
Maudala and built the fort of Klrttigiri, which, as already mention¬ 
ed, is identified with Deogarh, in the Jhansi District, where Klrtti- 
varman’s inscription has been found engraved on a rock. Some 
gold coins of his reign have been discovered. He was succeeded by 
his son Sallakshanavarman, who plundered Malava after defeating 
the Paramara Naravarman, and won a victory over a Chedi king who 
was probably the Kalachuri Yasahkarna. Sallakshanavarman crushed 
the refractory elements in the AntarvedI (the land between the 
Ganga and Yamuna), which was then ruled by the Gahadavaias. In 
or before A.D. 1117 he was succeeded by his son Jayavarman who, 
after a short reign, abdicated his throne in favour of his uncle 
Prithvlvarman, younger brother of Sallakshanavarman. Prithvl- 


58 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING Jlth AND 12th CENTURIES 


'SL 


fman was succeeded by his son Madanavarman, the extreme 
known dates of whose reign are A.D. 1129 and 1163; Maaana- 
varman’s inscriptions prove that his kingdom included Bhilsa, Mau 
in the Jhansi District, Ajaigarh, 20 miles south-west of Kalanjara, 
and Chhatarpur, besides Khajraho (also spelt as Khajuraho), 
Mahoba, and Kalanjara. He annexed Bhilsa by defeating the 
Paramara Yasovarman. He fought with the Gahaqlavala Govinda- 
chandra, who also claims to have conquered Dasarna or the Bhilsa 
region. He vanquished in a fierce fight the king of Chedi, who is 
to be identified with the Kalachuri Gayakarna. The Chaulukya Jaya- 
siriiha-Siddharaja of Gujarat invaded Mahoba after his conquest 
of Dhara. Madanavarman successfully defended his capital, though 
he had to surrender Bhilsa to the invader. The coins of Jayavarman, 
Prithvivarman, and Madanavarman have been found. Madana¬ 
varman was succeeded by his grandson ParamardT, son of Yaso¬ 
varman, shortly before A.D. 1165. 


Inscriptions of Paramardi’s reign, which bear dates ranging 
between A.D. 1165 and 1201, prove that he succeeded in maintain¬ 
ing his paternal kingdom intact for a very long time. The fact that 
he assumed the title “the lord of Dasarna” indicates that he was able 
to recover Bhilsa from the Chaulukyas some time after A.D. 1173, 
up to which date it is known to have formed a part of the kingdom 
of Gujarat. In or before A.D. 1182 the Chahamana Prithvlraja III 
defeated ParamardI and overran Jejakabhukti-mandala. In 
A.D. 1202 Qutb-ud-din invested Kalanjara. After offering some 
opposition ParamardI concluded a treaty with the Muslim general 
on condition of payment of tribute and elephants. His minister 
Aj Deo (Ajayadeva) disapproved of the ignominious conduct of his 
master, killed him before he could fulfil the treaty conditions, and 
renewed the fight. Ajayadeva had ultimately to surrender after a 
valiant defence due to shortage of water in the fort. Qutb-ud-din 
plundered Kalanjara and conquered Mahoba. Hazabbar-ud-din 
Hasan Arnal was appointed governor of Kalanjara. 


The Muslims could not keep Kalanjara under their control for 
a long time. Paramardi’s son Trailokyavarman, also known as 
Trailokyamalla, inflicted a severe defeat on the Muslims at Kakatfa- 
daha, modern Kakadwa, south-east of Bedwara, some time before 
A.D. 1205, and recovered all the territories including Kalanjara. 
His inscriptions, which bear dates from A.D. 1205 to 1241, 
prove that Lalitpur. Chattarpur State, Panna State, Ajaigarh 
State, and Rewah State were included in his kingdom. In 
A.©, 1211-1212 he wrested Rewah, in Baghelkhand, and probably the 


59 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


f . _ 'SJ. 

of l?ahala-mandala from the Kalachuri Vijayasimha 


Dahala 

formed a^part of the kingdom of his grandson Hammiravarman. 
Samanta (feudatory) Sallakshanavarman of the Kaurava Vamsa, 
whose headquarters were at Kakaredika, modern Kakeri on the 
border of the Panna and the Rewah States, owed allegiance to the 
Kalachuris. His son Hariraja and his grandson Kumarapala trans¬ 
ferred their allegiance to Trailokyavarman. One Bhojuka overran 
Bundelkhand and reduced Trailokyavarman to a critical position. 
Vaseka, an officer of Jayadurga i.e. Ajaigarh, defeated and killed 
Bhojuka and “made Trailokyavarman again the ornament of the 
princely families.” Kielhorn identifies Bhojuka with the father of 
Abhayadeva, who is known to have lived in the neighbourhood of 
Ajaigarh in or before A.D. 1268 during the reign of the Chandella 
Vlravarman. Vaseka’s brother Ananda, who was in charge of Jaya¬ 
durga, claims to have established peace and order in the kingdom 
of Trailokyavarman by subduing the wild tribes of the Bhillas, 
Sabaras, and the Pulindas. Malik Nusrat-ud-din Tayasai, a general 
of Iltutmish, invaded Kalanjara, and obtained vast wealth by 
plundering the townships of that territory. Trailokyavarman had 
not, however, to suffer any loss of territory on that occasion. He 
was succeeded by his son Vlravarman whose earliest known date 
is A.D. 1254. Vlravarman’s inscriptions prove that he succeeded in 
maintaining intact the kingdom which he had inherited from his 
father. His officer Mallaya won victories over Hariraja of Gwalior, 
Gopala of Nalapura (Narwar), and the king of Mathura. His sub¬ 
ordinate Rauta Abhi showed great valour in a tussle with Dabhyu- 
hadavarman in a battle at Sondhi, which is identified with the 
Seondha fort, now called Kanhargarh, on the bank of the Sindh river 
in old Datia State. Viravarman was succeeded by Bhojavarman, who 
was probably his son, some time between A.D. 1285 and 1288. Bhoja¬ 
varman ruled for a very short period and was succeeded in A.D. 1289 


by Hammiravarman, who seems to have been his younger brother. 
Hammlravarman’s inscription, dated A.D. 1289, draws the genea- 
l° g y from Paramardl, but does not mention the name of Bhoja¬ 
varman. It gives the title Shahi to all the Chandella kings it men¬ 
tions. Hammlravarman’s inscriptions prove that he was in possession 
of the Damoh and Jabalpur Districts, which were situated in the 
ancient Dahala country. The last known date of his reign is 
A.D. 1308. In A.D. 1309 ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji wrested Damoh District 
from Hammiravarman or his successor. The next known king of 
Bundelkhand is Viravarman II, who is known to have been ruling 
in A.D. 1315. Nothing is known of the successors of Viravarman II. 


60 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 31th AND 12th CENTURIES 



X. THE KALAGHURIS 


1. The Kalachuris of Tripun 

The Kalachuris of Dahala, the country round Jabalpur, in 
Madhya Pradesh, acquired more power and prestige during the reign 
of Kokalla IPs son Gangeyadeva, who assumed the title Vikram - 
aditya. He involved himself in a number of wars with his neighbours 
for the expansion of his kingdom. He made a confederacy with the 
Paramara Bhoja and Rajendra Chola, and invaded the Deccan, which 
was then ruled by the Chalukya Jayasimha II. But the Chalukyas 
succeeded in dispersing them. An inscription, dated A.D. 1019, 
states that Jayasimha defeated Bhoja and put to flight the confederacy 
of Malava. This indicates that Gangeyadeva came to the throne 
before A.D. 1019. He invaded Kosala, and defeated its king, who 
seems to have been the Somavaihsi Mahasivagupta Yayati. It is 
known from another source that Mahasivagupta Yayati laid waste 
the Dahala country after defeating the Chedis before the 8th year of 
his reign. His adversary on that occasion was either Gangeyadeva 
or his father Kokalla II. After victory over the Somavamsis 
Gangeyadeva conquered Utkala and reached the shore of the sea. 
He was assisted in that expedition by Kamalaraja of the Kalachuri 
family of Tummana. It was probably after this that Gangeyadeva 
assumed the title ‘Trikalihgadhipati’ or the lord of Trikalihga. Sub¬ 
sequently he quarrelled with his former ally Bhoja, who inflicted a 
defeat on him. His attempt to assert supremacy over Bundelkhand 
was frustrated by Chandella Vijayapala. On the north-east, how¬ 
ever, he achieved a unique success. He was already in possession of 
Baghelkhand. Some time before A.D. 1034 he conquered Banaras 
and annexed it to his kingdom. Banaras formed part of the kingdom 
of Chandella Dhanga but, as suggested above, Pala Mahipala I was 
probably in possession of it in A.D. 1026, and Gangeyadeva conquer¬ 
ed it from him. As about this time Pratlhara Yasahpala was in 
possession of the Allahabad region, Gangeyadeva could not evidently 
extend his supremacy beyond Banaras on the west. On the east he 
led a successful expedition against Anga or Bhagalpur, which was 
wjthin the kingdom of Mahipala I of Gauda, but could not annex any 
part of Magadha or TIrabhukti. In A.D. 1034 Gangeyadeva had to 
bear the brunt of an attack of the Muslims. Ahmad Niyaltigin, 
governor of the Punjab under the Ghaznavids, plundered Banaras, 
and carried away immense riches. Gangeyadeva launched a success¬ 
ful expedition against the Kira country, modern Kangra valley in 
the Punjab, which was under the sway of the Muslims. 

Gold, silver, and copper coins of Gangeyadeva have been found 
in large number. He is said to have died in the sacred city of Prayaga 


61 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


(Allahabad) along with his one hundred wives. He was succeeded 
by his son Lakshmikarna better known as Kama. The latest defi¬ 
nite date of Gangeyadeva’s reign is A.D. 1034 when, as BaihaqI tells 
us, Gangeyadeva was ruling in Banaras. The date of the Piawan 
rock inscription of his reign is read by Cunningham as (K.E.) 789 (= 
A.D. 1038), but both Kielhorn and Bhandarkar regard it as doubtful. 
Karria performed the annual sraddha ceremony of his father in 
A.D. 1042 and this has been taken by some to prove that Gangeya¬ 
deva died in A.D. 1041. But this inference can hardly be regarded 
as correct. Attention may be drawn to the fact that Gahadavala 
Govindachandra performed in A.D. 1117 the annual sraddha cere¬ 
mony of his father Madanachandra, who died before A.D. 1114. So 
the date of Kama’s accession to the throne is to be placed between 
A.D. 1034 and 1042. 


Kama was one of the greatest generals of the age. His inscrip¬ 
tions prove that Banaras and Allahabad were included in his kingdom 
and that he occupied Radha (West Bengal) for some time. He 
wrested Allahabad from Pratlhara Yasahpala some time after 
A.D. 1037 and, in course of conquest, reached the Kira country where 
he won a victory over the Muslims. His kingdom in U.P. was bound¬ 
ed on the west by that of the Rashtrakutas of Kanauj. On the east 
he led two expeditions, one against the Pala Nayapala, and the other 
against the latter’s son Vigrahapala III. Both these expeditions 
eventually proved to be abortive. He concluded a treaty with the 
Palas by giving his daughter Yauvanasri in marriage to Vigrahapala. 
Though he could not assert his supremacy over any part of the king¬ 
dom of the Palas he succeeded in occupying Radha probably by 
defeating king Ranasura or his successor. He invaded Vanga, and 
claims to have conquered it. The king of Vanga at this time was Jata- 
varman who concluded a treaty with him and married his daughter 
Virairi. The Rewah inscription of Kama, dated A.D. 1048, states 
that “the ship of the king of the Eastern country (Purvavanirdja- 
pota), being driven by the storm of unparalleled arrogance, was sub¬ 
merged inrthe ocean of his (i.e. Kama’s) forces, its joints being rent 
by (dashing against) the promontories of the mountains of his ele¬ 
phants.” It means that a king of the eastern country led an aggres¬ 
sive campaign against Karria but was repulsed by the latter. Accord¬ 
ing to the lexicographers of this age Purva-desa or the Eastern 
country lay to the east of Banaras. So it is difficult to ascertain 
whether the king of the eastern country, referred to, was Nayapala of 
Gauda, Vajravarman or Jatavarman of Vanga, or a successor of 
Ranasura of Radha. How long Kama succeeded in keeping his hold 
over Radha cannot be ascertained. After the decline of the supre¬ 
macy of Kama in that country, the Sena dynasty rose into power. 


62 


MIN/Sr^ 


/ NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 

Karna led successful expeditions against Odra and Kalinga. His 
adversary in Kalinga was Vajrahasta V of the Gahga dynasty. He 
overran Kanchi-vishaya, modem Conjeeveram, Madras, which was 
then ruled by the Chola Rajadhiraja or Rajendradeva. He claims to 
have defeated the Pallavas (of Nolambavatfi), the Kungas of Salem 
and Coimbatore Districts, Madras, the Muralas of the Malabar coast, 
and the Pandyas of Madura. It is not unlikely that the chiefs of all 
these countries formed a confederacy under the leadership of the 
Chola king, and opposed Karna. Kama won a victory over the king 
of Kuntala, who was obviously the Chalukya Somesvara I. His in* 
vasion of Southern India and the Deccan must have been completed 
before A.D. 1048, the date of the Rewah inscription, which mentions 
his fight with the people of those countries. Some time after 
A.D. 1051 Karna captured Bundelkhand by defeating the Chandella 
Klrttivarman. Subsequently Gopala, a feudatory of the Chandellas, 
drove him out, and helped Klrttivarman in regaining his throne. 
Kama raided the Huna -mandala, which was situated to the north¬ 
west of Malava. He made an alliance with the Chaulukya Bhima I 
of Gujarat for a simultaneous attack on the kingdom of the Paramara 
Bhoja from the east and west. When the battle between the Kala- 
churis and the Chaulukyas on one side and the Paramaras on the 
other was in progress, Bhoja died of a disease in c. A.D. 1055, and 
Malava was taken possession of by the invaders. In that difficult 
circumstance Rhoja’s son Jayasimha appealed to the Chalukya 
Somesvara I for help. Somesvara I sent his son Vikramaditya VI 
to render assistance to the Paramaras. Vikramaditya drove out 
Karna and Bhima and secured the throne of Malava for Jayasimha. 
Subsequently a quarrel broke out between Karpa and Bhima on the 
division of the spoils of their victory in Malava. Bhima invaded 
Dahala with a large army and forced Karna to surrender to him the 
golden man$apikd f which he had wrested from Bhoja together with 
elephants and horses. Thus though Karna fought a number of battles 
with many powers far and near, throughout the greater part of his 
life, he did not get much material advantage from them. Allahabad 
is the only country which he succeeded in adding to hil paternal 
kingdom. 

Karna assumed the title Trikalingddhipati. He built a temple 
at Banaras and founded a city near Jabalpur. He married Aval- 
ladevl of the Huna family, who gave birth to a son Yasahkarna. In 
his old age Karna seems to have abdicated his throne in favour of 
Yasahkarna shortly before A.D. 1073. 

I*i the early part of his reign Yasahkarna led two aggressive 
campaigns, one against Champaranya, modern Champaran in North 
Bihar, and the other against the Andhra country, which was then 




63 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Vijayaditya VII of the Eastern Chalukya dynasty. He had 
to fight a number of battles in defence of his kingdom. Jayasimha, 
younger brother of the Chalukya Vikramaditya VI, raided Dahala 
before A.D. 1081, while Chandradeva of the Gahadavala dynasty 
wrested Allahabad and Banaras. Paramara Lakshmadeva plun¬ 
dered his capital Tripurl, and encamped on the Reva for some time. 
The Chandella Sallakshanavarman claims to have defeated a king 
of Chedi, who was in all probability Yasahkarna. All these succes¬ 
sive foreign invasions weakened the foundation of the Kalachuri 
kingdom. Yasahkarna was succeeded by his son Gayakarna some 
time in the first quarter of the twelfth century A.D. 

Gayakarna suffered a defeat at the hands of the Chandella 
Madanavarman. Merutuhga relates a story that Karna, king of 
Dahala, led an army against king Kumarapala of Gujarat. Once 
in course of his march when he fell asleep on the back of his ele¬ 
phant in the night time his necklace, caught in a branch of a tree, 
hanged him to death. If there is any truth in the narrative, the 
Dahala king, referred to, is to be identified with Gayakarna, who is 
known to have been ruling in A.D. 1151. He was succeeded by his 
elder son Narasimha before A.D. 1155. Some time between A.D. 
1159 and 1167 Narasimha was succeeded by his younger bro¬ 
ther Jayasimha. The Kauravas of Kakaredika, modern Kakeri, on 
the border of the Panna and Rewah States, were his vassals. In 
the early part of his reign Jayasimha fought successfully with the 
king of Gurjara, evidently Chaulukya Kumarapala, and the king of 
Kuntala, who is to be identified with the Kalachuri Bijjala of the 
Deccan. About this time he repulsed an attack* of the Turushkas. 
This Turushka invasion is obviously the one led by Khusrav Malik 
which was repulsed by the Gahadavala Vijayachandra. It cannot 
be said definitely whether Jayasimha made a common cause with 
the Gahadavalas against the Muslims on that occasion. Some time 
between A.D. 1177 and 1180 Jayasimha was succeeded by his son 
Vijayasimha, the last known king of this branch of the Kalachuri 
dynasty. Inscriptions of Vijayasimha’s reign prove that he suc¬ 
ceeded ill maintaining his hold over Baghelkhand and the Dahala- 
mandala up to A.D. 1211, but within a year Chandella Trailokya- 
varman wrested from him Baghelkhand, and possibly the whole of 
the Dahala-mandaia. He had a son, named Mahakumara Ajaya- 
siiiiha, but nothing is known of him. 

2. The Kalachuris of Ratanpur 

Kalihgaraja, a remote descendant of one of the younger sons of 
Kokalla I, the founder of the Kalachuri dynasty of Tripurl, conquered 
Dakshina-Kosala and established his capital at Tummana, modern 




64 


WWSTffy 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 



<SL 


village of Tumana, in the Lapha zamindari , Bilaspur District, 
Madhya Pradesh, in the early years of the eleventh century. He 
ruled there as a feudatory of the Kalachuris of Tripuri. His son 
and successor Kamalaraja helped his overlord Kalachuri Gangeya- 
deva in conquering Utkala. Kamalaraja was succeeded by his son 
Ratnaraja, who founded the city of Ratnapura, modern Ratanpur, 
16 miles nortli of Bilaspur. Ratnaraja was succeeded by his son 
Prithvldeva, who is known to have been ruling in A.D. 1079. It 
was probably during his reign that Ratanpur was made the second 
capital of his family. His son and successor Jajalladeva I, who 
issued an inscription in A.D. 1114, became independent during the 
latter part of Yasahkarna’s reign when the power of the Kalachuris 
of Tripuri began to decline. He was in friendly relation with Gaha- 
davala Govindachandra and Chandella Sallakshanavarman. He 
took as prisoner Somesvara, the Naga ruler of Chakrakota (in the 
Bastar State), who had occupied a part of Dakshina-Kosala. He in¬ 
vaded Orissa and defeated Bhujavala, the chief of buvarnapuia, 
modern Sonpur. He claims to have received tributes from the 
chiefs of the Mandates of Dakshina-Kosala, Andhra, Khimidi. Vai- 
ragara, Lanjika, Bhaitara, Talahari, Dandakapura, Nandavali and 
Kukkuta. Khimidi is Khimidi in the Ganjam District, Orissa; Vaira- 
gara is Wairagarh in the Chanda District, Madhya Pradesh; Lan¬ 
jika is Lanji in the Balaghat District, Madhya Pradesh; and Danda¬ 
kapura may be identified with Dandaka on the border of Seuna-desa. 
It is hardly likely that he levied any tribute from Andhra, which 
was within the kingdom of Kulottunga Chola I. Jajalladeva was 
succeeded by his son Ratnadeva II before A.D. 1126. 


Ratnadeva II repulsed an attack of Anantavarman Chodaganga, 
who was joined by one Jatesvara, and of Gokarpa, a feudatory of 
the Kakatlya Prola II; and his minister Jagapala conquered for him 
Talahara-bhumi. He was succeeded by his son Prithvldeva II 
some time between A.D. 1128 and 1141. Prithvldeva II also repuls¬ 
ed an attack of king Jatesvara, and his minister Jagapala conquered 
the forts of Saraharagadh, Mavakasiha(va), and Bhramaravadra- 
desa, and took Kantara, Kusuma-bhopa, Kand§se(hVa)ra, and 
Kakayara-desa. His younger son Jajalla II succeeded him after 
A.D. 1158, and this new king’s reign period covered the years 
A.D. 1161 to 1167. Jajalla II succeeded in averting the trou¬ 
ble created by one Dhlru, who reduced him to such a critical posi¬ 
tion that he was about to lose his sovereignty. He was succeeded 
by his elder brother Jagaddeva who lived, before his accession, in 
the Eastern country (prag-desa). Some time before A.D. 1181 
Jagaddeva was succeeded by his son Ratnadeva III, who was fol¬ 
lowed on the throne by his sons Prithvldeva III and Pratapamalla in 


S.E.—5 


65 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


succession. Pratapamalla was a boy at the time of his accession 
and his kingdom seems to have been invaded by Vishnu, a minister 
of the Gahga Ananga-Bhlma III of Kalinga. He reigned at least up 
to A.D. 1218, but nothing definitely is known of his successor, 

Petty chiefs of a Kalachuri family are known to have ruled 
in the region of Kasia in the Gorakhpur District, U.P, from the 
ninth to twelfth century A.D, 


XI. THE PARAMARAS 
1. The Paramaras of Mdlava 

The Paramaras, who^on^ power and position 

under Munja an d rose to impe ilal-xank during the 

reign of Sindhuraja’s son and successor Bhoja^ who ascended the 
throne of Malava in c. A. D. 1000. Inscriptions of his reign bear 
dates ranging from A.D. 1020 to 1047, and his kingdom extended 
up to Chitor, Banswara, Dungarpur, Bhilsa, Khandesh, Konkan, and 
upper courses of the Godavari. In the early part of his reign he 
made a confed era cy with the Kalachuri Gahgeyadcya and Rajendra 
an j ore for an invasion of the kin gdom of the Chain 
Jaya simha of Kalyana. Though he and his allies at first won som e 
victories they were w ultimately... Jayasimha’s 

son So mes var a I, who came to the throne of the Deccan in A.D. 
1042, avenged himself of the wrong done to his father by plunder¬ 
ing Phara T Uj ia i n. and Maudvi,.. and f orcing Bhoja to flee away., from 
his c apital. 

During his s outhern ca mpaig n Bhoja inflicted a defeat on Indra- 
ratha, the ruler of Adi na gara , or Nagara, modem Mukhalingam, 
in the Ganjam District, Orissa. He probably fought this battle in 
association with Ra JSndra Choj a. who also claims to have defeated 
this ruler of Adinagara. In A.D. 1020 Bhoja conquered Konkan a, 
apparently by defeating the Silahara Kesideva, and annexed it to 
his kingdom. Kirttiraja of the Chaulukya dynasty of Lafa or 
southern Gujarat, whose kingdom lay to the north of that of the 
gilaharas, had also to bear the brunt of his sword. Bhoja’s attempt 
to assert his supremacy over Bundelkhand was frustrated by Chari- 
della Vidyadhara. Bhoja made an alliance with Kachchhapaghuta 
Abhimanyu of Dubkund and received military assistance from him 
in his northern campaigns. He tried to capture Gwalior but was 
stoutly resisted by the Kachchhapaghata Kirttiraja. About this 
time he seems to have come into clash with the Rashtrakujas of Kan- 
yakubja, but could not gain any material advantage over them. He 
invaded ^akapb haii and forggji. Qhahamana Viryarama to submij:. 
His endeavour Co conquer Nadol, in soutKem Marwar, by defeating 

66 
















NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 

amanas met with disaster. The Chahamana Anahilla killed 
his general Sadha, and routed the Paramara army. Bhoja’s general 

Suraditya claims to have stabilised t he royal .fortune^Qf Bhoja by 

killing one Sahavahana in the b at t l e. In ApF 1008 Bhoja sent a n 
army to help 'tKe"'Sh|hi„ Anandanala against re Tahmfid of Ghazni. 
About A D. ltfl9 he gave shelter to Anandanala’s son Trilochana - 
pala, who was hard pressed by Mahmud. In A.D. 1043 he seems to 
have*j0fluSed'a"'65nIS!^^g^2OBE!BGE^.chiels~4U3d conquered Hansi, 
Th anes w ar, Nagarkot and other dependencies of the Muslims and 
besfeged the fortress of Lahore for seven months. 20 Bhola ’s contr i¬ 
bution to the defence of Northern India against the incu rsions of th e 
Muslims was remembered by the Gahadavalas e ven long afte r his 
death. 21 




Cl 


Bhoja’s relation with his western neighbour, the Chaulukyas of 
Gujarat, was anything but friendly. I n the early part of his reign 
he_humiliat ed the Chaulukva Chamurtdaraja , so n of Mular aja, by 
forcing him to give up his royal robe when the latter was passing 
through Malava in course of his pilgrimage to Banaras. Chamunda¬ 
raja’s two sons Vallabharaja and Durlabharaja naturally assumed a 
hostile attitude, towards the Paramaras. Bhoja sacked Anahillapa- 
taka, the capital of Gujarat, during the reign of Durlabharaja’s suc¬ 
cessor Bhima I, who had w reste cLMt.. Ab.u.lrom the Paramara Dh^n- 
dhuka, a protege, of Bhoja. Bhima, probably realising that he alone 
would not be able to cope with the Paramaras, looked for an ally. For¬ 


tunately for him Bhoja also antagonised his eastern neighbour,...the 
Kalachuris of Tripun, by waging war against his former confederate 
the KalacHufi Gangeyadeva, who had to yield to his forces. Now 
Bhima found a good ally in Gangeyadeva’s son Kama against Bhoja, 
and invaded Malava. While engaged in conducting the war against 
his neighbours in the east and in the west, Bhoja died of a disease, 
and Malava fell into the hands of the Kalachuris and Chaulukyas in 
c, A.D. 1055. 


Though Bhoja fought numerous battles throughout his reign he \ 
could not acqu ire any new territory except Kohkana. He was not 
only a great soldier but also an erudite scholar. T^he authorship of 
more than t wenty-three books onvaned subjects is ascribed to him . 
He established schools for the education of his subjects. Dhanapila, 
Uvata, and many other men of letters lived in his court. He found¬ 
ed.?city named B hojapuxa and built a large ...number of temples in 
ho nour of &vaT All these attainments of Bhoja in different spheres 
of life establish his claim to be regarded as one of the greatest kings 
of mediaeval India. He was succeeded by Jav asimha. who was pro- 
bably his son. 


fi7 

























THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Jayasiihha got back his throne with the help of prince Vikrama- 
ditya VI of the Deccan, who forced the Chaulukyas and the Kala- 
churis to leave Malava. Henceforward Jayasiihha became a staunch 
ally of Vikramaditya. He accompanied the Chalukya prince in his 
invasion of the Andhra country and occupied Vengi. The Eastern 
Chalukya king Vijayaditya VII eventually drove them out of the 
Andhra country with the help of the Chola Virarajendra. Jaya- 
sirhha, by establishing friendly relation with Vikramaditya, antago¬ 
nised king Somesvara II, who suspected that his younger brother 
Vikramaditya was conspiring against him. In order to punish Jaya- 
simha king Somesvara II made an alliance with the Chaulukya 
Karna, son of Bhlma I of Gujarat, and invaded Malava. In the battle 
that followed Jayasiihha lost his life and Malava was occupied by 
Somesvara II and Kama. In that serious situation Udayaditya, a 
brother or cousin of Bhoja, sought help from the Chahamanas of 
Sakambhari. He recovered Malava after inflicting a severe defeat 
on the invader's with the help of the cavalry which the Chahamana 
Vigraharaja III had sent to his assistance. 

The inscriptions of Udayaditya’s reign bear dates A.D. 1080 and 
1086. His kingdom extended at least up to the Nimar District 
on the south, Jhalawar State on the north, and Bhilsa on the east. 
He built the famous temple of Nilakanthesvara at Udepur, in Bhilsa. 
He had a number of sons and, according to an inscription dated 
A.D. 1104, two of them, Lakshmadeva and Naravarman, ruled one 
after the other after his death. 

Lakshmadeva’s name is not found in any other record. He 
raided Gauda which was then under the supremacy of the Kaivar- 
tas, and plundered Anga and Kalihga, which were respectively ruled 
by the Rashjrakuta Mathanadeva and Anantavarman Chodagahga. 
During this campaign he seems to have come into clash with the 
Chola Kulottunga I whose kingdom extended up to Andhra. The 
statement that he conquered Papdya and Ceylon is an obvious 
exaggeration. He won a victory over the Kalachuri Yasahkarna and 
repulsed an attack of Mahmud, governor of the Punjab, when the 
latter invaded Ujjain. On the north he is said to have led his army 
to the Kira country, i.e. Kangra valley in the Punjab. 

It is known from various contemporary records that Udayaditya 
had a son named Jagaddeva, who is mentioned in some Hoysala in¬ 
scriptions as the Emperor of Malava. As regards his military achi¬ 
evements it is known that he invaded Dorasamudra in alliance with 
Chalukya Vikramaditya VI, but was ultimately repulsed by the sons 
of Hoysala Ereyanga. He conquered Chakradurga in old Bastar 
State, and defeated the kings of Malahara and the Andhra country. 


68 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


<SL 


also defeated near Mt. Abu the king of Gurjara, who may be iden¬ 
tified with Chaulukya Karna. There are good grounds for assum¬ 
ing that Lakshmadeva and Jagaddeva are identical. Jagaddeva was 
the youngest of the sons of Udayaditya. After a rule of some years 
he abdicated his throne, apparently in favour of Naravarman, “for 
fear of incurring the sin of superseding the elder brother.” On 
being invited by Vikramaditya VI he went to the Chalukya court 
and lived there for some time. After his abdication he ruled, at 
least up to A.D. 1112, the southern part of the Paramara kingdom 
which included the Yeotmal District in Berar and Adilabad District 
in the Hyderabad State. The Prabandha-chintamar li states that Jaga¬ 
ddeva was given a province to rule by Vikramaditya VI. Jagad- 
deva’s military valour was proverbial and formed the theme of many 
romantic stories in the folk-lore of Western India in the subsequent 
ages. 


Naravarman, who assumed the title Nirvdna-Ndrdyana, ascended 
the throne of Malava before A.D. 1094, which is the earliest known 
date of his reign. His kingdom extended up to old Bundi State on 
the north, and Chanda District, Madhya Pradesh, on the south. The 
Nagpur region, which was under the sway of Chalukya Vikramaditya 
VI in A.D. 1087, passed into his hands before A.D. 1104. Naravar¬ 
man had to acknowledge defeat at the hands of the Chandella Sallak- 
shanavarman and the Chahamana Ajayadeva of Sakambharl, who 
took prisoner Sulhana, the commander of the Malava army. A Pal- 
lava general under Vikrama Chola claims to have won a victory over 
a Malava king, who was in all probability Naravarman. But Nara- 
vajrman received the most severe blow from the Chaulukyas of Guja¬ 
rat. After fighting for twelve years with Chaulukya Jayasimha- 
Siddharaja he fell a prisoner in his hands. He succeeded no doubt 
in securing his release, but his discomfiture on this occasion shook 
the foundation of the imperial power of the Paramaras. He gave 
shelter to Bhikshachara, a fugitive from the court of Kashmir, in or 
after A.D. 1128. He was a poet and patron of men of letters. 


Yasovarman, who succeeded his father Naravarman before 
A.D. 1133, inherited a kingdom which was greatly shattered by the 
invasion of the Chaulukyas. It produced disruptive forces which 
he failed to control. One Vijayapala established an independent 
principality in the Dewas State in the heart of Malava. Chandella 
Madanavarman forcibly occupied the Bhilsa region. Last of all the 
Chaulukya Jayasimha-Siddharaja, accompanied by the Chahamana 
Asaraja of Nadol, fell on him and took him prisoner. Jayasiriiha 
annexed the whole of Malava, and assumed the title Avantmatha. 
Malava remained under the sway of Jayasimha up to A.D. 1138, 


69 




What happened to Yasovarman is not definitely known, but his son 
Jayavarman seems to have succeeded in recovering Malava during 
the closing years of Jayasimha’s reign. He issued an inscription 
from his residence at Vardhamanapura, which cannot be identified. 
He could not retain Malava under his control for a long period. 
Chalukya Jagadekamalla of Kalyana and the Hoysala Narasimha I 
invaded Malava, destroyed his power, and seem to have placed one 
Ballala on the throne of that country. Shortly after A.D. 1143 the 
Chaulukya Kumarapala, successor of Jayasiihha-Siddharaja, de¬ 
throned Ballala, and annexed the whole of Malava up to Bhilsa to 
his kingdom. 

For nearly twenty years Malava remained a part and parcel of 
the kingdom of Gujarat. During this period the princes of the Para¬ 
mara dynasty, designated as the ‘Mahdkumaras/ ruled Bhopal and 
the districts of Nimar, Hoshangabad and Khandesh as petty rulers. 
But in the seventh decade of the twelfth century Vindhyavarman, 
son of the Paramara Jayavarman, recovered Malava by defeating the 
Chaulukya Mularaja II. 

Vindhyavarman could not rule his newly conquered ancestral 
kingdom in peace. The decline of the power of the Chalukyas in the 
Deccan gave him no relief as the Hoysalas and the Yadavas, the suc¬ 
cessors of the Chalukyas, led successive invasions against Malava. 
Some time before A.D. 1190 Vindhyavarman, in alliance with the 
Cholas, invaded the Hoysala territory in order to crush the growing 
power of the Hoysalas, but Ballala II succeeded in repulsing them. 
Yadava Bhillama plundered Malava some time before A.D. 1189. 

In spite of all these, Vindhyavarman ultimately succeeded in 
repulsing his enemies, and when he died, shortly after A.D. 1193, 
the Paramara kingdom was firmly consolidated. His son and suc¬ 
cessor Subhatavarman turned his arms against the kingdom of Guja¬ 
rat which began to decline after the death of Ajayapala. He forced 
the Chaulukya feudatory, Simha of Lata, to transfer his allegiance 
to him. He plundered a large number of Jain temples at Dabhoi 
and Cambay, stormed Anahillapataka, and reached Somanatha with 
his army. There his progress was checked by SSridhara, the gover¬ 
nor of that place under Bhima II. Eventually Bhlma’s minister Lava- 
paprasada forced him to withdraw from Gujarat. Subhatavarman 
had to suffer a defeat at the hands of the Yadava Jaitugi. He was 
succeeded by his son Arjunavarman before A.D. 1210. 

Arjunavarman fought successfully with Jayasimha, who had 
usurped the throne of Gujarat for some time by dethroning Bhima II. 
Arjunavarman’s marriage with the daughter of Jayasimha, following 
a battle between the two kings, is the main theme of the drama 


70 




NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


<SL 


named Parijatamanjarl or VijaycLsri, composed by Arjunavarman’s 
preceptor Madana. Arjunavarman, like his predecessors, miserably 
failed in his contest with the Yadavas, who were then led by king 
Singhana. In this encounter Arjunavarman’s feudatory Sindhuraja, 
brother of Simha of Lata, lost his life. Arjunavarman wrote a num¬ 
ber of books and his court was graced by Madana, Asadhara, and 
many other men of learning. Some time between A.D. 1215 and 
1218 he was succeeded by Devapala, son of MuhcikumdTa Haris- 
chandra, grandson of Mahdkumdra Lakshmlvarman, who was the 
younger brother of Jayavarman. 


Devapala’s kingdom extended from Broach District, Bombay, 
to Bhilsa, and included Nimar and Hoshangabad Districts. Singhana, 
the Yadava king, attacked Lata and took prisoner Devapala’s vassal 
Saingramasimha, also known as Sahkha, son of Sindhuraja. Sankha 
was released and a treaty was concluded between Singhana and 
Devapala. Shortly afterwards, taking advantage of the absence of 
the Chaulukya minister Viradhavala, who went to the north to resist 
an invasion of the Muslims, Devapala and Sahkha, in alliance with 
Singhana, attacked southern Gujarat. Vastupala, governor of Cam- 
bay under Viradhavala, averted the danger by bringing about a dis¬ 
sension between Devapala and Singhana with the help of secret emis¬ 
saries. Subsequently Viradhavala wrested Broach from Sahkha. 
Malava was invaded by the Muslims during Devapala’s reign. In 
A.D. 1233 Iltutmish captured Bhilsa and plundered Ujjain, but the 
Muslim victory was shortlived. Devapala was succeeded by his son 
Jaitugideva before A.D. 1243. 

During the reign of Jaitugi Malava suffered a series of invasions. 
Krishna, the Yadava king, raided Malava; in A.D. 1250 Balban in¬ 
vaded it and, about the same time, Vaghela Visaladeva, king of Guja¬ 
rat, sacked Dhara. Jaitugi was succeeded by his younger brother 
Jayavarman II before A.D. 1256. After Jayavarman II the succes¬ 
sion of the Paramara kings can be traced only with the help of the 
known dates of the kings who followed him, but their relation with 
one another cannot be ascertained. The next known king after 


Jayavarman II is Jayasimha II, who was ruling in A.D. 1269 and 
1274.22 The kingdom of Jayasimha II was invaded by the Chaha- 
mana Jaitrasimha of Ranthambhor. The Paramara army was worst¬ 
ed by the Chahamanas at Jhampaithaghatta, and Jayasimha himself 
was forced to retire to the fort of Manjapa (Mandu). After his 
death in c. A.D. 1270 a quarrel broke out between his successor 
Arjunavarman II, who was probably his son, and his minister. After 
a severe contest each of them occupied a part of Malava. During 
the reign of Arjunavarman II the Chahamana Hammira of Rantham¬ 
bhor, the Yadava Ramachandra, and the Vaghela Sarangadeva in- 


71 




<s 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


vaded Malava. The next known king after Arjunavarman II is 
Bhoja II, who came to the throne shortly after A.D. 1283. During 
his reign Malava was again plundered by the Chahamana Hammlra, 
and Sultan Jalal-ud-din Khalji also carried on depredation in that 
country. After Bhoja II we find Mahlak Deo ruling in Malava in 
A.D. 1305 when ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji invaded the country. Mahlak 
Deo, having lost his general Kokadeva in the battle, took shelter 
in the fort of Mandu. There he was killed by ‘Ala-ud-din’s general 
‘Ain-ul-Mulk and Malava was finally conquered by the Muslims. 


2. Minor Branches of the Paramaras in Rajputdna 
(i) Mt. Abu 

In the latter part of the tenth century Vakpati-Munja, king of 
Malava, placed his son Aranyaraja on the throne of Mt. Abu, Sirohi 
State, Rajputana, with its capital at Chandravati. Aranyaraja’s suc¬ 
cessors were Krishnaraja, Dharanlvaraha, Mahxpala alias Dhruva- 
bhata (A.D. 1002), and Dhandhuka. Dhandhuka was dethroned by the 
Chaulukya Bhlma I of Gujarat before A.D. 1030, but was subsequent¬ 
ly restored to power by the Chaulukya king at the request of Vimalu 
of the Pragvata family. Dhandhuka had three sons, Pur^apala, 
Dantivarman, and Krishna II, all of whom ascended the throne one 
after the other. Purnapala (A.D. 1042, 1045) declared indepen¬ 
dence, but Bhlma I brought Mt. Abu again under his control in the 
later part of his reign. Since then the country remained a part and 
parcel of the Chaulukya kingdom. Krishna II was succeeded by 
Dantivarmans son Yog&raja, who was succeeded by his son Rama- 
deva. After the reign of Ramadeva the throne of Mt. Abu seems 
to have been usurped by Krishna IPs son Kakaladeva, who was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Vikramasiihha. Vikramasiihha revolted against 
the Chaulukyas but was defeated and thrown into prison by king 
Kumarapala, who then placed Ramadeva’s son Yasodhavala on the 
throne of Mt. Abu. Yasodhavala, who is known to have been ruling 
in A.D. 1145 arid 1150, fought with Ballala, king of Malava, on be¬ 
half of his overlord Kumarapala, and killed him. He was succeeded 
by his son Dharavarsha some time before A.D. 1063. Dharavarsha 
helped Kumarapala in his war against Mallikarjuna of Konkana, and 
his younger brother Prahladana saved the power and prestige of the 
Chaulukya Ajayapala, successor of Kumarapala, by defeating the 
Guhila Samantasimha of Medapata. It is stated that Ranasimha, son 
of the Paramara Vikramasiihha, defeated the warriors of Malava on 
the banks of the Parla and obtained Antara. It is further stated that 
Dharavarsha got back his territory through the favour of Ranasimha. 
It may only be suggested that Ranasimha, son of the deposed Vik- 


72 


MIN ISTfy 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


<SL 


ramasimha, usurped the throne of Mt. Abu some time after the death 
of Kumarapala, but restored Dharavarsha to power after a short 
reign. Dharavarsha repulsed an attack of the Chahamana Fcithvi- 
raja III against Bhima II of Gujarat. In A.D. 1197 he suffered a de¬ 
feat at the hands of Qutb-ud-din’s general Khusrav near the foot of 
Mt. Abu. He helped Viradhavala of Gujarat in repulsing an a tac 
of Sultan Iltutmish^nd was succeeded by his younger brother Pra 
ladana after A.D. 1219. Prahladana is the author of the drama 
P&rtha-pamkrama. Some time before A.D. 1230 Prahladana was 
succeeded by Dharavarsha’s son Somasimha, who declared indepen¬ 
dence. Somasimha’s son and successor was 'Krishnaraja. Krish- 
naraja’s son Pratapasimha, also known as Patala, reconquered, with 
the help of the Vaghelas, his paternal throne, which was occupied 
by Guhila Samarasimha. He ruled his kingdom as a vassal o t t 
Vaghela Sarahgadeva, and was succeeded by his son Arjuna, who is 
known to have been ruling in A.D. 1290. Some time before A.D 
1320 Mt. Abu passed into the hands of Chahamana Luntiga of South 

Marwar. 

(ii) Vagada 

In the middle of the tenth century A.D. Dhanika, a remote des¬ 
cendant of Dambarasimha, younger son of Upendra, 23 founded a 
kingdom in Vagada, modern Banswara and Dungarpur States, the 
capital of which was Utthunaka, modern Arthuna in the Banswara 
State. Dhanika’s successor Chachcha fought on the side of Siyaka II 
against Rashtrakuta Khottiga, and lost his life in the battle. Cha¬ 
chcha was followed by Chandapa and Satyaraja one after the other. 
Satyaraja assisted Bhoja in his war against the Chaulukyas. After 
Satyaraja ruled Limbaraja, Mandalika (A.D. 1059), Chamundaraja 
(A.D. 1079, 1100), and Vijayaraja (A.D. 1108-09). About the middle 
of the twelfth century Vagada was occupied by the Guhilas. 

(ii^) Jalor (Jabali'purct) 

Vakpati-Munja’s son Chandana was the first king of the Jalor 
branch of the Paramara family. He was followed in succession y 
Devaraja, Aparajita, Vijjala, Dharavarsha, and Vlsala (A.D. HID. 
The last known king of the family is Kumtapala, who had to surren¬ 
der Jalor to the Chahamana Kirttipala of Nadol in the latter part of 
the twelfth century. 

(iv}~ Bhinmal 

Sindhuraja’s son Dusala is the founder of the Bhinmal branch 
of the Paramara dynasty. In the early years of the eleventh century 
Devaraja of this family obtained Maru-ma-adala from the Chahamana 

73 



l'HE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


*8L 


labharaja of Sakambhari. Krishnaraja (A.D. 1060, 1066), grand¬ 
son of Devaraja, was put into prison by the Chaulukya Bhima I. He 
was released by the Chahamana Balaprasada of Nadol and ruled as 
an independent king. After Krishnaraja his son Sochharaja, Uda- 
yaraja and his son Somesvara (A.D. 1140, .1161) occupied the throne. 
Udayaraja’s might is said to have spread as far as Choda, Gauda, 
Karnata and Malava, but his son Somesvara is said to have regained 
his lost kingdom through the Chaulukya Jayasimha-Siddharaja. The 
next known king after Somesvara is Jayatasimha (A.D. 1182), who 
seems to have been succeeded by Salakha. In the early years of the 
thirteenth century Bhinmal came under the supremacy of the Cha- 
hamanas of Southern Marwar. 


XII. THE CHAULUKYAS OF GUJARAT 

By the beginning of the eleventh century A.D. the Chaulukyas 
had firmly established themselves in Gujarat. In A.D. 1009-10, king 
Chamundaraja, after the death of his son Vallabharaja, handed the 
sovereignty over to his second son Durlabharaja to whom Chahamana 
Mahendra gave his sister in marriage in a svayamvara sabha (an 
assembly for the selection of bridegroom) at Nadol. The chiefs of 
Malava, Mathura, Huna country etc., the disappointed suitors for the 
hand of the princess, attacked Durlabha on his way back to his own 
country, but he defeated them all. He plundered Lata, which was 
then ruled by Kirttiraja (A.D. 1018), son of Gongiraja, and grandson 
of the Chaulukya Barappa. Lata was not, however, annexed to the 
kingdom of the Chaulukyas on that occasion. After Kirttiraja his 
son Vatsaraja and his grandson Trilochanapala ruled Lata at least up 
to A.D. 1051. In his old age in c. A.D. 1022, Durlabha abdicated 
the throne in favour of his nephew Bhimadeva I, son of Nagadeva. 

Bhima had to suffer a great disaster three years after his acces¬ 
sion. In A.D. 1025 Mahmud of Ghazni overran Gujarat and plunder¬ 
ed Somanatha. Bhima had fled to Kanthakot in Kutch at the approach 
of the Muslim army, but returned to his capital after the departure 
of the invader. Some time before A.D. 1031 he wrested Mt. Abu 
from Paramara Dhandhuka, and appointed Vimala of the Pragvata 
family as its governor. Vimala built there the famous temple of 
Adinatha. Subsequently Bhima restored Dhandhuka to power, 
whose son Purnapala is known to have been ruling there in A.D. 1042 
as an independent chief. The Mt. Abu inscription of Bhima, dated 
A.D. 1062, proves that the country again passed into his hands in the 
closing years of his reign. It remained a part of the kingdom of 
Gujarat till the end of the thirteenth century. Bhima annexed 
Bhinmal and threw its ruler, the Paramara Krishnaraja, into prison. 


74 


MINISr/fj, 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 



His attempts to assert his supremacy over southern Marwar were, 
however, baffled by the Chahamana Ahila of Nadol and the latter’s 
successor Anahilla. Anahilla’s son Balaprasada forced him to release 
Krishnaraja. The Dvydsraya relates that Bhlma went to the Punjab, 
crossed the Sindhu by means of a stone bridge built by him, and 
defeated Hammuka, ruler of Sindh. Merutunga relates that during 
this time, taking advantage of Bhlma’s absence, the Paramara 
Bhoja’s general Kulachandra plundered Anahillapataka. After his 
return to Gujarat Bhlma sent batches of soldiers to Malava from 
time to time for marauding purposes. It has been noticed above that 
in the middle of the eleventh century Bhlma and his ally the Kala- 
churi Karna made an organised attack on Malava. Bhima’s final 
battle with Bhoja and his subsequent quarrel with Karna have been 
noticed above. 24 The statement in the Dvydsraya that he won vic¬ 
tories over Bhadrabhat, the ruler of the distant Gajabandh desa, 
and defeated the kings of Dasarna, Kasi, Ayodhya, and Yantri desa 
does not find support in any other record. The same source relates 
that the rulers of Pundra and Andhra entered into friendly relation 
with him. 

Bhlma had three sons, Mularaja, Kshemaraja, and Karna. 
Mularaja predeceased his father, and Kshemaraja, whose mother 
was of low birth, declined to ascend the throne. So Bhlma handed 
the sovereignty over to Karna in c. A.D. 1064, and retired to a place 
of pilgrimage for penance. 

The kingdom of Karna, who assumed the title Trailokyamalla, 
extended on the south up to Navsari, in Bombay State. In alliance 
with the Karnatas, he conquered Malava by defeating and killing 
Paramara Jayasimha, but was ultimately repulsed by the Paramara 
Udayaditya. In the latter part of his reign he had to suffer a 
defeat at the hands of the Paramara Jagaddeva. He subdued 
a Bhilla chief named Asa, residing at Asapalli, modern Asaval, near 
Ahmadabad. His invasion of Southern Marwar was repulsed by the 
Chahamana Prithvlpala of Nadol. He married MayanalladevI, the 
daughter of the Kadamba Jayakesin, king of Goa, and was succeed¬ 
ed by his minor son Jayasimha in c. A.D. 1094. MayanalladevI acted 
as a regent for her son for some time. 

Jayasimha, who assumed the title Siddhardja, was one of the 
greatest kings of his dynasty. Inscriptions of his reign prove that 
his kingdom extended up to Bali in Jodhpur and Sambhar in Jaipur 
on the north, Bhilsa on the east, and Kathiawar and Kutch on the 
west. He put down the revolt of the non-Aryan Barbara, who was 
troubling the ascetics of Siddhapura. After a protracted battle he 
defeated and imprisoned Navaghana, the chief of the Abhlras of 


75 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




Saurashfra, and appointed his Dandadhipati Sajjana governor of 
that country. On the north he annexed Bhinmal by defeating the 
Paramaras before A.D. 1129, and continued his hereditary fight with 
the Chahamanas of Nadol. It seems that when Jayasimha was 
young, Chahamana Jojalla sacked Anahillapataka. Jojalla’s successor 
Asaraja submitted to Jayasimha and ruled his territory as his vassal. 
Jayasimha pushed his arms further north and conquered Sakarnbharl, 
modern Sambhar, after defeating the Chahamana Arnoi'aja. He 
gave his daughter in marriage to Arnoraja and allowed him to rule 
his territory as his vassal. He conquered Vagada, and being assisted 
by Asaraja of Nadol, invaded Malava. After a long-drawn battle he 
took Paramara Naravarman prisoner, but subsequently released him. 
Some time before A.D. 1138 he took Naravarman’s son Yasovarman 
prisoner and annexed Avanti to his kingdom. He invaded Kalanjara 
and Mahoba, and forced the Chandella Madanavarman to surrender 
Bhilsa to him. On the south Jayasimha came into conflict with the 
Chalukya Vikramaditya VI of Kalyana and won a victory over him. 
He was in friendly relation with the king of Dahala, who seems to 
have been Gayakarna. During the closing years of his reign Jaya- 
sirhha could not keep his control over some of the newly annexed 
territories. The Paramara Jayavarman, son of Yasovarman, became 
independent in Malava, and the Chahamana Asaraja of Nadol, having 
freed himself from the control of the Chaulukyas, declared hostility 
against Jayasimha. 

Jayasimha was a devotee of Siva and built the temple of Rudra- 
Mahakala at Siddhapura. He established schools for learning 
Jyotisha Sastra, Nyaya jSdstra, and Purana, and his court was graced 


by the great Jain scholar Hemachandra. The last known date of 
Jayasimha is V.S. 1200 (= A.D. 1143). He had no son, and Kum-ara- 
pala, the great-grandson of Kshemaraja, who was a son of BhTma I 
by a concubine, was a claimant to the throne. In view of the low 
origin of Kumarapala Jayasimha did not approve of his claim, and 
adopted Bahama, the son of his minister Udayana, as his successor. 
Kumarapala’s father Tribhuvanapala was killed, and he was driven 
into exile. But after the death of Jayasimha, some time between 
A.D. 1143 and 1145, Kumarapala secured the throne for himself with, 
the help of the Jains and his brother-in-law Krishna. Bahada fled to 
Sakarnbharl, and took service under the Chahamanas. 

The inscriptions of Kumarapala’s reign show that his kingdom 
extended up to Barmer in Mallani, Pali in Jodhpur, and Chitor in 
Udaipur on the north, Bhilsa on the east, and Kathiawar on the 
west. Immediately after his accession Kumarapala put to death the 
ministers who conspired to kill him, and blinded for insolence his 
sister’s husband Krishna, who had helped him in securing the throne. 


76 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


<SL 


nthe early part of his reign he was threatened with invasions by 
his northern and eastern neighbours. The Chahamana Arnoraja of 
Sakambhari took up the cause of Bahada and made an alliance with 
Ballala, king of Ujjain, and the chiefs ruling on the banks of the 
Para river against Kumarapala. Arnoraja and Ballala made a 
simultaneous attack on Gujarat from the north and the east. 
Kumarapala despatched his generals Vijaya and Krishna against 
Ballala, and himself marched with an army to meet Arnoraja. 
Arnoraja received a severe wound in the battle, and concluded peace 
which was cemented by the marriage of his daughter to the Chau- 
lukya king. Kumarapala then attacked Mt. Abu, dethroned Paramara 
Vikramasimha, who had become hostile to him during his war with 
the Chahamanas, and made the nephew of the latter, Paramara 
Yasodhavala, its king some time before A.D. 1145. He, then, along 
with Yasodhavala, joined his generals Vijaya and Krishna, who were 
fighting with Ballala. Ballala was killed in the battle and the whole 
of Malava up to Bhilsa was again annexed to the kingdom of Gujarat. 
At this time Suiiivara, a chief of Saurashtra, revolted, and the 
Chaulukya minister Udayana lost his life in an attempt to put him 
down. Kumarapala sent another contingent to Saurashtra and 
brought Sumvara under his control. The Chahamana Ahladana, son 
of Asaraja of Nadol, gave him substantial help on this occasion and 
probably in recognition of this service he gave him Kirafakupa (near 
Banner) and some other territories to rule. Kumarapala defeated 
Rajyapala of Nadol and handed the kingdom over to his Daridanayaka 
Vaijalladeva, who administered it from c. A.D. 1154 to c. A.D. 1159. 
Paramara Somesvara of Bhinmal, whose kingdom extended up to 
Kiraju, acknowledged his sway. In A.D. 1150 Kumarapala led an 
aggressive campaign against the Chahamana Anioraja of Sakam¬ 
bhari, as the latter had insulted his queen, the daughter of the 
Chaulukya Jayasimha. He devastated the Sapadalaksha country and 
defeated Arnoraja, but allowed him to rule his territory. Some 
time between A.D. 1160 and 1162 he despatched his minister 
Ambada with a large army against Mallikarjuna of Kohkana, who 
was killed and whose kingdom was annexed to Gujarat. The Para¬ 
mara Dharavarsha and prince Somesvara, second son of the Chaha¬ 
mana Arnoraja, assisted the Chaulukya army in this battle. 


The Jain chronicles of Gujarat claim that Kumarapala came 
under the influence of Hemachandra, the erudite Jain scholar and 
author of a large number of books, who lived in his court, and 
embraced Jainism. This is corroborated by an epigraphic record 
which further shows that the king changed his creed before 
A.D. 1164. The Gujarat chroniclers state that the king forbade 
animal sacrifice, and his order was obeyed in Saurashtra, Lata, 


77 



Malava, Abhira, Medapata, Meru, and Sapadalaksha. The Brah- 
manas, who were not allowed to violate this order, had to offer 
sacrifices of grains. There are epigraphic records to prove that 
Kumarapala’s feudatories in Southern Marwar issued order prohibit¬ 
ing the slaughter of animals. The inscriptions of Kumarapala show 
that though he changed his creed, he was reverential to his family 
deity Siva, and built temples for both the Jains and the Brahmanas. 
He abrogated the law empowering the State to confiscate the pro¬ 
perty of those who died intestate, and stopped gambling, which was 
very popular both with the nobles and the common people. 

After the death of Kumarapala in A.D. 1171-72 there was a 
struggle for the throne between his sister’s son Pratapamalla, who 
was apparently backed by the Jains, and Ajayapala, son of Kumara¬ 
pala’s brother Mahipala, who seems to have been supported by the 
Brahmanas. Ajayapala came out victorious, and ascended the 
throne. He maintained his control over the kingdom of Malava, 
which extended up to Bhilsa on the east, and Purna-Pathaka, on the 
bank of the Purna, on the south. He led an army against Sakambharl 
and forced its king Somesvara to surrender to him a golden mantja- 
pika as a tribute. The Guhila chief Samantasimha of Mewar invad¬ 
ed Gujarat and wounded Ajayapala in the battle. On that occasion 
the Paramara Prahladana, younger brother of Dharavarsha of Mt. 
Abu, saved the prestige of the Chaulukya king by inflicting defeat on 
the invader. The Jain chronicles allege that Ajayapala was a per¬ 
secutor of the Jains, that he demolished Jain temples, mercilessly 
executed the Jain scholar Ramachandra, and killed Ambada, a 
minister of Kumarapala, in an encounter. 

Ajayapala lost his life at the hands of the Pratihara Vayajaladeva 
in c. A.D. 1176, and was succeeded by his young son Mularaja II, 
whose mother, queen Naikidevi, the daughter of the Kadamba Para- 
mardin, king of Goa, acted as regent. In A.D. 1178 Mu‘izz-ud-din 
Muhammad Ghuri attacked the kingdom of Gujarat. Naikidevi, 
“taking her son (Mularaja) in her lap,” led the Chaulukya army 
against the Muslims and defeated them at Gadaraghatfa near the 
foot of Mt. Abu. Though the Muslim historians mention the name 
of Mu'izz-ud-din Muhammad Ghuri’s adversary on this occasion as 
Bhima (II), the overwhelming internal evidence leaves no doubt 
that the battle was fought during the reign of Mularaja II. About 
this time the Paramara Vindhyavarman wrested Malava from the 
Chaulukyas. Mularaja II died in the early part of A.D. 1178, and 
was succeeded by his younger brother Bhima II, who was obviously 
a minor. 


78 


MIN/Sr^ 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING nth AND 12th CENTURIES 


Bhima IPs inscriptions, the dates of which extend from A.D. 1178 
to 1239, prove that he was in possession of Barmer, Godwar in 
Jodhpur, Dungarpur, and Kathiawar. Internal disorder and foreign 
invasions reduced Bhima to the position of a titular king, and taking 
advantage of his young age the provincial governors and the minis¬ 
ters divided the kingdom among themselves. In that predicament 
Bhima had to rely on the support of the Vaghelas who rose into 
prominence in Bhimapalli under Dhavala of the Chaulukya family, 
the husband of Kumarapala’s maternal aunt. Dhavala’s son Arno¬ 
raja had fought on the side of Kumarapala against the chiefs of 
Medapata and Chandravati. In recognition of this service Kumara¬ 
pala granted him the village Vyaghrapalll, 10 miles south-west of 
Anahillapataka, where he settled along with his family. It is after 
the name of this village that the successors of Arnoraja are called 
Vaghelas. Arnoraja came to the rescue of young Bhima II, and 
brought the recalcitrant elements under control, but lost his life while 
thus consolidating the power of Bhima. Arnoraja’s son Lavana¬ 
prasada then took charge of the administration on behalf of the 
Chaulukya king. He fixed his headquarters at Dholka, the chief city 
in Khetaka, modern Kaira, and the two brothers Tejahpala and 
Vastupaia of the Pragvata family served him as ministers. The 
weakness of the sovereignty of the Chaulukyas invited the foreigners 
to invade Gujarat about this time. The Yadava Bhillama and his 
son Jaitugi led successive expeditions against Bhima. The Paramara 
Subhatavarman annexed Lata and overran Gujarat, but was ulti¬ 
mately routed by Lavanaprasada. The Muslims under Qutb-ud-din 
occupied Ajmer in A.D. 1193-94. In 1195 Bhima sent an army to help 
the Mhers against the Muslims, and the Chaulukya army pursued 
the Muslims up to the vicinity of Ajmer. In A.D. 1197 Qutb-ud-din, 
with a fresh contingent from Ghazni, invaded Gujarat. He forced 
his way through Mt. Abu by defeating Rai Karan and Dharavarsha, 
and plundered Anahillapataka, but shortly after withdrew from 
Gujarat. In the early years of the thirteenth century the Chaulukyas 
under Bhima established their supremacy over Godwar, in Jodhpur, 
by defeating Samantasimha, and posted there the Chahamana 
Dhamdhaladeva as their governor. / 


Some time before A.D. 1210 one Jayasirhha usurped the throne 
of Anahillapataka. The usurper, who had suffered defeat at the hands 
of the Paramara Arjunavarman of Malava, was dethroned by 
Bhima II some time between A.D. 1223 and 1226. Bhima is not 
known to have taken any part in defending Gujarat against the 
aggression of the foreigners, and all arrangements for defence were 
made by Lavanaprasada and his able son Viradhavala. They put 
Tejahpala in charge of Dholka and posted Vastupaia at Stambha 


79 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


(Cambay) as a governor to defend southern Gujarat. Lavapa- 
prasada repulsed a number of invasions led by the Yadava Singhana. 
On one occasion, when Singhana reached the Mahi river with his 
army, Lavanaprasada and Viradhavala had to hurry to the north to 
meet the attacks of some Maravada chiefs, who made an alliance 
with the Chahamana Sahkha of Lata and Ghughula, king of Godraha. 
Though Singhana did not press his advantage further, his ally 
Sahkha attacked Vastupala, but was defeated in the battle at Vata- 
kupa, Lavanaprasada and his son succeeded in repulsing the attacks 
of the Maravada chiefs and making their position secure on the 
north. On another occasion Sihghaiia, in alliance with Devapala oi 
Malava and Sahkha‘ attacked southern Gujarat, just at the time 
when the Muslims under Iltutmish had invaded northern Gujarat. 
Viradhavala, leaving Vastupala in charge of the southern frontier, 
himself went to the north and repulsed the invaders. Vastupala also 
succeeded in dispersing Singhana and his allies. Lavanaprasada 
entered into a treaty with Singhana before A.D. 1231, and the two 
countries maintained friendly relation for some years. Shortly after 
A.D. 1231 Lavanaprasada retired and Viradhavala became the 
de facto ruler of Gujarat. Viradhavala killed the two rebel chiefs 
Sangana and his brother Chamunda of Vamanasthali, subjugated 
Bhlmasimha of Bhadresvara, and took king Ghughula of Godraha 
prisoner. Viradhavala had three sons, Pratapamalla, Virama, and 
Visvamalla (Visala). Pratapamalla died at an early age leaving 
behind a son named Arjuna. How long Viradhavala ruled Dholka can¬ 
not be ascertained. Mahamandalesvara Virama is found ruling from 
Vidyutpura as a vassal of Bhima II in A.D. 1239. A colophon of a 
manuscript of the Yogasastra bears the date V.S. 1295 (= A.D. 1233) 
and is stated to have been written during the reign of the Maha¬ 
mandalesvara Visaladeva. The Gujarat chroniclers state that the 
two brothers were hostile to each other, and Visala forced Virama 
to take shelter in Jabalipura (Jalor) under his father-in-law Udaya- 
simha, where he was killed at the instigation of Vastupala. The 
authenticity of this account cannot be verified. The Sundha Hill 
inscription (A.D. 1261), on the other hand, states that Chachiga, son 
of Udayasiihha (A.D. 1206-49), destroyed the Gurjara lord Virama. 
It follows from this evidence that Virama occupied the throne oi 
Gujarat, and was defeated by Chachiga some time after A.D. 1249. 
This, however, goes against the testimony of the Jain literature, 
according to which Virama never occupied the throne and his brother 
Visala became king in A.D. 1243. 

The last known date of Bhima II’s reign from his inscriptions is 
A.D 1239. He was succeeded by Tribhuvanapala, who was ruling 
in Anahillapataka in A.D. 1242. It seems that during the reign of 


') NORTHERN INDIA DURING Ilth AND 12th CENTURIES 

fry . 

Tribhuvanapala the Yadava Singhana, the Paramara Jaitugi of 
Malava, and the Guhila Jaitrasimha of Mewar invaded the kingdom 
of Gujarat. Visaladeva helped Tribhuvanapala in routing all these 
enemies. Tribhuvanapala seems to have been superseded by Virama, 
who was again deposed by his brother Vlsala before A.D. 1251. 
Visala abdicated the throne of Anahillapataka in favour of his nephew 
Arjuna, son of Pratapamalla, between A.D. 1261 and 1264. Arjuna 
had two sons, Rama and Sarangadeva, and was succeeded by the 
latter in A.D. 1274. It is known from Sarangadeva’s inscriptions 
that Kaira in Gujarat, Kathiawar, Kutch, and Anahillapataka were 
within his kingdom. Some time before A.D. 1285 he was reduced to 
a precarious condition by the Muslims under Balban, but succeeded 
ultimately in repulsing them with the help of the Guhila Samara- 
simha. Subsequently this Guhila chief became hostile to Saranga¬ 
deva, who thereupon helped the Paramara Pratapasimha in recon¬ 
quering Mt. Abu from Samarasimha. Sarangadeva won a victory over 
Arjunavarman II of Malava and repulsed an attack of the Yadava 
Ramachandra of Devagiri. He was succeeded by his nephew Kama, 
son of Rama, in A.D. 1296. In A.D. 1299 Ulugh Khan and Nusrat 
Khan, two generals of ‘Ala-ud-din Khaljl, wrested the whole oi 
Gujarat from Karria and captured his queen Kowladevi (Kamaladevi) 
who was subsequently admitted into the harem of ‘Ala-ud-din. 
Kama fled with his daughter Devaladevi to Baglan in Nasik where 
he ruled for some years. Shortly after A.D. 1306 Alaf Khan, 
governor of Gujarat, attacked Baglan. Kama sent Devaladevi, who 
was betrothed to the Yadava Sankara, to Devagiri under an escort. 
But on the way she was captured by the Muslims and sent to Delhi. 
Kama fought bravely for some time with Alaf Khan but, having fail¬ 
ed to cope with the invader, fled to Devagiri. His subsequent career 
is not known. He was the last king of the dynasty, and evidently 
died a fugitive. 



{ XIII. THE CHAHAMANAS 
1. The Chahamanas of Sakambharj 


The Chahamanas of Sakambhari, as we have noted above, 
wei'e already a rising power under Durlabharaja at the close of the 
tenth century. Govindaraja II, also known as Ganqlu, son of Dur¬ 
labharaja, seems to have come into clash with Mahmud of Ghazni, 
but did not suffer much. Govindaraja IPs successor Vakpatiraja II 
defeated Guhila Ambaprasada. The next king Viryarama, younger 
brother of Vakpati II, was badly worsted in a battle with the 
Chahamana Anahilla of Nadol and subsequently lost his life in a 
battle with the Paramara Bhoj a. Viryarama wag followed in sue- 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


ission by his brother Chamundaraja, Simghata, and Dusala (Dur- 
labharaja III). Durlabha, the brother of Simghata, lost his life 
in a battle with the Matahgas, i.e. the Mlechchhas, and was 
succeeded by his brothers Virasimha and Vigraharaja III one after 
the other. Vigraharaja helped the Paramara Udayaditya with a 
cavalry force against the Chaulukya Karna. Vigraharaja’s son and 
successor Prithviraja I, who is known to have been ruling in 
A.D. 1105, killed 700 Chaulukyas who went to Pushkara to rob the 
Brahmanas. From the time of Prithviraja Fs son and successor 
Ajayaraja, the Chahamanas of Sakambhari began to launch aggressive 
campaigns against their neighbours in order to establish an empire. 
Ajayaraja invaded Ujjain and captured in battle Sulhana, the com¬ 
mander of the army of the king of Malava, who seems to have been 
the Paramara Naravarman. He killed three kings, viz. Chachiga, 
Sindhula, and Yasoraja, in engagements, and founded the city 
of Ajayameru, modern Ajmer. Silver and copper coins of his reign 
have been found, some of which bear the names of his queen Somala- 
devl. Fie was succeeded by his son Arnoraja, also known as Anaka 
and Annalladeva, before A.D. 1133. 


Arnoraja defeated and killed a large number of the Turushkas, 
i.e. the Muslims, who attacked the Sapadalaksha country by way of 
Marusthall (desert). He overran the kingdom of Kusavarana, which 
cannot be definitely identified. He had to acknowledge the suze¬ 
rainty of the Chaulukya Jayasimha, who gave him his daughter 
Kanchanadevi in marriage, and suffered two defeats at the hands of 
the Chaulukya Kumarapala who married his daughter Jalhana. His 
wars with these two Chaulukya monarchs have been described above. 
In addition to Kanchanadevi Arnoraja had another queen named 
Sudhava, who was the daughter of a chief of Avlchi in the desert. 
Kanchanadevi gave birth to a son Somesvara, while Sudhava had 
three sons. Arnoraja was killed by the eldest son of Sudhava, for 
some unknown reason, before A.D. 1153. This parricide, who may 
be identified with Jugadeva, ruled for a short time, and appears to 
have been supplanted by his younger brother Vigraharaja IV, also 
known as Visaladeva. 


The known dates of Vigraharaja extend from A.D. 1153 to 
1163. The Chahamanas established a big empire for the first time 
during his reign. Fie conquered Dhillika (Delhi) from the Tomaras, 
and took possession of Asika, modern Hansi in the Hissar District in 
the Punjab. While carrying on conquest in the Punjab, he fought 
a number of battles with the Muslims. In the south he plundered 
Pallika (Pali in Jodhpur), burnt Jabalipura, modern Jalor, and sack¬ 
ed Nadol. All these territories were in the kingdom of the Chau- 


82 


miSf/fy 


lj NORTHERN INDIA DURING Uth AND 12th CENTURIES 

'^kya Kumarapala, and the Paramara Kumtapala was his adversary 
at Jabalipura. Vigraharaja is said to have also defeated one Sajjana. 
Delhi Siwalik Pillar inscriptions of his reign prove that his kingdom 
extended up to the Siwalik Hill, Saharanpur, U.P., on the north. 

The epigraphic records of his reign also establish that Jajpur District, 
in Udaipur, was within his territory. Vigraharaja composed the 
Harakeli-nataka, fragments of which are found engraved on a stone 
at Ajmer. The Mahdkavi Somadeva composed in honour of this king 
the Lalita-Vigraharaja-ndtaka , some portions of which are found 
engraved in a mosque at Ajmer. Vigraharaja was a king of great 
power and strength, and his claim that he made Aryavarta again the 
land of the Aryas by repeatedly defeating the Mlechchhas or the 
Muslims is not an empty boast. He was succeeded by his son Apara- 
Gangeya, who died young. After Apara-Gangeya Prithvlbhata or 
Prithvlraja II, .son of the eldest son of queen Sudhava, occupied the 
throne. As Prithvibhata claims that he defeated the king of Sakam- 
bharl, it seems that he wrested the sovereignty from young Apara- 
Gaiigeya. His inscriptions bear two dates, A.D. 1168 and 1169. He 
put his maternal uncle, the Guhila Kilhana, in charge of Asika 
(PIansi) to keep the Muslims in check. Kilhana burnt a city named 
Panchapura, which is identified with Panchapattana on the Sutlej, 
and took its ruler prisoner. His adversary on this occasion appears 
to have been Khusrav Malik of the Yamim dynasty, who came into 
conflict with the Gahadavala Vijayachandra of Kanauj. Kilhana also 
defeated a prince named Vasata. 

Prithvlraja II was succeeded by his uncle Somesvara, son of 
Arnoraja by the Chaulukya princess KanchanadevI, in A.D. 1168-69. 

In the early part of his life Somesvara lived in the court of Gujarat 
during the reigns of his grandfather Jayasimha and Kumarapala. 
While living there he fought on the side of Kumarapala against 
Mallikarjuna of Konkana and is said to have killed his adversary. 
About this time he married a Kalachuri princess, who gave birth to 
two sons, Prithvlraja (III) and Hariraja. After the death of Prithvi- 
raja II, Somesvara went to Sapadalaksha on the invitation of the 
ministers of State, along with his queen and two sons, and ascended 
the throne. His kingdom extended up to Bijuli in Udaipur on the 
south. He was succeeded by his son Prithvlraja III in A.D. 1177. 

I he career of Prithvlraja III and the circumstances under which the 
rule of the Chahamanas came to a close in Ajmer will be discussed 
in the following chapter. 

2. The Chahamanas of Ranastambhapura 

A collateral branch of the Chahamanas of Ajmer ruled in Rana¬ 
stambhapura, modern Ranthambhor, in Jaipur, in the thirteenth % 




83 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


ceritury. The kings of this family claim to have been born in the 
lineage of Prithviraja III. The statement in Nayachandra Sun’s 
Hammira-Mahaktivya that Govindaraja, the founder of the family, 
was a grandson of Prithviraja III, cannot be accepted as true in view 
of the fact that Prithviraja III was a minor in A.D. 1177. Govinda¬ 
raja, who came to power in the closing years of the twelfth century, 
was a scion of the Chahamana family of Ajmer. It is stated that 
having been banished by Prithviraja III he founded a kingdom at 
Ranastambhapura; and that after the capture of Ajmer by the 
Muslims, the family and followers of Hariraja, younger brother of 
Prithviraja III, took shelter with Govindaraja, who was very much 
affected at the news of Hariraja’s death, and received them cordially. 
According to the Muslim source, however, Ranthambhor came under 
the influence of the Muslims during the reign of Hariraja, and its 
ruler was their protege. /Govindaraja was succeeded by his son 
Balhanadeva, generally identified with Gadhapati Valanadeva, who 
was ruling in A.D. 1215 as a feudatory of Sultan Iltutmish, and whose 
kingdom extended up to Manglana, 19 miles west of Maroth, in 
Jaipur. Balhana probably threw off the yoke of the Muslims some 
time after A.D. 1215, but in A.D. 1226 Iltutmish led an army against 
Ranthambhor and conquered it. It appears from Tabaqat-i-Ndsin 
that Ranthambhor was under the supremacy of Iltutmish till his 
death in A.D. 1236, but after the close of his reign the Hindus laid 
siege to that fort. Raziyya sent to its rescue her general Qutb-ud- 
din Hasan Ghuri who took the Muslim army out of the fort, demolish¬ 
ed it, and returned to Delhi. It is difficult to reconcile the reports 
of the Muslim historians with that supplied by Nayachandra Sun’s 
Hammira-Mahaktivya, which is virtually the only authority that 
gives a continuous narrative of this branch of the Chahamanas. 
Nayachandra relates that Balhana had two sons, Prahlada and Vcig- 
bhata. As he grew old and feeble he installed Prahlada on the throne 
and appointed Vagbhata as his Prime Minister. Prahlada lost his 
life in a hunting excursion, and was succeeded by his young son 
Viranarayana. It is said that once when Viranarayana started for 
Amarapura (Amber) to marry the daughter of the Kachchhavaha 
prince of Jayapura he was attacked on his way by Sultan Jalal-ud- 
dln of Delhi. Having failed to overcome him the Sultan invited him 
to Delhi and killed him, and Ranthambhor fell into the hands of the 
Muslims. Subsequently Vagbhata who, being insulted by Vira- 
narayapa, had left his service and proceeded to Malava, killed the 
Malava king and wrested Ranthambhor from the Muslims. The fact 
that no Sultan of the name of Jalal-ud din is known to have ruled 
in Delhi about this time casts doubt on the whole story. It may only 
be suggested that Iltutmish occupied Ranthambhor by defeating 

84 


MIN/Sr^ 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING Ilth AND 12th CENTURIES ^ 

uranarayana, and Vagbhata reconquered it during the reign of 
Raziyya. Ulugh Khan (Balban) led two invasions against Rantham- 
bhor in A.D. 1248 and 1253, when it was ruled by Bahar-deo, who is 
described as the greatest of the Rais of Hindustan by Minhaj. On 
both these occasions the Muslims had to rest content only by secur¬ 
ing some spoils. Bahar-deo may be identified with Vagbhata who, 
according to Hammlra-Mahakavya s stationed a large number of 
forces at different places along the frontier to keep off the Muslims. 
He was succeeded by his son Jaitrasirnha. 


The Balvan inscription of Hammira supplies some valuable 
information about Jaitrasimha’s military activities. The king 
harassed a chief named Jayasimha in Mandapa, who is generally 
identified with the Paramara Jayasimha of Malava. The Paramara 
Jayasimha was in possession of Mandapa, i.e. Mandu in Dhar State, 
but there was a Mandapa-dwga where Balban stopped while advanc¬ 
ing towards Ranthambhor from Delhi and a lake called Jaitrasagara 
was situated near that. Jaitrasirnha defeated hundreds of brave war¬ 
riors of the Malava king at Jhampaithaghatta, and kept them as 
prisoners at Ranthambhor. He killed a Kurma king and a king of 
Karkaralagiri. According to Hammira-Mahakavya Jaitrasirnha paid 
tribute to the Sultan of Delhi, and he was probably the king of Ran¬ 
thambhor who, according to Minhaj, was defeated by the army of 
Sultan Nasir-ud-dln in A.D. 1259. Jaitrasirnha had three sons, Ham¬ 
mira, Surattrana, and Vlrama, and was succeeded by Hammira in 
A.D. 1283. 


Hammlra’s kingdom included Seopur District in the Gwalior 
State, and Balvan in the Kotah State. Sarngadhara, whose grand¬ 
father Raghava was a courtier of Hammira, refers to this king as a 
ruler of the Sakambharl country in his Paddhati, composed in 
A.D. 1363. It is not unlikely that the kings of this family held sway 
over Sakambhari from the time of Balhana, whose kingdom is known 
to have been extended up to Maroth in Jaipur. The Hammirci-Maha- 
kavya gives a description of Hammlra’s digvijaya. The king defeat¬ 
ed Arjuna of Sarasapura, an unnamed chief of Gadhamapdala, and 
Ehoja II of Dhara. He marched to Chitrakuta, ravaged Medapata, 
and extorted submission from the ruler of Abu. Then he sacked 
Vardhamanapura, modern Wadhwan in Kathiawar, and proceeded 
to Pushkara by way of Ajayameru (Ajmer). From Pushkara 
he went to Sakambharl, plundering on his way a number of towns, 
and from that place to Ranthambhor. His adversaries in Medapata 
and Mt. Abu were respectively the Guhila Samarasimha and the 
Paramara Pratapasirhha, a subordinate of the Vaghela Sarangadeva 
of Gujarat. The Balvan inscription of his reign mentions his victory 


85 


wmsr/fy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




over Arjuna, king of Malava. This suggests that he led two expedi¬ 
tions against Malava, once during Arjunavarman’s reign and again 
during the reign of Bhoja II. The Prakrita-paingalam relates his 
victory over Malava and Gurjara and describes his prolonged tights 
with the Muslims of Delhi. It is known from the Muslim source that 
Jalal-ud-dln Khalji led an unsuccessful invasion against Rantham- 
bhor in A.D. 1290. ‘Ala-ud-dln Khalji also declared war against 
Hammira because the latter stopped the payment of tribute and gave 
shelter to some rebels from Gujarat. He sent a number of expedi¬ 
tions against Ranthambhor under his general Ulugh Khan, but failed 
to overcome the enemy. Then ‘Ala-ud-dln himself led the army. 
After a strenuous fight he defeated and killed Hammira and captured 
Ranthambhor in A.D. 1301. 


3. The Chahamanas of Nadol 

The Nadol branch of the Chahamanas played an important role 
in the history of this period. In the early years of the eleventh cen¬ 
tury Asvapala was on the throne of Nadol, and his son and successor 
Ahila repulsed an attack of the Chaulukya Bhlma I. Ahila’s paternal 
uncle and successor Anahilla, son of Mahendra, defeated the Chau¬ 
lukya Bhlma I, killed Sa$ha, a general of the Paramarai Bhoja, cap¬ 
tured Sakambharl, whiclj, was then ruled by the Chahamana Virya- 
rama, and fought successfully with the Turushkas, i.e. the Muslims 
of the Punjab. Anahilla’s son and successor Balaprasada forced the 
Chaulukya Bhlma I to release the Paramara Krishnaraja of Bhinmal. 
Jinduraja, the brother and successor of Balaprasada, whose inscrip¬ 
tion is dated A.D. 1075, won a victory in a battle at Sandera, modern 
Sanderao in the Jodhpur State. Jincluraja’s son Prithvipala repulsed 
an attack of the Chaulukya Kama. Prithvlpala’s brother, king 
Jojalla, whose inscription is dated A.D. 1090, captured Anahilla- 
pataka for a short time, probably during the early part of Jayasirhha’s 
reign. Jojalla was succeeded by his youngest brother Asaraja, whose 
inscriptions bear dates from A.D. 1110 to 1143. Asaraja had 
to surrender Nadol to his nephew Ratnapala, the son of Prithvipala, 
between A.D. 1115 and 1119. Ratnapala was succeeded by his 
son Rayapala, whose inscriptions bear dates from A.D. 1132 to 1145. 
Asaraja, being deprived of his supremacy ever Nadol, ruled in Bali 
in God war. He acknowledged the sway of the Chaulukya Jaya- 
simha and helped him in his war against the Paramara Naravarman. 
In the closing years of his reign he became hostile to Jayasimha, 
though he obeyed the authority of the latter in A.D. 1143. Asaraja’s 
son Katudeva occupied Nadol for a short time in A.D. 1143-44, but 
Rayapala reconquered it before A.D. 1145. He had, however, to sur¬ 
render it to the Chaulukya Kumarapala before A.D. 1154, and his 


86 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING J 1th AND 12th CENTURIES 




son Punapakshadeva ruled as a vassal in the region of Ratanpur in 
Jodhpur. His other son Sahajapala was the ruler of Mandor, north 
of Jodhpur. Kumarapala’s general, the Chahamana Vaijalladeva, took 
charge of the administration of Nadol before A.D. 1154 and continued 
till A.D. 1159. Alhanadeva, second son of Asaraja, helped Kumara- 
pala in his war against Saurashtra, and probably in recognition of 
this service he obtained from the latter Kiratakupa (Kiradu, 
Mallani), Latahrada, and Siva before A.D. 1152. He got back the 
throne of Nadol through the favour of Kumarapala some time 
between A.D. 1159 and 1161. Alhanadeva’s kingdom extended 
on the north up to Mandor, north of Jodhpur. About this time 
Vigraharaja IV of Ajmer plundered Nadol. 


Alhanadeva had four sons, Kelhana, Gajasimha, Kirttipala, and 
Vijayasirhha, He was succeeded by Kelhana, the dates of whose 
inscriptions extend from A.D. 1163 to 1192. Some time after 
A.D. 1178 Kelhana declared independence. He was assisted in his 
royal business by his brother Kirttipala, also known as Kitu, and the 
two brothers, in alliance with the Chaulukyas, repulsed at Kasahrada 
an attack of Mu‘izz-ud-din Muhammad Ghurl who plundered Nadol 
in A.D. 1178. Kirttipala conquered Mewar by defeating the Guhila 
Samantasimha, but was driven out of that country by Samantasimha’s 
brother Kumarasimha. He also defeated Asala of Kiratakupa, the 
vassal of Chaulukya Rhlma II, and wrested Jabalipura from the Para- 
maras. Kirttipala’s successors, known as Sonigaras, ruled in Jabali¬ 
pura or Jalor for more than a century. Kelhana repulsed an attack of 
the Yadava Bhillaipa, and was succeeded by his son Jayatasiha 
before A.D. 1194. During Jayatasiha’s reign Qutb-ud-din invaded the 
kingdom of Na^lol in A.D. 1197. Maharaja Samantasimha, who was 
ruling in Godwar and over a part of the Sirohi State from A.D. 1199 
to 1201, might have dethroned him or might have been his legitimate 
successor. Dr. Bhandarkar’s identification of this Samantasimha 
with the Guhila king of the same name is untenable on chronological 
ground. Dhamdhaladeva, son of one Visadhavaladeva of the Chaha¬ 
mana family, ruled Godwar as a vassal under the Chaulukya 
Bhlma II from c. A.D. 1209 to 1226. The Chaulukyas were 
superseded there by the Chahamana Udayasimha of Jalor, and 
Godwar remained under the rule of the Chahamanas even in the 
fourteenth century. 


4. The Chahamanas oj Jabalipura (Jalor) 

It has been noticed above that Kirttipala of Nadol is the founder 
of the Sonigara branch of the Chahamanas at Jalor. The name Soni- 
gara is the contraction of the name Suvarnagiri, a hill-fort at Jalor. 
Kirttipala was succeeded by his son Samarasimha, who issued in- 


87 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

riptions in A.D. 1182. Samarasimha had two sons, Manavasimha 
alias Mahanasiihha and Udayasimha, and one daughter Liladevi, 
who was married to the Chaulukya Bhima II. After Samarasimha, 
Udayasimha ruled at Jalor<:Manavasimha, whose successors consti¬ 
tuted the Devada branch, Is not known to have occupied the throne 
of his father. Udayasimha, whose inscriptions bear dates extending 
from A.D. 1205 to 1249, asserted his supremacy over Nadclula, 
Jabalipura, Mandavyapura, Vagbhatameru, Surachanda, Ratahrada, 
Kheda, Ramasainya, Srimala, Ratnapura, and Satyapura. Mandavya¬ 
pura is Mandor, Vagbhatameru is Barmer, Surachanda is Surachand, 
Ratahrada is Raddhuda in Mallani, Kheda is in Mallani, Ramasainya 
is Ramsen, Srimala is Bhinmal, Ratnapura is Ratanpur, and Satya¬ 
pura is Sanchor. Udayasimha’s kingdom thus extended from 
Mandor to Sanchor and from Mallani to Godwar. He reconquered 
Nadol after A.D. 1226 from the Chaulukya Bhima II, and defeated 
the Chahamana Sindhuraja of Lata. Iltutmish invested the fort of 
Jalor between A.D. 1211 and 1216. Udayasimha, who capitulated 
after a strenuous resistance, was allowed to rule his territory by the 
Sultan. Some time latet, while Iltutmish advanced against Gujarat 
counting upon the support of Udayasimha, the latter joined the 
Gujarat army, and helped the Vaghela Vlradhavala in repulsing the 
Muslims. According to some Jain writers of Gujarat, Udayasimha 
gave his daughter in marriage to the Vaghela Viramadeva. He was 
a man of learning and mastered the works of Bharata, i.e. Bharatiya - 
Nafya-sastra . He was succeeded, before A.D. 1262, by his son 
Chachiga who claims to have destroyed the power of the Vaghela 
Viramadeva and defeated some princes named Salya, Patuka, Sanga, 
and Nahara. Chachiga was succeeded by Samantasimha between 
A.D. 1277 and 1282, and the latter by his son Kanhada after 
A.D. 1296. In A.D. 1310-1311, ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji defeated and kill¬ 
ed Kanhada and his son Virama, and captured Jalor and Sanchor. 


5. The Chahamdnas of Satyapura (Sanchor) and Devada 

Vijayasimha, son of king Alhana of Na$ol, was the founder 
of the Satyapura (Sanchor in Jodhpur) branch. He was followed in 
succession by Padmasimha, Sobhita, and Salha, all of whom were 
feudatories of the Chahamanas of Jalor. Salha claims to have libe¬ 
rated Bhinmal from the hands of the Muslims, and probably wrest¬ 
ed it from ‘Ala-ud-din or his successor after A.D. 1310-11, when the 
southern part of Jodhpur was occupied by the Muslim army. Salha 
was succeeded by Vikramasimha, Samgramasimha and Pratapa- 
siriiha (A.D. 1387) one after the other. 

The Devada branch of the Chahamanas was founded by Vijada 
also known as Devaraja, the son of Pratapa, and grandson of Manava- 


88 


MiN/sr^ 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


<§L 


mha, who was the son of Samarasimha of Jalor, The name Devatfa 
is said to have been derived from Devaraja. Vija$a~Devaraja is 
referred to as the lord of Marusthall-raa^daZa. He had four sons, the 
eldest of whom, Luriiga (Lavanyakarna), succeeded his father, and 
conquered Mt. Abu from the Solankis (Vaghelas) with the help of 
his brothers. His successor was his younger brother Luntiga 
(Lundha), who is known to have been ruling in A.D. 1315 and 1320. 
Luntiga was succeeded by Luniga’s son Tejasimha (A.D. 1330, 1336), 
who was succeeded by his son Kanhadadeva in A.D. 1337. 


XIV. THE GUHILAS OF MEWAR 


After the termination of the reign of the Guhila Saktikumara in 
the closing years of the tenth century 26 his son Ambaprasada ascend¬ 
ed the throne of Medapata or Mewar. From this time Aghata, 
modern Ahar, in Udaipur, served as the second capital of this 
dynasty. Ambaprasada lost his life in a battle with the Chahamana 
Vakpati II of SakambharL After Ambaprasada the throne of Meda¬ 
pata was occupied by Suchivarman, Naravarman, Anantavarman, 
Kirttivarman alias Yasovarman, Yogaraja, Vairata, Iiamsapala, 
Vairisimha, Vijayasimha, Arisimha, Chodasimha, Vikramasimha, 
and Ranasirhha alias Kama. Of them Vijayasirnha, whose father-in- 
law was the Paramara Udayaditya and whose son-in-law was the 
Kalachuri Gayakarna, is definitely known to have been ruling in 
A.D. 1108 and 1116. Kama had three sons, Mahana, Kshemasirhha, 
and Rahapa. The successors of Kshemasirhha were known as Raval or 
Rajakula, and the successors of Rahapa, who ruled as vassals of the 
Ravals at Sisoda, were known as Ranas. Kama was succeeded by 
Kshemasirhha, whose son and successor Samantasimha is known to 
have been ruling in Mewar in A.D. 1171. The Chaulukya Kumara- 
pala was in possession of Chitor in A.D. 1151, but it is not certain 
whether he could bring the Guhilas of Medapata under his sway. 
Kumarapala’s successor Ajayapala invaded that country but receiv¬ 
ed a severe wol!*nd in a battle with Samantasimha, and the Para¬ 
mara Prahladana of Mt. Abu saved the Chaulukya king from disas¬ 
ter on that occassion. Shortly after this battle Klrttipala, the youn¬ 
ger brother of Kelhana of Nadol, took possession of Medapata by 
defeating Samantasiriiha, who. thereafter ruled only over a part of 
the Jodhpur State. Klrttipala was driven out from Mewar by 
Kumarasimha, younger brother of Samantasimha who, with the 
help of the Gurjara king, established himself at Aghata. The Gur- 
jara king might have been Ajayapala or Mularaja II. kumarasimha 
occupied Mewar before A.D. 1182 and was followed in succession 
by Mathanasirhha, Padmasimha, and Jaitrasiriiha. 


89 



misr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


The Guhilas of Mewar gained a high political status during 
the reign of Jaitrasirhha whose known dates range between A.D. 
1213 and 1252. Chitrakuta, modern Chitor in Udaipur, is 
known for the first time to have been included in the Guhila king¬ 
dom during his reign. In the early part of his reign the Muslims 
under Sultan Iltutmish overran Mewar and destroyed the Guhila 
capital Nagahrada. Jayatala, who was obviously Jaitrasiriiha, king 
of Mewar, suffered a heavy loss of men and property on that occa¬ 
sion. But on receipt of the news that the Vaghela Viradhavala was 
advancing with his forces to render assistance to Jaitrasirhha the 
Muslim army withdrew. 


Jaitrasiriiha plundered Na$ol where his adversary seems to 
have been the Chahamana Udayasimha of Jalor. He invaded the 
territory of the Chaulukyas of Gujarat, and one of his generals lost 
his life in a battle while capturing Kottadaka from the Chaulukya 
Tribhuvanapala. He was ultimately repulsed by the Vaghela 
Visaladeva. Madana, son of Jaitrasiihha’s officer Kshema, fought 
on behalf of Jesala with the Panchalagudika Jaitramalla on the 
battlefield of Utthunaka, which is identified with Arthuna, the capi¬ 
tal of Vaga^a. Jesala may be taken as identical with Jaitrasiriiha, 
who was also known as Jayasiriiha. Jaitramalla is identified with 
the Paramara Jaitugideva of Malava but he seems to have been 
a chief of the Guhila dynasty of Vaga<Ja. Jaitrasimha fought suc¬ 
cessfully with a king of Sakambhari, who may be identified with a 
Chahamana king of Ranthambhor. The Sindhuka army, which he 
defeated, cannot be identified. 


Jaitrasiriiha was succeeded by his son Tejasiriiha, who is known 
to have occupied the throne of Aghata before A.D. 1280. An 
inscription of his reign, which refers to Chitrakuta -mahadurga, has 
been found at Chitor. This is the earliest known epigraphic re¬ 
cord of the Guhilas of Mewar found at Chitor. Tejasimha was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Samarasithha between A.D. 1267 and 1273. Sama- 
rasiriiha’s inscriptions, which bear dates ranging between A.D. 1273 
and 1301, prove that his kingdom extended from Chitor to Mt. Abu. 
He wrested Mt. Abu from the Paramara Krishnaraja, but could 
not hold it for long as Krishnaraja’s son Pratapasiriiha 
reconquered it with the help of the Vaghela Sarangadeva 
between A.D. 1285 and 1287. Some time before A.D. 1285, while 
the Turushkas, apparently under Sultan Balban, overran Gujarat, 
Samarasimha helped the Vaghela Sarangadeva in routing the Mus¬ 
lims, but in the closing years of the thirteenth century, when Ulugh 
Khan, the brother of ‘Ala-ud-din Khaljl, was marching against Guja¬ 
rat, Samarasimha saved his country from devastation by paying 


90 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 



-homage to the Muslim general. Samarasimha was succeeded by 
his son Ratnasirhha, one of whose known dates is A.D. 1302. Rat¬ 
nasiriiha met with a severe catastrophe after a rule of a couple of 
years. ‘Ala-ud-din Khaljl, desiring to assert his supremacy over 
India, invaded Chitor and pitched his camp on the bank of a river 
in the vicinity of that place. Ratnasirhha resisted the Muslims for* 
two months. He had a daughter named Padmini, who was marri¬ 
ed to the Guhila Lakshmanasimha of the Sisodiya branch. Laksh- 
manasiriiha, along with his sons Arisirhha and others, came to help 
Ratnasiriiha in that perilous war. Ratnasimha, despairing of his 
success, stealthily got out of his fort without consulting his relatives 
and lieutenants, flowed down the river, reached the Sultan’s camp, 
and ignominiously surrendered to him. The Sultan put him under 
restraint and made a vigorous attack on the fort. Lakshmana- 
siihha and his sons lost their lives in their endeavour to defend the 
citadel, while the relatives of Ratnasimha, along with Padmini, 
fled to the hilly tracts. ‘Ala-ud-din made a triumphant march into 
the fort of Chitor in A.D. 1303, posted there his son Khizr Khan, 
and returned to Delhi along with the captive king Ratnasimha. He 
expressed his willingness to release the Guhila monarch if he agreed 
to make an arrangement for the surrender of his daughter Pad- 
mini. 27 The proposal was communicated to his relations by Ratna¬ 
simha and the Guhilas utilised this opportunity to effect the release of 
Ratnasirhha by a device. The conquest of Chitor, which was only an 
outlying fortress in the Guhila kingdom, did not make ‘Ala-ud-din the 
master of Nagahrada and Aghata, which served as capitals of the 
Guhilas at least up to the time of Samarasimha. After his release 
Ratnasiriiha carried on depredations in the territories around the 
fort of Chitor, and the Sultan did not think it safe to keep Khizr 
Khan there any longer. He recalled him, and handed the fort over 
to his ally Maladeva, younger brother of the Chahamana Kanhada- 
deva, and the sister’s son of Ratnasirhha. Maladeva ruled Chitor 
for seven years as a vassal under ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji. Nothing more 
is known of Ratnasimha. 

It has been noticed above that the Sisodiya branch of the Guhilas 
was founded by Rahapa, the son of Ratnasiriiha alias Karna. The 
Ekalingaji inscription, dated A.D. 1652, mentions that Rahapa’s 
successors were Narapati, Dinakara, Jasakarna, Nagapala, Karna- 
pala, Bhuvanasirhha, Bhimasiriiha, Jayasiihha, Lakha’nasiriiha, 
Arasi (Arisirhha), Hammira, etc. An inscription of Rand Kumbha- 
karna, dated A.D. 1439, states that Jayasiihha was the son of Bhu- 
vanasirhha, and Lakshmanasirhha had two sons, Ajayasiriiha and Ari- 
sirhha. The gallant fight of Bhuvanasirhha, Lakshmanasirhha, and 
Ar isiriiha, against ‘Ala-ud-din for the defence of Chitor has already 

91 


misT^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



been noted above. Hammlra overthrew Jeso, the son and successor 
of Maladeva, and established the supremacy of the Sisodiyas over 
Chitor some time after the reign of Ghiyas-ud-din Tughluq. 

XV. THE PUNJAB UNDER THE YAMINi DYNASTY 

The great conqueror Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni died in A.D. 
1030, leaving behind three sons, Muhammad, Mas‘ud I, and ‘Abd-ur- 
Rashid. Muhammad and Mas‘ud were bom on the same day. 
Mahmud expressed his desire that after his death Muhammad would 
be the ruler of Ghazni and the country of Hind, and Mas‘ud would 
receive Khurasan, ‘Iraq, and Persia. As soon as Mahmud died the 
nobles of the court placed Muhammad on the throne of Ghazni. 
Mas‘ud, who was at ‘Iraq about this time, marched towards Ghazni 
and defeated his brother, who had been on the throne only for seven 
months. Muhammad was blinded and thrown into prison by 
Masud, who ascended the throne of Ghazni in A.D. 1031. Ariyaruq, 
who was appointed governor of the Punjab by Sultan Mahmud, still 
held that post, but his tyrannical and oppressive actions led 
Mas‘ud to call him back. Though he avoided his presence by ex¬ 
cuses for some time, he was imprisoned and subsequently put to 
death. Mas‘ud then appointed Ahmad Niyaltigin governor of the 
Punjab. Niyaltigin, after assuming his office, began to quarrel 
with Abu-T-Hasan, The Shirazx Qazi’ who was in charge of the re¬ 
venue administration of the Punjab. Both submitted complaints 
to the Sultan charging each other with serious offence. Mas‘ud 
supported Niyaltigin, asking the Qazi to limit his sphere of work 
to the collection of revenue. Being thus secured in his position, 
Niyaltigin launched expeditions against the Indian chiefs. In 
A.D. 1034 he exacted tribute from the Thakurs, crossed the Gahga, 
and following its left bank quite unexpectedly arrived at the city 
of Banaras, which was within the kingdom of Gang, i.e. the Kala- 
churi Gangeyadeva. He plundered the markets of the drapers, per¬ 
fumers, and jewellers from morning till mid-day, and returned to 
the Punjab with a large amount of gold, silver and jewels. The 
Qazi, who was very much dejected at this success of his rival, sent 
a report to the Sultan that Niyaltigin deposited only a portion of 
the riches which he had obtained as tributes from the Thakurs and 
also by plundering Banaras. The Sultan, also received letters from 
independent sources mentioning Niyaltigln’s association with the 
Turkomans and numerous turbulent chiefs of Lahore. All these 
alienated the Sultan from Niyaltigin, and he sent a force under the 
command of a Hindu named Tilak against him. Tilak reached 
Lahore and defeated Niyaltigin in a severe engagement. Niyaltigin 


92 


MINIS 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


<SL 


d away but was killed by the Jats, while Tilak returned to the 
royal court after settling the affairs of the country. In A.D. 1036 
Mas'ud sent his second son Majdud as the governor of the Punjab 
and next year organised a big army to fight for the expansion of his 
empire in Hindustan. In vain did his advisers try to persuade him 
to give up the project in view of the fact that the Saljuqs were 
threatening to conquer the northern part of his empire. The Sul¬ 
tan marched to the Punjab and encamped on the bank of the Jhelum 
near Dinarkotah. Thence he went to Hansi, in the Hissar District, 
Punjab, and invested the fort. After a strenuous fight Hansi fell 
into his hands. He then marched to Sonpat and defeated its gover¬ 
nor Dipal Har. From Sonpat he advanced towards the kingdom of 
Ram Rai, who saved himself from molestation by offering him valu¬ 
able presents. 


Mas'ud had very soon to pay the penalty for wasting his re¬ 
sources in Hindustan. In A.D. 1040, being hard pressed by the Sal¬ 
juqs, he left Ghazni and proceeded towards Hindustan with his 
family, including his blind brother Muhammad, and treasure. On his 
way, in the pass of Marigala, his Turkish and Hindu slaves revolted, 
took him prisoner, and declared Muhammad as king. In the same 
year Mas'ud was slain in the fort of Girl. 


On receipt of these news, Mas'ud’s son Maudud, who was at 
Balkh, hastened to Ghazni, ascended the throne, and marched to¬ 
wards India to punish his uncle. Muhammad had enjoyed royal 
position only for four months. He confronted his nephew at Nan- 
grahar between the Sindhu and Ghazni, but fell a captive in the 
battle along with some of his sons. All of them were soon put to 
death, and Maudud returned to Ghazni. Muhammad the blind had 
appointed his younger son Nami governor of Peshawar and Multan. 
Maudud despatched an army against Nami, who lost his life in the 
engagement. Maudud’s brother Majdud, who was appointed the 
governor of the Punjab by Mas'ud and was then in the possession 
of the country from Hansi to the Sindhu, refused allegiance to him. 
So the Sultan sent an army against him from Ghazni. Majdud also 
marched from his residence at Hansi to resist his brother’s army 
and reached Lahore, where Maudud’s forces arrived a day or two 
later. The two armies were preparing for the final battle, when 
one morning Majdud was found dead on his bed. The next day 
his vizier Khwaza Ayaz was also found dead. It was suspected 
that they were secretly poisoned. Majdud’s army now joined 
Maudud, and the Punjab easily passed into the hands of the latter. 

Though Maudud succeeded in asserting his supremacy over the 
Punjab, his position at Ghazni was made miserable by the succes- 


93 


MINlSr^ 



sive attacks of the Saljuqs. The situation became worse when, in 
A.D. 1043, some Indian chiefs formed a confederacy under the 
leadership of the Raja of Delhi to put an end to the Muslim rule 
in the Punjab. They wrested Hansi, Thaneswar and other places 
from governors who were posted there by Maudud. After captur¬ 
ing Nagarkot they marched to Lahore and invested it for seven 
months. The Muslims, in despair, sallied forth from the fort and 
attacked the invading army which, being taken unawares, took to 
flight. The Indian chiefs retained their hold over Nagarkot, Hansi 
and other conquered places for some time. The Raja of Delhi, who 
led the confederacy, was obviously a chief of the Tomara dynasty. 
The Paramara Bhoja, the Kalachuri Karna, and the Chahamana 
Anahilla were probably among those who formed the confederacy. 28 

After the death of Maudud in A.D. 1049 some of the royal ser¬ 
vants placed Maudiid’s young son Mas‘ud II on the throne. But after 
a few days the ministers and the nobles deposed the young boy and 
declared his uncle ‘All Abu-’l-Hasan, son of Mas‘ud I, as king. Dur¬ 
ing the reign of ‘All, in A.D. 1049, an officer named ‘AH bin Rubia 
broke open the treasury, secured a heavy amount of gold and jewels, 
and fled to Peshawar with some household troops. There he raised 
an army from the natives and reduced Multan and Sindh. In A.D. 
1051 Sultan ‘All was dethroned by Tzz-ud-daulah ‘Abd-ur-Rashid, 
the sixth son of Sultan Mahmud, who was released from prison 
after a long confinement. The new Sultan succeeded in persuading 
‘All bin Rubia to come back to Ghazni, and appointed Nushtigln 
Hajib the governor of the country to the east of the Sindhu. Nushti- 
gin captured Nagarkot, which had been in the possession of the 
Hindus since A.D. 1043. ‘Abd-ur-Rashid was dethroned and murder¬ 
ed by Tughril Hajib, a slave of Sultan Mahmud, who declared him¬ 
self king of Ghazni in A.D. 1052-53. Tughril was on the throne for 
forty days only. He asked Nushtigln to owe allegiance to him, but 
Nushtigln refused to obey his order, marched to Ghazni, and took an 
active part along with the nobles in destroying his power. He placed 
Farrukhzad, a son of Mas‘ud I, on the throne in A.EL 1052 and him¬ 
self became his vizier. The new Sultan ruled till A.D. 1059, and 
was succeeded by his brother Ibrahim, another son of Mas'ud I. 

Ibrahim led many expeditions against Indian chiefs, and con¬ 
quered Tabarhindah (modern Sirhind), Buria (modern Burya on the 
Yamuna in Ambaia), Dhangan, Jalandhar, Ajudhan (modern Pak 
Pattan), and Rupal on the summit of a hill, and reduced the fort of 
Darah, in the neighbourhood of Rupal. In A.D. 1075 he appointed 
his son Mahmud governor of the Punjab. Mahmud led an expedi¬ 
tion into the heart of India, and conquered Agra by defeating its chief 


04 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 

Jaipal. Kanauj, which was ruled by a Rashfrakuta family, passed 
into his hands, and he engaged Chand Rai, apparently Chandradeva 
of the Gahadavala dynasty, to look after his elephant forces there. 
He next invaded Ujjain, but was repulsed by the Paramara Lakshma- 
deva. He also invested the fort of Kalahjara, which was then ruled 
by the Chandella Kirttivarman. Mahmud’s expeditions against the 
Indian chiefs were nothing more than plundering raids. 

Ibrahim was succeeded by his son ‘Ala-ud-Daulah Mas‘ud III in 
A.D. 1099. During the reign of Mas‘ud III Amir ‘Uzd-ud-Daulah 
was in charge of the government of the Punjab. Iiajib Tughatigfil, 
an officer under the Sultan, crossed the Gahga and carried on con¬ 
quest in Hindustan. Malhi, the king of Kanauj, who was in all pro¬ 
bability the Gahadavala Madanachandra, was taken prisoner by the 
Sultan’s army. Madanachandra’s son Govindachandra defeated the 
Muslims, and secured the release of his father. In A.D. 1099 
Mas'ud conferred the sovereignty of Ghur on Malik Tzz-ud-dln 
Husain, who kept on terms of friendship with the Sultans of Ghazni. 
This proves that the ShansabanI chiefs of Ghur still acknowledged 
the supremacy of the Sultans of Ghazni. But during this time the 
Saljuqs deprived the Ghaznavids of a large portion of their kingdom, 
and Lahore virtually became the seat of the royal family. 

Mas'ud was succeeded by his son Kamal-ul-Daulah Shlrzad in 
A.D. 1115. Shlrzad ruled only for a year and was succeeded by his 
brother Arsalan ‘Abd-ul-Malik. Arsalan, after his accession, impri¬ 
soned all his brothers except his step-brother Bahram, who succeeded 
in escaping to his maternal uncle Sultan Sanjar Saljuq, in Khurasan. 
Arsalan also treated Bahrain’s mother with indignity. Sanjar took 
up the cause of his nephew and invaded Ghazni. Arsalan, being de¬ 
feated, fled to Lahore, and Sanjar, having placed Bahram on the 
throne, retired to his own dominion. But as soon as he withdrew 
from Ghazni Arsalan came back and wrested it from Bahram, who 
again took shelter with his uncle. In A.D. 1118 Bahram, with an 
army supplied by his uncle, captured Ghazni. Arsalan, who was 
taken prisoner, was released, but shortly afterwards he was put to 
death for conspiring against Bahram. 

Bahram led an expedition to the Punjab, and forced Muhammad 
Bahllm, who was appointed governor of that country by Arsalan, to 
acknowledge him as his master. After the departure of the Sultan, 
Bahllm shifted with his family and treasure to Nagaur where he 
built a fort, and declared independence. He organised an army and 
plundered the adjoining territories of the Indian princes. Sultan 
Bahram marched against the rebel and defeated him in a battle at 
Multan. Bahllm and his sons died of an accident while fleeing for 




95 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Bahram handed over the charge of the administration of the 
Punjab to Salar Husain, son of Ibrahim Alvi. In the latter part of 
his reign Bahram came into conflict with the Shansabani princes of 
Ghiir, who acknowledged the supremacy of his predecessors. Qutb- 
ud-din Muhammad, Malik-ul-jibal of this family, quarrelled with his 
brothers and withdrew to Ghazni. Bahram had him killed by poison 
on receipt of the news that he was plotting against him. This led to 
the outbreak of hostility between the Mahmudi family and the Shan- 
sabanis, which lasted for a long time and brought about disaster on 
the former. Qutb-ud-din’s younger brother Saif-ud-din, king of 
Ghiir, in order to avenge the death of his brother, marched against 
Bahram, defeated him, and captured the throne of Ghazni. Bahram 
fled to Lahore, and Saif-ud-din established himself at Ghazni, being 
the fust Sultan of his family to rule there. He placed his brother 
Baha-ud-dln Sam in charge of Ghur, and sent there the major portion 
of his army at the approach of winter. As soon as the cold set in, 
and the roads and passes from Ghur to Ghazni were blocked by snow, 
Bahram cgrrie back from Hindustan and conquered Ghazni in A.D. 
1149. Saif-ud-din was treated with indignity and then cruelly 
murdered. On receipt of this news Baha-ud-din Sam marched from 
Ghur with a large body of soldiers to punish Bahram. But as 
soon as he reached the district of Kidan he fell ill and 
died. When the news of Baha-ud-din’s death reached Ghur his 
brothei Ala-ud-din Husain, whom he had left in charge of adminis¬ 
tration there, rallied his forces and lost no time in leading an expe¬ 
dition against Bahram. He defeated his adversary in three succes- 
sive engagements and forced him to flee to Hindustan. He took the 
city of Ghazni by storm, carried on arson and plunder there for seven 
days and nights, and completely destroyed the magnificent city. For 
this work of destruction he was known in history as “Jahansuz,” “the 
world-burner.' After pillaging the edifices and palaces of the Mah¬ 
mudi dynasty in the city of Bust, ‘Ala-ud-din returned to Ghur. 
Shortly afterwards, when ‘Ala-ud-din was engaged in a battle with 
Sultan San jar Saljuq, Bahram recovered Ghazni. He died in A.D. 
1152, and was succeeded by his son Khusrav Shah, during whose 
reign the larger portion of the empire of the Mahmudi dynasty pass¬ 
ed into the hands of thd Sultans of Ghur. Shortly after A.D. 1157 
Khusrav Shah was driven out of Ghazni by the Ghuzz (Turks), and 
Ghazni was lost to the Mahmudi dynasty for ever. Khusrav Shah 
proceeded to Lahore where he ruled till A.D. 1160. He was succeed¬ 
ed by his son Khusrav Malik during whose reign the governors and 
the chiefs under him assumed almost independent powers. About 
this time there was a change in the government at Ghur. Sultan 
•Ala-ud-din Husain, “the world-burner,” had put into prison his two 




96 


MINlSr^ 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 



nephews Shams-ud-din Muhammad and Shihab-ud-din Muhammad, 
sons of Baha-ud-din Sam. ‘Ala-ud-din’s son and successor Saif-ud-din 
released them. After the death of Saif-ud-din, Shams-ud-din, under 
the name of Ghiyas-ud-din, ascended the throne of Ghur. Ghiyas-ud- 
dln wrested Ghazni from the Ghuzz in A.D. 1173, and placed on its 
throne his brother Shihab-ud-din Muhammad, who was known as 
Mu‘izz-ud-din Muhammad after his success in Khurasan. Mu‘izz-ud- 
din Muhammad made incursions against Hindustan every year, and 
in A.D. 1181 reached the gate of Lahore. Khusrav Malik concluded 
a treaty with him, and surrendered as a hostage one of his sons, 
whom Firishta mentions as Malik Shah. In 1184 Mu‘izz-ud-dln 
Muhammad again invaded Lahore but, having failed to capture it, 
ravaged the neighbouring districts. On his way back he captured 
the fort of Sialkot, and posted there Husain, son of Khar-mil. As 
soon as he left Hindustan Khusrav Malik invaded Sialkot, but met 
with failure. In 1186 Mu‘izz-ud-dln Muhammad, for the third time, 
led an army against Lahore. Khusrav Malik got frightened and 
sued for peace. As he came out of the fort to settle the terms of 
the treaty, Mu‘izz-ud-din seized him and captured Lahore. Thus 
the rule of the Yamini dynasty came to an end. Khusrav Malik, 
along with his son Bahrain, was sent to the Sultan Ghiyas-ud-din 
Muhammad at Firuzkuh. In A.D. 1192 when Ghiyas-ud-din and 
Mu‘izz-ud-din were involved in a quarrel with Sultan Shah Jalal-ud- 
din Mahmud of Khvarazm, Khusrav Malik and his son Bahram were 
put to death in order to avoid future trouble. 


XVI. KASHMIR 
1. First Lohara Dynasty 


The Lohara dynasty came to power in Kashmir in the early 
years of the eleventh century. 29 Sarhgramaraja, the first king of 
the dynasty, sent his minister Tuhga to help the Shahi Trilochanapala 
against Mahmud of Ghazni. Mahmud led several expeditions to 
conquer Lohara during his reign, but failed to achieve his end. 
Samgramaraja was succeeded in A.D. 1028 by his son Hariraja, who 
died after a rule of 21 days and was succeeded by his younger bro¬ 
ther Ananta. Vigraharaja, the elder brother of Samgramaraja, ad¬ 
vanced with his army to dethrone his nephew, but lost his life in 
the engagement. Ananta put down the revolt of the Damaras and 
repulsed an attack of the Darads. His queen Suryamati, a prin¬ 
cess of Jalandhara, helped him in the administration of his kingdom. 
Being thus relieved of the burden of looking into the affairs of the 
state he devoted his energy to launching expeditions against his 
neighbours. He overthrew Sala, also known as Salavahana, the 


S.E. 7 




MINlSr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




ruler of Champa (Chamba), and placed his own nominee on its 
throne. He asserted his supremacy over Darvabhisara, Trigarta, and 
Bhartula, but his invasions against the hill states of Urasa and Val- 
lapura met with failure. In A.D. 1063 he abdicated in favour of 
his worthless son Kalasa under the influence of his queen. Very 
soon they realised their error and resumed the royal power, though 
they allowed their incompetent son to occupy the throne. About 
this time the Lohara king Kshitiraja, son of Vigraharaja, and cousin 
of Ananta, bestowed his sovereignty upon the young Utkarsha, 
the second son of king Kalasa, to prevent his rebel son Bhuvanaraja 
from succeeding him. Ananta forced the chiefs of Rajapuri and the 
neighbouring states to pay him tribute, but when he was thus 
acquiring new fortunes, the licentious habits of Kalasa greatly mar¬ 
red his domestic happiness. He could not keep him under restraint 
due to the intervention of Suryamati, who had a weakness for her 
son, and so in disgust he left Srinagar a, and settled at the Tirtha of 
Vijayesvara in A.D. 1079, taking with him his troops and treasure. 
The queen also accompanied him there, but the quarrel between the 
father and the son continued for some time. Ananta tried to place 
Harsha, son of Kalasa, on the throne, but Kalasa crippled his father's 
power considerably by setting fire to the town of Vijayesvara and 
destroying a part of his treasure. He also pressed him for going into 
exile at Parnotsa. In order to get rid of all these difficulties Ananta 
committed suicide in A.D. 1081, and Suryamati also followed him to 
the funeral pyre. The death of his parents brought about a change in 
the mind of Kalasa for the better. He made up his difference with his 
son Harsha, and carried on administration with success. He sent his 
army twice to assist the young king of Rajapuri, named Samgrama- 
pala, against his uncle Madanapala, who was trying to usurp the 
throne. Madanapala was ultimately taken prisoner to Kashmir. 
Kalaia’s general conquered Urasa and, after crossing the Krishna 
(Kishanganga) river, raided Abhaya’s kingdom. In A.D. 1087 the 
rulers of eight hill states, viz. Kirtti of Baddhapura (?), Asata of 
Champa (Chamba), Kalasa of Vallapura, Samgramapala of Rajapuri, 
Utkarsha of Lohara, Sangata (?) of Urasa, Gambhiraslha of Kanda, 
and Uttamaraja of Kashthavata assembled in his capital. Though 
Kalaia’s foreign policy met with conspicuous success, he could not 
close his reign in peace. His son Harsha gave him so much trouble 
that he had to put him into prison, though reluctantly. To make 
matters worse he again indulged in debauchery which he had given 
up after the death of his parents. Immediately before his death in 
A.D. 1089, his ministers brought his son Utkarsha from Lohara and 
inaugurated him as king. Utkarsha took stringent measures to keep 


Harsha under restraint. 


98 


MINISr^ 



NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


Within a few days after his accession Utkarsha alienated his 
ministers by his injudicious acts. His step-brother Vijayamalla 
revolted and attacked the royal palace, In order to secure the sup¬ 
port of Harsha he released him, but Harsha joined Vijayamalla, cap¬ 
tured the throne for himself, and took Utkarsha prisoner. Utkarsha 
committed suicide in his captivity. 


Harsha’s character was a strange admixture of virtue and vice. 
He displayed energy and activity in the early part of his reign and 
brought prosperity to his kingdom. Vijayamalla, who fled to the coun¬ 
try of the Darads (Darad-desa) after his failure to obtain the throne, 
led an expedition against Kashmir, but was accidentally killed by an. 
avalanche. Harsha, with the help of his commander Kandarpa, suc¬ 
ceeded in maintaining his hold over Lohara, and in subjugating 
Samgramapala, ruler of Ptajapurl, who had turned hostile. But he 
soon lost the valuable support of Kandarpa by suspecting his loyalty, 
for Kandarpa, along with his family, retired to Banaras. In order to 
replenish the exchequer Harsha plundered the properties of temples 
and imposed various taxes on his subjects. He also became addicted 
to debauchery, and the state of things degenerated to an alarming 
extent. Harsha led an expedition against the chief of Rajapuri, who 
again became hostile, but met with failure. Similar result followed 
when he tried to capture from the Darads the fort of Dugdhaghata, 
modern Dudakhut, which guards the pass leading to the Darad terri¬ 
tory of the Kishanganga valley. On this occasion, two brothers 
Uchchala and Sussala, who belonged to a collateral branch of the 
Lohara dynasty, attracted his attention by their bravery. A serious 
situation developed when, in A.D. 1099, the country was visited by 
a devastating famine and the king still levied oppressive taxes. 
Uchchala and Sussala fled for their lives from the capital in 
A.D. 1100 as the king suspected them to be the rivals of his 
son Bhoja for the throne. Shortly afterwards the two brothers, with 
the help of the Damaras, forced their way into the capital and burnt 
the royal palace. The king took shelter in a hut below Srlnagara 
where he received the news of the treacherous murder of his son 
Bhoja. He himself lost his life in an encounter with the enemies in 
A.D. 1101. He was a man of learning and a patron of poets. He 
introduced the system of wearing head-dress and ear-ornament 
among the Kashmirians. 


2. Second Lohara Dynasty 

Uchchala, who now ascended the throne, is regarded as the 
founder of the second Lohara dynasty. He was descended from 
Kantiraja, an uncle of Sarngramaraja, the founder of the first Lohara 
dynasty in Kashmir. He tried to appease his ambitious brother by 


99 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


malting, him an independent king of Lohara. This did not satisfy 
Sussala, who led an expedition against him from Lohara, which, how¬ 
ever, met with failure. Uchchala condemned to death Bhikshachara, 
son of Bhoja and grandson of king Harsha, apprehending that his 
royal position might be challenged by him. Bhikshachara saved his 
life by taking refuge with the Paramara Naravarman of Malava. 
About this time the birth of Sussala’s son Jayasimha brought about 
a reconciliation between the two brothers. The rise of the Damaras, 
a class of bar.ons, became a source of danger to Uchchala and a menace 
to the Kashmirian politics of this period. In A.D. 1111 Uchchala lost 
his life at the hands of the city-prefect named Chudda, whose brother 
Radda occupied the throne for a night only. He was killed by a 
powerful Damara of Lohara named Gargachandra, who set up Sal¬ 
hana, a. half-brother of Uchchala, on the throne. Gargachandra also 
repulsed an attack of Sussala who, at the news of the death of his 
brother, rushed with his army to capture the throne of Kashmir. Not 
long afterwards, Gargachandra, finding that Salhana was friendly to 
his rivals, formed an alliance with Sussala who easily captured the 
capital and took Salhana prisoner in A.D. 1112. 

After his accession Sussala could not keep on friendly terms 
with Gargachandra. After a protracted quarrel he put Gargachandra 
and his three sons to death in A.D. 1118. He dethroned Somapala, 
the ruler of Rajapuri, and placed Nagapala on the throne. But as 
soon as he left Rajapuri Nagapala lost his throne. In A.D. 1120 
Bhikshachara, who had returned from Malava and had been intrigu¬ 
ing for the throne for some time, defeated Sussala with the help of 
the Damaras, and declared himself king. Sussala fled to the fort of 
Lohara. In A.D. 1121 he inflicted a crushing defeat on Bhiksha- 
chara’s army which was advancing to conquer Lohara, and within a 
short time succeeded in recovering the throne of Kashmir. Bhiksha¬ 
chara retired to the village Pushyananada, which was within the 
territory of Somapala of Rajapuri. Sussala could not destroy the 
power of the Damaras, who led successive invasions against him. 
The situation was aggravated by a devastating fire in the city, which 
was followed by a famine. The death of the queen about this time 
added to the misery of the king, who in disgust brought his son Jaya¬ 
simha from Lohara and abdicated in his favour in A.D. 1123. But 
Jayasimha soon fell into the disfavour of his father, who retained 
his hold over the main business of the state and looked for an oppor¬ 
tunity to put him in prison. In A.D. 1128 Sussala fell victim to a 
conspiracy and lost his life. 

Jayasimha won over the powerful reactionary forces to his side 
by his diplomatic skill. In A.D. 1130 he succeeded in putting to 

100 


Northern india during nth and 12 th centuries 

death Bhikshachara, who made frequent attacks to regain the throne 
of Kashmir. Sussala’s half-brother Lothana revolted in Lohara and 
Jayasiriiha’s army, sent against it, met with disaster. In A.D. 1131 
Lothana was deposed by his own partisans. Mallarjuna, a half- 
brother of Jayasimha, then occupied the throne, but in A.D. 1132 
Jayasimha wrested Lohara from him. He deposed king Vikramaditya 
of Vallapura and placed Gulhana on its throne. Yasodhara, king of 
the Darad country, was friendly to the kings of Kashmir. After his 
death two rival factions fought for the throne. Jayasimha, in order 
to maintain his supremacy over that country, took up the cause of 
one of them. But Viddaslha, the leader of the opposite party, who 
usurped the whole power, frustrated his object. He also encouraged 
Lothana, the deposed ruler of Lohara, to- renew hostility against 
Jayasimha. Lothana formed alliance with Alamkarachakra, a 
powerful Damara of Karnaha, Vigraharaja, a half-brother of Jaya- 
simha, andi Bhoja, a son of the king Salhana, and advanced against 
Kashmir, but Jayasimha besieged them in the fort of SirahSila. 
Bhoja managed to escape from the fort, while Alamkarachakra pur¬ 
chased peace by surrendering Lothana and Vigraharaja to the royal 
army. Bhoja surrendered after making a futile attempt to defeat 
Jayasimha with the help of Viddasiha of the Darad country and 
some Mlechchha chiefs of the upper Sindhu valley. Jayasimha put 
down all the refractory Damaras and ruled his kingdom in peace 
during the remaining part of his life. He crowned his minor son 
Gulhajia as a king of Lohara and was in friendly relation with some 
kings of India. The Gahadavala Govindachandra sent his ambassador 
Suhala to his court, which was also visited by Tejakantha, the 
ambassador of the Silahara Aparaditya of Konkajna. Jayasimha rul¬ 
ed up to A.D. 1155. 30 




Jayasimha was followed on the throne by his son Paramapuka 
(A.D. 1155-1165) and his grandson Vantideva (A.D. 1165-1172) one 
after the other. Vantideva was the last king of the dynasty. 


3. Advent of the Muslim Rule 

After the close of Vantideva’s reign the people elected one 
Vuppadeva as their king. Vuppadeva was succeeded in A.D. 1181 
by his brother Jassaka, and the latter by his son Jagadeva, in 
A.D. 1199. Jagadeva was poisoned by one of his officers in A.D. 1213, 
and a rival faction placed his son Rajadeva on the throne. Baladhya- 
chandra, the chief of Lohara, defied the authority of Rajadeva and 
occupied half of Srinagar a. Rajadeva was succeeded in A.D. 1236 
by his son Saingramadeva during whose reign the sons and relations 
of Kalhana assumed great power. They forced him to take refuge 
with the ruler of Rajapurl, and though some time afterwards the 


101 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


king recovered his power, he was killed by his enemies. He was 
succeeded in A.D. 1252 by his son Ramadeva, and the latter by the 
Brahmana Lakshmadeva, whom he adopted as his son, in A.D. 1273. 
A Muslim named Kajjala killed Lakshmadeva in a battle in A.D. 1286 
alter which anarchy broke out in Kashmir. One Simhadeva succeed¬ 
ed in establishing his authority but lost his life in a love intrigue. 
In A.D. 1301 his brother Suhadeva asserted his supremacy over the 
whole of Kashmir, but during his reign the kingdom was overtaken 
by a severe calamity. Dulucha, a general of a great king Karmasena 
overran Kashmir with an army of 60,000 men consisting of the 
lajikas, Turushkas, and the Mlechchhas. The situation became 
worse when just at this time a Tibetan named Rinchana plundered 
the capital. Dulucha, being afraid of the excessive cold of Kashmir, 
left the country, taking with him a large number of Kashmirians as 
slaves. Suhadeva, who showed abject cowardice all along, seems 
to have lost his life in A.D. 1320. According to Am-i-Akbarl Dalju 
(Dulucha) was the commander-in-chief of the king of Kandahar. 
One Ramachandra, probably a relation of the deceased king Suha¬ 
deva, fought with Rinchana, but was treacherously murdered 
by his adversary. Rinchana, who assumed the royal power fell vic¬ 
tim to a conspiracy, and died in A.D. 1323. His young son Haidara 
was deposed by his officer Sahamera, a Muslim, who placed Udayana- 
deva, a relative of his master, on the throne. After the death of 
Udayanadeva m A.D. 1338 Sahamera, under the name Shams-ud-din, 

seized the throne of Kashmir where his successors ruled for a long 
time. b 


3. 

i. 

5. 

6 . 


1. Vol. IV, p. 54. 

2. IV. 47. 

See above, p. 25. 

See above, p. 25. 

See above, p. 29. 

See above, p. 33. 

6a. IHQ, XXX. 211-2. 

a very weak basis. ’ lh Thls theor y- h °wever, rests on 

7. Vol. IV, p. 61. 

8. Vol. IV, p. 59. 

10.' Vd. IV°p nt 38 f dynaSty iS bSSed ° n Panchobh C.P. (JBORS, V. 582 ff). 
Authors History of the Paramdra Dynasty, 100-101* El I 235 V 19- thp 

, S&isar sswf ’Suit’s 

13. HIED, IV. 518 ff; Islamic Culture, October, 1942, p. 424. 

14. Mamie Culture October, 1942 p. 426; IA, XVIII. 18. 

15. See above, p. 50. 

16. See above, p. 33. 


11 


12 . 


102 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING 11th AND 12th CENTURIES 


above, pp. 50-51. 

18. VoL IV, p. 38. 

19. VoL IV, pp. 95 ff. 

20. Brigg’s Firishta, I, 118; Author’s History of the Paramdra Dynasty , 101. 

21. Author’s ‘Early History of the Gahatfavala Dynasty' in Proceedings of the 7th 
Oriental Conference , Baroda, pp. 533 ff. 

22. An inscription from Atru, in the Kotah State, belongs to the reign of king 
Jayasimha. Dr. D. R. Bhandarkar, who first noticed it, read its date as 14 and 
referred it to the Sirhha era which would make it equivalent to A.D. 1127. 
Subsequently he changed his view and restored the date as (13)14, which, 
referred to the Vikrama era, corresponds to A.D. 1257. If the latter view 
proves to be correct the inscription is to be referred to the reign of the Para- 
mara Jayasimha II, who will have to be identified with the Paramara Jaya- 
varman H. 




23. Vol. IV, p. 94. 

24. See p. 63. 

25. Vol. IV, pp. 105 ff. 

26. Vol. IV, pp. 108-9. , , • 

27. Amir Khusrav does not state anything about ‘Ala-ud-dln’s relation with the 
Guhilas after his conquest of Chitor. He does not also mention anything about 
Padmini. Firishta pursues the narrative and introduces the Padmini episode 
which is also referred to by other later sources. Amir Khusrav’s silence on 
the incidents relating to Padmini has led some scholars to suggest that the 
entire episode is a myth (cf. e.g. G. H. Ojha, History of Rajpntana; K. R. 
Quanungo, Prabasi , a Bengali monthly, 1337 B. S. Falgun; R. R. Haider, IA , 
LJX, 235). It does not, however, carry conviction as it is based on negative 
evidence. Firishta’s statement that ‘Ala-ud-din conquered Jalor finds support 
in contemporary Sanskrit literature, though Amir Khusrav is silent about it. 
It does not follow from this that ‘Ala-ud-dln’s conquest of Jalor is a myth. 
As a matter of fact Firishta’s account of this matter may be taken as a sup¬ 
plement to that of Amir Khusrav. Prof. Habib thinks that there is an indirect 
reference to Padmini in Amir Khusrav’s book (JIH, 1929, p. 369 f; IHQ, VII, 
287 f) 

28. Brigg’s Firishta , I. 118. Author’s History of the Paramdra Dynasty, p. 101; 
El, II. 11, 15; IX. p. 75, v. 17. 

29. Vol. IV, p. 120. t . - T __ , . 

30. The Rdjatarahgini, from which we derive the detailed information of Kashmir, 
closes with the reign of this king, and relates the history of Kashmir only 
up to A.D. 1148-49. For the subsequent history that follows we are indebted 
to Jonaraja’s supplementary work which continues the narrative from that 
year and is known as Dvitiya Rajatarangini. 


103 


Chapter til 


THE AGE OF PRITHVIRAJA III 

• 

The Chahamana Somesvara, as noted in the preceding chapter, 
lived in the court of Gujarat in the early part of his life. He married 
there KarpuradevI, the daughter of Achalaraja of the Haihaya dynasty 
of Tripur!, who gave birth to a son named Prithviraja. In the opinion 
of some writers the astronomical data in the Prithviraja-vijaya indi¬ 
cate that the birth of the prince took place in A.D. 1166. But the 
correctness of this conclusion may reasonably be doubted. The 
Prithviraja-vijaya relates that Karpuradevi’s second son Hariraja was 
younger to Prithviraja at least by one year and eight months, and 
that both were born during the lifetime of king Vigraharaja IV. The 
last known date of Vigraharaja IV is V.S. 1220. He was succeeded 
by A para - Gangeya, w ito was again foll owed on the throne h y-PpthvT- 
Caja.1I- ¥Ke earliest Known date of PpthvTraja II’s reign is V.S. 1224. 
It is therefore reasonable to conclude that the reign of Vigraharaja IV 
was over some time before V.S. 1224, and Prithviraja was bom 
prior to V.S. 1223 (= A.D. 1166). As the prince is known to have 
been a minor in A.D. 1177 his birth may be dated some time bet¬ 
ween A.D. 1162 and 1165. 

In A.D. 1168-9 Somesvara went along with his queen and two 
sons to the Sapadalaksha country from Gujarat, and ascended his 
paternal throne. During the reign of Somesvara Prithviraja was 
properly educated in letters and military science. Somesvara died 
in c. A.D. 1177 when Prithviraja was still a minor, and his mother 
Karpuradevi acted as the regent. At this time Kadambavasa serv¬ 
ed him as the chief minister of the State. He is said to have “guard¬ 
ed the six virtues of Prithviraja and sent the imperial armies in all 
directions to add to the glory of his sovereign.” Karpuradevi 
appointed as the commander of the army Bhuvanaikamalla, who 
was a scion of her father’s family of the Kalachuris of Tripuri. 
Prithviraja-vijaya states that “as Rama and Lakshmana suffered 
trouble owing to Meghanada’s sarpapdsa (serpent noose) and 
Garuda eventually saved them from the pasa (noose), so, in this 
birth, Bhuvanaikamalla, the incarnation of Garuda, ever served 
Rama and Lakshmana (Prithviraja and Hariraja) loyally.” The 
enemies who proved dangerous to the safety of these two Chaha¬ 
mana princes were evidently the Nagas, whom Bhuvanaikamalla 
is said to have exterminated. The country of these Nagas cannot 


104 





MINISr^ 


$HjE AGE OF P$I < fHVlRAjfA tit 

how be definitely identified. During the regency Ajayameru or 
Ajmer became very prosperous. The city was densely populated, 
and it was beautified by many gardens, parks, and wells. The 
period of regency does not seem to have covered more than a year 
as Prithviraja appears to have assumed the charge of the govern¬ 
ment in A.D. 1178. 

The Prithviraja-vijaya refers to Pyithviraja’s forthcoming mar¬ 
riage with a princess of extraordinary beauty. But as the manu¬ 
script of this book is incomplete, further details of the marriage 
and the name of the bride are not known. The Prithvnraj Rdso 
of Chand Bardai, a work of a very late period, states that Prithvi¬ 
raja had a number of queens, the eldest of whom was Ichchhanl- 
devi, the daughter of the Paramara Jaita, king of Mt. Abu. The 
name of another queen is given as Sasivrata, the daughter of Bhana 
of the Yadava dynasty, king of Devagiri. But the throne of Mt. 
Abu was occupied by the Paramara Dharavarsha at this time, and 
no king of the name Bhana is known to have ruled in Devagiri 
during this period. The youngest of Prithviraja’s queens, accord¬ 
ing to Rdso, is Samyogita, the daughter of the Gahadavala Jaya- 
chandra of Kanauj. The story runs that Samyogita entertained a 
keen desire to become the consort of Prithviraja when she heard 
of his prowess. As her father Jayachandra was a hereditary 
enemy of Prithviraja, she had to keep her desire secret. She, how¬ 
ever, carried on correspondence with the Chahamana king without 
the knowledge of her father. Jayachandra called an assembly of 
the princes at Kanauj for the selection of a bridegroom by his 
daughter. In order to humiliate Prithviraja he did not send him 
any invitation on that occasion, but placed his statue at the 
entrance of the hall in the position of a door-keeper. In the assem¬ 
bly Samyogita did not choose any of the attending princes as her 
husband, but moved to the door, and, to the surprise of all, garland¬ 
ed the statue of the Chahamana king. Prithviraja, who was hiding 
near by with his attendants, rushed to the spot and rode off with 
the princess. The army of Jayachandra, which pursued them, was 
strongly opposed by the followers of the Chahamana king. Prithvi¬ 
raja safely reached his capital and married the Gahadavala prin¬ 
cess. This marriage is said to have taken place in the interval bet¬ 
ween the first and second battles of Tarain. The details given by 
Rdso in connection with the above marriage are so improbable and 
romantic that the authenticity of the whole story may reasonably 
be doubted. 

Besides Kadambavasa and Bhuvanaikamalla, Prithviraja had 
a number of other officers of great ability. So$ha was the ministar 




106 


MiNisr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Of peace and war to king Somesvara. He had two sons Skanda and 
Vamana, who were given the posts of the chief councillors by Fri- 
thvlraja. In addition to this the Chahamana king conferred on 
Skanda the post of the commander of the army, and entrusted 
Vamana with the post of the minister of peace and war. Udaya- 
raja, a resident of the Gauda country, was another military officer, 
and Somesvara, another minister of Prithviraja. 


( After his assumption of the charge of the government, Prithvl- 
/ raja found himself confronted with grave dangers. In A.D. 1178 
Shihab-ud-din Muhammad, also known as Mu‘izz-ud-din Muham¬ 
mad, marched towards Gujarat by way of Multan, Uch, and the 
tractless desert. At this time he sent a diplomatic agent to the 
court of Prithviraja at Ajmer for negotiation, as he learnt that 
the latter was bitterly hostile to the Muslims. The details of the 
representations made by him cannot be known, as the relevant 
pages of the Prithvlrdja-vijaya are missing. Subsequent incidents, 
however, show that his mission to establish an alliance with the 
Chahamana king miserably failed. Mu'izz-ud-din Muhammad 
reached Kiradu, near Banner, in Marwar, in A.D. 1178, and plun¬ 
dered the temple of Somesvara there. He then took possession of 
Nadol (Naddula), the capital of a collateral branch of the Chahamanas. 
When the news of the fall of Nadol reached Ajmer, Prithviraja re¬ 
solved to crush the invaders, but refrained from taking any hasty 
action on the advice of his minister Kadambavasa, who deemed it 
wise, to allow the enemy to exhaust himself by fighting with the 
Gurjaras. Just about this time a messenger from Gujarat came to 
Ajmer and informed Prithviraja that the king of Gujarat had utter¬ 
ly routed the Muslim invaders. This obviously refers to Mu‘izz-ud- 
dln Muhammad’s defeat at the hands of the Chaulukya Mularaja II 
at Kasahrada at the foot of Mt. Abu. Prithviraja was greatly de¬ 
lighted at this news and handsomely rewarded the messenger. He 
also showered high praises on Kadambavasa for the valuable advice 
he gave in that critical moment!] 


During this period Prithviraja had to fight with his own cousin 
named Nagarjuna, the son of his uncle Vigraharaja IV. The young 
age of the king seems to have encouraged Nagarjuna to raise the 
standard of revolt. He captured a city named Gudapura, which 
cannot now be identified, and established himself there. Prithvi¬ 
raja left behind Kadambavasa and Bhuvanaikamalla, and himself 
marched against the rebel. He besieged the city of Gudapura 
wherefrom Nagarjuna fled like an abject coward. The army of 
Nagarjuna resisted him for some time under the leadership of Deva- 
bhata (?), apparently a lieutenant of Nagarjuna, but all the chief 


106 


THE AGE OF PljtlTHVlR AJA Hi 

combatants lost their lives in the encounter. Guqlapura was 
occupied by Pfithviraja, who took the mother, wife, and the atten¬ 
dants of Nagarjuna prisoners. He then proceeded to Ajayameru 
along with the captives, and is said to have hung the severed heads 
of his enemies on the gates of the fort of that city. This he did 
probably to serve as a deterrent to Nagarjuna and his surviving 
associates. 

Some time before A.D. 1182 Pj-ithvlraja invaded the country 
of the Bhadanakas, which cannot be identified but probably com¬ 
prised the modern Rewari Taksil, Bhiwani and its adjoining vil¬ 
lages, and a part of the old Alwar State. The chief of the Bhadanakas 
resisted the Chahamana king with his powerful elephants but was 
severely defeated. 

The KhprgAaxuguch&MrpatlavaU of Jinar^la states that Pfi- 
thviraja went out for digvijaya (conquering of the quarters) in 
A.D. 1182, but does not ment ion the name s of the countries which 

were invaded b y the . Chahamfina kkO t is known from other 

sources that in this year PrithvIraja v K?a an army against Jej aka¬ 
bhukti or the modern Bundelkhand. The tradition relates that the 
Cha j)de 11a Paramardi, also known ass Paramal, king of Jejakabhukti, 
had two able generals named Alha and Cdal, sons of Jasaraja of the 
Banafar clan. The king._grew. suspicious of the.loyalty of. these, two 
brothers on the report of a designing man, and dismissed them. 
Thereafter the two generals left Jejakabhukti and accepted service 

u pder the_king Jayachandra of Kapflpj. Shortly afterwards — Prh - 

thviraja invaded Jejakabhukti, forcibly captured Sirswa on the 
Pahuj, a tributary of the Sind, and reached the border of Mahoba. 

At this Paramard! got frightened and sent a messenger to Kanauj 
to bring Alha and tidal. The two brothers at first refused to leave 
Kanauj, remembering the ill-treatment they received from Para- 
mardi. Subsequently their love for their motherland triumphed 
over every other consideration, and they returned to Mahoba. In 
the battle that ensued they fought bravely and sacrificed their lives. 
PrithvIrSja defeated Paramard! and plundered Mahoba and Kalan- 
jara. The authenticity of this story, as narrated by the bard, can¬ 
not be verified. But that there was a conflict between Prithvlraja 
and Paramard! is known from reliable sources. Merutuhga, in his 
Prabandha-chintamani, makes a confusion between Paramard!, who 
is identical with the Chalukya Vikramaditya VI of the Deccan, and 
the king of this name of the Chandella dynasty. He associates 
Paramard! with Siddharaja-Jayasimha in one place, and connects 
him with Prithviraja of the Sapadalaksha country elsewhere. Para- 
mard! in the latter reference is evidently the Chandella king of 




107 












X 


fHE STRUGGLE .FOR EMPIRE 

tins name. It is stated that this king entered into a war with Pri- 
thviraja, but his army was defeated and he fled to his capital. The 
&drngadhara«paddhati also refers to this conflict. Madanpur is a 
village 35 miles south-south-east of Lalitpur. Some stone inscrip¬ 
tions found there in a temple of Siva state that Prithvlraja, son of 
Somesvara of the Chahamana family, devastated Jejakabhukti in 
A.D. 1182. All these leave no doubt that Prithvxraja defeated 
Paramardi in a battle and plundered the Chandella kingdom in 
A.D. 1182. The Chahamanas could not, however, maintain their 
control over Jejakabhukti for a long time. Two inscriptions from 
Ralanjara and Mahoba prove that the Chandellas were in posses¬ 
sion of them in A.D. 1183. 

P4ttelrliia enter ed Bhima 

II of .Guja rat, whose kingdom extended up to Kir ajii^and 

Nadol in southern Maxwar. The Chahamanas of Na$ol and the 
Piram&ras of Mt. Abu were vassals of the Chaulukyas. The Pri- 
thviraja-vijaya states that Kadambavasa advised Prithyiraj a not to 
involve himself in a war with MuTzz-ud-din Muhammad, pointing 
out^d'lSriS' thariF^wbuld lSe to the advantage of the Chahamanas 
if the Muslims and the Chaulukyas, both of whom wanted to assert 
their supremacy over SakamEliari, exhausted themselves by fight¬ 
ing with each other. This shows that the relation between the 
Chaulukyas and the Chahamanas was inimical from the very begiii- 
irajn’s reign. Shortly before A.D. 1187 Pjithviraja 
launched a campaign against the kingdom of Gujarat. The Para- 
mara Dharavarsha and Jagaddeva Pratihara, the prime minister of 
Bhima II, opposed his advance. Dharavarsha claims that he re¬ 
pulsed a night attack of Prithvlraja, the king of the Jangala-desa. 
The Jangala-desa comprised Bikaner and the northern part of Jodh¬ 
pur. Its capital was Ahichchhatrapura or Nagapura, modern 
Nagaur, in the old Jodhpur State. Jagaddeva Pratihara also is stated 
to have won a victory over Prithvlraja. But the result of the battle 
was not very much unfavourable to the Chahamana king. Bhjjtna 
II ultimately concluded^ a t reaty with his adve rsar y, wh ich he fried 
to observe with meticulous ca re. In A.D. 1187 some people from 
the Chahamana kingdom visited Gujarat with some valuable arti¬ 
cles. The Dan$andyaka Abhayada sent a messenger to Jagaddeva 
Pratihara seeking his permission to seize the property of these visi¬ 
tors. Jagaddeva Pratihara is said to have replied that he had re¬ 
cently concluded a treaty with Prithvlraja after taking a lot of 
trouble. “If Abhayada therefore laid his hands on the people of 
Sap&dalaksha, he would have him sewn in the belly of a donkey.” 
On the receipt of this peremptory order Abhayada treated the tra¬ 
vellers with care, and allowed them to proceed to their destination. 




108 






THE AGE OF PFUTHVIRaJA HI 


All these wars waged by Prithvlraja against his neighbours do 
not gggm to Tii ve resulted, in anv-acauiattlQP. of territory. He in¬ 
herited from his predecessors a kingdom which extended up to 
Hissar and Sirhind, in Patiala, on the north-west, and Delhi on the 
nryth . It was' bounded on the south by the kingdom of the Guhilas 
of" Mewar, and the territories of the Chahamanas of Nadol, who 
were vassals of the Chaulukya Bhima II; on the east by the king¬ 
doms of the Yaduvam£ls of Bayana-Srlpatha, the Kachchhapa- 
ghatas of Gwalior, and the Gahadavalas of Kanauj; and on the 
north-west by the kingdom of the Yaminis of Lahore. Altogethei 
six inscriptions of Prithviraja’s reign have been discovered, 
with dates ranging between A.D. 1 177 an d^!188. The tvashmn ian 
poet Jayanaka, the author of Prithvlraja-vijayaT^ ived under the 
patronage of Prithvlraja. The Jain teacher Asadhara, the author 
of a large number of books, lived in Sapadalaksha in the early pa it 
of his life. It is known from the Kharataragachchha-pattdvali of 
Jinapala that the poets Vidyapati Gauda and Vaglsvara Janardana 
visited the court of Prithvlraja III. Pj-ithvibhata served this king 
as the royal bard. Some silver and bullion coins issued by Prithvl¬ 
raja have been found. 


(Prithvlraja could not enjoy his well established kingdom for 
many years. Mu‘izz-ud-dln Muhammad of Ghur, who was repulsed 
by the Chaulukya Mularaja II near Mt. Abu in A.D. 1178, overthrew 
in A.D. 1186 Khusrav Malik, the last ruler of the Yamini dynasty 
of Ghazni, and strengthened his position by the annexation of the 
western Punjab. This brought the kingdom of the Maliks of Ghur 
up to the border of that of the Chahamanas. Mu‘izz-ud-dln carried 
on successive military excursions into the kingdom of the Chaha¬ 
manas in the Punjab for some time. 1 He then made a bid for the 
conquest of Hindustan. He marched at the head of a well-organis¬ 
ed army from Ghazni and reached Tabarhindah, 2 which was situat¬ 
ed in the kingdom of Prithvlraja. Tabarhindah may be identified 
with Sirhind, in the old Patiala State. The Sultan took the 
fort by storm and placed it under the charge of Malik Ziya-ud-dln. 
Twelve hundred horsemen were posted there with adequate muni¬ 
tions of war. They were instructed to hold it for eight months 
until the Sultan returned from Ghazni. The advance of the Mus¬ 
lims as far as Sirhind caused great consternation into the minds 
of the feudatories of the Chahamanas in the west. Chandraraja^ 
son of Govindaraja, the governor of Delhi, came to Ajmer along 
with other chiefs on deputation to Prithvlraja. Chandraraja. re¬ 
ported to the king that a Muslim named Shihab-ud-dln “had pillag¬ 
ed and burnt most of their cities, defiled their women, and reduced 
them altogether to a miserable plight. There is scarcely a moun- 


109 




misTfy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



tain-pent valley in the country but is filled to suffocation with Raj¬ 
puts who have fled thither for protection from his tyranny. The 
noblest of the Rajput families* have disappeared before him, and he 
has now established his capital at Multan.” The chiefs of the west 
sought his assistance against this unrelenting enemy. Prithviraja 
was very much excited when he heard this woeful tale, and readily 
agreed to render all possible help. He set out with two hundred 
thousand horse and three thousand elephants to punish Mirizz-ud- 
din Muhammad. Govindaraja of Delhi and many other Indian prin¬ 
ces accompanied him. While making arrangement for departure 
from Tabarhindah Mu‘izz-ud-dln Muhammad received the news of 
the advance of Prithviraja against him. He met his enemy in the 
battlefield of Tarain, 14 miles from Thaneswar and 80 miles from 
Delhi, in A.D. 1190-91. When the battle was in progress, the right 
and the left wings of the Sultan’s army broke down and fled. The 
central division also became very thin. At this time the Sultan was 
informed by one of his confidential attendants about the disinte¬ 
gration of his army, and was advised to retreat. He scornfully re¬ 
jected the.advice, unsheathed his sword, and along with the few 
soldiers still sticking to their posts rushed to attack the enemy. 
His movement suddenly caught the attention of Govindaraja, who 
forthwith drove his elephant towards him with all speed. The 
Sultan finding him in front darted a spear, which succeeded in 
breaking two of his teeth. Govindaraja in return threw a javelin 
which caused a deep wound in the Sultan’s arm. The Sultan was 
about to fall from his horse in agony when a Khalji soldier rushed 
to his rescue. The valiant warrior sprang on the horse with a 
lightening speed, gave him support with his arms, and took the 
horse out of the battlefield. The Sultan was carried to a place 40 
miles off where he met his fleeing forces. After the departure of 
the Sultan there was disorder in the Muslim army in the battle¬ 
field and it was readily overpowered by the Chahamanas. Skanda, 
the general of Prithviraja, took a prominent part in this battle, and 
brought success to his master. According to Hammira-Mahakavya 
Prithviraja took Shihab-ud-dln captive in this battle but subsequent¬ 
ly released him and allowed him to go back to Multan. This seems 
to be an exaggerated account of the victory of Prithviraja over the 
Muslims.) 

After his success in the battle of Tarain Prithviraja marched 
with his army to Tabarhindah, and besieged the fort. The com¬ 
mander of the fort, Malik Ziya-ud-din, defended his position for 
thirteen months and then capitulated. Prithviraja took possession 
of it and the supremacy of the Chahamanas was re-established in 
the Punjab. 


110 



THE AGE OF PRITHVfRAJA HI 


Q 

lo 


[in order to avenge himself of the defeat sustained at the hands 
of Pyithviraja, Mudzz-ud-dm Muhammad organised at Ghazni, after 
a strenuous labour, an army of one hundred and twenty thousand 
men. He came with this force to Lahore via Peshawar and Mul¬ 
tan. The Hammira-Mahakavya relates that the Sultan, in order 
to strengthen his forces, sought help from the king of the Ghataika 
country, who readily complied with the request by despatching 
many horses and men. The Ghataika country cannot be identified. 
About this time the Sultan sent an emissary named Rukn : ud : din 
Hamzah to Ajmer with a proposal to Prithvlraja for embracing 
Islam and acknowledging his supremacy in order to avoid the dread¬ 
ful consequence of the war. The Chahamana king treated the pro¬ 
posal with the contempt it deserved, and rallied his forces, which 
consisted of 300,000 horse, 3,000 elephants and a large body of 
infantry. Many Rajas of Hindustan helped him, apd one hundred 
and fifty chiefs joined him with the determination of either defeat¬ 
ing the Muslims or dying on the battlefield. The Hammlra-Mafoa - 
kavya's report that elate d mar- 

ched on this occasion with a small bQdy o f soldiers to meet the 
Muslims, does not seem to be correct. Skanda, the commander of 
the arir^‘" wtio .Brought success "’•to Prithvlraja’s arms in the last 
battle with . a war elsewhere, and 

could not accompany the Japg. Another lieutenant named Udaya- 
raja, who was io join him, delayed in starting from the capital. 


persuade the king not to proceed further. The king suspected him 
of treachery, cut off his ears, and dismissed him. Somesvara turn¬ 
ed a bitterenejny^ of the j^ T 

with his vast army, reached the battlefield of Tarain. Mu‘izz-ud- 
din Muhammad, after conquering Tabarhindah, met him there. 
Prithviraja sent a letter to him, requesting him to withdraw his 
army~ being content with the possession of Tabarhindah and the 
Punjab. This gave the Sultan an opportunity to defeat his enemy 
by a stratagem. v He replied that he could not retreat without the 
permission of his brother at whose command he led this invasion. 

He 2 however, agreed to a truce till he received instruction from his 
brother on this matter. The Chahamana army, relying on the 
assurances of the Sultan, went on merrymaking during the night. 
w^The ffiuha n instru cted a batch of soldiers to keep the light in the 

caipp.burning in order to make a show, before the enemy that the / 

Muslims were encamped, and made preparation for a 

He marched with the main body of his soldiers throughout the night 

by a different route, forded the river before dawn, and attacked the 


111 











THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


fear of* the enemy A confusion broke out in the Chahamana army. 
But Prithviraja skilfully brought out his cavalry and frustrated the 
attempt of the Sultan, who returned discomfited to his camp. He 
now took recourse to a new artifice. He divided his army into five 
divisions, one consisting of 12,000 cavalry, and the remaining four 
of 10,000 light-armed horsemen each. These four smaller divi¬ 
sions carried on successive attacks on the Chahamanas on the right, 
left, front, and the rear from the morning onward. Each time the 
latter made counter-attacks on them with their elephant, cavalry, 
and infantry, Jhey retreat^ IBy tlTe“ afternoon 

the Chahamanas got extremely tired, when the Sultan with the 
bigger diyis'ipM j^vi^orous attack and completely overpower- 

ed them. One lakh of the Hin^u soldiers lost tiieir lives ’ Govin- 
daraja, the chief of Delhi; fellthe Sul¬ 
tan recognised jjjim through the absence of his two teeth which he 
had broken in the last engagement. In this predicament Prithvi¬ 
raja got down from his elephant and, mounting a horse, fled away. 
He was overtaken by the Muslim army in the neighbourhood of 
Sursuti, which seems to be identical with the Sarasvati, and was 
taken prisoner. This battle took place in A.D, 1192. After con¬ 
quering HansI, Sursuti, Kuhram or Guhrarn, and Samana, the Sul¬ 
tan marched towards Ajmer with the captive king, and took that 
city by assault. He demolished the temples there, and built mos¬ 
ques and Islamic colleges on their ruins. The captive Prithviraja, 
who was granted immunity from punishment, made an intrigue 
against the Sultan. The conspiracy was detected and at the order 
of the Sultan Prithviraja was executed.^ 

The above account of the defeat and death of Prithviraja at 
the hands of Mu‘izz-ud-dm Muhammad is based on the authority of 
the early and later Musli m historians. The Sailgkrit jsources also 
throw light on this subject. a 

nearly contemporary authority, states that when Prithviraja’s gene¬ 
ral Skanda ‘‘went to another battle, the king, whose intellect was 
shrouded by the vice of sleep, who, though alive, was as good as 
dead in battle, was slaughtered by the Turushkas.” The Prabandha- 
chint&mcmi relates that the miniser Somes vara, who was dis¬ 
missed by Prithviraja, conducted the Muslims to the camp of the 
Chahamana king. At this time Prithviraja was enjoying a deep 
sleep, and a severe encounter took place between the Muslims and 
the heroes of Prithviraja’s vanguard. Prithviraja was taken pri¬ 
soner when he was still excessively drowsy. The king of the Mus¬ 
lims took the Chahamana king to the latter’s capital, and resolved 
to reinstate him on the throne. But the* sight of a picture 
in the royal palace, depicting the Muslims as being killed by a drove 

112 





THE AGE OF PRITHVIRAJA ni 

of pigs, greatly infuriated him, and he readily put Prithviraja to 
death. 8 It is difficult to take these accounts seriously 

( Pri thviraja was evidently a gen eral of high ord dr ^ but he lack¬ 
ed ^plitical .foresight:.It .was a ,grass.,d^fect . with tKfe fmiian chiefs 

1;hat in their fight with the Muslims they always chose to be on the 
✓' defensive. The result was that their adversaries, even when they 
were defeated, could escape annihilation if they could only with¬ 
draw from the battlefield. Prithviraja was not free from this 
drawback. At this thne the rule of the Maliks of Ghur was hot 
firmly established in the Punjab. Prithviraja ought to have pur¬ 
sued’the disabled fjidtiiii to the Punjab after his victory in the first 
b attle oTThrain, ahd made an attempt to root out the Musljm rule 
there. His task would have been easy, as it was not possible for 
his opponents there to avail themselves of the service of their great 
leader. But far from doing this, and even without making any | 
suitable arrangement for the defence of the fort of Tabarhindah, j 
which guarded his north-western frontier, he retired to Ajmer, and f\ 
the dreadful consequence followed./ 

/ The defeat of Prithviraja in the second battle of Tarain not 
only destr oyed the imp er i a l pow er of the. Chahamanas, byt. also 
brought disaster on the whole of Hin dust an. The mor ale of the 
ruling princes and the people corupleli^ down, and-the entire 

country was seized with panic. Many of those who were accustom- 
'ecT to peaceful pursuits fled with their family and settled in. the 
south. The Jain teacher Asadhara states that when Sapadalaksha was 
conquered by S hihab -ud-din, he, for fear of being molested by the 
conquering armies,"left his native country, and migrated with his 
family to Malava. This state of things obviously made it easier for 
Mu‘izz-ucT-dln Muhammad and his generals to establish a firm foot¬ 
ing in the heart of Hindustani 

The Viruddhavidhi-viddhavarhsa states that after the death of 
Prithviraja his general Skanda placed the king’s brother Hariraja 
on the throne of Sakambhari. The Hammira-Mahakavya relates 
that on the death of Pfithvlraja his brother Hariraja performed his 
funeral ceremonies and then ascended the throne. Hasan Nizami, 
on the other hand, reports that after the execution of Prithviraja 
Mu‘izz-ud-dln Muhammad placed the deceased king’s son on the 
throne. As Prithviraja was a minor in A.D. 1177 his son was 
apparently very young at this time. After settling the affairs at 
Ajmer the Sultan marched to Delhi and invested the fort. After 
a short resistance the son of Govindaraja and his lieutenants sur¬ 
rendered and agreed to pay him tributes regularly. The Sultan 
left for Ghazni, posting an army in Delhi, and appointing his gene- 

113 

s. E.—8 

















MINIS/*,, 



ral Qutb-ud-din governor of Guhram and Samana. Shortly after¬ 
wards Qutb-ud-dln finally took possession of Delhi. But about this 
time lie received a report, sent by Rukn-ud-dln Hamzah from Ran- 
thambhor, that Hiraj (Hariraja), the brother of the Rai of Ajmer, 
had gone into rebellion, and threatened to invade Ranthambhor. 
The son of Prithviraja was also living in Ajmer in a precarious con¬ 
dition. Qutb-ud-din forthwith marched towards Ranthambhor, 
and at his approach Hariraja fled away with his army. Qutb-ud- 
din presented a robe of honour to the son of Prithviraja, and re¬ 
ceived from him immense wealth for the service of the State. 

After Qutb-ud-dln’s return to Delhi, Hariraja, with the help of 
the general Skanda, overthrew the son of Prithviraja and wielded 
the sovereignty of Ajmer. The Indian sources, referred to above, 
do not mention the events which happened between the fall of 
Prithviraja and the accession of Hariraja. A stone inscription of 
Hariraja’s reign, dated A.D. 1194, proves that he was in possession 
of Ajmer in that year. He sent an army to the borders of Delhi, 
which oppressed the Muslims and plundered their property. This 
induced Qutb-ud-din to lead an invasion against him. Hariraja’s 
position in Ajmer was not very strong. He fell into disfavour of 
his subjects due to his licentious habits. Bhlma II, the king of 
Gujarat, in order to be friendly with him, presented him some danc¬ 
ed girls. Hariraja was so much enamoured of their beauty that 
he spent day and night in their association, and squandered the 
revenue. When Qutb-ud-din invaded his kingdom, he was not pre¬ 
pared for resistance. He did not, however, choose to sacrifice his 
honour by surrendering to the enemy. He entered into the fort 
and died along with all the members of his family by ascending the 
luneral pile. Hariraja had no son. His followers, in despair, left 
Ajmer and took shelter under Govindaraja of Ranthambhor. Ajmer 
fell into the hands of Qutb-ud-din without any fight. Hasan Nizami 
fixes the date of this conquest of Ajmer by Qutb-ud-din in A.D. 
1193. This is obviously an error as Hariraja, as has already been 
noted, was ruling in Ajmer in A.D.. 1194, and Qutb-ud-dln’s con¬ 
quest of Ajmer must, therefore, have taken place after this date. 
Qutb-ud-din settled the affairs in Ajmer, posting there a governor, 
and letuilied to Delhi, thus the rule of the Imperial Chahamanas 
came to an end. 


114 - 





THE AGE OF PRITHVIRAJA in 


1. The account of the war between Prithviraja and Mu‘izz-ud-din Muhammad is 
found in the nearly contemporary works, viz . ViniAdhavidhi-viddhavamsa, 
Jdmiu-l Hikdyat, Taj-ul-Motdsir, and Tabaqdt-i-Ndsiri, and later works, oiz. 
Prabaiidha-chintdmani, Hammira-Mahakavya, Firishta, Tabaqat-i-Akbari, etc. 

2. Commenting on the name of the fort Tabarhindah Raverty observes that all 
the copies of the text have Tabarhindah or Tabarhind. Ta’rikh-i-Alfi, Zubdat - 
ut-Tawdrikh , and Budauni have Tarhindah. Budauni says that it was the 
capital of Jaipal. The printed text of Tabaqat-i-Nasiri. and many works of 
late date, viz. Tabaqat-i-Akbari , Mir’dt-i-Jahan-Numd, and Khulasat-ul- 
Tawdrikh , etc., have Sirhind. Firishta calls it Pathindah. The Lubb-n.t~ 
Tawdrikh-i-Hind says that Tabarhindah is now known by the name Bifhandah 
(Raverty, Tabaqdt+i-Nasiri, p. 457, n). Some are inclined to identify the place 
with Bhatinda, in Patiala, and some again take it as identical with Sirhind. 
in the same State. As the distance of Bhatinda from Tarain is double that of 
Sirhind I am inclined to agree with the latter view. 

3. The Hammira-Mahdkdvya narrates the final battle between Pfithviraja and 
MuTzz-ud-dm in a different way. It states that Shihab-ud-dln (Mvi‘izz-ud-dln) 
succeeded in seducing Prithviraja’s master of the horse and the royal musi¬ 
cians. As soon as the Muslims made an onslaught on the camps of the 
Chahamanas a confusion broke out. The master of the horse designedly sup¬ 
plied a horse named Natyarambha for the use of the king at this critical 
juncture. When the king mounted on it the musicians played on a tune 
favourite to him. Natyarambha started dancing, and the king, being attracted 
by the music, forgot the grave task he was to perform. Taking advantage of 
the king’s indifference the Muslims made a severe attack on the Chahamanas, 
Prithviraja got down from his horse, and killed many Muslims with his sword, 
but he soon fell a captive, and was taken to Delhi. When Udayaraja besieged 
the city for the release of his master, the Sultan, in order to avoid future 
trouble, threw the captive king into the fort. The king died there a few days 
after, and Udayaraja, in despair, rushed upon the Muslims and died fighting. 
The Hammira-Mahakavya’s report goes against the testimony of Td$-nl~Ma’dmr. 



115 


MIN IST^ 


%L 

CHAPTER IV 

THE TURKISH CONQUEST OF 
NORTHERN INDIA 

1. THE MUSLIM STATES IN THE EAST 

A brief reference has been made above, in Chapter II, to the 
part played by the Saljuq Turks and the Shansabanls of Ghur in 
bringing about the fall of the Ghaznavids. In order to understand 
more clearly the background of the events that followed and ulti¬ 
mately led to the Muslim conquest of India, it is necessary to re¬ 
view briefly the history of these and other Muslim states in the east 
in the eleventh and twelfth centuries A.D. 

As noted above, Sultan Mahmud had to bear the brunt of Ilak 
Khan’s attack and to buy peace by allowing him to capture the rich 
plain north of the Oxus. But soon another and far more numerous 
horde, the Ghuzz Turks, rose into prominence. Starting from the 
Kirghiz steppes of Turkistan, their chieftain named Saljuq had settled 
in the region of Bukhara about the middle of the tenth century A.D. 
His grandsons, Chaghri Beg and Tughril Beg, rose to power by 
helping the Samanids against llak Khan. But soon after Mah¬ 
mud’s death they crossed the Oxus, conquered Merv and Nishapur 
from the Ghaznavids, and brought under their sway the whole of 
Khurasan and northern Persia, the petty kingdoms of the land fall¬ 
ing before them just as the Indian kings had succumbed before Mah¬ 
mud. In A.D. 1054 Tughril marched against Baghdad, revived the 
dying Caliphate, and gave it a lease of life for another two cen¬ 
turies. The greatest service that the Saljuqs rendered to Islam was 
to re-unite middle Asia from Afghanistan to the Mediterranean 
under one political authority, which made it possible for the Mus¬ 
lims to check the progress, first of the Byzantine Emperors, and 
later of the Crusaders. 

The next important event in the politics of Central Asia in 
this age Was the rise of the house of Khvarazm Shah. Khvarazm 
(the modern Khiva) was bounded on the west by the Caspian, on 
the east by Bukhara and the Oxus, and on the south by Khurasan. 

It passed from the hands of the Samanids to the Ghaznavids, and 
from these to the Saljuqs. Ever since the Samanid days the gover¬ 
nors of Khv§razm had enjoyed the title of Khvarazm Shah. In 
the last quarter of the eleventh century the Saljuq Sultan Malik 

lift 



THE TURKISH CONQUEST OF NORTHERN INDIA 

Shah appointed his cup-bearer Anushtegin governor of Khvarazm. 
Either he or his son Atsiz declared himself independent, and found¬ 
ed the dynasty of Khvarazm Shah, which was destined to play for 
a century the leading role in the history of Central Asia. 

At this time there entered into the arena of Central Asiatic 
politics a new force, the Qara Khitai Turks, who moved westward 
owing to the pressure of the Mongols and Chinese from the East. 
These Turks were not Muslim. In A.D. 1141 their leader (known as 
Gur Khan or Universal Lord) inflicted a crushing defeat upon Sul¬ 
tan Sanjar and shattered the power of the Saljuqs beyond recovery. 
This left the field free for the Khvarazm Shahs to increase their 
power and possessions at the expense of the Saljuqs, and the Ghu¬ 
rids or Chiefs of Chur to aggrandise themselves at the expense of 
the Ghaznavids. Thus the two great powers, the Saljuqs in Per¬ 
sia and the Ghaznavids in Afghanistan and Khurasan, were sup¬ 
planted respectively by the Khvarazm Shahs and the Ghurids. At 
a later date, ‘Ala-ud-din Khvarazm Shah (A.D. 1199-1220), the 
more powerful of the two, drove the Ghurids out of Khurasan, and 
the Qara Khitais back into China, and extended his sway from 
Persia to Bukhara and Samarqand. In A.D. 1214 he also drove out the 
Ghurids even from Ghazni arid Afghanistan. But before we come 
to this period we shall deal in some detail with the ruling house 
of Ghur which laid the foundation of the Muslim empire‘in India. 

2. THE GHURIDS 

The Ghurids inhabited the region between Ghazni and Herat. 
Some writers think that they were Afghans, but most probably 
they were eastern Persians. With the decline of Ghaznavid Sul¬ 
tans they gradually asserted their power and finally the nephew 
of the “World-burner,” Ghiyas-ud-din Muhammad, 1 ascended the 
throne of Ghur as Sultan in A.D. 1163. He drove the Ghuzz Turks 
from Ghazni and made his brother Shihab-ud-din Muhammad 
governor of that province in A.D. 1173. The latter, also called Mu'izz- 
ud-din Muhammad bin Sam, tried to emulate the exploits of Sultan 
Mahmud and led several expeditions against India. 

The early expeditions of Muhammad were made through the 
Gomal Pass, west of Dera Ismail Khan, and not through the Khy- 
ber, because the former was the safer and shorter route. Con¬ 
sequently Multan and Uch, which were the first to fall on his way, 
were wrested from their Qaramitah chiefs in A.D. 1175. By A.D. 1182 
the Sumra chief of lower Sindh was compelled to acknowledge 
Muhammad’s suzerainty. So far the direction followed by Muhammad 
was correct. But when he attempted to cross the desert and penetrate 

117 




MINIS' 



into Gujarat, forgetting the experience of Mahmud, he was acting 
against the dictates of geography. It would seem that some Tur¬ 
kish warriors had been frequently raiding the Rajput kingdoms 
from that quarter in the twelfth century, but all the attacks had 
been repulsed by the Gujarat rulers. Following this tradition 
Muhammad crossed the desert and reached the foot of Mt. Abu in 
A.D. 1178, with an exhausted and famished army. The Turkish army 
was beaten with great slaughter by the forces of Mularaja II, the 
Chaulukya king of Gujarat, 2 but Muhammad luckily managed to 
escape with the poor remnant of his ruined army. This reverse 
left no other course for him except that of entering India by the 
northern rcute and, consequently, of first wresting the Punjab from 
the Ghaznavids. Soon an opportunity offered itself. Chakradeo, 
the ruler of Jammu, invited the Ghurl Sultan to help him against 
Khusrav Malik, the Ghaznavid, as the latter was supporting the 
tribesmen, known as Khokars, who had rebelled against the autho¬ 
rity of the Jammu chief. Muhammad accordingly invaded India. 
Peshawar was taken in A.D. 1178, Sialkot fell in A.D, 1185, and the 
following year Lahore was captured by treachery from Khusrav 
Malik, the last of the Ghaznavids, as has been described above. 

Muhammad’s fight with the Chahamana or Chauhan king Pri- 
thviraja, ending in the defeat and death of the latter in the second 
battle of Tarain in A.D. 1192, has been described in the preceding 
chapter. 

After this great victory Mu'izz-ud-din Muhammad conquered 
Delhi, but, as noted above, Hindu chiefs were allowed to rule both 
in Ajmer and Delhi as tributary kings. He then occupied and 
garrisoned the military outposts of HansI, Kuhram, SursutI and 
Sirhind. After these brilliant victories Muhammad returned to 
Ghazni, leaving his favourite general Malik Qutb-ud-din Aibak with 
an army at Indarpat, about ten miles from Delhi. 

3. QUTB-UD-DIN AIBAK’S CONQUESTS 

Qutb-ud-din Aibak had full powers to deal with the Hindu 
chiefs and to make further conquests. A Hindu chief having be¬ 
sieged the garrison at HansI (A.D. 1192), Aibak at once rushed to 
its relief and defeated and slew the chief near Bagar. Then he cap¬ 
tured and garrisoned Meerut and Baran (modern Bulandshahr.) in 
the upper Doab, the latter place having fallen because of the trea¬ 
chery of Ajaipal, a relation of the Dhor chief, who was a vassal of the 
Gahadavalas. These two places served as military bases for opera¬ 
tions in the east. 


118 




fHE TURKISH CONQUEST OF NORTHERN INDIA 



For consolidating the conquest it was necessary to settle at a 
central place, Indarpat being only a temporary camp. Aibak, there-, 
fore, drove away the Chauhan chief, who was suspected, of hostde 
designs, from Delhi, and made it his capital early in A.D. 1193. Aibak 
had already occupied and garrisoned the mighty fort of Rantham- 
bhor, but the Chahamanas, under the leadership of Hariraja, bro¬ 
ther of the late Prithvlraja, recovered both Ajmer and Rantham- 
bhor. Aibak immediately moved against them, and on his approach 
they withdrew. Meanwhile the dispossessed chief of Delhi 
again revolted, and Aibak had to go against him leaving Hariraja 
unsubdued. In the midst of all these preoccupations the Turkish 
general was called away by his master to Ghazni, probably to help 
him against the Khvarazmian menace, and was away for six 
months. It is surprising that this long absence of Aibak was not 
utilised by the Indian chiefs to make an effective combination to 
drive out the foreigners from the land and to prevent their future 
entry into it. A splendid opportunity was thus missed by them. 
There were only stray risings and revolts which were easily put 
down, and soon after the conqueror returned, he occupied the Doab 
as far as Kol (Aligarh) and garrisoned it. 


(i) The Gahadavdlas. 


All this happened within an year and Aibak had prepared the 
ground for another avalanche from Ghur. In A.D. 1193 Mu'izz-ud-dln 
marched with fifty thousand cavalry against the Gahadavalas, and 
was met by Jayachandra near Chandawar on the Yamuna, between 
Etawah and Kanauj. A hard contest followed, and Jayachandra 
had well nigh scored a victory, when he received a deadly wound 
from an arrow and fell. His force was thrown into confusion and 
the lucky invader turned it into a rout. An orgy of extensive and 
ruthless massacre, rapine, and pillage followed. Temples and 
shrines were razed to the ground and relieved of their fabulous 
treasures. Banaras and the fort of Asni which contained the trea¬ 
sury of the Gahadavalas were the first to be occupied. One thou¬ 
sand temples are said to have been destroyed at Banaras alone, and 
mosques raised in their places. This victory added extensive ter¬ 
ritory in Hindustan, as far east as Banaras and Chandravatl, to 
the dominions of the conqueror. But, as noted above, the Gahada¬ 
valas recovered some of. the territories. 3 


(it) Ajmer ; Gujarat, Baydna and Gwalior 

Muhammad gathered the hoard of treasures and departed for 
Ghazni, leaving Aibak to deal with the affairs in India. Aibak had 
enough work on hand to keep him occupied. The Hindu chiefs 


119 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

effectively subdued, and the country was seeth¬ 
ing with hostility and revolt. Kol was being besieged by Dhor 
Rajputs; Ajmer was invested by Hariraja again, and an army led 
by Jhat Rai, under Hariraja’s direction, was proceeding to recap¬ 
ture Delhi. But Aibak, nothing daunted, proved equal to the task. 
Detaching a part of his force to guard the capital, he proceeded 
towards Ajmer and cut off Jhat Rai on the way. The latter fell 
back to Ajmer which was then closely besieged by Aibak, reduc¬ 
ing Hariraja to such straits that he, finding escape impossible, burnt 
himself on a funeral pyre to save himself from the humiliation of 
defeat and captivity. Aibak then set aside his protege, the son of 
Prithvlraja, and appointed one of his officers to govern it. Ajmer 
was thus annexed to the Delhi dominions in. or shortly after A.D. 
1194. It was at this time that Aibak erected the Quwwat-ul-Islam 
mosque at Delhi from the materials of 27 Hindu or Jain temples 
which were demolished. This was. followed about A.D. 1196 by the 
erection of another mosque, which came to be popularly known as 
Adhai-din-ka-Jhoiiipda, at Ajmer, on the site of the Sanskrit college 
of Visaladeva. This mosque was completed in A.D. 1200. 

In A.D. 1195 Mu‘izz-ud-din returned to round off the conquest of 
Northern India by annexing the petty principalities of Bayana and 
Gwalior. The chief of Bayana, Kunwarpala, 4 evacuated his capital 
and entrenched himself in the neighbouring fort of Thangarh (Tahan- 
garh), but surrendered after a short siege. The several strongholds 
and strategic outposts of the locality were then occupied and gar¬ 
risoned, and the command of this frontier between Rajputana and 
Doab was entrusted to Eaha-ud-dln Tughril. The latter founded 
another military station, which he named Sultankot, to serve as a 
base of operations both in the east and the west. After this the 
Ghurl chief laid siege to the mighty fortress of Gwalior. This fort 
was not easy to subdue and the siege was prolonged. Therefore 
when the Parihar chief Sallakshana opened negotiations for peace, 
Muhammad welcomed the opportunity, raised the siege, and retir¬ 
ed, leaving Tughril to complete the reduction of the fort. The lat¬ 
ter then so harried the Parihar chief by his frequent forays for more 
than a year that he was compelled to surrender his fort which was 
thus annexed to the Delhi Sultanate. 

There was however no respite for Aibak. In A.D. 1195-6 the Mher 
tribes of Ajmer combined with the Chaulukyas to expel the Turks 
from Rajputana. Aibak had to rush to the help of the Turkish 
governor of Ajmer. Finding the Mhers camping near Ajmer he 
engaged them in a battle, but when the enemy were reinforced 
by the Chaulukya ruler’s army, Aibak was forced to withdraw into 




120 


THE TURKISH CONQUEST OF NORTHERN INDIA 

the city. Here he was closely besieged and Ms position became 
very precarious. But the fortunate approach of reinforcements 
from Ghazni at this critical moment saved him. On the approach 
of this force the Rajputs raised the siege and retired. 

To avenge this attack Aibak early next year mustered a power¬ 
ful army and advanced on Anahillapataka (Anhilwara). It seems 
that Bhlma II of Gujarat, on the approach of Aibak’s force, Retired 
to some distant fortress. But, as noted above; 5 Rai Karan, assist¬ 
ed by Dharavarsha Paramara of Abu, collected a huge army arid 
awaited the Turks at the foot of the Abu hills. Aibak quailed be¬ 
fore this enormous horde or perhaps he feigned fright, and resorted 
to shock tactics. When the Rajputs, thinking that Aibak was try¬ 
ing to avoid engagement, carne out into the open, the Turks made 
a sudden onslaught. The superior manoeuvres and quicker move¬ 
ment triumphed over superior numbers, and the Rajputs met with 
a terrible reverse. Fifty thousand men are said to have been slain 
and twenty thousand taken captive. The Muslims mercilessly 
sacked the capital city Anahillapataka, defiled and demolished its 
temples, and plundered its palaces. According to Firishta a Mus¬ 
lim officer was placed in charge of Gujarat and Aibak returned to 
Delhi. But, shortly after, Bhlma came out of hi^ hiding place, and 
the Turks were gradually driven out of Gujarat. Some scholars 
suppose that it was due to the valour shown by Bhlma II that the 
Turks did not venture to attack Gujarat for one full century. But 
the immunity of Gujarat from Turkish invasion was probably due 
mainly to its being situated at a long distance from the capital 
with the important territory of Rajputana intervening between the 
two. These obstacles were not easy to overcome for a general who 
was kept preoccupied with insurgence and revolt rampant it) the 
country around the capital. 

(Hi) Northern Daab and Rajputana 

In the following year the country beyond the Gariga, Katehr 
and Rudaun (Badayun), was reduced to submission, and Chanda war 
and Kanauj had again to be captured. Some expeditions were 
also probably undertaken into Rajputana which compelled the 
Chahamanas (Chauhans) of Nadol to migrate to safer places. 
These Chauhan chieftains founded the houses of Kotah, Bundi and 
Sirohi. Nevertheless Aibak could not establish a firm arid lasting 
foothold over Rajputana. 

(iv) The Chandellas (Chandels) 

The conquest of the northern Doab arid the surrounding coun¬ 
try being complete, it was now the turn of the next great king- 


121 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

dom which touched the south-eastern border of the Turkish domi¬ 
nions. This was the kingdom of the brave Chandellas of Jejaka- 
bhukti (modem Bundelkhand). Their kingdom extended as far 
as Kalpi and Asni in the north and beyond the line of the Yamuna 
in the east. Their country was rugged, full of ravines, and water¬ 
less, and they possessed a number of mighty forts perched on the 
summits of hills, the mightiest of these being Kalanjara (Kalinjar) 
and Mahoba. The king of the Chandels at this time was Para- 
mardi or Paramal (c. A.D. 1163-1203). 

Border raids and hostilities had been going on between the Turks 
and Chandels ever since the former's occupation of the northern 
country. But the final attack by Aibak was made in A.D. 1202. 
Paramardi withdrew and shut himself in the fort of Kalinjar, which 
was besieged by Aibak. Cut off from contact with the outside 
world and deprived of the necessary supplies, Paramardi was con¬ 
strained to sue for peace and offered to pay tribute. But before 
the terms of the treaty could be put into execution the Chandel 
ruler died, and his minister Ajayadeva, relying on a newly dis¬ 
covered supply of water, repudiated the treaty and decided to con¬ 
tinue hostilities. He, too, however, could not resist long and re¬ 
tired to Ajayagarh fort, leaving Kalinjar, Mahoba and Khajuraho 
to the Turkish general. Hasan Arnal was entrusted with the govern¬ 
ment of this territory. 

4. IKHTIYAR-UD-DlN MUHAMMAD BAKHTYAR KHALJT 

In their original design of conquest neither Mu‘izz-ud~din nor 
Aibak had probably dreamt of penetrating beyond the Gahadavala 
dominions in the very first thrust. It was due to the sheer dare¬ 
devil adventure of a reckless soldier that the eastern lands 
were also added to the dominion of the Turks. 

Among the many free-lances who had come in the entourage 
of Muhammad Ghuri, was a daring adventurer named Ikhtiyar-ud- 
din Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji. The handicap of an uncouth per¬ 
sonal appearance stood in the way of his getting employment 
at Ghazni and Delhi. Nothing daunted by these disappointments, 
he at first took up a humble soldier’s job under Hijabr-ud-din 
Hasan Adlb of Budaun in A.D. 1193, and some time later, under Malik 
Hisam-ud-din Aghul Bak, who had established himself in Awadh. 
Here he was entrusted with the work of reconnoitring the adjacent 
territories and was assigned some villages for his upkeep. This 
afforded him an opportunity to give full play to his adventurous 
spirit. From his small income he got together a small contingent 
of adventurers and, about the year A.D. 1200, commenced raids on the 




122 



THE TURKISH CONQUEST OP NORTHERN INDIA 


Q 


f^adha territory beyond the Karmanasa which was probably the 
western boundary of the Sena kingdom. It is surprising that he 
met with no opposition whatsoever by the Sena ruler who, indeed, 
seems to have taken no notice of these raids. Within a short time 
Bakhtyar amassed enough fortune from his plunders to build up a 
large force. Finding these districts utterly prostrate and incapable 
of any resistance, he was emboldened to push as far as the Vihara 
(monastic University town) of Odantapuri (Bihar) and, obtaining 
permission from Aibak, made a final attack upon that town. There 
were no soldiers to defend it. But some feeble resistance was offer¬ 
ed by the helpless shaven-headed Sramanas (Buddhist monks), who 
were taken by Bakhtyar to be Brahmin priests and were slaughtered. 


After capturing Odantapuri Bakhtyar visited Aibak at Budaun 
and secured permission for further conquests, but on condition of 
relying on his own resources without expecting any help from the 
chief. Within a year of the Bihar expedition Bakhtyar set out on 
his campaign against Nadiya, How he captured this city and con¬ 
quered a large part of Bengal has been described above. 6 


Nadiya was not occupied permanently; presumably on account 
of its strategic position it was not easy, and probably even dan¬ 
gerous, to hold it. Bakhtyar therefore sacked it and retreated to 
a safer place which he could also use as his military base for further 
operations. This place was Lakhnawatl (Lakshmanavati), the 
northern capital of the Senas on the Ganga (near the site of Gaur, 
in District Malda). Bakhtyar’s phenomenal success in Bengal had 
fired him with the ambition of conquering even Tibet. He there¬ 
fore marched with a large army, led by a Koch guide, presumably 
along the Brahmaputra, and arrived at a spot where there was a 
stone bridge across the river, leading into the hills. Here his guide 
took leave of him and, as the Khalji warrior was about to proceed, 
he received a message from the king of Kamarupa (Assam) advising 
him to postpone his campaign till the following year when he would 
reinforce him. Bakhtyar paid no heed to this and plunged forward, 
reaching on the 16th day the open country of Tibet. Here he met 
with a tough resistance and heard that an army of 50,000 Turks was 
on its \vay to meet him. This report unnerved him and his forces, 
and he decided to beat a hasty retreat. Due to the hostility of the 
hillmen, it became a veritable rout, and much of the force was des¬ 
troyed on the way. When he reached the bridge where he had 
crossed the river, he found that it had been demolished by an 
Assamese army, and he was forced to seek shelter in a neighbour¬ 
ing temple. But, on being besieged there, he dashed out with the 
remnant of his followers, and all desparately threw themselves into 


123 





the river to ford or swim across it, The river was deep and the 
current very swift, so that most of his men were washed away. 
Bakhtyar managed to reach the shore with hardly a hundred men. 
Here his guide met him and conducted him back to Devakot. 
Crushed and broken hy the weight of this disaster Bakhtyar sickened 
and rapidly sank until the merciful knife of one of his own lieute¬ 
nants, ‘All Mardan, relieved him of all his troubles (c. A.D. 1206). 

5. END OF THE GH.URI DYNASTY 

We may now revert to the last days of Mu‘izz-ud-din Ghuri’s 
career. The Khvarazmian house constituted the greatest menace 
to the rise and expansion of the Ghurids. Instigated by the Caliph of 
Baghdad whom the Khvarazmian Takash had offended, and taking 
advantage of a civil war which had ensued on the death of Takash 
(A.D. 1200) between his son and grandson, the Ghurid princes occu¬ 
pied Khurasan and captured its important towns, Nishapur, Tus, and 
Merv, early in A.D. 1201. Their triumph was, however, shortlived. 
‘Ala-ud-din, who eventually succeeded Takash, proved to be more 
than a match for the Ghurids. He soon recovered Nishapur and 
other Ghurid conquests including even Herat (A.D. 1201). 

Ghiyas-ud-din, the elder brother of Mu'izz-ud-din, died in 
A.D. 1202, and the latter ascended the throne of Ghur. The hostility 
with the Khvarazmians continued, and in A.D. 1205 Mu‘izz-ud-dln sus¬ 
tained such a severe defeat at their hands at Andkhul that his military 
reputation and prestige in India suffered a fatal blow. The Khokars 
and other tribes in India rose in rebellion and defeated the governor 
of Multan. They also plundered Lahore and closed the road bet¬ 
ween that city and Ghazni. Mu'izz-ud-din, bent upon taking 
revenge against the Khvarazmians, at first asked Aibak to deal 
with the outbreak, but was ultimately convinced by the seriousness 
of the situation that his presence was necessary. He accordingly 
left Ghazni on October 20, 1205, and within a month defeated the 
Khokars in a hotly contested battle between the Jhelum and the 
Chenab rivers. The Khokars fought bravely from the morning to 
the afternoon, and were on the point of gaining victory, when the 
arrival of Aibak with the forces of Hindustan turned the tide 
against them. The Khokars were treated with ferocious cruelty. 
Large numbers were killed and taken prisoners, and a body of 
them, who took shelter in a dense jungle, perished miserably as the 
Muslims set the forest on fire. Mu‘izz-ud-dln reached Lahore bn 
February 25, 1206, and after settling affairs there, proceeded 
towards Ghazni. On the way he was stabbed on March 15 ift his tent 
at Damyak on the bank of the Sindhu river. 


124 



THE TURKISH CONQUEST OF NORTHERN INDIA 

The identity of the assassins has not been satisfactorily esta¬ 
blished. Some hold that they were Khokars who had lately suffer¬ 
ed so severely at his hands. But others believe that they were 
“fanatical Shiahs of the heretical Isma'ili Sect”"who got possession 
of Khurasan and held it until they were crushed by Mu‘izz-ud-din 
in A.D. 1199. 

The body of Mu‘izz-ud-din was carried to Ghazni and buried 
there. But the Ghurid empire did not long survive him. His 
nephew and successor Mahmud had to acknowledge the Khvarazm 
Shah’s suzerainty, and after his death the bulk of the Ghuri 
empire passed under the sway of the Khvarazmians. For a short 
while Taj-ud-dln Yildiz, a slave of Mu‘izz-ud-dln, managed to retain 
hold of Ghazni. With his expulsion in A.D; 1215, the Ghuri empire 
in Central Asia came to an end, and the Khvarazm Shah took the 
place of lords of Ghazni. The Indian conquests of the Ghuris, how¬ 
ever, proved far more stable. The story of this, empire will form 
the subject of the next chapter. 

6. CAUSES OF THE COLLAPSE OF HINDU RULE 

The astou nding rapidity of the Tur kish co nquest constitutes an 
im portant proble m for the students of Indian history. It is puzzling, 
nay almost baffling, to explain the almost complete collapse of 
Northern India, within an incredibly short time, before the onslaught 
of invaders whose po wer and"resou rc es were hardly eq ual to those ^ 
of s ome of th e higger .'H indu StatesT not to speak of a comBmatttm'P'f 
them. It is natural that men should seek to solve the mystery and 
find out the real causes that lay behind the great political catastrophe 
that overwhelmed India. History would appear to be meaningless if 
facts of such outstanding importance cannot be viewed in their true 
perspective agains t a proper backg round. It is no wonder, therefore, 
that various spec ulatio ns have been made and diverse solutions 
offered to the problem. 

Certain general considerations must, however, be borne in mind, 
while we approach the question in a critical spirit. To begin with, 
we are not sure of the essential facts on which all theories must 
necess arfty'be bas ed. The history of the Muslim conquest of India 
is known, almost in its entirety, fjom the chronicles written by the 
Muslims. Apart from a few incidental notices or brief allusions, the 
Hindbi_gources are silent on thisjgreat episode. But the picture of a 
victor, as painted by himself alone, can hardly be regarded as 
a reli able represent ation, or even an approximation to truth. The 
general outlin e may in deed be fairly correct, but it is impossible to 
accep t, wi thout question, those numerous details which colour the 




125 
















MIN/Sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 




narrative and necessarily form the principal materials for our judg¬ 
ment. This is well illustrated by the current *story about the con¬ 
quests of Muhammad Bakhtyar, mentioned above. 7 On the face of 
it, it appears incredible thaL Lakshmaiiasena should not have taken 
adequate steps to defend his frontier against a probable, one might 
say a known, danger, or that his guards should have admitted, with¬ 
out question, the Turkish horsemen inside the capital city at a time 
when an invasion was apprehended at any moment. The extreme 
improbability of the situation almost necessarily implies that we 
have not the full story befor e us, and that if th e defenders ' version 
were known, m uch that appears incredible to-day would h ave ap¬ 
peared Jnaclifferent light and we could have taken a more rational 
view of the whole "situation. 


So long, at least, as the m ain facts are not definitely established , * 
it is idle to speculate on the causes that led to the debacle of the 
Hindus. It is equally unwarranted to attribute it solely to the social 
and religious peculiarities of the Hindus, for our ideas about them are 
also vague and indjstinct, and based on no sure knowledge of facts. 

It is true that we have a mass of literature and other data on this 
subject, but it is difficult to ex plain their bearing on the social evolu¬ 
tion in different parts of India at different periods of time. 



We have thus to grapple with the great difficulty caused by the 
uncertainty in regard to facts—pol itical, social and religio us—which 
must form the essential data in any endeav our to probe the deeper 
cause underlying the broad _faet of the T urkish conquest of India. 
This should make us pause in our laudable attempt towards a philo¬ 
sophical interpretation of historical fact s, and turn our attention to 
the serious defects underlying, all suggested solutions of the very 
interesting problem. In any case, we must moderate our zeal and 
fully realise that while it is incumbent on us to discuss the problem, 
any solution that we may offe r at the present state of our knowledge 
cannot claim any scientific basis, far less, finality in character" 


Subject to these natural limitations we may refer to some of 
the causes of t he downfall ofTHeTIindus that appear probable in the 
light of the available da ta. The foremost among these seem to be 
/ ^rf the iniquitou s""systemTtf caste and the absence of contact with the 
■ o utside wo rld, the fi rst resulted in a fragmentation of In dian 
^ society into mutu ally exclusive* cla sses, among whom the privile ged 
minorit y preserved their vested i nterests by depriving the masses 
of m any civic righ ts, specially edu cation and of l^e Tin tercourse 
and association on equal terms with their fellow men r and further, 
by imposing* on Them The most irritati ng disabili ties on the one 
hand, and a tremendous weight of innumerable duties and obli- 


126 








































mist#,. 



THE TURKISH CONQUEST OF NORTHERN INDIA 


<§L 


gations towards the privileged classes on the other. And this evil 
led to another. It bred amo ng t he leaders of the Indian people a vain 
pri de in isolationism and i nsula rit y and that at titude of arrogance 
which has been noticed by AL-B lrum. “The Hindus”, says~~fie, 
“believe that there is no coi Intrvl)ut the irs, no king like their s, no 
scienc e like theirs .... If they travelled an d mixed with other nations 
they would soon change their mind,” Al-Biruni also remarks that 
“their ances tors were no t so narrow-minded as the present ge nera¬ 
tion/’ This spirit of exclusive supe riority was created andlna in- 
tained by a pr ocess of intellectua l fraud, inasmuch as almost the 
entire literature of the period was utilised for this purpose and 
the masses were asked to follow it blindly in the name of the Holy 
Writ, to question whose authority was an unpardonable sin. It 
became thus a part of the Hindu rfharmn. not to cross the seas or 
even jthe territorial limits of certain hallowed areas ! This insula¬ 
rity contributed largely to the supineness of the Indian chiefs, and 
their utte r Tack of appr eciation of the high er values of patrioti sm 
and n ational freedo m in the co ntext of^ India as a whole, apart from 
the narrow gebgraphical_£egiqn^Jri^yhich they lived. Co nsequen t- 
ly they were unable to comprehend the far- reaching imp ortance of, 
and the proper measures* for, f rontier defe nce, in view of the 
great pol itical chang es and evolution in mi litary ta ctics which were 
taking place in Jhg "wo rl d outsid e. 

The degraded level to which the majority were pushed down 
made them indifferent to country-wide d angers and k indred pro - \ 
blems. This alone made possibl e the woeful situation that while the 1 
invaders swept acros s the cou ntry, the masses mostly remain ed inert. 
The pe ople of the land, wit h a few ex ceptions, were indiffer ent to 
what was happenmg around them . Their voice had been hushed in 
silence by a ~ relig io-social tyranny. No public upheaval greets the 
foreigners, nor ar<Tany organised efforts made to stop their progress. 
Like a paralysed body, the Indian people helplessly look on, while 
the co nqueror marches on their corps e. They look staggered, for 
a moment, only to sink back into a pitiable acquiescence^ to the 
inevitable to which they have been taught tcTsubmitT 




V" 




Then, again, the false ideals of Kshatriya chivalry, taught them 
by their mentors, made the Rajput princes paralyse one another by 
perpetual internecine coinflicts, and what was more fatal, made 
them obfadaus-of a broad nati o nal v ision and patriotic get dAroaSg- 

This alone can explain why, or how, at a time when the 
country wa s threatened wit h a grav e peril, the rul ers of the lan d 
devote d thebestpart of th eir energi es in mutual fightin g. The 
enormous wealthof the country was sp ent in building and enrich- 


127 































































MIN/Sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




ing the temples which they proved unable to protect, whereas the 
most appropriate use for these resources should have been to orga¬ 
nise a common defence against the invaders, backed b y a national 
effort. On the contrary it was the ver y fab ulous w ealt h of these 
defenceless temples and sacred towns which invited the foreigners 
and contributed greatly to the consequent disaster. 


History had no meaning for the Hindu kings who presided over 
the destinies of this woe-stricken land. The repeated warnings of the 
past went unheeded. The onslaught began with the Arab conquest of 
Sindh in the eighth century when the Hindus got a foretaste of what 
might happen in the future. But it assumed formidable proportions 
under the lead of Mahmud at the end of the tenth and beginning of 
the eleventh century. The next century and a half witnessed a ces¬ 
sation of this onslaught, barring a few comparatively minor and 
irregular raids. But when the offensive was resumed by another 
Turk, even though he was far inferior to Mahmud, he found the 
victim as ready for slaughter as it was two centuries earlier. As 
A noted above, it is passing strange that P rithvlraja had not taken any 
adequate m easure after his victory at Tarain t o prevent the secon d 
" in vasio n of Mu‘izz-ud-din GhurL Nor is there any evidence to show 
that the great Sena king bestirr ed himself early enough to stop the 
marauding excursions of Muhammad Bakhtyarlii"Blhar and Bengal. 
«Whi le individual courage and bravery were certainly not w anting, 
) there was lack of wisdom and statesmanshi p, of thel mowled ge of the 
( ou tside world , and of a des ire to keep abreast wi th the s pirit of 
the time. No realistic adjustment, no far-si ghted approa ch to the 
problem which had stared them in the face for centuries and 
threatened their ver y existen ce, no improvemfintjnjoutlook, no ele¬ 
vation of pol itical vision from their petty jealousies and parochial 
ideals, and consequently no prep aration for a concerted defen ce com¬ 
mensurate with the extent of the* dan ger—these were the conspicuous 
traits of the Hindu rulers and their priestly co nsci ence-keepers of the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. N ational consciousn ess, love of 
c ountry , and pri de of freedon ywere smot hered under the weight 
of a m ass_ ofRit uals and social conven tions, a pett y-minded va nity, 
and narrow^ selfish ness. Add to this the not infrequent cases 
of treason and treachery on the part of ministers and other officials, 
and we shall Have a fairly comple te p icture. But whether it fully 
reveals the reasons of the collapse or not, one thing seems to be 
reasonably certain. The ut ter and precipitate prost ration' of such 

i a v ast and ancient Iand t endowed with resources far superior and 
greater t o those of her invader s, can be the res ultlmainly o fjnfernal 
decay and not merely of external attacks , which were its e ffect 
rather than the cause. 8 


128 







































VIQNV i° 


TOE TURKISH CONQUEST OE NORTHERN INDIA 



4. 

5. 






,T, 


7, See p. 39. 

8. Cf. ‘Hindu Reaction to Muslim Invasions" by R. C. Majumdar in M. 
Commemoration Volume, pp. 341-51. 



M. Potdar 





S.E.—9 


J29 







CHAPTER V 


THE MAMLUK SULTANS OF DELHI 1 

I. QUTB-UD-DIN AIBAK AND ILTUTMISH 

The victories of Mu‘izz-ud-din Muhammad Ghuri, related in the 
last chapter, had only initiated a process whose completion, requir¬ 
ing sustained military direction, seemed foredoomed by the implica¬ 
tions of his sudden death on the bank of the Sindhu. The Andkhui 
disaster 2 had robbed him of his Central Asian empire; his assassina¬ 
tion at Damyak threatened Ghazni itself. For, the Khvarazm Shah 
was now free to extend his empire beyond the Hindu Kush and the 
annexation of the Ghur kingdom was only a question of time. 
Because of their affiliation with the doomed kingdom, the Indian pro¬ 
vinces also lay exposed to the perennially unstable politics of Cen¬ 
tral Asia where, towards the east, stirrings of a yet another race- 
movement could already reach the discerning ear. Within India, 
the tide of Turkish conquest seemed to be turning. Even before 
Bakhtyar’s disastrous defeat in Assam, Kalanjara was reconquered 
by the Chandellas, while in the Doab, Gahadavala princelings held 
out in defiant independence. 3 y 

A unified command in India, unhampered by considerations of 
trans-Indus politics, was urgently called for, but to achieve this was 
in itself a major task. For, Mu'izz-ud-din left no son but a band 
of slaves to claim his dominions. His nephew Ghiyas-ud-dln Mah¬ 
mud, “a prince in whose disposition, conviviality, pleasure and jolli¬ 
ty were dominant”, 4 was satisfied with his ancestral principality of 
Firozkoh and nursed no greater ambition than to be asked to manu¬ 
mit the bond-slaves of his family. Among these was the able and 
ambitious Taj-ud-dln Yildiz who, purporting to fulfil his master’s 
wish, possessed himself of Ghazni and so felt qualified to claim suze¬ 
rain status. To this was opposed the ambitions of two of his co¬ 
slaves, Nasir-ud-dln Qabacha and Qutb-ud-din Aibak, both holding 
extensive commands in India. The latter enjoyed an extra distinc¬ 
tion as being placed in general charge of his master’s Indian con¬ 
quests and thus exercising de facto authority of a viceroy from 
Delhi. 

Aibak’s assumption of supreme power in Lahore in June 1206, 
therefore, meant no formal change in the government, for he adopt¬ 
ed no sovereign titles and issued no coin of his own. But the step 
implied severance of India’s ties with Ghazni and so forestalled Yil- 


130 




THE MAMLOK SULTANS OF DELHI 


<SL 


diz’s claims. In order to keep himself ready for the latter’s enmity, 
Aibak mostly lived in Lahore, and the task of extending authority 
over the outlying areas could receive only his passing attention. 
Qabacha, in any case, could not be immediately interfered with in 
his sovereign authority over Sindh, nor could military action be 
resumed to arrest the revival of native powers in India. For, on 
the west the situation was changing fast. In A.D. 1208 the Khvarazm 
Shahi pressure forced Yildiz out of Ghazni, and as he sought shel¬ 
ter in the Punjab, Aibak, fearing an extension of Khvarazmi aggres¬ 
sion to India, promptly drove him out and then moved to occupy 
Ghazni. The venture, however, failed, for the citizens secretly 
facilitated Yildiz’s sudden return and Aibak had to beat a hurried 
retreat. 6 


Except for a passing attention to the affairs of Lakhnawatl 
where Khalji lieutenants of the deceased Bakhtyar had set up a 
clannish oligarchy and so had to be forced to admit Delhi’s suze¬ 
rainty, 6 Aibak remained preoccupied with the problem of preserv¬ 
ing his government’s separate entity and of establishing a political 
frontier. That task was still unaccomplished when he died in A.D. 
1210. But he had successfully initiated a State and outlined its 
foreign policy. 

As an instrument of this State a dynastic leadership was, 
however, essential, and in the circumstances a contest appeared 
the only means of stabilizing it., While his son, an untried youth 
named Aram, succeeded Aibak in Lahore, a more powerful faction 
at Delhi favoured his son-in-law, Iltutmish, lately the muqti 
(Governor) of Baran and an officer of proved ability and tact. 
The schism, though lasting not more than eight months and ending 
with the death of Aram while leading his forces on Delhi, inten¬ 
sified the immediate problems. Qabacha pushed to Multan and ex¬ 
tended his hold over Lahore, Bhatinda, and even Sursuti; the 
Hindu feudatories showed increasing defiance, and Ranthambhor, 
originally placed under Prithviraja’s son, ceased to own vassalage; 
the Pratlharas, commonly known as Pariharas, reoccupied Gwalior; 7 
and in Lakhnawatl Aibak’s nominee ‘Ali Mardan declared indepen¬ 
dence. A more pressing danger came from the north-west where 
Yildiz was fast losing ground to the Khvarazm Shah and yet wax¬ 
ing in imperial pretensions. 

Iltutmish eschewed Aibak’s impetuosity and acted with cir¬ 
cumspection. His own position was still insecure, and a fierce 
rising of the jandars (guards) of Delhi in support of Aram was sup¬ 
pressed with difficulty. He therefore preferred to placate his rivals 
and even pretended to accept an investiture from Yildiz. He also 


131 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


ected complete indifference when the latter’s troops expelled 
Qahacha from Lahore and occupied most of the Punjab. But he 
took advantage of the vacuum and quietly tightened his grip on 
the cis-Sutlej districts of Sursutl, Bhatinda and Kuhram. By the 
time political developments across the Sindhu came to a head, and 
a decisive action on his part became unavoidable, he had greatly 
strengthened his position and established a firm hold on the coun¬ 
try up to Banaras. When, therefore, Yiidiz was finally driven out of 
Ghazni in A.D. 1215 and, falling back on Lahore, sent imperious 
orders to send forces from Delhi to aid him, Iltutmish faced him 
with confidence, and captured him in an open battle at Tarain. 8 


A straight march on Lahore would have been a natural sequel 
to the victory, but Iltutmish preferred to measure his steps. Qaba- 
cha’s reoccupation of the city was therefore acquiesced in, while he 
reorganised his newly extended western frontier. Two years later 
he seized upon an alleged breach of agreement and moved his 
troops across the Beas to Lahore. Qabacha fled in haste to Uch, 
and Delhi officers took the city without any opposition. 9 


This steady advance towards the Sindhu basin, however, re¬ 
ceived a serious set-back when, like an avalanche, the Mongols of 
Tartary swept across Central Asia and drove an incalculable num¬ 
ber of refugees—princes and people alike—into the safety of the Pun¬ 
jab. The Khvarazmi empire was rolled up in the process, and the 
crown-prince of Khiva, Jalal-ud-dln MangbarnI, chased through 
Khurasan and Afghanistan, was sent flying across the Sindhu. 
There Chingiz Khan stopped, posted troops to watch the border of 
the Sindhu and search for the fugitive prince, and returned to die 
shortly after in A.D. 1222. 


These sudden catastrophic changes gravely imperilled the 
kingdom of Iltutmish. All his exertions to keep away from the 
trans-Indus power-politics appeared frustrated when Jalal-ud-dln’s 
continued sojourn in the Punjab threatened to invite Mongol ope¬ 
rations. It severely taxed Iltutmish’s diplomacy to refuse the 
prince’s request for shelter and armed assistance against the pagan 
Mongols, and yet show his solidarity with the Muslim cause. To 
the irresistible Mongols he gave a wide berth, and, when they came 
to search for MangbarnI in the Salt Range, he pretended not to 
take offence. He took no action when the prince moved away from 
the Mongols towards Lahore but got an army ready to oppose his 
progress further eastwards. Thus confined, the prince forced an 
alliance on the Hindu chief of the Salt Range, gathered a straggling 
army of fugitive tribes and, moving up and down the Sindhu val¬ 
ley, caused enormous devastation in Qabacha’s kingdom. The re- 


133 


MINI ST/f 



THE MAMLuK SULTANS OF DELHi 


<SL 


north of Multan became practically a no man's land, and it 
was therefore sought to be made a Khvarazmian principality. 
When MangbarnI passed through lower Sindh on his final exit via 
Kerman, he set fire to Uch, seized Sehwan, and put the ruler of 
Debal to flight. To follow up the territorial advantages secured 
by such methods, he left two of his officers, Hasan Qarlugh and 
Uzbek Pai who, pressed inexorably by the Mongols from the west, 
steadily fell back on lower Sindh as a thorn in Qabacha’s side. 
Following a Mongol siege of Multan shortly after, the first of a 
series of such raids, a large horde of Khalji tribesmen broke into 
Sehwan for shelter, and the effect of all this left Qabacha gasping 
for breath. 10 


All this advanced Iltutmish's plans against his rival, if not his 
scheme for the consolidation of the frontier. Advancing from 
Lahore, which he reoccupied shortly after Mangbarni’s departure, 
he forced Qabacha out of Multan and Uch, and, almost without a 
battle, drove him to seek shelter in the island fortress of Bhakar, 
and eventually to a watery grave in the Sindhu (A.D. 1228). 11 


Delhi's frontier now ran along the lower courses of that river, 
but in the north Iltutmish found himself facing a far more diffi¬ 
cult problem. The Sindhu basin had become a Mongol operational 
area with a tendency to spread eastward as Hasan Qarlugh and 
Uzbek Pai continued to yield ground. They were useless as 
buffers, and assistance to them meant inviting Mongol aggression, 
and yet their complete elimination would bring the unwelcome 
Mongols nearer still. Iltutmish was thus constrained to watch the 
situation, while instructing his officers on the border to reduce the 
Chenab and Jhelum valleys without giving direct offence to the 
Mongols. Before his death he managed to extend his rule up to 
Sialkot and Hajner in the north, but failed to make much headway 
on the west beyond a preliminary advance on Nandana in the Salt 
Range. 


Nevertheless, Iltutmish had solved the major problem of terri¬ 
torial integration under a single command. Immediately after 
Mangbarm’s departure from India Iltutmish recovered enough 
confidence to attempt a reconquest of Lakhnawati, the province 
in the east, where ‘All Mardan’s misrule had been followed by the 
assumption of power by Hisam-ud-din ‘Iwaz Khalji, one of Bakht- 
yar’s junior associates. The latter had assumed sovereign status, 
and by good government and profitable raid into neighbouring 
Hindu states had increased his resources. By a show of force Iltut¬ 
mish succeeded, in A.D. 1225, in inducing the Khalji king to agree to 
a limitation of his sovereignty and to relinquish his hold on Bihar. 


188 



MIN/Sr^ 



Within a year, however, Twaz broke the agreement, and seized 
Bihar. This brought upon him Iltutmish’s crown-prince, Nasir-ud- 
din Mahmud, who, from his base in Awadh (Oudh), swooped on 
‘Iwaz’s capital and slew him in battle. But the province did not 
immediately settle down to a subordinate status. Within two years 
N§sir-ud-dln Mahmud died in Lakhnawatl, and a Khalji chief, who 
acknowledged Delhi's suzerainty, was pushed out by another named 
Balka whom Iltutmish had to defeat by a personally conducted cam¬ 
paign in A.D. 1229. 12 

With equal energy and determination, but with less decisive 
results, he set to work to wrest the military initiative from the 
Hindu princes. In the area south of the Chambal, the Pariharas, 
starting from the recaptured Gwalior as their base, had expanded 
their rule over Jhansi and Narwar, 13 At Ranthambhor the Chaha- 
mana (Chauhan) family under Govindaraja had also found strength 
to follow an independent course of expansion and to impose para- 
mountcy over the neighbouring states, despite a nominal allegiance 
to the “Suratrana Lititimishi (Iltutmish) of Yoginlpura (Delhi)”. 
A collateral branch, ruling at Jalor in apparent repudiation of the 
vassalage imposed by Aibak, also extended overlordship over a 
large area in south-west Rajputana and claimed even to have re¬ 
peatedly humbled the Turks. 14 In the north, the Yaduvamsi 
or Jadohbhattis controlled the approaches to Alwar and so practically 
sealed off Bayana, Thangir and even Ajmer. 

The extent of the revival of Hindu Powers and the difficulties 
facing the Delhi troops were heavily underlined by the inconclusive 
results of Iltutmish’s operations in Rajputana. Opening the cam¬ 
paign in A.D. 1226, he took Ranthambor and Mandawar and humbl¬ 
ed Jalor, but was repulsed with heavy losses by the Guhilots from 
Nagda. Rajput records speak also of his failure in an attack on 
the Chaulukyas of Gujarat. A similar expedition, conducted by 
one of his officers against the Chauhans of Bundi, also ended in 
failure. While he recaptured Bayana and Tahangarh, and widened 
the Ajmer base by garrisoning the neighbouring positions of Lawah, 
Kasili and Sambhar, the success proved temporary, for it failed to 
arrest the Chauhan revival. A seemingly successful raid into 
Malwa in A.D. 1234-35 similarly gave Iltutmish more plunder and 
righteous satisfaction than political or military advantage, for the 
Paramaras remained in undisturbed possession of the country for 
the rest of the century. 16 

No more decisive results attended his efforts along the southern 
frontier. He recaptured and garrisoned Gwalior, but his raids pro¬ 
duced no effect on the Chandellas whose hold on the country as 


134 


MiNisr^ 



THE MAMIjOK SULTAMS OF DELHI 


<SL 


as JhSnsi showed no sign of slackening. A foretaste of the ris- 
ing power of a new dynasty was also provided to the Delhi com¬ 
mander, Malik Tayasal, who led an expedition through Central 
Indian defiles against the Chandellas. On his return march he was 
defeated by the powerful “Rana Chahir Ajari”, Chahatfadeva of the 
Jajapella (Yajvapala) dynasty which was just rising to power 
around Narwar (Gwalior State) and was to supplant the Pariharas 
in Gwalior. 16 

Even in the heart of the kingdom, the Gahga-Yamuna area, 
Iltutmish launched operations whose successful termination he was 
not destined to see. Although Harischandra, the last of the impe¬ 
rial Gahadavala line, is not heard of again, in the districts north of 
the Gahga round Budaun, Farrukhabad, and Bareilly, numerous 
Hindu chiefs had found sheltered bases against the Turkish posts 
in the Doab. In Anola the Katehriya Rajputs had formed a strong 
hold and, with the remnant of the Rashprakuta family of Budaun, 
not only barred Turkish expansion across the Ganga but encroached 
even on Awadh, which area, in itself, harboured not a few resisting 
chiefs. Iltutmish’s operations in the region are not sufficiently de¬ 
tailed, but the inclusion by his chronicler of Budaun, Kanauj and 
even Banaras among his conquest, can be understood only in this 
context, for these places had figured in Aibak’s initial conquests 
also. Since the Katehriyas continued to engage the Sultanate’s 
forces throughout and far beyond the thirteenth century, Ututmish’s 
reported capture of Katehr can only indicate the range of his 
operations. Some idea of the nature of the fighting in these areas 
may be formed from reference to Prince Nasir-ud-dln Mahmud’s wag¬ 
ing continuous “holy wars against the refractory Hindu tribes’’ and 
to his overthrowing a chief “named Bartu, beneath whose sword a 
hundred and twenty thousand Mussalmans had attained martyr¬ 
dom”. Armed insurrection prevailed in the Doab also, and gover¬ 
nors emphasised their success by such reports as the capture “of 
the son of the Raja of Chandwar”. 17 Most of these were, however, 
personal triumphs, shortlived and local in effect, and they could do 
little to help the Delhi Government in reducing the extent and 
power of the Hindu resistance' 

Iltutmish died in A.D. 1236. His greatest achievement was the 
initiation of a dynastic monarchy, and in utilising it in welding the 
loosely conquered territories into a political unity. To have pre¬ 
served the Sultanate’s separate entity and escaped the repurcussions 
of earlier affiliations with Central Asia when Chingiz Khan swept 
through the Continent was a very difficult task which he accom¬ 
plished with great foresight and skill. It was sheer ability whicli 
earned him, an ex-slave, almost a sacrosanct right to the crown, and 


135 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 

the Caliph’s investiture, received in A.D. 1229, 18 only confirmed the 
status which his dynasty and state had acquired. Working on the 
outlines drawn by Aibak, he filled in the details of a military state 
and richly deserved his position as its first king. 


II. WEAK SUCCESSORS OF ILTUTMISH 

For thirty years after the death of Iltutmish the Sultanate was 
confronted with problems which nearly destroyed its structure. Due 
to the absence of well-defined rules of succession, struggles for 
power recurred frequently, and the Government, with its energies 
distracted by such internal strife, was unable to maintain continui¬ 
ty of action against the Mongols or the Hindu States. 

On the unexpected death of his crown prince, Nasir-ud-din Mah¬ 
mud, in A.D. 1229, Iltutmish had nominated, after some hesitation, 
his eldest daughter, Raziyya, to succeed him, in supersession of his 
other grown-up sons. No legal difficulty bothered him or his cour¬ 
tiers; nor was any doubt entertained about her abilities, for she 
had been tested frequently when her father left her in charge of 
the government during his campaigns. But practical considera¬ 
tions of pitting a young woman against the jealousy of her grown¬ 
up brothers and of the proud nobles seemed to have weighed with 
him towards the end, for, before his death, he summoned his eldest 
surviving son, Plruz, from Lahore with a view, as was interpreted 
by interested parties, to his succession. The prince, in any case, 
secured the support of the provincial governors who had assembled 
in the capital to join the king’s last expedition which his illness 
caused to be abandoned, and got himself proclaimed king on the 
night of his father’s death.''- 

If he had abilities he could possibly have disarmed all opposi¬ 
tion, but he proved a colourless rake who left all power to his 
mother Shah Turkan, a low-born, jealous woman, whose vicious 
rule almost immediately drove her own supporters to revolt The 
governors of Multan, Lahore, HansI, Budaun and Awadh, resolved 
to end this petticoat rule, moved their forces towards Delhi, from 
where even the wazir, JunaidI, deserted his post to join them. 
P iruz marched out to meet the rebels, but his own army officers 
revolted on the way, murdered his body-guards, and returned to the 
capital, to find that during the Friday prayer the aggrieved Raziyya 
had cleverly exploited the popular discontent against Shah Turkan 
and, in the name of her father, had induced the populace to seize 
and throw her into prison. The army officers completed the pro¬ 
cess by proclaiming Raziyya’s accession, and so Firuz returned only 


186 



THE MAMLUK SULTANS OE DELHI 


<SL 


Eo find the shackles ready for him. His 
an inglorious reign of seven months. 


death in prison followed 


The new sovereign received popular acclaim when she asked 
for'a chance to prove her abilities “far better than any man”; but 
the coup displeased the insurgent governors who were converging 
on Delhi with the obvious intention, not only of deposing Firuz, 
but also of making their own choice of a king. Opposing not so 
much the new ruler as the method by which she captured the 
throne, they encamped opposite the city and began a siege by cut¬ 
ting all communication with the outlying provinces. But the queen 
proved equal to the task. Having no strong military force at her 
command at the moment, and unable to summon reinforcements 
from loyal provinces, she resorted to the well-known trick of divid¬ 
ing her enemies. She persuaded two of the insurgents to agree to 
join her secretly and betray their comrades, and then spread this 
news among thb latter who thereupon took fright and fled. Many 
were pursued and slain while the wazir died a lone fugitive in the 
Sirmur hills. 


Raziyya’s reign of three years forms a brief interlude in a 
decade of oligarchic misrule increased by factiousness. Aware of 
the powers claimed by her father’s freedmen, and aware also of the 
need for vigorous exercise of the Crown’s authority in a state which 
was still military in nature and function, she tried to compensate 
for the disability, supposedly attaching to her sex, by foresight, 
firmness and kingly demeanour which her courtiers hardly expect¬ 
ed from a young woman. She discarded female attire, rode out 
in public, and held open court; she selected for high offices men of 
her own choice and, deliberately, not always from among Iltut- 
mish’s freedmen who came to be known as ‘the Forty.’ 19 Among 
these new appointees was the Abyssinian Jalal-ud-din Yaqiit whose 
promotion to the post of Amir-i-Akhur (Master of the Stables), a 
sinecure carrying more prestige than power, was obviously cal¬ 
culated to counter the Forty’s monopolistic control of all such offi¬ 
ces. Like her father Raziyya showed a realistic prudence when 
she firmly but tactfully turned down an invitation to form an alli¬ 
ance with Hasan Qarlugh, the Khvarazmi representative, who was 
then struggling singly against the Mongols in the western Sindh 
Sagar Doab. 29 
/ 

The ‘Forty’ could hardly tolerate such calculated undermining 
of their position. By the third year of Raziyya’s reign a conspiracy 
was set afoot to depose her or at least to curb her liberty of action. 
With Aitigin, the Amir-i-Hajib (Grand Chamberlain), at the head, 
and with all the Turkish officers in and outside the court in collu- 


187 



MINfSr/j,, 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


ton, the conspirators tried to stage a coup. Since this was not 
found possible during her stay in the capital, where she enjoyed 
strong popular support and kept a vigilant watch, they planned to 
decoy her to a distant province where they could isolate her by force 
while partisans seized the capital. A revolt was accordingly staged 
by the governor of Lahore early in A.D. 1240, but the queen con¬ 
founded the conspirators by the energy and speed with which she 
marched out, chased the rebel as far as the Chenab, and compelled 
him to surrender unconditionally, before his friends could join 
him. Within a fortnight of her return, however, another rebellion 
was reported from Bhatinda, then under the command of Malik 
Altuniya. Disregarding the heat and the inconveniences of the 
month of Ramazan, the queen again marched out with all available 
forces. On arrival the conspirators in her retinue rose against her, 
murdered Yaqut and her other supporters, and imprisoned her in 
the Bhatinda fort. Working on a pre-arranged plan, and before the 
return of the ring leaders, the Delhi partisans immediately occupi¬ 
ed the palace and proclaimed the accession of their nominee, Iltut- 
mish's third son, Mu‘izz-ud-dln Bahram (April, 1240). 2 * 

Bahrain's installation was the reward, as it transpired, for his 
agreeing to leave all effective power to the conspirators; he was to 
retain his prerogatives but the government was to be entrusted to 
one of their nominees designated Naib-i-Mamlikat (Deputy of the 
State) for “at least one year”. It was an experiment with immense 
possibilities for constitutional progress, although its immediate aim 
was to assure the continued domination of the ‘Forty’ so dangerous¬ 
ly threatened by the late queen. 22 


As the leader of the conspiracy, Ikhtiyar-ud-din Aitigin’s 
appointment to the new post was proclaimed on his return from 
Bhatinda. Aitigin, however, soon piqued the young king Bahram 
by marrying one of his sisters and by violating the royal preroga¬ 
tive by keeping an elephant and naubat at the entrance of his house. 
Within three months the king’s annoyance impelled him to take 
decisive action, and so the deputy was murdered in his office with 
Bahrain’s connivance. 


The crime shook the power of the ‘Forty’ but did not improve 
matters for the king, for his Amir-i-Hajib (Grand Chamberlain) 
Badr-ud-din Sunqar now quickly assumed control over the adminis¬ 
tration. Some of the ‘Forty’ left the court to organise another re¬ 
bellion with Altuniya who was closely guarding the captive Raziy- 
ya, while the wazir, resentful of the new domination, planned re¬ 
venge. Aitigin’s murder had ruined Altuniya’s hopes for a due 
share of reward for his part in the late conspiracy, and he now 


138 


THE MAMLtJK SULTANS OF DELHI 

found it wiser to ally himself with his captive and thus to acquire 
the latter’s rights in support of his demands. Raziyya agreed to 
marry him, and the two organised an advance on Delhi to wrest 
back her crown. But their mercenary troops, recruited mostly from 
the Khokar tribe, proved no match for the regulars of the Delhi 
government, and they were easily repulsed. Flying before the 
pursuing troops Raziyya halted at Kaithal, where her mercenaries 
deserted, and she was murdered by Hindu robbers while resting 
under a tree (25 Rabi I, 638—13 October, 1240). 23 
/ 

\/ Meanwhile, a timely betrayal by the wazir of a conspiracy or¬ 
ganised by the Amir-i-Hajib and a few ecclesiastics to depose Bah¬ 
rain, had led to the fall of Sunqar and, in the resulting vacuum, the 
wazir was ruling with a great show of power. Nursing his earlier 
grudge against Bahram the wazir rejoiced when the king offended 
the ecclesiastics by brutally killing one of their members, on the 
instigation of a darvish . In A.D. 1241 the report of a Mongol advance 
on Lahore gave the wazir a chance to overthrow the king. He ac¬ 
companied the troops sent to reinforce the besieged city, but as 
they neared Lahore he spread consternation and anger among the 
officers by disclosing the king’s alleged secret order for their execu¬ 
tion. The army at once revolted and turned back to depose the 
tyrant. On this news Bahram sent the Sheikh-ul Islam to reassure 
and remove their suspicions, but as a promoter of the plot, the 
latter worked for the opposite effect. The troops returned to find 
the king’s partisans put up a gallant defence of the capital, but an 
insurrection organised by the wazir’s men aided the attackers, and 
when the city fell, Bahram was seized and executed (May, 1242). 

/Although exactly the same conditions were imposed on the 
new king, 24 Iltutmish’s 16-year old grandson ‘Ala-ud-din MasTid, 
and a JVaib with wide powers was appointed in the person of the 
refugee prince Qutb-ud-din Husain of Ghor, it was yet the wazir 
who naturally monopolised all power. He filled the administra¬ 
tion with his own nominees, mostly ecclesiastics and dissidents from 
Aitigm’s party, and even attempted to exclude the ‘Forty’ from posi¬ 
tions of power. The latter therefore leagued once again and mur¬ 
dered the wazir , appointed the submissive Najm-ud-dln Abu Bakr 
to the vacant post, and nominated one of their junior members 
named Balban for the office of Amir-i-Hajib. 

By superior ability Balban soon overshadowed his party men, 

\ and with a correct understanding of the problem, diverted their 
energies to campaigns against Mongols and Indians. With apparent 
tranquillity Mas'ud’s reign thus lasted four years until in A.D. 1246, 
a secret plot, apparently motivated by personal ambition, and in 




189 



which Balban also seems to have shared, led to his replacement by 
litutmish’s youngest son, Mahmud, who was proclaimed as Sultan 
Nasir-ud-dln Mahmud. 26 


The new reign meant no change in the policy, for Balban, now 
in firmer control, filled the key positions with his nominees and set 
about to break the power of his erstwhile comrades. He gave his 
daughter in marriage to the king, obtained the post of Naib for him¬ 
self, and nominated his younger brother Kashli Khan as the Amir-i- 
Hajib, while his cousin Sher Khan got the important governorship of 
Lahore and Multan. Mahmud proved a pliant sovereign and willing¬ 
ly left all initiative to the deputy. The latter’s policy of monopolis¬ 
ing all offices for his own kinsmen, however, provoked an opposi¬ 
tion in which the non-Turkish elements, headed by an Indian Mus¬ 
lim named ‘Imad-ud-dln Raihan, took the leading part. Raihan 
managed to secure for himself the important post of Wakil-i-dar 
(Superintendent of the King’s Household establishment) and then 
contrived to replace Balban and his kinsmen by his own supporters. 
As could be foreseen, this 'Hindi rule’ proved loathsome to the 
Turks, who entertained an extreme feeling of racialism and con¬ 
sidered the Delhi Sultanate as their exclusive heritage. A counter¬ 
move, therefore, soon started in which Balban took the leading part. 
Most of the Turkish officers posted in the provinces round Delhi 
joined their forces and prepared to march on the capital to end the 
non-Turkish domination. Mahmud was advised to resist and the 
royal forces set out to oppose the insurgents. But near Samana, 
despite Raihan’s best efforts to encourage the king to adhere to his 
decision even at the cost of an armed conflict, Mahmud lost heart 
and was glad to end the tension by accepting the opponents’ terms. 
Raihan and his associates were accordingly dismissed from court 
and Balban regained his former ascendancy. 26 

Except for this brief interruption (A.D. 1253-54), Balban held 
all effective power during the whole of Mahmud’s reign, and is even 
reported to have used the royal insignia. His period of viceregency 
can thus be said to have shaded off into his reign when, on the 
death of the childless Mahmud in A.D. 1265, he assumed the crown, 
thus starting a new dynasty but no new regime. 

III. INTERNAL DISORDER 

Of the problems which had accumulated through all these years 
of changes on the throne, one of the most serious was the increas¬ 
ing tendency among the provincial governors to flout the king’s 
authority and thus to threaten the unity which Iltutmish had envi¬ 
saged. Military ineffectiveness of the Central government tempt- 


140 




THE MAMLUK SULTANS OF DELHI 

edthe officers in the western provinces to lean conveniently on the 
neighbouring Mongol power, who was thus enabled to extend its 
pressure across the Sindhu and the Chenab rivers. In the East, 
the governors fought each other and even declared independence 
at will, while the Awadh and Doab provinces, because of their pro¬ 
ximity’to Delhi, sharply reacted to events in the capital. All this, 
in turn, heartened the Hindus to greater and concerted aggressions. 
It was almost a miracle that the Sultanate escaped total dissolution. 

Even in Iltutmish’s lifetime Lakhnawati had become a problem 
province. His final arrangement, effected after three expeditions, 
proved ineffectual. Tughan Khan, whom he had appointed to suc¬ 
ceed Saif-ud-din Aibak in Lakhnawati, forcibly seized Bihar an , 
although he kept up a show of loyalty during the reigns of Raziyya 
and Bahrain, early in A.D. 1242 he advanced to take possession of the 
provinces of Kara-Manikpur and Awadh. The Awadh governors 
appeal brought little help from Mas 1 ud’s government, and Tughan 
Khan’s easy occupation of the town was averted only by the per¬ 
suasion of the respected ecclesiastic Minhaj who was then on his 
way to the eastern province. On his return to Lakhnawati Tughan 
repulsed an Orissan attack on his frontier and pursued the retreat¬ 
ing Hindus into Jajnagar. At Katasingh (near Midnapore) he was, 
however, routed, and as he fell back, the Orissan forces came up m 
close pursuit. While he sent an urgent appeal to Delhi, the Hindu 
forces captured his frontier post of Lakhanor and advanced to besiege 
Lakhnawati itself. A timely report of the despatch of reinforce¬ 
ments from Delhi, however, saved the situation, for the Orissan 
commander thereupon raised the siege, plundered the countryside, 
and withdrew. Reinforcements arrived shortly after, but instead 
of pursuing the Orissans, the commander picked up a quarrel with 
Tughan and blockaded his capital. The latter defended himself in¬ 
effectually and was at length obliged to hand over his province to 
the commander, Tamar Khan. Balban’s hand in this curious pro¬ 
ceeding becomes evident when we find Tughan Khan being com¬ 
pensated with the vacant governorship of Awadh where he died two 
years later. 27 

This camouflaged imposition of Delhi’s authority could hardly 
last. Yuzbak, who was appointed to the province some time after 
A.D. 1249, followed Tughan’s example, occupied Awadh, and even 
had the khutba read in his name. Although a reported approach of 
Balban’s troops made him withdraw, he crowned his insubordination 
by proclaiming sovereignty immediately on Balban’s return. Even 
his death in course of a rashly conducted invasion of the Brahma¬ 
putra valley soon after failed to restore Delhi’s authority, for within 

141 





le governor 
in Lakhna- 
eignty, but 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


o years the officiating governor, Yahya, was dispossessed, 
killed in open violation of authority by Arsalan Khan, 
of Kara and Awadh, who thereupon installed himse 
wati. He is not known to have assumed full soveri 
against his continued unauthorised occupation of the pi 
Awadh, Bihar and Lakhnawati Mahmud’s government could 
no effective action, so that Arsalan’s son Tatar Khan, who qu 
succeeded to the position, boastfully called himself “Chief of all 
Maliks of China and East”. 28 .■ 


Although comparatively tranquil during the earlier years, 
Awadh and Doab also latterly reacted against the manner of Bah 
ban’s restoration to power. Following his dismissal from the court, 
and transfer to Bahraich, ‘Imad-ud-din Raihan allied himself with 
Qutlugh Khan, the king’s step-father who held Awadh and was not¬ 
ed for his antagonism to Balban, and prepared to negative Mah¬ 
mud’s authority in the trans-Ganga region. An armed expedition, 
which was ineffectually opposed by Qutlugh as it passed through 
Awadh, however, eventually succeeded in driving Raihan from 
Bahraich. But when Qutlugh was transferred to Bahraich, he re¬ 
volted and defeated a Delhi force. On Balban taking the field in 
person he tied to the Himalayan foothills, but returned immediate¬ 
ly on the former’s departure, seized Awadh and even threatened 
Kara-Manikpur. He was, however, repulsed by the local governor 
and took refuge with the chief of Santurgarh who refused to give 
him up, suffering, in preference, the ravaging of his territories by 
Balban in A.D. 1257. 


IV. MONGOL RAIDS 

It was on the west that Delhi’s hold was most seriously jeo¬ 
pardised by continued Mongol pressure. Soon after the accession 
of Uktai to the supreme Mongol Khanate in A.D. 1229, aggressive 
campaigns were launched along the Sindhu basin, and by A.D. 1241 
they were extended up to Lahore. Its reinforcement was undermin¬ 
ed, as noticed earlier, by the intrigues of the wazir and it had conse¬ 
quently to be evacuated by the governor. The Mongols plundered 
the city, destroyed the fortifications and withdrew, but Lahore pro¬ 
vince henceforth became “the frontier”. By A.D. 1247 it became a 
Mongol dependency when a close siege, unrelieved by any hope of aid 
from Delhi, compelled the governor to pay tribute and accept Mon¬ 
gol suzerainty.- Control over Multan and Uch proved equally 
insecure. These two cities, held rebelliously by Kabir Khan 
thioughout Mas ud’s reign, suffered, in turn, an occupation by 
Hasan Qarlugh, the Khvarazmi representative finally driven from 


142 


THE MAMI.UK SULTANS OF DELHI 


the west, and then by the Mongols who came in his pursuit. Bai¬ 
ba n managed to recover temporary control by quickly garrisoning 
the towns immediately on the Mongol withdrawal, but the new 
governor, Kishlu Khan, had to face another Mongol raid and then 
lost Multan once again to Hasan Qarlugh. He was dispossessed of 
Uch by Sher Khan, the governor of Bhatinda, who, in accordance 
with Balban’s wish, refused to restore it to Kishlu. In revenge, 
the latter joined Raihan and, on Balban’s dismissal in A.D. 1253, was 
re-instated over the two provinces. On Balban’s return to power 
Kishlu broke with Delhi and, shortly after A.D. 1255, made a present 
of the whole Sindh province to the Mongols by formally transferring 
his allegiance to Hulagu Khan, the Mongol viceroy of Iran. 30 

A further constriction of the western frontier resulted from 
the Mongol help secured by prince Jalal-ud-din Mas'ud, Mahmud’s 
younger brother, who, dissatisfied with his status in life, had be¬ 
taken himself to the Mongol Khan, Mangu, at Qaraqoram, and was 
given armed assistance for installing himself as the vassal over the 
territories extending from the Sindhu to the Sutlej. Although the 
prince, following the failure of an attempt to get reconciled with 
Mahmud’s government, is reported to have disappeared from the 
scene, and Sher Khan, despite his treasonable contact with the Mon¬ 
gol court, was soon after reconciled and was induced to take action 
against the Mongol protege, yet the boundary line was not appre¬ 
ciably advanced on the west. Within a couple of years it even 
receded to the old bed of the Beas up to which the Mongols moved 
freely “to harass the frontiers of Delhi”. 31 A grave danger threaten¬ 
ed the government when in A.D. 1257 Kishlfi Khan, now a Mongol 
protege and holding Sindh, marched his troops along the Beas to at¬ 
tack Delhi in conjunction with Qutlugh Khan whom Balban had fail¬ 
ed to draw out from the Sirmur Hills. They had partisans among the 
Delhi ecclesiastics who promised to deliver the city. The rebels 
therefore evaded Balban’s forces sent out to oppose them at Sama- 
na, and reached the capital, only to learn, however, that their parti¬ 
sans had been discovered and banished. Kishlu thereupon with¬ 
drew and shortly after journeyed to ‘Iraq to induce Hulagu to sanc¬ 
tion a full-scale invasion of # the Delhi Sultanate. 

Hulagu refused, but promised him protection. The Mongol 
forces, stationed in Sindh under Sali Bahadur, were ordered to de¬ 
stroy the Multan fortifications, but they were not to cross the Delhi 
frontier under any circumstances. 32 This forbearance, suggesting 
a desire to stabilise the frontiers, was quickly reciprocated by the 
Delhi Government, who disbanded the special force raised to meet 
Sali Bahadur’s expected invasion. Mahmud’s government thus 



tacitly acquiesced in the loss of Sindh and the Punjab west of the 
Beas line. An anxiety to avoid hostilities, even with the Mongol vas¬ 
sals, was evident when, in A.D. 1258, Balban transferred Sher Khan 
to the interior provinces of Kol and Gwalior from the frontier area 
of Bhatinda where he was conducting operations against Kishlu 
Khan for the possession of Uch and Multan. Balban even made 
friendly overtures to Hulagu, who warmly responded and; in A.D. 
1259 sent a goodwill mission to Delhi, were the envoys were accord¬ 
ed a magnificent reception. 33 

Whether a formal agreement resulted from all this is not 
definitely known, but Balban must have discerned some change in 
the attitude of the Mongols towards their protege Kishlu Khan to 
feel encouraged to dispossess him of Multan a few years later. 
Kishlu is reported to have taken refuge in Baniyan, the area west of 
the Sindhu, and to have made fruitless attempts to recover Upper 
Sindh which, from the beginning of Balban’s reign, appears in effec¬ 
tive control of Delhi. 34 Whether the Mongol forces withdrew 
across the Sindhu under military pressure, or in accordance With the 
agreement, is equally uncertain. But they remained in undisturbed 
possession of west Punjab, and Lahore was not reannexed until a 
few years after Balban’s accession. 

V. REVIVAL OF HINDU POWER 

Dominating the entire background, however, were the Hindus 
whose revived striking power, only feebly met by Iltutmish’s efforts, 
found fresh opportunities during the weak regime of his successors. 
Along the undefined border, and inside the vaguely dominated 
country, the Sultanate was normally confronted with a standing 
military challenge which intensified with every local or individual 
disaffection. The difficulties of ensuring the governor’s loyalties 
had made Lakhnawati, for example, an uncertain possession; 
within eight years of Iltutmish’s death Orissa’s confident aggressions 
threatened its very existence. The failure of Tughan Khan’s private 
adventure in the Awadh province and his implied rejection'of Delhi’s 
authority offered Narasiihha I his chance of striking at the Lakhna¬ 
wati frontier in A.D. 1243. Although promptly repulsed, the attack 
signified more than it accomplished, for it, highlighted the role which 
the Hindu power now began to play on all the contiguous areas. As 
mentioned earlier, Tughan Khan’s counter-attack also failed, and he 
was chased back to his capital which the Orissan forces closely 
besieged. Until aid from Delhi could arrive, the Hindu forces had a 
free run of the country, and even when they withdrew across 


144 



THE MAMLttK SULTANS OF DELHI 


Lakhanor which they plundered, military action for its recovery was 
hardly possible. 

Although of no major territorial consequence, the episode put 
Lakhnawatl on the defensive, with Orissa free to substantiate her 
claim to have ‘‘despatched the Yavanas of Radha and Varendn”. 3 f 
Her progress in this direction is not evidenced in the records, but 
when, under Yuzbak, Lakhnawatl resumed military action ten years 
later, the earlier pattern was repeated. After two minor triumphs, 
a major reverse in Orissa obliged him to seek Delhi's aid with which 
he captured what he thought was the ‘Rai’s capital’, but which, from 
its name “Arzbadan” (or Umurdan), is probably to be identified with 
the village now known as Garh Mandaran, on the Hooghly-Midna- 
pore border, thus indicating the region along which the successive 
campaigns were fought. The Lakhanor area evidently remained 
with Orissa, but Yuzbak gained in the south what he lost in the west; 
for he occupied Nadiya and the adjacent Bh&girathT basin effectively 
enough to commemorate it by a special issue of silver coins in A.D. 
1255 “struck from the kharaj of Arzbadan and Nodia”. 36 But the 
success did little to affect the overall pattern of the military situa¬ 
tion, for Orissa’s frontier remained on the lower Bhagirathx till a 
subsequent push, towards the end of the century, completed the an¬ 
nexation of the coastal region. 


From East Bengal, where the Sena dynasty still continued, the 
Turks apprehended no great danger, but in the Brahmaputra valley 
their offensive power suffered an unparalleled set-back when, 
encouraged by his success in southern Bengal, Yuzbak launched a 
similar campaign in the north-east, against the Kamarupa kingdom, 
then comprising the country from the Karatoya to Gauhati. As he 
crossed the river, the Kamarupa Raja, withdrew his troops, thus 
allowing the invader to march unopposed to Gauhati, where he pr6- 
claimed himself king of Lakhnawatl and Kamarupa. He spurned the 
R&jd’s request for reinstatement as a tributary vassal and, assured 
by the rich crop then ripening in the fields, even foolishly sold his 
own grain stock to the latter’s agents. His .folly dawned on him only 
when he found the standing crops totally destroyed by floods caused 
by the Raja's cutting the embankments of the swollen rivers. Yuzbak 
was forced to retreat, which ended in disaster. Trying to avoid the 
hooded valley he moved along the unexplored and hostile Garo- 
Jaintia Hills, and in the defiles was caught between the hill tribes 
and the Kamarupa forces. He was taken prisoner and died of his 
wounds while his army was annihilated. 37 


This disaster emphasised once again the altered military 
situation which was perceptible almost simultaneously in other parts 


145 


S.E.—10 



MIN/Sr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


of the kingdom. Turkish hold on the narrow riverine strip of the 
Patna-Monghyr-Bhagalpur districts was rendered precarious by the 
extended activity of the surviving Hindu princes of South Bihar 
whose existence was never seriously affected by the conquest. Round 
Bodh-Gaya were the Sena rulers of Plthl to whose continuous occu¬ 
pation of the district the votive records of the Hindu chiefs of 
Sapadalaksha and Kumayun bear indirect evidence. Extension of 
Muslim rule in Shahabad, where power of the Mahdndyakas of 
Rohtasgarh could not have entirely disappeared, was hardly possible, 
and it is only the late Tibetan traditions which ascribe Turkish suze¬ 
rainty over Bodh-Gaya. Early in Mahmud's reign even the town of 
Bihar had to face Hindu assaults, and the local governor lost his life 
in resisting what was evidently a siege. The attack failed, but it was 
a defensive achievement which retained control over the route to 
Lakhnawati. 38 


More positive evidence of Hindu revival comes from the 
Sultanate’s southern frontier. The Chandellas had effected a speedy 
recovery, and by A.D. 1241 had earned recognition as overlord by the 
Mahcirdvaka of Kakaredika (modern Rewah). They advanced steadily 
towards the west and claimed, in an inscription of A.D. 1263, to be rul¬ 
ing over Jhansi; a subsequent record implies overlordship over Nal- 
pur (Narwar), Gopal, Madhuban (Mathura), and Gopagiri. (Gwalior). 
The situation became grave for the Sultanate as these localities form¬ 
ed the nucleus of the growing power of the Jajapellas (Yajvapala), 
who already in Iltutmish’s reign had compelled notice as the dominat¬ 
ing power in the country round Narwar, “the greatest of all the Rais 
of Hindustan”. Their pressure on Gwalior latterly increased to such 
an extent that reinforcing the garrison proved ineffective and, as 
mentioned before, Raziyya was obliged to abandon the fortress. By 
A.D. 1251 the dynasty, under Chahadadeva, had extended its power to 
Chanderi and even to Malwa, and Balban's expedition in that year 
against the “Rana Chahir Ajari” produced no more abiding result 
than a temporary capture of Narwar and Gwalior; for in the dynasty s 
epigraphic and numismatic records these places continue to figure 
uninterruptedly to as late a date as A.D. 1298. 39 

Just south of the Yamuna, between Mahoba and Hamirpur, the 
Bhar Rajputs threatened the security of the Doab province. The 
rising power of the Vaghelas in Rewah who, in two generations, 
acquired control over most of the country south of Chunar and along 
the Tons river, not only barred Turkish expansion southwards but 
even endangered the cis-Yamuna area. Exertions put forth by the 
governor of Awadh against the territory of “Bhatigor” (an old name 
of the Tons valley) failed to control this rising power; even a full 


146 




THE MAMLCfK SULTANS OF DELHI 

scale expedition led by Balban in A.D. 1247 into the country between 
Kalanjara and Kara achieved little beyond raiding the chief’s 
stronghold. 40 

Even within the provinces administered by the Sultanate an 
intensification of Hindu resistance was in evidence. The half-subdued 
countryside offered enough manoeuvring space for the local tribes 
who, in the absence of organised military leadership, took to a form 
of guerilla warfare. Balban was obliged to wage two sanguinary 
campaigns to obtain even a temporary control over the Aligarh Dis¬ 
trict, where local tribes, infesting the highways and forests, were 
to engage the government’s undivided attention even in the next 
reign. In A.D. 1247 it required another campaign to recover portions 
of the Kanauj District from a Hindu chief. In the northern fringe of 
the present Uttar Pradesh Delhi government encountered heavier 
and more protracted resistance from the Hindus. Notable among 
these were the tribes settled in Budaun, Sambhal and Aonla, des¬ 
cribed as the Katehriyas, whose aggressions involved the Delhi 
government in bloody campaigns even far into the fourteenth cen- 
tury Their frequent raids on the towns of Budaun and Sambhal 
lendered Delhi’s power in those parts almost nugatory. In order to 
supplement the local governor’s attempts against them, Balban eon- 
ducted a big expedition in A.D. 1254 and pushed through Bijnaur as 
. ar as the Ramganga. The Katehriya resistance caused heavy casual- 
les m the Delhi forces, and if the campaign could be described as a 
success, it was so only as a retaliatory measure, for control over the 
trans-Ganga districts remained as costly a process as it was before 
The reported success of the governor of Meerut in overthrowing 
Ranahs and other independent Hindu tribes inhabiting places as 
ar as Rurki and Miapur”, and in reducing the Bijnaur area, could 
have meant no more than preliminary operations for the establish- 
ment of a military station in Amroha. 41 

, J* 1 ® ™ S1 serious set - back was in Rajputana. Iltutmish’s death 

found the Chauhans pressing on Ranthambhor, and Raziyya was oblig- 
ed,as in the case of Gwalior, to withdraw from the fortress which 
theiiceforth became the seat of the later Chauhan dynasty under 
agbhaja.■ » It became the centre from which Chauhan power 

SIT n i° V6 f f lengthening arc en ^osing northern Rajputana and 
the collateral houses of Kotah, Bundi and Jalor. In inscriptions of 

v? io! he J™ a !l er P rmei P allt y of Mewar, ranging in dates from A,D. 
U13 to 1252 4 2 victory over the Turushkas provides special items of 
ation. Against this tide of Rajput power, the military hold over 
' .imer could be of little consequence, for loss of the recently 

147 


misT#,, 



Punitive expeditions availed but little to arrest this trend of the 
military situation. In A.D. 1248 Balban’s raid on the Chauhan strong¬ 
hold was repulsed; ten years later we read again of similar but ap¬ 
parently ineffective raids into the territories ‘ of the infidels of Ran- 
thambhor, Bundi and Chitrur”, A factor which very seriously ham¬ 
pered Delhi’s striking power in Rajputana was the continuing depre¬ 
dation of the turbulent people of the northern Alwar region designat¬ 
ed as the “Koh-payah” of Mewat. These were the Yaduvaihsi Rajputs 
who, following the loss of their strongholds of Bay-ana and Tahangarh, 
spread themselves over the countryside, and kept up an armed 
resistance which intensified as the century progressed, and which 
increasingly tended to merge in the general Rajput offensive. They 
harried the districts of Siwalik, Harianah, and Bayana, and towaids 
the end of Mahmud’s reign, terrorised even Delhi itself. Heavily dis¬ 
tracted by their raids, which in A.D. 1256 reached as far as Hansi, Bal- 
ban had to follow up his earlier exertions by two full-scale campaigns 
in. A.D. 1258. But he could accomplish little beyond plundering a few 
Mewat! villages and capturing some of their leaders. Although not 
directed by the Chauhans, the Mewatis yet appear to have operated 
as their spearheads which kept Delhi engaged in its neighbourhood 
while Ranthambhor accumulated strength and territory. 43 


VI. BALBAN RESTORES THE AUTHORITY OF SULTANATE 

An effective solution of these multiplying problems called for a 
stable central direction which, in the circumstances, could only come 
from a strong king, realistic in approach and severely efficient in 
execution. For, external dangers arose as a direct consequence of 
internal weakness, which was due to the state’s incomplete consoli¬ 
dation. The need for concentrating oh this primary task was there¬ 
fore the lesson which the politics of the last three decades clearly 
brought home to Balban. The initial expansionist motives of Mu'izz- 
ud-din and Aibak had qualified Iltutmish’s attention to internal pro¬ 
blems and had become a political tradition with his dynasty. Io 
break with this tradition and reverse the emphasis, therefore, requir¬ 
ed unquestioned power and strong resolution. 

Such power Balban had in effect wielded as the Deputy of the 
State (Naib-i-Mamlikat); he was even known to have used some of 
the royal insignia. He gave form and content to Mahmud’s kingship 
in such a personal manner that when his name formally appeared on 
the coins on the latter’s death in A.D. 1265, 44 it evoked little comment 
or disapproval, for it seemed a natural process that the old dynasty 


148 



'THE MAMLCK SULTANS OF DELHI 


would merge in his family. Old loyalties were thus continued, but 
the new king sought to reinforce them still further by formulation of 
theories of dynastic monarchy expressed in such regalia and decorum 
that it set the standard for future kings. Like Iltutmish, he also 
belonged to the Ilbari clan of Turks, but while the former’s supreme 
status rested more on practical ability than on inherited distinction, 
Balban tried to buttress his crown arid also his undoubted abilities 
with claims of noble lineage; for he regarded himself as descended 
from Afrasiyab, the Turkish hero of Persian mythology. On the gra¬ 
dually spreading myth Of Turkish racial superiority was thus super¬ 
imposed a cult of family prestige which effectively replaced the 
acquired status of the older dynasty. 

A supporting theory of kingship was also formulated on the lines 
of the Sassanian monarchy. Balban ignored Islamic constitutional 
principles, and far outreached his master when he spoke of kingship 
as a “divine gift”, and of the king as a “unique personage”. Such a 
king ruled not merely by protecting Islam, but by insisting on the 
absolute acceptance of his superhuman status. This involved a tech¬ 
nique of government which must suppress all notions of Tribal or 
Islamic republican equality, and which therefore depended on the 
king’s undoubted ability to compel the people’s unquestioning 
obedience. 45 


Acting on such ideas, matured during his deputyship, and in 
sharp contrast to the conduct of the meek, unassertive Mahmud, 
Balban inaugurated his reign by adapting the court ceremonial to 
the new conception. This included a rigid insistence on the zaminbos 
and paibos (prostrating before and kissing the king’s feet or the 
throne), two of the non-Islamic practices which Iltutmish was vainly 
requested by the jurists to regard with disfavour. Since the king’s 
person was to be unapproachable, Balban surrounded himself with 
body-guards,—a picked band of impressively uniformed, fearsome 
soldiers with drawn sabres glittering in the sun. In public, he never 
talked except to his officials, and that only through the Grand Cham¬ 
berlain; once he administered a sharp rebuke to a courtier who 
pleaded with him to grant an interview to a private citizen, a rich 
merchant of Delhi, who offered all his wealth for this honour. Even 
in private life, the consciousness of his ‘unique’ status hampered his 
naturalness, for he Was never seen even by his immediate attendants 
to laugh. When his eldest son died in battle, the sorrow corroded 
his heart, but, god-like, he remained unmoved, and his conduct or 
countenance showed no trace of his inner feelings. Acting on the 
same motive he gave up his earlier habit of drinking and prohibited 
the same to his courtiers. The fear and dignity which he sought 


149 



MINIS?*,, 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


to earn by such frightful correctness of conduct was heightened by 
the effects of the Mongol conquests which sent princes and eminent 
scholars flying for asylum to his court. 

Even more emphatic were the governmental expressions of his 
autocracy which had to justify itself by pitiless efficiency. As one 
of the departments through whose working the king’s power and 
correctness are usually assessed, the judiciary received his vigilant 
attention. Justice was administered with ruthless impartiality, for 
it was not ,so much the Law which had to be vindicated, as the king’s 
god-like power which can suffer no distinction in its exercise. The 
exemplary punishment he gave to the governors, of Budaun and 
Awadh, for reported cruelty to their domestic servants, 46 * was not so 
much a judicial act, as the exercise of the king’s right to seek out 
and punish those who impinged on his absolute guarantee of security 
to all. To this end he improved the espionage service and reporters 
were selected with the greatest care. 


The prevailing insecurity round the capital afforded him fuller 
opportunity to vindicate this sovereign guarantee. The mounting 
Rajput offensive, added to the Mongol pressure and the rebellious 
uprising of the Turkish chiefs, had created a situation which strain¬ 
ed the government’s resources almost to the breaking point. Robbers 
stalked the countryside, communications were unsafe, and dense 
forests near Delhi sheltered marauders who menaced even the city 
life. In the Doab and Awadh Hindu peasants suffered little control, 
and with the ever-turbulent Katehriyas holding Budaun and Amroha 
under constant threat, the king’s prestige was at a fearfully low ebb. 
Balban studied the problem carefully, and almost immediately on 
his accession set to work on. it with fierce determination and sense 
of urgency. Within a year forests round the capital were cleared, 
and robbers hunted out. On the south-western approach to the city 
he erected military posts and garrisoned them with seasoned Afghan 
troops to guard against the Mewatis. Other approaches were simi¬ 
larly fortified. Next year operations were extended to the east, and 
the affected areas of Awadh and the Doab were divided into military 
commands, with troops detailed to campaign relentlessly against the 
insurgents. This concentrated drive produced quick results, and 
within a year brigandage ceased, forests were cleared, and peasants 
returned to normal obedience. In the neighbourhood of Kampil and 
Patiali (Farrukhabad District), where the later Gahadavalas had 
founded strongholds, Balban conducted the operations personally, 
clearing forests and building new roads. Fortresses were erected at 
strategic points, and permanent colonies of Afghan soldier-farmers 
were established in and around to ensure their safety and provide a 


150 


THE MAMDOK SULTANS OF DELHI 

local militia. News of a fresh Katehriya incursion on Budaun inter¬ 
rupted the king’s operations in these areas. In terrible anger he 
returned to fit out a larger force from Delhi and, moving as on a hunt¬ 
ing expedition, suddenly fell on Katehr like lightening. A frightful 
slaughter of the besieged insurgent population then followed, their 
houses were burnt and bodies lay rotting for days on end, the stench 
fouling the area as far as the Ganga. This calculated ferocity 
thoroughly cowed down all potential rebels in the neighbourhood, 
and the districts returned to peace. Forests were cleared and a net¬ 
work of roads spread to facilitate administrative control. 

With security problems as his primary occupation, Balban thus 
kept an unceasing watch on the slightest manifestation of those ail¬ 
ments which had paralysed the government during the past few 
decades. The conquest was yet to lead to settlement in the country; 
the governmental machinery had to shed its inchoate and improvised 
character and had to work primarily towards integrating the loosely 
co-ordinated provincial army commands. There was no longer any 
organised Hindu opposition on a large scale in the conquered area, 
but, ill-defined though it was, the Sultan’s government had to fight 
its way through the countryside. All round the state were Indian 
powers, whose energies the Sultanate’s recent weakness had tended 
to revive to such an extent, that the original war of conquest seemed 
once again to be in progress. A supremely dangerous complication 
was the Mongol who controlled the major areas of the .Punjab and 
pressed on up to the Beas. As a foreigner the Turk was cut off from 
his homeland, and shortage of man-power therefore threatened his 
dominating position in the Sultanate. 

During his deputyship Balban had made a correct appraisal of 
these recent developments, and inevitably decided on adopting the 
only possible course of action, namely conservation of strength pri¬ 
marily for consolidation rather than expansion. This involved a 
departure from the policy hitherto guiding the Sultanate, and when 
his courtiers, unable to outgrow the earlier tradition, urged him to 
acquire new territories, he told them that he could ill afford to 
employ his limited man-power and resources in occupying hostile 
states, for it will endanger internal security. The problem of safe¬ 
guarding the western frontier governed his foreign policy and limit¬ 
ed his striking power. With regret—for he was no pacifist—he had 
to restrain himself from the temptation of leading “his well-prepared 
lorces to capture the distant Ranas”. He constantly reminded him¬ 
self of the prudent counsel not to overstrain oneself by trying to 
subjugate others. He would certainly defend his borders against 
1 aggression, but if he was to maintain the dominant position of the 




151 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Turks in Indict, as he was determined to do, he could not extend his 
military commitments. 46 

This last point deserves attention. It explains the ruling temper 
of the Mamlfik state which had resulted in the main from the race- 
movements conditioning the initial conquest. A feeling of racial 
superiority sustained the otherwise loose federation of the conquei- 
ing Turks both against the Hindus and the Mongols. The State in¬ 
evitably took the character of a Turkish proprietary concern, and the 
non-Turk Indian Muslim found, as in the early years of Mahmud’s 
reign, that any attempt to claim a share in the administration intensi¬ 
fied the opposition of the ruling race. The House of Iltutmish 
jealously championed this racialism. 

In itself, this was an untenable policy; the effect of the Mongol 
conquests made it dangerously so. Pure-boni Turks were rapidly 
diminishing in number, for no more immigrants came through the 
Mongol barriers. Mixing of blood was fast producing a generation 
which had little direct contact with the racial traditions of the Turks, 
and had greater community of feeling with the Indian Muslims. 
Even as regards the Hindus, a sense of community of interest had to 
be fostered in order to put forth the maximum resistance to the 
Mongol barbarian. And through all these years, by immigration and 
conversion, non-Turki elements tended to increase as much in num¬ 
ber as in quality. What was therefore easy for Iltutmish wa.-> 
impossible in the age when Balban reigned. His striking power was 
limited by his racialism, for he had to extend the basis of his state 
in order to command those forces which proved so irresistible when 
used later by the Khaljis. 

But Balban sought to resist this process of time and employed 
his extraordinary energy and will-power to perpetuate a racial polity 
which, in its ultimate form, merged with his absolutism. He sym¬ 
bolised the primacy of the Turk, with his own power exercised 
primarily in the interest of his race. Expansion of the kingdom was 
therefore of less immediate importance than perfecting the coercive 
instrument with which to vindicate this superiority. In devoting 
his energies; to this end he, however, helped in a necessary- historical 
process, though with an objective which, as will be seen presently, 
could not stand the ultimate pressure of events. 

Since defence required improvement of the army, Balban 
expanded it with more and abler personnel. Defects in the cavalry 
organization, discovered in course of an expedition to Lahore early 
in the reign, were remedied by reallotting the revenue assignments 
among better recruits and cashiering the unserviceable men, to make 


152 


THE M'AMLuK SULTANS OF DELHI 

that radical approach to the problem of army organization whicn 
brought outstanding result to his successor dynasty. 

His vigilance nevertheless proved a compensating factor, and 
along the western border defence measures against the Mongols 
proved effective. Balban’s cousin Sher Khan held the frontier pro¬ 
vinces of Multan and Dipalpur till his death a few years after the 
Sultan’s accession, and was reported to have been “like the walls of 
Gog and Magog to the Mongols”. When appointing a successor, 
Balban decided on reducing the extent of the governor’s administra¬ 
tive responsibility so that his striking power remained unhampered. 
While Multan and Dipalpur were placed under his eldest son 
Muhammad, the eastern district of Bhatinda was separated to become 
the forward base of the Sunam-Samana provincial command which, 
under his second son Bughra Khan, was detailed to hoid the Beas 
line. While P-rince Muhammad was made the supreme commander 
of the entire frontier region, under each of the two commanders a 
picked force of eighteen thousand horsemen was provided to hold 
the strategic points, while an equally strong reserve force, based on 
Delhi, was to supplement the defence as occasion demanded. The 
result of this arrangement was a vast improvement in the defence 
strategy, ensuring quick and co-ordinated action. Although Lahore 
remained as a border region, yet the Mongols were effectively check¬ 
ed, and we are told that whenever they tried to cross the Beas, the 
three forces quickly converged, and “as a result of the several vic¬ 
tories obtained over them they never dared to approach the river any 
more”. A greater concentration was effected towards the end Of 
the reign when, in view of Bughra’s proposed transfer to Lakhnawatl, 
the Sunam-Samana command was divided into smaller regional 
units, all co-ordinated to work under the overall command of Prince 
Muhammad. The effect of this strategy was soon felt by the Mongols, 
for the prince easily kept them beyond the Sindhu, and annually sent 
to Delhi captives taken from among the raiders. 47 

Contemporary accounts bear eloquent testimony to the security 
which directly resulted from all these measures. The king was held 
in awe, and the governing machinery worked with ruthless efficiency 
for peace. The only incident which marred this picture was a rebel¬ 
lion in the distant Bengal, but its costly failure only emphasised the 
terrible strength of the will which worked that machine. Lakhna¬ 
watl had shown persistent disapproval of her subservience to Delhi, 
and throughout the Mamluk period the province was in chronic dis¬ 
temper, distance and climatic hazards adding to the ease with which 
ambitious governors often flouted the central government. During 
the last decade of Mahmud’s reign Lakhnawati enjoyed, as mentioned 

153 







the struggle for empire 



earlier, unmolested autonomy under Arsalan Khan, who annexed 
Bihar and bequeathed the territories to his son Tatar Khan. One of 
the latter’s inscriptions, dated A.D. 1265, claims almost imperial 
status for him, but he appears to have avoided open proclamation of 
sovereignty, and even to have placated Balban by sending token pre¬ 
sents. Whether he died or was removed shortly after is uncertain, 
but Delhi’s control over the province was firm enough to enable one 
of Balban’s freedmen, named Tughril, to be appointed governor. 
Tughril, however, lost no time in imbibing the country’s political 
tradition, for, having earned popularity by liberal and efficient 
administration, and increased his resources by raids into the ne ign- 
bouring Hindu states, he allowed, as the chronicler puts it, “the bird 
of rebellion to lay eggs in his brain”. Balban’s alleged infirmity, due 
to advanced age, was considered to offer a good opportunity, and so, 
some time in A.D. 1280, Tughril signified his rebellion by withhold¬ 
ing the king’s share of the booty captured in his latest expedition. 
This he followed up by a formal declaration of sovereignty, clothed 
with the regal title of Sultan Mughis-ud-dln. He defeated the force 
sent by Balban under Amin Khan, the governor of Awadh, — most of 
the Royal troops deserting to his side, as Hindu tribes harassed their 
retreat. 

The news of this reverse hurt Balban’s pride and the vanquished 
general was hanged for his failure to vindicate the king’s authority. 
But when the next two succeeding expeditions also met with a 
similar fate, the king decided to stake everything on this challenge 
to his prestige. Vowing never to return without the rebel’s head, he 
set out personally at the head of a large force of provincial and 
special troops, and ignoring the hazards of the rainy season he march¬ 
ed expeditiously through Awadh and North Bihar. He encountered 
no opposition, and found on arrival that the city of Lakhnawati had 
been evacuated by the rebel. Tughril was frightened by the unexpect¬ 
ed hardening of the octogenarian king’s will, and was reported to be 
hiding in the eastern districts. His plan was obviously to 
depend on the climate and the water-logged country to wear out the 
king’s forces. But Balban pushed towards Sonargaon where the 
local ruler Danujamadhava of the Deva dynasty was persuaded to 
co-operate in preventing the rebel’s flight by the water-routes of his 
kingdom, which, it appears, extended to the Feni river. 48 With the 
rivers thus closed to him, Tughril moved by land towards the 
Tippera frontier, but Balban scented his trail and sent detachments 
to scour the countryside. One of these eventually came upon the 
rebel camp, fell on the unsuspecting troops, and cut off Tughril’s head 
as he tried to escape. With the rebel’s adherents in chain, Balban 
returned to Lakhnawati to execute everyone suspected of the 


154 


THE MAMLUK SULTANS OP DELHI 


“slightest sympathy with him. Their corpses, hung on gibbets, lined 
the main bazaar, and while advising his son Bughra Khan, whom he 
left in charge of the province, he tellingly pointed to these emphatic 
proofs of the king’s unconquerable power. 

As he returned triumphantly after three years, governors and 
chiefs hastened to congratulate and to reaffirm their subservience. 
Perfect peace and order prevailed in every part of the kingdom, and 
the Sultan’s prestige was at its height. Balban could feel legitimate 
pride in restoring order and in completing Iltutmish’s work, for 
he had almost recreated the Sultanate. This he never tired of in¬ 
stilling into the mind of his heir apparent, his eldest son Muham¬ 
mad, a prince whose qualities evoked warm praise from all his con¬ 
temporaries. Muhammad, however, was not destined to succeed 
his father, for early in A.D. 1286 he was killed in a fierce engagement 
with the Mongols in course of one of their periodical raids on the 
Lahore-Dipalpur border. This meant no military set-back, as the 
Mongols were eventually expelled, but the prince’s death, frust¬ 
rating all his hopes, came as a fatal shock to the old monarch. For 
Bughra Khan was no substitute. The iron king remained calm in 
public but melted in tears in his nightly solitude. 

Balban lived for a year more, weighed down by sickness and 
anxiety. He summoned Bughra to be near his death-bed and as¬ 
sume the eventual responsibility. But the prince, avoiding a 
direct refusal, waited for the king to recover slightly, and then 
slipped away from the hazards of the Delhi throne to the enervat¬ 
ing ease of Lakhnawatx. On the way he heard of his father’s- re¬ 
lapse but he stuck to his decision. With his end approaching fast, 
and thus left with a choice between his two grandsons, both adole¬ 
scents, the king, resigned to his predicament, nominated Kaikhus- 
rav, son of the deceased Muhammad. In so doing he only provided 
for his dynasty, but for carrying on his policy he depended ulti¬ 
mately on his friends, notably the Kotwdl and the Wazir, to whom 
his dying request was to render the prince all necessary help and 
guidance. He breathed his last in A.D. 1287. 

In keeping alive the traditions of the Sultanate’s founders, 
Balban had ruthlessly held back the new forces which insistently 
demanded adjustment. His achievement lay in the strength with 
which the State was regenerated, and it was obvious that he was 
irreplaceable in the scheme in which the Sultanate was meant to 
function. His courtiers, therefore, had reason to mourn the death 
of this stem king, for, as the Kotwdl put it, he was their only gua¬ 
rantee “against every upstart who would now aspire to the crown*, 
and against the consequent “destruction of the old aristocracy”. 49 


155 



VII. 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 
THE END OF BALBAN’S DYNASTY 


Since Balban resisted the new social forces, adjustment through 
violent process became inevitable when his ruthless will was stilled 
by death. The history of the next reign of three years was a 
quickening of this process, the king’s incapacity giving a handle to 
his jealous and more conservative nobles to raise a wall round their 
power without the necessary ability to reinforce it. The bursting 
that resulted was less violent than it could have been, but more 
revolutionary in implications than what Balban had striven to 
oppose. 


How his pervasive strength of will was necessary to divert the 
latent factiousness of the Turk was seen, by contrast, when on the 
night of his death, and flouting his wish, the Kotwdl, who bore 
personal animosity to prince Muhammad’s family, manoeuvred 
Kaikhusrav out of the capital and had Kaiqubad, Bughra Khan’s 
son, proclaimed king. Kaikhusrav was sent off as governor of 
Multan, and his supporters, headed by the Wazir, were all impri¬ 
soned and exiled. The government thus became a family oli¬ 
garchy in which the KotwaVs scheming and able son-in-law Nizam- 
ud-din was enabled quickly to gather the strings of power. 

Nizam-ud-dm sedulously encouraged the youthful king’s thirst 
for sensuous pleasure, denied to him by the austere grandfather. 
Wine, women and song kept the Sultan busy, and the gaiety soon 
infected the court and became the norm of city-life. The adminis¬ 
trative machine was kept going only by the momentum gathered 
in the last reign, and the frontier defences retained enough strength 
and cohesion to repeat the earlier triumphs over the Mongols. 
Nizam-ud-din possessed the dictator’s ability, and although offi¬ 
cially only the city-magistrate (Dad-beg) of Delhi, his authority as 
the de facto ruler was openly admitted. With the king completely 
under his control—he sent his wife to supervise Kaiqubad’s harem 
—the dictator used his opportunities towards consolidating his 
power for the final usurpation which to everyone appeared in¬ 
evitable and even necessary. Within six months Kaikhusrav was 
murdered, supposedly under the king’s orders; the new Wazir, 
Khwaja Khatlr, was next removed, and a charge of sedition was 
trumped up to replace a large number of influential officers by 
NizSm-ud-din’s own creatures. 

But he was not to reap the fruit of his labour. Report of 
Kaiqubad’s heedless gaiety and his impending fall reached his father 
in Lakhnawati, and the family shirker was at last roused to a sense 
of paternal responsibility. Letters and messages being of no avail, 

150 


THE MAMLOK SULTANS OF DELHI 


Bughra eventually decided to meet his son, and a meeting was 
arranged on the border of Awadh. Some writers, including Amir 
Khusrav who wrote a long poetical account celebrating the occa¬ 
sion, refer to political motives actuating the father who, in any 
case, moved in full military strength. Kaiqubad also marched 
with an army to the camp on the SAraju river and, under Nizam-ud- 
din’s instructions, insisted on the Lakhnawati ruler coming over 
from the other side and paying respects due to the Sultan of Delhi. 
A protracted exchange of arguments on points of procedure, punc¬ 
tuated by occasional threats, was ended by the father finally agree¬ 
ing to do homage to Balban’s successor. The meeting that follow¬ 
ed is one of the tenderest incidents of medieval history. Kai¬ 
qubad affected stern dignity as Bughra Khan, bowing and kissing 
the ground, approached his feet, but his feeling welled up at length, 
and the audience broke into sobs as the son tearfully clasped his 
father. For three days Bughra Khan gave him paternal advice to 
mend his ways and realise his responsibilities, repeating what he 
had himself heard in vain from Balban, and, while taking leave, 
whispered a request to "get rid of men like Nizam-ud-din”. 

Kaiqubad’s impulsive resolution to heed his father’s advice 
and correct his ways, however, gave way even before he reached 
Delhi, but Nizam-ud-din’s rivals sought opportunities to remind him 
of Bughra’s parting advice. The dictator lacked the daring and 
quick decision of a soldier, and so used backstairs method to de¬ 
stroy his rivals while putting off the final action. The governor 
of Multan provoked his jealousy by his famed victories over the 
Mongols, and so was killed; Malik Tuzaki, the recently appointed 
army minister, was similarly removed. But then, in a drunken fit, 
Kaiqubad, reminded of his father’s advice, ordered Nizam-ud-din 
to proceed to Multan as governor, and, on his hesitating to comply, 
caused him to be poisoned. 

The sudden disappearance of this one dominant and stable fac¬ 
tor in the government, however, created a vacuum which neither 
the king nor any of his courtiers was able effectively to fill. Ziya- 
ud-dln BaranI pictures the resulting state of affairs as a chaos in 
which jealous, power-loving men of no ability kept pursuing each 
other, while the king sank rapidly under the cumulative effects of 
his excesses. Two of the new court functionaries, the Amir-i-Hajib 
Malik Kachhan and the Barbak Malik Surkha, controlled the king’s 
establishment, and so were enabled to initiate policy. Seeking to 
safeguard their power as guardians of Balban’s heritage, they plan¬ 
ned a rigid enforcement of his racialism which, as evidenced by 
some of the recent appointments, was tending to lose its primary 


157 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

to'begin with a purge of all undesirable non-Turki 
elements in the administration, they drew up a list of men whose 
elimination was to be effected urgently and under the king’s autho¬ 
rity. As the afflicted Kaiqubad had become unserviceable even as 
a titular head, the policy-makers took the radical step of finding a 
new king for their use, in the person of the three year old prince 
Kayumars who was formally proclaimed king as Shams-ud-din. In 
A.D. 1289 Kaiqubad’s reign thus faded into that of his son. 

But before the Kegency Council, formed by Kachhan, Surkha 
and the Kotwal, could begin implementing the new programme and 
strike at the listed men, the initiative was seized by the opposing 
forces. Heading the black list was Malik Yaghrash Firuz, leader 
of an influential and numerous clan known as the Khalji, who, be¬ 
cause of their early separation from Turkistan, were universally, 
though erroneously, believed to be of non-Turki stock. His recent 
appointment to the army ministry was considered a dangerous vio¬ 
lation of Balban’s principles, but since his open, dismissal was like¬ 
ly to prove ineffective as he had the army’s support, Kachhan had 
volunteered to assassinate him. One of his servants, named Ahmad 
Chap, however, happened to be the Khalji chiefs nephew, and so 
apprised the latter of the conspiracy. Firuz thereupon collected 
his kinsmen, and shifted his headquarters from Delhi to the sub¬ 
urban village of Giyaspur where an army muster had been sche¬ 
duled. Unaware of all this, and anxious to decoy him from his 
people, Kachhan one day rode up to deliver an urgent summons 
from the king’s court. Firuz begged for time to finish the parade, 
and then as Kachhan relaxed in the tent-shade, cut off his head. 
He followed it up with an immediate raid into the king’s palace, 
and carried away the boy-king before the Delhi citizens could 
realise the significance of these happenings. But the initial coup 
proved decisive. On the persuasion of the Kotwal the citizens re¬ 
strained themselves from streaming out to an unequal contest, and 
a feeling of hopelessness seized most of the Turkish officers. With 
the king now in his control, Firuz was able to legitimise his vic¬ 
tory and dispense the offices. Both the Kotwal and Balban’s nep¬ 
hew having disdained to receive the office of the Naib (Deputy of 
the Kingdom) from him, Firuz accepted it himself, and for three 
months continued this fiction of Balban’s dynasty. How this fiction 
was finally closed and Kayumars disappeared from history, is not 
recorded, but Firuz only gave form to the realities of the situation 
and symbolized the coming of a new age, when he proclaimed his 
own accession 60 as Sultan Jalal-ud-dln Firuz on June 13, 1290. 




stress. Dei 


158 


THE MAMLUK SULTANS OF DELHI 



1. This dynasty is usually referred to as Slave Dynasty in Indian history. But 
of the nine rulers, only three, Aibak, Iltutmish and Balban, began their poli¬ 
tical career as bond-slaves; all the others were freemen. Among the three it 
was only Aibak whose manumission followed his accession to sovereign power, 
Iltutmish and Balban both having obtained their freedom early in their life. 
None of these rulers in any case assumed the insignia of royalty while still a 
slave. To describe the entire series of these rulers as the Slave Dynasty, is, 
therefore, inappropriate, even if it is overlooked that they belonged not to one 
but to three dynasties or families. And yet they have obvious difference with 
the later Turkish dynasties,—difference emphasised by the domination of freed-, 
men grouped round leading members of the same class and functioning as a 
closed oligarchy and seeking reinforcement only from similar bondsmen. 
These features are exactly paralleled in contemporary Egypt where the Turks, 
supplanting the Ayyubide dynasty in 1250 ; ruled up to the Ottoman conquest 
through a series of ex-slaves recruited and trained by means of a rigidly con¬ 
trolled organization and who never cared for the principle of hereditary succes¬ 
sion. To medieval historians they are known as the Mamluks, lit. 'owned’ (from 
Arabic e malak*, to possess), based on the Quranic term for a slave, “and what 
your right hands possess” (xvi, 77). Being of such long usage in Muslim 
history and indicative of what seems to be a widespread Turkish practice in 
the Middle Ages the term Mamluk has thus greater applicability to the 
thirteenth century rulers of Delhi than the word ‘slave 1 which implies a life¬ 
long servitude. 

2. See above, p. 124. Andkhul is also spelt as AndkhCid. 

3. The long-drawn struggle between the Indian States and the Sultanate of Delhi 
has been described in detail in connection with the history of those states in 
Chs. II and III above. 


4. TN, pp, 88-89. 

5. Hasan Nizami, I.O. Ms. f. 202 a; TN, p. 140. For Yildiz’s position in Ghur and 
the Khvarazmi pressure, see Mir Khvand, Rauzat-us-Safa, IV, pp. 126-27. For 
Qabacha’s coins see JASB, 1887, p. 171. 

6. TN, p. 158. 

7. For coins evidencing Parihara rule, including those of Malayavarmadeva. in 
Narwar, Gwalior and Jhansi, see Ojha, Rajputane~ka-ItihascL, I, p. 166; I A. 1918, 
p. 241; also Cunningham, Arch. Sur. Reports, II, 315, 378-381. Account of 
Ranthambhor’s recovery of independence under Goyindaraja is to be found in 
the fragmentary Rajput ballad, Hammira-Mahahavya, 1A. 1879, p. 69. See also 
a reference to Ranthambhor’s suzerainty over Jaitra Singh of Manglana, in 
lA, XVI, p. 86. 

8. TN, p. 135; Hasan Nizami, op. cit., f. 230 b. 

9. Ibid, op. c it,, f. 245; TN, p. 171. 

,10. For Chingiz Khan’s operations against Khvarazm Shah and the flight of the 
prince Jalal-ud-din, see Juwaini, Ta’rihh-i~Jahan Kusha , II, pp. 140 sq.; 
Howroth, History of the Mongols, I, p. 90; Nessawi, Sirat-i-Jalal-ud-din 
Mangbami, ed. Scheffer, pp. 83-84; see also TN, pp. 171, 293. A detailed account 
is in Habibullah, Foundation of Muslim Rule in India , pp. 191-97. 

11. TN, p. 144; Auli, Jwamiul Hika'yat, I.O. Ms. f. 3a. 

12. TN, pp. 160-164; 174, 231-232. For Twaz’s coins, see Thomas in JRAS , VI, p. 348; 
Wright, Coins and Metrology of the Sultans of Delhi, pp. 15-16. For reference 

• to the conflict of the Senas with the Garga-Yavanas, see JASB, 1896, pp. 5-6; 
X (N.S.) pp. 99-104; HBR, I. 226. For Orissa and Kamarupa, see JASB , 1898, 
pp. 317-327; 1903, p. 109; El, XIII, p. 150; Barua, Early Historif of Kdmatupa ., 
p. 224; Gait, History of Assam, p. 37. For Twaz’s public works see Abid Ali, 
Gaur and Panduah. 

13. See note 7 above. 

14. El, IX, pp. 72-73; I A, XVI, p. 36. 

15. Hasan Nizami, (Elliot’s trans.) HIED, II, p. 241; Ojha, op. cit. I, p, 272 II, p 


16. TN, p. 175. Cf. Hiraman Munshi, Gwalior Namah I.O.Ms. f. 11; see EL VII. 
pp. 223-224, and I A. 1918, p. 242, for a wrong identification of this Chahadadeva 
with Chahadadeva of Ranthambhor. See above, p. 57. 

17. TN, pp. 170, 179, 247; Cf. Ray, DHNI, I, p. 547. 


159 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

18. TN, p. 174. For a silver commemorative coin, see Thomas, Chronicles of the 
Patkan Kings of Delhi, no. 28, and Wright, op. cit. p. 18, no. 50c. 

19. These Turks had, during the reign of Iltutmish, divided among themselves all 
the great fiefs and all the highest offices in the State. 

20. TN, p. 392. 

21. Ibid, pp. 184-89, 235 and 253; Isami, Futuhus-Salatin ed. Mahdi Husain, pp. 
127- 29; Ibn Baluta, Kitabur Rihla, ed. Defremery & Sanguinetti, II, pp. 25-26. 

22. TN, pp. 191-192, 253. 

23. Idem , See also Haji Dabir, An Arabic History of Gujrat, ed. Ross, II, p. 704; 
TA, I, p. 68. For a full account of Raziyya’s reign, see Sultana Raziah, in IHQ, 
1940. 

24. TN, p. 197. 

25. Ibid, pp. 189, 201. 

26. For Raihan’s episode, TN, pp. 217, 280 & 298. 

27. For Tughan Khan’s Orissan campaigns, ibid, pp. 243-246; Banerji, History of 
Orissa, I, p. 263. On Katasingh, see N. Vasu, Vangiya Sdhitya Parishat Patrika, 
XVI, p. 132, note 1. 

28. Epigraphia Indo-Moslemica, 1913, pp. 23-24; Barahdari inscription, Bihar. 

29. TN, p. 195. 

30. Ibid, pp. 212, 214, 217, 270-71. Ta’rikh-e~Was$af, British Museum Ms. f. 254b. 

31. Ibid, p. 314. 

32. Ibid . p. 322. 

*33. Ibid, pp. 317-319. 

34. Isami, op. cit. pp. 147-150. 

35. JASB, LXV, pp. 223-257; Banerji, op. cit . I, p. 267. 

36. Catalogue of Coins in the Indian Museum, II, p. 146, no. 61. For Arzbadan, sec 
JASB . (N.S.) V, pp. 215-17. 

37. TN, pp. 263-65; also, Barua, op. cit. p. 199. 

38. TN, p. 259. For the rulers of Plthl, see IA, 1875, p. 366; 1919, p. 47; JASB, V, 
p. 658; IA, X, p. 346; JASB, 1913, pp. 72-73; El, XII, p. 27; HER, I, pp. 259-61; 
also I A, 1887, p. 341, 7; JASB. (N.S.) XVII, p. 222. 

39. I A, 1918, p. 241. On the Jajapellas, see also, El, VII, pp. 223-24. 

40. TN, p. 291. On the Vaghelas, see JASB, 1881, p. 34; Cunningham, op. cit. XXI, 
p. 106; Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India, No. 21, p. 12; also, Ray, 
op. cit. II, p. 720. 

41. TN, p. 280. 

41a. See above, p. 85. 

42. IA, 1928, p. 32; Vienna Oriental Journal, “the Chirwa Inscription”, in Vol. XXI; 
also Bhavnagar Inscriptions, p. 93. 

43. TN, p. 285; also pp. 313-315. 

44. Mahmud’s latest coin is dated 664, although Baranl places Balban’s accession 
in 1263; see Wright, op. cit. p. 54, No. 224; Balban’s earliest coin was also in 
the same year, see ibul p. 59, No. 242a. For converting the Hijra into Christian 
date, Wolseley Haig’s Comparative Tables of Muhammadan and Christian dates 
(London, 1933) has been used. Christian dates given in the text indicate only 
the beginning of the Hijra year. On the correct date of Balban’s accession, see 
Haji Dabir, op. cit. II, p. 725, and also TaWikh-i^AVfi, British Museum Ms. f. 
61a. 

45. Baranl, pp. 34-35, 37, 40, 70-71. 

45a. For a detailed account, cf. CHI, III. 74-5; HIED, III. 101. 

46. For a full account of his discourses, see Baranl, pp. 50-53. 

47. Ibid, pp. 75, 81. 

48. For this prince and his dynasty, see above, p. 42 and HBR, I, pp. 254-59. For a 
fuller account of the whole episode see Habibullah, op. cit. pp. 164-168. 

49. Baranl, p. 123. 

50. Barani wrongly dates the event in 1289, p. 175; Firuz Khaljl’s earliest coin—a 
gold piece—is dated 689/1290; Wright, op. cit . p. 83, No. 280. For details of 
events leading up to his accsesion, see Habibullah, op. cit. pp. 175-187. 




160 


CHAPTER VI 


LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS 
OF KALYANA 

1. TAILA II (A.D. 973-997) 

Taila II, who re-established the sovereignty of the Chalukyas in 
the Deccan after overthrowing the Rashtrakuta Karkka II in A.D. 
973-74, claims to be a remote descendant of the Chalukya dynasty 
of Badami. The Chalukya Kirttivarman II of that dynasty, who was 
dethroned by the Rashtrakuta Dantidurga in the middle of the 
eighth century, 1 is said to have had an uncle whose name was possi¬ 
bly Bhima. Bhlma was followed in succession by Kirttivarman III, x 
Taila I, Vikramaditya III, Bhima II, Ayyana I, and Vikramaditya '% 
IV. 2 Of them Ayyana I is known to have married the daughter 
of the Rashtrakuta Krishna II of Manyakheta, and Vikramaditya IV 
married Bonthadevi, the daughter of the Kalachuri Lakshmana of 
Tripuri. Vikramaditya IV’s son and successor was Taila II. Two 
inscriptions, dated A.D. 957 and 965, disclose that Taila II was, in 
the early part of his life, a feudatory of the Rashtrakuta Krishna III 
in Tardavadi 1000 country. Tardavadi is now represented by the 
small village of Taddewadi on the south' bank of the Bhima, in 
the Indi Taluk, Bijapur District, Bombay State. The Bagewadi 
Taluk of this district was also included in it. It may be assumed 
that the predecessors of Taila II also ruled this country as feuda¬ 
tories of the Imperial Rashtrakutas. A number of other Chalukya 
families also ruled in the Deccan as vassals of the Rashtrakutas 
during this period, but their relation with the main line is not 
known. 

Circumstances leading to the overthrow of the Rashtrakutas 
by Taila II in A.D. 973-74 have been described above. 3 Taila II 
was variously known as Tailapa, Tailappa and Tailappayya. He 
assumed the titles Ahavamalla and Bhuvanaikamalla, and his capi¬ 
tal was Manyakheta at least up to A.D. 993. Immediately after 
his accession Taila II devoted his energies to the consolidation of 
his power. He found in Ganga Panchaladeva, who made himself 
master of the kingdom of the Ganga Marasimha II, his strong rival. 
Panchaladeva’s kingdom included Mulgunda 12 (modem Mulgund, 
in the Dharwar District) in Belvola 300, in A.D. 975, and is said to 
have extended up to the Krishna on the north. Panchaladeva, who 


s. Ell 


161 


Ml NIST#), 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


__ described as the ‘Chalukya-paiichanana,’ i.e. a very lion to the 
Chalukyas, challenged the authority of Taila II. Taila II, along 
with his general Nagadeva, the Ganga Bhutigadeva, and many feu¬ 
datory chiefs, confronted his rival in the battlefield. Bhutigadeva, 
who was the governor of Kogali 500, the country round the village 
Kogali, in the Hadagalli Taluk, Bellary District, Madras State, under 
the Rashtrakuta Khottiga in A.D. 972, seems to have been 
dislodged from his position by Panchaladeva. In the initial stage 
of the battle that followed Panchaladeva reduced Taila II into a 
very precarious condition, as the Chalukya feudatories, who were 
in the rear, took to flight. The situation was eventually saved by 
Bhutigadeva, who succeeded in defeating and killing Panchaladeva. 
In recognition of this service Taila II honoured him with the title 
Ahavamalla , and made him the feudatory of Toragale, modern 
Torgal, on the confines of the Dharwar District. The defeat of 
Panchaladeva, which took place before A.D. 977, enabled Taila II 
to establish his supremacy over the countries up to northern 
Mysore. The central and southern Mysore were under the Ganga 
Rachamalla, son and successor of Marasimha, in A.D. 977. About 
this time Taila II defeated and killed Ranastambha, who was an ally 
of the Rashtrakuta Karkka II. Some time before A.D. 980, Taila 
II came into conflict with the Chola king Uttama Chola and won 
a victory. After settling the affairs in the south Taila II looked for 
conquest towards the western region. The strip of land between 
the Western Ghats and the sea and between the Purna river and 
Goa was known as the Konkan a country (Konkan). A branch oi 
the Silahara dynasty had been ruling in Southern Konkan, with 
its capital at Valipattana and as vassal of the Rashtrakutas, from the 
second half of the eighth century. Taila II with the help of his 
general Kesa(va)jiya brought Southern Konkan under his sway, 
and the Silahara Avasara III or his son Rattaraja acknowledged his 
supremacy. The Northern Konkan, which had its capital at 
Thana, and was at this time ruled by Aparajita Mriganka of 
a collateral branch of the Silahara dynasty, remained outside the 
limits of the kingdom of the Chalukyas. The Yadava Bhillama II, 


ruler of Seuna-desa (the country round Daulatabad, in the Auranga¬ 
bad District, Hyderabad State), transferred his allegiance from the 
Rashtrakutas to the Chalukyas. Taila II made an attempt to assert 
his supremacy over the countries in the north, which once formed 
parts of the Rashtrakuta empire. He invaded Lata (the country 
between the Sabarmati river in Gujarat and the Ambika river in 
Surat, Bombay), conquered it, and placed it under his general 
Barappa of the Chaulukya family. To the north of Lata was the 
kingdom of Gurjara, ruled by the Chaulukya Mularaja I. About 


162 


MiNisr^ 



LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KALYANA 


<8L 


this time, when the kingdom of Mularaja was invaded by the Cha- 
hamana Vigraharaja I of Sakambhari, Barappa attacked Mularaja 
from the south. He gained some success, for an inscription credits 
Taila II with a victory over the Gurjaras. But Vigraharaja over¬ 
ran the Gurjara country, and reached Bhrigukachchha forcing his 
way through the kingdom of Barappa. The Chahamana occupation 
of Gurjara and Lata was, however, shortlived. Mularaja concluded 
a treaty with Vigraharaja and sent his son Chamundaraja to fight 
with Barappa, who was killed in the battle. It cannot be ascer¬ 
tained whether Taila II could maintain control over the successors 
of Barappa who ruled Lata for some time. 


Taila II wanted to assert his supremacy over Malava, which 
was formerly included in the Rashtrakuta empire. He led six in¬ 
vasions against that country, but was repulsed on all those occasions 
by the Paramaras under their king Munja, also known as Utpala. 
At last Munja took the offensive in order to put a stop to the further 
aggressions of the Chalukyas. He crossed the Godavari, and led a 
campaign against Taila II. Taila II, with the help of his: feudatory 
the Yadava Bhillama II of the Seuna-desa, defeated him and took 
him prisoner to his capital Manyakheta. The general Kesa(va)jiya 
claims to have won the admiration of Taila II for the military skill 
which he showed on the bank of the Godavari. It seems to have re¬ 
ferred to the last battle of Taila II with Munja. Taila II’s victory 
over the Paramaras on this occasion made him master of the southern 
portion of the Paramara kingdom. Munja was kept confined in the 
prison of the Chalukya capital. The story runs that Taila IPs sister 
Mrinalavatl, who was detailed to attend the captive king, fell in love 
with him, but when she came to learn that Munja’s ministers made 
secret arrangements for his escape, she reported the matter to her 
brother. Thereupon Taila II treated Munja with great indignity 
and executed him shortly afterwards. 


Taila II and his successors are mentioned as kings of Karpata, 
Kuntala, or Rattapadi seven and a half lakh country. The kingdom 
of the Chalukyas at this time included the Shimoga, Chitaldroog and 
Bellary Districts in the south, Southern Konkan and the border of 
Northern Konkan in the west, and extended up to the upper course 
of the Godavari, and possibly even the Narmada on the north. Taila’s 
feudatory Brahmarasa governed Banavasi 12000 and Santalige 1000. 
Banavasi comprised the Shikarpur and Sorab Taluks of the Shimoga 
District, and Santalige, Nagar and Tirthahalli Taluks of the same 
district. The tract of the country round Davanagere Taluk of the 
Chitaldroog District was known as Kadambalige 1000. It was govern¬ 
ed by the feudatory Mulugunda Sinda Jatarasa. The Kadamba 


163 



^ftryavarman and the Kadamba Adityavarman administered in suc¬ 
cession Kogali 500, Kisukad 70, and Sundavatti. Sundavatti is 
identical with Sindavadi, which is to be located in the Alur Taluk 
of the Bellary District. Kisukad is the modern Lingsugur, 
Hyderabad. The Ratta feudatory Karttavirya I ruled the Kundi 
country from its capital Venugrama, modern Belgaum, in the Bombay 
State. Santivarman of the Baisa family administered Saundatti, now 
in the Belgaum District. 

Taila II married Jakabba, the daughter of the Ratta Bhammaha, 
and had by her two sons Satyasraya and Dasavarman also known 
as Yasovarman. Dasavarman acted as a Governor during the reign 
of Taila II. The last known date of Taila II from inscription is 
A.D. 996. He ruled for twenty-four years and was succeeded by 
Satyasraya in A.D. 997. 

2. SATYASRAYA (A.D. 997-c. 1008) 

Satyasraya, also known as Sattiga and Sattima, assumed the 
titles Irivabedanga, Ahavamalla, and Akalankacharita. The earliest 
known date of his reign from inscription is A.D. 999. Satyasraya 
came into conflict with his northern neighbours soon after his acces¬ 
sion, The Paramara Sindhuraja led an army against him and recon¬ 
quered territories which were wrested from Munja by Taila II. The 
Kalachuri Kokalla II of Tripurl claims to have forced the king of 
Kuntala to live in exile (vanavdsa). There is obviously a pun on the 
word Vanavdsa which refers to the country of Banavasi. The 
Kuntala king, who was Kokalla II’s adversary, seems to have been 
Satyasraya. 

The Silaharas of Northern Konkan, who did not submit to 
Taila II, fell a victim to the attack of Satyasraya. Satyasraya reduc¬ 
ed the Silahara Aparajita to a precarious position. It is stated that 
“hemmed in by the sea on one side, and the Satyasraya’s army on the 
other, Aparajita trembled like an insect on a stick both the ends of 
which are on fire”. Aparajita eventually saved himself by taking 
resort to the sea. Satyasraya burnt the city of Aihsunagara in the 
kingdom of the Silaharas, received twenty-one elephants from them, 
and asserted his supremacy over all the territory up to the sea shore. 
Aparajita and his successors were, however, allowed to rule Northern 
Konkan as feudatories of the Chalukyas. After his conquest of 
Konkan Satyasraya seems to have invaded the Gurjara kingdom and 
inflicted a defeat on the Chaulukya Chamundaraja, son of Mularaja I. 

Satyasraya had to face a grave situation in the southern part of 
his kingdom. Chola Rajaraja, the Great, the successor of Uttama 


164 , 


MIN/Sr^ 


LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KALYANA 

Chola, invaded the Deccan with 900,000 soldiers, and after conquer¬ 
ing the southern divisions of the Chalukya kingdom, viz. Santalige, 
Banavasi, Kadambalige, and Kogali, captured the fort of Uhkallu, 
modern Unkal, in the Dharwar District. Lenka Keta, the commander 
of the fort, gave up his life in the battle with the Cholas while 
defending the stronghold. Rajaraja next pitched his camp at 
Dhanvur, modern Donur, in the Bagewadi Tdluk of the Bijapur Dis¬ 
trict. An inscription of the third year of Rajendra Chola, son of Raja¬ 
raja, states that Rajendra Chola conquered Iditurai-TMi$u, Banavasi, 
and Kollipakkai. Iditurai-nadu is the same as Ededorenad, the 
country comprising a large part of the Raichur District between the 
Krishna and the Tungabhadra, and Kollipakkai is the modern Kulpak, 
about 45 miles north-east of Hyderabad. These conquests seem to 
have been made by Rajendra Chola during his father’s campaign 
against Satyasraya. Rajaraja, while encamping at Donur, ravaged 
the surrounding country, killed women, children and the Brahmanas, 
forcibly carried away the Brahmana girls, and gave them in marriage 
to the people of different castes. Satyasraya made a desperate 
attempt to free his country from the tyranny of the Cholas, and a 
fierce battle ensued. sSrutiman Nakkan Chandiran, the chief of the 
elephant forces of Rajaraja, made a charge on the enemy at the 
order of his master, but lost his life. Rajaraja, being defeated, made 
a hasty retreat, but Satyasraya pursued him and captured a large 
train of his baggage wagons. Rajaraja returned to his own kingdom 
with some booty of gold flowers, which he dedicated to the temple 
of Tanjore. Satyasraya then led aggressive campaigns against his 
southern neighbours. He brought all the territories up to the 
Kurnool and Guntur Districts under his sway. A stone inscription 
of the reign of Satyasraya, found in the Bapatla Tdluk of the Guntur 
District, is dated A.D. 1006. In AD. 1004 Satyasraya is known to 
have been residing in Sriparvata, also known as Srisailam, in the 
Markapur Tdluk of the Kurnool District. 

Bhlmarasa continued to govern Banavasi during the reign of 
Satyasraya. Sobhanarasa ruled Belvola 300, Kundur 500, Purigere 
300, Halsasige 12000, and Kukkanur 30. Masavaijli was administered 
by Taila, and one of Satyasraya’s officers governed Panungal 500. 
Satyasraya had a feudatory named Kundamarasa, often described as 
his son, who distinguished himself in the Chola war. Satyasraya’s 
younger brother Dasavarman had three sons, viz. Vikramaditya V, 
Ayyana II, and Jayasimha II, and one daughter, Akkadevl. 
Satyasraya was succeeded by his nephew Vikramaditya V, 

165 









THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

3. VIKRAMADITYA V (c. A.D, 1008-1014) 

V ikramaditya V assumed the titles Tribhuvcinatna11a and 
V allabJia-narendra. Dates of the inscriptions of his reign range from 
A.D. 1008 to 1013-14. During this period the Chalukyas turned 
their attention to the expansion of their kingdom towards the east. 
The general Kesavajiya, who was sent with an army in that direction, 
claims that he pleased Vikramaditya (V) by his conquest of the 
Kosala country. At this time, the king of Kosala, i.e. South Kosala, 
appears to have been SomavamsI Bhimaratha Mahabhavagupta II. 
It may be noted in this connection that a SomavaihsI king, who can¬ 
not be definitely identified, claims that he defeated the king of the 
Karnata country. 

Kundamarasa ruled Banavasi 12000 and Santalige 1000 as a 
governor under Vikramaditya V, the Danidanayaka Kesava adminis¬ 
tered Belvola 300 and Purigere 300, and Vikramaditya V’s sister 
AkkadevI was the governor of Kisukad 70 in A.D. 1012. 

4. JAYASIMHA II (A.D. 1015-1043) 

Vikramaditya was succeeded by his younger brother Ayyana II 
in A.D. 1014. Ayyana II did not rule for more than a year, and was 
succeeded by his youngest brother Jayasimha II in or before 
A.D. 1015. 

Jayasiihha II, also known as Singadeva, assumed the titles 
Jagadekamalla II, Trailokyamalla, Mallikamoda, and Vikramasimha. 
The dates of his inscriptions range between A.D. 1015 and 1043. 
Shortly before A.D. 1019 the Kalachuri Gaiigeyadeva, the Paramara 
Bhoja, and Rajendra Chola formed a confederacy and made simul¬ 
taneous attacks on the Deccan. Jayasimha claims to have repulsed 
all of them, but Bhoja succeeded in annexing Northern Konkan to 
his kingdom. Rajendra Chola claims that he defeated Jayasimha at 
Musangi, which is identified with Maski in the Raichur Doab, and 
conquered Rattapadi seven and a half lakh country. There is no 
doubt, however, that Jayasimha succeeded in driving out the Cholas 
from his kingdom. Along with his general Chavanarasa, he pursued 
Rajendra Chola up to the Gangavadi and the Chera countries. He 
plundered Dorasamudra, modern Halebid in Mysore, and Baleya- 
vattana, modern Beliapatam, in the Chirakkal Taluk, Malabar, and 
the country of the Malepas. Some time before A.D. 1024 jaya¬ 
simha II and his general Chavanarasa reconquered Konkan, 
apparently after defeating the Paramara Bhoja. 

The general Chavanarasa claims to have conquered Pannala, 
also called Pranala and Parnala, modern Panhala, 12 miles north-west 




166 


misT/t 



LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KALYANA 


<SL 


of Kolhapur, which was then apparently ruled by the Silahara 
Jatiga II, and stormed the fortress of Bijavodi. Jayasima II’s 
feudatory Bijjarasa, the officer in charge of Santalige, is said to have 
defeated Bhillama and Chatfuga, seized Bhatta, and conquered 
Pattarali, Patahakota, and Toragale. Bhillama, referred to, is 
Bhillama III of the Yadava dynasty of Seuna-desa, who married the 
daughter of Jayasirhha II. All these facts indicate that the Chalukya 
kingdom was torn asunder by internecine quarrel for some time 
during the reign of Jayasiihha. This assumption is confirmed by an 
inscription, which states that the generals and vassals of Jayasirhha II 
revolted, and even made a plot to murder the king. Jayasiihha II 
succeeded in averting the danger and bringing under control all the 
hostile forces with the help of his general Kalidasa. 

The kingdom of Jayasiihha II included Shimoga, Tumkur, 
Anantapur and Cuddapah Districts in the south. Its boundary on 
the east lay beyond Kulpak, 45 miles north-east of Hyderabad. 
Several inscriptions, dated in A.D. 1028 and subsequent years, prove 
that Jayasiihha II ruled from his capital Kalyaija or Kalyaiji, modern 
Kalyani, in Bidar, Hyderabad. The Chalukya capital was shifted 
there from Manyakheta some time after A.D. 993. Kundamarasa 
governed Banavasi and Santalige from the capital Balipura, modern 
Belgami, in the Shikarpur Taluk, Shimoga District, at least up to 
A.D. 1031. A certain Satyasraya administered Santalige under him. 
Vikramaditya V’s sister AkkadevI ruled Banavasi, Belvola, and 
Puligere jointly with Mayuravarman from A.D. 1037. The Kadamba 
Shashthadeva, ruler of Gove or Gopaka-pattana, modem Goa, 
acknowledged his supremacy. Jagadekamalla Nolamba-Pallava 
Udayaditya governed Kadambalige, Kogali, Ballakunde, Ededore etc. 
from his headquarters at Kampili, modern Kampli, in the Hospet 
Taluk, Bellary District. The Haihaya Revarasa administered the 
Gulbarga District, and the Sinda Nagaditya was in charge of the 
administration of Bagalkot, Bijapur District. Jayasiihha II was 
succeeded by his son Somesvara I in A.D. 1043-44. 


5. SOMESVARA I (A.D. 1043-1068) 

Somesvara I assumed the titles Ahavamalla, Trailokyamalla and 
Rajanardyana, and was also known as Vira-Martainda. Dates of 
the inscriptions of his reign range from A.D. 1043 to 1068. 
Immediately after his accession in A.D. 1043-44, he was involved in 
a protracted war with the Cholas. The Chola Rajadhiraja invaded 
the Chalukya kingdom with a big army. He was opposed at Pundi 
by Vichchaya or Bachcharasa, feudatory of the Chalukyas in the 
Rayadrug Taluk, in the Bellary District, who subsequently fled away. 


167 


THE STRUGGLE FOR fiMPIRE 

march, of the Cholas was next opposed by the 
Chalukya generals Nulumba (Nanni-Nolamba), Chamundaraja, the 
ruler of Banavasi, Kalidasa, Kommayya, and Villavaraja. But it 
was of no avail. The next resistance to the advance of the Cholas 
was given by Somesvara I at Koluru, on the bank of the Bhima, near 
Chitapur Railway Station, in the Shorapur District, Hyderabad. 
Though the Cholas suffered a heavy loss on this occasion, they forced 
Somesvara I to withdraw. Rajadhiraja next made a triumphant 
march to the Chalukya capital Kalyana, pillaged the city, and burnt 
the royal palace. He celebrated his victory there by performing the 
Vlrdbhisheka, and assuming the title Vijayardjendra. It was 
probably from Kalyana that he advanced towards Kollippakkai. 
Somesvara, along with his son Vikramaditya, Vijayaditya of Vengi 
and his commanders Sarigamaya, Gandappaya, Gangadhara and 
others, gave the Cholas there a stiff resistance, but Kollippakkai 
could not be defended. Gandappaya and Gangadhara lost their lives 
in the encounter and Somesvara I fled away like a coward. Raja¬ 
dhiraja returned to his kingdom after overrunning the Deccan. 

Some time before A.D. 1047 Rajadhiraja led another campaign 
against Somesvara I, defeated the Chalukya generals Gandar-Dina- 
kara, Narayana, Ganapati, and Kalidasa’s son Madhusudana, and 
captured Kampili. After sacking the city of Pundur, on the bank of 
the Krishna, where there was a cantonment, he seized a place named 
Mannandippai. In consequence of these Chola invasions the normal 
life in the Deccan was greatly disturbed. An inscription, dated 
A.D. 1050, from the Dharwar District, states that some ministers and 
administrative officers granted the renewal of corporate constitution 
a. of some Settis, which was partly broken down in the stress of the 
war with the Cholas. Somesvara I, however, did not suffer any loss 
of territory on this occasion. His general Chamundaraja, governor 
of Banavasi, succeeded in driving out the Cholas before A.D. 1047. 

In A.D. 1051-52 Rajadhiraja invaded the kingdom of Somesvara I 
for the third time, and was accompanied by his brother Rajendra on 
this occasion. He seized Kollapuram, burnt down many Jain 
temples, and defiled and damaged the Jain sanctuaries. Somesvara I 
took a bold stand, and not only checked the further progress of the 
Chola army, but even pursued the enemy which was retreating south¬ 
ward. For the final trial of strength the Cholas and the Chalukyas 
confronted each other in the battlefield of Koppam, a celebrated 
place of pilgrimage on the bank of a big river. Some suggest that 
the place is identical with Khidrapur on the right bank of the 
Krishna, about 30 miles east by south of Kolhapur. Some again think 
that it is to be identified with the ancient Kopana or Kupanapura, 




168 


W LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KALYANA 


. •stf*' 

modern Kopal, on the left bank of the stream Hirehalla, a tributary 
of the Tungabhadra in Lingsugur. When the battle was in progress 
Rajadhiraja, seated on an elephant, was mortally wounded by 
Somesvara X’s feudatory Per(ma)la Madarasa. At the death of their 
king the Cholas were retreating in confusion, when the deceased 
Icing’s brother Rajendra II rallied the Choja forces with great skill 
and renewed operations against the enemy. Somesvara I’s brother 
Jayasimha, and the Chalukya generals Pulikesin, Dasapanman, 
Nanni-Nolamba, Asokaiyan, Araiyan, Moftaiyan and many others 
lost their lives in the battle. Somesvara I, together with his generals 
Vanniya-Kevan, identified with the Haihaya feudatory Revarasa, 
Tuttan, Kuutfamayan, and many others fled away. After this victory 
Rajendra II crowned himself king in the battlefield and returned 
to the Chola country, but he could not annex any part of the 
Chalukya kingdom. 

The earliest known date of the inscriptions referring to the 
battle of Koppam is A.D. 1054. In that year Somesvara I was en¬ 
camping at Kampili on the Tungabhadra, and led some aggressive 
campaigns against the Cholas from time to time. Shortly before the 
battle of Koppam he, along with his general Pulikesin, who lost his 
life at this battle, invaded Kanchi and captured that city, wherefrom 
the Choja governor fled away. Bilha^a’s statement of the conquest 
of Kanchi by Somesvara I is corroborated by an inscription of the 
reign of this king dated A.D. 1058. In A.D. 1058-59 Somesvara I is 
known to have led another expedition to the Choja country. Some 
time between A.D. 1059 and 1061 Somesvara I, together with his son 
Vikramaditya and his general Valadeva, made an attack on the 
kingdom of the Cholas. The Chola Rajendra II and his son Raja- 
mahendra advanced to resist the invaders. A battle took place at 
Mudakaru, which seems to be the same as Mudukakere on the bank 
of the Tonga river, in the Channagiri Taluk, Shimoga District. 
Somesvara I suffered defeat and fled away with Vikramaditya and 
the general Irugaiyan, while Valadeva lost his life in the engage¬ 
ment. The intensity of the struggle between the Chalukyas and the 
Cholas greatly increased during the reign of Rajendra’s successor 
Vlrarajendra.* An inscription issued in the latter part of Vlra- 
rajendra’s reign states that the king saw the back of Ahavamalla five 
times in battle. It means that he fought with his adversary at least 
five times. Somesvara, along with his son Vikramaditya and some 
feudatories, met Vlrarajendra first in the battlefield of Gangavadi, 
i.e. central Mysore. They were defeated and pushed back to 
the bank of the Tungabhadra. The next battle between the two 
kings was fought in the Andhra country. 

169 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


Some time before A.D. 1049 Somesvara asserted his supremacy 
over the Eastern Chalukya king Rajaraja of the Andhra country. A 
stone inscription of Somesvara’s reign, dated A.D. 1057, has been 
found in the Ramchandrapur Taluk of the Godavari District. Some¬ 
svara I’s son Somesvara II, while serving his father as a governor in 
A.D. 1049 and 1053, assumed the title ‘the lord of Vengi.’ Vijaya- 
ditya VII, successor of the Eastern Chalukya Rajaraja, turned hostile 
to Somesvara I, and sought the protection of Virarajendra. After 
the battle of Gangavadi Virarajendra marched to Vengi, the capital 
of the Andhra country, to lend support to Vijayaditya against his 
enemies. In the battle that followed, the Chalukya general 
Chamundaraja, the governor of Banavasi, lost his life, the nose of 
the queen of Irugaiyan, who was the daughter of Chamundaraja, was 
cut off, and the Chalukya army under the leadership of Irugaiyan 
was routed. 


Shortly after his success in the Andhra country Virarajendra 
met Somesvara I at Kudal-sangamam, also mentioned as Kiidal. 
According to Fleet it is the confluence of the Panchaganga and the 
Krishna in the neighbourhood of Khidrapur. Mr. V. K. Pillai takes 
it to be the junction of the Tungabhadra and the Krishna. Mr. Rice 
identifies it with Kudali at the junction of the Tunga and Bhadra. 
It is known from a record of Vikramaditya VI that in A.D. 1073 he 
granted land to the god Saihgame&vara at Kudal. This Samgamesvara 
temple is situated in the village Singepalle in the Rayadrug Taluk 
of the Bellary District. Kudal-sangamam may be identified with this 
place. Somesvara I, along with his two sons Vikramaditya and Jaya- 
sirhha, his feudatory Singan, who was the chief of Kosal(ai), his 
lieutenants Keiava, Kettaraian, Marayan, Pottarayan, Irechchayan, 
Annalan, and Maduvanan, fought with all their might in the battle, 
but failed miserably. Sihgan fell fighting and Somesvara I, together 
with his sons and generals, fled away. Virarajendra claims to have 
seized Somesvara’s wives, family treasures, parasols etc. on this 
occasion. The victory at Kiidal was one of the greatest military 
achievements of the Cholas of that age, and they remembered it with 
pride for many generations. 

In A.D. 1063-64 Somesvara led an expedition against the Cholas 
and encamped at Mudukakere on the Tunga, in the Shimoga District. 
He was opposed by Virarajendra there and was defeated. Vira¬ 
rajendra claims to have won victory over the Chalukyas at 
Mudakkaru, which, according to some, means a winding river, but 
may be taken as identical with Mudukakere. It appears that not 
long after this engagement Virarajendra fought a sanguinary battle 
on the bank of a river with a number of generals, who seem to have 


170 


miStyy 


LATER chalukyas and kalachtjris of kalyana 



been the officers of Somesvara I, and killed many of them. Shortly 
afterwards Virarajendra accepted the challenge of Somesvara to try 
his strength with him again at Kudal and reached with his army at 
Kandai, a place in the neighbourhood of Kudal. Somesvara, instead 
of meeting his adversary there at the appointed time, fled to the 
western coast, and his generals Devanathan, Sitti and Kesi retreated. 
Virarajendra, having waited for the enemy for a month, overran 
Ratfapadi and planted a pillar of victory on the Tungabhadra. About 
this time Somesvara I succeeded in regaining his position in the 
Andhra country, and so Virarajendra moved from the Tungabhadra 
towards Vehgl. He inflicted a defeat on the Chalukya geneialo 
Jananatha of Dhara, Rajamayan, and Mupparasan on the bank of the 
Krishna near Visaiyavadi (Vijayawada), and claims to have restored 
Vijayaditya of the Eastern Chalukya family to power. All these 
wars between Somesvara I and the Cholas were fought before the 
fifth year of Virarajendra’s reign (A.D. 1067). In A.D. 1067-68 
Vikramaditya, son of Somesvara I, marched against the Chola capital 
Gahgaikoij4a and plundered it. Somesvara I fought with the Cholas 
for nearly a quarter of a century, and yielded to their military forces 
on many occasions. His enemies, however, could not wrest, from 
him any part of his kingdom. 

Besides the Cholas Somesvara I had to fight with many other 
ruling dynasties of his time. The Silahara Aparajita of Northern 
Konkan had two sons Vajjada II and Arikesarin (A.D. 1017). 
Vajjada II had three sons Chittaraja, Nagarjuna, and Mummuni. 
After Arikesarin his nephews Chittaraja (A.D. 1026) and Mummuni 
ruled in succession. There was a civil war in Northern Konkan 
during the reign of Mummuni. Some time before A.D. 1047 Some¬ 
svara I, together with his generals, the Kakatiya Prola, Kadamba 
Chamundaraja of Banavasi, the Yadava Ajjavasa, the Haihaya 
Revarasa, Madhusudana alias Madhuva, and Pulikesin, invaded that 
country, overthrew Mummuni, and placed his own nominee on its 
throne. 4 How long Somesvara kept Konkan under his control can¬ 
not be determined. Mummuni’s nephew Anantapala, son of 
Nagarjuna, claims that he defeated those enemies “who at a time of 
misfortune from relatives that had become hostile, having obtained 
power, devastated the whole Kohkana district, and harassed the gods 
and Brahmanas.” Anantapala’s adversaries seem to have been the 
Chalukyas. About this time Somesvara I raided Lata and Gujarat. 
His adversary in Gujarat was the Chaulukya Bhlma I, and in Lata 
the Chaulukya Vatsaraja or his successor Trilochanapala. He also 
invaded the adjoining territory of Malava with the assistance of his 
generals Nagadeva, Gundamaya, Jomarasa, and Madhusudana. and 
plundered Mandapa (modem Mandu, in Dhar, Madhya Bharat), 


171 



mtSTQy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


Ujjayini, and Dhara, the capital of the Paramara Bhoja, who fled 
away. In A.D. 1055, when the Kalachuri Karna and the Chaulukya 
Bhima forcibly took possession of Malava, Vikramaditya VI, at the 
order of his father Somesvara I, defeated them and restored Jaya- 
simha, successor of Bhoja, to power. Some time before A.D. 1048 
Somesvara came into conflict with the Kalachuri Kama. Bilhana 
states that Somesvara I utterly destroyed the power of Kama, who, 
on the other hand, claims that he defeated the king of Kuntala. 
Pmkrita-paingalam mentions that Karna vanquished Vikrama, i.e. 


Vikramaditya VI. 


Somesvara I and his feudatory, the Kakatlya Prola, raided 
Kosala, and conquered Chakrakota, in the Bastar State, after defeat¬ 
ing a king of the Naga dynasty. It is not unlikely that he came into 
clash with Virarajendra and Rajendra Chola II at Chakrakota. Prola 
claims to have defeated a chief named Bhadranga (?) Kadparti, and 
killed Gonna, the chief of Purakuta. Vajrahasta V, king of Kalinga, 
suffered defeat at the hands of Somesvara I. Some time before 
A.D. 1047 Somesvara I, assisted by his son Vikramaditya and his 
feudatory Chamundaraja, invaded Kerala or Malabar coast and 
defeated and killed the king of that country. Nagadeva, the general 
of Somesvara I, subdued the revolt of the Yadavas of Seuiia-desa 
shortly before A.D. 1060. Somesvara I’s feudatory, the Kadamba 
Jayakesin I, son of Shashthadeva, who is referred to as the king of 
Konkana, conquered the Alupas, king of Kapardikadvipa, and up¬ 
rooted Kamadeva. 


Several inscriptions of Somesvara I’s reign, with dates commenc¬ 
ing from A.D. 1050, mention that he conquered Vahga, Magadha, 
Nepala, Kanauj, Panchala, Kuru, Khasa, and Abhxra. Bilhana states 
that the prince Vikramaditya VI led expeditions against Gauda, 
Kamarupa, Pandya, and Ceylon. But one may doubt the authenticity 
of all these claims, though there may be historical basis for some of 
them. In any case he must be regarded as a great king. 

Somesvara I had four sons, viz. Somesvara II, Vikramaditya VI, 
Vishnuvardhana-Vijayaditya, and Jayasimha, all of whom occupied 
administrative posts under him. Somesvara II was in charge of 
Belvola and Purigere, Vikramaditya VI governed Gangavadi, 
Banavasi, Santalige, and Nolambavadi, and Jayasiiiiha was in charge 
of Uchchangi, Mandali, Suluhgal etc. Jayasimha acted as subordi¬ 
nate of Vikramaditya VI. In recognition of the Kakatlya Prola’s 
military service Somesvara I granted him the Anmakonda-snshaya, 
modern Warangal District, Hyderabad. Somesvara I’s kingdom 
extended in the south up to Shimoga, Chitaldroog, Anantapur, and 


172 


MIN/Sr^ 



later chalukyas and kalachuris of kalyana 


Kmnool Districts. He appointed his son Somesvara II as his suc¬ 
cessor, and died in March, 1068. 


6. SOMESVARA II (A.D. 1068-1076) 

Somesvara II, who assumed the title Bhuvanaikamalla, was 
involved in a war with his brother Vikramaditya immediately after 
his accession. Vikramaditya strengthened his position by marrying 
the daughter of Virarajendra who, in or before the sixth year of his 
reign (A.D. 1068-69), led an expedition against Somesvara II to secure 
the throne of the Deccan for his son-in-law. Virarajendra burnt the 
city of Kampili, set up a pillar of victory at Karadikal (modern village 
of Karadi, in the Lingsugur Taluk, Raichur District, Hyderabad), 
and declared Vikramaditya as the king of Rattapa# seven and a half 
lakh country. Somesvara II, with the help of his cavalry 
forces, routed Virarajendra and established peace and order in his 
kingdom. After this Vikramaditya submitted to his brother and 
lived with him cordially, at least up to A.D. 1074. After his victory 
over the Cholas, Somesvara II made a confederacy with the Chaulukya 
Karna of Gujarat, defeated the Paramara Jayasirhha, successor of 
Bhoja, and occupied Malava. He could not retain possession of it. 
for a long time as the Paramara Udayaditya, with the help of the 
Chahamanas, drove him and his ally out of Malava. 

Vikramaditya VI is known to have been governing Bellary, 
Anantapur, Chitaldroog, and Dharwar Districts from his head¬ 
quarters at Govindavadi (modern Govindavada, a village in the Raya- 
drug Taluk, Bellary District), at least from A.D. 1071 to 1074. 
In A.D. 1072 Jayasimha, the younger brother of Vikramaditya, was 
in charge of Chitaldroog District. As all these territories are known 
to have been within the kingdom of Somesvara II during this period, 
both the princes must have administered them as his subordinates. 
That Vikramaditya was in the service of Somesvara II and was in 
cordial relation with him is proved by the Nrialgi inscription, dated 
A.D. 1074, which states that the Mdhdmandalesvara Vikramaditya 
and Vishnuvardhana-Vijayaditya were then at Bankapura (in 
Dharwar District) in the service of the king Bhuvanaikamalla. After 
the death of Virarajendra there was anarchy in the Chola country. 
Vikramaditya VI, as a feudatory of Somesvara II, put down the 
revolt and placed Virarajendra’s son Adhirajendra on the throne. 
Shortly afterwards, when Rajendra Chola II alias Kulottunga I 
occupied the Chola throne after the death of Adhirajendra in a 
popular commotion, Vikramaditya marched against the usurper but 
failed to dethrone him. Bilhana’s statement that about this time, 
i.e. in A.D. 1070, Vikramaditya overthrew Somesvara II is erroneous. 


173 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


■rscriptions of Kulottunga I supply much information about his con¬ 
flict with Vikramaditya VI during this period. An inscription of the 
year A.D. 1074 records his victory over the king of Kuntala, and 
another of A.D. 1076 mentions that Vikramaditya and Jayasimha, 
having suffered defeat at his hands, plunged into the river. His 
inscription of A.D. 1080 states that he fought with Vikramaditya VI 
between Nahgili (in the Kolar District) and the Tungabhadra and 
captured two countries Gahgamandalam and Singanam. But in the 
midst of these conflicts with the Cholas Vikramaditya seized the 
Chalukya kingdom. 


The Vikramankadeva-charita and a number of inscriptions of 
Vikramaditya Vi’s reign state that Somesvara II became vicious and 
neglectful of his royal duties; so Vikramaditya VI, with the help of 
the Hoysala Ereyahga and Pantfya of the Chola family, defeated 
Somesvara, took him prisoner, and wielded the sovereignty of the 
Deccan. It is difficult to say whether this represents the whole truth. 
Unfortunately no further details of this palace revolution are known 
to us. The last known date of Somesvara II’s reign is A.D. 1076 
which is also the year of Vikramaditya Vi’s accession. 


7. VIKRAMADITYA VI (A.D. 1076-1126) 

Vikramaditya VI, also known as Perma^ideva, assumed the title 
Tribhuvanamalla. Immediately after his accession in A.D. 1076 he 
started a new era, called after his own name. An inscription dated 
in the second year of the Chalukya-Vikrama era has been found. 
Jayasimha governed Banavasi, Santalige, and Kadur as a subordi¬ 
nate of his brother Vikramaditya VI at least up to A.D. 1082. Some 
time after his marriage with the Silahara princess Chandralekha, 
Vikramaditya received the news that Jayasimha had turned hostile 
to him and advanced with his army to the bank of the Krishna, 
where he was joined by many feudatories. He opposed his brother 
there and suffered defeat at the initial stage of the battle. Even¬ 
tually he succeeded in taking Jayasimha prisoner, but released him 
shortly afterwards. 

After a long period of peace following his accession Vikrama¬ 
ditya VI marched against the Cholas and took Kanchl some time 
before A.D. 1085. Some time between A.D. 1091 and 1093 he, 
along with his general Govindarasa, burnt Vengi, defeated the 
Velanan(i Gonka I, and wrested Andhra from Vira-Cho<Ja, 
son of Kulottunga Chola I. In the latter part of A.D. 1099 
Kulottunga reconquered Vehgi from the Chalukyas and retained 
his control over it till A.D. 1117. In the closing years of Kulot- 
tuhga’s reign, when his son Vikrama Chola, the viceroy of Andhra 


174 


LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KALYA$TA 

country, left for the Chola capital to secure his succession, Vikra¬ 
maditya VI annexed it again to his kingdom. Inscriptions of Vik¬ 
ramaditya prove that he was in possession of the Andhra country 
from A.D. 1118 to at least 1124. 

Vikramaditya VI came into conflict with the Hoysalas of Gan- 
gavadi, which included Hassan, Tumkur, and part of the Mysore 
Districts, and had its capital at Dorasamudra. The Chalukya 
Somesvara I had married a Hoysala princess, and the Hoysala Nri- 
pakama’s son Vinayaditya (A.D. 1047-1101) acknowledged the 
supremacy of Somesvara I, Somesvara II, and Vikramaditya VI. 
Shortly after his death the Hoysalas tried to assert their indepen¬ 
dence. About this time the Paramara Jagaddeva abdicated the 
throne of Malava in favour of his brother Naravarman, and became 
an ally of Vikramaditya VI. The Chalukya emperor sent Jagad¬ 
deva to put down the revolt of the Hoysalas. The Hoysala princes 
Ballala I, Vishnuvardhana and Udayaditya, sons of Ereyanga, and 
the grandsons of Vinayaditya, gave stiff resistance to the Chalukya 
army under Jagaddeva, and won some initial successes over the 
invader. But Jagaddeva eventually succeeded in forcing his way 
into Dorasamudra and bringing the Hoysalas under control. A 
Sr avana Belgola inscription, dated A.D. 1118, states that the Hoy¬ 
sala Vishnuvardhana’s general Gangaraja made a night attack on 
the army of the Chalukya Tribhuvanamalla, encamped at Kannegal 
under the command of the twelve samantas, and defeated it. The 
Sinda chief Acha II of Erambarage is stated to have pursued and 
prevailed against Hoysala at the command of the universal emperor 
Vikramaditya. Vishnuvardhana’s inscriptions claim that the king 
conquered Belvola, Hanungal, Banavasi, and Nolambavadi, and his 
horses, in course of his victorious march, bathed in the Krishna 
river some time before A.D. 1120. These, no doubt, reflect the 
different phases of the conflict between the Hoysalas and the Chalu- 
kyas in the early part of the twelfth century. Though the relation 
between these two dynasties became acrimonious from time to 
time, the inscriptions of Ballala I and Vishnuvardhana, dating from 
A.D. 1101, prove that they acknowledged the supremacy of Vikra¬ 
maditya. 

The Kadamba Jayakesin I of Goa, son of Shashfhadeva, owed 
allegiance to Vikramaditya VI at least up to A.D. 1071. Jayakesin I 
had two sons, Guvaladeva II and Vijayaditya. Guvaladeva was 
ruling in A.D. 1098. His successor Vijayaditya seems to have re¬ 
volted against the Chalukyas. The Sinda Acha II of Erambarage, 
at the order of Vikramaditya, took Gove, burnt it down, and put 
to flight Lakshma, a commander of the Kadamba army. Thereupon 




175 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

^cie Kadambas submitted to Vikramaditya. Vijayaditya’s son 
Jayakesin II, whose known regnal years are A.D. 1125 and 1147, 
married Mailaladevi, daughter of Vikramaditya VI, and ruled his 
territory along with Kohkana 900, Halasige 12000, Payve 500, and 
Kavadi-dvipa 125000 jointly with his queen as a subordinate of the 
Chalukyas. Acha II also put down the revolt of a Panqlya chief of 
Uchchahgi. 

A branch of the gilahara dynasty ruled at Karaha{aka, modern 
Karad, in the Satara District, from the tenth century A.D. Kolha¬ 
pur and Panhala were the other headquarters of this family. The 
Chalukya Jayasimha II asserted his supremacy over it. Vikrama¬ 
ditya VI married Chandralekha, the daughter of a king of this 
family, who seems to have been Marasimha. Marasimha had five 
sons, Guvala II, Gahgadeva, Ballala, Bhoja and Gandaraditya, who 
ruled in succession. Bhoja, who came to the throne after A.D. 1086, 
revolted and attacked the territory of the Sindas of Erambarage, 
but the Sinda Acha II succeeded in repulsing him. Vikramaditya 
VI led an expedition against the rebel Bhoja and encamped at 
Appayanadakuppa on the Bhlmarathi river in A.D. 1100. But 
as Bhoja is known to have been ruling in A.D. 1108, he could not 
evidently be brought under control. 

An inscription, dated A.D. 1078, states that Seven Konkanas 
became like bracelets to Vikramaditya through the aid of his brother 
Jayasimha. Vikramaditya’s conquest of Kohkana is mentioned in 
another inscription. An inscription, dated A.D. 1113, records that 
the Paridya Kamadeva ruled the Konkana-rdshtra as a feudatory of 
Vikramaditya VI. 

The Yadavas of Seuna -desa, whose kingdom extended from 
the Ahmadnagar District to the Narmada, were feudatories of Vik¬ 
ramaditya VI. Iramadeva, son of Seunachandra of this family, 
acknowledges the supremacy of Vikramaditya VI in an inscription 
dated A.D. 1100. Vikramaditya VI put down the revolt of the 
Yadavas, who declared hostility against him about this time. 

Some time before A.D. 1088 Vikramaditya crossed the Narmada 
and brought Kanama and some other chiefs under his control. It 
was probably on this occasion that he plundered Lata and burnt 
the city of the Gurjara king, who seems to have been the Chaulukya 
Karna. A fragmentary inscription relates that Vikramaditya’s 
feudatory Bijjala, son of Pitta, had some relation with Jayasiihha 
of Gurjararashtra, i.e. Jayasimha-Siddharaja, son of Karna. The 
Kalachuri king Jajalladeva of Ratanpur (the capital of Dakshina- 
Kosala) pushed the western frontier of his kingdom near the border 
of the empire of the Chalukyas, but Vikramaditya checked his fur- 



LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KAI-.YANA 



ther advance towards the west. Some time before A.D. 1124 his 
feudatory Pandvadeva of Nolambavadi chased at his 1 command the 
king of Ratanpur, who was apparently Jajalladeva I. A large num¬ 
ber of Vikramaditya Vi’s inscriptions, with dates beginning from 
A.D. 1077, state that he conquered Gurjara, Dahala, Konkana, Maru, 
Nepala, Barbara, Kashmir, Sindhu, Turushka, Abhira, Nallura, 
Vidarbha and Vanga. Vikramaditya probably made some of these 
conquests before his accession, but much of it seems to be mere 
panegyrics. 

Vikramaditya Vi’s empire extended up to Hassan, Tumkur and 
Cuddapah Districts in the south, Khammamett District in Hydera¬ 
bad and Godavari District in the east and south-east, and the Nar¬ 
mada in the north. The Hoysalas of Dorasamudra, Kadambas of 
Goa, Pandyas of Nolambavadi, Santaras of Patti-Fomburcha (mo¬ 
dern Humcha in the Nagar Taluk, Shimoga District), Sindas of Eram- 
barage, Yadavas of Seuija-deia, and the Kakatlyas of Telihgaija 
were his vassals. Vikramaditya VI had at least three sons, Malli¬ 
karjuna, Jayakarna, and Somesvara III. Mallikarjuna was the 
governor of Tardavadi, and Jayakarna administered Kaladgi and 
Belgaum Districts. In A.D. 1083 Vikramaditya VI sent an embassy 
to the court of Vijayabahu, king of Ceylon. The Kashmirian poet 
Bilhana, the author of Vikramdnkadeva-charita, and Vijnanesvara, the 
author of Mitdkshard, graced his court. He erected a big temple 
and founded a city, which was given the name Vikramapura. The 
last known date of his reign is A.D. 1126. He waj succeeded by 
his son Somesvara III in that year. 

8. SOMESVARA III (A.D. 1126-1138) 

Somesvara III assumed the titles Bhulokamalla and Tribhu- 
vanamulla. The Hoysala Vishnuvardhana led an expedition against 
the kingdom of the Chalukyas during his reign, captured Bana- 
vasi, assaulted the Uchchahgi fort, and laid siege to Panungal, ruled 
by the Kadamba Mallikarjuna. The Hoysalas were, however, ulti¬ 
mately routed by the Chalukyas. It is known from an inscription 
found in the Shikarpur Taluk of the Shimoga District, dated A.D, 
1129, that Somesvara III came to the south in course of an expedi¬ 
tion and encamped in Hulluri tirtha. He had to surrender 
the Andhra country to Kulottunga Chola II before A.D. 1134, 
though he is credited with conquests of Andhra and Dramila coun¬ 
tries in an inscription of this period. The statement that he con¬ 
quered Magadha and Nepala cannot be verified, but it probably 
refers to the rule of Karnata dynasties in these kingdoms. 6 

177 

S. K—1^ 




MIN IST/f 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


Somesvara III, who was given the title Sarvajna-bhupa or 
Sarvajna-Chakravartti for his extensive knowledge, composed the 
book entitled Manasollasa or Abhilashitartha-chintamani . 6 He had 
two sons, Taila III and Jagadekamalla II. Taila III governed Sinda- 
vadi in A.D. 1120 under Vikramaditya VI, and continued to hold 
that position during the reign of his father. The Kadamba Taila 
administered Banavasi as a feudatory of Somesvara III, and Vira 
Pandya was the vassal of this Chalukya monarch in Nolambavadh 
the capital of which was Uchchahgi. Somesvara III was succeeded 
by Jagadekamalla II in A.D. 1138. 


9. JAGADEKAMALLA (A.D. 1138-1151) AND TAILA III 

(A.D. 1151-1156) 

Either in the latter part of the reign of Somesvara III or in the 
early part of that of Jagadekamalla, the Hoysalas of Gangavadi, 
the Kadambas of Goa, and some other feudatories revolted, but the 
Sinda Permadideva, son of Acha II of Erambarage, helped the Cha- 
lukyas in putting down the revolt. An inscription of Permadideva, 
issued during Jagadekamalla IPs reign, states that Permadideva 
defeated Kulasekharahka, besieged Chatta and beheaded him, pur¬ 
sued Jayakesin, invested Dorasamudra, and pursued the Hoysala 
Vishnuvardhana as far as Belupura and took the city. He 
finally came to the mountain pass of Vahadi in pursuit of his 
enemy. Jayakesin referred to is Jayakesin II of the Kadamba 
family of Goa. Chatta seems to have been Chatta II, ruler of 
Toragale (modern Torgal), whose grandson Barma is known to have 
been ruling in A.D. 1188. The Hoysala Vishnuvardhana increased 
his power and prestige and stationed himself at Bahkapura in 
Dharwar, but paid nominal allegiance to the Chalukyas. 

About the year A.D. 1143 Jagadekamalla, together with the Hoy¬ 
sala Narasimha, invaded Malava, dethroned the Paramara Jayavar- 
man, and placed one Ballala on the throne. It was probably on this 
occasion that Jagadekamalla plundered Lata and won a victory over 
the Gurjara king, who was Kumarapala. In the south Jagadekamalla 
fought successfully with Chola Kulottunga II and Anantavarman 
Chodagahga of Kalihga, and also put down the revolt of a Nolamba- 
Pallava chief. Vira Pandya of Nolambavadi, Goravadevarasa of 
Banavasi, Jagaddeva Santara of Pomburcha, Kesavagovinda of Bel- 
vola etc, Iruhgulachola of Anantapur, and Sinda Permadideva of 
Erambarage were his feudatories. The last known date of Jaga¬ 
dekamalla II is A,D. 1151 in which year he was succeeded by his 
brother Taila HI. 


178 


MiN/sr^ 



LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KALYANA 


<SL 


'aila III, who assumed the title Trailokyamalla, was also 
known as Nurmadi Taila. His inscriptions prove that he was in 
possession of Shimoga, Cuddapah, and Kurnool Districts in the 
south. Some time before A.D. 1153 he succeeded in repelling the 
attacks of the Chaulukya Kumarapala and the Chola Kulottunga II. 
At this time, the Kakatiyas of Telingana revolted. Taila III, along 
with the Santara Jagaddeva, marched to Warangal to punish the 
rebels, but was taken prisoner by the Kakatlya Prola, who is said 
to have released him forthwith out of devotion for him. This in¬ 
cident gave a crushing blow to the prestige of the Chalukyas. Ere 
long the Chalukya empire was shattered by internal revolts. In 
A.D. 1156 the feudatory chief Bijjala of the Kalachuri dynasty prac¬ 
tically wielded the sovereignty of the Deccan. Bijjala and the 
other feudatories, however, acknowledged the nominal sway of the 
Chalukyas till the death of Taila III. An inscription from Hanam- 
konda, dated A.D. 1163, states that Taila III died of dysentery for 
fear of the Kakatiya Rudradeva. The Deccan was ruled by Bijjala 
and his successors for nearly a quarter of a century, 7 till the for¬ 
tunes of the Chalukyas were restored by Somesvara IV, son of 
Taila III. 


10. THE KALACHURI USURPATION (A.D. 1156-1181) 

Bijjala, who wrested the sovereignty of Kalyana from Taila III, 
was a member of one of the many branches of the Kalachuri family, 
which ruled in different parts of the Deccan as feudatories of the 
Chalukyas. Krishna, an early member of this family, is said to 
have conquered Kalanjara and Dahala. In his lineage was born 
Kannama, who flourished in Mangaliveda, in the country of Tari- 
kadu in Kuntala. Mahgaliveda is the modern Mangaivedha, in the 
old Sangli State. Kannama’s son was the king Raja, whose sons 
were Ammugi, Sahkama I, and Jogama. Jogama, who is said to 
have attained to the mighty splendour of primitive kings, was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son Permadi, also called Hemmadi. Hemmadi is 
known to have been governing Tardavadi tin the Bijapur District) 
in A.D. 1129 as a feudatory of the Chalukya Somesvara III. He 
was succeeded by his son Bijjala before A.D. 1147, in which year 
the latter served the Chalukya Jagadekamalla II as a feudatory. 
Bijjala also served Taila III in that capacity for some time, and 
got the charge of the administration of the southern divisions of the 
Chalukya kingdom, which included Banavasi and Nolambavadi in 
addition to Tardavadi. Taila Ill’s defeat at the hands of the Kaka¬ 
tiyas of Telingaria encouraged Bijjala to bid for the sovereignty 
of the Deccan. With the help of the Silahara Vijayaditya, son of 


,/( 


179 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Gandaraditya, ruler of Karahataka, and the Dandadhinatha Raeha, 
the officer in charge of Nagarakhanda in Banavasi, he seized the 
throne of the Chalukyas. 


Bijjala assumed the titles Tribhuvanamalla, Nissankamalla, 
Sanivarasiddhi, and Giridurgamalla. Several inscriptions of his 
reign prove that he ascended the throne of the Deccan in A.D. 1156 
and occupied Kalyana before A.D. 1160. He, however, acknow¬ 
ledged the nominal sway of Taila III so long as the latter was alive. 
He devoted the early years of his reign to putting down distur¬ 
bances in the south. Some time before A.D. 1162 he is known to 
have been encamping at Balligave in the Banavasi-ndd in order to 
subdue the southern region. He destroyed Tagarate in the Shi- 
moga District, defeated the Santara Jagaddeva of Pomburcha, and 
laid siege to the fort of Gutti (Gooty in Anantapur), which was 
destroyed. The Hoysala Narasimha I suffered a reverse at his 
hands on the bank of the Tungabhadra. The Pandya chief Vijaya 
Pandya, also known as Kama, who refused to acknowledge his 
supremacy, was brought under control. Bijjala fought successfully 
with the Cheras of the Malabar coast, the Chola Rajaraja II, Vela- 
nap$i Rajendra-Choda II of Andhra, the Ganga Raghava of 
Kalmga in the south, and the Chaulukya Kumarapala, whose king¬ 
dom included Gurjara, Lata, Saurashtra, and Malava, in the north. 
He inflicted a defeat on the Kalachuri Jayasimha of the Chedi coun¬ 
try, but his victory over this Kalachuri monarch was not decisive, as 
the latter also claims to have won a victory over the king of Kun- 
tala. The statements in some inscriptions of the successors of Bij¬ 
jala that he invaded Simhala, Nepala, Turushka, Anga, Vahga, and 
Magadha are obviously hyperboles. Kesapayya-Nayaka of Bana¬ 
vasi. Vijaya Pandya of Nolambavadi, Barma or Bammidevarasa of 
Sindavadi, Sinda Chavunda II of Erambarage, Sridhara of Tarda- 
vadi, Kadamba Somadeva of Hangal (Hanuhgal), Silahara Vijaya- 
ditya of Karahataka, and the Ratta Karttavirya III of Saundatti 
were his 1 feudatories. 

* 

Some works of the late period, viz. the Buscivcipurdna , Cyhannci- 
basavapur cuia, and Bijjalardya-charita narrate stories referring to 
Bijjala’s quarrel with Basava, son of Madiraja, the founder of the 
Lingayat sect. It is stated that Bijjala, a patron of the Jains, ap¬ 
pointed Basava as his minister, but soon quarrelled with him as he 
was using his office for the propagation of his creed. Basava mur¬ 
dered the king through his agents and himself committed suicide 
to avoid the extreme punishment at the hands of the son of the 
deceased king. The authenticity of the story may reasonably be 
doubted as the contemporary evidence proves that Bijjala abdicated 


MIN/Sr^ 


LATER CHALUKYAS AND RALACttURIS OF KALYANA 



the throne in favour of his son. An inscription of this period from 
Ablur states that Ekantada Ramayya, a great devotee of Siva, who 
brought discredit on the Jains by performing some miracles, won 
the admiration of Bijjala. Bijjala gave him a jaya-patra (a certi¬ 
ficate of victory) over the Jains and honoured him by laving his 
feet. 

Bijjala had four sons, Somesvara, Sankama, Ahavamalla and 
Sihghana, and one daughter Siriyadevi, who was given in marriage 
to Sinda Chavunda II of Erambarage. An inscription reports that 
in the 16th Kalachuri (Bijjala) year (S. 1090 = A.D. 1168) Bijjala 
abdicated his throne in favour of his son Somesvara. Another ins¬ 
cription, dated A.D. 1165, mentions Somesvara as the king of Kun- 
tala. It seems that Somesvara was associated in the government 
with his father from A.D. 1165. 

Somesvara, also known as Somadeva and Sovideva, assumed 
the title Raya~Murari, His inscriptions fix the date of his accession 
in A.D. 1168. The Shimoga District was included in his kingdom. 
He was also in possession, in A.D. 1174, of the Krishna District which 
was probably annexed by Bijjala. Somesvara is said to have 
conquered Chola, Gurjara, and Lata countries before A.D. 1172. 
At this time the Chola country was ruled by Rajaraja II, and Gur¬ 
jara and Lata were ruled by Chaulukya Kumarapala. Some time 
before A.D. 1174 Somesvara is stated to have plundered Khasa, 
Kalinga, Kimmira, Turushka, Chera, and Saurashtra. During this 
period Kalinga and Kimmira (Kimida), modern Kimide, in the Gan- 
jam District, were under the sway of the Gahga Rajaraja II. 
Somesvara’s feudatory, the Kadamba Sovideva, took prisoner in 
battle the Changalva king Mahadeva, who ruled western Mysore 
and Coorg. Somesvara’s minister Bayalike Ke£imayya governed 
Banavasi, Sindavadi, Tardavadi, and Hanungal. The last known 
date of Somesvara’s reign is A.D. 1177, which is also the earliest 
known date of the reign of his younger brother and successor San- 
kama. 

Sahkama II had an able general named Kavaiia, who had 
seventy-two officers to serve him. Kavaiia defeated the VelanaQt'i 
Rajendra-Choda II of the Andhra country, won victory over the 
Chola Rajaraja II, led an expedition to the south through Banavasi, 
and fought successfully with the Hoysala Ballaia II. The Kadamba 
Vijayaditya of Goa and the Silahara Aparaditya II of Northern 
Konkan yielded to his forces. He claims to have worsted in battle 
the king of Gurjara, who Was the Chaulukya Bhlma II. An inscrip¬ 
tion of his reign makes the very extravagant claim that he 
conquered Gauda, Magadha, Turushka, and Simhala. The Sinda 


181 



fsvara-bhupa, who governed Banavasi, Edevatte etc., and the Sinda 
Vikkayya, son of Chavunda II of Erambarage, were his feudatories. 
He was succeeded by his younger brother Ahavamalla. 


Ahavamalla’s inscriptions fix the date of his accession in 
A.D. 1180. Like his predecessors he carried on campaigns against 
his neighbours. With the help of his generals Kesimayya, Laksh- 
mapa, and Chandugideva, he defeated the Velananti Gonka III of 
the Andhra country, plundered Kanchi after defeating Kulottuhga 
Chola III, won victory over the Hoysala Ballala II, and subdued the 
Kadamba Vijayaditya of Goa. He also worsted in battle the Sila- 
hara Aparaditya II of Northern Konkan, and the Paramara Vin- 
dhyavarman of Malava. An inscription, dated A.D. 1181, gives 
him credit for conquering the Chaulika army. This may be refer¬ 
ring to his success in frustrating an early attempt of the Chalukya 
Somesvara IV to conquer the Deccan. His governor in Banavasi, 
Santalige, etc., was his general Kesimayya. In A.D. 1181 Somes¬ 
vara IV succeeded in wresting from Ahavamalla the larger portion 
of the Deccan including Kalyana. After this discomfiture Ahava¬ 
malla continued to rule Belvola and Banavasi for two more years. 
The last known date of his reign is A.D. 1183, and he was 
succeeded by his youngest brother Sihghana in that year. 
In A.D. 1183-84 Sihghana surrendered to Somesvara IV 
Belvola and Banavtasi, and acknowledged his supremacy. An 
inscription, dated A.D. 1184, mentions him as a feudatory of Somes¬ 
vara IV. There is no trace of the rule of this branch of the Kala- 
churis after this date. 

11. SOMESVARA IV (A.D. 1181-c. 1189), THE LAST 
CHALUKYA RULER 

The political status of Somesvara IV, son of Taila III, during 
the rule of the Kalachuris is not known. Some suggest that he 
resided at Annigere in the Dharwar District during this period. In 
any case he ascended the throne in A.D. 1181-82 and assumed the 
title Tribhuvanamalla . Within two or three years, as noted above, 
he defeated the Kalachuri rulers Ahavamalla and Sihghana and re¬ 
covered his ancestral kingdom. In this he was greatly helped by 
his general Brahma, also called Bomma and Bammayya. 

An inscription from Kurgod, in the Bellary Taluk of the Bel¬ 
lary District, states that in A.D. 1181-82 Somesvara IV was on the 
throne of Kalyapa and that, under him, the Sinda Rachamalla ruled 
over Ballakuiide from the fort of Kurugodu, modem Kurgod. Other 
inscriptions of his reign prove that Shimoga, Chitaldroog, Bellary 
and Bijapur Districts were included in his kingdom. Kamadevarasa 

182 





LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHUftlS OF KALYANA 


of Banavasi and Hanungal, Hoysala Ballala II of Dorasamudra, and 
Vijaya Pandya of Nolambavatfi were his feudatories. 

Somesvara IV invited the Saiva Ekantada Ramayya to his 
palace and showed him reverence. He ruled the Deccan up to the 
Godavari river in the north till at least A.D. 1184, and the last 
known date of his supremacy over the Bellary and Shimoga Dis¬ 
tricts is A.D. 1189. He was deprived of his sovereignty of the Dec- 
can by the Yadava Bhillama in or before that year. He then took 
shelter with the Kadamba Jayakesin III of Goa, who acknowledged 
his suzerainty at least up to A.D. 1198. Nothing further is known 
of Somesvara IV. 


1. Vol. IV, p. 2. 

2. This genealogy, given in later grants, is not regarded as reliable by either 
Bhanclarkar or Fleet (Bom. Gaz. VoL I, Part II, pp. 211, 378-9, 427), Altekar 
takes the same view ( Rashtrakutas , p. 127). 

3. Vol. IV, p. 16. 

4. An inscription in the Ambamath temple belongs to the Mahamandale&vara 
Mamvaniraja (KL. No, 308). Some identify this chief with the Silahara 
Mummuni. The date of the record is read by some as S. 982r=A.D. 1060. If 
the reading of the date is correct, Mummuni is to be taken to have been over¬ 
thrown after A.D. 1060. But Kielhorn remarks that the reading of the second 
numerical figure as 8 is doubtful, 

5. See p. 47. 


6. Cf. Ch. XV for the contents of the ManasolUisa. 

7. About this time some chiefs of the Chalukya dynasty were wielding political 
power in the southern part of the kingdom of the Chalukyas. An inscription, 
dated A.D. 1160, found in the Sagar Taluk, Shimoga District, states that: the 
Santara Jagaddeva ruled Banavasi and Santalige as a feudatory of Bhuloka- 
malla. An inscription from the same Taluk, issued in the same year, mentions 
Trailokyamalla as the overlord of Jagaddeva. Some inscriptions, dated 
A.D. 1164, relate that the Chalukya Tribhuvanamalla was ruling Shimoga, 
Tumkur, and Kadur Districts, and the Hoysala Narasimha of Gahgavadi was 
his vassal. Another epigraphic record reports that in A.D. 1170 Mallideva 
Chola-Maharaja was ruling Govindavadi as a subordinate of Tribhuvanamalla. 
An inscription, dated A.D. 1164, from Davanagere Taluk, Chitaldroog District, 
records that when the Chalukya Jagadekamalla, who conquered Lata, Pallava, 
and Kalinga, was ruling his kingdom, the king Bijjala’s feudatory Vijaya 
Pandya was ruling Nolambavafli. Another record, dated A.D. 1165, from the 
same locality, states that Vijaya Pandya ruled Nolambavadi as a subordinate 
of Jagadekamalla. An inscription discloses that when in A.D. 1169 Jagadeka¬ 
malla was ruling from Kalyana, his vassal Mallideva Chola was administering 
Anantapur District. The Chalukya Jagadekamalla is known to have been 
ruling the Bellary and Tumkur Districts in A.D. 1173, 1179, 1181, and 1183. The 
Hoysala Ballala's acknowledgment of the supremacy of Jagadekamalla is proved 
by his inscriptions dated A.D. 1187 and 1194. The identity of these three 
Chalukya kings Bhulokamalla, Tribhuvanamalla, and Jagadekamalla cannot be 
established. 


'..I ■ • ’ ' >'■ V? 

188 



M'N ISTfty. 


APPENDIX 

THE SILAHARAS 

Reference has been made above, more than once, to the 
Silaharas. There were three distinct families of this name, ruling 
respectively in Northern Konkan, Southern Konkan, and the South 
Maratha country comprising the districts of Kolhapur, Miraj and 
Karhad. They were founded in the times of the Rashtrakutas and 
were feudatories to them. The title Tagarapiira-varadhisvara , borne 
by all of them, indicates that they once ruled at the city of Tagara. 

The first two of these dynasties, founded about the middle of 
the ninth century A.D., passed through vicissitudes of fortunes dur¬ 
ing the suzerainty of the later Chalukyas of Kalyana. These have 
been referred to in course of the general narrative in this chapter. 

The third Silahara family, founded in the tenth century A.D. 
by Jatiga, with his capital probably at Karhad, had a more dis¬ 
tinguished career. The chiefs ruled as independent or semi-inde¬ 
pendent sovereigns after the fall of the Rashtrakuta empire. South¬ 
ern Konkan was added to their dominions some time before A.D. 
1058. 

Gan<Jaraditya of this family, who ruled in the first half of the 
twelfth century A.D., was a famous figure, and is said to have fed 
a hundred thousand Brahmanas. He constructed a large tank called 
Gatiidasamudra (sea of Gan$a) in the Miraj District, placed on its 
margin images of Buddha, Jina and Siva, and assigned land for the 
maintenance of each. 

Vijayaditya, the son and successor of Gandaraditya, enabled the 
Northern Silaharas to recover their independence, and aided Bijjala 
in his revolt against the Later Chalukyas. During the reign of 
Bhoja II, son and successor of Vijayaditya, the Kalaehuris wanted 
to establish their authority over him, but without success. Bhoja 
II formally declared independence, but Singhana defeated him and 
annexed his principality to the Yadava dominions, as mentioned 
above. 

The Silaharas carried the Suvarna-Garutfa-Dhvaja (banner of 
a golden Garuda), and used the title Sriman-Mahalakshvvi-labdha - 
vara~prasada. Thus Mahalakshmi was their tutelary deity and they 
were followers of the Puranic and Vedic religion. An epigraphic 
record 1 describes the Silahara family as “the best of the Simhala 
kings”, indicating some real or fancied connection with the island 
of Ceylon. According to the same record, the Silaharas were 
descended from Jlmutavahana, the lord of the Vidyadharas , son of 
Jimutaketu, who gave his life to Garuda. 

1. El , III 292. 




184. 





CHAPTER VII 


THE YADAVAS OF DEVAGIRI 

The predecessors of the Yadavas of Devagiri ruled over a coun¬ 
try comprising Khandesh, Nasik, and Ahmadnagar Districts in the 
Bombay State, as vassals of the Rashtrakutas of Manyakhe^a and 
the Chalukyas of Kaiyapa for more than three hundred years. The 
founder of this feudatory family was Dri^haprahara, who is said to 
have been the son of Subahu, king of Dvaravatipura, modern Dwa- 
raka, in Kathiawar. Dridhaprahara flourished in the first half o! 
the ninth century A.D., and established his capital at Chandraditya- 
pura, modern Chandor, in the Nasik District. His son and succes¬ 
sor Seunachandra I founded a city called Seu^apura and also gave 
the name Seuna -desa or Sevuiia -desa to his kingdom after his own. 
It was situated on the confines of Dandaka, and included Devagiri, 
modern Daulatabad, in the Aurangabad District. The successors of 
Seunachandra are referred to as the Sevunas in their own inscrip¬ 
tions as well as in those of their neighbours. A remote successor 
of Seunachandra was Karna, whose son Bhillama V was the first 
independent king of the dynasty. 1 

1. BHILLAMA V 

Bhillama ascended the throne in A.D. 1185, when there was a 
great political upheaval in the Deccan. Though the Chalukya 
Somesvara IV Tribhuvanamalla succeeded in recovering his empire 
from the Kalachuris with the help of his general Brahma, he failed 
to consolidate his power by putting down all the refractory ele¬ 
ments. This offered a favourable opportunity to Bhillama to bid 
for paramount power in the Deccan. He had a number of able 
generals, such as Jaitrasirhha, Peyiya Sahani, Mayideva, and Lakh- 
khana. With their help he organised an army of more than two 
lakhs of infantry and twelve thousand cavalry, and launched an 
aggressive campaign. He wrested from Somesvara IV not only 
Kalyana, the capital of the Chalukyas, but also Kisukad-nnd, the 
capital of which was Erambarage (modern Yelburga, Lingsugur, 
Hyderabad), Tardava$i-ndd (country round Mutgi in the Bagewa^li 
Taluk , Bijapur District), Belvola (country around Gadag, in the 
Dharwar District), and the adjoining territories. The Chalukya 
Emperor, in his distress, took shelter with the Kadambas of Goa, 
and was acknowledged as suzerain by the Kadamba Jayakesi III 


185 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

at least up to A.D. 1198. About this time the chief of Mahgala- 
veshtaka (modern Mahgalvedha in the old Sangli State) lost his life 
in an engagement with the Sevunas (Seunas). Bhillama next in¬ 
vaded the kingdom of the Hoysalas of Dorasamudra, who had also 
taken advantage of the weakness of the Chalukyas to declare inde¬ 
pendence about this time. In vain did Ballala II, the king of the 
Hoysalas, try to defend his kingdom against the incursion of the 
Sevunas. Bhillama overran the Hoysala kingdom and reached 
Seringapatam, in the Mysore District. During this campaign he 
also invaded the territory of the Cholas and won a victory over 
Kulottunga III. In the meantime Ballala II organised another strong 
army, and confronted the Sevunas at Ingalakupe, 2 modern village 
of Ingalaguppe, in the Seringapatam Taluk. In A.D. 1188-1189 he 
inflicted a severe defeat upon Bhillama which forced the latter 
to withdraw from the Hoysala country. Inscriptions of Bhillama’s 
reign refer to his supremacy over Befvola, Tardavadi, and Mada- 
gihal in the old Jath State. The Silaharas of Northern and South¬ 
ern Konkan, Kadambas of Goa, and the Rattas of Saundatti do not 
seem to have acknowledged his suzerainty. 

Bhillama also led expeditions against his northern neighbours. 
He wrested the city of Srlvardhana, near Nagpur, from a chief 
named Antala. At this time the Paramara Vindhyavarman was 
ruling in Malava, the Chaulukya Bhima II was ruling in the Gur- 
jara country, and the Chahamana Kelhana was ruling in Na£ol 
(Naddula). Bhillama overran Malava and Gurjara after defeating 
Vindhyavarman and Bhima II and reached the border of the Na^iol 
kingdom in the old Sirohi State. Kelhana proved himself equal to 
the occasion and baffled all the attempts of the Sevunas to make 
further advance in that direction. After this discomfiture Bhillama 
retired to his own kingdom. The other adversaries defeated by 
Bhillama, viz. the Varalas, Malla, Malluji, Munja, and Anna cannot 
be identified. The statement of the Mutgi inscription of his reign 
that he won victories over the Kalihgas, Gaudas, Vangas, Ahgas, 
Nepalas, and the Panchalas seems to be a hyperbole. 

In the closing years of his reign Bhillama was again engaged 
in a terrible struggle with the Hoysalas. Ballala II launched an 
aggressive campaign against the Sevunas and readily captured 
Virata’s fort (Hangal), Gutti, and Rattapalli. The Hoysala army 
next attacked the fort at Soratur, twelve miles south of Gadag. 
Jaitrasimha, Bhillama’s general of the southern forces, finding his 
position untenable there, withdrew to the fortress at Lokkigundi, 
modern Lokkundi, six miles east of Gadag, where there was a big 
concentration of the Sevuua army. Ballala II pursued him there 




186 


<SL 


and compelled him to surrender the fort. After this unique achi¬ 
evement Ballala advanced towards Erambarage, which was defend¬ 
ed by a number of fortresses. Within a short time the city was 
besieged and taken possession of by the Hoysala army, which finally 
advanced up to the Krishna river in pursuit of the Sevunas. All 
these conquests, which were made between A.D. 1191 and 1192, 
made Ballala master of Huligere (the country around Lakshmes- 
war, Dharwar District), Belvola, Kisuk&d and the adjoining terri¬ 
tories up to the Heddore, i.e. the Krishna river. After finishing his 
northern conquest he encamped at Lokkigundi for some time in 
A.D. 1193. He made Erambarage his capital for the northern 
countries and is known to have resided there in A.D. 1196. 

According to Hemadri Bhillama founded the city of Devagiri 
and presumably transferred his capital there. The earliest men¬ 
tion of Devagiri as the capital of the Sevunas is found in an inscrip¬ 
tion of Jaitugi, also known as Jaitrapala, son of Bhillama, dated 
A.D. 1196. The last known date of Bhillama is A.D. 1193, but an 
inscription of Jaitugi is dated A.D. 1192. Another inscription of 
this king bears a date corresponding to A.D. 1196, which was the 
sixth year of his reign. All these point out that Bhillama associat¬ 
ed with him his son Jaitugi in the government from A.D. 1191 and 
died shortly after A.D. 1193. 

2. JAITUGI 

Jaitugi failed to dislodge Ballala II from Kisukad and Bel¬ 
vola. He however succeeded in wresting the eastern portion of 
Sindavadi country in which was situated the modern Adoni Taluk 
of the Bellary District. Though he claims victory over the Pandyas, 
apparently of Nolambavadi, who were feudatories of the Hoysalas, 
he could not push the boundary of his kingdom further south. 
Ballala II is known to have been ruling the Siraguppa and Bellary 
Taluks of the Bellary District even after the death of Jaitugi. 

About this time the northern part of the Kurnool District 
seems to have passed into the hands of the Sevunas. The exten¬ 
sion of the kingdom of the Sevurias up to the confluence of the 
Krishna and the Tungabhadra brought Jaitugi near the border of 
the kingdom of the Kakatlyas and he now pressed hard on them. 
The Kakattya Mahadeva, who ascended the throne shortly after 
A.D. 1195, used all his forces to resist the advance of the enemies, 
but failed. In the engagement that followed he lost his life, and 
his young son Ganapati was taken prisoner. The whole of the 
Kakatiya kingdom lay prostrate before Jaitugi. About this time 
Jaitugi seems to have successfully fought with Anangabhnna II of 



187 


'The struggle for empire 



<SL 


the Ganga dynasty of Kalihga and Kulottunga III of the Imperial 
Chola dynasty. Subsequently Jaitugi took compassion on the young 
Ganapati, released him, and placed him on his paternal throne. 

Like his father Jaitugi also waged wars against his neighbours 
to the north of the Narmada. The Paramara Subhatavarman and 
the Chaulukya Bhlma II yielded to his force and their kingdoms 
were plundered by the Sevuna army. Probably about this time 
Jaitugi came into clash with the forces of Qutb-ud-din Aibak, 
who were carrying on depredation in Gujarat in A.D. 1197. 

Jaitugi ? s minister was Murari Kesava, and two brothers, Malli- 
deva and Sahadeva, were the commanders of his army. The king 
ruled at least up to A.D. 1198 and was succeeded by his son Sim 
ghana about the year A.D. 1200. 


3. SINGHANA 

Sihghana, who was the most distinguished member of his 
family, made an extensive preparation for establishing an empire in 
the Deccan. But the Hoysalas proved a great obstacle to the fur¬ 
ther expansion of the Sevuna kingdom in the south. With the 
assistance of his able general Bichana, Sihghana launched an ex¬ 
pedition against the Hoysala Ballala II in A.D. 1211. Vikramaditya 
of the Sinda family, who was ruling the Kisukad country from his 
capital Erambarage as a vassal under the Hoysalas, submitted to 
him. Belvola, Huligere, Masavatfi, and Hanungal (Iiangal) fell be¬ 
fore him one after the other. Vira-Vikramaditya II of the Gutta 
family of Guttal, near Haveri, in the Dharwar District, transferred 
his allegiance to him. All these conquests brought Sihghana to the 
northern border of the Banavasi country, the capital of which was 
located at Balligrama, modern Belgami, in the Shikarpur Taluk of 
the Shimoga District, Mysore. The country consisted of at least 
three divisions, viz., Nagarkhanda, Jiddulige, and Edavatte. The 
headquarters of Nagarkhanda were at Bandanike, modern Banda- 
like, in the Shikarpur Taluk, and those of Jiddulige at Uddare, mo¬ 
dern Udri, in the Sorab Taluk of the Shimoga District. Adjacent 
to Banavasi was Santalige, the country round the village of Pune- 
dahalli, in the Shikarpur Taluk , the capital of which was at Hosa- 
gunda. Mallideva of a collateral branch of the Sinda family was 
at this time ruling Banavasi and Santalige as a feudatory under 
the Hoysalas. Ballala II made extensive preparations lor the 
defence of Banavasi. But a fiercely contested battle soon enabled 
Sihghana to establish his authority over Balligrama. The Sevuna 
king then advanced towards Bandalike where Ballala gave him a 
stiff opposition. But the Hoysalas capitulated as soon as they 


188 


THE YADAVAS OF DEVAGIRI 

found that their grain store was seized by the Sevuna army. With¬ 
in a short time Uddare shared the same fate with Balligrama and 
Bandalike. By the year A.D. 1213 Singhana conquered the whole 
of Banavasi and Santalige and reached the banks of the Tuhga river. 
This brilliant success emboldened him to make a bid for the whole 
of the Hoysala kingdom, and he marched towards Dorasamudra. 
Yelavare, son of Malleya-Niayaka, an officer of Ballala, lost his life 
in an attempt to arrest the advance of the Sevuna army. Singhana, 
like his grandfather Bhillama, reached the Kaverl river in course of 
his conquest, and defeated Jajalladeva, the ruler of Rahga 3 or 
Seringapatam, Mysore. About this time he also defeated Kakkalla, 
king of Virata. But he had eventually to withdraw to the north of 
the Tuhga river which formed the southern boundary of his domi¬ 
nion. Stone inscriptions of his reign have been found in large 
numbers in the Shikarpur and Sorab Taluks . Singhana directed 
another expedition against the Hoysalas. Two Sevuna generals 
Vikramapala and Pavusa lost their lives in that engagement. 

Singhana also turned his arms against the petty chiefs of the 
western coast of the Bombay State. The Kadamba Tribhuvana- 
malla, son of Jayakesi III, king of Gove (Goa), and Karttavirya IV 
of the Ratta family of Veijugrama, modern Belgaum, which was 
the capital of the Kujagli country, submitted to him. Singhaa^a put 
an end to the rule of the Kolhapur branch of the Silahara family 
by overthrowing Bhoja II, who resided at the fort of Pranala, mo¬ 
dern Fanhala, twelve miles to the north-west of Kolhapur. An 
Abhira chief named Lakshmideva, ruler of Bhambhagiri, presumably 
modern Bhamar in Pimpalner Taluk of the West Khandesh Dis¬ 
trict, submitted to him. Singhana does not seem to have made any 
attempt to bring the Silaharas of Northern Konkan under his sway. 
On the south-east he annexed the larger portion of the Anantapur 
District, Madras State, apparently by defeating the Hoysalas. His 
attempt to extend his power into the Kakatlya kingdom, which lay 
to the east of Anantapur, was foiled by the Kakatlya Ganapati. 
On the east Singhana, in course of his conquest, reached Chahanda, 
modern Chanda District, Madhya Pradesh, where he inflicted a de¬ 
feat upon the Paramara Bhoja, who belonged to a minor branch 
of the Paramara dynasty ruling in that part of the country. Hema- 
dri, whom the Sevuna king worsted in a battle, was the king of 
Parnakheta, which seems to have been situated in Berar. 

After making himself master of the Deccan, Singhana turned 
his arms against his hereditary enemies, the Paramaras of Malava 
and the Chaulukyas of Gujarat. About this time the country of 
Lata with its capital Bhrigukachchha formed a part of the kingdom 




189 


MIN ISTfy 



r/ THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

of the Paramara Arjunavarman, and was ruled hy a chief named 
Sindhuraja. Singhana, assisted by his Brahmana general Kholes- 
vara, crossed the Tapti river and attacked Bhrigukachchha. Arjuna¬ 
varman and his feudatory Sindhuraja gave battle but were defeat¬ 
ed, and the latter lost his life. The Sevuna army next invaded the 
Gurjara country, which was passing through a crisis under the 
weak rule of the Chaulukya Bhima II. Lavanaprasada of the Vag- 
hela family, who was the cle facto ruler of the country, failed to 
withstand the onslaught of the invaders, who after a successful 
raid withdrew to their own country. Some time afterwards Siiig- 
hana again attacked La^a and defeated Sankha, son of Sindhuraja. 
During the reign of Sankha, also known as Sarhgramasimha, the son 
and successor of Sindhuraja, Singhana led two more expeditions 
against Lata. Though on the first occasion Sankha succeeded in re¬ 
pulsing the invaders 1 , he fell a captive in their hands on the second 
occasion. When Sankha was produced before the Sevupa king he suc¬ 
ceeded in securing his release by asserting his influence over the 
victor. Henceforward he acted as one of the allies of the Sevupas. 


Singhana also led two more expeditions against Gujarat. Dur¬ 
ing the first campaign when his approach was announced in the 
Gurjara country, the people became very much panicky. In appre¬ 
hension of the tyranny of the foreign army, they gave up the work 
of the construction of new houses and also of the storing up of 
foodgrains. and thought only of securing large numbers of carts 
for the transport of their valuables from the war zone in times 
of emergency. As Singhana advanced nearer and nearer, burning 
villages on his way, the crowd of the Gurjaras retreated farther and 
farther, ascertaining the position of the enemy from the smokes 
arising out of the burning villages. Lavanaprasada and his son 
Vlradhavala arrayed their army on the bank of the Mahi against 
the Sevuna king. But the situation became perilous to the Gur¬ 
jaras as Lavanaprasada was forced to hurry to the north to meet 
the invasion of a confederacy of the Marava<Ja chiefs. But curious¬ 
ly enough Singhana, for some unknown reasons, did not avail him¬ 
self of this opportunity, and retreated to his own country. Some 
time between A.D. 1221 and 1229 he made a confederacy with 
the Paramara Devapala, king of Malava, and his vassal Sankha, 
ruler of Lata, for another invasion of the Gurjara country. On 
receipt of this news Vlradhavala made arrangement for a suitable 
resistance. But the disquieting news of the advance of the Mus¬ 
lim army against northern Gujarat compelled him to rush to the 
northern border of the Chaulukya kingdom, leaving his minister 
Vastupala in charge of the defence of the southern front. Vastupala 


190 


THE YADAVAS OF DEVAGIRI 

thought it injudicious to confront the vast army of Singhana and 
his allies with the forces at his command, and took recourse to a 
skilful stratagem. Some well-trained spies employed by him soon 
succeeded in creating suspicion into the mind of Sihghana about 
the integrity of his allies. The Sevuna king, in disgust, dissolved 
the confederacy, and abandoned the project of the invasion of Guja¬ 
rat. Some time before A.D. 1231 he concluded a treaty with Lava- 
naprasada, which laid down that “the contracting parties should not 
encroach on each other’s territory and should be confined to the 
limits of their respective kingdoms. If either of them was attack¬ 
ed by a strong enemy both should join hands in resisting him. A 
x'ecalcitrant prince from the countries under the contracting 
parties should not be given shelter.” As a guarantee for the proper 
observance of these conditions, the contracting parties had to give 
suitable surety. Sihghana acted up to these conditions so long as 
Lavaiiaprasada and Vlradhavala were alive, but renewed hostilities 
■against Gujarat during the early years of the reign of Visaladeva, suc¬ 
cessor of Viradhavaia. The Sevuna army crossed the Narmada under 
the leadership of Kholesvara’s son Rama, but was repulsed by the 
Vaghela chief, and Rama lost his life in the battle. Thus Singhana’s 
aggressive operations in the north ended in signal failure. During 
one of these campaigns he came to clash with the Turushkas. His 
Muslim adversary might have been Sultan Iltutmish, who is known 
to have plundered Malava in A.D. 1233-34. 4 

Singhana’s empire extended from Khandesh up to the Shimoga 
and Anantapur Districts, and from the western coast (excluding 
Northern Konkan) up to the eastern parts of Hyderabad and Berar. 
Nikumbha family of Durgapura (Khandesh), Rattas of Venugrama, 
Kadambas of Goa, and the Sindas of Erambarage ruled their terri¬ 
tories as his vassals. Dennayaka, whose headquarters were at 
Ambadapura, modern Amrapur in the Buldana District, was his 
governor of Berar. His officer for the administration of the Sindava^i 
country was Jagadala Soma Nayaka. He appointed Vankuva Ravuta 
the viceroy of the southern countries, viz. Belvola, Huligere, Bana- 
vasi, and Basavura. Mallideva, governor of Belvola, the Guttas of 
Guttal, and the Sindas of Banavasi were placed under his supervision. 

The astrologers Changadeva and Anantadeva received patronage 
from Singh ana. During the reign of this king Sarngadhara wrote a 
treatise on music entitled Sangitaratnakara. Singhana was on the 
throne at least up to June 1247. He had two sons Jaitugi II and 
Sa(m)rnapani. Jaitugi predeceased his father leaving behind two 
sons Krishna and Mahadeva. It seems that after Singhana’s death 
a civil war broke out between Sa(m)raiaparii and the sons of Jaitugi 




191 



MiN/sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



for the throne. Krishna gained the upper hand and forced his uncle 
to leave the kingdom of the Sevunas. 5 Sa(m)rnapaioi in his distress 
took shelter with his hereditary enemy, the Kakatiyas of the Telihga 
country. He was ruling Panuhgal in A.D. 1267 under the 
KakatTya Rudramba. e 

4. KRISHNA 

Krishna ascended the throne in the latter part of A.D. 1247. He 
continued the foreign policy of his grandfather, which aimed at the 
expansion of the Sevuna dominions in all directions. He sent his 
general Chamuntfa against Somesvara, the king of the Hoysalas. 
Chamunda succeeded in wresting only the Kogali Division, which 
consisted of Hadgalli Taluk in the Bellary District, and the Deva- 
nagere Taluk in the Chitaldroog District, Mysore, and which was 
situated in the Nolambavadi country. Krishna also sent another 
contingent under Malla against the Silaharas of Northern Konkan, 
who ruled the Thana, Alibag, and Ratnagiri Districts, and the 
southern part of the Surat District. Though Malla claims victory 
over the king of Konkan, who appears to have been the Silahara 
Somesvara, he could not make any territorial gain in that direction. 
Malla also claims to have defeated the Pandyas, who seem to have 
been those ruling in Nolambavadi. On the east Krishna led his army 
as far as the South Kosala country, modern Raipur and Bilaspur 
Districts, Madhya Pradesh. During this campaign he seems to have 
come into clash with the Kakatlya Ganapati. He also carried on the 
traditional hostilities with the Paramaras of Malava and the 
Vaghelas of Gujarat, and gained some success. About this time the 
Sevuna army encountered some Muslim forces, probably those who 
invaded the Paramara kingdom in A.D. 1250 under the leadership 
of Balban. Krishna fought successfully with the Abhlras and two 
other chiefs, Heodari-Raya and Kamapala. 

Stone inscriptions of Krishna have been found in the Shimoga, 
Chitaldroog, Bellary, Dharwar, and Belgaum Districts. Obviously 
he succeeded in maintaining the dominions he had inherited from 
his grandfather. His viceroy of the southern countries, viz., Belvola, 
Banavasi, Hanungal, Tardavadi, and Kogali, was Chaunu^isetti. 
The existence of the rule of the Rattas over the Kundi country cannot 
be traced after A.D. 1228. During the reign of Krishna Malla-Setti 
was the governor of this country, the capital of which was Yenu- 
grama. Krishna’s chief administrative officer in the Sindavacli 
country was Jagama Rahuta, and his feudatory in Goa was the 
Kadamba Sivachitta Shashthadeva II. Jalhana, the author of 
Suktimuktavali, was his counsellor and the commander of the army. 


392 



THE YADAVAS OF DEVAGIHI 



Although he had a son named Ramachandra, Krishna appointed 
his brother Mahadeva, his heir apparent (Yuvaraja), shortly after 
his accession. He probably made this arrangement in recognition of 
the service rendered by Mahadeva during the civil war. Mahadeva 
succeeded him on the throne in A.D. 1261. 6a 


5. MAHADEVA 


Mahadeva continued hostilities with the Hoysalas, the Silaharas of 
Northern Konkan, the Vaghelas of Gujarat, the Paramaras of Malava, 
and the Kakatlyas of Telunga country. He made an abortive attempt 
to penetrate into the heart of the Hoysala kingdom. The Hoysala 
Narasirhha III claims that he forced Mahadeva to flee away leaving 
behind his cavalry forces. Chanagiri Taluk of the Shimoga District, 
which is on the other side of the Tuhga river, and which was under 
the sway of the Hoysalas at least up to A.D. 1233, is known for the 
first time to have been included in the Sevuna empire from an 
inscription of Mahadeva. 

The most noteworthy achievement of Mahadeva is his annexa¬ 
tion of Northern Konkan. The &ilahara king Somesvara lost his life 
in a naval engagement with him. After this victory Mahadeva seems 
to have appointed one Jaitugi the governor of that country. 
Mahadeva also advanced against Gujarat and won a decisive victory 
over the Vaghela Vlsaladeva. Hemadri refers to Mahadeva’s inva¬ 
sions of Malava and the Telunga countries. It is stated that at this 
time Malava was ruled by a king who was an infant, and Telunga 
was ruled by a woman named Rudnama. Mahadeva defeated both of 
them in successive fights but did not kill them as one was a child and 
the other was a woman. The Malava king seems to have been the 
Paramara Jayasimha II, and Rudrama was evidently the daughter 
and successor of the Kakatiya Ganapati. 

Hemadri was the minister of Mahadeva. A particular style of 
architecture is called HemadpantI after his name. Mahadeva closed 
his reign in A.D. 1270-1271. After his death a civil war broke out 
between his son Amana, and Ramachandra, son of king Krishna. 
Amarta assumed the royalty of Devagiri, which, Ramachandra 
thought, really belonged to him. It was not, however, possible for 
him to capture the impregnable fort of Devagiri with the forces at 
his command. So he had to take recourse to unchivalrous means 
in order to achieve his end. One evening he introduced a body of 
soldiers in the guise of dancers into the fort for giving a musical 
performance. When Amajia and his retinue were absorbed in the 
entertainment, the soldiers threw off their mask and took the royal 
guards by surprise. 7 The palace revolution continued for some time 


193 


S.E.—13 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


causing hpavy casualties. Cart-loads of wounded soldiers were 
sent out through the villages. The neighbouring villagers got 
panicky at the news of the turmoil and fled away pell mell. Amapa 
fell a captive into the hands of Ramachandra who subsequently 
blinded and killed him. 


6. RAMACHANDRA 

In the early years of Ramachandra’s reign the Sevunas made a 
desperate attempt to crush the power of the Hoysalas, and a large 
body of soldiers, under the leadership of the most eminent generals, 
was despatched against the Hoysala kingdom. Saluva-Tikkama, 
Jeyideva, Haripala, and Irungala-Chola II of Niragunda overran the 
Belavadi country, modern Belur in the Hassan District, Mysore, and 
besieged Dorasamudra. A detachment of the Sevuna army under 
the great general Kannaradeva, and the ministers Chavurujarasa and 
Vanadevarasa attacked Doravadi, in the Kurugodu country, modern 
Karugodu, in the Manjarabad Taluk of the Hassan District. Though 
Sihgeya-Nayaka, the officer-in-charge of the place under the 
Hoysalas, succeeded in killing Vanadevarasa, he had to yield to the 
invading army. The Sevupa army engaged in storming Dora¬ 
samudra, however, could not achieve its end. Chikkadeva, Ahka 
Nayaka, and Khandeya Raya Raneya, generals under the Hoysala 
Narasimha III, killed a body of 12000 Sevuna cavalry and pursued 
the retreating Saluva-Tikkama and his associates up to Dummi on 
the border of Shimoga and Chitaldroog Districts. This was the last 
invasion of the Sevunas against the Hoysalas, which ended in disas¬ 
trous failure. Ramachandra^s military operation against Gujarat 
was also foiled by the Vaghela Sarahgadeva. He was, however, suc¬ 
cessful in his campaigns against the chiefs of Dahala (modern Jabal¬ 
pur and the adjoining territories), Bhandagara (modern Bhandara 
in Madhya Pradesh), and Vajnakara (modern Wairagarh in the 
Chanda District, Madhya Pradesh), and also defeated the petty chiefs 
of Palli, Mahima, Sahga, ahd Kheta. The claims that he drove out 
the Muslims from Banaras, and that the king of Kanyakubja sub¬ 
mitted to him are evidently without any historical value. 

Inscriptions of Ramachandra prove that in the early years of his 
reign he succeeded in maintaining intact the empire he had obtain¬ 
ed from his predecessors. His Ramtek and Lanji inscriptions further 
prove that he succeeded in pushing the eastern boundary of his 
dominions up to the Nagpur and Balaghat Districts. Bhimadeva- 
Rape and Vasudeva-Nayaka were his governors in Sindavadi and 
Kisukad respectively. Northern Konkan was governed by Achyuta- 
Nayaka, Rrishpa, and Jaideva in succession. The Santara chief 


194 


MIN/STyjy 


THE YADAVAS OF DEVAGIEI 



Timmarasa ruled Santalige as a vassal of Ramachandra. Hemadri, 
Sridhara and Purushottama served him as ministers. But the most 
trustworthy officer of the king was Raghava. who administered the 
Empire as his deputy. 8 

When Ramachandra was peacefully ruling his empire, ‘Ala-ud~ 
din Khalji, who was the governor of Kara under his uncle Flruz 
Shah Khalji, invaded Devagiri by way of Ellichpur in A.D. 1294. At 
this time a large body of the Sevuna army was away from the capital, 
and was engaged in escorting Ramachandra’s son Sahkaradeva and 
the queen to places of pilgrimage. Ramachandra made a fruitless 
attempt to resist the invader at Lasura in the vicinity of Devagiri 
and ultimately withdrew to the citadel. ‘Ala-ud-din pursued 
him there and pillaged the city. The Sevuna king was forced to con¬ 
clude a treaty on payment of a heavy amount of gold. On receipt 
of the news of the invasion of Devagiri by the Muslims Sahkaradeva 
hastened back to Devagiri and, disregarding his father's advice, 
attacked the retreating Muslim army. He was overpowered by 
‘Ala-ud~din who then forced Ramachandra to agree to more stringent 
terms. Though ‘Ala-ud-dln withdrew from the Deccan, the signal 
failure of Ramachandra even to save his own capital from rapine and 
plunder irretrievably impaired the political prestige of the Sevunas. 
Their hereditary enemies in the east and south now began to press 
hard on them. In the early years of the fourteenth century the 
Kakatiya Prataparudra succeeded in pushing the western border of 
his empire at least up to Medak and Raichur in Hyderabad. In 
A.D. 1303 the Hoysala Ballala III, successor of Narasimha III, sent 
his general Gahgeya Sahani with a big contingent for the invasion of 
the Sevuna dominions. Gahgeya Sahani encamped in Banavasi and 
fought a battle at Sirise in the Kadambalige country with the 
Sevunas. In A.D. 1305 Ballala III himself led an army against 
Ramachandra and wrested from him Banavasi, Santalige, and Kogali, 
There is no evidence to prove that Shimoga and Chitaldroog Districts 
were within the Sevuna empire after A.D. 1300. On the other hand 
a minister of Ballala III is known to have been administering Santa¬ 
lige in A.D. 1307. 

When the Sevunas were fighting for the defence of their domi¬ 
nions in the south the Deccan was again raided by the Muslims. The 
story runs that some time after the conquest of Gujarat ‘Ala-ud-din 
Khalji ordered his officers to capture Vaghela Kama's daughter 
Devaladevi, who was betrothed to Sankaradeva. When Sankara- 
deva's younger brother was conveying the princess from Nandurbar, 
in West Khandesh, to Devagiri, she was seized by the Muslims, who 
then sent her to Delhi. If there is any truth in this story the un- 


195 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



toward incident certainly made the relation between the Sevunas 
and the Muslims acrimonious. In any case Ramachandra swerved 
from his allegiance to the government of Delhi, and in A.D. 1307 
‘Ala-ud-din Khalji sent Malik-Naib Kafur with an army to the 
Deccan to chastise him. Malik-Naib overran the Sevuna kingdom 
and took Ramachandra prisoner, who was then carried to Delhi. 
After a period of six months Ramachandra was released with honour 
and was allowed to rule his kingdom as a vassal under the Sultanate 
of Delhi. In 1308 Malik-Naib, on his arrival at Devagiri with his 
army for an invasion of Telingana country, received substantial help 
from Ramachandra. Ramachandra also furnished the Muslim army 
with equipments when Malik-Naib marched against Ballala III of 
Dorasamudra in February, 1311. 

7. SANKARADEVA AND HARAPALADEVA 

The last known date of Ramachandra from the epigraphic source 
is September, 1310. He was succeeded by his son Sankaradeva 
some time after February, 1311. Sahkaradeva antagonised the 
Sultan by his hostile activities. In A.D. 1313 Malik-Naib, with the 
consent of ‘Ala-ud-dTn, directed an expedition against the Deccan, 
killed Sankaradeva, and assumed the government of Devagiri. 
But he had soon to leave Deccan as his service was urgently needed 
by the ailing Sultan. The government of Delhi was passing through 
stress and strain on the eve of ‘Ala-ud-dm’s death. Taking advantage 
of this situation Harapaladeva, who was the son-in-law of Rama¬ 
chandra, and seems to have been identical with his general Haripala, 
revolted and declared independence. He captured the fort of Deva¬ 
giri with the assistance of Raghava, who was the deputy and minister 
of Ramachandra. In A.D. 1317 Mubarak, son and successor of ‘Ala- 
ud-din, recovered Devagiri after defeating and killing Haripala. 
Raghava, with 10,000 cavalry, retreated to a hill where he was pur¬ 
sued by Khusrav Khan, the commander of Mubarak’s army. 
Raghava received a severe wound in the engagement and fled. 9 The 
kingdom of the Sevunas then finally passed into the hands of the 
Muslims. 10 

1. These chiefs claimed descent from the Yadavas who, it is stated, were at first 
lords of Mathura, and then, from the time of Krishna, became sovereigns of 
Dvaravatipura. The usual Puranic genealogy from Brahma, through Atri, 
Soma, Yadu, k etc., appears first in a record of A.D. .1000 and is given more 
fully in Hemadri’s Vratakhanda (thirteenth century AD.). According to this 
authority, Subahu was a universal sovereign, but he is not mentioned in any 
epigraphic record. His son Dridhaprahara, who is mentioned in the Basseiri 
. grant of AD. 1069 (IA, XII. 119), may be regarded as the first historical king 
of this family. 

It may be mentioned that the kings of this dynasty_had_ the hereditary title of 
Dvaravati-puravar-ddhisvara, (supreme lord of Dvaravati, the best of towns) 

19(5 


MiN/sr^ 


The yAdavaS of devagiri 



and Vishnu-vamsodbhava (born in the race of Vishnu). They carried the 
Suvarna-Garuda-dhvaja (banner of a golden Garutfa), which also appears as 
the device on the seals of their charters, sometimes alone, and sometimes along 
with the figure of Hanuman. In at least one case, the monkey-god alone 
appears as lanchhana or crest. 

Not much is known of the twenty chiefs who flourished between Dri$ha- 
prahara and Bhillama V, though their n$mes are given both in Vratakhanda 
and the epigraphic records. According to these, the queen of Bhillama H was 
probably the daughter of a Silahara chief and ‘'sprang on her mothers side 
from the Rashfrakuta family”. Bhillama is said to have fought against Munj a 
on behalf of Raparangabhima, who has been identified with Tailapa. Bhillama s 
father Vaddiga is, however, represented as a follower of Krishnaraja, probably 
Krishna III of the Rashtrakuta dynasty. The_ family thus transferred their 
allegiance from the Rashtrakutas to the Chalukyas of Kalyana when the 
latter overthrew the former. 

There is a curious discrepancy among the different authorities, about the 
parentage of Bhillama V. While VratakhayAa and several inscriptions of the 
thirteenth century A.D. give his father's name as Mallugi, a record of the time 
of Bhillama himself, dated A.D. 1191, definitely says that his father was Karpa. 
It is no less curious that in Bombay Gazetteer Vol. I, Part II (pp. 230 ft, 511 it), 
which may be regarded as the chief authority for the history ot Yaclavas, 
so far published, the two different views are supported respectively by Sir 
R. G. Bhandarkar (p. 238) and Dr. Fleet (pp. 516 ff). 

2. EC, XIV. 207, No. 255. 

3. Ibid, XI, Jg. 30, p. 155. But the Panungal inscription mentions Jajalla as the 
king of Kimidi ( Hyderabad Archaeological Series, No. 13). 

4. Inscriptions of Sihghana make extravagant claims that he_ defeated the kings 
of Ahga, Vahga, Katiiiga, Magadha, Nepala, Kasi, Mathura, Sindh, Barbanka, 
Chera, Chola, and Turagapati. 

5. El, XIX. 19, v. 12 Ulonmulita-rdshtra kantaka-chamu-chakmm etc. 

6. Hyd. Arch. S . No. 13. 

6a. Cf. Kalegaon copper-plate grant of Mahadeva— Summaries of Papers, AlOC, 
1955, p. 88. 

7. El, XXV. 221, v. 14. 

8. Ibid, 7. 

9. HIED, III. 558. Khusrav Khan's fight with Raghu has been mentioned in Amir 
Khusrav’s Nuh Sipihr, the historical value of which has been ignored by the 
modern scholars without reason. Raghu, mentioned here as the deputy and 
minister of Ramachandra, is most probably identical with Raghava of the 
Ramtek inscription (El, XXV. 8, 11. 16-17), who was the most important of the 
officers of Ramachandra. 

10. Dates of the Yadava kings are given differently by different authors (cf. HSl, 
190 ff.; JOR, XII. 47-52). 


197 


CHAPTER VIII 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 

1. THE KAKATIYAS 

The Kakatiyas, who were members of the Durjaya family, were 
Sudra by caste. They believed that their remote ancestor Kari- 
kalachola founded or first settled in Kakatipura, which cannot be 
now identified. 1 The kings of the Kakatiya dynasty always took 
pride in calling themselves the “lords of Kakatipura”, though they 
are sometimes referred to as kings of the Andhra or Teluhga coun¬ 
try. The earliest known king of the dynasty is Beta I, who is said 
to have belonged to “the feudatory family of the working class.” 2 
Beta I was a subordinate of a Pallava king, and was overthrown by 
the Cholas, probably during Rajendra Chola I’s northern cam¬ 
paigns. Some time after the departure of the Chola Emperor, Era, 
a subordinate of Beta I, defeated the Chola governor and placed his 
master on the throne. Beta I flourished in the first half of the ele¬ 
venth century and ruled the Koravi country which included at least 
a part of the Nalgonda District of Hyderabad State. He was suc¬ 
ceeded by his son, the Mahaman^ale£vara Prola I. 

Prola I acknowledged the supremacy of the Chalukya Somes- 
vara I Trailokyamalla (A.D. 1043-1068). He fought successfully, 
apparently on behalf of the Chalukyas of Kalyana, against the Nagas 
of Chakrakota, Silaharas of Konkana -mandala, Bhadranga, and the 
son of Dugga of Kadparti, and killed in battle Gonna, the chief of 
Purakuta. Probably in recognition of this military service he 
“obtained permanently from king Trailokyamalla, by way of grant, 
Anmakonda -vishaya” the country round Hanamkonda, in the 
Warangal Taluk (Warangal District, Hyderabad State). Prola was 
succeeded by his son Tribhuvanamalla Beta II, who acknowledged the 
suzerainty of the Chalukya Vikramaditya VI Tribhuvanamalla (A.D. 
1076-1126) of Kalyajja. 

Stone inscriptions of Beta II’s reign, dated A.D. 1079 and 1090, 
have been found in Hanamkonda and Kazipet. Some time before 
A.D. 1090 Beta II won victories over the Paramara Udayaditya, 
king of Malava, and Kulottunga Chola I of Tanjore, obviously under 
the leadership of the Chalukya Vikramaditya VI. Evidently after 
this achievement he saw the Emperor in his capital, who rewarded 
him with the ownership of Sabbisayira one thousand. Sabbisayira 


198 


MINIS/*,, 


DYNASTIES OP EASTERN DECCAN 



one thousand seems to be identical with Sabbinandu, which is locat¬ 
ed in or near the Karimnagar District, in Hyderabad State. Beta 
II established his capital at Anmakonda where he built a tank call¬ 
ed Sivapuri and a temple after his own name. He was succeeded 
by his son Prola II, 3 whose earliest known date is A.D. 1115. 


In the early years of his reign Prola II owed allegiance to Vik- 
ramaditya VI, after whose death in A.D. 1126 the Chalukya empire 
began to disintegrate. Taking advantage of this situation Prola II 
revolted and attacked the feudatories of the Chalukyas in the Telih- 
gana and Andhra countries. He defeated Govindaraja and handed 
his kingdom Kondapalli, in the Krishna District, over to Udaya or 
Chododaya, whose brother Mahaman^alesvara Gokarnachoda was 
ruling as his feudatory near Panugal (Nalgonda District). He also 
defeated and killed Gunda, also described as Mantena or Manthanya 
Gunida, ruler of Mantrakuta (modern village of Mantena, in the 
Nuzvid Taluk, Krishna District) and annexed his kingdom. Prola's 
attempt to push his arm further into the Velananti kingdom was 
frustrated by the MahaTnandcdesvarci Chodaraja. Hostile activities 
of the Kakatiyas led the Chalukya Tailapa III (A.D. 1151-1162) to 
invade the Telunga country along with his feudatory Jagaddeva of 
the Santara family of Patti-Pomburchapura. They advanced as 
far as Anmakonda and besieged it. But Prola rose equal to the 
occasion, took Tailapa III prisoner, and forced Jagaddeva to with¬ 
draw his army. The Emperor was subsequently released. Hence¬ 
forward the Kakatiyas began to rule as independent chiefs and even 
cherished an ambition for the establishment of an empire. Prola 
had two sons, Rudra I and Mahadeva. Rudra succeeded him on the 
throne some time before A.D. 1158. 


Some time before A.D. 1162 Rudra I attacked Tailapa III and 
dealt the final blow on him. It is stated that out of fear for him 
“the king Tailapa with body completely overcome by dysentery 
died”. During the early part of the reign of Rudra I there was a 
general revolt of the feudatories in the Kakatiya kingdom. The 
king brought under control Domma and Meda, who was a chief of 
the Pakhal Taluk to the north-east of Warangal, and deprived Mai- 
ligideva of his kingdom of Polavasa -desa (modern Polas, in the Yel- 
gandal District in Hyderabad State). The Kakatiya army burnt 
the city of Chododaya, the ruler of Kondapalli, who is said to have 
died about this time out of fear for the king. Bhima, who poisoned 
his brother Gokarnachoda to death, fled to the forest leaving his 
capital Vardhamanapura at the mercy of the Kakatiyas. Thus by 
the year A.D. 1162 Rudra succeeded in establishing peace and order 
in the Kakatiya kingdom. To the south of his kingdom was the 


199 


miST/fy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


kingdorq of Andhra, consisting of the Kurnool, Guntur, Krishna, 
and the Godavari districts, which was ruled by the Velananti chiefs 
as feudatories of the Imperial Cholas. Shortly before A.D. 1173 the 
supremacy of the Cholas in the Andhra country was ended by the 
Kalachuri Sovideva of Kalyana. Loss of the support of the Cholas 
greatly weakened the military strength of the Velananti chiefs, who 
were forced to surrender Kurnool District to Rudradeva some time 
before A.D. 1185. 

Rudra I was a well-known writer, and the Sanskrit work NUisara 
is said to have been written by him. During his reign temples 
were built in Anmakon$a, Pillamari, and Mantrakuta. The city of 
Oruhgallu, modern Warangal, was at this time rising into promin¬ 
ence; Rudra founded there a number of quarters and built a temple 
of Siva. He was succeeded by his younger brother Mahadeva short¬ 
ly after A.D. 1195. 4 


Mahadeva was devoid of princely qualities. He came under 
the influence of the Saiva teacher Dhruvesvara, and devoted his time 
to religious performances. An inscription, apparently of his reign, 
states that after acquiring the sovereignty he “cared a straw for it 
and became one completely engrossed in the worship of Siva,” He 
had, however, to pay the penalty for his neglect of administrative 
duties. The Yadava Jaitugi, king of Devagiri, attacked the Telun- 
ga country with all his forces. In vain did Mahadeva and his son 
Gapapati try to resist the invader. Mahadeva lost his life in the 
battle, and Ganapati, whose life was spared, was taken prisoner. 
Subsequently, Jaitugi took compassion on the young prince and in¬ 
stalled him on his paternal throne. 


Ganapati ascended the throne in A.D. 1198. He was a con¬ 
temporary of the last three Chola Emperors, Kulottuhga III (A.D. 
1178-1216), Rajaraja III (A.D. 1216-1246), and Rajendra Chola III 
(A.D. 1246-1279). Chola empire began to disintegrate from the 
time of Kulottuhga III. A protracted struggle began between the 
Kakatiyas, Hoysalas, and the Pan^yas for supremacy over the terri¬ 
tories of the Cholas. Ganapati occupied the kingdom of Andhra to 
the west of the Godavari river by putting an end to the rule of the 
Velananti chiefs, and forced the Gahga Anahgabhima III, king of 
Kalinga, who only shortly before carried his arms into the Vehgi 
country, to surrender to him the Godavari District to the east of 
the Godavari river. Kotas of Amaravati, Telugu-Chodas of Gun¬ 
tur, Nathavadi chiefs of the Krishna District and many other chiefs 
acknowledged his supremacy. He next conquered Nellurapura 
(Nellore) after defeating Manuma Gandagopala. Gradually all the 
territories up to Kanchi or Conjeeveram passed into his hands. The 


200 



WNIST/fy 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 



extension of the Kakatlya kingdom up to the Kurnool and Cuddapah 
Districts brought it to the border of the kingdom of the Hoysalas, 
who had asserted their supremacy over the Bellary and Anantapur 
Districts. Though Ganapati claims to have won a victory over the 
Karajatas i.e. Hoysalas, he could not wrest any territory from them. 
In the third decade of the thirteenth century Singhana, king of 
Devagiri, ousted the Hoysalas from the Bellary and Anantapur 
Districts and established there the authority of the Yadavas. Some¬ 
where in this region Ganapati seems to have come into conflict with 
king Singhana. As both the kings claim victory, the result of the 
battle was evidently indecisive. In the north-east Ganapati fought 
successfully with a chief off Tuihmaipa, in the Bilaspur District, 
Madhya Pradesh. 6 

Stone inscriptions of Ganapati’s reign have been found in the 
Warangal, Nalgonda, and Mahbubnagar Districts, in the Hydera¬ 
bad State, and in the Godavari, Krishna, Guntur, Kurnool, Nellore, 
Cuddapah, Chittur, and Chingleput Districts, in the Madras State. 
His empire thus extended from the Godavari District up to Chin¬ 
gleput, and from Yelgandal, in Hyderabad State, up to the sea. He 
put two of his able generals, viz. Samanta-Bhoja and Gahgeya 
Sahaiji, in charge of the defence of the bordering districts in the 
west. Samanta-Bhoja, who issued an edict of the Emperor from 
Kanchi, was connected with Chingleput and Chittur. Gangeya 
Sahani, who successfully repulsed the attacks of the rebellious 
chiefs Damodara of the west and Rakkasa-Gangarasa, administered 
the Kurnool and Cuddapah Districts. Ganapati, however, could 
not keep this newly established empire intact up to the end of his 
reign. Some time after A.D. 1250 Jatavarman Sundara Pandya 
(A.D. 1251-1268) of Madura, after subduing the Cholas and the 
Hoysalas, invaded Kanchi. A sanguinary battle was fought bet¬ 
ween the Kakatiyas and the Pandyas at Mudugur “in which the 
dead bodies were strewn up to the banks of the Peraru.” Ganapati 
was defeated, and Jatavarman Sundara Pandya conquered Kanchi 
and occupied Nellurapura. Stone inscriptions of this Pandya king 
have been found at Conjeeveram and Nellore. 

Ganapati transferred his capital from Anmakontfa to Orgun- 
gallu (Warangal),,also known as Ekasilanagari, which enjoyed that 
privileged position till the final collapse of the Kakatiyas. Gana¬ 
pati encouraged over-sea trade by abolishing oppressive taxes on 
the foreigners. Motupalli, now in the Krishna District, was an 
important sea-port in his kingdom, frequently visited by cargo ves¬ 
sels. Beautiful temples were erected at Ramappa, Palampet, Pil- 
lamari and in many places during his reign. He himself built the 


201 


MINISr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


beautiful gateways in the Warangal fort. Under his benevolent 
patronage the great Saiva teacher Visvesvara Sambhu, an inhabi¬ 
tant of West Bengal, established useful institutions in the Andhra 
country for the benefit of the villagers. Ganapati had no son, and 
ohly two daughters, Rudramba and Ganapamba. He designated 
Rudramba, who was married to Chalukya Virabhadresvara, by a 
male name Rudradeva, and associated her with the government 
from A.D. 1258-59. The last known date of Ganapati’s reign is 
A.D. 1261. 


After the assumption of the royal power Rudramba had to en¬ 
counter a series of troubles. The Yadavas of Devagiri were the 
sworn enemies of the Kakatlyas. Some time after the death of the 
Yadava Sihghana the Kakatlyas gave shelter to his younger son 
Safmjrnapani, who was deprived of the throne of Devagiri by 
his brother Jaitugi II’s sons Krishna and Mahadeva. This Yadava 
prince was appointed to rule the territory of Panuhgal, modern 
Panugal (Nalgonda District). The Yadava Mahadeva (A.D. 1261- 
1271) could not tolerate his rival to the throne of Devagiri flourish¬ 
ing under the care of the Kakatlyas. He invaded the Telunga coun¬ 
try and captured some elephants and musical instruments by de¬ 
feating Rudramba, but spared her life as she was a woman. This 
victory of the Yadavas greatly impaired the political power of 
Rudramba. Her feudatory Ambadeva-maharaja, whose head¬ 
quarters were at Valluri-pattana, established friendly relation with 
her enemies, the Yadavas and the Pandyas, and declared indepen¬ 
dence in the Kurnool and Cuddapah Districts. He also defied the 
power of the Kakatlyas by placing one Manuma-Gandagopala, who 
was formerly dethroned by Ganapati, on the throne of Nellurapura. 
The Kakatlyas could not reconquer Nellore, Cuddapah, and Kur¬ 
nool during the reign of Rudramba. About this time the Pallava 
Kop-Perunjinga of Sendamangalam, who took possession of Kanchl 
in A.D. 1260, won a victory over the Kakatlyas. 

The Venetian traveller Marco Polo, who visited Motupalli 
about A.D. 1293, speaks highly of the administrative qualities of 
Rudramba. Rudramba had a daughter named Mummadamba, who 
was given in marriage to Mahadeva. Rudramba adopted Mumma- 
damba’s son Prataparudra as her successor to the throne, 6 and asso¬ 
ciated him with the government from A.D. 1290. 

Immediately after his accession Prataparudra engaged himself 
in the task of restoring the lost territories of the Kakatlyas. Am- 
badeva was dethroned and his kingdom was annexed. Prata- 
parudra’s general Adidamma attacked Nellore and killed its ruler 
Manuma-Gandagopala, but could not take possession of the city. 
Vijaya-Gandagopala alias Raja-Gandagopala, presumably a succes- 


202 


MINISr^ 



DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN >3 

of the deceased chief, ruled Nellore at least up to A.D. 1315. 
In the early years of the fourteenth century the war-like activities 
of the Muslims under the Sultan ‘Ala-ud-dln Khalji created an 
alarming situation in the Deccan. Prataparudra had to postpone 
his military campaigns in the south in order to make suitable arran¬ 
gements for the defence of his kingdom against the new danger. 
He fought bravely with Malik Kafur, the general of ‘Ala-ud-din 
Khalji, when he invaded Warangal in A.D. 1309-1310, but despair¬ 
ing of victory purchased peace by surrendering all his treasures to 
the invader. Some time after the departure of the Muslim army 
Prataparudra re-opened his southern campaigns. He wrested Nel¬ 
lore from Vijaya-Gandagopala and having captured Kanchl by de¬ 
feating Ravivarman Kerala, installed there as governor his own 
protege named Manavira. This brilliant achievement encouraged 
Prataparudra to push his arms further south. Within a very short 
time he conquered all the countries up to Trichinopoly, which was 
then ruled by the Hoysalas, and even defeated the Pandya king. 68 
He also fought an indecisive battle with the Yadava Ramachandra. 
Stone inscriptions of his reign have been found, in the Trichinopoly, 
Chingleput, Cuddapah, Kurnool, Nellore, Guntur, Krishna and 
Godiavarl Districts in the Madras State, and in the Nalgonda, 
Warangal, Raichur, and Medak Districts in Hyderabad State. 
Thus in the latter part of his reign the Kakatlya kingdom ex¬ 
tended from the Godavari river to Trichinopoly and from 
Medak to the sea. Prataparudra could not enjoy this vast empire 
for a long time. In A.D. 1322 Ulugh Khan, son of the Sultan 
Ghiyas-ud-dm Tughluq, invaded Warangal and took Pratapa¬ 
rudra prisoner. The whole of Telingana was conquered by the 
Muslims, who appointed their own officers for its administra¬ 
tion. According to Shams-i Siraj’Afif Prataparudra died on his 
way to Delhi. But this seems to be erroneous in view of the fact 
that a stone inscription of Prataparudra’s reign, dated A.D. 1326, 
has been found in the Guntur District. Nothing further about the 
political activities of this monarch or his successor is known. 7 He 
was a patron of poets. His court was graced by Vidyanatha, the 
author of Prataparudra-yasobhushatya. 

II. THE EASTERN CHALUKYAS 

As noted above, 8 the Andhra country was torn asunder by civil 
war towards the latter part of the tenth century A.D., and Sakti- 
varman I, son of king Danarnava, who ascended the throne in A.D. 
999, restored peace and order by putting down all refractory ele¬ 
ments. He was succeeded by his younger brother Vimaladitya in 
A.D. 1011. The Eastern Chalukyas ruled the Andhra country as 


203 


wmsr/fy 


She struggle for empire 

proteges of the Imperial Cholas. Vimaladitya married Kun- 
dava, the daughter of the Chola Rajaraja the Great, who gave birth 
to his elder son Rajaraja. His other queen, also a Chola princess, 
gave birth to his younger son Vijayaditya. He was succeeded by 
Rajaraja in A.D. 1018. 

Rajaraja’s coronation took place in A.D. 1022. He maintain¬ 
ed friendly relation with the Cholas, but could not rule peacefully 
due to the hostile activities of his half-brother Vijayaditya. The 
latter revolted, carved out a small kingdom in the eastern corner 
of the Chalukya kingdom in the Visakhapatnam District, and perform¬ 
ed his coronation ceremony there in A.D. 1030. Rajaraja married 
AmmahgadevI the daughter of his maternal uncle, the great 
Rajendra Chola I, who gave birth to his son Rajendra Chola II, later 
known as Kulottunga Chola I. In the early part of his life Rajen¬ 
dra Chola II lived in the Chola capital under the care of his grand¬ 
mother, the queen of Rajendra Chola I. In A.D. 1060 a serious 
disaster befell Rajaraja. His half-brother Vijayaditya usurped the 
throne of VeiigI when he was away from the capital. 

Vijayaditya abdicated the throne in favour of his son Sakti- 
varman II, whose coronation took place in A.D. 1061. After a rule 
of one year 6aktivarman died and Vijayaditya again assumed the 
royalty. About this time Vehgi became the target of attacks of 
the neighbouring kings. Vijayaditya was dislodged from his throne 
by the combined forces of the Chalukya Vikramaditya VI and the 
Faramara Jayasimha. But the Chola Vlrarajendra (A.D. 1063-1070) 
came to his rescue, and having defeated the Chalukyas and the 
Paramaras reinstated him on the throne. Vijayaditya enjoyed his 
kingdom without further trouble so long as Vlrarajendra occupied 
the Chola throne. Within a short time after the death of that 
monarch there was a civil war in the Chola country, which ended 
in A.D. 1070 with the accession of Rajendra Chola II alias Kulottunga 
Chola I, nephew of Vijayaditya. After consolidating his position 
in the Chola country Kulottunga Chola demanded the throne of 
Andhra from his uncle. The situation became worse for Vijaya¬ 
ditya when, shortly before A.D. 1073, the kingdom of Vehgi was 
plundered by the Kalachuri Yasahkarna of TripurL It was not 
possible for him now to check the onrush of the Chola army. He 
surrendered the Andhra country to Kulottunga and took shelter 
with the Ganga Rajaraja I of Kalihganagara, who allowed him to 
rule over a small territory on the western part of his kingdom. 
Kulottunga annexed the Andhra country to the Chola empire in 
A.D. 1076. He and his successors, who were in reality princes of 
the Eastern Chalukya dynasty, occupied the throne of the Cholas 
up to A.D. 1271. 




204 


MiNisr^ 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 



III. THE EASTERN GAnGAS 

The history of the Eastern Gahgas, up to the accession of Vaj- 
rahasta Anantavarman, has been traced in a preceding chapter. 0 
This king, Vajrahasta V, was anointed king in A.D. 1038. He issued 
a number of inscriptions from the capital Kalinganagara, and as¬ 
sumed the title Trikalmgadhipati . His mother was a Vaidamba 
princess, and he himself married the daughter of a Haihaya king. 
During his reign Kalihga was invaded by the Kalachuri Karpa, who 
also assumed the title Trikcilingddhipati. He was succeeded by his 
son Rajaraja I Devendravarman, who was crowned in A.D. 1070. 

Rajaraja antagonised Kulottunga Chola I by giving shelter to 
Vijayaditya VII, the deposed king of the Andhra country. Kulot- 
tunga sent his son Mummadi-Choda with an army to chastise the 
Ganga king shortly after A.D. 1076. Rajaraja, who was then asso¬ 
ciated with his son Anantavarman Chodagahga in the government, 
succeeded in repulsing this attack. About this time the grave poli¬ 
tical situation in the Utkala or Orissa country, which was under 
the rule of the Somavainsi kings, encouraged Rajaraja to make an 
attempt for the expansion of his kingdom in that direction. The 
last known king of the Somavarhsl dynasty from epigraphic sources 
is Uddyotakesarl. 9a who flourished some time in the eleventh century. 
In the latter part of this century there were two rival claimants to 
the throne of Orissa. Rajaraja supported the cause of one of them, 
whose name seems to have been Karnakesarl, and succeeded in plac¬ 
ing him on the throne. He had an able general named Vanapati, 
who claims to have defeated the king of the Choda country, the 
army of Utkala, the king of Vengl, kings of Kimidi, Kosala, and the 
Gidrisihgi countries, and killed one Daddanjava. Rajaraja’s queen 
was Rajasundarl, the daughter of Kulottunga Chola I, who gave 
birth to his son and successor Anantavarman Chodagahga. 

Anantavarman Chodagahga was anointed king in A.D. 1078. 
In the early part of his reign Kulottunga Chola I sent a big army 
against Kalihga under his general Karunakara. The Chola army 
took possession of Visakhapattana (Visakhapatnam) and changed its 
name to Kulottungasolapattanam. Anantavarman could not resist 
the advancing Chola army. The whole of Kalihga up to the border 
of Orissa fell into the hands of Karunakara, probably shortly after 
A.D. 1083, the date of a stone inscription at Mukhalingam of the 
reign of Anantavarman. If there is any truth in the claim that 
Rajaraja, Chodagahga (A.D. 1084-1088), son of Kulottunga Chola I, 
and the viceroy of Vengl, held sway over a territory extending up 
to the Mahendra mountains, the position of Anantavarman must 
have been very serious indeed. But even in this predicament he 


205 



did not lose heart. Within a few years he not only recovered his 
throne, but also wrested the Visakhapatnam District from the Chojas 
before the year A.D. 1090. After the death of Kulottuhga the Cha- 
lukyas under Vikramaditya VI captured the Andhra country and 
ruled it for some years. As soon as Vikramaditya VI died (A.D. 
1126) Anantavarman attacked the Andhra country and brought all 
the territory up to the banks of the Godavari under his sway. But 
he could not enjoy this new possession in the Godavari District for 
a long time. Some time before A.D. 1134 Kulottunga Chola II, 
with the help of his feudatories Manda II and Velanianti Rajendra- 
Choda, drove out the Gangas from the Godavari District. Visakha¬ 
patnam District, which was ruled by the Eastern Chalukyas for seve¬ 
ral centuries, became a part and parcel of the kingdom of the Gan- 
gas from the time of Anantavarman. 

Anantavarman also looked for the expansion of his kingdom 
to the east. About this time Karnakesari, king of Utkala, and a 
protege of the Gangas, was overthrown by Ramapala, king of Ben¬ 
gal, who placed his own nominee on the throne of that country. 
Anantavarman could not take this challenge lying down. He de¬ 
feated the nominee of Ramapala and restored Kaniakesarl or his 
successor to power. Some time before A.D. 1118 the whole of 
Orissa was annexed to the kingdom of the Gangas. Henceforward 
the kings of the Ganga dynasty assumed the title “the lord of Utkala” 
along with the title “the lord of Trikalinga”. After the death of 
Ramapala the kingdom of the Palas began to break up. The weak¬ 
ness of the Pala kings made their feudatories in south Bengal help¬ 
less. This offered Anantavarman a favourable opportunity for 
further expansion of his kingdom. His advance into south Bengal 
was held back by Vaidyadeva, the minister of Kumarapala, son of 
Ramapala, for some time. But as soon as Vaidyadeva was called 
to Assam by a more critical situation 11 , Anantavarman renewed 
his military operations. He defeated the chief of Mandara, pil¬ 
laged his capital Aramya, modern Arambagh (Hooghly District), 
and pursued him up to the bank of the Ganga. During these wars 
he seems to have received the co-operation of Vijayasena, a ruling 
chief in Radha. The kingdom of Anantavarman now extended from 
the Ganga up to the Godavari, and his epigraphic records and those 
of his successors boldly claim that he exacted tributes from his 
subjects living in the countries between these two rivers. His 
attempts to push the boundary of his realm further to the north 
were, however, frustrated by the Kalachuri Ratnadeva II (A.D. 1120- 
1135), king of Southern Kosala, and the Paramara Lakshmadeva 
(A.D. 1088-1094), king of Malava. Stone inscriptions of his reign 


206 


misr/fy 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 

have been found in the Gan jam and Visakhapatnam Districts, and in 
Draksharama, in the Ramchandrapur Taluk of the Godavari District. 

Anantavarman founded the magnificent temple of Jagannatha 
at Puri. Satananda, a resident of Puri, composed the astronomical 
work BM&vatt during his reign, in A.D. 1099. Anantavarman had 
a number of queens and had by them four sons, Kamarnava VII, 
Raghava, Rajaraja II, and Aniyankabhima or Anangabhlma II. He 
anointed Kamarnava VII king in A.D. 1142. The last known date 
of Anantavarman is 6. 1072 (= A.D. 1150). 

Kamarnava VII (A.D. 1148-55) 12 was succeeded by his half- 
brother Raghava (A.D. 1157-1170) during whose reign Vijayasena 
put an end to the supremacy of the Gangas in south Bengal and 
established there the authority of the Senas. After Raghava his 
two half-brothers, Rajaraja II (A.D. 1.171-1192) and Anangabhlma II 
(A.D. 1192), ruled in succession. From the time of Anangabhima’s 
son and successor Rajaraja III (A.D. 1205-1206) Orissa (Jajnagar) 
became a target of attacks of the Muslims who had firmly established 
themselves in west and north Bengal. In A.D. 1205 Muhammad Bakh¬ 
ta 1 ' sent Muhammad-i-Sheran and his brother Ahmad-i-Sheran at the 
head of an army towards Lakhanor and Jajnagar. But the prema¬ 
ture death of Muhammad Bakhtyar forced the Sheran brothers to 
retreat to Devakota. Rajaraja III wrested the Godavari District to 
the east of the Godavari from the Velananti chiefs. During the reign 
of his son and successor Anangabhlma III (A.D. 1216-1235) Khalji 
Ghiyas-ud-dln Twaz, the Muslim ruler of Bengal, invaded Orissa, but > 
was repulsed by the Gangas. This invasion took place some time 
between A.D. 1211 and 1224. Anangabhlma III led a successful 
military campaign against the Kalachuri. ParamardI of Turiimana and 
established a friendly relation with him by giving his sister in mar¬ 
riage to him. From the time of his father Rajaraja III the Godavari 
was the western boundary of the kingdom of the Gangas. Ananga- 
bhima III invaded Vengi to wrest the Andhra country from the 
Velananti chiefs. Though he won some preliminary victories the 
Kakatiya Gapapati forced him to surrender even the whole of the 
Godavari District to the east of the Godavari river some time between 
A.D. 1230 and 1237. 

o. ^ nai ^ a ^ ma ^ was succeeded by his sdn Narasimha I in c. A.D. 

1238. His reign marks a glorious period in the history of Orissa. 

He was one of the few Hindu kings of this age who thought it more 
prudent to launch aggressive campaigns against the Muslims than 
o play the defensive part. The Muslims were now in possession of 
the greater part of Radha (W. Bengal), but large parts of Hooghly 
and Nadia districts were still unsubdued. Towards the end of 




207 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

1243, Narasimha sent an army to Bengal, and the Muslim histo¬ 
rian Minhaj-i-Siraj characteristically refers to it as ‘molesting’ the 
kingdom of Lakhnawatl. Tughril-i-Tughan Khan, the Muslim 
ruler of Bengal, took the field against Narasimha in March, A.D. 
1244, and the historian Minhaj also joined in “this holy war”. The 
Orissan army made a strategic retreat, without fighting, to the for¬ 
tress of Katasingh on their frontier, a region full of dense jungles and 
cane-bushes. In Api*,il, 1244, the Muslim forces made an assault on 
the fort and obtained some initial success. But while they were 
taking rest at mid-day, the Hindu soldiers appeared both in their 
front and rear. The Muslim army was seized with panic and fled in 
hot haste, pursued by the Orissan forces. Tughril Tughan was un¬ 
able to make a stand even in his own fort of Lakhanor, 70 miles 
north-west of Katasingh. It was a veritable disaster for the Muslims. 

Narasimha I captured Lakhanor and put an end to the Muslim 
rule in Radha. He then invaded Varendra (N. Bengal) and advanced 
as far as Lakhnawatl (March, 1245). Tughril, who had already 
sent swift messengers to Delhi asking for military assistance, shut 
himself in his capital city. Fortunately for him the Sultan ordered 
the Governors of Kara-Manikpur and Awadh to proceed at once to 
“exterminate the infidels” of Orissa. Their united forces reached the 
vicinity of the Rajmahal hills when Lakhnawatl was besieged by 
Orissan forces. On hearing of this reinforcement, Narasimha raised 
the siege of the capital city but maintained his position in Radha. 
His dominions now extended to the Ganga river which, according 
to one of his inscriptions, “assumed the dark countenance of the 
Yamuna by the collyrium-stained tears of the Yavana women of 
Radha and Varendra (West and North Bengal).” 

It was not till the end of A.D. 1253 that the new Muslim 
Governor of Bengal, Yuzbak, made an attempt to recover Radha. He 
was stubbornly opposed by a feudatory of Narasimha who is called 
Savantar in Muslim chronicles, which probably stands for Oriya 
Santra. This feudatory chief was a son-in-law of Narasimha and 
ruled as his vassal over a strong principality with its capital at 
Madaran in Hooghly District. Three battles were fought in the 
last of which Yuzbak suffered a defeat with heavy loss and implored 
assistance from the Sultan of Delhi. Towards the end of A.D. 1255 
Yuzbak again invaded Radha and captured Madaran. He succeeded 
in re-establishing Muslim authority over Radha! 

Although Narasimha could not maintain his hold in Bengal, his 
aggressive compaign and success against the Muslim forces for a 
period of ten years entitles him to a high place of honour among 
the Hindu kings of Northern India during this age. He has also 




208 


MiNfsr^ 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 






earned undying fame by building the magnificent Sun Temple at 
Konarak, which has been described in the chapter on Art. 

The reign of Bhanudeva I (A.D. 1264-79), son and successor 
of Narasimha I, was an uneventful one, from political point of view. 
But during the reigns of Bhanudeva I and his son Narasimha II 
(A.D. 1279-1306) the great religious teacher Narahari Tirtha lived 
and preached in Orissa, and gave a great impetus to Vaishpava reli¬ 
gion which replaced Saivism as the dominant creed of the country. 
As the reign of Narasimha II introduced a new phase in the history 
of Orissa, it will be treated in the next volume. 


IV. THE SOMAVAMSIS 


The history of the Somavamsls up to the death of Yayati Maha¬ 
sivagupta I has been narrated above. 13 Yayati Mahasivagupta I was 
succeeded by his son Bhimaratha Mahabhavagupta II who ruled 
probably about the beginning of the eleventh century (c. A.D. 1000- 
15). During this reign, Simhadatta continued to serve as minister 
for war and peace. One of the feudatories of Mahabhavagupta II 
was the Mathara chief Puhja who resided at Vamandapad, possibly 
the same as modern Bamragarh in the old Bamra State. Puhja, who 
was a Parama-rnahesvara like his overlord but was also devoted to 
the goddess Kalesvari (probably a form of Kali, the consort of Siva 
in Hindu mythology), has been described as Samadhigata-pancha - 
maUdisabda , Man$alika-Ranaka and Panchadasa-pallikadhipati (i.e. 
“lord of fifteen small villages’'). His seal bears the swan emblem. 

The latest known date of Bhimaratha is the thirteenth year of 
his reign. According to the Balijhari 14 (Narsinghpur State) and 
Bhuvaneswar 16 inscriptions of Uddyotakesarl, Bhimaratha Maha¬ 
bhavagupta II was succeeded by his son Dharmaratha (c. A.D. 1015- 
20), probably styled Rajamalla and Mahasivagupta II. Dharmaratha 
died without leaving a son and was succeeded by his brother 
Nahusha (Naghusha), probably styled Mahabhavagupta III. There 
is evidence to show that Nahusha ruled in troublous times 
(c. A.D. 1020-25). According to the Bhuvaneswar inscription, which 
does not mention Nahusha, some time passed after Dharmaratha had 
died without leaving a son, when various combatant chiefs (bhatas) 
were devastating the whole rashtra (i.e, the Somavariisi dominions) 
and a great hero, no doubt pointing to Chandihara (Yayati) belong¬ 
ing to the royal family, was passing his days elsewhere. This 
Chandihara, who was the son of Abhimanyu, grandson of Vichitra- 
vlra, and great-grandson of Janamejaya Mahabhavagupta I, was then 
raised to the throne by the amatyas (ministers). The new king 
(c. A.D. 1025-55) freed both the rashtras (Kosala and Utkala) from 


209 


S.E.—14 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


enemies. The Balijhari inscription says that Nahusha was succeed¬ 
ed by his anuja (younger cousin in this case) Yayati (Chandihara), 
styled Mahasivagupta III, who freed both the rdshpas of Kosala and 
Utkala which had been seized (avashtabdha) by combatant chiefs 
(bhatas). It is thus clear that Kosala and Utkala were regarded as 
two component parts of the Somavaihsi dominions about the middle 
of the eleventh century, and that both the countries had been over¬ 
run by enemies shortly after the death of Dharmaratha. But when 
and under what circumstances exactly the dominions of the Karas 
passed to the Somavamsis cannot be determined in the present state 
of our knowledge. Who moreover were the enemies of the Soma- 
vathsis with whom king Nahusha seems to have been engaged in a 
struggle for existence? Although there is evidence to show that the 
Kalachuris were encroaching upon Somavaihsi territories about this 
time, it is tempting to suggest that the enemies referred to were the 
Cholas who, according to their records, defeated and seized king 
Indraratha of the Chandrakula ( i.e . Somavamsa), together with his 
family, at the battle of Yayatinagara, 16 and captured, probably as a 
result of this success, OgLravishaya and Kosalanadu, shortly before 
A.D. 1023. There is no doubt that Indraratha, also known from the 
Udayapur prasasti 1 ' to have been defeated by the Paramara king 
Bhoja, belonged to the family of Bhimaratha and Dharmaratha, but 
he can hardly be placed between any two of the Somavamsi rulers 
discussed above without disturbing the probable regularity of the 
alternate occurrence of the two names Mahabhavagupta and Maha¬ 
sivagupta in the family. It is, therefore,'mot improbable that Indra¬ 
ratha was just another name of Nahusha Mahabhavagupta III who 
was a brother of Dharmaratha and possibly a son of Bhimaratha. It 
may be mentioned in this connection that a Chola chief named 
Yasoraja, whose successors are known to have acknowledged the 
suzerainty of the Chhindaka-Nagas of Bastar, is said to have carved 
out a kingdom in Kosala about the middle of the eleventh century. 
It is unknown whether Yasoraja’s success was at the expense of the 
Kalachuris or the Somavamsis, 

Thus Chandihara-Yayati Mahasivagupta III seems to have freed 
Kosala and Utkala (apparently the same as Odra of the Chola 
records), probably from Chola occupation, some time in the second 
quarter of the eleventh century. He appears to have been a power¬ 
ful ruler. lo him no doubt' belongs the Maranjamura (also called 
Jatesinga-Dungri) inscription 18 written by the Mahdsandhivigrahin 
Rudradatta, who was the son of a brother of Simhadatta (minister 
under Mahasivagupta I and Mahabhavagupta II) and the grandson 
of Harshadatta. According to this record Mahasivagupta III con¬ 
quered Trikalihga by his own prowess 19 and became the lord of 

% 10 





DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 

Kalihga, Kongoda (in the Ganjam District), Utkala and Kosala. He 
also claims to have come into conflict with the kings of Karnata, 
Lata, Gurjara, Radha and Gauda. Although the description may, no 
doubt, be taken as a mere eulogy (prasasti), it may be noted that it 
suits Mahasivagupta III better than any other king of the family 
bearing the same name. The reference to his struggle with the 
Karnatas probably points to a date earlier than the eastern expedi¬ 
tions of Chalukya Vikramaditya VI. A defective passage of the record 
seems to speak of the king’s success against Bhuvifa which may be a 
mistake for Dravida meaning the Cholas. 20 The king is further de¬ 
scribed as a Parama-mahesvara and as Mahabhavagupta-pddarm- 
dhyata, possibly pointing to his predecessor Nahusha, who, as 
suggested above, appears to have been also known as Indraratha and 
Mahabhavagupta III. The Maranjamura grant was; issued in the 
king’s third regnal year. The actual duration of the rule of Maha¬ 
sivagupta III cannot be determined. 

Chandihara-Yayati Mahasivagupta III was succeeded by his 
son Uddyotakesari Mahabhavagupta IV (c. A.D. 1055-80) some time 
about the middle of the eleventh century. Uddyotakesari was a 
devout J§aiva like his father. His hold over both the Sambalpur tract 
and lower Orissa is proved by the Balijhari charter issued in the 
fourth regnal year from Yayatinagara, recording a grant of land in 
Odradesa, and by the Bhuvaneswar inscription recording the con¬ 
struction, in his eighteenth regnal year, of the temple of the deity 
Brahmesvara at Ekamra (i.e. Bhuvaneswar) by the king’s mother 
Kolavatl who was born in the solar dynasty. His father’s minister 
for war and peace, named Rudradatta, who is known from the 
Maranjamura grant to have been the grandson of Harshadatta and 
the nephew of Simhadatta, is mentioned in the Balijhari grant of the 
earlier year of Uddyotakesari’s reign as the Mahasandhivigrahin for 
both the countries of Utkala and Kosala. The same minister Rudra¬ 
datta is mentioned as the son of Devadatta in the Kesarkella grant 21 
of the eleventh regnal year of king Mahabhavagupta who seems to 
have been no other than Uddyotakesari. The seal attached to this 
charter bears the Saivite emblem of a horned bull surmounted by a 
crescent. The mention of Rudradatta as minister for Utkala and 
Kosala is interesting as the earlier ministers of the Datta family were 
only in charge of the Kosala country. This seems to suggest that the 
Utkala country formed a part of Somavamsi kingdom some time 
about the second quarter of the eleventh century. 

Uddyotakesari Mahabhavagupta IV was the last great king of 
the family. The Bhuvaneswar inscription credits him with victory 
over the rulers of Dahala, Odra, and Gauda. 22 That he came into 




2\l 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

with the Kalachuris of Central India and the Palas of Bengal 
is not improbable; but the ruler of Odra was probably one of his 
father’s adversaries. Uddyotakesari, whose latest known date is his 
eighteenth regnal year, appears to have been a contemporary of the 
Gaiiga king Anantavarman Vajrahasta III (A.D. 1038-70) of Kalinga- 
nagara (in the Srikakulam District) and the latter’s son Rajaraja I 
(A.D. 1070-78) who claims to have defeated the kings of Utkala and 
Kosala. Rajaraja’s son Anantavarman Chodagaiiga (A.D. 1078-1150) 
is described as having, at first, reinstated the fallen lord of Utkala, 
and later, not only as having defeated the king of Utkala, but also as 
having been decorated with the full sovereignty of the whole of 
Utkala. The claims that Chodaganga exacted tribute from the whole 
land as far as the Gaiiga in the east, and that he destroyed the capital 
of the king of Mandara (probably Garh Mandaran in the Hooghly 
District), show that by A.D. 1112, which is the date of Chodagahga’s 
Korni grant, 23 independent Somavaihsi rule must have been termi¬ 
nated in lower Orissa by the Gangas and that Uddyotakesari’s rule 
had ended some time before that date. 

The king of Utkala named Karnakesari, mentioned in the Rama - 
charita as having been defeated by Jayasimha, the feudatory ruler 
of Dandabhukti under king Ramapala of Bengal, seems to have been 
a successor of Uddyotakesari and probably a subordinate ally of 
Chodaganga who shortly afterwards extirpated Somavaihsi rule from 
Orissa. 

Ranakesarl, another king probably of the same family, is known 
from his Govindapur (old Nayagarh State) inscription which seems 
to be dated in the Ganga year 611, 24 corresponding to A.D. 1107-09. 
He may have been a subordinate ally of Chodaganga and a claimant 
for the Somavaihsi throne. According to the Madalapanji, which 
gives a legendary account of the Somavaihsi rulers that is hardly 
reliable, Suvarnakesari was the last Somavaihsi ruler extirpated by 
Chodaganga. But nothing definite is known about him. 

It may be pointed out in this connection that the capital (or 
secondary capital) of the Somavamsis in Utkala was probably Jajpur 
(in Cuttack District), apparently a corruption of Yayatipura , named 
probably after Yayati Mahasivagupta III, who seems to have been 
the first Somavaihsi king of lower Orissa. In the days of the Soma- 
varhsis, Jajpur seems to have been called both Yayatipura and 
Yayatinagara, the latter being also the name of the capital of the 
Somavamsis in Kosala. The Muslim chronicles referred to Orissa 
as the kingdom of Jajnagar, probably because Jajpur (Yayatipura or 
Yayatinagara) became for a short period a secondary capital of the 
Gangas after the extirpation of the Somavaihsis from Utkala. 




212 





DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 


The Somavamsxs, who were ousted from the southern part of 
their dominions by the Gahgas, also lost Kosala. In the first half of 
the eleventh century, probably during the reign of Kalachuri Gah- 
geya of Dahala, a Kalachuri prince named Kalihgaraja established 
himself at Tumraana (modern Tumana in the Bilaspur District) in the 
western part of Dakshina-Kosala, and apparently became a thorn in 
the side of the Somavamsi kings. His son Kamalaraja endeavoured 
to equal Gahgeya in prosperity and claimed, like Gangeya himself, 
a victory over the ruler of Utkala, probably a Somavamsi king. 
Kamalaraja’s grandson Ppithvldeva I, whose Amoda grant 33 of 
A.D. 1079 describing him as MaMmavdcdesvara and Samadhigata- 
panchamahasabda shows that he was still a feudatory of the house 
of Dahala (Tripuri), seems nevertheless to have been a semi-inde¬ 
pendent ruler who assumed the title Sakala-Kosaladhipati (lord of 
the entire Kosala country), apparently as the result of a successful 
campaign against the Somavaxhsis. Prithvldeva’s son Jajalla I, 
whose Ratanpur inscription 26 is dated A.D. 1114, claims to have 
defeated and captured Somesvara, while another record 27 refers to 
his victory over Bhujabala, king of Suvamapura (Sonpur in the 
eastern part of Dakshina-Kosala in the kingdom of the Somavamssis). 
Now the northern enemies of the Somavaxhsis stood face to face -with 
their southern adversaries, and it is interesting to note that Jajalla’s 
son Ratna II claims to have defeated Chodaganga. 

We have seen that the greatest achievement of Jajalla I 
(A.D. 1114) is described as a victory over Somesvara in one record 
and over Bhujabala of Sonpur in another. This may suggest that 
Bhujabala or Bhujabalamalla was a viruda of Somesvara. Some¬ 
svara, defeated by the Kalachuris of the western part of Dakshina- 
Kosala in the early years of the twelfth century, seems to be no other 
than the Somavamsi Kuirtara Somesvara, lord of Paschima-Laxika 
(probably the district round Sonpur), who issued the Kelga plates 
from Suvamapura. Somesvara calls himself Kumara and Kumar- 
adhiraja (cf. the case of the Paramara Mahakumdras) , but also 
assumes the imperial titles Paramesvara and Paramabhatfaraka. He 
seems to have ruled over the district round Sonpur when the other 
parts of the Somavamsi dominions were occupied by the enemies. 
He issued the Kelga plates 28 after the end of the rule (attta-rdjye) of 
Abhimanyu who had been installed in the Kosala kingdom present¬ 
ed to him by Uddyotakesari. It appears that Uddyotakesari, during 
the latter part of his rule, made Abhimanyu, apparently a prince of 
his own family, a sub-king of that part of his kingdom which lay in 
Kosala, while he himself ruled in Utkala. This arrangement might 
have been devised to check Kalachuri and Chhindaka-Chola en¬ 
croachment upon Kosala and Gahga aggression against Utkala. As 


213 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Somesvara seems to have ruled in the early years of the twelfth cen¬ 
tury, Abhimanyu may be assigned to the last quarter of the previous 
century. The position of Somesvara and Abhimanyu in the genea¬ 
logy of the Somavamsis cannot be determined; but the latter may 
have been a grandson of Abhimanyu (son of Vichitravlra and grand¬ 
son of Mahabhavagupta I) and a brother or cousin of Uddyotakesarl. 
As to the extirpation of Somavamsi rule from Kosala, it may 
be pointed out that the Chhindaka (Naga) king Somesvara 
(c. A.D. 1090-1110) of Bastar, and Yasoraja, who was probably a 
Chola feudatory of the Chhindakas and flourished in the middle of 
the eleventh century, 29 claim to have conquered Kosala or parts of 
that country. Yasoraja’s great-grandson Ranaka Somesvara, who 
called himself “lord of the whole of Kosala” and flourished probably 
in the first quarter of the twelfth century, actually issued his charters 
from Suvarnapura (Sonpur). Considering the date of this Chola lord 
of Kosala (Somesvara), who appears to have been a feudatory of his 
Chhindaka-Naga namesake (Somesvara, c. A.D. 1090-1110), it seems 
very probable that these two Somesvaras were responsible for the 
extirpation of their Somavamsi namesake, Kumara Somesvara, lord 
of Paschima-Lahka. 

The name of the Somavamii Kumara may suggest that for a 
time the Somavamsis acknowledged the suzerainty of the Chhindaka- 
Naga king Somesvara I. This is not improbable in view of the 
Telugu-Choda influence on the style of Somavamsi Somesvara’s 
charter. In that case, Kumara Somesvara’s short rule may have 
been the result of a successful revolt against Chhindaka-Naga 
authority. 

Y. THE NAGAS OE CHHINDAKAS 

A number of inscriptions of a dynasty of rulers belonging to the 

Chhindaka family of the Naga race have been found in Bastar in 
Madhya Pradesh. These Chhindaka-Nagas are sometimes described 
as the kings of Chakrakotta (also called Chakrakuta, Chakrakota, 
etc.), which was the old name of Bastar. They appear to have ruled 
from Barasuru (modem Barsur about 55 miles from Jagdalpur, chief 
city of Bastar). They belonged to the Kasyapa gotra and had the 
snake-banner and the ‘tiger-with-cub’ crest. One of their significant 
titles was “the lord of Bhogavatl (Bhogavatl), the best of cities.” 
Bhogavatl was the mythical capital of the snake-demons, called 
Nagas, who lived in Ra&atala, forming a part of Patala or the sub¬ 
terranean world. 

The above informations about the Chhindaka-Nagas of Bastar 
clearly point to their close relationship with the Sindas of the 


214 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 

Kannad country. 30 The land of the Sindas, called Sindavadi, com¬ 
prised parts of northern Mysore, Bellary, Dharwar and Bijapur, and 
is mentioned in a record of A.D. 750. The Sinda families ruled from 
Bagalkot and Yelburga in Bijapur and Hollavur and Belagufti in 
Mysore. There is no doubt that the family name Chhindaka, pre¬ 
ferred by the Nagavamsis of Bastar, is the same as Sinda, although 
the Sindas fabricated a mythology to explain their family name as 
derived from the name of the river Sindhu. The fabricated genea¬ 
logy of the Sindas sometimes says that the eponymous progenitor 
of the dynasty was a “long-armed” Sinda who was the human son of 
a snake king named Dharanindra and that he was born at Ahich- 
chhatra near the Sindhu and was reared by a tiger. Elsewhere, 
however, the same mythical Sinda is described as the son of the god 
Siva from the river-goddess Sindu and as brought up by the snake- 
king with tiger’s milk. We have no such explanation of the 
family name in the inscription of the Chhindakas; but it is quite signi¬ 
ficant that, like them, the Sindas also claimed the Naga lineage, the 
snake-banner (sometimes explained as the banner having the figures 
of the Naga-chiefs Ananta, Vasuki and Takshaka represented on it), 
and the hereditary title “lord of Bhogavatl, the best of cities.” It may 
be suggested that the Chhindakas left their original home in the 
Kannada country before the fabrication of the above genealogy by 
the Sindas, some time after the middle of the eleventh century. 

The earliest Nagavamsx instription in Bastar is a frag¬ 
mentary record 31 from Errakot, about ten miles from Jagdalpur. 
The name of the Chhindaka-Naga king mentioned in it cannot be 
fully read, but may be Nripatibhushana (or Kshitibhushana?). It 
is said that the inscription bears a date in Saka 945 (— A.D. 1023). 
This date seems to suggest that the Chhindakas entered Bastar in 
the train of the army of the Chola king Rajendra I, which is known 
to have invaded the said area some time before A.D. 1023. It 
should, however, be noted that personal names in this family like 
Dharavarsha and Kanhara would suggest its original subservience 
to the imperial house of the Rashtrakufas, while the popularity of 
the name Somesvara in this dynasty and also in that of its Telugu- 
Choda feudatories seems to indicate that both of these houses 
acknowledged the suzerainty of the Chalukya monarch Somesvara 
I Ahavamalla (A.D. 1043-68) of Kalyana. This may have been a 
result of the expedition led by Vikramaditya VI, son of Ahava¬ 
malla, against the East Indian countries some time during his 
father’s reign. 

An inscription 32 from Barsur, which bears a date in A.D. 1060, 
refers to the reign of a Chhindaka-Naga king named Maharaja Dha- 

215 




MIN IST/f 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


ravarsha alias Jagadekabhushana. It is stated that his feudatory 
Mahamandalesvara Chandraditya-ma^dnija, who belonged to the 
Telugu-Choda family and was the lord of Ammagrama, built a Siva 
temple and excavated a tank at Barasuru (modern Barsur, the find- 
spot of the record in question). Chandraditya is further said to 
have purchased a village from his overlord and dedicated it in 
favour of the deity installed in the temple. King Dharavarsha Jaga- 
dekabhusha^a is stated to have been present when this transaction 
was made. Now the above fact appears to indicate that the feuda¬ 
tory chief Chandraditya had his headquarters at Ammagrama while 
his Chhindaka-Naga overlord ruled from the city of Barasuru. 

King Dharavarsha Jagadekabhushana does not appear to have 
survived long after A.D. 1060 as the Chhindaka-Naga throne was 
occupied by another member of the family, named Madhurantaka, 
some time before the fifth of October, 1065, the date of the 
latter’s Rajapura plates. 33 It cannot be determined whether the 
fragmentary Dantewara inscription 34 of A.D, 1061 belongs to Dha¬ 
ravarsha or Madhurantaka. King Madhurantaka was soon ousted 
from the throne by Dharavarsha’s son Somesvara I whose earliest 
known date is A.D. 1069. The names of these two rivals of the 
same family for the Chhindaka-Naga kingdom of Bastar may sug¬ 
gest that Somesvara was supported by the Chalukyas of Kalyana, 
while Madhurantaka received help from the Chojas. It is inte¬ 
resting to note in this connection that a Chola inscription 36 of A.D. 
1074 refers to certain victories achieved by Kulottuhga I at an 
earlier date in Vayiragaram (Wairagarh in the Chanda District) 
and Sakkarakottam (Chakrakotta). 


The Rajapura copper-plate inscription of Madhurantaka, bear¬ 
ing the date A.D. 1065, records the grant of the village of Rajapura 
(fmdspot of the record, 22 miles north-west of Jagdalpur) in the 
Bhramarakotya(Bhramarakof;ta)-mandala, probably as a compen¬ 
sation for supplying victims for human sacrifices. The Bhramara- 
kotta-raan#ala was either identical with Chakrakotta or a part of the 
latter. The king was a Saiva and had the banner bearing the repre¬ 
sentation of a lotus and a plantain leaf on the back of Airavata 
instead of the snake-banner used by other members of the family. 

Somesvara I, son of Dharavarsha Jagadekabhushana, is known 
from several records, the earliest of which, as indicated above, is 
dated in A.D. 1069. The latest known date of this king is A.D. 1097. 
One of the two Kuruspal (22 miles from Jagdalpur) inscriptions 36 
of DharariamahadevI, the second queen of the Chhindaka-Naga king 
Somesvara I, bears a date in the Khara Samvatsara which fell in 


216 


MIN/Sr^ 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 




A.D. 1069. Two other inscriptions 37 of the reign of the same king, 
one from Kuruspal and another from Gadia, are dated in A.D. 1097. 


The most important record of the reign of Somesvara I is a 
fragmentary inscription from Kuruspal. 38 This epigraph mentions 
the king's son Kanhara and seems to have been engraved late in 
his reign. Somesvara is stated in the inscription to have acquired 
the sovereignty of Chakrakuta (Chakrakotta) through the grace of 
the goddess Vindhyavasini. He is further said to have killed king 
Madhurantaka who is undoubtedly the issuer of the Rajapura plates 
of A.D. 1065. Madhurantaka was a ruler of Chakrakuta of which 
Somesvara I claimed to have been the hereditary king. The record 
also credits Somesvara with many other military activities, such as 
the burning of Vengl, the subjugation of Rhadrapattana and Vajra, 
and the seizure of the six lakhs and ninety-six villages of Kosala 
(South Kosala). Vengl, the kingdom of the Eastern Chalukyas, 
was now a part of the Chola-Chalukya empire, and Virachotfa, also 
mentioned in the record under review, was governing it in A.D. 
1078-84 and 1088-92 as the viceroy of his father Kulottuhga I 
(A.D. 1070-1120). We have already noticed that Kulottuhga 
claimed some success against Wairagarh (probably the same 
as Vajra in Somesvara’s record under discussion) and Chakrakotta, 
achieved by him some years before A.D. 1074. Bhadrapattana of 
the inscription has been identified by scholars with modern Bhan- 
dak in the Chanda District. According to the Padma Purdna , 39 the 
conventional or traditional number of gramas in Kosala was ten 
lakhs, although this is certainly an exaggerated statement if the word 
grama or village is taken in the ordinary sense of the term. 40 The 
Chhindaka-Naga king Somesvara I thus seems to have claimed the 
possession of a large part of South Kosala. This success may have 
been achieved at the expense of both the Kalachuris and the Soma- 
vamils. In this connection, we cannot ignore the fact that Yaso- 
raja I, father of the Telugu-Cho$a chief Chandraditya who was rul¬ 
ing at Ammagrama as a feudatory of Somesvara’s father, also claim¬ 
ed to have carved out a kingdom in Kosala. It is not altogether 
unlikely that Ya£oraja I entered Kosala as a lieutenant of Somes¬ 
vara I and was rewarded by the governorship of a portion of the 
country he had conquered on behalf of his overlord. Another inte¬ 
resting fact is that Kumdra Somesvara of Suvarnapura and Pas- 
chima-Lanka, who belonged to the Somavamsa that was overthrown 
by the descendants of Yasoraja I, was probably named after the 
Chhindaka-Naga king Somesvara I. This may suggest that for a 
time the later Somavamsis had to acknowledge the supremacy of 
the Chhindakas, The suggestion seems to be supported by the in- 


217 



MINISr^y 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<8L 


uence of the Telugu-Choda grants on the style of the copper-plate 
charter of SomavariisI Somesvara, The inscription of Chhindaka 
Somesvara I under review also mentions the king of Ratnapura 
(capital of the Kalachuris of South Kosala) as one of his antagonists 
and points to the fact that he came into conflict with the Kalachuris 
as well. Some scholars are inclined to identify the king named 
Somesvara, whom the Kalachuri king Jajalla I claimed to have 
seized in a battle some years before A.D. 1114 41 with the Chhin- 
daka-Naga ruler Somesvara I. 

According to the Kuruspal inscription, besides the antagonists 
mentioned above, Chhindaka Somesvara I came into conflict 
also with the kings of Udra (Orissa), Lanjl (in Balaghat Dis¬ 
trict) and Lemna (Lavana in Balaghat District). The king of 
U$ra was possibly the Somavarhsi ruler Uddyotakesari. 


The Narayanpal inscription 42 of A.D. 1111 mentions Gun^a- 
Mahadevi who was the queen of Dharavarsha, mother of Somesvara 
I, and grand-mother of Kanhara. It is clearly stated that Kanhara 
was then ruling after the death of his father. Thus Somesvara I 
must have ended his reign some time before A.D. 1111. 

A Barsur inscription 43 dated Saka 1130 (A.D. 1208), mentions 
Ganga-MahadevI as the queen of the Chhindaka-Naga king Somes¬ 
vara, who may be identified with king Rajabhashana Somesvara II 
known from the Gadia inscription. 44 Raj a bh us h ana ~ma hdrdj a is 
also known from an undated Dantewara inscription. 46 An inscrip¬ 
tion 46 from Barsur similarly mentions a king named Kannara who 
seems to be a later member of the family and may be styled Kan¬ 
hara II. Hiralal, however, believed that the date of Gahga-Maha- 
devx's inscription is a mistake for Saka 1030 (A.D. 1108) and that 
she was a queen of Somesvara I, son of Dharavarsha Jagadekabhu- 
shana. 


The Jatanpal inscription 47 of A.D. 1218 and the Dantewara 
inscription of A.D. 1224 speak of a Chhindaka king named Jagade- 
kabhushana Narasimha who seems to be identical with Maharaja 
Jagadekabhushana mentioned as the worshipper of the goddess 
ManikyadevI (modern Danteswari of the Dantewara temple) in an 
inscription from Bhairamgarh. 48 The undated Sunarpal inscrip¬ 
tion mentions another king of the family, named Jayasimha, whose 
relation with Jagadekabhushana Narasimha is unknown. King 
Harischandra of Chakrakota, possibly a later member of the Chhin¬ 
daka-Naga family, is mentioned in {he Temara inscription of A.D. 
1324. 49 


218 


MiNisr^ 



VI. THE CHOLAS OR TELEGU-CHODAS 


The Kumarisimha 50 and Patna Museum plates 61 were 
issued by a king named Somesvara II, the first in the 
eleventh and the second in the seventeenth year of his 
reign. He belonged to the Xasyapa gotra and the Chola or 
Chotja family which is described as the race of the sun. He was a 
devotee of Siva as well as Vishnu, and is described as a worshipper 
of the god Vaidyanatha whose temple is situated on the Tel, about 
12 miles from Sonpur. A significant title of the king is Kaveri- 
natha (lord of the river Kaveri) which points to his claim of descent 
from the Cholas of Karikala’s house. He claims to have enjoyed 
the title “lord of the entire Kosala (South Kosala),” although his 
subordinate position is clearly indicated by the feudatory, titles 
Rmtaka, Mahdrii(tn$alesvara, and Mahavyuhapati. The king is also 
called Ayyana-gandhavaraiya, which was a Kannada title known to 
have been assumed by the feudatories and generals of the Chalukya 
emperors of Kalvana. He had the rakta-dhvaja or blood-red ban¬ 
ner and the simha-lanchhana or lion crest. The Kumarisimha and 
Patna Museum plates of Somesvara II of the Choja or Chotfa family 
were issued from Suvamapura which had been previously one of 
the capitals of the Somavamsis of Kosala. This Somesvara appears 
to have flourished about the first quarter of the twelfth century 
and to have been responsible for the final expulsion of the Soma- 
vaihii Kumar a Somesvara from Suvarnapura. 

The Kumarisimha plates describe Somesvara II as the son of 
Yasoraja II and the grandson of Chandraditya, while the Patna 
Museum plates inform us that Chandraditya was the brother of 
Somesvara I, son of Yasoraja I, and grandson of Challama of the 
Chola family sprung from the sun. Yasoraja I is stated to have 
carved out a kingdom in the Kosala (South Kosala) country. 

The Barsur and Potinar inscriptions 62 of A.D. 1060 speak of 
Mahamay4alesvara Maharaja Chandraditya, ruler of Ammagrama, 
as the feudatory of the Chhindaka-Naga king Dharavarsha Jaga- 
dekabhushana, who had his headquarters at Barasuru, modern Bar¬ 
sur in Bastar. The date of these records would suggest that Chan¬ 
draditya and his brother Somesvara flourished in the third quarter 
of the eleventh century. Thus Chandraditya’s son Yasoraja II and 
grandson Somesvara II may be roughly assigned respectively to the 
last quarter of the eleventh and the first quarter of the twelfth cen¬ 
tury A.D. Similarly his father Yasoraja I and grandfather Chal¬ 
lama may be roughly placed in the first half of the eleventh cen¬ 
tury, although, as indicated above, Yasoraja I may have been serv¬ 
ing as a general of the Chhindakas even after A.D. 1060. 


219 



MIN/Sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


Chandraditya is stated to have built a temple of the god Chan- 
dradityesvara, excavated a tank called Chandraditya-sa mudra, and 
planted a garden called Chandraditya-nandanauana, all at Barasuru, 
the capital of his overlord. He also granted two villages (one of 
which is said to have been purchased from his Chhindaka overlord 
Dharavarsha) for the maintenance of the temple and the garden. 
All the epithets of the Telugu-Chodas are attributed to Chandra¬ 
ditya who is further stated to have been a scion of the Karikala 
family ruling from the city' of Orayuru (modern Uraiyur near Tri- 
chinopoly) and holding sway over the region of the Kaveri. 

These Cholas of Bastar and South Kosala enjoyed the same 
birudas as the Telugu-Chodas flourishing in different parts of the 
Cuddapah, Kurnool and Anantapur Districts. 63 There is, therefore, 
little doubt that they migrated to Bastar from the Telugu country. 
As many of the Telugu-Choda chiefs of the Andhra country 
are known to have owed allegiance to the Chalukya emperors of 
Kalyana, it is not unlikely that Challama or his son entered 
Bastar in the train of Vikramaditya VI who is known to have led 
an expedition against the eastern, countries some time during the 
reign of his father Somesvara I Ahavamalla (A.D. 1043-68). The 
popularity of the name Somesvara among the Chhindakas and their 
Telugu-Choda feudatories, the Kannada title Ayyana-gandhavdrana 
assumed by these Telugu-Choda chiefs, and the history of the 
Rashtrakutas of Vagharakotta discussed separately suggest that these 
ruling families acknowledged the supremacy of the Chalukyas of 
Kalyana at least for some time. 


The Mahada plates were published long ago with an inaccurate 
transcript, and the charter was wrongly assigned to a ruler named 
Yogetsvaradevavarman. 64 Actually this grant was issued by a 
Telugu-Choda chief named Somesvaradeva-varman who was the 
son of Dharalladeva-varman and the grandson of another Somes¬ 
vara. The date of the charter is the issuer’s twenty-third regnal 
year. It is stated that the grant was made when the ruler in ques¬ 
tion was standing before Lankavarttaka on the banks of the Chi- 
trotpala (Mahanadi). Lankavarttaka seems to indicate a deity that 
was worshipped on the Lahkesvarl hillock in the bed of the Maha¬ 
nadi at Sonpur. The description of the issuer of the Mahada plates 
is strikingly similar to that of the Telugu-Choda chiefs of Chakra- 
kofja and Kosala, and there is no doubt that he was closely related 
to Somesvara II who issued the Kumarisimha and Patna Museum 
plates. But Somesvaradeva-varman of the Mahada plates appears 
to have flourished at a later date and may have been a grandson 
of Somesvara II. The comparative lateness of the Mahada plates 


220 



DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 

is suggested by the fact that the issuer of the charter is endowed 
with the epithets Panchamahasabda-samanvita, Mahamahimaiidales- 
vara. Mahdbhupati and Chakravarttin. In these we find a combina¬ 
tion of both paramount and subordinate titles, which shows that 
Somesvaradeva-varman owed only a nominal allegiance to the fami¬ 
ly of the overlords of his predecessors. This is further indicated by 
the fact that MahdmaJiimandalesvara and Mahabhupati are clearly 
deliberate modifications of the feudatory titles Mahamandalesvara 
and Mahavyuhapati enjoyed by Somesvara II. Moreover, the issuer 
of the Mahada plates as well as that of the Kumarisimha and Patna 
Museum plates apparently ruled over the same region with head¬ 
quarters at the same city (Suvarnapura or Sonpur). We are there¬ 
fore inclined to take Somesvaradeva-varman of the Mahada plates 
as Somesvara III, grandson of Somesvara II. He seems to have 
flourished about the middle of the twelfth century. Nothing is 
known about his father Dharalla. 


VII. THE RASHTRAKUTAS 

Various Rashtrakuta ruling families are known to have flourish¬ 
ed in different parts of India. But so far no family of Rashtra¬ 
kuta origin was traced in Orissa. The recently discovered Bargarh 
plates of Parachakrasalya prove the existence of a Rashtrakuta 
ruling family in the Sambalpur tract of Orissa about the twelfth 
century A.D. 

The Bargarh plates may be assigned to the twelfth century 
A.D. on palaeographical grounds. . The charter is dated in the year 
56, probably of the Chalukya Vikrama era of A.D. 1076. The date 
of the grant thus seems to be A.D. 1131. It was issued by Ranaka 
Parachakrasalya who was the son of Dhamsaka and grandson of 
Mahamandalesvara Mahamandalika Ranaka Chamaravigraha who is 
described as a devotee of Siva and an ornament of the Rashtrakuta 
lineage. As Dhamsaka is mentioned without any epithet, he seems 
to have predeceased his father, and Parachakrasalya probably suc¬ 
ceeded his grandfather. In spite of the Saiva religion preferred by 
the family, the seal of the Bargarh. plates bears the figure of Garuda, 
Vishnu’s vdhana. An interesting epithet of Chamaravigraha is 
Llatalora-vinirgata, apparently pointing to the original home of the 
family at Llatalora. This Llatalora is undoubtedly the same as 
Lattalura, otherwise called Lattalur, Lattanur, Latanaura, etc., the 
traditional home of the Rashtrakutas of the Deccan. A feudatory 
of the Western Chalukya emperor Vikramaditya VI (A.D. 1076- 
1126), who belonged to the Maha-Rashtrakuta lineage, is described 


221 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


as “emigrated from Latalaura” 56 exactly like Chamaravigraha in 
the Bargarh inscription. 

The description of Chamaravigraha as having the Garuda - 
darpanadhvaja reminds us of the fact that the Rashtrakutas of the 
Deccan enjoyed the Palidhvajci, Oka-ketu and Garuda-lanchhana . 
Chamaravigraha claims to have frightened his enemies with the; 
sound of the trivali > which undoubtedly refers to the musical 
instrument of the same name which is known to have heralded the 
Rashtrakuta rulers of the Deccan in public. Chamaravigraha is 
further stated to have enjoyed the white umbrella and the yellow 
chowrie. 


The description of the issuer of the Bargarh plates and his 
grandfather and predecessor may raise the suspicion that these 
Rashtrakutas had really nothing to do with Orissa, although the plates 
were found in a locality in the Sambalpur tract. Such a contention, 
is, however, completely negatived by the epithet ashfadasa-ghatta - 
Gondram-adhipati applied to Chamaravigraha. “Lord of the 
eighteen Gondramas” or “lord of all the Gondramas” is a typical 
epithet of many early rulers of Orissa. The “eighteen” (really 
meaning “many”) Gondramas are now believed roughly to indicate 
the same thing as Oriya athara-gada-jata, a collective name for all 
the native states recently merged in Orissa. The earliest refer¬ 
ence to the “eighteen” states in an Orissan record seems to be that 
in the Kanas plate of A.D. 599-600 which describes the kingdom of 
Tosali (Orissa) as comprising eighteen atavi-rdjyas. 


The Bargarh plates were issued from Vagharakotta which was 
apparently the name of a fort. Vagharakotta, which was no doubt 
the capital of Rashtrakuta Parachakrasalya, may be modern Bar¬ 
garh in Sambalpur, although it is difficult to be definite on the point. 
The Rashtrakutas appear to have ruled over a small district around 
their capital. Their relations with other ruling families of Upper 
Orissa are as yet unknown. 

These Rashtrakutas of Kannada origin may have entered Orissa 
in the train of the eastern expedition led by Chalukya Vikramaditya 
VI some time before the death of his father in A.D. 1068. This 
seems to be suggested not only by the history of the Chhindaka- 
Nagas and Telugu-Chodas, discussed above, but also by the esta¬ 
blishment, some time in the eleventh century, of the Senas, claim¬ 
ing Karnata descent, in Bengal and of the Karnataka family in Mit- 
hila. 


222 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 


VIII. THE TAILAPAVAMgIS 

Like the Rashtrakutas of Orissa, another ruling family of Kan¬ 
nada origin, settled in the Eastern Deccan in the same age, is known 
from an inscription 6 7 ® discovered at Upalada in the Parlakimedi 
Taluk of the Gan jam District. The epigraph may be assigned on 
palaeographical grounds to the eleventh or twelfth century. It 
records the grant of the village of Upalavada (the same as Upalada 
where the inscription was found) by Kanaka Ramadeva. 

Ramadeva was a feudatory ruler. This is indicated by his title 
Kanaka as well as by his epithet samadhigata-pancha-maliasabda . 
Kanaka Ramadeva was a devout worshipper of the god Siva; but he 
also claims to have enjoyed the favour of the goddess AgidevI, 
apparently a form of the Mother-goddess. 

It is stated in the Upalada inscription that Kanaka Ramadeva 
sprang from the Tailapa-uawia, i.e. the Tailapa dynasty. Tailapa, 
from whom Ramadeva apparently claimed descent, seems to be none 
other then the Western Chalukya monarch Tailapa II who over¬ 
threw the Rashtrakutas and re-established Chalukya sovereignty in 
the Deccan about A.D. 973. He was the great-great-grandfather of 
Vikramaditya VI who is known to have led an expedition against 
Eastern India. It is not unlikely that Ramadeva or one of his imme¬ 
diate predecessors came to the east coast country in the company 
of Vikramaditya VI in his eastern expedition. But the way in 
which Ramadeva claims descent from the Chalukya emperor Tail¬ 
apa seems to suggest that he was not a member of the Chalukya' 
family, but was merely the son or descendant of a princess of the 
Chalukya house. 

1. There/were villages Kakati-khandi and Kakati-pallika in the Visakhapatnam and 
Ganjam Districts ( El, Y. 109, IMP, Gj. 167). Gahga Sahani, a feudatory of the 
Kakatiya Rudraftnba, who ruled*ln the Cuddapah District, calls himself a prince 
of Kakatlyapuram (IMP, Cd. 63). 

2. Samanta~vishti~vamsa.... (IND, p. 25). 

3. The Kazipet inscription (IND, 30) seems to be suggesting that Dugga Tribhu- 
vanamalla was the son and successor of Beta II. There is no other evidence 
to corroborate it. 

4. Hemadri, in his Vrata-khanda, states that the Yadava Jaitugi killed Raudra, 
king of Tillahga (EHD, 243, v. 41). Sir R. G. Bhandarkar takes Raudra, which 
means the son of Rudra, to be error for Rudra.- But in view of the fact that 
Jaitugi killed Mahadeva, brother and successor of Rudra, the expression ‘Raudra’ 
seems to be referring to this unfortunate Yadava king. 

5. The Pakhal inscription of Ganapati gives a long list of countries conquered by 
the king (Hyd. Arch. Series , No. 4; IND, p. 52). 

6. Prataparudriyam of Vidyanatha gives a long list of countries conquered by 
Prataparudra when he was a Yuvaraja (BSS, LXV, Int. XIV, XV). 

6a. Cf. Ancient India, V. 56. 

7. For the condition of Telingana and Andhra after Prataparudra, cf. JAHRS , V 
217; EIM, 1923-24, p. 13. 



223 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


8. Vol/lV, Ch. VI. 

9. Vol. IV, Ch. VL 

9a. The latter part of the name of these rulers is written either as “kesarl” or 
“kesarl.” 

10. V. Rangacharya wrongly reads the date of a stone inscription of Kulottunga 
Chola I in the Vizagapatam Dist. as of 6i 1021 (cf. Hist. Ins. 91). 

11. See p. 32. 

12. The extreme known dates of the kings mentioned in this para have been 
given in the parenthesis. No attempt has been made to determine the years' 
of their accession with the help of stone inscriptions bearing regnal years along 
with dates in §aka year, as there is no agreement between them. Sometimes 
regnal years given in the stone inscriptions exceed the reign-periods mentioned 
in the copper-plates. In order to meet these difficulties M. M. Chakravarti sug¬ 
gests that regnal years given are as a matter of fact anka years which will have 
to be calculated by a particular method in order to get the actual figures (Cf. 
JASB, LXXII, 100; G. Ramdas, JBORS, XVTII. 285; Subba Rao, JAHRS , VI. 
208). But the application of this system also does not lead to the correct solu¬ 
tion of the problem. 

13. Vol. IV, pp. 145-8. 

14. JBORS, XVII. 15 ff; 1HQ, XXII, 300 ff. 

15 See JRASBL, XIII, 63 ff. The Bhuvaneswar inscription actually reads the 
names of Yayati I (1.4), Rhimaratha (1.5) and Dharmaratha (1.6). The read¬ 
ing of the second and third names as DIrgharava and Apavara is not supported 
by the published eye-copy. 

16 The name of the Chandrakula king is often believed to be Dlffratara of Adi- 
nagara. But this seems to be wrong. The Chola records appear to suggest 
some relation of this king with O^ira and Kosala mentioned without reference 
to rulers; cf. PIHC, IV. 66-67. 

17. Eh I. 235. 

18. JBORS, n. 52. 

19 It is sometimes suggested that the epithet sva-bhujopdriita-trikalihgadhipati 
would indicate only the first king of the family of the SomavamsI lords of 
Trikalinga. This is not convincing, as the title could be assumed after_ averting 
any danger to the succession or to the state; cf. the epithet sva-viry-adhigata- 
rdjya applied to Pallava Skandavarman (I) of the Omgodu grant No. 1, who 
was not the first of the Pallava family (Sue. Sat., p. 201). 

20 The charter records the grant of two villages in the Ungo<Ja and Gandharavadi 
districts, both attached to Kosala. Gandharavadi seems to be no other than 
Gandhatapati mentioned in an inscription of Mahasivagupta I, which has been 
discussed above. Gandhatapati is the modern Gandharadhi in Baudh. 

21. El, XXII. 138. 

22. The eye-copy suggests the reading ddhalam ch~odrci~gaudau and not sirhhalaih 
choda-gaudau. 

23. JAHRS , VIII. 40. 

24. The date was read by B. Misra as 811. 

25. El, XIX, 78. 

26. El, I. 32. 

27. El XXI. 159. 

28. El XII, 239; XXVIII, 321. 

29. See Sections V, VI, above (pp. 214-221). 

30. Bom. Gaz. I, li, pp. 572 ff; El, III, 230 ff; Sewell, H1S1, pp. 392-3 etc. 

31. Hiralal, ICPB, 2nd ed. p. 166 (No. 285). 

32. Ibid, pp. 158-59. 

33. Hiralal, op. cit., 163-64. 

34. Ibid, p. 165. 


224 


DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 

35. Sewell, op. cit, p. 84. 

36. Hiralal, op. cit, pp. 162-63. 

37. Ibid, p. 163. 

38. El, X. 25 if. 

39. Kumtirika-khanda, ch. 39. 

40. See JBRS, XL, i, 8 if. 

41. El, I. 38. 

42. Ibid, IX. 311 if, 161-62. 

43. Ibid, IX. 162. 

44. Hiralal, op. cit, p. 170. 

45. Ibid, p. 166. 

46. Ibid , p. 169. 

47 Ibid, p. 164. 

48. El, X. 40; Hiralal, op. cit, p. 169. 

49. Hiralal, ibid , p. 165. 

50. JKHRS, I. 229 if. 

51. El, XIX. 97 if. 

52. Hiralal, op. cit, pp. 158-59. 

53. El, XI. 343-44. 

54. Ibid, XII. 218 if; XXVIII, 283 if. 

55. Bomb. Gaz. I, ii, p. 384, note 4. 

56. El, XXII. 141 if. 






S.E.—15 


2 25 • 


CHAPTER IX 


THE HOYSALAS 

1. ORIGIN OF THE HOYSALAS 

The Hoysalas had their origin, in the hilly tracts to the north¬ 
west of Gangavadi in Mysore. The original home of the Hoysa¬ 
las is traditionally located in a village in Mudgere Taluk of the 
Kadur District, Mysore, where there is a Vasantika temple. The 
story runs that a Jain resident of the locality went to the Vasantika 
temple for worship and found in the temple a Jain ascetic wrapt in 
meditation in front of the goddess and oblivious to all else outside. 
A tiger from the forest, finding him in that condition, was about to 
spring upon him but, at the word of the ascetic “poy, Sala”—“strike, 
Sala”, the lay worshipper, without the slightest hesitation, drew 
out a dagger from his waistband and killed the tiger after a struggle. 
Appreciating the achievement of the man, the saint bespoke the 
favour of the goddess Vasantika and promised him sovereignty over 
the territory round about; hence the line of kings was called Poy- 
sala or Hoysala. This is the legend recorded in the earlier inscrip¬ 
tions of the Hoysalas. We find, however, a similar story of a wrestle 
with a tiger ending in its death mentioned as the distinct achieve¬ 
ment of another immigrant chieftain of the locality, Irungo Vel of 
Araiyam, who came 48 generations after the Mahabhdrata war. 
This is found in an address by the poet Kapilar, who appealed to 
the chieftain to accept for his spouse one of the daughters of his 
friend, the patron Pari, who died before marrying off the girl suit- 
ably. Like the Hoysalas, this early Tamil chieftain also claimed 
descent from the Yadava stock. 

The Hoysala kingdom lay between the Chola and the Later 
Chalukya territories, a region much disputed between the rival 
powers. Ever since the emergence of the Chalukyas in A.D. 973 
they became heirs of the Rashtrakufas to the rivalry against the 
Cholas for the possession of Gangavadi. Since the days of the 
Chola Rajaraja the Great, Chola authority superseded that of the 
Gahgas in this region, viz. the Gangavadi 96,000 and parts of 
Nolambavadi in the neighbourhood reaching up to the border¬ 
land of Banavasi to the north-west of both. Rajaraja’s autho¬ 
rity in that region became well established before A.D. 1000, and 
hostilities went on, as noted below, 1 during the subsequent reigns of 
Rajendra and his sons with undiminished vigour on both sides. 


226 


MIN/Sr/jy 


THE HOYSALAS 



In course of the struggle between, the Chalukyas and the Cholas, 
the hill chieftains in the intervening region had their opportunities 
to display their valour and acquire small principalities. The 
most successful of them seems to have been the Hoysala chief¬ 
tain, who distinguished himseli in various wars and ingratiated 
himself with his liege lord, the Chalukya ruler. The 
Hoysala chieftains thus achieved prominence and became in a way 
the trusted lieutenants of the Chalukya emperor on this border. 
Rising from this subordinate position, they created a kingdom for 
themselves under the Chalukya supremacy. When the Chalukya 
power declined, the Hoysalas stood forth as' the independent suc¬ 
cessors in authority over the southern territory of the Chalukyas. 

2. EARLY KINGS 

Sala, the first chieftain of the line and the hero of the tiger 
story, may perhaps be identified with Nripakama, though some deny 
any connection between the two. The achievement of killing the 
tiger seems to have been a historical fact, as the later Mackenzie 
manuscripts definitely state that Nripakama was engaged in hunt¬ 
ing and killing the tigers of the locality and was rewarded by the 
payment of an annual fee of one pana for the service. This seems 
far more likely than the other story about the tiger and the saint; 
but it might as well be a rationalization of the legend. He gradual¬ 
ly made himself headman and hero of the locality round about his 
village, Sosavir, or in Sanskrit Sasakapura. He seems to have been 
a man of ability and assumed the title Rajamalla Peruman Adi , 
which superseded his ordinary name Kama Hoysala. His son and 
successor, Vinayaditya, was a feudatory of the Chalukyas under 
Vikramaditya VI. Vinayaditya’s reign-period coincided with that 
of the protracted struggle between the Cholas and the Chalukyas 
for the possession of the Gangavadi province. As stated above, the 
Cholas were in possession not only of Gangavadi, but of a consider¬ 
able part of Nolambavadi, right up to the frontier of the Western 
Ghats and Banavasi. These had to be conquered after a severe 
struggle which provided the opportunity for a talented chieftain, 
well placed on the frontier, to achieve a position for himself. Both 
Vinayaditya and his son Ereyanga fought loyally for the Chalukyas, 
and the latter was known as the right-hand man of the Chalukya 
emperor. Some of the Hoysala inscriptions credit Vinayaditya 
with rule over the territory bounded by Konkana, Aluvakheda, Bayal- 
nadu, Talakad, and Savimalai. This is exactly the boundary of 
Gangavadi, which we find later on under Hoysala Vishnuvardbana. 
In all the campaigns of Vinayaditya, his son was associated with him 


227 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


until he predeceased his father. When Vinayaditya died in A.D. 
1101, his eldest grandson Ballala I succeeded him. He shifted the 
capital from Sosavir to Belur (or Velapura), although Dvarasamudra 
(modern Halebid) was an alternative capital. He married the three 
daughters of a military officer in the same pavilion, as one of his 
grants declares. He conducted a campaign against the Changalvas 
in A.D. 1104 and, along with his brother Vishnu, made a successful 
invasion of the Pan^ya dominion of Nolambavaqli. He is also said 
to have repulsed the Paramara prince, Jagaddeva, as noted above. 2 
The inscriptions of Ballala’s time are all dated in the Chalukya-Vik- 
rama era, which means that he regarded himself as a feudatory of 
the Chalukya emperor. 

3. BITTIGA OR VISHNUVARDHANA 

When Ballala died some time about the year A.D. 1106, his 
younger brother Bittiga or Bittideva succeeded to the throne. This 
Bittideva, generally known by the synonymous title Vishnuvar- 
dhana assumed by him, is the real maker of the Hoysala kingdom, 
corresponding to modern Mysore. The name Bittideva is the 
vernacular equivalent of what in Sanskrit would be Vishpudeva; 
the somewhat sacerdotal title Vishnuvardhana is thus not exactly a 
new name, but only the old name put in a new form. The first mention 
of him occurs in A.D. 1100 in association with his brother Ballala, 
the last of whose records is dated A.D. 1106. It is ten years later 
that inscriptions speak of him and his exploits. He began by carrying 
on successful invasions against Nolambava<Ji and Gangavadi, and it 
is the conquest of most of these two divisions after years of war 
that constitutes his title to greatness. The capture of Talaka^l in 
A.D. 1117 marks the climax of this conquest, credit for which 
is claimed by Bittideva as well as a number of generals. The capture 
of Talakad seems to have been a decisive event as after that he 
assumes the titles Vtraganga and Talakadu-gorida. He toured through 
his dominions and advanced as far as the eastern frontier of Kolar, as 
a record of his mentions his having been in Bethamangalam, when his 
younger brother Udayaditya’s daughter died. He had to carry on an 
expedition against Nolambava^i again in which he won a victory at 
a place called Dumme on the border between Shimoga and Chital- 
droog Districts. By A.D. 1117 Vishnuvardhana had become ruler of 
Gahgavadi and claimed portions of Nolambavadi. He is said 
to have defeated successively one after the other, the various chief¬ 
tains who occupied territories in the immediate neighbourhood, and 
built up a little kingdom for himself, the boundaries of which are 
giy en as Nangili in the east, Kongu, Cheram and Anamalais in the 


MINlSr^ 



south, Barakanur in the west and Savimalai in the north. This 
would mean that he had already taken possession of what came 
to be recognised as the Hoysala kingdom later on. Nangili is the 
village on the eastern frontier of Kolar. The Kohgu country is 
Salem and Coimbatore Districts, Cheram is the Chera country west¬ 
ward, and Anamalais are the hills to the south of the Palghat gap; 
Barakanur is in S. Kanara at the end of the main road leading over 
the Western Ghats from the Shimoga District into the coast region. 
Savimalai is yet unidentified, but the northern boundary at one time 
extended to the Krishna. 

We have a record of A.D. 1121 which shows Vishnuvardhana, 
resident at Dvarasamudra, his capital, making a grant to the Siva 
temple, which apparently was a foundation of the Cholas. The re¬ 
markable fact about this is that he made the grant in full durbar 
with his Jain queen Santaladevi and the five great ministers, who 
were responsible advisers, most of them, if not all, being Jains. His 
younger brother Udayaditya died and Vishnuvardhana made a grant 
for the merit of his soul. He made the grant of a village to his Jain 
wife Santaladevi, which was converted into a Brahmana settlement 
with 220 houses. It is a big Brahmana village even today, and goes by 
the name Santalagrama. In A.D. 1125 he made a grant to a Jain divine 
Sri Pala. He is found in his palace at Yadavapura in A.D. 1128 
and from there makes a grant to Marbalatirtha, the Siva temple on 
the Chamundi hill. This grant exhibits his catholic attitude in 
religion, for he had adopted the Vaishnava teachings of Ramanuja 
and was proclaimed a Vaishnava. 

Having secured the southern frontier against the Cholas he 
began to carry on wars of aggression in the north. He was in pos¬ 
session of Gangavadi, and had annexed a good part of No}arabava<Ji 
to his territory. This attracted the attention of emperor Vikrama- 
ditya, who directed a number of his Mahdrnan^Lalesvaras in the 
neighbourhood to check the advance of Vishnuvardhana. Though 
Biftideva’s generals claim a victory against the imperialists, his ad¬ 
vance towards the north must have been checked. His preoccupa¬ 
tions during these years were all along the northern frontier. An 
inscription, dated A.D. 1131, claims for him rule over Gangavadi 
96,000, Nolambavadi 32,000, the Banavasi 12,000 and Hanungal 500. 
This would mean the whole of the modern state of Mysore and con¬ 
siderable portions of the borderland outside the Mysore frontier in 
the north. Along with the Pandya of Uchchangi and Kadamba 
Jayakesi II, Bitfiga advanced up to the Krishna, but Vikramaditya, 
aided by Sinda Achugi II, drove him back to his territory and en¬ 
forced the acknowledgement of his suzerainty. 


229 


WHlST/fy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


In A,D. 1131 Biftiga also made a grant to the Siva temple at Mad- 
dur, which was otherwise called Narasimhachaturvedimangalam, the 
land granted having been claimed as a gift by the Ganga king Siva- 
mara, whose copper-plate grant was exhibited in evidence. The 
same year his queen SantaladevI died, and two years later his 
right-hand man, general Gahgaraja, who captured Talaka$, also 
died. This Gahgaraja had the reputation of having restored all the 
Jain shrines destroyed in course of the Chola invasions. His son Bap- 
pa, who succeeded him as Vishnuvardhana’s commander-in-chief, 
built a Jain shrine at Halebid in honour of his father and got it conse¬ 
crated by a Jain divine Nayaklrti. This shrine is in existence now, 
and is exhibited to visitors. The consecrated food from this shrine 
was sent to Vishnuvardhana while he was in camp on the banks of the 
Krishna in course of his northern campaigns. Simultaneously mes¬ 
sengers came bringing the happy news that his queen Lakshmldevl 
had given birth to a son and heir. These messengers reached him 
as he was returning victorious to his camp from the battlefield. 
Hence he ordered his baby son to be named Vijaya Narasiriiha and 
the Jain shrine Vijaya PanSvanatha. 


Vishnuvardhana’s records proclaim him as a feudatory of the 
emperor Somesvara III. He had his capitals at Talakad in the 
south and Bahkapura in the north, two fortified places which he 
occupied as occasion demanded. It was in A.D. 1137 also that he per¬ 
formed the great ceremony of Tulapurusha, which may be inter¬ 
preted as the symbol of his assuming royal power*. The next year, 
however, he had to campaign again beyond the Tungabhadra. The 
emperor Somesvara III died in that year and was succeeded by his 
son. Vishnuvardhana is described as being encamped at Banka- 
pura, victorious against his enemies, in the year A.D. 1147. He 
ruled probably up to A.D. 1152, possibly till A.D. 1156, but the date 
cannot be definitely determined. 3 Vishnuvardhana may be regard¬ 
ed as the maker of the Hoysala kingdom, although he did not assume 
independence, which was to come half a century later under his 
grandson. 


4. BALLALA II, THE FIRST INDEPENDENT KING 


Vishnuvardhana Hoysala was succeeded by his son Vijaya 
Narasirhha I, who was associated in the government with his father 
almost from his very birth. On his death in A.D. 1173, he was 
succeeded by his son Ballala II. Ballala successfully maintained 
the position of precedence that Vishnuvardhana had established in 
the course of his long and active reign, though he had to fight hard 
against the Nojambas and the Kalachuris, two of the most active 


280 


MINIS?*,, 


1110: HOYS ALAS 



feudatories of the Chalukya empire. His prolonged fight with the 
Yadavas has been discussed above in Chapter VII. After the first 
twenty years of his rule, marked by hard fighting, he felt confident 
that he could assume independence. The empire proved to be power¬ 
less to assert its authority against the Kalachuri usurpers and had 
to struggle for existence against the powerful feudatories, the Yada¬ 
vas, who were rising into prominence. Vlra Ballala himself was 
constantly engaged in fighting against the imperial feudatories, 
primarily the Kadambas in the south-west corner of the Banavasi 
division, and it was as the result of a successful campaign against 
them that he felt that the empire was as good as non-existent. He, 
therefore, solemnly declared himself ruler of his territories in the 
year A.D. 1193, from which time we may date the independence 
of the Hoysala kingdom. He aided the Chola Kulottunga III and 
Rajaraja III against Sundara Pandya whom he compelled to restore 
the Chola country to its rulers (A.D. 1217). He seems to have died 
about A.D. 1220, and was succeeded by his son Narasimha, the se¬ 
cond of the name in the dynasty. 

5. NARASIMHA II AND THE HOYSALA EMPIRE 

Narasimha’s reign began about A.D. 1220 and lasted on to 
A.D. 1234. From the beginning of his reign, the northern frontier 
of the Hoysalas was exposed to attacks by the Yadavas. Narasimha 
Hoysala had to intervene again to save the Cholas from Pandya 
aggressions. Maravarman Sundara Papaya I claims great achieve¬ 
ments against the Chola kingdom; among others, to have burnt 
down the capital cities of Tanj ore and Uraiyur. Simultaneously 
Rajaraja III was very hard put to it to hold his own against his 
refractory vassal, the Kadava Kop-Perunjinga, round about Cudda- 
lore and Kanchl. Narasimha II intervened in A.D. 1231, defeated Sun¬ 
dara Pandya at Mahendramangalam on the Kaveri, and released and 
restored to the throne Rajaraja III who had been thrown into prison 
by Kop-Perunjinga. In the course of these activities, it became 
clear that the Chola kingdom was in constant danger of being over¬ 
whelmed by the aggressive Pandyas, and Narasimha’s son and suc¬ 
cessor, Somesvara (A.D. 1234-1263), felt it necessary to establish 
himself in the south for the protection of the Chola kingdom against 
the Pandya menace. He built for himself a capital at Kapnanur, 
about four to five miles from Srirangam, on the northern bank of 
the Coleroon, and renamed it Vikramapura. From there he was 
able to offer effective protection to the Chola against his powerful 
feudatories, the Sambuvarayas of North Arcot and Kop-Perun¬ 
jinga of Cuddalore, not to mention the others. He had to leave the 


231 



MINIS 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


administration of his kingdom proper to his elder son Narasimha 
III and keep with him the younger prince Ramanatha. He had to 
fight against the Papayas vigorously, and Jatavarman Sundara 
Pandya lays claim to several victories over him. The wars bet¬ 
ween the Pandvas and the Hoysalas became very frequent and 
grave till at last the Pandya ruler could boast of having driven 
Somesvara from his southern capital, taken possession of the Chola 
kingdom, and marched northwards unmolested. Somesvara’s fight 
with the Yadava Krishna and consequent loss of territory have been 
mentioned above. 


6. THE FALL OF THE HOYSALAS 

When Somesvara was killed in course of one of these cam¬ 
paigns, about A.D. 1263, his kingdom was partitioned. The elder 
son Narasimha III took possession of the Hoysala territory proper, 
while the southern region was governed by his younger brother 
Yira Ramanatha from the southern capital at Kannaniir. As men¬ 
tioned above Narasimha repulsed the Yadava invasions under Maha- 
deva and Ramachandra, and held the Hoysala frontier in the north 
successfully against Yadava aggressions till A.D. 1291, when he 
died. Meanwhile Ramanatha and his ally, the Chola Rajendra III, 
suffered defeat at the hands of Pandya Maravarman Kulalekhara in 
A.D. 1279. Ramanatha, who thus lost his kingdom in the Tamil land, 
now started a war with Narasimha and occupied part of his terri¬ 
tory which he ruled from Kundani in the Bangalore District. After 
he died, his son had but a brief rule of a few years, and the two 
parts of the kingdom were united again under Ballala III, the son 
of Narasimha. Ballala ruled from A.D. 1291 to his death at Tri- 
chinopoly in A.D. 1342. 4 His successful aggressive campaigns 
against the Yadavas have been noted above. He had also to fight 
hard against the powerful rebellious feudatories of the empire. He 
ably ruled over his kingdom and protected his southern frontier 
against powerful Pan$yan rulers, inclined to be aggressive if oppor¬ 
tunity offered. He recovered Kinga, Mugadai, and Toajdainad, and 
Kanehi and Tiruvannamalai became his subsidiary capitals. He thus 
maintained his kingdom successfully till about A.D. 1310 when Malik 
Kafur invaded it during the reign of ‘Ala-ud-dln Khalji to which 
a detailed reference will be made in the next volume. The Hoy¬ 
sala had to pursue a policy of alternately submitting to the superior 
power and trying to re-establish his authority. His capital was 
overthrown in one of the Muhammadan invasions, and his son was 
sent as a prisoner to Delhi. The capital itself suffered destruction 
and Ballala had to reconstruct it. When at last the Khalji rulers 


232 


THE HOYSALAS 



<SL 


were supplanted by the Tughluqs, Ballala had to defend himself 
against invasions of Muhammad Tughluq and his generals. Sub¬ 
sequently, when the Tughluq empire fell, a Muhammadan dynasty 
ruled over Madura, with a strong garrison of Muhammadans 
established at Kannanur. These were like nails driven into the 
coffin of the Hoysala kingdom. Vira Ballala, as he is called, 
struggled hard in c#der to clear South India of these Muhammadan 
garrisons, but after years of campaigning he lost his life in a battle 
against the Madura Muhammadans at Trichinopoly, almost at the 
moment of victory. That is the last we hear of the Hoysala king¬ 
dom, although a son of his succeeded and ruled for a short while. 
The Hoysala dynasty, from the time of Vish^uvardhana, ruled in 
great glory for more than a century, but came to an inglorious end at 
the moment of success, and it was left to another Hindu dynasty 
to achieve what its last ruler attempted to do, viz. to turn out all 
the Muhammadan garrisons from South India and to assure Hindu 
independence. This was successfully accomplished by Vijayana- 
gara at a later date, but the way was paved for it to a great extent 
by the struggle of the Hoysalas, particularly the last one, Vira Bal¬ 
lala IIP 1 * 3 * 5 

1. See pp. 234 ff. 

2. See p. 175. 

3. Hice fixed*A.D. 1141 as the date of Vishnuvardhana’s death, but cf. K. A, N 
Sastri’s views in P1HC, XI. 129. 

4. There is some difference of opinion among scholars regarding the dd#s of 
Hoysala kings. Cf. The Hoysala Vaiiisa by W. Coelho (Bombay, 1959). 

Prof. K. A. N. Sastri has suggested the following dates in his latest publi¬ 
cation, A History of South India (1955), p. 215: 

1. Nripakama (1022-47); 2. Vinayaditya (1047-98); 3. Ereyanga (1063-1100) 

4. Ballala I (1100-10); 5. Vishnuvardhana (1110-52); 6. Narasimha I (1152-73) 

7. Ballala II (1173-1220); 8. Narasimha II (1220-38); 9. Somesvara (1233-67) 

10. Narasimha III (1254-92); 11. Ballala III (1291-1342). 

5. Further account of Vira Ballala will be given in Vol. VI. 


233 



CHAPTER X 


THE CHOLAS 

I. POLITICAL HISTORY' 

Rajaraja the Great (A.D . 985-1014) 

Hajaraja^ I, the so n of Sundara Chola, ascended the throne in 
June-July7985. His brother Aditya II was murdered at the instance 
of Uttama Chola, 1 who had made Rajaraja heir apparent. Con¬ 
sequently, he was enabled before his accession to the throne to ac¬ 
quire extensive knowledge of public affairs during several years. 
His ^early 1 titles were Rajakesari Afumoli and Mummadi Chola , the 
latter^rneaning “three times Chola’’, similar to the surnames Immafa 
(twice) and Nurma$i (hundred tim$s). tfhe inscriptions of Raja- 
raja range from his second to his tliirty-first regnal years,. He start¬ 
ed the practice of prefixing ‘historical introductions’ to his inscrip ¬ 
tions, wh ich was followed by his successors, and these officialrecords 
of public events are thus of great help to the historian of the Cholas. 

No other contemporary accounts of Rajaraja are Sxtarit. 

«• *. 

The Tanjore inscription of the twenty-ninth regnal year of 
Raj|paja mentions his jwarlike. achievements^ in its ‘historical intro¬ 
duction.’ “He was pleased to destroy_the.,- T sMps ,^) jjj^dajur- 

rg§lai, and conquered by his army, which was victorious in great 
•battles, Yengai-na<Ju, Gahgapadi, Tadigaipa^i, Nolambapadi, Ku$a- 
malai-nadu, Kollam, Kalihgam, Ilaman<Jalam (which was the coun¬ 
try) of the Singalas who possessed rough strength, the seven and 
a jialf J.a]tsha$ of Irattapadi an d ‘twelve thousand ancient islands of 
t he sea ’, deprived the Seliyas of (their) splendour~aFHie~Yefr mo¬ 
ment when (they were) resplendent (to such a degree) that (they 
were) wnH;hyj^ be where.’’ The first great trium ph 

^of Rajaraja was se cured early in his reign when he .,destroyed the 
// Chera navy at Triv andrum. fThe Tamil expression ( Kandalur fairiik- 
Kalamaruttaruli’ means “pleased to destroy the ships in the road¬ 
stead of Kandalur (Trivandrum)^ We learn from another source 
that Vilinam was destroyed before the seizure of Kandalur &alai. 
Inscriptions state that/Koll am or Q uilonjwas attacked separately. 
The Kerala ruler durin^fthis period was Bnaskara Ravivarman (A.D. 
987-1036). Rajaraja next conquered Madura and seized Arharabhu- 
jahga Pandya; subsequently he turned* his attention to K^sunjd$i- 
nadu or Coorg and got into possession of the stronghold q£j ^ daga i, 




234 

























THE CHOtAS 



<SL 


in order to check the, pow er of the Pandyas and the Cheras . The 
expediti on to ilama ncEram or Ceylon resulted^in .tbp dislodgement 
of JMahendra V_and the annexation of the northern part of the island. 
vjEajaraja”ruined Anuradhapura, made Po lonnaruva his capital, and 
I buT mKere ,.j jt substantial stone temple, the Siva Deval e. 

Gaiigavadi, TadujEihvadi and Nokmbavadi were political divi¬ 
sions of the'Western Ganga country. Rajaraja conquered them all 
about A.D. 991 and they remained a part of the Chola empire till about, 
A.D. 1117. The Chola army invaded Iraftapadi or the kingdo*i of the 
Western Chalukyds during the reign of Satyairaya, and ravaged it 
so mercilessly that children and Brahmanas were massacred and wo¬ 
men dishonoured according to a Chalukya inscription of A.D. 1007. 
But soon Satyairaya succeeded in recovering his position and con¬ 
fining the Cholas to the south of the Tungabhadra. 

Rajaraja’s interference in Eastern Chalukya affairs was the result 
of the distracted condition of the Vengl kingdom during the tenth 
century. As noted above 2 he helped Salctivarman to secure the throne 
after the long interregnum from A.D. 973 to 999. The Chola em¬ 
peror did so partly in order to frustrate the scheme of Satyairaya 
to combine the resources of the Western and Eastern Chalukyas 
against the Cho^ , Putting an end to the civil war in Vengl, Raja¬ 
raja claimed “to befits conqueror The alliance between the powers 
was cemdnted^y the marriage: of Kundava, Rajaraja’s dau ghter, 
with Vimaladitya (A.D. 1011-1018), the younger brother of SaklBrar- 
rnali 'l 'tlltimate lv this marriage prepared the way for th e uni ™ of 
the Eastern Chalukyas and the Cholas. 

Rajaraja’s conquest of Kalinga must have followed his sub¬ 
jugation of Vengl, as Kalinga sought to aggrandize itself at the ex¬ 
pense of its southern' neighbour.- Lastl y. Rajaraja conquered „the 
Maidive island s, “the 12,000 ancient isla nds” of the inscription . His 
empire included the WloTeTof SouthI I n5la"up to the Tungabhadra , 
the Maldives, and a part of Ceylo n; the Anflhrad esa was in feuda- 
. t(ffyaliiah ce with hi m.' Some of his titles reflect his, achievements: 
Mumma4i Chola; Cholamartanda; Jayangonda ; PandyakvMsani; 

/ Keralantaka; SihgalSttta'ka arid Telingakulpkala. 

Rajaraja^was one of the gr eates t soverei gns of Sout h In dia, a 
famous conqueror^and empire-builder, an administrator of ability, 
a pious andfolerant man7a~patron"Of art and Tetters" arid, above all, 
an amiable~pers6nalityl He not, only conquered extensively, but 
saw to it that the conque r ed terr it ory wa s properly administe red. 
He started a gre at land survey, in A.D, 1000, strengthened the im¬ 
perial administration, and en couraged local^self-government through¬ 
out his«*eirfhxlons. In A.D, 1012 he associated irilHe government of 


235 













































MINI STfy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




the empire his only son Rajendra who ha^^ready. been active on 
the battlefield, and the latter's reign period vtfas reckoned from his 
coronation as yuvardja. This system improved the administration 
by placing, in future, the energies of several princes at the service 
of the empire. - It prevented struggles for succession and familiaris¬ 
ed the heir apparent with injgerial affairs. This sort of joint rule 
accounts for the overlapping dates of Chlha dynastic history. 
Rajaraja, who was ji gvoted to Siva, assumed the title ©f Sivapada- 
The gr^at Rajarajesvara temple at Tanjor e, tire mosFbeautl- 
vA° } TuT^and perfe ct Tam i l temp le, wasTcompleted^nlt.D. 1010, and was 
maintained b y the revenue ojf many v illages scatt e red thrnnghmif. 
the^mpire. Bajaraja’s policy of religi ous toleratio n is indicated by 
some Buddhi st sculpt ures in the Tanjoregtemple^and the*pxection of 
temples for X/Tshnu wErch~]enjoyed his pa tronage and that of his 
sister. *Re co-operated in the construction of the Chudamani Vihara, 
a Buddhistjnona^ by the SaiI^ara™Emperor 

Maravijayottunga-varman (of Malay Peninsula, Java and Sumatra) in 
A.D. 1006 and gave away the village of Anaimangalam to the Buddha 
of that monastery. 3 The great and solid work of Rajaraja was the 
foundation upon whic h Raje ndra built; the work of the son is the 
most authentic testimony to the work of the fa^df. Rajaraja had 
several gugens inc luding (Loka MahadeviX the greate st of T HehTall; 
one son and three^daUghters indudingr KundavV Jtiis mother, 
Vanavan Mahadevi, was a Malaiyaman princess and she committed 
satQpn the death of her royal husband in A.D. 973. The most respected 
lady of the imperial household was Sembiyan Mahadevi, the queen 
of Gandaraditya, who lived on till A.D. 1001. The Chera queen of 
Sundara Chola also lived till that date. Rajaraja had a sister also * 
named Kundava. 


2. Rajendra I, Gmgaikonda Chola (A.D. 1012-1044) 

As noted above, Parak esari Rajend ra took an active part in 
public affairs beforejus^fi^io^ to the throne, and was associated 
with ♦his. father in the government of the empire. He ruled from 
A.D. 1^12^10^1044, and made his son Rajadhiraja heir apparent as 
early as A.D. 1018, The . inscriptions <»f Rajendr a describe his wars 
and c.qngjLiests-an^je^dnbrtJ^ ^eatn ess as a conqueror. The famous 

_grant (thirty- one ^ pper-plafes) of his sixth regnal 

(A.D. 1017) recites his achievim ehts~and a djditiohFwer e made 
to tjke^ aceount in Sanskri t about A.D. 1025 afteThis”conquest of 
KatjU ia or Kad^r am. ‘ ' ’ 

Another important record of Rajendra is his Tirumalai rock 
insgnption^ t hirteen th regnal year (A.lTl^^ 


236 












































THE CHOIAS 



gives a complete list of his continental, conquests. “Parakesarivar- 
man alias the lord Sri Rajendra Choladeva, . . . seized by* (his) great, 
warlike army (the following): Idaiturainadu; Vanavasi . . • ■ 
Kollippakkai; Mannaikkadakkam, the crown of the king of Ilam 
....; the beautiful crown and the necklace of Indra which the king 
of the South (i.e. the Pandya) had previously deposited with that 
(king of Ilam); the whole Ilamandala. . the crown praised by many 
and the garland of the sun, family-treasures which the arrow-shoot¬ 
ing (king) of Kerala rightfully wore; many ancient islands. the 

crown of pure gold _, which Parasurama, having considered the 

fortification of Sandimattivu impregnable, had deposited (there) 
when, in anger, he bound the kings twenty-one times in battle; the 
seven-and-a-half-IaJcshas of Irattapadi, (which was) strong by nature 
(and which he took), together with immeasurable fame, (from) Jaya- 
simha, who turned his back at Musangi and hid himself; Sakkara- 
kkottam, whose warriors were brave; Madura-mandala. . . ., Nama- 

naikkopam... , Panchappalli-, the good Masunidesa-, Indra- 

ratha of the old race of the Moon together with (his) family in a 

fight which took place (at) Adinagar-; Odda-vishaya, which was 

difficult to approach. ..., the good Kosalai-nadu where Brahmanas 
assembled; Tandabutti, in whose gardens bees abounded (and which 
he acquired) after having destroyed Dharmapala (in) a hot battle; 
Takkanaladam, whose fame reached (all) directions (and which he 
occupied) after having forcibly attacked Ranasura; Vangala-desa, 
where the rain-water never stopped (and from which) Govinda- 
chandra fled....; elephants of rare strength, women and treasure 
(which he seized) after having been pleased to put to flight on a hot 
battlefield the strong Mahlpala together with Sangu. .. .; Uttiraladam 
...., and the Ganga... . ” 

Regarding the identification of the names mentioned above, 
there is no agreement among scholars in some cases. Idaiturainadu 
is the Raichur Doab; Vanavasi is Banavasi; Kollippakkai is Kulpak, 
near Hyderabad; Mapnaikkadakkam is Manyakffeta, Malkhed; Ilam is 
Ceylon; “many ancient i slands” refer to the Maldives; Sandigia t tivu ' 
is an island in the Arabian Sea f amous in legend ; IrattaRa fli .is the 
West ern Clialukya countryftfav asimha (ID is the Western. Chalukya.:: 
king (Jagadekamalla f) who ruled from A.D. 1015 to 1043; Musangi 
or Muyangi is Maski in Hyderabad State; Sakkarakkottam is a place 
in Bastar; Madura-mandala, Namanaikkonam and Panchappalli may 
be regarded as parts of Masunidesam or Bastar under the Naga- 
vamsi rulers; Adinagar is Jajnagar in Orissa; Indraratha was pro¬ 
bably a SomavaihsI king; Odda-vishaya is Orissa; Kosalai-nadu was 
on the banks of the MahanadI; Tandabutti is Dandabhukti (Midna- 
pore District); Dharmapala, Ranasura and Govindachandra were 


237 















THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


local rulers in Bengal; Mahipala was Mahipala I of the Pala dynasty 
of Bengal hn& Bihar 4 and Sahgu was" probably his general; 
Takkanaladam and Uttiraladam were southern Radha and northern 
Ra<Jha which together comprised that part of Bengal which lies to 
the south of the Ganga; and Vahga]adesa was eastern and southern 
Bengal. 

The Tirumalai inscripti on re fers at the beginn ing to the mili¬ 
tary achievements of Rajendra as Yuvardjq . In A.D. 1018 Ceylo n was 

by destruction and looting on a 
large scale. Rajendra redeemed Parantaka Ps failure by seizing the 
Pantfya crown and other royal insignia in the custody of the Sinha¬ 
lese ruler; he also took away the crowns of the king and queen of 
Ceylon) The conq uered country wa s governed as a province, and 
several Si va and visK nuTe mples wer e erected. In the same year 
' he deprived the Chera ruler also of his crown. In A.D. 1018-1019 
Rajendra appointed \is son. as "viceroy of Madura, where a palace 
A was built, and Kerala^was subsequently added to his charge. 
> jA^^Though^ Jayasimha w as defeated at J Musarigi (Mas ki) in A.D. 1021, he 
yiX* soon recovered the Raichur Doah, re-established his authority up 
to the Tuhgabhadra and even penetrated int o the Bellary regio n. 
Therefore the statement in the TirumAlai inscription that Rajendra 
conquered the whole of Irattapacii can only be regarded as royal 
rodomontade. 

The next military effort of Rajendra was the expedition to 
' Eastern India , which was entrusted to his general. Crossing the 

Godavari and passing through Bastar and Orissa, the Chola army 
reached Western Bengal, defeated two rulers, crossed the Ganga, 
overthrew another ruler, recrossed r that river, triumphed over 
Mahipala I and returned home. The victorious general received the 
congratulations of his sovereign on t he banks of the Godavari, 
Water was brought f rom the__Gahga and poured into the Chola - 
tHe Targe irrig ation tank excavated near the , 

"j Gahgaik ondacholapuram ^TXJdaiyarpala^m” Taluk, Trichinopoly 

District;. near Chidambaram), built by Rajendra who assumed the 
Jitle 'Ganoatkond adiola’. The horthe r n raid w as not perHapT"wKl^ 
out some permanent results^ Some scholars attribute to it the 
settlement of some South Indian chiefs in Bengal and Mithila lead¬ 
ing to the foundation of the Sena prin£ipalfty x of Bengal and 
the Kamata dynasty of Mithila. Besides, w&, have clear evidence of 
the establishment of Saivas from Northern India in the Tamil 
country. 

The Tamil epigraphical account of the campaign of Rajendra 
against Kajla^am runs as follows: “(who), having despatched many 

238 




























MINIS T/}y 


THE CHOJjAS 



ships in the midst of the rolling sea and having caught Sangrama- 
Vijayottunga-varman, the king of Kadaram, together with the ele¬ 
phants in his glorious army, (took) the large heap of treasures which 
(that king) had rightfully accumulated; (captured) Srlvijaya .. . .; 
Papnai. • • •; the ancient Malaiyur. ...; Mayirudingam. . . .; Ilanga- 
soka... Mappappalam.. ..; Mevilimbangam; Valaippanduyu....; 
Talaittakkolam; Madamalingam. .. Ilamuridesam. . ..; Manakka- 
varam. ..and Kadaram of fierce strength which was protected by 
the deep sea.” j&rivijava was a kingdom in Sumatra; Pannai was on 
the east coast of the same island; M alaiyur was probably between 
grTvijaya'and T’annai; Mayirudingam may be located near Ligor in 
Malaya, to its south was Ilangasoka; Mappappalam was probably 
near the isthmus of Kra. The next two places cannot be 
identified. Talaittakkolam is identical with Takkola and was near 
the isthmus; Madamalingam was perhaps near the Bay of Bandon 
in Malay Peninsula; Ilamuridesam- (mod. Lamri) was in northern 
Sumatra; Manakkavaram is the Nicobar Islands; and Kadaram may 


be identified with Kedah, near Penang. 6 Thus . 

Raiendra’s oversea 

expedition was confined to Sumatra__and_Malay 

•v . - 

Peninsula. 


It seems that Rajendra seized the various divisions of the king¬ 
dom of San grama-Vij ayottuhga-va rman and finally his capital 
Kadaram, in one and the sam¥ campaign. It is, however, difficult 
to guess the real object of the expedition. For the Sailendra 
e mperor was the successor of Mara-Yijayottunga-varman, who' had 
founded a__Buddhist m onastery'at. Negapatam _in the j Avrmi V - fir st 
r egnal vearfAD. J .@ilnl£a iaraia I . and Rajendra, at the commence¬ 
ment of his reign, had renewed his father’s grant of the village of 
Anaimangalam to the Buddha of that monastery. We cannot say 
how the friendly relation between the two great powers changed 
into one of hostility during the decade between Rajaraja’s death in 
A.D. 1014 and Rajendra’s expedition to Kadaram. about A.D. 1025. 
Probably the Chola emperor"desIred to increase the prestige that had 
accrued to him from his Gangetic expedition, by a naval demonstra¬ 
tion against the Sailendra empire. It is also not unlikely that the 
Chola king was actuated by the motive of controlling the rich trade 
between India and the Far East. We do not also know whether his 
mastery over this region was only temporary and whether his con¬ 
quests in Sumatra and Malay were maintained by him and his 
successors. 

Rajendra^sjwarlike activities did_noi_cease after the conquest 
of Kadaram. About A.D. 1029 a struggle for independence started in 
Ceylon. There were also rebellions in the Pandya and Chera coun¬ 
tries, which were put down by Rajadhiraja, the heir apparent since 


239 






















THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


A.D. 1018. The last years of Rajendra witnessed the Chola invasion 
of the Western Chalukya dominions ruled over by Somesvara I Ahava- 
malla (A.D. 1043-1068). Rajadhiraja won a victory at Pundi on the 
Krishna, sacked Kalyana, and bro ught home the dvdrapalak a_{door- 
k e e per ) 'image which is~now found at Dar asuram (Tanjore District ). 
The Chola invasion was' particularly’’ ruinous and humiliating to the 
Western Chalukyas. Minor campaigns were conducted in some 
parts of Mysore, with the result that “cows were carried off and 
women’s girdles were unloosed.” The Cholas offended seriously 
against the ethics of warfare even in the days of Rajaraja the Great 
and Rajendra the Gangaikondachola. 

Rajendra, the greater son of a great father, was active for 
about thirty-two years in extending the power and prestige which 
the Chola Empire had acquired during the previous reign. His most 
famous titles epitomise his greatness: Mudikon$a, Gangaikonda, 
Kaddrangonda and Pandita Chola. The first title means that he cap¬ 
tured the crowns of the Pandya, Kerala and Ceylonese kings; the 
second and third indicate his great continental and oversea achieve¬ 
ments; the fourth receives substance and reality from an .inscriptio n 
at Ennaviram (South Arcot District) , assignable to about A.D 10257 
which records the provision made at an important Vaishnava centre 
for a Vedic College with 340 students learning the Vedas, Vyakarana, 
Mimamsa, and Nyaya under fourteen teachers. Three of them 
taught the Rigveda; four the Yajurveda; two the Samaveda; and 
five the Sutras, the Rupavatdra (a work giving the elements of 
grammar), Vyakarana, the Mimamsa of ‘Prabhakara and Vedanta. 
Teachers and pupils received a daily allowance of naddvL which was 
sopplemehted hv a mone y paym ent. The highest salary was paid 
to the teacher^ of Vyakaran a, but the teacher of Vedanta received 
no money paym ent. This institution was ma intained from the pro¬ 
duce of forty-five veils of l and. The educational policy of Rajendra 
was continued by his successors. Inscriptions mention f our of_ his 
queens. His three sons, Rajadhiraja^ I, Rajendra II, and Vira- 
rajendra I ascended the throne in succession, and his daughter, 
Amm angadevi, was the queen of Rajaraja I of Vengi and mother of 
Rulottunga TA 



(A 


3. Rajadhiraja I (A.D. 1018-1052) and Rajendra 11 (A.D. 1052-1064 j 6a 


Rajadhiraj a was made joint ru ler with his father_as early as 
A.D. 1018. l5uring his independent reign from A.D. 1044 to 1052 the 
Ceylonese troubles continued. Drastic steps were taken to remove 
them, including barbarities like the mutilation of the nose of the 






















THE CHOLAS 


Ceylonese queen-mother, and in most parts of the island Chola 
authority was maintained intact. The war-with the Chalukyas, also 
characterised by the destruction of their cities and buildings, cul¬ 
minated in A.D. 1052 in the h ard fought bat Ugjag JCop pam, 6 in which 
the Chalukya king Some^vara^vasdefcated^ but the Chola emperor 
lost his life. His younger brother, Rajendra II, who had been chosen 
heir apparent, in supersession of the claims of Rajadhiraja’s sons, 
crowned himself on the battlefield, where he had distinguished him¬ 
self by his bravery. He advanced to Kolhapur and erected a pillar 
of victory there. In spite of the frequent defeats of the Chalukyas 
and the serious injury done to some parts of their dominions, the 
Cholas failed to reduce them to vassalage or annex permanently any 
portion of their territory. Rajadhiraja performed a horse sacrifice 
about A.D. 1044 and pursued an uninterrupted martial career for 
more than thirty years. An inscri ption of A.D. 1048 a t Tribhuvani, 
nea r Pondicherry , mentions a Ve dic college with an endowment’of 
seventy-two veils of land and with 260 students and twelve teachers, 
who were exempted from service on the committees of the 
local assembly. pThe inscriptions of R ajadhiraj a's ^s ucce ssors refer 
to him as Anaimerrunj ina or “ who d ie d on the elephant back/hj K ^ 

RajendraJL (A.D. 1052-1064), the he ro of Koppam. marched 
against Somesvara in A.D. 1062 in order to check the growth of his 
power and prevent his interference in the affairs of Vengl and defeat¬ 
ed him as mentioned above. 7 Rajendra’s eldest son, Rajamahendra, 
became Yuvardja about A.D. 1059, but after his death his place was 
occupied by Vlrarajendra I. Rajendra’s daughter Madhurantakl 
married the Eastern Chalukya prince Rajendra who was later known 
as Kulottunga I. ^ , 

' s l 

4. Vlrarajendra I (A.D, 1063-1070) and Adhirdjendra (A.D. 1QG8- 

70) 


Rajendra II was succeeded by his younger brother, Vlrarajen¬ 
dra I (A.D. 1063-1070), who invaded the Western Chalukya empire 
in A.D. 1067 in response to a challenge of Somesvara to meet him at 
Kudal-Sangamam again. But the latter did not turn up, and the Chola 
army returned home after erecting a pillar of victory on the banks 
of the Tungabhadra and offering insults to the effigy of Somesvara, 
who was then suffering from an incurable fever which subsequent¬ 
ly led to his suicide by drowning in the Tungabhadra. The Chola 
inscriptions say that Vlrarajendra “saw the back” of (defeated) 
Somesvara five times. The Chola emperor proceeded to Vengi, 
defeated the Western Chalukyas near Vijafyawada, strengthened his 
hold on Vengl, and returned to Garigaikondacholapuram, the Chola 










MINlSr^ 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

capital from the days of Rajendra I. Virarajendra sent an expedi¬ 
tion to Ceylon and crushed the rebellion there. He is said to have 
conquered Kad&ram and placed a friendly ruler on its throne about 
A.D. 1069. Virarajendra came into conflict with Somesvara II (A.D. 
1068-1076), the son of Somesvara I, and both sides claimed victory. It 
seems that Somesvara II and his younger brother, Vikramaditya VI 
(A.D. 1076-1126), quarrelled, and on the latter’s appeal to the Chola 
emperor, the former was forced to surrender a part of his dominions 
to his brother, who married a Chola princess. Virarajendra assum¬ 
ed a number of titles like Ahavamallakulakala or destroyer of the 
family of Ahavamalla (great in war) Somesvara I, and Vattabha- 
vallabha, or lord of the Western Chalukyas who called themselves 
Medinivallabhas or lords of the world. An inscription of A.D. 1067 
mentions the provision made for a Vedic college with a hostel and 
hospital at Tirumukkudal (Chingleput District), and the medical 
staff consisted of two doctors, two nurses and others. There were 
beds for fifteen in-patients, and water scented with cardamoms and 
Khas Khas (cus cus) roots was brought from Perambalur (Trichino- 
poly District). 

. Virarajendra I was succeeded by his son Adhirajendra, who ruled 
from A.D. 1068 to 1070 with his father, and only for a few months as a 
sole monarch. His unnatural death and the accession of Kulottunga I 
resulted in the extinction of the Vijayalaya line. It is not easy to 
explain the confusion which followed Virarajendra’s death, the 
intervention of Vikramaditya VI and his return, the death of Adhi¬ 
rajendra in the rebellion which broke out and the part played in 
these affairs by Kulottunga I. Adhirajendra is regarded by some as 
the Krimikantha (diseased neck) Chola of Vaishnava tradition; he 
seems to have been the persecutor of Ramanuja though some 
scholars regard Virarajendra I or Kulottunga as the enemy of that 
Vaishnava saint and philosopher. 




**5. Kulottunga I (A.D. 1070-1120) 


Rajendra II Eastern Chalukya or Kulottunga Chola I was the 
great-grandson of Rajaraja I Chola in two ways: his mother, 
AmmahgadevI, was the daughter of Rajendra I Chola (son of Raja¬ 
raja I Chola), and his father, Rajaraja I Eastern dialukya was the 
son of Kundava (daughter of Rajaraja I Chola)' and Vimaladitya of 
Vehgi. Thus Kulottunga I was seventy-five per cent Cho|a by 
blood. The career of this Chalukya-Chola from the death of his father 
in A.D. 1060 to his own occupation of the Choja throne in A.D. 1070 is 
obscure. During this period he fought successfully with some chiefs 
of Bastar and even with Vikramaditya VI as prince. It is likely 


242 


\ 


« r 


THE CHOHAS 



<SL 


that Kulottunga was on good terms with Virarajenclra I and helped 
him in the re-establishment of Chola authority in the kingdom of 
Vehgl in A.D. 1067 against the encroachments of the Western Chalu- 
kyas. It is probable that his accession to the Chola throne was regard¬ 
ed with satisfaction as the confusion of the previous reign necessitat¬ 
ed the restoration of the integrity and strength of the empire, though 
in the light of the conflicting evidences we cannot satisfactorily 
account for his advent to the Chola throne. No doubt the internal 
confusion in the Chola empire afforded a good opportunity, but the 
supposition of a struggle between him and Adhirajendra, or of a 
prolonged fight for the throne, is untenable. 

About A.D. 1073 Yasahkarna Kalachuri raided the Vengi country ^ 
without any appreciable results. Vij ayabahu (A.D. 1055-1110) ofV^ - 

Ceylon took advantage of the anarchy in the Chol a^empiye befo re ttie 
apegsVsion of-Kulottunga. capti^d Polonn aruVU-ikhO]it AT)?" 1 \ 

crowned himself Ik ing ■ of^eylon in A.D. 1073,, and be came iiid SPg^- 
defiT peace with him in A.D. 1088, 

and gavehis daughter in marriage to a Sinhalese prince. The Chola 
conflict with Vik ramad iiaz a..Vi b roke out in A.D. 1076, and in the 
statement of itTresult, the Chola and Chalukya records are not in 
agreement. Anyhow it is clear that the ^eat_e mperor 0 f Kalyana per¬ 
sistently thwarted the plans of Kulottunga, especially the union of 
the Eastern Chalukya and the Chola kingdoms. After the death or 
ejection of Vijayaditya VII Eastern Chalukya in A.D. 1076, Kulottun¬ 
ga appointed his sons as viceroys of Vehgl. The troubles of Kulottun¬ 
ga during his early regnal years led to the revolt of the Pandya and 
Chera countries, but they were reconquered. Military colonies (nilaip- 
padai) were established in these countries to keep them under con¬ 
trol, but in matters of internal administration they were left free. 
Kulottunga claims to have destroyed Kadaram, but about A.D. 1090 an 
embassy came from its king and at his request, Kulottunga exempted 
from, taxes the village granted to the Buddhist monastery at Nega- j 
patam. The rebellion of Venad about A.D. 1098 was put down by I 
Naralokavira, a famous general of Koluttunga. 


Kulottunga twice invaded Kalih ga, His first expedition about 
A.D. 1096 quelled the revolt of Southern Kalihga, a part of the Vehgl 
province. The second and more important expedition in A.D. 1110 is 
dealt with in the Kalmgattupparani of Jayangondar, the cou rt poet 
of Kulottunga, in wlncn^oth theHbrightand seamy”sides of warfare 
afe~b^^ The expedition started from Kanchi and was led 

by a rep uted general of Kulottunga . n amed Karunakara Topclaiman. 
He was a Pallava chieftain ruling over Vanduvahjeri (Tanjore Dis¬ 
trict), or Vandalur (Chingleput District) according to some scho- 


243 





















THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


lars Anailtavarman Cho^aganga (A.D. 1078-1150) of Kalihganagara, 
the son of the Chola princess Rajasundarl, was defeated, We do 
not know exactly why the Chola emperor waged war with Kalihga; 
but the failure of its ruler to send in the annual tribute is mention¬ 
ed in the poem of Jayangoiida r. Anyhow the second Kalihga war 
led to no annexations. 

Kulottunga’s inscription of A.D. 1111 shows his friendly relations 
with the Gahadavalas of Kanauj. About A.D. 1115 the Chola empire 
was ^almost as extensive as i n the days of^fs^So ry, exc ept lor the 
losso? Cev lorn But within two or three years from that date Rfolet- 
tuhga lost the Gangavadi and Vengi pipvin ces. 

I As noted above, V ishnuvardhana Hoysa la conquered the 
f Chola provinces of Gaiigav adi and Nolambavadi, c aptured Tala- 
(kad and assumed thcTlitl^^ lie is also" said to 

have invaded the Tamil country and raided it as far as Rames- 
varam. An inscription states that his attempt to carry away some 
images from Atfuturai (Trichinopoly District) to Halebid was fru¬ 
strated. About A.D. 1118 the province of Vengi came under the control 
of Vikramaditya VI, who maintained it till his death. This was 
his. greatest victory over Kulettunga with whom he had always been 
on terms of hostility. Thus during the last decade of his long reign, 
Vikramaditya realised the object, cherished from the beginning of 
his reign, of separating the Eastern Chalukyas and the Cholas. 

Though Ceylon was permane ntly and wholly los t to the Cho la 
emp ire, Ve iigi and parts or^GaAgavadiwere later r ecovered, Hjvas 
* Kulottuhga wh pUpr. time made V engi an integral part of 

the Cho^a emp ire T but he was wise enough not to make~any attempt 
to alter the Tuhgabhadra frontier. He gave a fresh lease of life tot 
his empire by conferring on his subjects the benefits of internal 
peace and benevolent administration. Though Gahgaikondachola- 
puram continueitp_be^the i mperia l capital^ th e impo^ahce of Kanch! 
stead ily I ncreased. Kulottunga assumed the titles of Tribhuvana- 
ch akra vajt^XEmipeYor of Three Worlds), Virudarajabha y^l^afa (a 
terror to Virudaraja i.e. Vikramaditya), and Su ngandavirtta or who 
abolished tolls, but the character of this fiscal reform is not known. 
He ordered a land survey in A.D.0.O86^the date of Dome sday Survey 
of EnglandTby a strange coincidence; and another survey was made 
in A.D. 1110. Kulottunga’s queens were Madhurantaki who died about 
A.D. 1100, Tyagavalli and others. Seven sons and a daughter of his are 
known. Among the sons, Cho$aganga, Mummadi Chola, Vira Cho/Ja, 
and Vikrama Chola were viceroys of Vengi under their father; his 
daughter married a Ceylonese prince. 




























THE CHOJiAS 


6. Vikrama Chela (A.D. 1118-1135) and Kulottunga 11 (A.D. 1133- 

1150) 

Kulottunga I was succeeded by his son Vikrama Chola who be¬ 
came sole ruler in A.D. 1120. He seized the opportunity afforded by 
the death of Vikramaditya VI in A.D. 1126 to restore the Chola power 
in the Vehgl kingdom, and also recovered Kolar and some other parts 
of Gangavadi. About A.D. 1125 North and South Arcot Districts 
suffered from floods and famine. The year A.D. 1128 is memorable 
for the king’s handsome donations to the Nataraja temple at Chidam¬ 
baram which had been favoured by the Chola emperors since the days 
of Parantaka I and which had become particularly important in con¬ 
sequence of the change of the c apital from Taninre to GanpaiVrmffa- 
choja^uiajp, not far from Chidambaram. Vikrama Chola toured 
frequently, and was living in his palace at Chidambaram in A.D. 1130. 
His surnames, Ty&gasamudra and Akalahka, suggest his liberality 
and moral purity. An inscription of A.D. 1121 refers to a Medical 
School at Tiruvaduturai (Tanjore District) teaching the Samhitd 
of Charaka and the A.shtangahridaya Savihita of the younger 
Vagbhata. 

Vikrama Chola was succeeded by his son Kulottunga II (A.D. 1133- 
1150), who became independent ruler after his father’s death in 
A.D. 1135. He continued his predecessor’s benefactions to the Chidam¬ 
baram temple. He, however, exhibited religious intolerance by 
throwing the image of Govindaraja into the sea, though the anti¬ 
quity of the Vaishnava shrine is proved by Manikkavachakar’s re¬ 
ference to it. Kulottunga II has been identified by some scholars 
with the Krimikantha Chola of Vaishnava literature, the Chola whose 
neck was diseased, or infected with germs, because of his impiety. 3 
His reign is an epoch in literary history; he and his feudatories pat¬ 
ronised Ottakkuttan, Sekkilar and Kamban. 

7. Rajaraja II (A.D. 1146-1173) and Rajadhiraja II (A.D. 1163-1179) 

During the reign of Kulottunga II’s son, Rajaraja II, a 
civil war broke out about A.D. 1169 between Parakrama Pandya 
and Kulasekhara Pandya, and the latter seized Madura and 
killed his opponent along with some members of his family. 
The help sought for by Parakrama Pandya from Parakrama- 
bahu the Great, king of Ceylon, came too late. Lahkapura, 
the Sinhalese general, conducted a destructive campaign in 
the Pandya country necessitating Choja intervention on behalf 
of Kulasekhara, won a victor^- over him, and put Vira Papaya, 
the son of Parakrama Pandya, in possession of the country. 
But soon Kulasekhara was reinstated by the Cholas, who invaded 


245 






eylon. Parakramabahu changed his policy suddenly and allied 
himself with Kulasekhara, who in consequence turned against the 
Cholas. Therefore they also changed their policy and enthroned 
Vira Pandya. This protracted warfare continued beyond the reign 
of Rajaraja II till about A.D. 1177. Thus, a century after the accession 
of Kulottunga I, the growth of trouble from the feudatories reached 
its climax and revealed the central weakness of the Chola empire. 
Rajadhiraja II (A.D. 1163-1179), the successor of Rajaraja II and an¬ 
other grandson of Vikrama Chola, brought the Pandya Civil War to 
a close. 


8. Kulottunga III (A.D. 1178-1216) 

Kulottunga III was chosen by Rajadhiraja II to be his successor 
but the relation between the two is not known. Though the help 
of Rajadhirajaf secured the throne for Vlra Pandya, the latter intri¬ 
gued with Ceylon and turned against the Cholas. Probably about 
A.D. 1182, he was dethroned by Kulottunga w'ho enthroned Vikrama 
Pandya. perhaps related to Kulasekhara Pandya. About A.D. 1189 
Vira Pandya again created trouble with the aid of the Kerala king, sus¬ 
tained defeat at the hands of Kulottunga, and took refuge in Quilon. 
Ceylon joined in the fray as usual, and while Kulottunga claims a 
victory over her, Nihsahkamalla, the Sinhalese ruler, is 
said to have invaded the Pandya country thrice, and appears to 
have seized Ramesvaram. Between A.D. 1190 and 1194 the Chola 
authority was asserted in the Kongudesa. The relations of Kulottuh- 
ga with his Telugu-Choda feudatories, who occupied the region bet¬ 
ween the North Arcot and Nellore Districts, were generally good, 
but about A.D. 1196 he recovered Kanchi from them after their occu¬ 
pation of it for some time. About A.D. 1205 the third Pandya expedi¬ 
tion was sent against Jatavarman Kulasekhara, probably the son of 
Vikrama Pandya, who was defeated but reinstated. Kulottunga, how¬ 
ever, ravaged the country and destroyed the coronation-hall at 
Madura. He despatched an expedition to the Andhradesa about 
A.D. 1208. Towards the close of his reign Kulottunga reaped the fruit 
of his harsh Pandyan policy; he was overpowered bv Maravarman 
Sundara Pandya I (brother of Jatavarman Kulasekhara) who cou ld 
not however exploit his victory fully because of the Hoysala inter¬ 

vention on behalf of theTTioIas ~ 

" Gangaikondacholapuram remained the capital of the Chola 
empire. Kulottunga gave much attention to Pandya affairs and 
was largely successful except at the end of his reign. He assumed 
the title of Maduraiyum Pdndiyanmudittalaiyam Kondaruliya “who 
was pleased to take Madura and the crowned head of the Pandya." 
He exercised firm control over the Telugu-Chodas. Famine conditions 



246 









THE CHOXjAS 


prevailed in A.D. 1201 and 1202 and relief works were started by 
private agency, according to an inscription at Tiruvannamalai (North 
Arcot District). An inscription of A.D. 1213 mentions an institution 
for the study of Vydkarana at Tiruvorriyur near Madras. Kulottuhga 
was active in building temples and improving them and the finest 
work of his reign is the temple at Tribhuvanam (Tanjore District), 
with striking Ramayana reliefs. Though he maintained his em¬ 
pire and its administrative system intact, his difficulties bring into 
relief the dangers that threatened his position. His personal quali¬ 
ties were responsible for the continuance of the empire under him, 
and he may be regarded as the last great Chola. Many feudatory 
chieftains rose to power, such as Telugu-Chodas, Banas, Sanabu- 
varayas, Kadavas, Malaiyamans, Adigamans and others, and this im¬ 
paired the strength of the central authority. At last, the imperial¬ 
ism of the Pandyas ruined the Chola empire in the thirteenth 
century. 

9. Rdjamja Ill (A.D. 1216-1246) and Rdjendra III (A.D. 1246-79) 

The relationship of Rajaraja III to his predecessor or successor 
is not definitely known, and his inscriptions refer to Kulottuhga III 
as Periyadevar or the great king. Perhaps he was the son of Kulo¬ 
ttuhga, and father of Rajendra III. Rajaraja was confronted with 
a difficult political situation, consequent on the rise of the Pandyas, 
the Hoysalas, the Kadavas, the Telugu-Chodas, and the Kakatiyas, 
and his incompetence and 'folly aggravated his difficulties. He 
brought about a conflict with the Pandyas' by violating the treaty with 
them. They inflicted a sanguinary defeat on him and seized his 
capital. A contemporary historical romance, J:he Ga d yakarqmnp.ta. 
of Kjalakalabha; refers to the flight of Raiaraia, his capture after a 

battle by the Kadavara ya, Kop -Peruhjinga, and the Hoysala inter - 
ve ntion~in his favour . 

One of the queens of Hoysala Ballaia II (A.D. 1173-1220) was a 
Chola princess. His son, Narasimha II (A.D. 1220-1234), provoked by 
the audacity of Kop-Peruhjinga, who had imprisoned Rajaraja at 
Sendamangalam (“South Arcot District) and ruined the Chola country" 
aticl its temples" left his capital Dvarasamudra and pitched his camp 
at Pachchur, near Srlrangam. After directing his generals against 
Kop-Peruhjihga, Narasimha, who had captured Srirangam and Kan- 
chi, marched as far as Ramesvaram where he is said to have erected 
a pillar of victory, jfae Tiruvendipuram (South Arcot District) 
inscription of Raj ara ja III dated A.D. 1231-2, narrates the story of 
Kop-Per uhjihga ? s revolt, of his imprisoning the king, of the march o f 

ffieTToysala generals, Senda - 

mangalam, of their liberation of the royal prisoner, and the death 


247 
















MIN isr/fy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


of his _line7 changed 
of friend- 




oi a r.f»vln-nogp prince who L ari befriended. the Kadava. Narasiihha 
became famous as the Cholardjyapratishthdpandcharya, or the foun¬ 
der of the Chola kingdom, After the defeat of the Pandyas, the 
Hoysala king 'entered into matrimonial relations with them. Thus 
Rajaraja became dependent on the Hoysalas. The administration 
of the Cho}a country deteriorated, and the feudatories freed them¬ 
selves from imperial control. Though the Hoysalas saved the 
Chola power from extinction for the time being by their interven¬ 
tion, they consolidated their position in the Chola country and at¬ 
tempted with success to play the role of arbitrators in the affairs of 
the Tamils. Narasimha’s son Somesvara (A.D. 1234-1263) established 
his position at Kannanur, near Trichinopoly, about A.D. 1239 and 
played a part in the affairs of the declining Chola empire. 

Rajendra III (A.D. 1246-1279), more capable and energetic than 
Rajaraja III, attempted to increase his power and prestige with the 
help of the Telugu-Chodas. It is probable that he triumphed over 
Maravarman Sundara PandyaII, and the Hoysalas then inclined 
, towards the Pandyas against the Cholas. But the accession of 

( Jatavarman Suhdara~~P~andya I, \fhe~ gr eatest _ 

rknnesvara's hostile attitude towards Rajendra into one 
ship and co-operation. About A.D. 1250 Kanchi was occupied by Gana- 
pati Kakatiya. Taking advantage of this state of affairs Jatavarman 
Sundara Pandya executed a grand military march which almost re¬ 
volutionized the political condition of South India. Somgsvara 
was defeated andjdainjilbattle. The Cholas were subdued; Kop- 
Perunj ihga~~was converted'^mto a subordinate'' Pandya ally ; the 
Telugu-Chodas were vanquished; the Kakatlyas were expelled from 
Kanchi; and Nellore was seized. /Raj endra’sl political position was 
consequently that of a Pan dyan feudator y fr om about A.D. 1258 to 
1279. Thus the mighty royaT'power - founded by Rajaraja and 
Rajendra came to an ignoble end. Ga hgaikonrjacholapuraj n continu¬ 
ed as the capital down to the last days of the Chola empire. 

10. Kop-Perunjinga 

The caree r of Ko p-P erurijiriga or Maharajasimha (A.D. 1229-1278) 
of 6e ndamahgalam loest illustrates the decline of the Chola empire. 
He'sTarted~as'a _ loyarfeudatory of Rajhraja, but defeated Tffnrufbout 
A.D. 1231 at Tellaru, near Wandiwash, and imprisoned him at Senda- 
mangalam. After the intervention of Hoysala Narasirhha II Kop-Peru¬ 
njihga again became a Chola feudatory. But im A.D. 1243 he assumed 
titles indicative of his independent status. Kop-Perunjinga defeat¬ 
ed the Hoysalas in A.D. 1252-3 at Perambalur (Trichinopoly District), 
seized their ladies and expiated his guilt by gifts to the temple at 




248 




















MINIS T Ry 



<SL 


tHE CHOLAS 

/rmahachalam. But Jatavarman Sundara Pan$ya besieged £enda- 
rnangalam, reduced him to vassalage in A.D. 1255, and secured his co¬ 
operation in his own northern campaigns. 

The inscriptions of^Ko p-Peruhjihga are lai^elv_found in the 
South Axcpt, Nort h" A rcot, and Chingleput Districts and to a lesser 
extent, in the TanjoreT^^urnool an7TGbdavail"Districts. He" claims 
to have conquered the Choias, the Hoysalas, the Pan^yas and the 
Kakatlyas. From his stronghold at Sendamangalam he controlled 
Cuddalore, Chidambaram, Vriddhaehalam and KatnchL He was de¬ 
voted to God Nataraja at Chidambaram and built the eastern 
Gopura of the temple there. His titles are not only political, mili¬ 
tary and religious but also literary. There is some truth under¬ 
lying the titles Pdi^d^amandala-sthapana-^titradhdra, Sahodara - 
sundara, Karnfyalakshrnl-lwjtiaka, Kathaka-kula-tilaka, and PenndVM- 
dindtha. There is ample justification for his titles of Sarvajna Khad- 
gamalla, Vdlbctlaperumdl and Kanakasabhcipati-sabh'l-sarvakcirya - 
sarvakala-nirvahalca. But whether his literary titles like Kavisarva- 
bhauma and Sahitya-ratnakara are well founded is more than one 
can say, though the title Bharata-malla may be justified by the sculp¬ 
tures of dance-poses he caused to be engraved on the eastern gateway 
of the Chidambaram temple; he shows self-restraint in describing 
himself as Kdveri-kamuka. He claims to be a Kaduvetti or Pallava 
by descent. His character and achievements before and after A.D. 1243 
exhibit a remarkable inner unity. During an age of stress and 
storm, he established his power and prestige and his forceful per¬ 
sonality and unbounded energy made his name and family famous 
in the triangular political contest among the Pandyas, the Hoysalas, 
and the Kakatxyas for control of the fast declining Chola empire. / 

II POLITICAL ORGANISATION 
1. Central Government 

The extent and resources of The Chola empire increased the r i W v.. v-mL 
power and prestige of its sove reign s. The pomp of kingship was v < < Lj 
augmented not only by the great capitals like ^anjoreJ ^Qftpgai- ^ 
kon dachola puramX Pu<^^^an 7 and feaiicba, (the larg<r imperial % - t >.> 
househ ol ci and state ba) iqucet; and the magnificent ddnas " 

or donations made in lieu of th e Mvdmedha 

old, but also byjhe.giving ofjx n^Jp^oIs_anci thj^stalla- -7 ^ 

tion and worship of the ima ges. of kings aiid jqueens in temples. urr '‘ "'^ f ^ 
„/The system of hereditary succession ^to the t hron e wa s occasio nally ^ 
mod ified by the rulijigJiLng^^ of a_ younger pri nce 

in preference to his seniors. The princ^s^were associated with the 

^ — ~~ • 249 / 





















misr/fy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



ruling sovereigns and actively employed in war and peace . The 
absolutism of monarchy was tempered both by a ministerial coun¬ 
cil and by an organised administrative staff, the heads of depart¬ 
ments being in close contact with the king, and often consulted by 
him. Royal tours contributed to the efficiency of the administra¬ 
tion and the officers were paid by land assignments, and honoured 
and encouraged by titles. The higher officials enjoyed the status 
of jperundaram , and the lower ones sirutaram . Administrative 
activities, as well as military and trade movements, were facilitated 
by peruvalis or trunk roads. There was brisk commercial inter¬ 
course with China, Sumatra, and Java in the east, and Arabia and 
other countries around the Persian Gulf in the west. Some mer¬ 
chant guilds were gigantic international organisations. Industries 
were in a flourishing condition, particularly jewellery and metal 
work, weaving, and manufacture of salt. Public revenue was de¬ 
rived mainly from land and collected in kind, or in cash, or in 
both, by village assemblies. Land was possessed by individuals 
and communities. There were peasant proprietorship and other 
forms of land tenure. Agricultural prosperity was ensured by the 
special attention given to irrigation by government as well as local 
authorities. The proper utilisation of the water of Kaveri and 
other rivers was supplemented by great tanks. Village assemblies 
were to perform the functions of maintaining tanks in good condi¬ 
tion and of reclaiming forest and waste lands. The state’s demand 
of land revenue seems to have been one-third of the gross produce 
in the time of Rajaraja I. This proportion was fixed after an ela¬ 
borate land" survey and we have already mentioned the surveys 
ordered by that emperor and by Kulottunga I. There were perio¬ 
dical revisions of the classifications of land and of the assessment 
- of land revenue. The other items of public income were customs 
and tolls, taxes on various kinds of profession, mines, forests, salt¬ 
pans, etc. The numerous taxes, though uneconomical from the 
modern point of view, were intended to supplement the land re¬ 
venue with its fluctuations due to remissions in hard times. There 
were occasional famines, general or local; the visitation of A.D. 1152 
evidently belonged to the former category. Unpaid labour was 
frequently employed. Though there is evidence of the sympathetic 
administration of the tax system—Kulottunga I earned fame by 
• abolishing tolls—some cases of oppression are on record. Further, 
the rise into power of the feudal chiefs must have increased the tax 
burdens of the people. "Failure to pay the land revenue involved 

fhe sale nf the land in miesti rm nnt. evelndinor .terrmle lands The 



250 


\ 







WNlST/fy 


THE CHO^AS 



army and navy, civil administrative staff, roads, and irrigation, 
tanks and channels besides temples and religious endowments. 

• The army consisted of elephants, cavalry and infantry— mun- 
rukai-mahdsenai or the great army with three limbs. As many as 
seventy regiments, named after royal titles, are mentioned in in¬ 
scriptions. They possessed a corporate organisation, participated 
in civic life, and made grants to temples. Attention was given 
to their training and discipline, and cantonments (ka$agam or 
padaividuj existed. There were recruits from Kerala in the army. 
The strength of the elephant corps was 60,000 and that of the whole 
army, about 150,000. It was composed chiefly of Kaikkolas (lit. men 
with strong arms) or gengundar (lit. spear-wielders). The Velaik- 
karas were the body-guard of the monarch, sworn to defend him with 
their lives and often ready to immolate themselves on his funeral 
pyre. Very costly Arabian horses were imported in large numbers 
in order to strengthen the cavalry, but most of them were short¬ 
lived in South India. Kings and princes led armies, and Rajaditya 
and Rajadhiraja I died on the battlefields of Takkolam and Koppam. 
Commanders enjoyed the rank of Nayaka, Senapati, or Mahadatj- 
danayaka; they were Vellalas, Brahmanas and others. Wars some¬ 
times started ' with cattle-lifting. Titles like Kshatriyasikhamayi 
were conferred upon men with a distinguished record. The terri¬ 
ble character of Choja warfare was exhibited in the invasions of 
Iraftapadi, Pandyamandalam and Ceylon. Much injury was done 
to the civil population, women not excepted, and mutilations like 
nose-slitting are on record. When we speak of the glories of tem¬ 
ples and of the luxuries of kings and chieftains, we cannot forget 
that they obtained enormous spoils of war by the infliction of un¬ 
speakable miseries on their neighbours. Even the sanctity of am¬ 
bassadors was sometimes violated. 

The naval achievement of the Cholas reached its climax during 
the reign of Rajaraja the Great and his successor. Not only were 
the Coromandel and Malabar coasts controlled by them, but the Bay 
of Bengal became a Chola lake. But we cannot form any idea of 
the technique of their naval warfare or of other details related to 
the navy. Some think that merchant vessels were employed in 
transporting the army and that Chola naval fights were land battles 
fought on the decks of ships .^ 

The empire of Rajaraja the Great was divided into about eight 
man$alams or provinces, and the latter, into valanadus and nodus. 
The next administration sub-divisions were kUrrams or kottams 
each consisting of a number of autonomous villages playing a vital 
and conspicuous part in the administration. We have seen that 
princes were in charge of the provinces of Vengi and Madura. 

251 

\ 


V 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



2. Local Self-Government: the Mahasabha and the Variyam 

Though there was corporate activity in economic and religious 
life and in territorial divisions like nddus and nagarams, (towns), 
it was the village assemblies that exhibited the greatest and the 
most comprehensive group activity. The village and town assem¬ 
blies were primary assemblies while those of na/jius were represen¬ 
tative institutions. Of the two kinds of assemblies called the Ur 
and the Sablia or Mahasabha which were gatherings of the adult 
male members of the local community, the former was of the gene¬ 
ral type and the latter was the assembly of the a grahara or Brah- 
mana settlement, and it is this type that looms large in Chola inscrip¬ 
tions. 

Inscriptions referring to the Mahasabha or describing its activi¬ 
ties are largely found in Tondamandalam and Cholamandalam. The 
assemblies are found concentrated in certain regions, the major 
concentration being around Kanchi and a minor one encircling 
Madras. 

The two Uttararnerur records of Parantaka I of A.D. 919 and 921 
contain the resolutions passed by the local Mahasabha on the con¬ 
stitution of variyams or Executive Committees, the second resolu¬ 
tion improving on and superseding the first. According to the re¬ 
gulations of A.D. 921, each of the thirty wards of the village was' to no¬ 
minate for selection persons possessing the following qualifica¬ 
tions^ —Ownership of more than 1/4 veil (about an acre and a half) 
of land; residence in a house built on one’s own site; age between 
thirty-five and seventy; the knowledge of the Vedic mantra-brah- 
manas; in the alternative one-eighth veil of land and knowledge of 
one Veda and a Bhdshya. The following among others were ex- 
du^gd : —those who had been on any of the committees for the past 
three years; those who had been on the committee but had failed 
to submit the accounts, together with all their specified relations; 
those who had committed incest or other great sins as well as their 
relations (specified); those who had stolen the property of others; 
etc. 

From among the persons duly nominated, one was to be chosen 
for each of the thirty Kudumbus or wards by Kudavotai (lit. pot- 
ticket) or lot for a year in the manner”prescribed. Of the thirty 
so selected twelve, who were advanced in age and learning and had 
served on the garden and tank committees, were assigned to the 
samvatsara-variyam • or an nual co mm ittee; twelve to the toftavdri- 
yam or garden committe e: and six to the erivariyam or tank com¬ 
mittee. Two other committees were similarly selected—the* pah- 
chav ara-variy am (a standing committee) and the pon-vdriyam (gold 
committee). The lot system was Worked on the following lines: Names 


252 






THE CHOIRS 



of eligible persons were written on palm-leaf tickets which were 
put into a pot and shuffled, and a young boy was directed to take 
out as many tickets as there were members to be - chosen. Inscrip¬ 
tions in other places than Uttaramerur mention additional commit¬ 
tees for justice, wards, and fields, the uddslna committee and so on. 
The term udasina has been interpreted as ascetics, but it is better 
to take it as referring to strangers or foreigners. The number of 
committees and of members varied from village to village, and no 
payment was made for their services. The members of the com¬ 
mittee were called Variyapperumakkal; the Mahdsabhd was called 
Perunguri and its members, perumakkal. Ordinarily the assembly 
met in the village temple and occasionally under a tree or on the 
bank of a tank. There are no references to voting or to a quorum 
General questions were discussed in the assembly and resolutions 
(vyavasthai) were passed and recorded. 

Membership of the Committee required very high qualifications, 
regarding age, property, learning, capacity for committee work, and 
moral purity not only of one’s self but also of one’s relations; and 
no membership of any of the Committees was permitted until three 
years had elapsed from the period of last service on a Committee. 
Such a personnel rendering honorary service would have been 
available only in prosperous, enlightened and virtuous villages. To 
run the Mahdsabhd successfully, a village should have men, honest 
and true, learned and capable, self-supporting and experienced. The 
lot system would produce the best results only under such condi¬ 
tions. Otherwise it may give a chance to anybody irrespective of 
his qualifications; without the principle of rotation in office, it may 
do injustice to competent candidates. Uttaramerur avoided the pit- 
falls of the Kudavolai system and it was the model for other sabhds 
in the Chola empire. 

3 , Functions of the Mahdsabhd; Fiscal , Judicial and Ministram 

The extent of village autonomy may be gauged from the func¬ 
tions performed by assemblies. The Mahdsabhd possessed proprie¬ 
tary rights over communal lands and controlled the private lands 
within its jurisdiction. It did everything preliminary to convey¬ 
ance of property, which required the sanction of the central autho¬ 
rity. The Mahdsabhd was concerned" with the reclamation of forest 
and waste lands. It co-operated with royal officials in estimating 
the produce of cultivated land and assessing the land revenue due 
from the village. It collected that revenue and in capes of default 
had the power to sell the land in question by public auction. Dis¬ 
putes about land and irrigation rights were settled by it and in spe¬ 
cial cases assemblies from the neighbourhood were requested to co- 


258 




minis 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



operate with it in x'eaehing a decision. General surveys were under¬ 
taken by the Central Government, but the approval of the Maha- 
sabhcL was necessary for any change in the classification of land 
within its sphere) It had powers of taxation for purposes connect¬ 
ed with the village, and of remission of such taxation for specific 
^reasons. Instead of paying land revenue every year, a landowner 
might pay a fixed sum to the assembly and compound all his future 
dues to the local and central authorities, the assembly regularly 
paying all such dues thereafter in perpetuity. Such arrangements 
were made in the case of lands set apart for charitable purposes. 

The Committees looked after the village administration with 
the assistance of paid officials, who detected crime. The judicial 
committee, Nyayattar, of the assembly settled disputes, pronounced 
on the innocence or guilt of the accused, and awarded punishments. 
The establishment of the guilt by a popular committee is the basis 
of the remark that the jury system prevailed under the Cholas. 
Inscriptions reveal that various forms of homicide were distinguish¬ 
ed and capital punishment was not inflicted in all cases/. When death 
was caused by accident as in hunting, the guilty man was required 
to endow a perpetual lamp to be lighted in the village temple for 
religious merit of the deceased. Even in some cases of murder, the 
extreme penalty of the law was not meted out. The Choja admini¬ 
stration of justice may thus be regarded as unduly lenient. The 
Uttaramerur inscriptions discussed above emphasise the gravity of 
such offences as incest, adultery, theft, and forgery, and hint that 
‘hiding on an ass” was a punishment for some serious crimes. 

The Mahasabhd performed other functions like the maintenance 
of roads and irrigation works including tanks (the major public 
works being executed by the Central Government as their construc¬ 
tion was beyond the resources of local bodies), supervision of endow¬ 
ments (religious, medical and eleemosynary) by the dharmavariyam, 
and provision for learning, etc. from its own limited resources. Thus 
the Central Government concerned itself with external defence, 
the maintenance of internal peace and order, ^he promotion of the 
general prosperity and cultural progress of the empire, and left the 
/^Village assemblies largely to themselves, exercising a general control 
and interfering in their affairs only in cases of conflict or other excep¬ 
tional situations) Unions of villages might be effected with the 
approval of the Central Government./The administration of vil¬ 
lages was well organised on popular lines, conducive to the progress 
and prosperity of their inhabitants, and it was such villages exhibit¬ 
ing corporate activity which, though in a state of decline, early in 
the nineteenth century, formed the “little republics” that extorted the 
admiration of famous Anglo-Indian administrators. 


254 


THE CHOl/AS 



1 Contra Pandarathar, Pirkdlach-Cholctr-Charittircini; (in Tamil), Pt. I (Anna- 
malainagar, 1949), pp. 76-78. 

2. See Vol. IV, p. 139. 

3. Cf. Suvarnadvvpa, by R. C. Majumdar, Part I, p. 168, and also infra , Ch. XXI. 

4. See above, pp. 24-26. 

5. For these identifications and the Chola conquest of this region, cf. Suvarnadvtpa 
by R. C. Majumdar, Part I, pp. 167 ff, who holds that the Chola emperors tried 
to maintain their hold on the distant oversea empire, at least for nearly a 
century. 

5a The dates of these and some subsequent kings are given somewhat differently 
bv different writers. Thus K. A. N. Sastri gives the following dates m his 
second edition of the ‘Colas’ (published in 1955) which differ from those given 
above: 

Rajadhiraja I (A.D. 1018-1054). 

Virarajendra (A.D. 1063-1069). 

Kulottunga III (ruled upto A.D. 1217-18). t. y f*. » * • 

In ‘A History of South India’, also published in 1955, K. A. N. Sastri gives 
A.D. 1016 as the date of Rajaraja’s death (p. 200) instead of A.D. 1014, as given 
in the text above, and also in his *Colas’ (p. 183). 

6. See above, pp. 169-170. 

7. See above, p. 170. 

8. But cf. above, p. 242. 

9. Mudikonda-Cholapuram; known as Palaiyarai (near Kumbhakonam) and Nandi- 
puram before the eleventh century (Pandarathar, op. cit, 82). 


2t55 


CHAPTER XI 


THE LATER PANDYAS 

1. INTERVAL BETWEEN THE FIRST AND THE SECOND EMPIRE 

The first empire of the Pandyas was ruined by their defeats 
at Tellaru, Arichit, and Sripurambiyam, and Rajasimha II was over¬ 
thrown by Parantaka I about A.D. 920. But the battle of Takko- 
lam revived their importance and Rajaraja I found them to be very 
powerful. He reconquered them and Rajendra I seized the Pandya 
crown from Ceylon, appointed one of his sons as the Chola-Pandya 
Viceroy and constructed a great palace at Madura. But his suc¬ 
cessors were troubled by Pandya princes in alliance with Ceylon. 
The anarchy during Adhirajendra's reign gave scope for their in : 
transigence which was put down with a strong hand by Kulottunga 
I, who changed the system of administration by Chola princes and 
established military colonies on the highways of the Pandya coun¬ 
try without, however, attempting to control its internal affairs. The 
further marks of Pandyan subordination were the Chola names given 
to places and the payment of tribute. The inscriptions of the Pandyas 
increase and those of the Cholas diminish in number during the 
period of Kulottunga and his successors. The steady growth of 
Pandya power was however paralysed by a civil war, which lasted 
from A.D. 1169 till about A.D. 1177. This gave the Cholas another 
chance of asserting their power in the southern kingdom. We have 
sketched above 1 the three Pandya campaigns of Kulottunga III 
about A.D. 1182, 1189 and 1205. In the last of these campaigns, he 
overpowered Jatavarman Kulasekhara (A.D. 1190-1216) who was a 
great ruler and the harbinger of his country's independence. His 
inscriptions are found in the Madura, Ramnad and Tinnevelly Dis¬ 
tricts, and Travancore was subordinate to him. He seems to have 
assumed the title of Rajagambhtm. 

2. MARAVARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA 

Maravarman Sundara (A.D. 1216-1238), probably the brother of 
Jatavarman Kulasekhara, inaugurated the second empire of the 
Pandyas which lasted right through the thirteenth century. An 
inscription of his third regnal year describes him as Soyiarjuvalangi - 
yaruUya, “who was pleased to effect the rendition of the Chola 
country.'’ Quite at the beginning of his reign he invaded the kingdom 
of Kulottunga III, burnt Uraiyur and Tanjore, drove the Chola king 
into the wilderness, and marched as far as Puliyur or Chidambaram. 


256 


MINlSr^ 



THE LATER PANDYAS 



Hoysala intervention prevented Sundara Pandya’s reaping the full 
benefits of his victory, and he had to give back the conquered terri¬ 
tory to the vanquished enemy who accepted the position of a vassal. 
Kulottuiiga died soon after his reinstatement. Maravarman’s later 
inscription states that ‘‘the Chola (Rajaraja III) no longer consider¬ 
ed it the proper course to owe allegiance to the Pandya who had 
bestowed the ci’own on him on a former occasion. He began once 
more to feel that his security lay in his own fertile country and 
declined to do the usual honour to the commands (of the Pandya), 
refused to pay the usual tribute, and instead despatched a large 
army”. Rajaraja’s violation of the peace proved disastrous to his 
kingdom, and again Hoysala intervention was necessary for repair¬ 
ing the effects of his stupidity. Maravarman defeated the Chola, and 
occupied large parts of his territory. Rajaraja was seized and im¬ 
prisoned by his vassal, Kop-Perunjihga, and the Hoysalas interfer¬ 
ed, released the prisoner, defeated the Pandyas, invaded their 
country and obliged them to acquiesce in the restoration of the 
Chola emperor. Thus both the victories of Maravarman against the 
Cholas were rendered nugatory. But he ruled over a powerful 
kingdom. Besides his own country his dominions included parts of 
the Trichinopoly District and Pudukkoftai, and he assumed titles 
indicative of his seizure and rendition of the Chola country. He 
was succeeded by Maravarman Sundara Pandya II (A.D. 1238-1251), 
whose weakness was taken advantage of by Rajendra III. The 
inscriptions of the latter describe him as “ an expert in cutting off 
the crowned head of the Pandya”, “who plundei'ed the Pandya 
country”, etc. It is probable that his overlordship was acknowledg¬ 
ed by Maravarman Sundara Pandya II. 


3. JATAVARMAN SUNDARA PANDYA I 


Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I (c. A.D. 1251-1268) was the great¬ 
est king of his line. His grand imperial career started with the defeat 
of the Chera king, Udayamartan<Ja. Jatavarman overcame the 
Hoysalas at Kaimanur near Trichinopoly, caused their withdrawal 
from the Kaveri region, reduced the Chola to subordination, pro¬ 
ceeded against Sendamahgalam (the capital of Kop-Perunjihga), 
rejected the Kadava’s offer of tribute, defeated him and seized his 
territory, but subsequently reinstated him as a subordinate ally. Be¬ 
tween A.D. 1254 and 1256 Northern Ceylon was reduced to vassalage. 
Thus, during the first six years of his reign. Jatavarman conquered 
the Chera, Hoysala, Chola, Kadava and Sinhalese powers, and his 
authority extended from Travancore to the South Arcot Dis¬ 
trict. Subsequently, he marched against Gandagopala the Telugu- 
Choda chief, defeated and killed him, captured Kahchl, overcame 


257 


S.E.—1T 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

y/ 

^Oanapati Kakatlya, and reached Nellore, where he celebrated his 
victories by a Vlrabhisheka. We are in. the dark regarding the exact 
order of Jatavarman’s conquests. He annexed the Kongudesa, and 
in another conflict with the Hoysalas killed their king Somesvara 
in the neighbourhood of Srlrangam in A.D. 1262. 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya’s imperialism was thorough-going, 
and the Chola kingdom was incorporated in the Pandya Empire; in 
the language of his inscription the Ponni (Kaveri) land (the Chola 
country) became the Kanni land (the Pandya country). The whole 
region from Ceylon to Nellore and Cuddapah, excluding Mysore, 
was under his imperial control. He assumed many imposing titles: 
Samastajagadddhara or support of the whole world; Emmavdalarm tm 
Kcmdaruliya or who was pleased to take every country; Hema- 
chchhadanaraja or the king who covered (the temple) with gold; 
Mahdrdjadhirdja-sriparamesvara; Mardkata-prithvi-bhrit or the 
emerald king; Kemchipuramkorigan; Ellandalaiyanan or supreme 
over all. His conquests made him exceedingly rich and he largely 
endowed the Chidambaram and Srlrangam temples. His numerous 
gifts to the latter temple, amounting to eighteen lakhs of gold 
pieces, are enumerated in his Srlrangam inscription. He provided 
the Chidambaram and Srlrangam temples with golden roofs and 
built a golden hall in the Chidambaram temple. He crowned him¬ 
self at Nellore and Srlrangam and performed many tulabhdras at 
these two places. His records emphasise his warlike qualities, his 
liberality, his love of pomp and display, and above all, his profound 
appreciation of the extent of his empire and of the credit accruing 
to him therefrom. His Srlrangam inscription begins by recording 
the death of “the moon of the Karnata family” (Somesvara Hoysala), 
and mentions the overthrow of the king of Kathaka (Kop-Peruh- 
jihga) besides specifying the king’s various gifts to god Ranganatha. 
Further, his superiority as “the Sun among kings” is emphasised by 
the frequent use of the phrase Rdjatapana and its numerous 
synonyms. 

The chronology of the later Pandyas is characterised by over¬ 
lapping dates. Thus we find Jatavarman Vlra Pandya (A.D. 1253-1275) 
ruling along with Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I. Marco Polo 
refers to the “five Royal Brothers,” and the reference is supported 
by Chinese evidence. The Muslim historian,. Wassaf, mentions the 
king’s three brothers who were independent rulers. Hence arose 
the theory of the joint rule of five Pandya brothers. But overlap¬ 
ping dates occur in Chola and Sinhalese chronology as well, and 
are explained with reference to the position of the Y uvardjas. In¬ 
scriptions do not exhibit the Pandyan kingdom as divided into five 
separate parts. Moreover the rule of five brothers is hardly ever 

258 



mmsTfy 


THE LATER PA^DYAS 



monarchy was a single monarchy, of which the unity was by no 
means impaired by the presence of ‘sub-kings.’ Most of the achieve¬ 
ments, with which Jatavarman Vira Partly a is credited in his 
records found in the Madura, Ramnad and Tinnevelly districts and 
in Pudukkottai, are those of Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I himself, 
j. nerefore the former must have played a prominent part in the 
affairs of the realm during the reign of Sundara. 

4. MARAVARMAN KULASEKHARA PANDYA 

During the reign of the last great Pandya Maravarman Kula¬ 
sekhara (c. A.D. 1268-1310), the following four princes co-operated 
with him in the administration of the empire: Jatavarman Sundara 
Pandya II, Maravarman Vikrama Pandya, Jatavarman Vira 
Paudya II, and Jatavarman Sundara Pandya III, who came to power 
in A.D. 1276, 1283, 1296 and 1303 respectively — the two last being 
sons of Kulasekhara. The emperor assumed the titles: “the conqueror 
of all countries,” “who had no equal,” and “captor of Kollom” 
(Quilon). His inscriptions say that he conquered Kerala, Kongu, 
Cholamandalam, Tondamandalam and Ceylon. He inflicted final 
defeat on Rajendra III Chola and Hoysala Ramanatha in A.D. 1279, 
and annexed their territories. About A.D. 1284, his general, Arya 
Chakravartx, invaded Ceylon and returned home with the Tooth 
Relic of Buddha during the interregnum in Ceylonese history from 
A.D. 1283 to 1302. Parakramabahu III (A.D. 1302-1310) submitted 
to Kulasekhara and recovered the Tooth Relic by peaceful negotia¬ 
tion during a visit to Madura. 

The greatness of Maravarman Kulasekhara is vouched for by 
Marco Polo and Muslim historians like Wassaf. Marco Polo, who visit¬ 
ed the Papflya country about A.D. 1293, observes: “The great pro¬ 
vince of Ma'bar (the coast of South India from Quilon to Nellore) 

-is styled India the Greater; it is best of all the Indies_the 

finest and noblest in the world. At this end of the province reigns 
one of those five royal brothers, who is crowned king, and his name 
is Sonder Bandi Davar (Sundara Pandya Devar). In his kingdom 
they find very fine and great pearls.... Call (Kayal at the mouth 
of the Tamraparni) is a great and noble city, and belongs to Ashar 
(Sekhar?) the eldest of five brother kings. It is at this city that all 
the ships touch that come from the west, as from Hormos and from 
Kis (an island in the Persian Gulf) and from Aden, and all Arabia, 
laden with horses and with other things for sale.... There is a 
great business done in this city.... The king possesses vast treasures 
and wears upon his person great store of rich jewels. He maintains 
great state and administers his kingdom with great equity, and ex- 


259 




tends great favour to merchants and foreigners so that they are very 
glad to visit his city.” The Venetian traveller’s account of social life 
refers to the king’s 500 wives, the nakedness of the people and 
absence of tailors, the prevalence of sati, the belief in omens and 
astrology, and the dancing girls attached to temples. Marco Polo 
draws pointed attention to the speedy death of most of the imported 
horses, owing to mismanagement and absence of farriers, and to 
the consequent colossal financial loss. He also notes the poor fight¬ 
ing equipment of the warriors who are described as “most wretched 
soldiers,” 

The remarks of Wassaf are very valuable. “The curiosities of 
Chin (China) and Machin (Canton) and the beautiful products of 
Hind and Sind, laden on large ships.... sailing like mountains with 
the wings of the winds on the surface of the water are always arriv¬ 
ing there. The wealth of the Isles of the Persian gulf in particular, 
and in part the beauty and adornment of other countries from Ii'ak 
and Khurasan as far as Hum (Turkey) and Europe are derived from 
Ma‘bar, which is so situated as to be the key of Hind. .. .Kales 
Dewar (Kulasekhara Devar), the ruler of Ma‘bar, enjoyed a highly 
prosperous life, extending to forty and odd years, during which time 
neither any foreign enemy entered his country nor any severe 
malady confined him to bed. His coffers were replete with wealth 
inasmuch that in the treasury of the city of Mardi (Madura) there 
were 1200 crores of gold (dinars) deposited... . Besides this there 
was an accumulation of precious stones, such as pearls, rubies, tur¬ 
quoises and emeralds more than is in the power of language 
to express.” Muslim historians inform us further that some Arab 
merchants occupied a high place in the councils of the Pan^yas. 
Abdur Rahman is described as Prime Minister in charge of the 
customs to which office his son and grandson succeeded. 

Maravarman Kulasekhara had two sons, the legitimate Jata- 
varman Sundara Pandya and the illegitimate Jatavarman Vira 
Pandya. The association of Vira Pandya in the government as early 
as A.D. 1296 and choice of him as heir apparent caused Sundara Pan¬ 
dya to usurp the throne after murdering his father in A.D. 1310. 
Expelled from Madura by Vira Pandya, Sundara Pandya appealed 
for help to ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji or Malik Kafur. Vira Pandya aided Vira 
Ballala III Hoysala (A.D. 1291-1342) against Kafur. Malik Kafur 
who would probably have invaded Ma‘bar in any case, as a part 
of the imperial policy of the Khaljis even if there had been no 
Pandya war of succession, or any other cause of complaint, led an 
expedition against the Pandya kingdom. The sequel of this inva¬ 
sion will be described in the next volume. 


1. See p. 246. 


260 





CHAPTER XII 


CEYLON 

The story of the liberation of Ceylon by Vijayabahu I Srisahgha- 
bodhi (c. A.D. 1055-1110) from the Chola yoke about A.D. 1070 has 
been narrated in the previous volume. 1 The period of about a cen¬ 
tury and a half after Vijayabahu’s success against the Cholas is re¬ 
garded by historians as the Polonnaruva age of Ceylonese history. 
Vijayabahu changed the name of the city from Pulatthinagara 
(Polonnaruva) to Vijayarajapura. An important feature of the 
history of this period is the rivalry between the Pandya and Kalinga 
factions at the Ceylonese court. 

Vijayabahu I invested his next younger brother Virabahu with 
the dignity of Upar&ja, and made over to him the province of Dak- 
shina-desa. On his youngest brother Jayabahu he conferred the 
dignity of an Adipada, and bestowed on him the province of Rohana. 
Lilavati, daughter of king Jagatipala (c. A.D. 1042-46) who was a 
former ruler of Ceylon, escaped from the Chola country and came 
back to the island. She was consecrated by Vijayabahu I as his 
Mahishl (Queen). The king’s daughter from Lilavatl was married 
to Viravarman who was made viceroy of the province of Merukan- 
dara. The king also brought to the island princess Trilokasundarl 
of the royal family of Kalinga and consecrated her as his Mahishl. 
Trilokasundarl must have been related to the contemporary Imperial 
Ganga monarch Rajaraja I (A.D. 1070-78) of Kalinganagara. 2 She 
gave birth to Vikramabahu and several daughters. Her kinsmen 
Madhukarnava (Madhukamarnava?), Bhimaraja and Balatkara came 
from the Kalinga capital Simhapura and settled in Lanka on receipt 
of befitting maintenances from the king. Trilokasundari’s daughter 
Ratnavall, married to Manabharana, gave birth to Parakramabahu 
who became the ruler of the island in the latter half of the twelfth 
century. A sister of the Kalinga princes settled in Lanka, named 
Sundarl, and queen Lilavati’s daughter’s daughter bearing her 
name, were given in marriage to prince Vikramabahu. Two of 
Vijayabahu’s daughters from Trilokasundarl were married to his 
younger brothers Virabahu and Jayabahu. On the death of Vira¬ 
bahu the king made Jayabahu the Uparaja and Vikramabahu an 
Adipada, conferring on the latter the viceroyalty of Rohana. King 
Vijayabahu gave his sister Mitra in marriage to a prince of the 
Pandya royal house of South India. 


261 




MIN ISTfy 



Vijayabahu built many Buddhist monasteries, repaired a num¬ 
ber of tanks and vihciras, and invited and settled in his kingdom 
numerous monks from Ramanya (Ramannadesa, Lower Burma). He 
tried to maintain diplomatic relations with the Karnata (Western 
Chalukya) and Chola kings. In the 30th year of his reign (c. A.D. 
1085) the king declared war against the Cholas; but the Tamil 
mercenaries settled in Ceylon and known as the Velakkaras v/ere 
unwilling’to fight with their kinsmen across the sea and rebelled. 
Vijayabahu succeeded in subduing the revolt. In the 45th year (c. 
A.D. 1100), the king was preparing for defence against a Chola at¬ 
tack; but the Cholas did not appear. The king ruled for 55 years 
(50 or 80 years according to some traditions). 

On Vijayabahu’s death in c. A.D. 1110 his sister Mitra with her 
Pandya husband’s help raised Jayabahu to the throne at Polonnaruva 
and her own son Manabharana to the dignity of Yuvaraja, although 
prince Vikramabahu of the Kalihga faction was entitled to this 
latter position. This led to a struggle between North and South 
Lanka. Vikramabahu (II), who was the viceroy in the South, con¬ 
quered Rajarashtra and made Polonnaruva his headquarters; but he 
lost the South to his enemies. He, however, did not crown himself 
as king. Vikramabahu had also to fight with an invader called 
Viradeva, who is described as the lord of Aryadesa and the sovereign 
of Palandvipa and was apparently an Indian adventurer. Viradeva. 
is stated to have occupied Rajarashtra for a time, but to have been 
soon afterwards killed. There was also constant fight between the 
partisans of the North and the South. 

On the death of Jayabahu, Mahadipada (Yuvaraja) Mana¬ 
bharana, also styled Vxrabahu, considered himself his successor. He 
soon died, leaving his young son Parakramabahu. His brothers 
Klrtisrimegha and Srivallabha now led the partisans of the South. 

Vikramabahu II (c. A.D. 1116-37) died after a rule of 21 years 
(28 years according to some traditions) and was succeeded by his 
son Gajabahu (c. A.D. 1137-53) at Polonnaruva. In the South, 
Klrtisrimegha died and Parakramabahu succeeded him in his domi¬ 
nions. Parakramabahu assumed the title Mahadipada with an eye 
to the succession to the throne of Polonnaruva after Gajabahu’s 
death. He organised a huge army and, as a first step, conquered 
the mountainous district called Malaya. A protracted war then en¬ 
sued between Gajabahu and Parakramabahu, in which the former was 
ultimately captured along with the princes Chodagaiiga and Vikranta- 
bahu. About this time, prince Manabharana, the son of Parakrama- 
bahu’s uncle Srivallabha from queen Sugala, rose against Para¬ 
kramabahu, occupied Polonnaruva, and got Gajabahu in his 


262 


CEYLON 



<SL 


power. But his army was soon overpowered by Parakramabahu’s 
forces that reconquered Polonnaruva. Gajabahu succeeded in taking 
shelter at Koshthasara (probably near Kantalai) and Manabharana 
repaired to Rohana with the sacred relics of the Buddha. Gajabahu 
then made Gangatataka (Giritala, about 7 miles west-north-west of 
Polonnaruva) his residence. He died after having reigned in all for 
twenty-two years according to one tradition, although it is difficult to 
be definite on the point. Before Gajabahu’s death there was a tripar¬ 
tite civil war disturbing the peace of the whole island- But essentially 
it was part of a long struggle between the North and the South. 
Parakramabahu was for a time compelled to take shelter at Vikrama- 
pura, not far from the city of Polonnaruva. But he succeeded 
ultimately in recovering the city and Manabharajia fled to Rohana 
where he died. 

Parakramabahu I (c. A.D. 1153-86), sumamed Arirajavesya- 
bhujahga, ruled for thirty-three years (thirty-two years according to 
one tradition). As we have seen, his grandmother Trilokasundarl, 
queen of Vijayabahu I, was a princess of the Gahga dynasty of Kalih- 
ga. He married Rupavatl born in the family of king Kirtisrimegha. 
Parakramabahu was a powerful king and a great builder. He was 
learned in the science of medicine and founded many hospitals and 
other charitable institutions. The city of Pulatthinagara (Polonna¬ 
ruva) and old Anuradhapura, destroyed by the Cholas, were rebuilt 
by him. He laid out many gardens and built numerous religious edi¬ 
fices. He reorganised civil and military administrations, and his irri¬ 
gation works led to the prosperity of his dominions. He also reorga¬ 
nised the Buddhist Church. But he oppressed the subjects with 
heavy taxation. 


Parakramabahu I suppressed a rebellion of the Sinhalese and 
Kerala (Malayali) mercenaries of Koshthasara (a military garrison 
not far to the east of Polonnaruva) who combined themselves with 
the Dravidian military corporation known in Sinhalese history as 
the Velakkaras. 

Queen Sugala, wife of Srivallabha and mother of Manabharana, 
was ruling independently over the province of Rohana from Uddha- 
nadvara (probably Galabada near Monaragala). She was in the 
possession of the sacred relics (Buddha’s tooth and alms-bowl) which 
were a source of great income and prestige. An expedition was 
sent by Parakramabahu against Rohana, which was conquered, and 
the sacred relics were secured lor the king of Ceylon. But the 
king’s authority could not be firmly established in Rohana and ano¬ 
ther rebellion in the region had to be suppressed in his 8th regnal 


263 




misTfy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Among the generals who conducted the expeditions in Rohana 
was a Damila (Tamil) named Raksha. 


There were formerly friendly relations between Ceylon and 
Ramapya (Lower Burma). The Burmese contemporary of Para¬ 
kramabahu I, however, ill-treated the Ceylonese envoys. He raised 
the prices of elephants and refused to sell them to Ceylon. He also 
did away with the old custom of presenting an elephant to the 
vessel carrying the Ceylonese king’s presents to him, and on one 
occasion seized a princess sent by the Ceylonese king to the king 
of Kambuja (Cambodia). These incidents provoked Parakrama¬ 
bahu I to order a Damila (Tamil) general named Aditya to organise 
a naval expedition against Arimardanapura (Pagan, the Burmese 
capital). Ships were built for five months and were equipped with 
rice and other food-stuff, armours and many hundred thousands of 
sharp-pointed Gokurncilcu arrows of iron for defence against ele¬ 
phants, different kinds of medicines in cow-horns for wounds caused 
by poisoned arrows and for treating diseases caused by poisoned 
water, iron pincers for extracting arrow-heads, skilful physicians 
and nurses, etc. It is said that some of these ships succeeded in 
landing Ceylonese soldiers in Ramanya, and that they defeated the 
Ramanyas, killed their king, and established Ceylonese supremacy 
in that country. The Ramanyas are stated consequently to have 
agreed to pay tribute in elephants. Although the story greatly 
exaggerates the amount of Ceylonese success against the Burmese, 
an inscription 3 of Parakramabahu I actually refers to the king’s 
resolve to send an expedition against Bhuvanaditya, the king of 
Aramana (Ramanya), in the twelfth year of his reign. 


When Madura, capital of the Pandya king Parakrama, was be- 
seiged by his rival Kulasekhara (c. A.D. 1167-71) backed by the 
Cholas, Parakrama Pandya appealed to the Ceylonese monarch for 
help. Parakramabahu I agreed to help the Pandya king who had, 
however, been defeated and killed before the Ceylonese army land¬ 
ed in the Ramesvara region under the generals Lankapura and 
Jagadvijaya (called Jagattraya in Chola records). The chronicles 
speak of successful engagements of the Ceylonese forces against the 
lieutenants of Kulasekhara, and of the installation of Vira Pandya, 
son of the deceased Parakram^) Pandya, on the throne of Madura 
by the Ceylonese generals. But the story is abruptly closed and 
available evidence shows that it is not a faithful account of the whole 
campaign. The Chola records admit the initial success of the Ceylo¬ 
nese forces and refer to Lahkapura’s return to the island some time 
before A.D. 1167-68, the date of the Arpakkam grant, as brought 
about by divine aid. 4 This apparently points to the first phase of 


264 


MINf$7fy, 



CEYLON 

e war. But the Pallavarayanpettai inscription 5 of the eighth regnal 
year (A.D. 1170-71) of the Chola king Rajadhiraja II (A.D. 1163-79) 
says that Lahkapura was defeated and killed, that his head was 
nailed to the gate of Madura, and that Kulasekhara was reinstalled 
in the Pandya capital. This was the second phase of the struggle. 
The third phase of the war is referred to in the Tiruvalangadu in¬ 
scription 6 of the 12th regnal year (A.D. 1174-75) of the same king. 
This record tells us how Kulasekhara later allied himself with the 
king of Ceylon and how the Chola king deposed him and replaced 
Vira Pandya on the Pandya throne. It also refers to the help the 
Chola king rendered to ^rivallabha, nephew of the Ceylonese king, 
in his struggle against Parakramabahu I. The next phase of the 
war is indicated by the records of the Chola king Kuiottunga III 
(A.D. 1178-1216), which refer to the expulsion of Vira Pandya and 
the Ceylonese soldiers being driven into the sea by the forces of 
the Chola king. 7 Vira Pandya had been won over by the Ceylonese 
king and the Chola monarch was now supporting Vikrama Pandya, 
as stated above. 8 


The next ruler was Vijayabahu II who ruled for one year 
about A.D. 1186-87. He was the son of a sister of the previous king 
who had been apparently married to a prince of the Gahga house 
of Kalihga. According to a Polonnaruva inscription, 9 Vijayabahu 
II was staying at Simhapura, capital of Kalihga, when Parakrama¬ 
bahu summoned him to Lanka. Vijayabahu II, who was a great 
scholar, is stated to have contracted a friendly treaty with the king 
of Arimardanapura (Pagan, Burma). 

Mahendra VI of the Kalihga clan then killed the king. But 
Klrtinihsanka or'Nihsankamalla, who was born in Kalihga and was 
the Uparaja of Vijayabahu II, killed Mahendra VI after five days 
and became king. He ruled for nine years (c. A.D. 1187-96). The 
inscriptions 10 of Nihsankamalla state that he was born at Simhapura 
in Kalihga as the son of king Jayagopa and queen Parvatl, and that 
he was summoned by the king of Lanka to take over the administra¬ 
tion. This Jayagopa seems to have been a scion of the Gahga royal 
family and the ruler of a district under the contemporary Imperial 
Gahga monarch. 

Nihsankamalla built many temples, excavated a number of 
tanks, and made numerous gardens. He set up mile-stones at every 
gavyuti on the main roads. The king regularly visited the sacred 
places on the island. In his inscriptions 11 he claims to have fought 
successfully with the Cholas, Pandyas and other peoples of South 
India, although the real nature of the claim cannot be determined. 
He also claims to have built the Nihsahkesvara temple at Ramesvara 


265 



misr/fy 



on the Indian coast and to have had diplomatic relations with dis¬ 
tant lands like Rajputana and Cambodia. 12 


On Nihsahkamalla ’s death, his son Virabahu II seems to have 
been murdered after a rule of one night. The next king was 
Nihsankamalla’s younger brother Vikramabahu III (or II) who 
ruled for three months. He was killed by Chodaganga (c. A.D. 
1196-97) who was a sister’s son of Nihsahkamalla. The name of the 
new ruler shows that he claimed relations with the Imperial Ganga 
monarch Anantavarman Chodaganga of Kalinganagara. After a 
rule of nine months Chodaganga was deposed by the general Kirti 
who raised Lilavati (c. A.D. 1197-1200), the first Mahishi of king 
Parakramabahu I, to the throne. 

After a period of three years, Sahasamalla of the Ikshvaku clan, 
who was really a step-brother of Nihsahkamalla, ascended the 
throne on the 23rd August, A.D. 1200. 13 He was deposed after a rule 
of two years (c. A.D. 1200-1202) by the general Ayushmat who 
raised Kalyanavati, the first Mahishi of Nihsahkamalla, to the throne. 
Kalyanavati (c. A.D. 1202-08) ruled for six years (six months accord¬ 
ing to a tradition). 

Thereafter general Ayushmat raised to the throne a boy of 
three months, named Dharmasoka. After a rule of one year, the 
young king was killed together with his general by Mahadipada 
Anikanga (Aniyanka), who was the father of Dharmasoka and came 
from the Chola kingdom with a great army. But Anikanga was 
himself killed after a rule of seventeen days by a general named 
Vikrantachamunakra who reinstalled on the throne queen Lilavati, the 
first Mahishi of Parakramabahu I, and conducted the administration 
for one year (c. A.D. 1209-1210). Then Lokesvara (c. A.D. 1210-11) 
came from South India with a large Damila (Tamil) army, subdued 
the whole of Lanka and ruled for nine months (five months accord¬ 
ing to some traditions) at Polonnaruva. After this a general named 
Parakrama raised queen Lilavati again to the throne. The queen 
ruled for seven months (four months according to one tradition) 
after which Parakrama Pandya came from the Pandya kingdom 
with a Pandya army, deposed the queen, and ruled for three years 
(c, A.D. 1211-14). It is difficult to determine whether he was a 
member of the Parndya branch of the Ceylonese royal family or a 
scion of the Pandya dynasty of Madura. Parakrama Pandya was 
deposed by Magha (or Magha) who came from Kalinga with 24,009 
soldiers including a large number of Kerala (Malayali) mercenaries. 
Magha (c. A.D. 1214-35) then ascended the throne and ruled for 
twenty-one years (nineteen years according to one tradition). He 


266 


CEYLON 



as stated to have oppressed the Buddhists of the island and destroyed 
many Buddhist monasteries. 

The Polonnaruva period of Ceylonese history ends with Magha. 
The later kings mostly ruled from places like Dambadeniya (Kuru- 
negala District), Gampola, etc. But Polonnaruva did not completely 
lose its importance all at once. Parakramabahu II (c. A.D. 1236-71) 
temporarily occupied the city, and Vijayabahu IV (c, A.D. 1271-73) 
and Parakramabahu III (c. A.D. 1302-10) ruled from there. But 
none of the later rulers enjoyed supremacy over the whole island. 
The Tamils were in occupation of wide areas since the days of 
Magha. The Paarfya kings of Madura invaded the island several 
times and, for nearly two decades about the close of the thirteenth 
and the beginning of the fourteenth century, the Pantfyas were the 
dominant power in the island. Parakramabahu III acknowledged 
the supremacy of the Paiidya king Maravarman Kulasekhara (A.D. 
1268-1310). The Tamils founded the kingdom of Jaffna which for 
some time owed allegiance to the emperors of Vijayanagara. The 
Rajput mercenaries appear also to have exercised some influence, 
and Bhuvanaikabahu I is stated to have succeeded in gaining the 
throne about A.D. 1273 with their help. About the middle of the 
thirteenth century the island was invaded by a Javanese of Tamra- 
linga, named Chandrabhanu, with a mixed host of Pandyas, Cholas 
and Javanese. The Ceylonese king Vira Alakesvara or Vijayabahu 
VI is known to have been captured by the leader of a Chinese em¬ 
bassy and carried off to China in A.D. 1411. All this shows a period 
of gradual decline which ultimately led to the Portuguese occupation 
of the island. 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

1 The Polonnaruva Period (Special Issue of the Ceylon Historical Journal, Vol. 

IV, 1954-55), ed. by S. D. Saparamadu. 

2 Art and Architecture of Ceylon by S. Paranavitana, 1954. ___ 

1. VolTlV, p. 173. t 

2 Ch 59 of the Cliulavamsa refers to Vijayabahu’s marriage with the Kalinga 
princess Trilokasundari and the settlement of the three Kalinga princes of 
Sirhhapura, capital of Kalinga, in his kingdom. In this connection Geiger 
(Cliulavamsa, Eng. trans., Part I, p. 213, note 1) observes: “Slhapura (Simha- 
pura) is the town which according to the legend (cf. Mhvs. 6.35) was founded 
ill Lala (R&{Jha) by Vijaya’s father Sihabahu. Lala borders in the north of the 
Kalinga kingdom, the home of Trilokasundari, as must be inferred from Mhvs. 
6.1-5. The south-eastern district of Chutia Nagpur to the west of Bengal is still 
called Singbhum.” It has, however, to be noticed that in the age of vijaya¬ 
bahu I (really from about the end of the sixth at least to the end of the twelfth 
century A.D.), the name Kalinga was exclusively applied to the kingdom of 
the Gahgas of Kalinganagara (modern Mukhalingam near Srikakulam), who 
styled themselves as Kalihq -adhiyati. Sirhhapura (mod. Singupuram m me 
same neighbourhood) was, however, the capital of the Kalihg-adhipatis in the 
fourth and fifth centuries. It was no longer the capital of Kalinga, but may 
have been the residence of some scions of the Ganga family. Radha and 

267 








THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Kalinga do not appear to have had contiguous boundaries in any known period 
of Indian history. Sirhhapura in Ra^ha (probably modern Singur in the 
Hooghly District) cannot be regarded as the same as the Kalinga capital of the 
same name, identified with modem Singupuram near Srikakulam. The repre¬ 
sentation of Sirhhapura as the capital of Kalinga in the Mahavamsa tradition 
seems to be due to the fact that the chronicle was composed about the fifth 
century, while the Chulavamsa appears merely to have continued the same 
tradition, although the later capital of the country was at Kalihganagara. 

3 H. C. P. Bell, Report on the Regalia District, A.S.C., 1892, pp. 73 ff. 

4. Sewell, HISI, p. 116; JRAS, 1939, p. 519. 

5. El, XXI. 184. 

6. Ibid., XXII. 86. 

7. Sewell, op. cit., p. 123. 

8. P. 246. Cf. SII, III. 206 ff., 217-18; ARSIE, 1908, para. 64; El, XXII. 88. 

9. EZ, II. 179 ff. 

10. Cf. EZ, II. 98 ff. 

11. See Geiger, Chulavamsa , trans., Part II, p. 128, n. 6. 

12. EZj I. No. 9; II, No. 17; H. W. Codrington, A Short History of Ceylon, p. 63; 
G. C. Mendis, The Early History of Ceylon, p. 65. 

13. JRAS, 1909, pp. 327, 331. 



CHAPTER XIII 


POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
ORGANISATION 

I. POLITICAL THEORY 

During the period under review political speculation was conti¬ 
nued in the Smriti commentaries as well as in independent works on 
Nitisastra. Examples of the former are the justly famous commen¬ 
taries of Yijhanesvara and Apararka on Yajnavalkya and of Kulluka 
on Manu, while those of the latter are the Laghv-Arhanniti-sastra of 
Hemachandra and the well-known Sukrariltisdra attributed to 
Sukracharya, the preceptor of the demons. A link between the two 
is presented by the Rdjadharma sections of voluminous Smriti 
Digests like the Rajadharmakanda of Lakshmldhara’s Krityci- 
kalpataru.i 

Beginning with the Smriti commentaries, we have to observe 
that Vijnanesvara agrees with the liberal view of Medhatithi on the 
vexed question of connotation of the term ‘king’. He writes 2 :— 
“Though this aggregate of kingly duties has been laid down with 
reference to the king, this duty should be understood to apply to 
one of another caste also who is engaged in the task of protecting 
the province, the district, and so forth”. Justifying this view by a 
textual argument the author first quotes the separate use of the 
generic term nripa (king) in Manu-smriti. Q The second and the 
more important argument is based upon the old Smriti conception 
of the relation of protection to taxation. Levying taxes, we are 
told, has protection for its object, and protection in its turn 
depends upon the infliction of punishment (danda). In other 
words the wide connotation of the term ‘king’ so as to make it 
applicable irrespectively of caste or status is justified by the fact 
that taxation imposes upon the ruler the obligation of protection. 
Apararka in his commentary on the same verse of Yajnavalkya justi¬ 
fies a similar interpretation of the term rajan (king) by a general as 
well as a particular argument. All these duties (dharma), he says, 
have been prescribed for a Kshatriya ruler of the kingdom. When, 
however, a non-Kshatriya does this work, he should perform the 
whole set of these duties. This view is supported in general terms 
by the maxim (nyaya) that from the performance of a particular 
occupation follows the acquisition of its corresponding obligation 


269 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

(dharma). More particularly we are told that the protection of sub¬ 
jects is involved in the acceptance of taxes. Everyone who contri¬ 
butes wealth, it is explained, expects a benefit accruing to himself, 
while paying taxes has no other object than self-preservation and 
therefore one who takes the taxes is bound to protect the people. 
In other words taxation and protection are the two sides of a bar¬ 
gain between the ruler and his subjects. Thence follows the corol¬ 
lary that kingship is independent of Kshatriya-birth . 4 

Of the other Smriti writers belonging to this period reference 
may be made to Gopala who wrote a Digest called the Kamadhenu. 
According to Gopala the king is one who has been consecrated, since 
the protection of subjects depends upon performance of the king’s 
consecration, and knowledge of kingly duties cannot be acquired 
without it. In another passage, however, Gopala declares that the 
coronation rites mentioned in the works on rajanlti are merely illus¬ 
trative, and that the king may be proclaimed simply by being seated 
on the throne according to the particular usages of countries and 
families. We may mention, finally, that Gopala repeats Srlkara’s 
view about the claim of the indigent and other classes to the king’s 
wealth and about the evil of rule of the ‘Many ’. 5 

Lakshmldhara’s ideas of the origin and nature of kingship as 
well as of the mutual relations between the ruler and his subjects 
are based on the old Smriti texts of Manu and Narada. He believes 
in the dogma of the king’s divine origin as well as the principle of 
the people’s absolute obligation of honouring him and obeying his 
command. He also holds with Manu that the penal authority of the 
king (or the State) is the grand security of the social and the poli¬ 
tical order. The author also quotes 6 a number of Smriti passages in¬ 
culcating, often by means of moral and spiritual sanctions, the king’s 
obligation of protecting his subjects. On the other hand it is 
significant that he is completely silent about the texts justifying 
the subjects in resisting their evil ruler. In Hemachandra’s Laghv- 
Arhannlti we have an interesting theory of the origin of rcijanitij 
which ascribes its creation to the mythical prophet-king Rishabha. 
This is evidently due to the Jain author’s attempt to mark the science 
as of Jain origin . 8 

The £ukranitisara, Q which announces itself as a summary of the 
archetypal rutiscistra work of the god Brahma from the pen of the 
sage Bhargava (Sukracharya), is distinguished from early mediaeval 
compilations of a similar nature by the freshness and originality of 
its outlook upon some important political ideas. As regards the 
scope of the science, Sukra 10 introduces his work with the statement 
that it has been prepared for the benefit of kings and others. In 
accordance with this wider conception of the science, we find that 




270 


misTfy 



POLITICAL, THEORY 


Sukra devotes a separate chapter 11 of his work to the subject of 
general (sadharana) mtiidstra applicable to all and sundry. Thus 
Politics (or more properly the art of government) in Sukra’s system 
is not (as in Kamandaka) an independent branch of knowledge for 
instruction of kings in statecraft, but is merged in a science of general 
morals. As the interests of the rulers form the core of this science, 
nitisastra is primarily the science (or art) of good administration. 
But since it fulfils a more general purpose than the interest of the 
king, its use must extend over a wider field. This is explained by 
the author 12 by means of an estimate of the relative values of nlti- 
sastra and the parallel sciences. Other sciences, we read, enlighten 
the people on only one aspect of their activities, but nitisastra is the 
source of subsistence of all classes and it maintains the established 
usages of men. 

The ideas of kingship in the Sukranitisara are largely based 
upon the thought of the older writers, but they present some points 
of remarkable, if not original, interest. Sukra is a great believer 
in the doctrine of karma, for he says 13 that karma alone is the cause 
of good and evil conditions on this earth. Elsewhere 14 we are told 
that men are directed towards virtue and vice by means of desires 
assuming such forms as would help the fulfilment of deeds done in 
a previous birth, and that most certainly everything happens in ac¬ 
cordance with such deeds. This doctrine is applied by Sukra to 
explain the basis of the king’s authority over his subjects. The king, 
we are told, 15 acquires his prowess and becomes a protector and 
director and the source of delight through his austerities, and he sus¬ 
tains the earth by his deeds done in a previous birth as well as his 
austerities. This repeats an idea of Narada, namely, that the king’s 
authority is derived from his own karma. The same doctrine is 
repeated in other passages. In 1.71-72 the author, while boldly 
altering (as it appears) a well-known text of Manu, observes that the 
king becomes a lord of the movable and immovable beings through 
his own austerities (tapas), taking (for that purpose) the eternal 
particles of Indra, of the Wind, of Yama, of the Sun, of Fire, of 
Varuna, of the Moon, and of the lord of Wealth (Kubera). Lordship, 
we are told in another place, 16 is the reward of austerities, while 
servitude is the penalty for sin. Elsewhere 17 we read that lordship 
which is superior in every way to the mastery of riches is the fruit 
of no little austerities. With the above idea of the basis of the 
king’s authority in his own karma, Sukra combines the old concep¬ 
tion of Manu and Bhxshma in the Mahabhdrata about parallelism of 
the king’s functions with those of the Regents of the Quarters. In 
1.73-76 he shows how the various administrative functions of the king 
correspond to the respective attributes of the gods Indra, Wind, the 


271 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Ifuin, Yama, Fire, Varuna, the Moon and Kubera. In another verse 13 
he declares the king’s attributes to comprise those of the father, 
the mother, the preceptor, the brother and the friend as well as the 
gods Kubera and Yama, in other words the best human and divine 
attributes. Sukra likewise supports by some fresh arguments 19 
the notion of Manu-smnti and the Mahdbharata about the influence 
of the king upon the time-spirit (“Zeit-geist”). According to him. 
the king stamps himself upon his Age through his enforcement of 
the customs and duties of the people by the arm of his political 
authority. With this conception may be compared the Mahabharata 
idea 20 that the king is a maker of the Age-cycle through the degree 
of his performance as well as non-performance of danduniti. 

As regards the idea of mutual relations of the ruler and his 
subjects, Sukra in the first place repeats Kamandaka’s verses relat¬ 
ing to the fundamental importance of kingship under proper condi¬ 
tions for the fulfilment of the people’s needs. In his view the secu¬ 
rity and prosperity of the people and in short their complete life 
depend upon the intellectual and moral quality of their ruler. This 
leads the author to discuss the question of mutual dependence of 
the ruler and his people. The people, he says, 21 do not observe 
their duties without protection by the king, but the king does not 
flourish without the people. Elsewhere the author employs a bold 
mythological simile to the effect that the people like the Queen of 
Indra must never be without a lord. 22 It is in the light of this con¬ 
ception that we have to understand the author’s references to the 
obligations of subjects towards their ruler. Describing the beha¬ 
viour of the people visiting the king the author says 2 ” that they 
should salute the king as if he were an incarnation of Vishnu. More 
specifically he observes 24 that they should not divulge the king’s 
secrets, nor even think of injuring or slaying him. In another 
place 26 in the course of his description of the people s obligations, 
he enjoins them to honour the king along with the gods, the ascetics, 
the preceptor, the fire and learned men. 

5§ukra asserts with equal emphasis the king’s obligations which 
include protection of the people and chastisement of the wicked. 
The author supports the king’s obligation with the usual moral and 
spiritual sanctions. Thus he includes 26 in a category of thiee pei- 
sons whom the gods kill and cast down, the king who fails in his 
duty of protection. In an earlier passage 27 the author enjoins the 
king by the promise of rewards and the threat of penalties to en¬ 
force the observance of their specified duties by the subjects. 

The climax of this principle of the king’s obligation is reached 
in a striking passage 28 applying the dogma of the kings rvine 


272 


MiN/sr^ 



"^creation to the old Smriti conception of the co-ordination between 
taxation and protection. The king, we read, having the aspect of a 
master was ordained by Brahma for the service (dasyatva) of the 
people with his own share of the produce as his fee (bhriti) for the 
purpose of their consistent protection. 

Besides insisting with the older thinkers upon the king’s obli¬ 
gation of protection, Sukra follows them in making righteousness the 
rule of the king’s conduct. It is in this connection that Sukra draws, 
practically for the first time among our ancient thinkers, a sharp 
contrast between two contrary types of rulers, namely, the divine 
and the demoniac. The king who is righteous, we read, 29 is a por¬ 
tion of the gods, while his reverse, who destroys righteousness and 
oppresses the people, is a portion of the demons. With this may be 
compared another passage 30 where a king endowed with various 
good qualities is declared to be a portion of the gods, while his oppo¬ 
site is held to be a portion of the demons and destined for residence 
in hell. In another passage 31 Sukra applies the philosophical doc¬ 
trine of the three qualities of substances to kings. There are, he 
says, three types of austerities, namely, those marked by Goodness 
(sattvika), Darkness (tamasa) and Passion (rajasa), and the king 
assumes his distinctive character according as he practises very 
much one or other of them. In the following lines Sukra, after defin¬ 
ing the three types of rulers, declares that the sattvika king assimi¬ 
lates the particles of the gods, the tamasa type those of the demons 
and the rajasa type those of men. 

We may conclude this brief survey of Sukra’s political thought 
with some reference to his attitude towards the old Smriti idea of 
the rights' of the subjects with reference to their rulers. Brahmanas, 
he says in one place, 32 incur no sin by destroying very wicked 
Kshatriyas even by fighting them with weapons: even so when 
Kshatriyas are oppressed by lowly folk, Brahmanas should quickly 
destroy them in battle. This passage repeats an important principle 
inculcated by Bhishma in the Mahabharata, 33 namely that of the 
Brahmana’s right of armed resistance against very oppressive 
Kshatriyas and against lowly oppressors of Kshatriyas. As regards 
the rights of the people in general with respect to their ruler, Sukra 
in one place, 34 it is true, counsels resignation to the will of a bad 
king as to the unnatural acts of parents and the inscrutable ways 
of Providence. A bolder line is taken up in other passages. The 
people are asked to leave the land ruled by an unrighteous king and 
constantly to frighten him by going over to his virtuous and very 
powerful enemy. 35 In another passage 36 the author concedes to the 
people’s representatives the right of deposing the bad ruler. “If 

273 

S.E—18 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



SMe king, although high born”, we read, “becomes averse to good 
qualities, policy and strength, and is unrighteous, he should 
be repudiated as the destroyer of the kingdom. In his place the 
Purohita should install a virtuous prince of his family for protection 
of the subjects after obtaining the approval of the latter.” 


II. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 
NORTH INDIA 


The decline and fall of the Imperial Pratiharas of Kanauj paved 
the way for the rise of new powers in different parts of North India. 
Such were the Kalachuris of Chedi, the Chandellas of Jejakabhukti, 
the Paramaras of Malwa, and the Chaulukyas of Gujarat. The 
administrative organisation of these and other contemporary dynas¬ 
ties was, as might be expected, of the same general type, but there 
were some important differences. 


1. The Kalachuris 


The Kalachuris of Chedi assumed the usual imperial titles. The 
most famous kings of this dynasty, namely, Karna, Yasahkarna, and 
Jayasimha of the Tripuri line added to these titles the epithets of 
asvapati, gajapati , narapati, and rajatrayadhipati (king of horses, 
king of elephants, king of men, lord of the three grades of kings). 31. 
Next in importance to the king was the Crown Prince {mahdrdja- 
putra) who is often mentioned in the legal formula of the Kalachuri 
land-grants. The Kalachuri records, both of the Tripuri and the 
Ratanpur lines, speak of officers bearing the titles of mantripradhdna 
(or pradhdndmdtya or amatyamukhya ) (chief minister) and also of 
a dharmakarmadhikari (minister in charge of religious endow¬ 
ments). 38 We can judge the high status of the amdtyamukhyas from 
the fact that Kokalla II is said to have been raised to the throne 
by them. 33 The list of dignitaries occurring in the formula of 
land-grants of these kings included the mahdm&tya, the dharma- 
pradhdna, the dasamulika, the sandhivigrahika, the praithdra, the 
dushtasadhya, the akshapatalika, the pramattavara, the asvasa- 
dhanika, and the b handdgari Tea. 40 In the above, mahamdtya and 
dharmapradhana correspond respectively to pradhdndmdtya and 
dharmakarmadhikari mentioned above, while sandhivigrahika, 
akshapatalika and bhdndagdrika are old familiar offices. The dushta- 
sddhya may perhaps be equated with the dauhsadhasadhanika of the 
Pala records. The other titles are new and difficult to explain. The 
later records of the Kalachuris 41 substitute (or add) high imperial 
titles of the type known to the Gupta period. Such are mahasdndhi- 
vigrahika, mahdpratihdra, mahdkshapatalika, mahdsvasddhanika, 


274 


misr/fy 






ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 


mahdbhandagdrika, mahaprarriatd, and rrmhddhyaksha. As regards 
the branch of local administration we find that the donated village 
is located in one record 42 in a group of 12. This reminds us 
of the system of chiefs’ estates in the Rajput clan-monarchies, for 12 
is an exact fraction of the standard size (84) of such estates. The 
reference to paftakila (identified with the modern Patel) in another 
record 43 points to the continuation of the traditional type of village 
administration under a headman. 


2. The Chandellas 


The Chandellas of Jejakabhukti used the conventional 
imperial titles. A record of the beginning of the thirteenth century 44 
mentions among their officers of State a mantfi (minister) bearing 
the titles of mahamahattaka and mandalika , a sandhivigrahika 
(minister of foreign affairs), a kottapala (city prefect) and a sreshthl 
(banker) who was also the writer of deeds. The last three formed 
a Board of panchakula as well as the dhavTnadhikarana (court of 
justice) for adjudicating upon the disputes of merchants. The care 
of the administration for the families of deceased soldiers is illus¬ 
trated by an unusually interesting inscription of A.D. 1205, 45 which 
records the grant of two villages by way of maintenance for death 
on the battlefield. In the branch of local government, we find 
villages being grouped into vishayas or pathakas (districts), but we 
have no reference to the titles of officers placed in charge of them. 
Some light is thrown upon village administration by the fact that 
the adhikritarnahattamas are sometimes 46 mentioned in the list of 
persons to whom the king’s grant of land is announced. These 
officers apparently correspond to the mahattaradhikarins (the 
executive Board of the assembly of mahattaras) who are met with 
elsewhere. 


3. The Paramaras 


The Paramaras adopted the usual imperial titles. Among their 
high officers of State are mentioned the mahasdndhivigrahika 
(minister of foreign affairs), the dandadhlsa (commander-in-chief) 
and the like. 47 In Merutuhga’s account of king Munja (Prabandha - 
chintdmani) reference is made to a faithful mahamatya of the king, 
who committed suicide in sheer despair when he found his master 
embarking on an expedition against his advice. 48 The villages in 
the Paramara kingdom were grouped into larger units called in 
the ascending order, pratijagaranaka, pathaka (or bhoga or vishaya) 
and mandala . They were also gathered into units bearing the 
name of the chief village with various numeral endings (12, 16, 17, 


275 






1st) 37, 48, and 84). The villages were in charge of the usual 
patfakila (headman). 

4. The Gahadavalas 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



The heirs of the Imperial Pratlharas in the sovereignty of the 
Middle Ganga valley were the kings of the Gahadavala dynasty 
who ruled for more than a century (c. A.D. 1090-1193). The 
Gahadavala kings adopted the usual imperial titles, to which king 
Govindachandra added the epithets of asvapati, gajapati, narapati , 
and rdjatrayddhipati mentioned above. 49 The Queens assumed the 
corresponding dignified titles of patfamahddevi and mahdrdjni , and 
they claimed to be invested with all royal prerogatives.- 0 The 
Crown Prince {maharajaputra ), who was similarly invested with 
all royal rights, is sometime^ 51 further said to be consecrated to 
yauvarajya. The Maharajaputra Yuvardja Govindachandra made 
the largest number of his land-grants in his father’s life-time with¬ 
out even the formality of the king’s permission. Among the offi¬ 
cials mentioned in the formula of the grants are included the 
manti% the senapati, the pratihara, the hhdnddrika , the akshapa - 
tcilika, and the duta^ All these offices are known from earlier 
times. The same formula mentions' adhihdripurushas in charge of 
districts ( vishayas ) and towns (pattanas). This suggests the usual 
type of local government with State officers placed in charge of 
districts and towns. The donated villages as a rule are located in 
p attalas which may refer to fiscal rather than administrative 
divisions. 


5. The Senas 


The Senas of Bengal, on the whole, continued the administra¬ 
tive organisation of their Pala predecessors, but there were some 
new developments. From the time of Vijayasena the kings assum¬ 
ed the usual imperial titles. The later kings used the additional 
titles of asvapati , gajapati and narapati known to us from the 
records of the Kalachuri and Gahadavala kings. The list of per¬ 
sons mentioned in the formula of the Sena land-grants comprised 
a number of High Imperial Officers of the types known to. the 
Gupta Empire. Such were the mahadharmadhyaksha (chief justice), 
mahasdndhivigrahika (minister of foreign affairs), mahasenapati 
(commander-in-chief), mahdmudrddhikrita (keeper of the Great 
Seal), mahakshapatalika (chief accounts officer), mahapratiharw 
(chief of palace guards), mahavyuhapati (or mcihabhogapati ) (prob¬ 
ably a military title), mahapilupati (chief trainer of elephants), 
and rnahdganastha (apparently a military title). Other officials 
mentioned in the same formula are the rdjdmdtya (senior order of 


276 


WHiST^y 


ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 



amdtyas), the antarahga, the brihaduparika, the dauhsadhanika, 
the chauroddharanika (police officer), the gaulmika (probably a 
military officer), the dandapasika (police officer), the dandanayaka 
(general) and the vishayapati (district officer). Among these, the 
offices of mahasandhivigrahika, the mahakshapatalika, the maha- 
senapati and the mahapratihara as well as those of the raja.ma.tya, 
the dauhsadhanika, the chauroddharanika, the gaulmika, the danda¬ 
pasika, and the vishayapati were known to the Pala administration. 
The other names are mostly new and of uncertain meaning. A 
striking feature of the Sena administration was the political influ¬ 
ence of the Queen and the purohita who are now mentioned for 
the first time in the formula of the Bengal land-grants. The Senas 
continued some of the Pala administrative divisions (bhukti) with 
their nomenclature. 63 A uniform standard measurement for the 
cultivated lands was still wanting, for the size of the donated lands 
is given in the different records according to the different local or 
royal standards. 54 The Senas, however, carried out a bold mea¬ 
sure of land-revenue reform in the shape of cash assessment of the 
land at standard rates. 66 

6. The Chahamanas 

The administrative organisation of the Chahamanas, both of 
the main line of Sakambhari and Ajmer and of the branch lines of 
Marwar, 66 has some striking features. One of the oldest records 
of the main line 67 bearing the date 1030 V.S. (A.D. 973) mentions 
various estates as being held by the king and junior princes of the 
clan. This description fits in with the type of Rajput clan- 
monarchies to which reference has been made above. In the same 
record the gift-villages are located in one case in a group of 12 
comprised within a vishaya. This illustrates the super-imposition 
of the new system of clan-chief’s estates upon the older division 
into vishayas. We have a unique document dated 1198 V.S. (A.D. 
1141) illustrating the municipal administration in vogue under the 
Chahamanas of Nadol. In this record 68 the whole people of a town 
headed by sixteen Brahmanas (two being selected from each ward) 
tender a document signed with their own hands. By it they 
solemnly promise to find out in accordance with the custom of the 
country whatever is lost by (or snatched away from) the bhatas, 
the bhattaputras, dauvarikas, and others on their way. A large 
number of witnesses (including the whole class of bankers) bears 
witness to this document. 


277 



THE STRUGGLE FOlrf EMPIRE 

lit ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 
/ SOUTH INDIA 

1. The Chalukyas 

Chalukyas of Kalyana, who succeeded the Rashtrakutas in 
the sovereignty of the Deccan, adopted the usual imperial titles. 
To this they added such characteristic epithets as samastabhuva- 
ndsraya (refuge of the whole world), snpnthivlvallabha (favourite 
of fortune and the earth), Satydsrayakiilatilaka (forehead-orna¬ 
ment of the family of Satyairaya) and Chdlukydbharcma (ornament 
of the Chalukyas). Among their high officers of State are 
mentioned the daridanayaka (general), the iimhaprachandadanda- 
nayaka (great august general), the dJiarinddhikavin (superintendent 
of religious affairs 1 , according to Barnett, or better perhaps, chief 
justice), the mahapradhana (high minister) and the sdndhivi - 
grahika (minister of foreign affairs). A new tendency towards 
specialisation of officers is illustrated by such titles asi tadeya- 
dandanayaka (general in charge of reserves), Lala-sandhivigrahika 
(minister of peace and war for the Lala country), Heri-sandhivi - 
grahika and Kannatfa-sandhivigrahika (minister of peace and war 
for the Kannada country). 69 A record 69 commemorates a Brah- 
mana family, whose ancestor was the king’s chief preceptor, and 
which furnished three generations of dandanayakas to the State 
service. Another Brahmana, whose father held the post of 
treasured, was successively appointed sandhivigrahika ^ of two 
different varieties and was invested with all the insignia of royalty 
by the kings. 61 Like other imperial dynasties the Chalukyas 
allowed the combination of different offices in the same hands. ^ We 
have the example of a dharynadhikdrin who was also a mahapra- 
dhana and a dandandyaka . 62 Another dandandyaka held the offices 
of mahapradhana, Kannada-sandhivigrahika and maneverggacle 
(master of the household) together with the title of mahawmantadhi- 
pati (great lord of feudatories). 63 

When we turn to the branch of local administration, we 
find that the towns and villages belonging to the South Maratha 
country were grouped into Districts containing small numeral end¬ 
ings (30 etc.), which again were united into Divisions with higher 
numeral endings (1000 etc.). Reference is also.made to units of 70 
and 300 villages which were comprised within the larger groups 
of 500 and 2000 respectively. 64 The districts were ruled by officers 
called mahdmandalesvara and the like, whose office was sometimes 
shared by their wives. 65 

In the Kannada tract under Chalukya rule, the local adminis¬ 
tration was somewhat more complex. We hear of administrative 




278 



divisions with numeral endings varying from 32,000, 12,000, etc. 
through 3,000, 2,000, 1,000, etc. to 500, 300, etc. Reference is also 
made to kampanas (counties) of 20 and 30 comprised in a group of 
500. 66 In one instance 67 five towns are said to be included in a 
group of 140. Elsewhere, 68 in complete disregard of the system of 
numeral endings, we are introduced to a number of nadus included 
in two desas. The larger administrative divisions were governed 
by Princes, high officials (like dantjxinayakas) and feudatories. Fre¬ 
quently the governors of the larger divisions also held charge of 
smaller divisions of 500, 300, etc. or of groups of towns, or even of 
special departments of taxation. 69 Sometimes they held additional 
appointments like mahapradhdna, ‘President of the Intendants’, 
‘Steward of the Household,’ ‘Provincial Registrar,’ and '‘Minister of 
peace and war.’ The smaller divisions were often governed 70 by 
officials such as p vabhus, ndl-gdvundas, and dctndcindy aka s , or else by 
feudatories. Sometimes 71 they held charge of two groups of 300 
and 70, of two desas and the like. In one remarkable instance 72 a 
nddu is found to be governed jointly by a da.ndandtha and a vuihd- 
pradhana. This would suggest a division of civil and military com- 
mand in the district administration. 

The administration of the provincial governors and district 
officers in the Kannada area was modelled on that of the central 
government. The governors had under them officers called maha~ 
prachandadmiqiandyaka (great august general), sandhivigrahddhikara 
(minister of peace and war) and the like, who often had the addi¬ 
tional offices of mahapradhdna (chief minister), steward of the royal 
household and so forth. 73 A Chalukya Princess Akkadevi, while 
governing three groups of 60, 70, and 140, had under her a council 
of seven ministers comprising the mane-perggade (steward of the 
household), the two tantrapalas (councillors), a pradhdna (minister), 
an aliyci (meaning unknown), a steward of the betel-bag and a secre¬ 
tary to the council. 74 Under the same administiation we find 
ministers of State (pradhdna) along with the ndda-pergga(le , the 
secretary, and the chief justice (dharmadhyaksha) joining together 
in granting statutory constitution to a temple. The constitution 
Was renewed four years later by the administrative officials 
(karanas), headed by the steward (perggade).™ There were, besides, 
separate officers charged with the administration of different 
branches of taxation. Not only the nal-g&vundas, but also the taxa¬ 
tion officers, had the right of assigning portions of the revenue for 
pious objects. 76 The officer in charge of groups of 500 and the like 
had the right of assigning towns for the same purpose . 1 r 


279 







A remarkable feature of local administration of the Chalukyas 
is the frequent appointment of ladies to the governorships of pro¬ 
vinces and minor administrative divisions. We have an instance 78 
of a Chalukya Queen administering a group of 12,000. During the 
period from Saka 937 to 976 the Princess Akkadevi governed a group 
of 70 to which were afterwards added groups of 60 and 140. What 
is more, she governed for some time a province of 12000 along with 
a mahamandalesvara. 79 Another Chalukya Princess governed in 
company with her husband a province of 12000 along with smaller 
tracts in A.D. 1125, while in the next year she herself governed a 
division of 900 along with other groups. 80 The high official status 
of the wives of governors also appears in some recorded examples. 
Thus we find a petition being addressed through a mahamandale¬ 
svara and his wife to the Emperor for grant of an estate. 81 In 
another record the wife of a governor herself grants lands to a 
temple. 82 

In the Kannada tract the towns and villages often enjoyed a 
corporate constitution. The Chalukya records repeatedly introduce 
us to assemblies of mahajanas consisting of 1000, 200, 104, and the 
like. 83 We have a peculiar instance 84 of a town having a larger 
assembly of 1000 mahajanas along with a smaller assembly of 100. 
Ordinarily the assemblies had at their head officers called ur-odeya 
(mayor), gavunda (sheriff) or perggade (steward). But there are in¬ 
stances of a single village having as many as three gdvundas at its 
head, 8 ' 5 of towns being in charge of a committee of 30, 86 and of six 
gdvundas and eight setthis controlling the affairs of a town for no 
less than 74 years (Saka 932-1006). 87 An interesting record 88 
shows how a town enjoyed a statutory constitution guaranteed by 
official charter. From this document we learn how 8 setthis and 80 
households, representing a town, obtained from the local council of 
ministers and administrators, headed by the county-sheriff, a rene¬ 
wal of their corporate regulations, in so far as they had broken 
down owing to the calamities of the Chola invasion. These regula¬ 
tions were concerned with taxes and penalties for various offences 
that were payable by the townsmen. A comparison with the similar 
charter of A.D. 725 granted by Prince Vikramaditya of the earlier 
Chalukya dynasty, to which reference has been made above, perhaps 
may be taken to prove the greater extent of administrative decentra¬ 
lisation under the later dynasty. 

The Chalukya records also give us glimpses into the functions 
of these local bodies. The queens, the high officials and private indi¬ 
viduals, when making permanent endowments in favour of temples, 
frequently appointed the ur-odeyas (or the gdvundas), the committee 
in charge of the towns, or the assembly of mahajanas, to be trustees 


280 



ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 

for their charities. 89 Again, the ur-o$eyas (or the gavun&as) and 
the assemblies sometimes sold or donated lands (evidently owned 
by themselves) to private individuals. 90 

Like other imperial dynasties of ancient India, the Chalukyas 
of Kalyana wisely allowed a number of feudatories to enjoy a limited 
autonomy under the suzerainty of the paramount power. The great 
feudatory families like the Kadambas of Hangal, the in as ° 
Sindavadi and the gilaharas of Northern Konkan bore the title of 
king or maMmandalesvara, or both. They had a staff ot officials 
similar to that of the paramount power. Frequently they allowed 
the combination of different offices in the same hands. Thus a 
twelfth century record of a Sinda chief 91 refers to an officer bearing 
the titles of sarvddhikan (general officer, or perhaps chief minister), 
mantrichuddmani (crest-jewel of ministers), mahapradhana (high 
minister) and bearer of the betel-bag. Definite reference is made 
to a council of ministers in a record 92 of a feudatory Chalukya chief 
belonging to A.D. 1079. In this council were included, among others, 
an amdtyakesan (chief minister), a samanta, a parabola (military 
•commander), an armtya (minister) and the amatyas of two Qj* eens - 
In the record just mentioned the reference to the amatyas of queens 
suggests that the wives of feudatories held administrative posts 
under them. We have records of Kadamba chiefs-who ruled jointly 
with their Queens. 94 The feudatories often had sub-feudatories 
holding seigniories (manneyas) under them, this last being some¬ 
times in possession of the same family for several pn^atmns. lh^ 
•feudatories and even the holders of manneyas had sufficient freedom 
to freely assign lands on their own authority. 96 

2. The Cho\as 

The administration of the Imperial Cholas from the time of 
Raiaraja I (A.D. 985-1014) onwards was a continuation of that 
of their predecessors with the added magnificence derived from their 
political greatness. It is a sign of their increased dignity that the 
Cholas assumed such high-sounding titles as Chakravartigal and 
'Emperor of the three worlds.’ We even find temples being raised 
over the mortal remains of kings and princes, and images of kings 
and queens being set up in temples for worship. Though the Cholas 
do not seem to have possessed a regular council of ministers they 
had a body of executive officers ( udun-kuttam ) in immediate attend¬ 
ance on their persons. These last may have served as liaison officers 
between the king and the bureaucracy. The Chola officials enjoye 
distinctive titles which practically marked them off as a separate 
order of nobles. Even the higher and lower grades of the service 
were distinguished by similar titles. We have observed elsewhere 

281 


/ 




MIN/Sr^ 



the composite administrative machinery and the complex official 
procedure involved in the royal grant of lands in the time of Raja- 
raja I. A record of Vlrarajendra, 97 ordering certain contributions 
paid by a village to be chargeable thenceforth on the public reve¬ 
nues, illustrates the same complex process. The king’s oral order 
was first committed to writing by a Secretary and then signed by 
three Chief Secretaries. It was then ordered to be entered in the 
Accounts by three authorising officers and was endorsed by 38 
officers belonging to the department of royal attendants (udan - 
kuttam) and the department of officers issuing permits and arbitra¬ 
tions. This was followed by a meeting of thirty-two officers of the 
Accounts department, when four authorised the entry, one read the 
order, one made the entry, and one issued the revised account. 

We have a record 98 of two great ministers of Rajadhiraja H. 
One of them first helped to secure the succession of the young king 
after the death of his predecessor. Then the minister distinguished 
himself in a campaign against the Sinhalese invaders allied with a 
claimant to the Pandya throne. Finally, applying himself to the 
task of administration he appointed persons (as we are told) capable 
of bearing the burden of government after his death. The other 
minister won a great victory over the Pandya king who had treacher¬ 
ously allied himself with the Sinhalese invaders against the Chola 
sovereign. 

In the later Chola period the village assemblies continued to 
function on the whole as in the earlier period. 99 Two inscriptions 
of A.D. 1185 and 1190 supply us with instances of Chola kings lay¬ 
ing down, on the initiative of the State officials, rules for the election 
of the executive by the village assemblies. But other records be¬ 
longing to A.D. 1232 and 1233 prove that the village assemblies could 
frame rules as before, regarding the meetings and qualifications of 
their executive. We have an unusually interesting record of A.D. 
1225 which mentions a series of decisions by the mulaparishat of a 
temple on the question of election of the executive body of an 
assembly and its management of the village revenues. This seems 
to suggest that the village-mahasabha, failing to reach satisfactory 
decision on matters vitally affecting its activities, sought the assist¬ 
ance of another local authority. 100 

3. The Yadavas 

The administration of the Yadavas of Devagiri was substantially 
a continuation of that of their Chalukya predecessors in the 
sovereignty of the Deccan. From the time of Bhillama (A.D. 1135- 
1193) the kings assumed the title of maharajadhiraja, sometimes with 


282 


ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANISATION 

the addition of the other titles. 101 Among their chief officers are 
mentioned the mahapradhana, the senapati, the dandanayaka and so 
forth. The Yadavas seem to have introduced a new nomenclature 
(desas sub-divided into khampanakas) for their administrative divi¬ 
sions in the Maratha country. But the old numeral endings (12000, 
140, etc.) were continued in the Kannada area. Like their Chalukya 
predecessors, the Yadavas had feudatories and lords of manneyas 
(Seigniories) under them. We have an interesting record 102 illus¬ 
trating the attempt of the paramount power to bring the holder of 
a manneya under control. It tells us how, while the manneya was 
being held by a mahamandalesvara, a special commission was ap¬ 
pointed by the central government for its administration. 

4. The Hoysalas 

We now turn to the administration of the Hoysalas of Dora- 
samudra who became the leading power in the Mysore region after 
the downfall of the Chalukyas of Kalyana. The Hoysalas at first 
were content with the feudatory title of mahamandalesvara, indicat¬ 
ing submission to the Chalukya paramount power. But Vira Ballala 
II assumed the full imperial titles of his Chalukya predecessors, 
namely, sama^tabhuvanasraya (refuge of the whole world), 
srlprithivivallabha (favourite of fortune and the earth), maharaja- 
dhiraja, paramesvara, and so forth. Among the high officers of State 
under the Hoysalas are mentioned the mahapradhana, the sarvadhi- 
karl, the senapati, the dandanayaka, and the mahaprachandadan<}a- 
ndyaka. We have frequent instances of the combination of different 
offices under the same officer, e.g. of mahapradhana and dandanayaka, 
of mahapradhana and sarvadhikari and so forth. 103 We hear of two 
groups of 70 being governed by a mahapradhana senapati danda- 
ndyaka and of a district (ndd) being ruled by the samastasenddhipati 
of a mahapradhana. 104 The village assemblies under the Hoysalas 
retained their old functions. We have instances of a village mahd- 
sabhd (assembly) receiving gifts of money for providing worship 
in a temple out of the resulting interest, and of village mahajanas 
receiving another village tax-free. The village assembly enjoyed its 
own revenues and owned its own lands. We hear of the mahajanas 
of a village granting certain customs duties for the benefit of a 
temple, and of these, along with certain gdvuiidas and prabhus, 
granting lands to a temple. We have an interesting reference to a 
judicial trial by a collective body of villages in a record which says 
that when a dispute arose about the boundary of a fieldsmen of 
nine nadus assembled together and gave their decision after examina¬ 
tion of the boundaries. 105 




283 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


5. The Pandyas 

The administration of the later Pandyas, who became the lead¬ 
ing power in Southern India in the thirteenth century A.D., followed 
the same general lines as that of their Chola predecessors. The 
greatest Pandya king, Jatavarman Sundara Pandya (acc. A.D. 1251), 
assumed the titles of maharajadhiraja , paramesvara and so forth. A 
peculiarity of the later Pandya administration was the institution of 
joint rulers (or “co-regents”), which is specially noted by the con¬ 
temporary foreign observers. 106 Among the high officials of the 
Pandya State is mentioned 107 the Prime Minister who received 
grants of land that were purely personal. We have good reason 
to believe that there existed under the later Pandyas an ela¬ 
borate official procedure for the royal grant of revenue-free lands 
to Brahmanas and temples. Justice in the Pandya kingdom was 
administered in the first instance by village assemblies and other 
local authorities. Only in case of their failure were the disputes 
carried to the king’s officers, or, in the extreme cases, to the king 
himself. The village assemblies continued to function as in the 
earlier times. Mention is made of a committee of justice in one vil¬ 
lage and of an executive committee in another. We have also a 
record of a village assembly buying a plot of land and letting it out 
on permanent lease at a fixed rental. There is a remarkable instance 
of collective action on the part of the people of eighteen provinces 
(vishayas) who assembled together and made an agreement to collect 

funds for the building of a temple. 108 


1. Kanda XI. For the Smriti works in the above list we have followed the 
chronology of Kane. Hemachandra was a contemporary of Kumarapala of 
Gujarat (above, pp. 76-8). 

2. On Ydj, I. 368. 

3. VII. 1. 

4. The keen interest displayed by the Smriti commentators of this period on the 
subject of incidence of kingly duties is perhaps to be explained by the then cur¬ 
rent political situation. It seems probable that the upheaval of the Muslim inva¬ 
sions of Northern India gave the opportunity to provincial and district officers, 
not always of the Kshatriya caste, to assert their authority in various parts of 
the country. The question of status of such persons could not but be a matter of 
practical interest to the Hindu jurists of the time. (The view put forward in 
the present place is somewhat different from that presented for the first time 
in the author’s work A History of Hindu Political Theories, 2 p. 195). 

5. For the^ passages of Gopala’s Kdmadhenu mentioned above, see quotations in 
Chandesvara’s Rdjanitiratnakara , 2 and 85. 

6. Krityakalpataru, Rajadharma Kantfa, pp. 83-86. 

7. I. 8-17. 

8. For full details, see Dr. U. N. Ghoshal, A History of Hindu Political Theories 2 
pp. 203-4. 

9. The standard Edition of Gustav Oppert has been followed. [The &ukranitisara 
was first edited by Gustav Oppert (Madras, 1882) and has been translated by 
B. K. Sarkar in S. B. H. series. Oppert regarded it as an early work, belonging 
to the period of the “Smriti and the early epic literature” (preface, p. viii). 


284 





Others have referred it to Gupta period (Dr. Syamlal Pandya— Sukra hi Raja- 
niti (in Hindi), Lucknow, 2009 V. S. Ch. IX). On the other hand, modern 
scholars generally regard it as of a late date ( KHDS , I. 116). According to 
Keith, it “is a work of quite late date which mentions the use of gunpowder and 
is of no value whatever as evidence for early Indian usage or philosophy” 
(HSL . 464). Dr. U. N. Ghoshal, the author of this chapter, regards it as a work 
of the early medieval period and has discussed this question in his forthcoming 
work, A History of Indian political ideas—The Ancient period and the period 
of transition to the Middle Ages (Ch. XXVIII), 

While it is obvious from the detailed reference to fire-arms that the 
Sukranitisara did not assume its present shape till after the sixteenth century 
A.D, it is difficult to believe that the whole work was conceived at such a late 
date. It may be regarded as almost certain that some portions of it were 
much older though it is difficult to distinguish them. It appears to be some¬ 
what incongruous to ignore it altogether in the discussion of political theories 
during the Hindu period. Reference has, therefore, been made in this chapter 
only to the political theories which reflect the general spirit of the writers on 
polity of the Hindu period.—Editor]. 

10. I. 2-3. 

11. Chapter III. 

12. I. 4-12. 

13. I. 37. 

14. I. 45-47. 

15. L. 20. 

16. I. 122. 

17. IV. 3.3. 

18. I. 78. 

19. I. 21-22, 60. 

20. XII. 76. 6-25. 

21. I. 66. 

22. I. 95. 

23. II. 212. 

24. II. 231. 

25. III. 50. 

26. I. 121. 

27. I. 25-28. 


28. I. 188. 

29. I. 170. 

30. I. 84-87. 

31. I. 28- 35. 

32. IV. 7. 332-33. 

33. XII. 79. 15-20. 

34. III. 48-49. 

35. III. 43-46; IV. 1.1.3. 

36. IT. 274-75. 

37. El, XL 142; XII. 210; XXI. 95. For the significance of the above titles see E. J. 
Rapsoms paper in Woolner Commemoration Volume . Less satisfactory is the 
explanation of R. S. Tripathi, History of Kanauj, 338, namely, that they signify 
various classes of feudatories, or else stand for lordship over three branches of 
the army. 

38. El, II. 175; XXL 163. 

39. Eh XII. 207, 210. 

40. EI } XXI. 95. 

41. Eh XI. 142; XII. 20. 

42. Eh II. 175. 

43. EI f XXI. 95. 

44. El, XXV. 5. 

45. El, XVI. 271. 

46. Eh XVI. 12, 274. 

47. I A, VI. 191; El, X. 76. 

48. See above, Vol. LV, p. 97. 

49. ET f X. 95: XIX. 293. 

50. El, V. 117. 

51. El, IV. 118. 

52. El, XL 22; XIV. 193, 197. 

53. El, XIV. 159; XV. 282. 


285 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 
61. 
62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66 . 

67. 

68 . 

69. 

70. 

71. 

72. 

73. 

74. 

75. 

76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 

80. 
81. 
82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86 . 

87. 

88 . 

89. 

90. 

91. 

92. 

93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 

98. 


El, XII. 6; XIV, 156, 161; XV. 282. 

For the administrative system of the Senas, cf. B. C. Sen, Some Historical 
Aspects of the Inscriptions of Bengal (Pail III), and HBR. 280-83 and 287-88. 
For land-revenue assessment, cf. Dr. U. N. Ghoshal, Hmdu Revenue System , 
pp. 265-6. 

See above, pp. 81-89. 
lA 9 XLIII. 60. 

El, XI. 39. 

El XII. 274, 334. 

El XV. 27. 

El, XII. 274. 

El, XV. 350. 

El, XIII. 41. 

El, XII. 154, 283, 313. 

El, XV. 27. 

El, XVI. 37, 70. 

El, XV. 335. 

El, XVI. 338. 

El, XV, 94, 331; XVI. 28, 32, 46. 

El, XVI. 74, 77. 

El, XV. 95; XVI. 37, 54, 77, 330. 

El, XVI. 37. 

El, XVI. 28, 32, 54, 59, 330. 

El, XV. 78. 

El, XV. 82. 

El, XVI. 32, 37, 77. 

El, XVI. 37. 

El, XVI. 338. 

El XV. 76, 82; XVI. 77. 

El, XIII. 301, 320. 

El, XV. 27. 

El, XV. 331. 

El, XV. 336; XIX. 218f, 232. 

El XVIII. 171. 

El, XV. 335. 

El, XVI. 3. 

El, XV. 76-100. 

El, XV. 78. 

El, XIII. 41; XV. 95, 101, 336; XVI. 3, 28, 67, 70; XVIII. 8; XIX. 218f, 232. 

El, XVI. 28; XVIII. 171. 

El, XIV. 270. 

El, XVIII. 188. 

A. S. Altekar takes (El, XVIII. 188f.) panchapradhdna in the above to mean 
*a body of five ministers/ But see the remarks of the Editor, El, loc. cit. 

El, XIII. 170; XVII. 18. 

El, XVI. 37; XIX. 180. 

Ibid. 

El, XXI. 230. 

El, XXL 189. 


99. For a detailed account, cf. above, Ch. X, Section II 

100. For the full account see K. A. N. Sastri, The Colas, 2 Chs. XVI, XVII. 

101. El XXV. 211. 

102. El, XIX. 194. 

103. MAR. 1932, No. 46; 1940, No. 9, 29, 33. 

104. MAR, 1929, No. 62, 1937, No. 52. 

105. MAR, 1930, No. 49; 1942, No. 26; 1938, No. 73; 1937, No. 18; 1932, No. 12. 

106. Cf. the observations of Marco Polo (Yule and Cordier, Travels of Marco Polo, 
370-371), Wassaf (HIED, III. 32.) and the Sinhalese Mahdvamsa (XC). See 
also Ch. XI. 

107. El, XII. 45. 

108. Tire above is based upon the account in K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, The Pdndyan 
Kingdom, 215f. 


286 


CHAPTER XIV 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

I. NORTH INDIA 

The period under review was marked by a vigorous development 
of the juristic activity that had characterised the preceding epoch. 
Among the legal authorities! to whom this development is traceable 
two stand out conspicuously from the rest. These are Jlmutavar' 
hana, the famous author of the Ddyabhdga Digest, and Vijhanesvara, 
the eminent commentator on Yajnavalkya-smriti, who became the 
foremost representatives of the two great schools of Hindu law 
still extant. With JImutavahana we may join together Kuiluka 
and Govindaraja, well-known commentators on Manu-smriti, as 
well as the two authors of Digests, namely Dharesvara and Lakshml- 
dhara, as they all belonged to Northern India. We may similarly 
associate with Vijhanesvara, as natives of South India, Apararka, 
the commentator on Yajnavalkya-smriti, and Devannabhatta, the 
author of a well-known Digest. 1 

Before considering the works of JImutavahana we may pause 
to cast a glance at the views of his immediate predecessors. One 
of these, Jitendriya, declares that whatever is acquired by a person 
without the means or materials jointly owned by the members of 
his family is his exclusive property. On the law of inheritance he 
says that the widow shall succeed to the property of her deceased 
husband, whether he was separated or was a member of the joint 
family at the time of his death. He also lays down that the 
daughter's son shall succeed immediately after the daughter. We 
may next quote the views of two somewhat obscure authors, name¬ 
ly, Balaka and Yogloka, on a vexed question of the law of prescrip¬ 
tion. They held, along with Srikara, that adverse possession of 
immovables for twenty years and movables for ten years with the 
owner being present but taking no steps to assert his right, entail¬ 
ed loss of title. 2 

The Vyavaharamatrika of JImutavahana covers within its pur- \ 
view a wide range of topics bearing on legal procedure and positive 
law. Such are the constitution of the court of justice, the grades 
of courts, the four stages of judicial proceedings, arrest before trial, 
the role of agents (or representatives), sureties for satisfaction of 
judgment, the order of hearing of suitors, the amendment of the 


287 




misr#„ 



plaint, its defects, and the time allowed for filing the same, the four 
kinds of reply and the defects thereof, and above all, and in a 
special measure, the kinds of proof (namely, witnesses, documents 
and possession). Of the eighteen titles of law, says the author, 
fourteen are concerned with ‘wealth/ and the remaining four have 
their roots in himsa (injury). This evidently corresponds to the 
division between civil and criminal law. Judicial proceeding,, 
according to the author, shall be conducted without violation of 
dharmasastra and arthasastra; where these are at variance, the 
former is to be preferred to the latter: where the dharmasastras 
themselves are at variance, popular usage (which is identified with 
reason) is to be observed. The sabhyas who are guilty of giving 
unjust decision, of taking bribes and so forth, are to be banished. 
Similarly a judge or a sabhya speaking secretly to a plaintiff or a 
defendant on a case under trial is to be punished. While disputes 
of son with father, of pupil with preceptor, of slave with master 
and the like, are not to be entertained, serious offences must be 
taken cognisance of by the king: such are the cases of the preceptor 
inflicting improper punishment upon the pupil, of a father intend¬ 
ing to waste his property on women and the like, or to sell or give 
away his only son, of a husband intending to sell his virtuous wife, 
or a master desiring to sell his obedient slave. Among the kinds, 
of proof, namely, possession, documents, witnesses, and inference 
" from examination of the parties, each preceding one is more im¬ 
portant than the one immediately following: where even inference 
is wanting, recourse should be had to ordeal. Possession for three 
generations must not be disturbed, provided it was not simultane¬ 
ous but successive. 3 

The Dayabhaga of Jimutavahana deals authoritatively with 
many points of the law of ownership, partition and inheritance,, 
that had long continued to agitate the minds of the Smriti writers. 
Dealing with the concept of ownership, Jimutavahana ranges him¬ 
self on the side of the school that held svatva (ownership) to be 
exclusively indicated by the Sastras, and not based upon popular 
recognition. This view represents the dogmatic standpoint that 
the Sastras do not merely summarise modes of acquiring owner¬ 
ship known to popular usage, but that popular usage on the contra¬ 
ry follows Sastric rules laying down conditions for the acquisition 
of ownership. In the second place, ownership, according to Jimu¬ 
tavahana, implies absolute competence of the owner to dispose of 
his property at his will. Illustrating this point Jimutavahana says 
that alienation of property by a father without the consent of his 
sons, though forbidden by some texts, is not invalid. For, as the 
author says, this alienation is operative by reason of ownership 


288 


LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

is inherent in the father to the exclusion of his sons, and “a 
fact cannot be altered by a hundred texts.” 

Jlmutavahana’s views on the law of transfer of ownership are 
equally important. Svatva (ownership), he says, is created by 
mere gift on the part of the donor and it need not depend upon 
acceptance by the donee. But property becomes capable of enjoy¬ 
ment when it is accepted by the donee and not before. According 
to this view, therefore, though property is transferred to the donee 
by the mere act of the donor, it is liable to be defeated by a refusal 
of the donee to accept the gift or else to be perfected by his accept¬ 
ance thereof. 4 

The central theme of Jlmutavahana’s work is concerned with 
his law of partition and inheritance. He defines daya as wealth in 
which ownership dependent upon relationship to the last owner 
arises on cessation of his ownership thereof. In other words, 
ownership even in the case of sons arises only after death of the 
father or on his becoming patita or sarhnyasinp Connected with the 
above is Jlmutavahana’s view of partition (vibhaga). According to 
him it “consists in manifesting or particularising by the casting of 
lots or otherwise a property which has arisen in lands or chattels, 
but which extended only to a portion of them and which was previ¬ 
ously unascertained, being unfit for exclusive appropriation, because 
no evidence of any ground of discrimination existed.” In other 
words, before partition none of the parties can say that he is the 
owner of the whole, and there is nothing to show that a particular 
portion of a property is his. Partition makes this ownership de¬ 
finite by throwing an indicative sign on a certain portion of the 
property in question. 6 

A cardinal feature of the rule of succession in Jimutavaha&a is 
the principle of spiritual benefit conferred by the heir, which is 
based principally upon a famous text of Manu. 7 This passage is 
thus translated by Biihler: “To three (ancestors) water must be 
offered, to three the funeral cake is given, the fourth (descendant 
is) the giver of these (oblations), the fifth has no connection (with 
them). Always to that (relative within three degrees) who is 
nearest to the (deceased) sapinda the estate shall belong; after¬ 
wards a sakulya shall be (the heir, then) the spiritual teacher of 
the pupil.” Basing his order of succession on the high authority 
just quoted, Jimutavahana says that a kinsman belonging to the 
family of the deceased but of different male descent, like his own 
daughter’s son or his father’s daughter’s son, or belonging to a 
different family like his maternal uncle, is a sapinda, as they are 
allied together by presenting offerings to the three ancestors in 

289 

S.E.-19 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


the paternal and the maternal line. In the result “the bandhus 
(daughter's son and other cognates) are sifted in and out among 
the agnates, heirs in the female line frequently taking before very 
near sapindas in the male line on the principle of superior religious 
efficacy”. 8 

Unlike Vijnanesvara Jimutavahana defines stridhana in a 
Strictly technical sense to mean that which a woman is entitled to 
give, sell or enjoy independently of her husband. Differing like¬ 
wise from Vijnanesvara Jimutavahana fixes his rule of succession 
to a woman's stridhana , and declares that such property devolves 
equally upon the sons and the unmarried daughter. 

We shall next consider the fragments of the Smriti work of 
Dharesvara which have been preserved in quotations by later 
writers. On the old question whether ownership was deducible 
from the Sastras alone, or else was a matter of worldly recognition, 
Dharesvara decides in favour of the former alternative. Connect¬ 
ed with the above is his view that the sons have no ownership in 
the father’s property while the father is alive, and that this owner¬ 
ship is acquired by them for the first time after partition. Dealing 
with the law of partition, Dharesvara says in agreement with 
Vijnanesvara that the father has no right to give unequal shares 
to his sons in ancestral property divided by him in his life-time. 
As regards the law of succession, Dharesvara gives only a grudg¬ 
ing recognition to the rights of the widow. For he says that the 
widow is entitled to inherit her husband's property, provided he 
was separated at the time of his death and she herself is willing 
to raise up issue to him. Similarly he observes that the father’s 
mother shall take the property in preference to the father, “be¬ 
cause wealth taken up by the father may go even to sons dissimilar 
in class, but what is inherited by the paternal grandmother goes 
to such only as appertained to the same class.” On both the points 
last quoted Vijnanesvara expresses his dissent from Dharesvara. 
On the other hand Dharesvara’s view allowing the daughter's son 
to succeed immediately after the daughter agrees completely with 
that of Vijnanesvara. 9 

II. SOUTH INDIA 

We may begin our survey of the great jurist Vijnanesvara 
with an analysis of his views on the constitution of the court of 
justice. Referring to the members of the king's court Vijnanes¬ 
vara says 10 that the learned Brahmanas play only a subordinate 
role, so that in the event of default in the investigation or of false 
decision, the guilt lies not with them but with the king. Amplify- 



LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 

i i. i ; , 'P°* nt > he observes 11 that unlike sabhyas who are appoint- 
ed by the king, the Brahmanas are not so appointed, so that while 
the sabhyas incur blame if they fail to dissuade the king from 
acting unjustly, the Brahmanas incur sin only if they speak a false- 
lood or do not speak at all. In the same context Vijnanesvara 
quotes Katyayana’s authority for the association of a 'few mer¬ 
chants with the court, adding that this is necessary for the satis¬ 
faction of the people. Again, while he desires the sabhyas to be 
selected only from the Brahmana caste, he is equally clear 12 that the 
sabhyas by virtue of their Brahmana birth, are not exempted 
from the penalty of a double fine for a wilfully unjust decision 
Lastly, while referring to the grades of courts, Vijnanesvara 15 
observes that each of them (kula, sreni, piiga, ‘an authorised per- 
son , and the king) is entitled to hear appeals from the one im- 
mediately preceding, but not vice versa „ 

As iegards the branch of judicial procedure Vijnanesvara 14 
says that the plaint shall be written twice, one at the time of the 
first complaint when the cause of action alone is written, and 
again, in the presence of the defendant, when the year, the month 
and other particulars are to be recorded. This specification of the 
year and the month, we are further told, is essential in trials con¬ 
cerning deposits and pledges, gifts, and sales, while that of the 
country, place, etc., would apply only to transactions concerning 
immovables. Revision and correction of the plaint, Vijnanesvara 
adds, may be made only while the defendant’s answer has not yet 
been filed, and not thereafter, for “otherwise there would be the 
rfsk of the proceeding never coming to an end.” As regards sub¬ 
sequent changes in the plaint Vijnanesvara 15 says that in suits 
relating to property or title the plaintiff becomes thereby liable to 
punishment but does not lose his suit, while in disputes arising 
out of acts of violence the plaintiff further loses his claim if he 
makes a false statement. 


On the much discussed question of the origin of ownership 
Vijnanesvara’s views are eminently sane and reasonable. To be¬ 
gin with, he contradicts with a great wealth of argument the state¬ 
ment that ownership is deducible from the Sastras alone ( sastraika- 
saTtiadhigamya). His own conclusion is that it is understood from 
worldly transactions (laukika). This view brings Vijnanesvara 
into line not only with the famous authors of Digests like Mitra- 
misra, but also with the renowned authorities on Mlm-cimsd like 
Prabhakara, Kumarila, and Parthasarathi Misra. 16 Connected 
with the above is Vijnanesvara’s view on the vexed question, whe¬ 
ther ownership arises on partition, or partition takes place of that 
which already belonged to one’s own self. In deciding in favour 


291 



miSTffy 



of the latter alternative, Vijnanesvara relies partly on the argu¬ 
ment that the son’s ownership by birth is well known to people. 


On the subject of transfer of ownership Vijnanesvara makes 
some striking comments. Gift, he says, 17 means transfer of 
ownership from one to another “if the other accepts it as his own 
and not otherwise.” This view, differing completely from that of 
Jlmutavahana quoted above, evidently means that ownership is 
transferred to the donee only with acceptance. Now acceptance, 
according to Vijnanesvara, is of three kinds, namely, mental, ver¬ 
bal and physical. In the case of movable property all the three 
kinds of acceptance may take place at the same time. But where 
immovable property is concerned, complete physical acceptance, 
involving enjoyment of its profits, cannot take place all at once. 
Hence, says Vijnanesvara, acceptance of land, etc. shall be by 
possession for however short a time, otherwise a gift or a sale does 
not become complete. To put the above in technical language, 
“delivery of possession is not absolutely essential to constitute a 
valid gift, but a gift unaccompanied by possession is of a very risky 
kind, because in case of conflict between two apparent titles, in 
the absence of any evidence to the contrary, that which is accom¬ 
panied by possession must prevail.” 18 

The topic of possession as the basis of title forms in Vijnanes¬ 
vara the basis of some important remarks. Explaining Yajha- 
valkya 19 he observes:— “In case of possession within memory, it 
has evidentiary value only when it co-exists with the means of 
knowledge of title ... In case of immemorial possession, however, 
long-continued possession is itself evidence of ownership, inde¬ 
pendently of the knowledge of title because in that case there is 
an absolute absence of the means by which want of knowledge of 
the origin or title is accounted for.” 20 In other words, “under 
ordinary circumstances mere possession does not exclude an en¬ 
quiry into the title, for possession may be with one person and 
title with another .... It is only when the origin of possession is 
lost in obscurity by reason of its having commenced beyond living 
human recollection that enquiry into the question of title is super¬ 
seded, and possession standing alone is justified, for in such a case 
the presumption is that possession as a matter of fact followed the 
title.” 21 

We may consider in this connection Vijnanesvara’s view on 
the effect of adverse possession upon the title. According to a 
famous text of Yajiiavalkya, 22 he who sees his land enjoyed by 
another for twenty years or his money for ten years- without 
asserting his right, loses them. Explaining this verse Vijnanes- 


292 


miSTffy. 



vara says that omission to assert one’s title does not lead to loss 
of ownership, “non-protest not being known either in popular 
usage or in the Castro, as a cause of extinguishing ownership,” 
Similarly, possession for twenty years does not confer title, “be¬ 
cause possession is not the means of proof of ownership.” Vijnanes- 
vara’s own conclusion is that the loss referred to in the text means 
the loss of profit of the land as well as of the wealth, and not that 
of the corpus itself or of the right of a suit at law. It therefore 
follows that “the owner shall not be entitled after the prescribed 
period to recover the profits already appropriated by the person in 
possession, but the title to the property itself and the right to re¬ 
cover the same shall remain intact .” 23 

Vijiianesvara’s view on the subject of partition and inherit¬ 
ance entitles him to be regarded as the principal representative of 
ids school on the subject. Introducing Yajnavalkya , 24 he defines 
daya as wealth which becomes the property of another solely by 
reason of his relationship to the owner. Comparison with the 
parallel definition of Jimutavahana indicates the fundamental 
difference between the two masters. According to J imiitavahaiia, 
ownership to a person’s property by virtue of relationship to him 
arises only when his own ownership comes to an end. On the 
other hand Vijnanesvara thinks that certain relations acquire 
ownership at the moment of their birth and in fact become, along 
with the previous owners, co-owners in the same property. As 
regards the extent of the son’s right in the father’s property 
Vijnanesvara 26 explains that this right extends over the whole of 
the father’s property whether ancestral or self-acquired, but the 
son cannot prevent alienation by the father except in the case of 
ancestral property. With this may be connected Vijiianesvara’s 
view given in another context , 26 that unequal distribution of pro¬ 
perty by the father among his sons is allowable only for self- 
acquired, but not for ancestral property. Introducing a text of 
Yajnavalkya quoted above , 27 Vijnanesvara defines partition as the 
“adjustment of diverse rights regarding property held collectively 
by assigning severally (to individuals) particular portions of the 
aggregate.” Comparison with the corresponding definition of 
Jimutavahana given above reveals an essential difference in the 
conception of co-ownership between the two schools. This differ¬ 
ence is usually indicated by saying that “a Dayabhaga co-parcener 
holds the property in quasi-severalty as if he were a tenant-in¬ 
common, whereas a Mitakshara co-parcener holds the entire pro¬ 
perty and every part of it as if he were a joint tenant.” 

By contrast with Jimutavahana, Vijnanesvara 28 bases his 
rule of succession mainly, though not exclusively, upon the prin- 


293 




MINIS r/jy 



ciple of propinquity. In the result all agnates (relations through 
males) are allowed by him to succeed in preference to all cognates 
(relations through females), the only exception being the 
daughter’s son who comes just after the daughter and before the 
parents. As between the claims of the daughters, Vijnanesvara 
shows his good sense by preferring the unmarried to the married, 
and the unprovided to the endowed daughter. The striking origin 
nality of Vijnanesvara’s thought is illustrated by his giving the 
sonless widow the right to succeed to the whole estate of her hus¬ 
band who had died separate, on the sole condition of her chastity. 
It is also shown by his allowing (as Vishnu alone among the 
Smritikaras does) the daughter’s son to succeed immediately after 
the daughter, and before the mother and the father. In the same 
spirit Vijnanesvara allows the mother to succeed before the father, 
“for the father is a common parent to the other sons, but the 
mother is not so, and since her propinquity is the greatest, it is 
just that she should take the estate in the first instance.” 

As regards strldhana Vijnanesvara 29 takes it in its etymologi¬ 
cal non-technical sense to include property acquired by a woman 
“by inheritance, purchase, partition, seizure or finding.” Equally 
distinctive is Vijnanesvara’s rule of succession to the strldhana. 
In respect of two kinds of strldhana called anvddheya and prltidatta 
(what was obtained by a woman after marriage from the family 
of her husband or of her parents, and what was given to a woman 
through affection), daughters are allowed to succeed equally, and 
on their failure sons are given the succession in the same manner. 
As regards other kinds of ;strldhana such as what was given to a 
woman before the . nuptial fire ( adhyagni ), the heirs are given in 
the following order:—unmarried daughter, unendowed married 
daughter, endowed married daughter. In case of the bridal price 
( sulha ) the heirs are the uterine brethren alone. The strldhana of a 
childless woman, married according to the four approved forms, 
goes to her husband, and that of one married after the four un¬ 
approved forms goes to her parents. 

Apararka’s views on various points of law cannot compare in 
depth or originality with those of Vijnanesvara, and it will be 
enough to illustrate them by a few examples. Apararka takes 
Yajnavalkya, II, 24, to mean that adverse possession of immov¬ 
ables for twenty years and movables for ten years, with the owner 
being present but taking no steps to assert his right, definitely 
extinguishes his title. As regards the law of succession Apararka 
prefers the brother to the grandson and the great-grandson on the 
ground of superior spiritual benefit conferred by the former upon 
the deceased — a principle which brings him into line with Jimu- 


294 




LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 


tavahana. As between the claims of the parents, Apararka inter¬ 
prets the vague text of Yajnavalkya 30 to mean that the father 
succeeds before the mother—a view just the reverse of Vijnanes- 
vara’s opinion quoted above. 

We shall conclude this chapter with a few references to 
Devannabhatta, whose Digest called the Smriti-chandrikd takes al¬ 
most equal, but not the same, rank with Vijnanesvara’s com¬ 
mentary as the leading authority on Hindu Law in South India. 
Like Vijhanesvara the author of the Smriti-chandriJca assails with 
numerous arguments the view that ownership is deducible from 
the Sastras alone, and he concludes that it is based upon worldly 
transactions. The same agreement is found in the view of our 
author that sons acquire by very birth ownership in ancestral 
property. On the other hand, the Smriti-chandrikd expresses its 
dissent from Vijhanesvara’s view that unequal distribution of 
property by the father among his sons should not be resorted to 
as being repugnant to the people. The order of succession in the 
Smriti-chandrika . again, is somewhat different from that of Vijha¬ 
nesvara. It prefers, as between the claims of the daughters, one 
having sons to one who is sonless, for the former unlike the latter 
is capable of conferring spiritual benefit upon the deceased. 
Again, instead of allowing with Vijhanesvara the mother to 
succeed before the father, it declares that the father and the 
mother shall succeed together. 31 _ _____ _ - 

L The^ works of Smriti authors of this period with their place of origin and 
approximate dates according to Kane (KHDS., I. 296; IV. x-xi) are given 

Date. 

Between A.D. 1100 
and 1150 

Between A.D. 1150 
and 1300 

Between A.D. 1080 
and 1110 

Between A.D. 1000 
and 1050 
Cf. also Ch. II. 

Between A.D. 1100 
and 1130 

Between A.D. 1080 
and 1100 

Between A.D. 1110 
and 1130 

Between A.D. 1200 
and 1225 

Between A.D. 1000 
and 1100 

For different views, particularly about the date of Mitakshara, cf. Ch. XV, 
4 (II) [Ed.]. 


beiow:— 


Place of 

Name of author. 

Name of loork. 

origin . 

JImutavahana 

1. Vyavaharamatrika 

2. Dciyabhdga 

Bengal 

Kulluka 

Manvarthamuktdvali 

Bengal 

Govindaraja 

Manutikd 

North 

India 

Dh ares vara 

Unknown 

Malwa 

(Bhoja I, king 
of the Paramara 
dynasty of Malwa) 


Middle 

Lakshmidhara 

Krityakalyatarxi, XII 
(Rdjanitikanda) 

Ganga 

Valley 

Vijhanesvara 

Mitdk shard 

Maharashtra 

Apararka 

Ydjnavalkyadharma - 
sdstranibandha 

Konkan 

Devannabhatta 

Smriti-chandrikd 


Gopala 

Kamadhenu 



295 







2. For the above passages in Jitendriya, Balaka and Yogloka, see quotations in 
Dayabhaga of Jimutavahana and Vyavahdratattva of Raghunandana. 

3. For references, see the Vyavahdramdtrikd of Jimutavahana edited by Sir Asu- 
tosh Mookerjee, MASB, III, No. 5, 277, 283, 285, 314, 341. 

4. Cf. Priyanath Sen, General Principles of Hindu Jurisprudence, 67. 

5. It is nevertheless remarkable that Jimutavahana does not allow the father, when 
dividing his property with his sons, to make unequal distribution of the ancestral 
immovable property, corrody and slaves. 

6. Tire above is based upon the discussion in Kane, Vyavaharamayukha of Bhatta 
Nilakantha, Notes, 134. 

7. IX. 186-7. 

8. Mayne, Hindu Law (10th Edition), p. 702. 

9. For the above passages see quotations in Viramitrodaya , 528-536, Vyavahara- 
mayukha and Mitakshava on Yajhavalkya II. 135-136 (J. K. Gharpure’s Tr.). 

10. On Ydj, II. 1. 

11. On Ydj, II, 2. 

12. On Ydj, II. 3-4. 

13. On Ydj, II. 30. 

14. On Ydj, II. 6. 

15. On Ydj, II. 9. 

16. Cf. Priyanath Sen, op. c it, 46. 

17. On Ydj, II. 27. 

18. Priyanath Sen, op. cit., 70-71. 

19. II. 27. 

20. In the present and following passages the translations from Vijnanesvara are 
taken from the work Ydjnavcilkya-smriti with the commentaries of Mitdkshard, 
Viramitrodaya and Dipakaliku, Vyavaharadhydya, translated by J. K. Gharpure, 
Bombay, 1937-38. 

21. Priyanath Sen, op. cit., 118-119. 

22. II. 24. 

23. Priyanath Sen, op. cit., 104-105. 

24. II. 114. 

25. On Ydj, II. 121. 

26. On Ydj, II. 114. 

27. II. 114. 

28. On Ydj, II. 135-136. 

29. On Ydj, II. 143. 

30. II. 135-136. 

31. For the above references, see Smriti-chandrika, Mysore ed., Ill, Part II, 601- 

603f, 621, 686 68a 


296 


CHAPTER XV 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

A. SANSKRIT 
1. INTRODUCTION 

The close of the last period, as we have already seen, 1 witness¬ 
ed the decline of Sanskrit literature in poetry, drama, and other 
branches. The literature lost touch with the common man, began 
to cater for the Pandit and the court, and gradually tended to be¬ 
come a copy-book pattern according to rules of poetics, dramaturgy, 
etc. There was an ever-widening breach between the languages 
of the drama and those in every-day life. The highly cultivated 
poetry meant for the cultured audience, indicating the general 
prevalence of scholastic learning, showed a wide gulf between litera¬ 
ture and the common man. All these characteristics equally 
marked the period under review. 

The break-up of the empires during the previous period saw 
the rise of small principalities whose rulers encouraged Sanskrit 
learning. But although the output was thus maintained, the lite¬ 
rary productions are all stereotyped and laboured; they lack vigour, 
inspiration, and originality. They are merely mechanical re¬ 
productions of earlier models, without their vitality and living 
touch. It is an age of scholastic elaboration and systematic 
analysis, of technical skill and learning, of commentaries and sub¬ 
commentaries, and of manuals and sub-manuals. Practically all 
branches of literature are well represented during this period and 
their volume is also immense. But there is no life in the whole 
range of literature. It is imitative, insipid, artificial and laboured, 
not spontaneous and natural. The creative age was over by the 
tenth century, and the process of decadence had already set in. 
No genius or inspired poet or dramatist arose during the period, 
and there was no originality either in conception or execution. 

Muslim incursions can hardly be regarded as responsible for 
the decadence in Sanskrit literature. For the decadence, as we have 
seen in the previous volume, had already set in, and the literature 
may well be said to have come to its natural end. Foreign rule 
and its attendant disturbances during this period are not known 
to have actively discouraged literary production, nor affected the 
‘atmosphere’ surrounding the literary craftsmen. In fact, in the 


297 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



next period we find a number of Muslim rulers patronising San¬ 
skrit learning. Special interest attaches to the Sandesa-rdsaka, a 
Sandesa-kavya in Apabhramsa, composed in thetwelfth century 
by a Muhammadan, Abdala Rahamana (Abdul Rahman). 


The tightening up of the Smriti rules and the insular tendency 
it created contributed not a little to stifle the free spirit. All this 
resulted in the growth of stereotyped literature. With the loss of 
contact, with the outside world our literature became stagnant and 
lost freshness of outlook. The general surrounding was uncongenial 
to the rise of a genius or development of an imaginative spirit, and 
all writers of the period were mere intellectuals concerned with 
multiplying according to pattern. 

Before making a survey of the different branches of literature, 
it would be interesting to note some prominent characteristics of 
this period. In the first place, the large number of royal authors 
and patrons of learning is striking. Bhoja, Yasahpala, Somesvara, 
Kulasekhara, Apararka, Ravivarman, Prahladanadeva, Yigraharaja 
(Visaladeva), and Ballalasena figure among the crowned men-of- 
letters who composed poetry, drama, poetics, Dharmasastra, etc. 
Another important feature is the growing number of polymaths, 
such as Kshemendra, Bhoja, Hemachandra, and Ramachandra. 
There were also encyclopaedic works like Sringdraprakasa, Mrina- 
sollasa, Kntyakalpataru, Chaturvargachintamani, etc. The contri¬ 
bution of Jain monks, especially to the Kavya literature, is consider¬ 
able. The regional survey indicates that from Kashmir and Gujarat 
comes the bulk of literary contribution, with Bengal and the 
South coming next. 


2. BELLES-LETTRES 
I. Kavya 


In common with the other branches of literature, poetry of this 
period shows lack of originality and independence. It is artificial, 
unimaginative, and stereotyped, but lofty, cultivated and exclusive. 
It was apparently composed for an urban and sophisticated audi¬ 
ence, and was out of touch with common life and common realities. 
Tendency to uniformity also rendered poetry of this period a mono¬ 
tonous reading. 


(A) Mahakavya 


The only outstanding work of this period is the Naishadha- 
qharita of Srlharsha, son of Srihira and Mamalladevi, who probably 
flourished under Jayachandra and Vijayachandra of Kanauj in the 
latter half of the twglfth century; The poem, as it exists today; 


298 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

comprises twenty-two cantos, though tradition makes it run into 
sixty or even a hundred and twenty cantos, and describes the life of 
Nala up .to his marriage with DamayantL 2 Indian tradition has 
recognised the merit of this work by raising it to the status of a 
Mahakavya and by placing Sriharsha by the side of Kalidasa, 
Bharavi and Magha. An anecdote is, however, current which is 
a merciless criticism of this poem. According to it Mammata, the 
celebrated rhetorician, found Naishadha-charita full of poetic 
blemishes of all kinds. The poet no doubt shows undue fondness 
for double entendre and other sound plays, and for this there runs 
the proverbial expression ‘Naishadhanh vidvadaushadharrt; 1 but 
these defects should not overshadow the merits of the poem. It 
is a repository of traditional learning, and a storehouse of literary 
dexterity. The work ‘‘unquestionably has a definite interest in 
the history of Sanskrit literature, for it exhibits the application to 
the charming episode of the Mahabharata, familiar to all students, 
of the full resources of a master of diction and metre, possessed 
of a high degree of skill in the difficult art of playing on words, 
and capable of both delicate observation of nature, and of effective 
expression of the impressions thence derived.” 3 Twenty different 
metres are employed, and it is the last masterpiece exhibiting the 
industry and ingenuity that a Mahakavi is capable of. Sriharsha 
is also credited with the authorship of some other works, among 
which ranks the Khandana-khandakhadya, a philosophical treatise 
in support of the standpoint of Sankara. 

Kshemendra, the eleventh century polymath and court-poet 
of king Ananta of Kashmir, gives us the epitomes of the two great 
epics in his Bharata-manjari and Rarriayana-manjarl; his Padya- 
Kddambari is the metrical rendering of Bana’s masterpiece; the 
Da&avcitara-charita , which is not strictly a Mahakavya nor a religi¬ 
ous poem, describes the ten incarnations of Vishnu. The life of 
Buddha is told in the ninth canto, in which the Buddha and 
Krishna legends have been intermingled. Kshemendra, surnamed 
Vyasadasa, was the son of Prakasendra and grandson of Sindhu, 
and his literary activity extended also to the period of Kalasa, son 
and successor of Ananta. 4 

MankhaL or Mankhaka, son of Visvavarta, was another Kash¬ 
mirian poet of the twelfth century. His brothers, Sringara, Bhap- 
ga, and Alarhkara were, like himself, scholars and employed as state 
officials, fii^^ri kanth a-chxirita narrates, in twenty-five cantos, the 
destruction of Tripura by Siva in the usual epic style. The last canto, 
however, is of some historical and literary interest. It gives us a 
glimpse of the way in which compositions of learned scholars found 

299 




[ 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


publicity in those days. The Haracharitachintamani of Jayadra- 
tha, 6 belonging to the same century, Is not really a Mahakavya but 
a Mahatmya. v It is important only in so far as it embodies some 
old and new Saiva practices and legends, some of which are direct¬ 
ly connected with places of pilgrimage in Kashmir. In the same 
century again J^ayiraja wrote his Pdrijataharana describing the 
removal by Krishna of the heavenly tree from Indra’s garden. Surat - 
hotsava of Somesyara, son of Kumara and Lakshmi and court-poet 
of Viradhavala and Vlsaladeva, describes in fifteen cantos the mythi¬ 
cal story of Suratha, comprising his penance in the Himalayas and 
slaying the demons. Because of its allusion to Vastupala and the 
account of the poet and his patrons at the end, the Surathotsava 
has been regarded as a political allegory, but Dr. De demurs to 
this view. 6 Lplimbaraja, who probably flourished in the eleventh 
century, but whom Prof. Gode places in the sixteenth century, 
against the views of Drs. Keith, Krishnamachariar, De and others, 7 
relates the early exploits of Krishna up to his slaying Kamsa in the 
Harivildsa, in five cantos. 

Although Alesha (paronomasia) was a favourite figure of 
speech with Sanskrit poets, regular practice of glesha-kavya does 
not seem to have been cultivated before the eleventh century. The 
device of the Alesha, by which an entire Kavya is made to have a 
twofold or even threefold significance applicable to totally differ¬ 
ent themes, is possible only in Sanskrit on account of its special 
characteristics. Its pliability and adaptability, flexible and com¬ 
plex grammatical forms, multiple meanings of the same words with 
delicate subtleties, peculiar modes of compounding different 
words, and the various ways in which compound words or sen¬ 
tences can be split up, render Sanskrit an ideal language for the 
practice of 61esha-kavya. 

With the exception of a single canto in the Ktchaka-vadha 
which is in Alesha, the first sustained instance of a Slesha-kavya 
is the Rama-charitq, of Sandhy^kayanandin, which will be dealt with 
under the ‘Historical Kavya. 5 It describes both the story of Rama 
and the life of king Ramapala of Bengal. Dhanahjaya and Kavi- 
raja, who come next, have each written a Raghava-Pandavxya in 
which the stories of the two epics are simultaneously narrated. 
Dhanahjaya, known as Dhanahjaya Srutakirti, was the son of 
Vasudeva and Sridevi. His Raghava-Pandavtya or Dvisandhana, 
when read from left to right (in the usual way) describes the story 
of Rama; but while read from right to left it gives the story of the 
Pandavas. The Rdghava-Pdu4avxya of Kaviraja, whose personal 
name was probably Madhavabhafta, and who flourished under 




t»uw$r# K 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



<SL 


Kadamba Kamadeva, is better known. It delineates in thirteen can¬ 
tos the double story of Raghava and the Bantfavas. Vidyamadhava, 
the court-poet of the Chalukya king Somadeva, evident^ Somes- 
vara III (A.D. 1126-1138), similarly describes in his Parvatv- 
Rukmmlya, in nine cantos, the marriages of Siva and Parvatl and 
of Krishna and Rukmini. 

This device of handling different tales in the same poem has 
been very fruitful in later imitations, which develop it further to 
treble entendre, relating three stories at a time. Hemachandra is 
reputed to have composed a poem Saptasandhdna (having seven 
applications) which is not extant. The highest degree of alter¬ 
native interpretations is found in the Scttdrtha-kdvya of Somapra- 
bhacharya, written about A.D. 1177, in which a single verse is 
interpreted in a hundred ways ! 8 


Some Jain writers have adopted the form and spirit of the 
Mahakavya for presenting the Jain legends in a poetic garb, as 
also for historical or biographical accounts. Among the Jain 
epics may be mentioned the Yasodhara-charita of Kanakasena Vadi- 
raja (tenth century) and of Manikya SQri (eleventh century), the 
former being the Digambara and the latter the Svetambara version 
of the same narrative. Superior in merit and extent is the Trisha - 
shti-salakapurusha-charita of Hemachandra (twelfth century) de¬ 
scribing in ten cantos the lives of the sixty-three best men accord¬ 
ing to the Jain belief. To Vagbhata of the same period is assigned 
the Neminirv.ana dealing with the life of Neminatha. 9 


The Jains have made a considerable contribution to the 
Sanskrit Kavya during this period, and reference can be made 
here only to some of the important works. 10 The Kshatrachiida- 
mani of Otfeyadeva Vadibhasiihha, pupil of Pushpasena, treats of 
the Uttarapurana, legend of Jivandhara in eleven chapters, mostly in 
Sloka metre, and is said to be, in most places, a Sanskrit render¬ 
ing of the Tamil work JivakachintamanU 1 Abhayadeva, who 
received the title of Vadisimha from the king of Kasi, relates the 
birth and life of Jayanta in his Jayantavijaya (composed in V.S. 1278, 
i.e. A.D. 1221) in nineteen cantos. The Pandava-charita, by 
Maladharin Devaprabhasuri, pupil of Munichandra and tutor of 
Devananda, describes in eighteen cantos the story of the Mahdbhd- 
rata mainly with the object of glorifying virtue. It remodels many 
details, but hardly rises above the Puranic style. Another epitome 
of the Mahdbharata. is the Hdial)heircitci in nineteen cantos by Amara- 
chandra, a pupil of Jinadatta, who flourished under Visaladeva. of 
Gujarat. Abhayachandra appears to have composed several works 


301 






MINfSr* 



on poetics, metrics, and technical sciences. At the request of 
minister Padma, he wrote the Pqdxadnarida Mah&kavya which, 


though intended to give the lives of all the twenty-three Jinas, de¬ 
scribes in nineteen cantos only the life of Rishabha, the first Jina, in 
an ornate style. Vastupala’s Naranarayandnanda, which is full of 
imagery, describes the friendship of Krishna and Arjuna in eighteen 
cantos, the abduction and marriage of Subhadra coming at the end. 
Vastupala was a patron of learning, who patronised Somesvara, 
Arisimha, Harihara and Nanaka. Vastupala’s religious teacher 
Udayaprabha Suri wrote, in collaboration with Narendraprabha, a 
Mahakavya entitled Dh armabh yudaya or Sanghddhipati-charitra 
which was composed on the occasion of Vastupala’s pilgrimage to 
the Jain shrines in Western India. Dharmakumara’s ^ib/iadra- 
charita tells in seven cantos the legend of Salibhadra which was al¬ 
ready dealt with briefly by Hemachandra. Amamazcharita by Muni- 
ratna, a pupil of Samudragupta, describes in melodious verses the life 
of Amamasvami in thirty cantos. Munisuvrata-charita is another 
poem by Muniratna giving the lives of some Suris of his clan. 

These Jain productions possess practically all the regular 
features of the Kavyas. They deal with the usual Kavya topics 
and contain elaborate descriptions of nature, seasons, battles, and 
erotic sports, the last topic, curiously enough, being treated with 
equal zeal by the Jain monks, including even the pious Hema¬ 
chandra. 

(B) Shorter Poems 
(a) Lyrics 

In the direct line of Bhartrihari and Amaru come during this 
period Bilha na and jaygdeva. The former has written the C haurg - 
a small but elegant poem of fifty stanzas describing in 
a simple style a variety of love scenes. The title of the poem has 
given rise to various interpretations, some of which involve the 
author himself in a love intrigue with a princess. The poem itself 
narrates how a robber, when making love to a princess, was dis¬ 
covered and condemned to death, and as he was being taken to the 
execution ground, gave expression in these stanzas to the love 
enjoyed by him with his beloved. 

To Bengal goes the credit for having produced in Jayadeva a 
master of Sanskrit diction who in his Gita-govinda has attained to* 
very great heights of Sanskrit lyric poetry. He lived in the court 
of king Lakshmanasena of Bengal (twelfth century) and was a 
devout worshipper of Krishna. The poem describes in a very 


302 






MIN/Sr/iy 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

~~ attractive style the love of Krishna and Radha. The hero and the 
heroine are in separation and both long to meet each other; when 
Krishpa presents himself, Radha feigns anger and pretends reluc¬ 
tance to meet him; but in the end these minor difficulties are 
smoothed and reconciliation brought about by Radha’s friend. The 
form of the poem is extremely original and so it has been 
variously styled as a pastoral (Jones), a lyric drama (Lassen), a 
melodrama (Pischel), an opera (Levi), and a refined Yatra (von 
Schroeder). 12 It soon became so popular that it inspired many 
other works of similar nature. The various stanzas are accom¬ 
panied by indications as regards the tala and raga. Still the work 
is a blending of the stanzas that are to be recited and those to be 
sung. Jayadeva’s style, despite the occasional use of long com¬ 
pounds, is very simple. His poetry is the best specimen in the 
whole of Sanskrit literature of complete harmony in sound and 
sense. “It has all the perfection of the miniature word-pictures 
which are so common in Sanskrit poetry, with the beauty which 
• arises, as Aristotle asserts, from magnitude and arrangement. All 
the sides of love, save that of utter despair and final separation, 
are brilliantly described; all the emotions of longing, of awakened 
hope, of disappointment, of hot anger against the unfaithful one, 
of reconciliation, are portrayed by the actors themselves or 
Radha’s friend in songs which are perfect in material form and 
display at its highest point the sheer beauty of words of which San¬ 
skrit is pre-eminently capable.” 13 

A contemporary of Jayadeva was Govardhana whose Arya- 
saptasat i i s a collection of seven hundred erotic stanzas in the Arya 
metre-. -Govardhana seems to have used Hala’s Sattasai, a Prakrit 
poem, for his model. The stanzas are .arranged in an alphabetical 
order and the scenes depicted lack the variety of Hala’s poem. 
Bhikshdtana by Utprekshavallabha (before fourteenth century) is 
more an erotic than a religious poem, while his Sun dar Uataka in 
Arya metre, composed at the request of king Madanadeva, eulo¬ 
gises the beauty of the female form in a highly artistic style. 

The Meghaduta of Kalidasa was responsible for the production 
of numerous Duta-Kavyas in this epoch of imitations and Counter¬ 
feits. These show innumerable variations in the form and motif 
which have been utilized in different ways and for different pur¬ 
poses. Notable among them is the Pavanaduta of Dhoyl, in 
which princess Kuvalayavati, a Gandharva maiden of the Malaya 
hills, sends the wind as a messenger to king Lakshmanasena of 
Bengal. 




303 



miStyy 



(b) Devotional Poems 


Erotic poetry is closely associated with the devotional and 
didactic poetry of this period, as Sringara (Love), Niti (Wisdom), 
and Vairdgya (Renunciation), though differentiated in commonsense 
and poetics, are often found to intermingle. The trio goes hand in. 
hand,—the lover, the moralist, and the devotee each adding a zest 
and piquancy to the other. The devotional poetry of the period 
is found in two different strands, which occasionally blend, but do 
not stand in any constant relation. In contrast to the Stotra 
literature of a descriptive or philosophical character, there are 
highly impassioned devotional poems which pass through the 
whole gamut of erotic motif, imagery and expression. 

The majority of the Vedantic stotras, Kashmirian Saivite 
poems, South-Indian Vaishnava and Saiva panegyrics of deities, 
Bengal Tantrik and Vaishnava glorifications, as well as the Jain and 
Buddhist Mahayana hymns owe their inspiration to the various 
religious tendencies of the period. The literary stotra-kavyas 
either give a highly sensuous account of the amorous adventures 
of the deities, or describe elaborately their physical charms. The 
erotic element has been carried to an excess by ’ Lakshmana 
Achiirya who describes the breasts of Chan# in fifty verses in his 
Chandi-kucha-panchdsika. The Bhaktisataka of Ramachandra 
Kavibharatl of Bengal, who went to Ceylon about A.D. 1245 during the 
reign of king Parakramabahu II and became a Buddhist, is interest¬ 
ing as an example of the application of Hindu ideas of Bhakti (devo¬ 
tion) to an extravagant eulogy of Buddha in the regular kavya style 
and diction. The Jain poets, besides eulogising individual saints or 
Jains, extol all the twenty-four Jinas, in stotras known as Chatur- 
vimsati Jinastuti or Chaturvimsika. 

(c) Didactic and Satiric Poems 

The traditional form of Sataka is generally used in the didac¬ 
tic poetry like the erotic and devotional. Sambhu wrote in the 
eleventh century his Anyoktimuktalatasataka, a collection of 108 
stanzas. The Drishtantasataka of Kusumadeva is more simple. It 
derives its title from the fact that every stanza illustrates a parti¬ 
cular maxim. Kashmirian Silhana, perhaps to be identified with 
the famous Bilhana, wrote his Sdntisataka in the twelfth century. 
Still later is the Bjuivasataka of king Nagaraja of the Taka family, 
or of his protege Bhava. The TJpadesasataka of Gumani moralises 
on some myths and legends from the epics and Puranas. 


304 


MINfSr/jy 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


The Kashmirian polymath Ksh^mendra has written on several 
subjects, and is a versatile, accomplished and methodical writer. 
In his Sarnayamatrihci, which deals with the snares and trickeries 
of harlots, he gives clever instructions to novices in the profession. 
Inspired by Damodaragupta, the author gives the story of a young 
courtesan Kalavati in eight chapters composed mostly in Sloka. 
His Kaldvildsa in Arya metre speaks of numerous occupations and 
the tricks and follies of wandering singers, doctors, goldsmiths, 
and astrologers. The Darpadalana, in seven sections, seeks to 
establish the vainness of pride felt by a man endowed with wealth, 
knowledge, beauty, etc., which springs from seven sources. 
Sevyasevakopadesa in sixty-one stanzas displays shrewd observa¬ 
tions on the relation of master and servant. Chdrucharya is a century 
of Slokas on virtuous conduct. Desopadesa and Narmamala give 
pen pictures of the oppression, hypocrisy, and corruption prevalent 
in contemporary Kashmir. 


The Mugdhopadesa by Jalhana contains reflections on the lures 
and tricks of the traditional, rather than real, courtesan in sixty-six 
stanzas in Sardulavikridita metre. The style is erotically didactic 
rather than satiric. Amitagati’s Subhashitaratnasandoha deals with 
Jain ethics, while the Dharrmparlksha constitutes an attack on Brah¬ 
manism. Somaprabha’s Sringdravairagyatarangini, in forty-six stan¬ 
zas, utilises the device of Slesha for two simultaneous themes. 


(d) Anthologies and Women Poets 

Of anthologies, a literary form which originated shortly before 
A.D. 1000, there are several valuable specimens during the period 
under review. The importance of anthologies for a historian of 
literature cannot be over-emphasised. They rescue from oblivion 
many an unknown author, bring forth unknown “beauties” of 
well-known authors not found in their extant works, and often form 
important landmarks for fixing dates. The. earliest anthology 
during this period, the Subhashitdvali of Vallabhadeva, is definitely 
prior to A.D. 1160 as it is quoted by Vandyaghatiya Sarvananda. 14 
In its present form, however, the text is not earlier than the 
fifteenth century. The Subhashitdvali is an extensive anthology, 
incorporating 3527 stanzas in 101 Paddhatis or sections. The num¬ 
ber of poets cited, according to Peterson, is about 360. The 
author, a Kashmirian, has mostly drawn on works from the North. 
{ Sridha r ad asa. son of Vatudasa, compiled his Saduktikai'ndmrita in 
A.D. 1206 during the reign of Lakshmanasena. The book is divided 
into five Pravahas (streams) or parts, which have various Vichis 
(waves) i.e, sections, each containing five stanzas. The total 

305 


S.E.—20 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

umber of stanzas is 2370, that of the poets and works cited being 
485. The Suktimuktdvali was compiled on the model of Vallabha- 
deva’s Subh&sfi^vaM by Jalhana in A.D. 1257. Jalhana was the son 
of Lakshmldhara, and the minister of the Yadava king Krishna. 
Though there appear to have been two recensions, short and long, 
the printed edition gives the eclectic text comprising 2790 stanzas 
divided in 133 sections, the number of poets and works referred to 
being over 240. At the outset there are traditional verses on San¬ 
skrit poets and poetry, of great interest for literary history. 

These anthologies bring to light several women authors of 
whom some have been dealt with in the previous volume. Their 
works, from which the stanzas were extracted, are unknown. It 
would certainly be unjust to judge these writers from the meagre 
specimens of stray stanzas; but if an opinion may be hazarded, the 
specimens show neither originality, nor imagination, nor variety. 
There is nothing specifically feminine about the stanzas, which 
could well have been written by men. The specimens do not 
illustrate the highly artistic or creative productions of women, if 
there were any. 


(C) Historical Poems 

“Real History finds no place in Sanskrit literature, nor is 
there any conscious historical element in any of the works 
comprising it”-—thus observes Whitney in his introduction to 
A Sanskrit Grammar. 15 The more recent pursuits of scholars in 
Sanskrit literature have not yet unearthed anything which would 
modify the learned savant's remark. Before Kalhana there does 
not seem to have been any author who took to historical writing with 
a degree of seriousness. The Purana works apart, even the 
Harsha-charita of Bana smacks more of romance than of history. 

It is indeed curious that despite her achievements in other 
branches as also her abundance of intellect, India failed to produce 
any historical works in the modern sense. The so-called historical 
Kavyas are more poetical works than historical documents. Though 
dealing ostensibly with historical themes they are mainly concern¬ 
ed with the poetic, dramatic or romantic possibilities, and con¬ 
sequently are indifferent to chronology, mix divine and human 
action, believe in magic and miracle, and have deep faith in the 
incalculable human destiny. Different scholars seek to explain 
the absence of any clear, consistent, and adequate historiography 
as due to various causes. It is said, for instance, that the idea of 
composing realistic history aiming at objective accuracy is entire¬ 
ly out of harmony with the spirit of Sanskrit literature and its 


306 




MINIS 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


iception of art with its emphasis on imaginative and impersonal- 
ized creation. .Thus it is that in historical Kavyas authors cared 
more for poetic merit than for historical accuracy. It is also held 
that Indian mind was little interested in historical incident as such. 
Then, again, according to the Indian view, as presented in the 
Mahdbhdrata and other works, truth is not mere verbal accuracy 
or objective agreement of words with facts, but that which is 
beneficial for humanity. Truth is therefore valid so far only as 
it leads to human good. The poet, further, was to concentrate on 
the creation of ideals and aesthetic emotion which he achieved by 
descriptions, portraying of sentiments, exaggeration of facts 
through imagery, etc. It is also likely that it was the firm belief 
of Indians in the doctrine of Karman that prevented them from 
making any realistic and historical survey of the events in the 
past. 


We may now refer to the few historical works whose existence 
is so far known to us. According to Kalhana, Sahkuka wrote the 
Bhuvanabhyudaya describing the battle of Mamma and Utpala 
(c. A.D. 850), but unfortunately nothing is known of this work. 
Padmagupta or Parimala, son of Mrigahkadatta, wrote early in the 
eleventh century his Navasdhasdnka-charita describing in eighteen 
cantos the life of king Sindhuraja Navasahasahka of Malwa. 16 
That the author does not aim at history is obvious from the fact that 
the work primarily deals with the mythical event of the winning of 
the Naga princess Sasiprabha by Sindhuraja. 

Or a little more historical interest is the Viktamwikadeva-charita 
of the Kashmirian Bilhana, son of Jyeshthakalasa and Nagadevi. It 
glorifies the life of the author’s patron king Vikramaditya VI, the 
Chalukya king of Kalyana. 17 The work begins with the origin of the 
Chalukya dynasty and goes on to describe, in the usual style of a 
Mahakavya, the battles fought and the pleasures enjoyed by king 
Vikramaditya. The last canto, like the first Uchchhvdsa of the 
Harsha-charita, gives us an account of the author himself and his 
literary adventures, of his family, his country and its rulers. As a 
piece of history the work is full of blemishes. It seeks the inter¬ 
vention of Siva to explain away certain unhappy incidents in the 
life of the king. Accurate chronology is also lost in the medley of 
vague expressions. As a piece of poetry, on the other hand, Bilhana’s 
work deserves much praise. 


After Bilhana comes the celebrated Kashmirian Kalhana who 
nourished in the middle of the twelfth century. He gives us in 
the Rajataranginl the chronicles of the kings of Kashmir right from 
the beginning to his own days. A Brahmaria by birth and devoted to 


307 



Siva, he was free from the narrow sectarian outlook. From his work 
it appears that he had carefully studied the epics, the works of 
classical authors and earlier historians, and many other sciences. 
As a basis for his excellent Rajatarangini Kalhana seems to have 
used the works of early chroniclers in the field, and also gathered 
first-hand information from inscriptions, copper-plates, various 
eulogies, and family records. Yet there is very little element of 
historicity in the first three chapters of the work which are devoted 
to earlier dynasties. With the dynasty of Karkota, however, we 
come across historical realities more and more. Even in this work, 
belief in the working of fate, magic and witchcraft is responsible 
for some blemishes. At the same time it must be noted that Kalhana 
does not spare even his patron from honest criticism. “All that we 
have points, therefore, to a mind very busily in contact with reality, 
observing intently the process of current events in lieu of becoming, 
a mere book-worm, and endeavouring to find satisfaction for a keen 
intellect in recording the events around him and those of earlier 
days in lieu of the participation in affairs traditional in his family 
and congenial to his tastes.” 18 

Reference has already been made to % the Rari^charita of 
Sandhyakaranandin, who calls himself Kalikala-ValmikU The work 
simultaneously tells in four cantos the story of Rama and the history 
of Ramapala. It deals mainly with the successful revolution in North 
Bengal, the murder of Mahipala II, and the restoration of the pater¬ 
nal kingdom by Ramapala. The story is continued even after Rama- 
pala’s death, and ends with Madanapala. 19 The work possesses great 
historical value/as a contemporary record, but fails as a poetical 
composition. It was soon forgotten on account of its limited and 
local interest. 

Among the few' other minor historical works of this period none 
is comparable, even distantly, with the work of Kalhana. Atula’s 
Mushikavamsa (eleventh century) narrates in fifteen cantos the line of 
kings which ruled over the Mushika kingdom, i.e. south Travancore. 
Sambhu (eleventh century) wrote the Rajendrakariwpura in praise 
of his patron Harsha. Similarly Jalhana wrote Somapalayilasa in 
honour of the king of Rajapuri. Jain writers also proved their abi¬ 
lity in this branch of Sanskrit literature, and among Jain writers of 
the period prominent place must be given to the polymath Hema- 
chandra. He narrates- the life of king Kumarapala of Anahilwad 
(Anahillapataka) in the Kumargpala -ch arita. The poem is also 
entitled Dvyasraya-kavya , either because it is written both in San¬ 
skrit and Prakrit, or because the work, besides being a history, also 
serves the purpose of illustrating the rules of grammar. To the 


308 


misTfy 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


<SL 


the twelfth century belongs the unfinished Prithvznifa-vijaya 
of unknown authorship (probably by Kashmirian Jayanaka), 20 
which describes the victories of the Chahamana king Prithviraja of 
Delhi over Sultan Shihab-ud-dln Ghurt. To the thirteenth century 
belong’ the two panegyrics, the Kirtikaumudi of SomesvaradaRa, 
and the SukritasamJartana of ArisirnSay Both" in praise of Vastupala, 
a minister Of" the Vaghela princes of Gujarat. The former, which 
has some poetic value, deals with the history of the Vaghela 
dynasty of Gujarat. The first two cantos of the latter give 
an account of the Chapotkata and Chaulukya rulers. There 
is also a short eulogistic poem on Vastupala, called Sukrita- 
kirtikallolini, by Udayaprabha Suri. Another work on the 
rulers of Gujarat, and dealing with the various episodes in 
Vastupala’s career, is the Vasantavildsa of Bnlachandra Suri, pupil of 
Haribhadra Suri. Jinaprabha, the prolific writer of numerous 
stotras, has also written a Dvydsraya-kavya (A.D. 1300) on the life 
of Srenika. 


II. Drama 

The dramatist was not a poet of the people but of the court, and 
drama, like poetry, was isolated from real life. There was a wide 
separation of the language of the drama from the language of the 
people. Instead of becoming pictures or mirrors of life, dramas be¬ 
came rigid exercises in literary skill and ingenuity, and strict adher¬ 
ence to dramaturgic injunctions became a general feature of these 
works. 


(A) Legendary Plays 

The legendary plays derive their plots from the epics and the 
Puranas. The Kashmirian polymath Kshemendra speaks of a drama, 
Chitrabhdrata, by himself, which has not survived. 21 The earliest 
extant drama during the present period is probably the Prasanna- 
raghava of Jayadeva, who is to be distinguished from several name¬ 
sakes by his statement that he was the son of Mahadeva, of 
Kaundinya gotra , and Sumitra. 22 The Prasanna-rdghava is a Nataka 
in seven acts describing the life of Rama from his wedding to his 
return from Lanka. The author does not strictly follow the story 
in the epic and takes some liberty with the original. Umapatidhara, 
a contemporary of Jayadeva, author of Gita-govinda, wrote Parijata- 
harana dealing with the fight between Indra and Krishna for the 
celestial flower. Of the polymath Ramachandra, pupil of Hema- 
chandra, two dramas are available, viz. Nalavilasa, dealing with the 
story of Nala, in seven acts, and Nirbhayabhima, a one-act Vyayoga 


309 



misr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


-on the slaying of Baka. The Kerala king Kulasekhara, whom Dr. De 
places between the first half *of the tenth and the first half of the 
twelfth century, treats of the Mahabharata stories in his two plays: 
Tapati-Saihvarana treats of the legend of the Kuru king Samvarana 
and Tapati, the daughter of the sun god, in six acts; and Suhhadra- 
Dhanahjaya, in five acts, deals with the well-known story of the 
marriage of Arjuna and Subhadra. The marriage of Draupadi is 
dramatized in two acts by Vijayapala, son of Siddhapala, in his 
Draupadisvayamvara. The Pradyumnabhyudaya of another Kerala 
prince Ravivarman (thirteenth century) is also based on the Krishna 
legend. The Harakelinataka of the Chahamana king Visaladeva 
^igraharaja of ^kambhari (twelfth century) having the same theme 
as Bharavi’s poem, is only partially known from a few fragments 
inscribed on a stone which has been built up in a mosque at Ajmer. 


(B) Court Comedies 

There are a few Natakas which deal generally with stories of 
court life based on legendary, semi-historical or fictitious themes. 
The Karyasundan of Bilhana is a Natika in four acts celebrating the 
marriage of king Karnadeva of Anahilwad under the guise of a 
romantic story. It is, however, a poor recast of the Ratnavali and 
Viddhasalabhanjikd. To the same dramatic category belongs the 
VijayaSri or Pdrijatarnanjart of Madana Balasarasvatl (thirteenth 
century), preceptor of the Paramara king Arjunavarman. It depicts 
the marriage of king Arjunadeva with the Chaulukya princess who 
is introduced into the play as a garland of Parijata flowers which, 
on dropping on the breast of the king, is miraculously transformed 
into a beautiful maiden. In honour of the Chahamana king Visala¬ 
deva was written the Lalitavigrahavdjandtaka by his protege Soma- 
deva describing the king’s love for princess DesaladevI of Indrapura; 
the play is partly preserved in a stone inscription at Ajmer. In a 
similar vein Vidyanatha wrote his model play, the Prataparudra- 
kalydna, which serves the double purpose of eulogising the king of 
Warangal and illustrating the author’s views on dramaturgy. 

The extreme reaction of the dramatic conventions on the mind 
of the aspiring dramatist is reflected in a series of six dramas, 
of which four are mythological and two erotic and comic, 
deliberately written to illustrate six out of ten types of Sanskrit 
drama. They are the work of Vatsaraja, minister of king Paramardi- 
deva of Kalanjara. There is a Vyayoga named Kiratdrjuniya, based 
on the well-known epic of Bharavi, in which the Sutradhara recites 
the Nandi verses twice; an Ihamriga named Rukmimharana ; 23 a 


310 



mmsTfy 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Dima called Tripuradaha ; 24 and a Samavakara called Samudra - 
manthana . These deal with mythological subjects. There is a 
Bhana, KarpHra-charita , on the love of a gambler with a courtesan, 
and a Prahasana, Hasyachudamani , in which a preceptor of the 
Bhagavata school is ridiculed. Attention may be drawn in this con¬ 
nection to another Vyayoga named Pdrthapamkraina of Prahladana- 
deva (twelfth century) describing how Arjuna won the cows of 
Virata. Two points in particular deserve notice here—the author 
claims to excite in the audience a new sentiment, diptarasa, and the 
final benediction is invoked not by the hero but by Vasava. 


(C) Erotic and Farcical Plays 

Bhana and Prahasana, types of one-act plays, are farcical in 
character, the former being predominantly erotic and having 
merely a prolonged monologue sustained by suppositious dialogues. 
Though dramaturgic treatises mention several Prahasanas, only a 
few have survived. After the Chaturbhdni, described in the last 
volume, the earliest instance is the Karpura-charita of Vatsaraja, 
which has already been dealt with in the previous section along 
with his other works. The LatakaimelcLka of *§ankhadhara Kaviraja 
(twelfth century), written^duRng the reign of Govindachandra of 
Kanauj, describes in two acts the conference of rogues at the house 
of a go-between Dantura, for winning the favour of her daughter 
Madanamanjari. 


(D) Prakaranas and Semi-historical Plays 

Later writers of Prakaranas, which deal with middle-class life, 
follow the Mdlatimadhava rather than the Mrichchhakatika as their 
general model. There is little of poetic realism but free use of fancy, 
sentiment, magic and marvel. Out of the four Prakaranas mentioned 
by Ramachandra in the Ndtyadarpana, only the Kaumiidi-Mitrancinda 
by the same Ramachandra is published. It describes the adventures 
of a merchants son Mitrananda and his wife Kaumudi. The story 
resembles those of the Dasakumara-charita . The Prabuddharauhineya 
of Ramabhadra, pupil of Jinaprabha Suri (thirteenth century), nar¬ 
rates in six acts the circumstances which led the robber Rauhineya to 
change his profession. The Mudritakumudachandra of Yasaschandra, 
son of Padmachandra, records in five acts the controversy between 
two Jain teachers, Svetambara Devasuri and Digambara Kumuda- 
chandra, in which the latter was completely sealed up (mudrita). 

Of the type of Mudrarokshasa , having a historical interest, is the 
Hammiramadamardana by a. temple priest Jayasirhha Suri 


311 






MiNisr^ 



(thirteenth century) of Broach, written at the instance of Vastupala’s 
son Jayantasimha. The drama is full of intrigues and incidents and, 
though purported to commemorate the victory of king Viradhavala 
over the Mlechchha ruler Hammlra, in reality eulogises the two minis¬ 
ters Vastupala and Tejahpala, describing Vastupala’s skill in diplo¬ 
macy and repulsion, by him, of the Muslim invasion of Gujarat. 

(E) Allegorical Dramas 

Though one of Asvaghosha’s fragments contains personification 
of abstract virtues as dramatis personae, there is yet no evidence that 
allegorical drama played any important part in the evolution of the 
dramatic literature in Sanskrit. The Prabodhachandrodaya of 
Knshnamisra (eleventh century) is the earliest known drama of this 
type. It is an allegory glorifying the Advaita form of Vishnuism. It de¬ 
rives its name from the prophecy that there will be the rise of Know* 
ledge (prabodha) and Judgment (vidya) from the union of Discrimi¬ 
nation and Theology. The Mohardjapardjaya of the Jain Yasahpala 
(thirteenth century) mixes ailegory with reality as it introduces real 
human beings like king Kumarapala and the Vidushaka with different 
personifications of good and bad qualities. The play depicts the con¬ 
version of the king to Jainism and in consequence his promulgating 
the doctrine of ahimsti and prohibiting the practice of confiscating 
the property of those who died without heirs. 


(F) Irregular Dramas 

The question about the so-called shadow-plays, irregular types of 
dramas^ has already been dealt with in connection with the Mahd- 
ndtaka.^ The Dutmgada of Subhata exhibits similar features. Out¬ 
wardly dramatic in form, it is devoid of any dramatic action, being 
merely a collection of poetical stanzas. The work styles itself as a 
Chhaya-nataka, and has been taken as a typical instance of the 
shadow-play. In four scenes, it describes the embassy of Angada in 
connection with the recovery of Slta from Ravana. There are long¬ 
er and shorter recensions of the work. Some other plays also call 
themselves Chhaya-nataka in their prologue or colophon; but they 
cannot be taken as instances of the shadow-play. Probably, these 
pieces were intended for popular entertainment, and it is not neces¬ 
sary to postulate the existence of the shadow-play to explain the 
peculiarities possessed by these plays. 26 

III. Prose Romances and Champus 

There is not much prose outside scholastic and exegetical writ¬ 
ings, and the small amount of literary prose is not of much conse- 


312 


misTfy 


• Gow> 



*quence. The prose romances and Champus being usually heavily 
constructed and dexterously stylistic, one has to turn to story lite¬ 
rature for simple and direct prose style. 

(A) Later Romances 

None of the later authors has composed anything comparable 
to the earlier works of Bana, Dandin, and Subandhu. S odflhala 
(eleventh century), who was patronised by Chitta, Nagarjuna, and 
Mummuni Raja of Konkana, wrote the Udayasundarikatha describing 
the marriage of a Naga princess with the king of Pratishthana. 
Odeyadeva or Vadibhasimha (twelfth century?), a Digambara Jain, 
•closely imitates the Kadambarl of Bana in his Gadyachintcimani. It 
describes the life of king Satyadhara and his sonThe 
'Gadyakarnamrita of Vidyachakravartin describes the battle between 
the Hoysala Narasimha II and the combined forces of the Pandya, 
Magadha, and the Pallava kings. 

(B) Champus 

A peculiar type of literary composition written in indifferent 
prose and verse, styled as Champu, became popular with authors 
from the tenth century onwards and was a special favourite of South 
India. A part of the Ramayanachampu leading the Rama story up 
to the Kishkindhakanda is ascribed to Bhoja (eleventh century), and 
the remainder was finished later by one Lakshmana Kavi who also 
wrote another work, the Bhqratachamputilaka . Abhinavakalidasa 
(eleventh century), which sounds more like a title than a personal 
name, wrote the Bhagavatachampu and the Abhinavabharatachampu . 

IV. Story Literature 

(A) The ‘Brihatkatha’ and its Later Versions 

The Brihatkatha of Gunadhya, which is supposed to have been 
'written in the Paisachi Prakrit, is unfortunately lost to us almost 
beyond any hope of recovery. Still we can form some idea of the 
original from the three versions—two Kashmirian and one Nepalese 
*—that are available to-day. From these versions it appears that the 
form of the original was metrical, but Dandin probably hints that 
it was prose. The main theme of the narrative was no doubt the 
marriage of Naravahanadatta with Madanamanchuka who, like 
Vasantasena, was a courtesan. It is also possible that the original 
work contained many other stories of the love adventures of the 
hero. As regards the date of the original it is very difficult to dogma- 


313 





WHtSTffy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


tise, though its influence over Bhasa suggests first century A.D. as> 
the probable period of its composition. 

One of the three versions of the Brihatkatha is the Brihatkatha- 
slokasamgraha of Budhasvamin, the manuscripts of which are 
from Nepal: It may be dated in the eighth century A.D. The work 
is available only in a fragment; still a comparison with the other 
versions shows that this one is more faithful to the original than 
the two Kashmirian versions. The stories here are told with a sense 
of moderation and the language betrays a few Sanskritizations of 
Prakrit. 


The Bnhjxtkathd-manjari of Kshemendra (eleventh century) is 
one of the two' Kashmirian versions. Both Kshemendra and Soma- 
deva, the author of the KoMw^aritsugara, have added much matter, 
to wit the Pahchatantra and the V etalapahchavirhsatikd , to the 
original narrative of Gunadhya, and from this fact it seems permis¬ 
sible to surmise that the two Kashmirian authors had before them 
not the original Brihatkatha but some later and enlarged version of 
it. When compared with Somadeva’s work, Kshemendra’s version 
looks like an abridged edition, so much so that his brevity has some¬ 
times led to obscurity. 

The Kathasaritsagara, the other and the more important Kash¬ 
mirian version of the Brihatkatha , was undertaken by its author 
Somadeva (eleventh century) to divert the mind of Suryamatx, the* 
wife of king Ananta of Kashmir. While writing, it was the avowed 
aim of the author to narrate the substance of the work before him 
and at the same time to endeavour to produce a unified effect and 
maintain the flow of the narrative. As already remarked, Soma¬ 
deva, in the course of his narration, tells much more than what 
Kshemendra and Budhasvamin do. Thus there are numerous 
stories of faithful and adulterous women, of fools and rogues, 
thieves and gamblers, false ascetics and forest tribes. Wonderful 
events and feats of adventure are found in abundance, and magie 
and witchcraft are a matter of everyday routine. In spite of the 
vast material contained in the book the author has certainly suc¬ 
ceeded in narrating the stories in an easy, flowing style. From 
the point of view of sociology the work is a mine of information 
about ancient customs and manners. 

(B) Romantic Tales 

The Vejdl^anchavimsatikM narrates how an ascetic tried to 
beguile king Trivikramasena, who was eventually saved by a vam- 


314 





LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

pire whose riddles were correctly answered by the king. It has 
come down to us in more than one version—the Kashmirian 
version, incorporated in the works of Kshemendra and Somadeva, 
the version of Sivadasa in prose and verse, the one of Jambha- 
ladatta, and still another of Vallabhadasa. From these versions it 
is very difficult to decide whether the original work was in prose 
or poetry or even both. The date of the original is similarly un¬ 
certain, though the version of Sivadasa may have belonged to the 
twelfth century A.D. As regards its language Hertel has tried to 
show that it was much influenced by old Gujarati vocabulary and 
syntax. 27 Later versions substitute Vikramaditya’s name for that 
of Trivikramasena. 

The Sukasaptati has come down to us in two recensions of un¬ 
certain date—the simplicior and the ornatior of Schmidt- The 
former seems to have been written by a Svetambara Jain and the 
latter by a Brahmana, Chintamani Bhatta. The framework of the 
book consists of the stories, mostly of faithless women and cunning 
hetaerae, narrated by a clever parrot to the wife of a merchant in 
order to guard her chastity while her husband had gone abroad. 

The Simhasanadvatrimsika is known by different names and 
is available today in at least three important versions. It is said 
that king Bhoja of Dhara (eleventh century) discovered a throne 
that was once presented by Indra to Vikramaditya. When the 
king tried to ascend the throne, each of the thirty-two statuettes on 
it told him a story of king Vikramaditya and obtained release. The 
date of this work seems to have been somewhere between the 
eleventh and the thirteenth centuries A.D. 28 Similar in sub¬ 
stance, but of less importance, is the anonymous Vikramodaya 
narrating tales of king Vikramaditya in verse. The Viracharita of 
Ananta, an epic in thirty-two cantos, describes the events of the life 
of king Salivahana. A similar work, though partly in prose, is the 
Mlivahanakatha of Sivadasa. 

(C) Didactic Tales 

The Parisishtaparyan of Hemachandra is an appendix to his 
Trishashtisalakapurusha-charita and deals with the lives of the 
oldest of the Jain teachers. It also includes some strange legends 
about king Chandragupta Maurya and some other folk-tales. The 
Prabhav^kpf'pharUa _ of Prabhachandra and Pradyumna Suri 
(thirteenth century) forms a continuation of Hemachandra’s work* 




815 





The earliest glimpses of a fable are found in the Mahdbharata 
where at one place a particular policy recommended for adoption 
is illustrated by mean% of a beast fable. But this does not mean 
that the fables were collected and written down in a book form 
from the epic period itself. There are numerous similarities in 
Greek and Sanskrit fables, but the problem of their mutual 
relationship is rather difficult of solution. The earliest work on 
fables in Sanskrit is the Panchatantra, its purpose being to give 
instructions to some princes in morals and rules of worldly life. 
It is written in mixed prose and poetry, the former being employed 
for the narration of the story, and the latter for summing up its 
moral and also for incorporating certain verses of didactic import. 

As with the Brihatkatha, the original work, usually entitled 
the Panchatantra, on which are based numerous versions, is lost to 
us. 29 Its author is said to have been Brahmana Vishnusarman who 
perhaps lived in the Deccan some time between A.D. 200 and 400. 
Book I of the work deals with the topic of separation of friends, 
Book II with winning of friends, Book III with war and peace, 
Book IV with loss of one’s earnings, and Book V with dangers of 
hasty action. Within the framework of the main narrative in each 
book are inserted numerous other fables illustrating general rules 
of life. The author employs a fairly simple style which in general 
is free from poetic elaborations. 

Of all the derivative forms 30 of the original Panchatantra, the 
Tantrdkhydyika, of unknown date, is comparatively more akin to 
the original than the others. The textus simplicior is a Jain 
version prepared c. A.D. 1100, and differs considerably from the 
original. To the year A.D. 1199 belongs another Jain version, the 
Paiichdkhydyika, prepared by monk Purnabhadra. The Brihatka- 
tha-manjari and the Kathasaritsagara have each a version of the 
Panchatantra representing the form which the original work as¬ 
sumed in the north-west of India. The southern Panchatantra is 
available in five recensions and seems to be a shortened account 
of the original. The Bengal version is represented by the Hitopa- 
desa ascribed to Narayana (eleventh or twelfth century). The 
work includes many new tales not found in other versions, and 
incorporates even large sections from the Kamandakiya-Nitisdra. 
Not satisfied with this the author also rehandles the arrangement 
of the books. The provenance of the work in Bengal is made pro¬ 
bable by a story which describes a ritual in honour of Gaurl, showing 
the influence of Saktism. The style of the author is as simple and 
attractive as that of Vishnusarman. 


316 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

3. SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
I. Lexicography 

The earliest lexicographer in this period appears to be Yadava¬ 
prakasa, the author of Vaijayanti, who has been identified with the 
preceptor of Ramanuja. 31 Yadavaprakasa was born near Kane hi- 
puram. Originally a staunch follower of Sankara, he was later 
converted to Vaishnavism by his former pupil Ramanuja. The Vai¬ 
jayanti has two portions, synonymous and homonymous, which are 
fuller than the Amarakosa. The homonymous section arranges 
the words in the alphabetical order of their initial letters, and there 
are three Kansas containing homonyms of 2, 3, or more syllables. 
The N ^ aa m S liM P* Of Bhoja is of the nature of a compilation ( Sam- 
grihita). Its author has been identified with king Bhoja of Dhara 
who flourished in the eleventh century A.D. The work has 
been much influenced by the VaijayanU of Yadavaprakasa. 
Purushottamadeva, a Buddhist, wrote three lexical works, Trikdn - 
f asesha, HaravaU, and Varnadesana. The first, as indicated by its 
title, is a supplement, in ‘three parts containing 1050 verses, to the 
Amarakosa. It adopts the Paribhasha (terminology) and division 
of the Amarakosa, and aims to give only the words left out by the 
Amarakosa. In the short extent of 278 verses, the HaravaU deals; 
in two parts, with the synonymous and homonymous words not 
in common use. The Varnadesana, which is in prose, deals with ortho¬ 
graphical variations giving a collection of differently spelt words, 
and mentions such cases of confusion ' as between ksh and kh 
which, according to the author, is due to the similarity of the 
characters employed, among others, by the Gaudas. An Ekaksha- 
rakasa and Dvixupakosa are also attributed to him, of which the 
latter is a brief work of 75 stanzas, dealing with. words spelt in 
two different ways. In view of the quotations by VandyaghatJya 
Sarvananda (A.D. 1159), Purushottamadeva cannot be placed later 
than the first half of the twelfth century; but he is not much 
earlier, as one of his works is stated to have been composed at the 
request of Lakshmanasena, apparently before he became king. 

Visvaprakasa and Anekg/rth.akosa are homonymous lexicons 
with words arranged in the alphabetical order of final consonants. 
Visyaprajcosa by Mahesvara, as stated in the last verse, was com¬ 
posed in A.D. 1111. Mahesvara was the son of Sribrahma and 
grandson of Krishna, and his work gained fame even during the 
century of its composition, as is seen from quotations by Sarva¬ 
nanda and Hemachandra. Mahkha, the author of the Anekdr- 
thakosa, is identified with his namesake, the author of the 




317 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


^/^iJ^g^tha-charita, who lived in the reign of Jayasimha of Kashmir 
(A.D. 1128-55). Anekarthasabdakosa by Medinlkara, also known as 
MedinI, appears to be a mere remodelling of the Visvaprakdsa. Me- 
dini was the son of Prapakara. As he is quoted by Rayamukuta 
(A.D. 1431), MedinI must be placed in or before the fourteenth cen¬ 
tury, but he is probably much earlier, because the authorities cited by 
him are earlier than A- D. 1159, being all referred to by Sarvananda. 32 
Nanarthasamgraha of Ajayapala, available only in MSS., contains 
about 1730 words mostly found in the Sasvatakosa, arranged after 
initial letters. Ajayapala was a Buddhist, and is quoted in Gana- 
ratnamahodadhi (A.D. 1140), by Sarvananda, Kesavasvamin and 
others. Kesavasvamin’s Nanartharnavasamkshepa, the biggest 
homonymous lexicon known so far, contains about 5800 stanzas, 
which are divided into six Kandas according to the number of 
syllables. In each Kan^a, words are arranged after the 
initial letters. Kesava’s patron was Rajaraja Chola, son of Kulot- 
tuiiga. Two or three such persons are known during the twelfth and 
thirteenth centuries. The printed text of Dhananjaya ? s Nwna- 
mald (in Dviidasakosasaxhgraha, Benares, 1865, 1873) has only a 
synonymous portion in 200 verses, which appears to be the original 
recension. There are, however, other recensions which contain, 
in addition, a homonymous section in 50 stanzas, while a Tanjore 
MS. has three chapters, viz. Sabdasamklmarupana, Sabdasamkirna-* 
prariipana, and Sabdavistlrnarupana. Dhananjaya was a Digam- 
bara Jain and native of Kamatak. He was also the author of 
Dvisandhdnakavya, quoted in Ganaratnamahodadhi (A.D. 1140). 33 

The Gujarat polymath Hemachandra wrote four lexical works, 

* Abhidhanachintamani, Anekarthasamgraha, Nighantusesha, and 

Destndmnmdld . The first two deal respectively with synonyms and 
homonyms, the third is a botanical nighantu, and the last is a Pra¬ 
krit lexicon. The Abhidhanachintamani, containing nearly 1542 
stanzas, is divided into six Kandas; Devadhideva, dealing with Jain 
gods and religious terms; Deva, on Hindu and Buddhist gods and 
terms; Martya, human beings in their various relations; Naraka, 
nether world; and Samanya, abstract notions, adjectives, and in- 
declinables. The author has written his own commentary. Anc- 
kdrthasamgraha , also in six Kandas, contains nearly 1829 stanzas. 
The Kansas are arranged after the number of syllables, and in a 
twofold alphabetical order after the final and initial letters—and 
a supplementary Kanda is added on the Avyayas (indeclinables). 
Later than Hemachandra is Mahipa who in his Anekdrthatilaka 33a 
gives a dictionary of homonyms. 

This period also witnessed some important commentaries on the 
Amarakosa. The earliest extant commentary is the Amarakosodghd - 


318 






LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

tana by Kshirasvamin, who may be assigned to the latter half of the 
eleventh century. The commentary is lucid and simple, and eluci¬ 
dates and criticises the text with the help of over a hundred autho¬ 
rities. Next in time and importance is the Amarakosatikasarvasva 
written in A.D. 1159 by Sarvananda Vandyaghatiya, son of Artihara, 
to whom frequent reference has been made in this chapter. This 
learned and valuable commentary, written with the help of ten 
previous commentaries, has been the basis of the works of all later 
Bengal commentators including Rayamukuta. Kamadhenu by the 
Buddhist Subhuti or Subhutichandra, which is often quoted by 
Bengal commentators, is available in a Tibetan version. The author 
is mentioned in the Durghatavritti of Saranadeva (A.D. 1173). 

Kshirasvamin, Sarvananda, and MedinI refer to and quote from 
several lexicographers about whom nothing further is known. 

II. Grammar 

The period after A.D. 1000 marks the stage of progressive 
deterioration in the study of grammar. There is in the first place 
the rise of a number of new and popular schools of grammar intended 
to simplify the science for the enlightenment of the laity. There are 
also numerous recasts of the Ashtadhyayi. Among the works of the 
Paninian school may be mentioned the Dhdtuvritti of Kshirasvamin, 
the famous commentator of the Amarakosa. Kaiyata, son of Jaiy- 
yata, probably a native of Kashmir, wrote his Pradipa on the Mahd- 
bhashya of Patanjali. The Padavianjari by Haradatta is a valuable 
commentary on the Kasika. Haradatta was the son of Padmakumara 
and a resident of the Telugu country. The only complete work on 
Paniniya Ganapatha is Vardhamana’s Ganaratnamahodadhi, which 
is a metrical arrangement of the Ganas followed by a commentary 
by the author. Durghatavritti, written by a Buddhist writer, 
Saranadeva, under the supervision of- Sarvarakshita, deals with the 
difficult passages of Panini’s text. 

Among non-Paninian systems, the Chandra school disappeared 
from India during the period under review. But it is still exten¬ 
sively studied in Tibet and Ceylon, thanks to the Balavabodha, a 
popular recast of the Chandra grammar by Kasyapa, a Ceylonese 
Buddhist monk. The Jainendra school is represented by a few works 
in this period. Only two commentaries have been preserved; one 
by AbhayanandS (c. A.D. 1250), and the other, £abdarnavachandrika 
by Somadeva composed in A.D. 1205. Somadeva, resident of 
Ajurika (Ajre, in the old Kolhapur State), was the contemporary of 
Silahara king Bhojadeva (Bhoja II). The Panchavastu is a recast 
of the Jainendra grammar to facilitate its study by beginners. 




319 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


{-Srutaklrti is mentioned as the author in the introductory por¬ 
tion. 34 For the Sakafayana school, there is the Rupasiddhi of Daya- 
pala, pupil of Matisagara, and a fellow student of Vadiraja (or 
Jayasimha II, Chaulukya). It is an abridgment of Sakatayana’s 
grammar, somewhat similar in scope to the Laghukaumudi. Prabha- 
chandracharya’s Nyasa is another work of the school which is in the 
nature of a commentary on the Amoghavritti. From its non-men¬ 
tion by Bopadeva, the author of Mugdhabodha, the origin of the 
Sarasvata school cannot be placed much earlier than A.D. 1250. The 
school arose in response to a demand, probably from the Muslim 
rulers, who deemed it necessary to promote the study of Sanskrit. 
Brevity of treatment and simplicity are the principal features of the 
Sarasvata school. As against 4000 Sutras of Panini (3000 of Jainen— 
dra, over 1400 in Katantra, and 1200 of Bopadeva), the Sarasvata 
treats the entire subject in only 700 Sutras. Anubhutisvarupa- 
charya, the traditional founder, who wrote Sdrasvataprakriyd, pos¬ 
sibly had one or two predecessors. Vardhamana, a protege of 
Karnadeva, probably a ruler in Gujarat, wrote Katantravistara, a 
commentary on Durgasiihha’s Vritti which belongs to the Katantra 
school. Shortly after Vardhamana, Trilochanadasa, son of Megha 
and father of Gadadhara, of the Kayastha class, composed Katantra - 
vrittipanjikd. Another work of the school is Sabdasiddhi, a com¬ 
mentary written by Mahadeva, of which a MS. is dated Samvat 1340. 
The Gujarat polymath Hemachandra founded the Hemachandra 
school. His Sabdanusasana has, like the Ashtddhyayl, 8 Adhyayas 
of 4 Padas each, the total number of Sutras being 4500. Nearly a 
fourth of these form the last Adhyaya dealing exclusively with the 
Prakrit languages. Mugdhabodha by Bopadeva is the chief text of 
the Bopadeva school. Bopadeva, the son of Kesava and a pupil 
of Dhanesa, was a native of Berar. He was a voluminous writer, 
his othef works being Muktaphala, HariUlavivarana, Sataslokl, etc. 
His object in writing a new treatise on grammar was to combine 
simplicity with brevity. Religious element pervades this work, illus¬ 
trative examples referring to Hari, Hara or Rama. To Bopadeva be¬ 
longs also the Kavikalpadruma 34a which is a metrical Dhatupatha. 
It not only gives the roots and their meanings but also certain other 
information about the roots from the grammatical point of view and 


their usage. Kramadisvara was the founder of a new system, 
which however came to be known as Jaumara school from the 
name of Jumaranandi, the most celebrated writer of the school. 
Kramadisvara wrote Sa-rhkshiptasdra, which was revised by Mahd- 
•rajadhirdja Jumaranandi. Rasavatl is the name of a Vritti by 
Jumaranandi, who also revised the Paninlya Dhatupatha for this 
school. 


320 


misrty 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

III. Poetics and Dramaturgy 
(1) Poetics 



The interval between Anandavardhana and Mammata repre¬ 
sents, according to Dr. De, the definitive period in the history of 
Sanskrit poetics, during which details of the new system were 
precisely set up. 33 The writers of this period concerned themselves 
with summarising the results of earlier speculations and presenting 
them in the form of concise text books. The complete scheme of 
poetics with the Dhvani theory at its centre, harmonising the diver¬ 
gent theories of earlier writers, finds its expression in the Kavya- 
prakasa of Mammata in the middle of the twelfth century. Some 
reactionary theorists like Mahimabhatta and Kuntala flourished 
during this time. The period following Mammata was, in tune with 
the general literary tendency, a scholarly one of critical elaboration, 
which unquestioningly accepted the Dhvani theory. Despite some 
writers who tried to expound the old surviving traditions like Bhoja 
or Vagbhata, no new theory was propounded, the creative days of 
the science being over long ago. Besides a number of commentaries 
there was also a large production of popular books for the general 
reader as also manuals and school books. 

Rajanaka Mahimabhatta, the son of Sridhairya and pupil of 
Mahakavi gyamala, severely criticises the Dhvani theory in his 
Vyaktiviveka . He accepts only two senses of Sabda, viz. the vcichya 
(the actually expressed) and the anumeya (inferable), and includes 
under the latter both lakshya and vyangya whose independent exist¬ 
ence he controverts. Despite his logical acumen, deep insight and 
great scholarship, the work failed to evoke interest mainly because 
he adds nothing to the larger problems of poetics. The avowed 
object of the book is polemical. It was forgotten in later times and 
the author is cited only for refutation, probably on account of his 
pitting himself against the most formidable theory of Dhvanikara 
and Anandavardhana which was destined to supersede his by at¬ 
tracting the best thinkers of later times. Later theorists never re¬ 
cognised the Anumana theory. As his views are summarised in 
the Alamkdrasarvasva ? Mahimabhatta is earlier than A.D. 1100, and 
as he criticises Vakroktijivita and Lochana, and quotes the Bala - 
rtimayana, he is later than A.D. 1000. He therefore probably 
flourished between A.D. 1020 and 1060. The Alamkara portion of the 
Agni Purdna , which belongs to this period, apparently follows a 
tradition different in many respects from the orthodox systems. 
Bhoja further develops the definition of poetry given in the Agni 
Purdna by expressly adding Rasa among its essential characteristics. 

321 

S.E.—21 





Bhoja’s Sarasvatikanthdbharana is a voluminous work, divided into 
five Parichchhedas, but more or less a patient compilation. Ap¬ 
parently following Agni Pur ana, Bhoja regards Upama, Akshepa, 
Samasokti, and several others as figures both of Sabda and Artha. 
He enumerates six Ritis: Vaidarbhi, Panchali, Gaudiya, Avantika, 
Latiya, and MagadhI. He raises all six Pramanas of Jaimini to 
figures of speech, and looks upon even Gunas and Rasas as Alamkaras. 
Though speaking of eight Rasas, his way of treatment shows that 
he looked upon gringara as the only Rasa, which he has expressly 
stated in his Sringaraprakasa. The £rihgciraprakasa in 36 Prakasas 
is the largest known work in Sanskrit Poetics, and has been drawn 
on by Hemachandra and Saradatanaya. In the first eight chapters, 
the author deals with grammatical technicalities and the theory of 
Vritti; the next two deal with faults and merits of thought and ex¬ 
pression; the eleventh with the Mahakavya, and the twelfth with 
drama; and the last twenty-four are devoted to Rasas. Bhoja was 
a prolific author who wrote on a variety of subjects. He was the 
king of Dhara and known as Bhojadeva. 36 

Another voluminous writer on a number of subjects, and about 
whom we have already said a great deal, is the Kashmirian Kshe- 
mendra. His contribution to poetics was, however, meagre, and 
did not exert any appreciable influence on the Alamkarasastra. His 
Auchityavicharacharchd contains Karikas with his own Vritti, and 
illustrations taken from various works. He states that Auchitya 
(appropriateness or propriety) is the essence of Rasa. Propriety 
is the life of all poetical compositions because Guna, Alamkara, and 
Rasa, used improperly, not only do not beautify the poem, but lose 
their own beauty also. 

The Kavyaprakasa of Mammata occupies a unique position in the 
Alamkara literature, analogous to the Sankarabhashya in Vedanta 
or the Patanjalabhashya in grammar. Summing up in itself all the 
activities that preceded it in the field of poetics, it becomes itself 
the fountain-head of fresh streams of doctrines. It combines ful¬ 
ness of treatment with conciseness, traversing the whole field in 
142 Karikas (or Sutras). The work comprises the Karika, Vritti, 
and Udaharanas and is divided into ten Ullasas, dealing with all 
topics of poetics except dramaturgy. A late tradition, mostly ob¬ 
taining in Bengal, imputes the authorship of the Karikas to Bharata 
and of the prose Vjritti to Mammata; but this is unauthentic and 
fanciful. 37 The earliest known commentator of the Kavyaprakasa, 
Manikyachandra (A.D. 1159-60), and an early MS. of the work, 
dated A.D. 1158, refer to the joint authorship of the Kavyaprakasa 
by Mammata and Alaka, 38 and later commentators follow them. It 


322 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

appears, however, that the joint authorship related only to the 
seventh and tenth Ullasas. According to Kashmirian Pandits 
Mammata was the maternal uncle of griharsha, author of the Naisha- 
dhiya. As Mammata quotes Abhinavagupta and refers to Bhoia 
he cannot be earlier than A.D. 1050; and as the earliest commentary 
on the Kavyaprakdsa is dated 1159-60, he is earlier than A.D. 1150. 
Thus A.D 1100 appears to be the probable date of the Kavyaprakasa 
and, as shown by Dr. Gode, the latter part of Mammata’s life 
synchronised with the early literary activities of Hemachandra 
whose senior contemporary Mammata was. 33 The value of 
Mammata consists not in his originality but in the concise and 
orderly discussions of the main issues, the definitions, and the general 
treatment embracing the whole field covered by his predecessors. 

Rajanaka Ruyyaka or Ruchaka, 43 son of Rajanaka Tilaka came 
immediately after Mammata, and his Alamkarasarvasva shows a 
remarkable degree of insight and independence of judgment. He is 
a staunch advocate of the Dhvani school, and briefly summarises 
the views of Bhamaha, Udbhata, Vamana, Rudrafa, Vakroktijivita, 
Vyaktiviveka, and Dhvanikara on the essence of poetry. The work 
consists of the three usual parts, Sutra, Vritti, and Udaharana. The 
A lomkarasarvasva is important for its acute analysis of the scope 
and nature of the individual poetic figures. Ruyyaka quotes from 
Vikmirnnkadeva-charita, and criticises Vyaktiviveka and Kavva- 
prakasa, which show that he cannot be earlier than A.D 1100' his 
lower limit- is supplied by his pupil Mankhaka, who wrote Arikantha - 
c anta between 1135 and 1145; thus Alamkarasarvasva was composed 
about A.D. 1125. 


Hemachandra’s Kavyanusasana, written in the form of Sutra 
and Vritti, along with its commentary, called Viveka, composed by 
the author, indicates extensive learning, and constitutes a complete 
manual of poetics in eight chapters. The work, however, displays 
haidly any originality or independence of judgment. It is chiefly 
a compdation; the doctrines of Dhvani, Rasa, Guna, Dosha, and 
Alamkara appear to have been closely, and somewhat uncritically 
copied from Mammata. The Sutra, Vritti, and commentary are res¬ 
pectively called Kavyanusasana, Alamkarachudamani, and Viveka. 

The Bhavaprakasana of Saradatanaya is an extensive work deal¬ 
ing with Rasas, Bhavas, and dramaturgy. The author is a staunch 
lollower of the Rasa school, according to which Rasa is the soul 
of poetry, whereas the other principles, Guna, Riti, Alamkara, etc., 
are mere subsidiaries. It may be noted that according to the 
ivam school, Rasas hold the predominant position over Alamkara, 
TUpa and Riti. Its followers advocate the method of Rasa-Dhvani, 


328 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Wording to which, the Alamkaras, Gunas and Ritis should beautify 
the soul, Rasa, and these should be so chosen as to develop 
the Rasas. The book is divided into four sections and ten chapters. 
The first two divisions deal respectively with Bhava and Rasa; the 
third describes the relation between the words and meanings, and 
in the fourth we find the different types of dramas. The last sec¬ 
tion of the work will be dealt with later when we come to drama¬ 
turgy. Saradatanaya quotes extensively from the Sringaraprakasa 
and the Kdvyapraktisa, and Singabhupala, Kumarasvamin, and 
Kallinatha quote from him; Saradatanaya, therefore, flourished bet¬ 
ween A.D. 1175 and 1250. 


The Chandraloka by Jayadeva or Piyushavarsha, son of Maha- 
deva and Sumitra, is an elementary treatise on poetics in the 
Anushtubh metre in a lucid and easy style. The language is flowing 
and sonorous, and the work is admirably suited for the beginners. 
The author, as already stated earlier, is identical with the author of 
the Prasanna-raghava, and flourished before A.D. 1300. Rasaratna- 
pradipika by Allaraja, son of Hammira, the Chahamana king, is also 
a small treatise intended for beginners. 


6obhakara in his Alamkararatnakara, which was considerably 
popular in Kashmir, deals with the whole field of poetics in 112 
Sutras. He has elaborated them in his commentary and illustrated 
them by examples drawn from varied sources; in what are known 
as Parikaraslokas, he has summarised his views on particular topics. 
Yasaskara, in his Devisataka, wrote verses in praise of Devi in illus¬ 
tration of the figures of speech defined in the Sutras of this work. 
Sobhakara criticises Ruyyaka’s work, and Jayaratha, author of the 
Vimarsini (first quarter of thirteenth century), defends Ruyyaka 
against our author’s attacks. Sobhakara, therefore, must have 
written this work in the latter part of the twelfth or the early part 
of the thirteenth century. 


Older and younger Vagbhafas make considerable use of 
Mammafa, but do not admit Dhvani and owe allegiance to the pre- 
Dhvani schools. Dandin is of considerable authority with them, 
and the younger Vagbhata admits some of Rudrata’s poetic figures. 
However, they cannot be directly affiliated to the older Alamkara 
and Riti schools on account of the influence of the new school on 
them. Both were Jains, and the Vdgbhatalamkara, by the senior 
Vagbhata, is a small work of 260 Karikas divided into five chapters. 
The object of both was to present a popular and easy epitome of 
the subject, without adhering to any particular school, but following 
the traditional notions in an eclectic spirit without critically syste¬ 
matising them with reference to a central theory. 


824 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



The chief merit of the Ekavali of Vidyadhara lies in its 
systematic compilation and arrangement. Consisting of Karika, 
Vritti, and examples, the Ekavali is divided into eight unmeshas, 
the first following the Dhvanyaloka.' The work is modelled on the 
Kavyapraka&a, while the treatment of poetic figures is mainly based 
on Ruyyaka. The examples are by the author and contain panegyrics 
of his patron, king Narasirhha I of Orissa. As the Rasdrnavasudha- 
kara of Sihgabhupala (c. A.D. 1330) refers to the Ekavali , and as 
either the Gahga king Narasimha I or Narasimha II was the patron 
of Vidyadhara,, it appears that the work was composed at the end 
of the thirteenth or the beginning of the fourteenth century. 

(2) Dramaturgy 

There are only two works dealing mainly with dramaturgy 
which appeared during this period. Natyadarpana by Ramachandra, 
a pupil of the Jain polymath Hemachandra, deals with the science 
of dramaturgy in four sections called Vivekas. The first, Nataka- 
nirnayaviveka, gives a complete description of the Nataka; the next, 
Prakaranadyekadasarupanirnayaviveka, deals with the remaining 
eleven forms of Sanskrit drama; Vritti (dramatic styles), Rasa (senti¬ 
ment), Bhava (emotion) and Abhinaya (gesture) are considered in 
the third Viveka; and the fourth deals with Lakshanas (particulars) 
common to all Rupakas (dramatic compositions). Ramachandra 
divides dramatic compositions into twelve kinds, the eleventh being 
Natika (which other writers on dramaturgy take as an upa-rupaka, 
a sub-variety) and the twelfth, Prakarani; but no illustration is given 
of the last type. 

Saradatanaya, in the last section of his Bhavaprakdsana, des¬ 
cribes ten types of drama and twenty types of Nritya. In regard 
to the nature and functions of a Nataka, 6aradatanaya mainly 
follows Bharata and Dhanahjaya and mentions the views of Kohala 
and Matrigupta whenever these two differ. 

IV. Metrics 

Kshemendra of Kashmir, who lived in the middle of the eleventh 
century, had also composed a work on Sanskrit metres, in addition 
to his works on various other subjects. This work of his is called 
Suvrittatilaka and contains three chapters. The first defines about 
twenty-six Sama-Varna Vrittas of four lines each, which are com¬ 
mon, easy, agreeable, and suitable to all sorts of poetry. The second 
and the third chapters are, however, more important, since in them 
Kshemendra discusses and illustrates the defects and merits of some 


325 


M VIST/} 



metres as also their suitability for particular situations and events. 
Such a discussion is done by Kshemendra alone, and no other writer 
appears to have done this. In this connection, Kshemendra 
points out how some poets show a fondness for one particular metre 
even though they employ many different metres. This would indi¬ 
cate that he had tried to analyse the metrical practice of a few at 
least among the distinguished poets. 

Vrittaratnakara is a very important work on Sanskrit metres. 
An early manuscript of this work is dated Sarhvat 1190. It lies at 
Jaisalmer and forms part of the same palm-leaf manuscript which 
contains Jayaklrti’s Chhandonusasana and Viraharika’s Vrittajati- 
samuchchaya. The author, Kedara, could not have been much 
older than Hemachandra, who did not evidently know him because 
he does not allude to him in his otherwise exhaustive work on 
metres. Nevertheless, it is an old work and has suffered from many 
variant readings introduced by different scribes and commentators. 
This would show that the work was very widely used and was highly 
popular in different parts of India. 

Hemachandra, the famous Jain monk and versatile writer of 
Gujarat, composed his Chhandonusasana about A.D. 1150. This is 
a very exhaustive work on Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Apabhrariisa metres. 
It is really Hemachandra who gave a final sanction and sanctity to 
the Apabhrariisa language and literature by his two works, viz. the 
Chhandonusasana and the Sabdanusasana. The one exalted the 
Apabhrariisa poetry while the other rendered a similar service to the 
Apabhrariisa language. Before his time both the Apabhrariisa 
language and literature were neglected and even despised by Jain 
monks and other learned men of ancient India. Sanskrit was indeed 
the cultural language of the nation as a whole; but even the Prakrits 
had assumed a sanctity for the Jain monks, since their religious lite¬ 
rature, particularly their Agamas, were composed in the Prakrit 
language. No such position was possible for the poor Apabhrariisa, 
which was for several centuries a language of the ordinary masses, 
used for men’s daily transactions, but considered unfit for literary 
compositions, whether of a religious or of a philosophical nature. 
It was, however, the high poetical faculties of poets like Svayambhu 
and Pushpadanta, both of whom were Jain laymen, which compelled 
the attention and admiration of appreciative critics among the Jain 
monks and secured a place of honour for the Apabhrariisa language 
and literature. Hemachandra’s Chhandonusasana is clear, metho¬ 
dical, and exhaustive like all other scientific treatises composed by 
him. It consists of three parts, viz. the Sutras, the Vritti, and the 
illustrations composed by Hemachandra himself. This last feature 


326 


WNISTff^ 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


<SL 


of the text has somewhat diminished the value of the otherwise 
most valuable work for the study of the history of the Apabhramsa 
poetry. But we cannot blame Hemachandra, since he elected to 
compose his illustrations, rather than select them from the existing 
Apabhramsa poems, because he wanted to introduce the names of 
the metres in the illustrative stanzas themselves, as he had done in 
the case of the Sanskrit metres as well as the Prakrit ones. 

Jayakirti’s Chhandonusasana was composed just about this time, 
though Jayakirti and Hemachandra do not seem to have known each 
other. It is, however, more likely that Jayakirti was an older con¬ 
temporary of, but was not known to, Hemachandra, when the latter 
composed his Chhandonusasana. Jayakirti was a Digambara Jain 
and probably hailed from the Kannada districts in the South. In 
the seventh chapter of his work, Jayakirti defines several old 
Kannada metres, of course in Sanskrit. He does not give any 
illustrations, though he mentions a few Digambara poets by 
name. He defines only Sanskrit metres in the remaining chapters 
and does not show his knowledge of any Prakrit poetry or metres. 
As in the case of the other metricians of the Middle Ages, Jayakirti’s 
definitions serve as illustrations as well and contain the name of 
the defined metre. From the names of some of the Sanskrit metres 
used by Jayakirti, it would appear that he belonged to a different 
tradition from that of Hemachandra. The only manuscript of 
Jayakirti’s Chhandonusasana is lying at Jaisalmer and is dated 
Samvat 1190. 4Os 


Kavidarpana by an unknown author is the last important work 
of this period. This work closely follows Hemachandra and at times 
quotes him. It is composed in the Prakrit language, except the 
fourth chapter which deals with the classical Sanskrit metres and 
is written in Sanskrit. The mode of treatment in this work, however, 
materially differs from that of Hemachandra. It sometimes quotes 
from older poets. The only known manuscript of this work is accom¬ 
panied by an exhaustive commentary, again of an unknown author 
who vastly quotes from Hemachandra. The Kavidarpana is alluded 
to by Jinaprabha Suri in Samvat 1365, in his commentary on Nandi- 
sena’s Ajitasantistava. 


V. Politics and Practical Life 

The Arthasastra of Kautilya does not seem to have inspired 
works of similar nature, so that the only work of some importance 
during this period is the Laghv-Arhanniti of Hemachandra which 
again is only an abridged form of his big work in Prakrit. Written 
in a metrical form it deals with such topics as war, punishments. 


327 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



law, and penances. In his treatment of law he generally follows 
the Manu-smnti. Of still less. importance are the Yuktikalpataru 
ascribed to Bhoja, the Nitiratnakara of Chanclesvara. and a few 
others. Reference has already been made above 40b to Sukranltisdra 
which, in its present form, belongs to a later period. Some scholars, 
however, believe that the original text was composed in this age. 

VI. Medicine 

Chakrapanidatta (eleventh century) from Bengal, son of Nara- 
yana, and a KulLna of the Lodhravali family, wrote commentaries 
called Ayurvedadipika and Bhanumati, respectively on Charaka and 
Susruta. His Chikitsasarasamgraha, besides being an authoritative 
work on the subject, is important in the history of Indian medicine 
for marking an advance in the direction of metallic preparations 
which had been introduced since the time of Vagbhata and Vrinda. 
He also wrote Aabdachandrika, a vocabulary of vegetable as well as 
mineral substances, and Dravyagunasamgraha, a work on dietetics. 
Suresvara or Surapala, court-physician to king Bhlmapala, was ano¬ 
ther Bengali writer of this period. His father and grandfather 
were court-physicians to kings Ramapala and Govindachandra res¬ 
pectively. Suresvara wrote Sabdapradipa and Vrikshayurveda on 
medical botanical terms, and Lohapaddhati or Lohasarvasva on the 
medical use and preparation of iron. Vangasena (middle of eleventh 
century), very probably an inhabitant of Bengal, relied on. the 
works of Susruta and Madhava in the preparation of his Chikitsa- 
sarasmgraha. The &alihotra AOc of Bhoja (eleventh century?) is an 
interesting book giving information about the horses, their diseases 
and remedies. Milhana wrote his Chikitsamrita in A.D. 1224. 
Sarhgadhara’s Samhita mentions the use of opium and quicksilver, 
and stresses the importance of pulse in diagnosis. Among the works 
which deal with the metallic preparation calculated to give perpe¬ 
tual youth, invisibility, etc., are the Rasarnava (c. A.D. 1200), and 
the Rasaratnasamuchchaya, ascribed in some texts to Vagbhata and 
in others to Aivinikumara or Nityanatha, which has been assigned 
conjecturally to A.D. 1300. 

VII. Mathematics and Astronomy 

First in point of time comes the Trisati of Sridhara (eleventh 
century), but the most important treatises on Mathematics are the 
two chapters entitled the LTlavati and the Bijaganita in the Siddhanta- 
iirom niii of Bhaskaracharya (twelfth century). The form of the 
1 Lilavati is quite unique, since a beautiful maiden is addressed by the 
author. As regards contents, it is based on the earlier works of 


32 8 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



<SL 


rahmagupta and Srldhara and deals with combinations. The Bija- 
ganita forms the most complete and systematic work on Algebra. 

On Astronomy we have the Rajamrigmika, ascribed to Bhoja, and 
the Bhasvatz of Satananda, both belonging to the eleventh century. 
Two chapters from the Siddhantasiromani, viz . the Grahaganita and 
the Gola, are the most valuable writings on Astronomy. The 
Karanakutuhala was written by the same author a little later. As 
in Mathematics, so in Astronomy, no scholar contributed anything 
of importance after Bhaskaracharya. 


VIII. Music 


The Sangitamakaranda, attributed to Narada, perhaps belongs 
to the eleventh century. It deals with music and dance in two- 
separate parts. To the twelfth century belongs Jagadekamalla 
Pratapachakravartin, whose Sangitachuddmani deals with music and 
dancing in five chapters. The encyclopaedic Manasolldsa (which 
will be dealt with in the concluding section) of Somesvara devotes 
2500 verses to music and musical instruments, and touches on new 
phases of music, specially prabandhas . The most comprehensive 
treatise on the subject is the Sahgitaratnakara of Sarngadeva, 
son of Soddhala and Auditor-General of the Yadava king Sin- 
ghana of Devagiri. The Sangitaratnakara, in seven chapters, not 
only embraces the views of all ancient writers, but also contributes 
original definition and discussion. It deals with musical notes, 
melodies, technical terms, measures of time, musical instruments, 
dancing, acting, etc. Parsvadeva, son of Adideva and Gauri, a Jain 
writer of the same period, has also written a similar work, the 
Sangltasamayasara , dealing with all aspects of music in nine 
adhikaranas. 


IX. Ancillary Sciences 

Most of the works dealing with the ancillary sciences are of a 
late date, and in spite of the fact that some of them do not strictly 
belong to this period they are all brought here together for the sake 
of convenience. 

Silpasastra or Architecture is the subject of various anonymous 
works like the Mayamata, the Sanatkum&ravastusdstra, the Mana- 
$ara, and the Silparatna of Srlkumara (sixteenth century). The 
Hastyayurveda, dealing with elephants, is in the form of a dialogue 
between king Romapada and sage Palakapya. The Matangalild of 
Narayana pertains to the same subject. On horses and their diseases 
we have many works like the Asvasastra ascribed to Salihotra, the 


329 


MINISr^ 



Asvayurveda of Gana, the Asvavaidyaka of Jayadatta and Dipah- 
kara, and the Asvachikitsd of Nakula. On the subject of jewels may¬ 
be mentioned the Agastimata, the Ratnapariksha of Buddha Bhatta, 
and the Navaratnaparlksha of Narayana Pandita. 

On the science of love nothing has been written to dislodge the 
Kamasutra of Vatsyayana from the status that it enjoys today. The 
Pahchasdyaka of Jyotirlsvara and the Ratirahasya of Kokkoka belong 
to the twelfth century. Of the later glosses on the Kamasutra may¬ 
be mentioned the Jayamangala of Yasodhara (thirteenth century) 
which explains some of the obscure words in the Kamasutra. 

On the subject of omens we have the Samudratilaka, begun by 
Durlabharaja in A.D. 1160, and finished by his son Jagaddeva, who 
also wrote an independent work on dreams, the Svapnachintdmani. 
Similarly the Adbhutasdgara was begun by Ballalasena of Bengal 
and completed by Lakshmanasena. The. Narapatijayacharya Svaro- 
daya of Narahari (twelfth century) describes how the results of war 
and of other adventures can be prognosticated with the help of 
diagrams. A late work dealing with geomancy is the Ramalarahasya 
of Bhayabhanjanasarman. 

4. RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHICAL LITERATURE 

I. Puranas 

The corpus of the Puranas was complete in the Gupta Age, and 
additional matter was incorporated during the subsequent period. 41 
There was not much activity in this direction in our period. Dr. 
Hazra’s researches on the chronology of the Smriti chapters in the 
Purapas reveal that the bulk of most of the major Puranas, as we 
have them at present, was finalised by the end of the ninth century 
A.D. Only a few chapters dealing with topics such as holy places, 
varnairamadharma, yugadharma, strl-dharma, glorification of the 
Brahmanas, worship of Sa la gram a, tulasi, planets, Devi, etc., merits 
of digging tanks, dedicating trees, gardens and reservoirs,- etc.; were 
interpolated during the period under review in the Vdyu, Matsya, 
Padma, Brahma, Brahmavawarta, and Gambia Puranas. The Smriti 
chapters of the Skanda Pura-na are. generally late, not earlier than 
the tenth century A.D, 42 

II. Dharmasastra: Commentaries, Nibandhas, and 
Ritual Literature 

In the Dharmasastra literature the present period represents 
the phase of commentators and writers of Nibandhas (digests). As 


330 




mtST/fy 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



compared to commentaries on particular Smritis, the digests con¬ 
tained a synthesis of all the dicta of the ancient Smritikaras on 
various topics of Dharma. The general tendency from the twelfth 
century onwards was to compose digests rather than commentaries. 
The reputation of the Mitakshard , Vijnanesvara’s celebrated com¬ 
mentary on the Ydjnavalkya-smriti , has thrown into shade all the 
digests, anterior or contemporary, with the result that digests 
have not hitherto received sufficient attention. The Gaekwad’s 
Oriental Series has recently made available some volumes of the 
encyclopaedic Krityakalpataru by Lakshmidhara. In our survey of 
the Dharmasastra literature we shall describe in brief, in a chrono¬ 
logical order as far as possible, important writers and their 
contributions. 

Dharesvara, or Bhojadeva of Dhara (A.D. 1000-1055), composed 
several works on different branches of learning, such as poetics, 
grammar, medicine, astrology, yoga, etc. 43 Views of Dharesvara or 
Bhojadeva have been cited in various works on Dharmasastra. It is 
not known whether his work (or works) on Dharmasastra was a 
commentary or an independent digest. Jitendriya and Balaka are 
two writers from Bengal on Dharmasastra who are known only 
from frequent references in the works of Jimutavahana, Raghu- 
nandana, and Sulapani. Jitendriya, who flourished about A.D. 
1000-1050, wrote an extensive work on Dharmasastra which 
was completely eclipsed by the learned treatise of Jimutavahana. 
Balaka, 44 from East Bengal, also before A.D. 1100, wrote on 
several branches of Dharmasastra, such as Vyavahara and 
Prayaschitta. Haiayudha, the jurist, who is frequently quoted by 
Lakshmidhara, Chandesvara, Harinatha, Raghunandana, Mitramisra, 
and others was another Bengali writer of the same period. His work 
on Dharma is now lost, and the author is to be distinguished from 
several namesakes. 46 Bhavadevabhatta of the Savarna gotra of the 
Kauthuma school of Samaveda, born in Siddhalagrama in Raclha 
(W. Bengal), was the son of Govardhana and Sahgoka, and flourished 
about A.D. 1100. He was a versatile genius and composed several 
valuable works on Dharmasastra. Vyavahdratilaka is his work on 
judicial procedure, hitherto undiscovered; Karmanushthtinapaddhati 
(or Dasakarmapaddhati, or Dasakarmadipika) deals with the ten 
principal rites and ceremonies to be performed by Samaveda Brah- 
manas; Prdyaschittanirupana describes various modes of expiations; 
and Tautdtitamatatilaka is on the doctrines of Mimarhsa from the 
standpoint of Kumarila. Govindaraja was the son of Madhavabhatta 
and lived on the banks of the Gahga. He wrote a commentary on the 
Manu-smriti , and Smritimanjafi dealing with all principal topics of 


331 




Dharmasastra. The Mitakshara, which mentions Medhatithi and 
Bhojaraja, is silent about Govindaraja, and the Harcilata of Ani- 
ruddha (c. 1160) quotes Govindaraja, so that the time of Govinda¬ 
raja was between A.D. 1080 and 1140. 46 

The Krityakalpataru of Bhatta Lakshmidhara occupies a 
unique position among digests, and has exercised great influence 
on early writers of Mithila, Bengal, and Northern and Western 
India. Bhatta Lakshmidhara, son of Bhatta Hridayadhara, was 
the minister for peace and war of king Govindachandra of 
Kanauj. 47 He was well read in Smritis, Puranas, Mlmamsa and 
all branches of Vedic learning, and was a critical and conscientious 
compiler who evaluated his sources and selected the correct text. 
The Krityakalpataru has been composed according to a well- 
conceived plan, and its different topics follow the sequence of the 
different stages and activities of life as laid down in the Sastras. No 
other digest attempts such a logical and comprehensive presenta¬ 
tion of the Smriti material. The book is divided into fourteen 
Karidas, and helps one to discharge the Rinatraya (three debts, viz. 
that to seers, manes, and gods). The first Kan<Ja (Brahmachari- 
kanda), which deals with the duties of a boy up to the end of his 
studentship, sets out the means for discharging the debt to seers 
(Rishirina). The directions about discharging the debt to the ances¬ 
tors (Pitririna) are found in the next three Kandas. The second, 
Grihastha-kanda, treats of the duties of the householder, the third, 
Ahnika-kanda, deals with the daily ritual, and the fourth, Sraddha- 
kan^a, tells about the offerings to the manes. In the fifth, Dana-kan<Ja, 
we get an encyclopaedic treatment of gifts; consecration of images is 
dealt with in the next part, Pratishtha-kan$a; worship forms the sub¬ 
ject of the seventh, Puja-kanda; pilgrimage to holy places is treated in 
the Tirtha-kanda, the eighth; and various vows in the Vrata-kanda. 
These show the means of discharging the Devarina. Purificatory 
rites are described in the Suddhi-kanda, the tenth, and all kinds of 
propitiatory rites in the Santi-kan^a, the thirteenth. These two Kandas 
show how to attain peace of mind ( santi ) which is preliminary to 
final release (moksha). Viramitrodaya is the only other book 
that deals with moksha, which forms the last part of the Krilya- 
kalpataru. Duties of kings are dealt with in the Rajadharma-kanda, 
the eleventh, and civil law and procedure in the Vyavahara-kanda, 
the twelfth. These two are concerned with man’s civil environ¬ 
ment and its tuning to the progress towards ultimate beatitude. 

In the Dharmasastra literature the position of Vijnanesvara’s 
Mitdkshard is analogous to that of Patanjali’s Mahdbhdshya in 
Grammar, or Mammata’s Kavyaprakasa in Poetics, It represents 


332 



the essence of Dharmasastra speculation that preceded it, and be¬ 
came the fountain-head from which flowed fresh streams of exege¬ 
sis. In several matters of Hindu law Mitaksham is of paramount 
importance in modern law-courts in the whole of India, except 
Bengal (where Dayabhaga prevails) and Maharashtra (where 
Mayukha prevails). The Mitakshara is not a mere commentary on 
the Ydjhavalkya-smriti, but is in the nature of a digest of Smriti 
materials. It brings together numerous Smriti passages, explains 
away contradictions among them on the basis of the MImamsa rules 
of interpretation, brings about order by assigning proper scope to 
various dicta, and effects a synthesis of apparently disconnected 
Smriti injunctions. Vijnanesvara, of Bharadvaja gotra, was the 
son of Padmanabhabhatta, and pupil of Uttama. He wrote the 
Mitakshara when king Vikramarka (Vikramaditya) was ruling in 
Kalyana. 48 

Apararka or Aparaditya, a Silahara king (twelfth century A.D.), 
wrote a commentary on the Ydjnavalkya-smfiti in the nature of a 
digest, far more voluminous and extensive than the Mitakshara. 

Bhatta Lakshmidhara, Vijnanesvara, and Apararka were con¬ 
temporaries. Contrary to the view of MM. Kane who stated 
that Vijnanesvara is named in the Kalpataru, Prof. Rangaswami 
Aiyangar shows that the references are spurious, and that the 
Mitakshara was composed between A.D. 1118 and 27 (c. A.D. 1120), 
i.e. 20 years later than the latest date assigned to it by MM. Kane. 40 
The known dates of Govindachandra, the Gahadavala ruler of Kanauj, 
who was the patron of Lakshmidhara, range between A.D. 1114 and 
1154, and Krityakalpataru was probably composed in the early part 
of his patron’s reign. Apararka’s commentary was composed after 
A.D. 1126. Both Lakshmidhara and Vijnanesvara were commission¬ 
ed by their respective patrons, powerful rulers claiming Samrajya, 
to compose a work on Dharmasastra which would be a fitting memo¬ 
rial to their regime. The Silahara king also was fired by the same 
idea. The production of these three cardinal works in the same 
generation is a mark of the powerful wave of Hindu feeling stimu¬ 
lated by the Muslim incursions and the rise of new states. 

To the same period probably belongs Jimutavahana, the first 
of the celebrated Bengali triumvirate. Only three of his works 
are known, viz. Kalaviveka, Vyavah&ramatrika, and Dayabhaga. 
Kalaviveka contains discussions as to appropriate times for the 
performance of religious rites and duties, etc. Vyavaharamatrika 
deals with the elements of judicial procedure and the eighteen 
titles of law, etc. Dayabhaga is the principal authority in Bengal 
in modern law-courts in matters of inheritance, partition, strl- 


833 


MIN/Sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


dhana, re-union, etc. Some of its peculiar doctrines, which are 
sharply opposed to Mitakshara, have been discussed above. 49 * 
Jlmutavahana has been variously placed, from the eleventh to the 
sixteenth century, but he most probably flourished in the first half 
of the twelfth century.' 50 


grldhara’s Smrityarthasdra deals with the usual Dharma- 
£astra topics. He was the son of Nagabhartri Vishnubhatfca of 
Visvamitra gotra. As he quotes the Mitakshara , Kalpataru, and 
Govindaraja, and as he is quoted by Smriti-chandrika and Hemadri, 
his period is between A D. 1150 and 1200. Aniruddha was a resident 
of Viharapataka on the Gahga, and was a Dharmadhyaksha. He 
is one of the early and eminent Bengali writers on Dharmasastra. 
His Hdralatd , intended for the Samavedins, deals with the observ¬ 
ance of impurity consequent on birth and death. In his Pitri - 
dayita (or Karmopadesinipaddhati) Aniruddha speaks of rites and 
observances connected with Sraddha, and also includes a treatment 
of general duties. Aniruddha is probably identical with the guru 
of Ballalasena. Ballalasena composed at least five works of which 
two are known to exist. His Danasagara is an extensive digest in 
70 sections on matters relating to gifts; Adbhutasagara is a compre¬ 
hensive work on omens and portents, their effects and means of 
averting them; Achdrasdgara, Vratasagara, and Pratishfhdsdgara 
are yet to be unearthed. 61 Halayudha, son of Dhananjaya of 
Vatsa gotra , was the Dharmadhyaksha of king Lakshmanasena. 
His Bmhmanasarvasva is a guide for the Kanva Sakha Brahmanas 
of the Sukla Yajurveda to the Vedic mantras employed in the daily 
rites and periodical ceremonies, and deals also with the various 
daily duties. 


The Smriti-chandrika of Devannabhatta is a well-known and ex¬ 
tensive digest on Dharmasastra, the printed text dealing with the 
Samskara, Ahnika, Vyavahara, Sraddha, and Aiaucha Kansas. 
There was probably a Kan^a on Prayaschitta also. Devannabhatta 
(or Devana, Devananda, or Devagana) was the son of Kesavabhatta 
and a SomayajL He quotes most profusely from various Smritis, 
and thus affords valuable assistance for reconstructing and check¬ 
ing MSS. and text-editions. As Devannabhatfa refers to Vijnanes- 
vara, Apararka, and Smrityarthasdra , he is later than A.D. 1150, and 
Hemadri’s quotations from Smriti-chandrika fix A.D- 1225 as the 
lower limit for Devannabhatta’s date. Almost contemporaneous with 
Devannabhatta, or slightly earlier (as he does not refer to Apararka), 
was Varadaraja according to K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar; MM. 
Kane, however, places Varadaraja between A.D. 1200 and 1300. 62 
Varadaraja’s Vyavaharaniniaya is the foremost digest, held in 



334 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



<SL 


Igh esteem in South India. It is a comprehensive work dealing 
with both procedure (Vyavahara-matrika) and substantive law 
(Vyavahara). Complete and self-contained, the work shows origina¬ 
lity in interpretation, independence, and mastery of Mimarasa and 
Nyaya. No writer or work later than the Mitakshara is quoted in 
the Vyavaharanirnaya (or Varadarajlya). Another writer from the 
South, or at least very familiar with its usages, is Haradatta who 
has several commentaries to his credit, which may be regarded as 
models of ideal commentaries. He wrote Anakula on the Apastamba 
Grihya-sutra, Anavila on the Asvaldyana Grihya-sutra, Mitakshara 
on the Gautama. Dharma-sutra and Ujjvald on the Apastamba 
Dharma-sutra. He also wrote Padamamjan, a commentary on 
the Kdsikd of Vamana and Jayaditya. He lived between A.D. 1150 
and 1300, very probably nearer the earlier limit. 

Hemadri, son of Kamadeva and grandson of Vasudeva, of 
Vatsa gotra, was a very voluminous writer. His Chaturvarga- 
chintamani is an encyclopaedia of ancient religious rites and 
observations, quoting frequently from the Smritis and Puranas. 
Hemadri was a profound student of the Purva Mimamsa. He was 
in charge of the imperial records of Mahadeva, the Yadava king of 
Devagiri (A.D. 1261-71). Hemadri is said to have written a com¬ 
mentary on Saunaka’s Pranavakalpa; Kaivalyadlpika, a commen¬ 
tary on the Muktaphala of Bopadeva, the famous author of 
Mugdhabodha grammar, who was a friend and protege of Hemadri; 
Sr&ddhakalpa (different from Sraddhakanda) according to the rules 
of Katyayana; and Ayurvedarasdyana, a commentary on the Ash- 
tangahridaya of Vagbhata. Hemadri’s name is associated with 
numerous temples built in a peculiar style of architecture (called 
HemadapantI), and he is said to have invented the Modi script 
current in Maharashtra. 


Kullukabhatta, author of Manvarthamuktavall, the most famous of 
the commentaries on the Manu-smriti, came of a Varendra Brah- 
mana family of Bengal residing in Nandana, and was the son of 
Bhatta Divakara. He wrote the commentary in Kasl. The com¬ 
mentary is concise, lucid, and to the point, never prolix. It is not 
an original work, but is based on the commentaries of Medhatithi 
and Govindaraja. Kullukabhatta also composed a digest named 
Smritisdgara. As he mentions Bhoja, Govindaraja and Halayudha, 
Kullukabhatta’s date falls after A.D. 1150, but it is before A.D. 1300 
since Chandesvara’s Rajanitiratndkara quotes his explanations. 
So his period is between A.D. 1150 and 1300, probabty A.D. 1250. 
Sridatta Upadhyaya, one of the earliest of medieval Mithila Nibandha- 
karas, is the author of several works. His Achdrddarsa is a manual 


835 



the struggle for empire 

_Jgious duties of Sukla Yajurvedins, while the daily duties for 

Samavedins are treated in the Chhandogahnika. In the Samayd- 
pradipa he describes the proper time for various observances, whil^ 
the Pitribhakti and Srdddhakalpa are manuals on Sraddha rites res¬ 
pectively for the Yajurvedins and Samavedins* As he names Hari- 
hara and Halayudha, Sridatta flourished after A.D. 1200, but prior to 
A.D. 1325, as his Samayapradlpa is mentioned by Chandesvara. 

III. Philosophy 

Gahgesa’s Tattvachintamani (last quarter of twelfth century) 
is a standard text of the modern Nyaya school. The tradition was 
continued by his son Vardhamana, whose Nyayanibandhapro,kdsa 
(A.D. 1225) is a commentary on Udayana’s Nyayatatparyaparisuddhi. 
Ruchidatta’s Makaranda develops Vardhamana’s views. Among 
Jain logical works may be mentioned Devasuri’s Pramananayatatt- 
valokdlamkdra and Prabhakara’s Prameyakamalarnartanda. The 
Buddhist and Jain thinkers stressed the purely logical aspects of 
the Nyaya, rather than its metaphysical implications, and thus 
paved the way for modern Nyaya which is pure logic and dialectics. 
Later Nyaya works openly accepted the Vaiseshika categories, and 
Varadaraja’s Tarkikaraksha is an important treatise of the syn¬ 
cretic school which brings the twelve objects of the Nyaya as well 
as the six categories of the Vaiseshika under Prameya. T.arkasarh~ 
graha by Anandajnana (or Anandagiri) refutes the Vaiseshika 
theory of atomic creation, while Kesavamisra’s Tarkabhasha com¬ 
bines the Nyaya and the Vaiseshika views. 

Srivatsa’s Lildvati (eleventh century) is a commentary on 
Prasastapada’s Padarthadharmasamgraha. Sivaditya’s Saptapadarthi 
presents Nyaya and Vaiseshika principles as parts of one whole. 
Bhoja’s Rajamdrtanijla is a work of considerable value in the Yoga- 
sastra. 

Srlharsha’s Khandanakhandakhddya is the greatest work on 
Advaita dialectics. It points out the vanity of philosophy as the 
human mind is unable to compass those exalted objects which are 
suggested as worthy of pursuit by its speculative ingenuity. Ama- 
lananda’s Kalpataru is a commentary on the Bhamati, and Padma- 
pada's Panchapadika is commented by Prakasatma in his Pancha - 
padikavivarana. 

Yadavaprakasa, for some time teacher of Ramanuja, lived at 
Kahchi in the eleventh century. In his independent commentary 
with Advaitic leaning, he holds that Brahman is changed into chit 
(spirit), achit (matter), and Isvara (God), while according to Rama- 




336 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


_the distinction between Brahman and Isvara is unauthorised. 

Born in Sriperumbudur about A.D, 1017, Ramanuja learnt Vedanta 
from Yadavaprakasa. Besides commenting on the Brahmasutra and 
the Bhagavadglta, he wrote the Vedantasdra, Vedarthasamgraha, 
and Vedantadlpa. He preached the doctrine of salvation through 
hhakti, which he made out to be the central teaching of the Upani- 
shads, the Bhagavadglta, and the Brahmasutra. His commentary on 
the Brahmasutra was acpepted as the commentary by the Vaishnavas. 
He restored many Vaishnava temples, and converted many people to 
Vaishnavism. His influence is seen throughout the later history of 
Hinduism,—Madhva, Vallabha, Chaitanya, Ramananda, Kabir, 
Nanak, and others being largely indebted to his theistic idealism. 


Nimbarka, a Telugu Brahmana of Vaishnava faith, lived 
•between the period of Ramanuja and Madhva. His commentary 
on the Brahmasutra, called Parijatasaurabha, is an exposition of his 
theory of Dvaitadvaita, or dualistic non-dualism, in which Jiva, 
isvara, and Jagat are considered distinct. 


Madhva (or Purnaprajna, or Anandatlrtha), the promulgator 
of the dualistic philosophy, was bom about A.D. 1198 53 near Udipi. 
He holds Vishnu to be the supreme godhead, and pleads for the prohi¬ 
bition of bloodshed in connection with sacrifice. He wrote com¬ 
mentaries on the Brahmasutra, the Bhagavadglta, and the Upa- 
nishads, as also an epitome of the Mahabhdrata, and a gloss on the 
Bhagavata Purana. These works, along with his Anuvyakhydna,, 
help to elucidate his philosophy. 


5. GENERAL REVIEW 

We may conclude this survey by noticing certain important 
contributions of this period to Sanskrit literature. In the domain 
of Kavya, this period witnessed Naishadhlya, the last of the Maha- 
kavyas, and the growth of anthologies, which had made a beginning 
in the previous epoch. The historical Kavyas reached the high 
watermark in Kalhana’s Rdjataranginl, a critical work of outstand¬ 
ing merit. In lyrics, special mention must be made of Jayadeva’s 
Gita-govinda, which occupies a distinctive place in the history of 
Sanskrit poetry. In its novelty and completeness of effect, the 
Glta-govinda is unique and marks the beginning of a new literary 
genre. 

Under technical and scientific literature, some valuable work 
is found in grammar, lexicography, poetics, and music. Three 
new grammatical systems were started during this period, and the 
tendency to write popular and scholastic texts is found in poetics 

837 

S.E.—22 


MINIS/-/? 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



<SL 


and grammar. Among various lexical works Vai jayanti, Visva- 
prakasa, the voluminous Nandrtharrw.vasamksh.epa, and the works 
of the polymath Hemaehandra merit special reference. Kavya- 
prakasa, Mammata's standard work on poetics, is a valuable legacy 
of this period, and Bhoja’s Aringaraprakasa also is an important 
contribution. Sarngadeva composed the most comprehensive work 
on music, which received great impetus during this period. 


The most valuable contribution, however, is to the Dharma- 
sastra literature in the shape of both commentaries and digests 
(nibandhas) which reached a high watermark of perfection and 
comprehensiveness. Among commentators the period shows a 
galaxy of celebrities like Vijnanesvara, Apararka, Kulluka, and 
Govindaraja; the nibandhakaras include Lakshmidhara, author of 
the voluminous Krityakalpataru, Ballalasena of Achdrasdgara, 
Dan as cigar a, Adbhutasdgara, etc., Varadaraja of Vyavalidranirnaya, 
Devanpabhatta of Smriti-chandrikd, Hemadri of Chaturvargachinta- 
mani, and several others. Mention must also be made of Jimuta- 
vahana, the promulgator of the Dayabhaga law. 


Another valuable contribution is the encyclopaedic works, 
which made their first appearance during this period. Reference 
has already been made to the Sringdraprakasa, Krityakalpataru, 
and Chaturvargachintdmani. We may also refer here to the Mana- 
sollasa or Abhilashitarthachintamani by king Somesvara. 54 This 
encyclopaedia, in five Prakaranas of twenty chapters each, deals 
with one hundred different topics connected with the royal house¬ 
hold and royal court. The first Prakarana explains general and 
religious ethics, social service, manufacture of idols, and diseases 
and their remedies. Polity, under seven heads, and private and 
inter-statal law are dealt with in the second Prakarana, while the 
third concerns itself with architecture, picture-drawing, and painting 
in all details, iconography, and pleasures of domestic life. Various 
forms of amusements and recreations form the subject of the last 
two Prakaranas, which incidentally treat of arithmetic, prepara¬ 
tion of calendars, astrology, augury, omens, palmistry, and training 
and medical treatment of horses and elephants. There are also 
particulars about such diverse topics as mining, alchemy, gems and 
precious stones, marriage and child-rearing, cookery, liquor, bever¬ 
age, music (which has already been referred to ealier), convey¬ 
ances, and scents. It is a veritable thesaurus. 


Though the period is not rich in creative art and works of out¬ 
standing merit, the general output is prolific, and the performance 
is on the whole creditable, comparing favourably with the earlier 


338 


MIN/Sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



period, especially when the disturbed political conditions are taken 
into account 

B. SANSKRITIC 
I. PALI' 

1, Language 

Pali, the language of the sacred canon of the Buddhists of 
Ceylon, Burma, and Siam, has a long history since the third 
century B.C. The language in its early stage shows a composite 
nature, and some well-marked stages in its evolution can be dis¬ 
cerned in the earliest literature. This evolution, however, stopped 
after some time and the language became completely stereotyped 
since the period of Pali commentaries (fifth century A.D.). It is 
in this stereotyped Pali that most of the non-canonical works of 
the Buddhists are written, with this difference that as time went 
on the language came to be more and more approximated to San¬ 
skrit under the influence of later classical Sanskrit literature. 
There are very few archaic forms used in later non-canonical 
literature. 

The Pali of non-canonical literature therefore shows in gene¬ 
ral the same linguistic features as are seen in the early prose 
of the canon. The consonant clusters of Sanskrit are generally 
simplified and there are noticed other changes also due to assimila¬ 
tion, etc. In Morphology the cumbrous Sanskrit grammar is 
much simplified, though some of the old forms are still preserved. 
In the process of simplification analogy plays a great role. The 
dual is completely lost both in declension and conjugation. 
Similarly the dative and ablative cases are lost except in masculine 
and neuter nouns in -a. In conjugation, the distinction between 
special and general tenses and moods is lost. Most of the roots of 
other classes are brought over to the first or the sixth class. Even 
the distinction between the two Padas and voices is obliterated in 
most cases. 

This period of the Pali non-canonical literature is marked by 
later chronicles, literary pieces, manuals, commentaries and some 
scientific works on grammar, poetics and metre, and law. Even 
then it lacks works of secular interest such as those on astrology 
and astronomy, mathematics and logic. Though there are some 
works on the life of the Buddha, there are few works of the type of 
Kavya or dramas. 


339 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

2. Non-canonical Literature 
(a) Chronicles 

Some of the works of the semi-historical nature which we may 
notice during this period are the renderings into Pali of old 
Simhalese works. 

, i l. The Bodhivamsa or the Mahabodhivaihsa of Upatissa, which 
has been assigned by some to the first half of the eleventh century 
A.D., has already been referred to above. 540 

2. The Dathdvamsa or the Dantadhatuvamsa is an epic in five 
cantos by the monk Dhammakitti, narrating the history of the tooth- 
relic of the Buddha. Originally the work was written in the 
Simhalese in the first half of the fourth century A.D., but later on 
it was rendered into the Magadhibhasa by Dhammakitti at the re¬ 
quest of Parakkamo, the commander-in-chief of Ceylon. This 
rendering took place in the beginning of the thirteenth century A.D. 
The work is important for the knowledge of the history of the 
tooth-relic, which, according to this work, was brought to Ceylon 
by prince Dantakumara of XJjjain from Dantapura, the capital ot 
Kalihga. It also narrates the early life of the Buddha and his work 
in Ceylon, the distribution of Buddha’s relics, and the various 
miracles worked by the tooth-relic. The work is a specimen of 
fine poetry written in different metres. Its language is artificial 
Pali having long compounds. 

3. The Thupavamsa of Vachissara also belongs to the thirteenth 
century. It gives in three chapters not only the account of the 
Topes erected over the relics of the Buddha, but also the previous 
births and the life of the Buddha, and the account of the missionary 
activities carried on in different countries by the Buddhist monks. 

4. The Chulavamsa is not an independent work but forms an 
appendix to the Mahavamsa of Mahanama (sixth century A.D.). It 
consists of various addenda written by different authors at different 
times. The first author to continue the chronicle of Mahanama was 
monk Dhammakitti who lived in the thirteenth century A.D. Both 
the early chronicles, LKpavamsa and Mahdvarhsa , end with the leign 
of king Mahasena (fourth century A.D.). The Chulavamsa begins 
with the reign of Mahasena’s son, SirimeghavaYna, and ends with 
king Sirivikkamarajasiha (A.D. 1798-1815), giving an account al¬ 
together of more than a hundred kings. 

5. The Attanagaluvihdravamsa gives in prose and verse 
the history of the temple of Attanagalla, giving an account of the 
life of king Siri-Sarhghabodhi and his wife. The date of the work 
is the second half of the thirteenth century A.D. 




mtsTfy 



(b) Literary Pieces 


The tendency towards Sanskritisation of Pali, noticed sometimes 
in the Pali chronicles, is more markedly felt in the literary pieces. 

1. The Anagatavarhsa of Kassapa, 64b perhaps of the eleventh 
century A.D., is a continuation of the Buddhavarhsa, inasmuch as 
it gives an account of the future Buddha. The manuscripts of this 
work do not agree with each other in form or content. One of the 
manuscripts is in prose and verse, and contains a dialogue between 
the Buddha and Sariputta on the future decline of Buddhism. Ano¬ 
ther manuscript is in complete prose, and narrates the account of 
the ten future Buddhas including Maitreya. A third manuscript 
is in verse alone, giving an account of the future Buddha Maitreya 
and his contemporary Chakravartin Sankha. According to this 
account this future Buddha would be bom in a rich Brahmana family 
and would later on renounce the world. Having obtained the high¬ 
est knowledge he would then set in motion the wheel of law. As 
this account of the future Buddha is not given in the extant 
BudcLhavamsa , Dr. Law considers the present Andgatavamsa a later 
elaboration of an earlier account which formed the closing section 
of the original Buddhavamsa. S4c 

2. The Jinalamkara of Buddharakkhita, written in A.D. 1156, 
is a Kavya of the type of ornate poetry. It describes the life of 
Buddha till he attained the highest knowledge. 64d 

3. The Jinacharita of Vanaratana Medhamkara is another 
poem of a similar nature, describing the life of the Buddha accord¬ 
ing to the narrative in the Nidana-katha. The author lived in the 
reign of Bhuvanaikabahu I (acc. c. A.D. 1273). The language of the 
work is simple and natural. 

4. The Pajjamadhu of Buddhapriya is a Sataka type of 
poetry 546 praising the Buddha in 104 stanzas. It describes the beauty 
and the wisdom of the Buddha in a language which is very 
Sanskritised. The date of the work is the thirteenth century A.D. 

5. The Saddhammopdyana describes in 629 stanzas the various 
topics and the ethical doctrines of the Buddhist religion. Its date is 
probably the thirteenth or fourteenth century A.D. It resembles, 
in content, though not in form, the Telakatahagatha . 64f 

6. The Rasavahim is a collection of 103 narratives having their 
settings in India and Ceylon. The work was originally written in 
Simhalese, but later on translated into Pali by a monk Ratthapala, 
and afterwards corrected by Vadehathera in the thirteenth century 
A.D. The work is written both in prose and verse giving edifying 
legends exhorting the people to follow the Dhamma. 


341 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


<SL 


(c) Manuals 


The art of writing manuals in Pali has its origin in early days 
but it was only in later centuries that they came to be written m 
large number, presenting their themes in concise forms. Three 
such works may be noted in this period. 

Reference has already been made above to the Khuddakasikkhd 
of Dhammasiri and the Mulasikkhd of Mahasarai which are two 
short summaries of the Vinayapitaka. 64 * The works are very popu¬ 
lar in Burma. The same popularity is also shared by the Abhi- 
dhamma manual, the Abhidhammattha-samgaha of Anuruddha. It 
has given rise to a large number of commentaries^ The Ceylonese 
tradition refers the work to the first century B.C., but the wor 
was probably written in the twelfth century A.DThe work deals 
with psychology and ethics from the Buddhist point of view. 
Paramatthavinichchhaya and Ndmarupaparichchheda are two other 
philosophical works attributed to Anuruddha. 


(d) Commentaries 

The activity for supplying commentaries to canonical works, 
though started very early, was given a great impetus by the Council 
which the Thera Mahakassapa is reported to have called during t ie 
reign of Parakramabahu I (A.D. 1153-1186). The Tikas prepared by 
this Council include such works as the Sdratthadipam (on 
Samantapdsddikd), Pa\hamasdratthamanjusd (on Sumangalamlasim) 
and many others, but of these only the Sdratthadipani by Sariputta 
is preserved. Sariputta is also credited with another commentary 
Linatthapakasana on the Papanchasudam and an independent work 
Vinayasamgaha. 

This exegetical activity was carried on further by Sariputta s 
pupils, and one of them, Chhapada, a native of Burma, is known 
to have written a large number of commentaries. It has been 
already mentioned above that many exegetical works gathered 
round the Abhidhammattha-samgaha of Anuruddha in the twelfth 
century A.D., and one of these was written by Chhapada. I he 
Vamsatthapakdsini, a commentary of unknown authorship, on the 
Mahavamsa, was also probably written in the twelfth century A.D. 


(e) Scientific Literature 

(i) Grammar 

The grammatical works of Pali have been put into three cate¬ 
gories: (i) works of the school of Kachchayana: (ii) those of the 
school of Moggalana; and (iii) the Saddaniti. 

342 



To the school of Kachchayana in this period belong the Nyasa 
of Vimalabuddhi and the Suttaniddesa of Chhapada (twelfth cen¬ 
tury). The Sambandhachintd of Samgharakkhita, dealing with Pali 
Syntax, also belongs to the twelfth century. To the following 
century belongs the Rupasiddhi or Padarupasiddhi of Buddhapriya 
(the author of the Pajjamadhu) which is only a reshuffling of 
Kachchayana’s work. 

Thera Moggallana founded a new grammatical school with his 
Vyakarana called the Saddalakkhana and a commentary on it, the 
Moggallayanapanchika. The author, who belongs to the twelfth 
century, has drawn upon old Pali and also Sanskrit grammars. Piya- 
dassin, one of the pupils of Moggallana, prepared a summary of his 
teacher’s work in his Padasadhana . Vanaratana Madhamkara 
(different from the author of the Jinacharita ) wrote about A.D. 1300 
the Payogasiddhi which is considered to be the best work in this 
school. 

The Saddaniti of the Burmese scholar Aggavamsa (A.D. 1154) 
is based on the grammar of Kachchayana and some other Sanskrit 
grammatical works. The first eighteen chapters of the work are 
called the Mahasaddamti and the remaining nine are called the 
Chullasaddaniti. 

(ii) Lexicography 

The Abhidhanappadipilca of Moggallana (different from the 
grammarian) belongs to the end of the twelfth century. It is worked 
out on the model of Amarakosha and is divided into three parts deal¬ 
ing with synonyms, homonyms, and indeclin^bles, 

(Hi) Poetics and Metre 

There are very few works in Pali on these subjects. The 
Subodhdlamkdra of Samgharakkhita, belonging to the thirteenth 
century, deals with Pali poetics. The Vuttodaya, by the same author, 
and the Kamandaki and the Chhandovichiti are Pali works on metre. 

(iv) Law 

The oldest Burmese law-book is the Dharnmavilasa-Dhamma - 
sattha written by monk Sariputta or Dhammavilasa (thirteenth cen¬ 
tury). It is a very important work for it forms the basis of the later 
legal literature of Burma. 


343 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


II. THE JAIN MAHARASHTRI AND OTHER 
PRAKRITS 

1. Narrative 

The Prakrit literature of this period is mostly of the narrative 
type. It deals with the life of the Jain teachers and heroes and 
incidentally narrates other stories. The principal language used 
for the purpose is the Jain Maharashtri, which is primarily the 
language of the non-canonical works of the Jains and gives us a 
number of important narrative works. Its use is attested since the 
second or third century A.D., and is continued up to the fourteenth 
century. Resides the lives of Jain teachers it also gives us some 
beautiful romances. There are also some stotras and works of 
scholastic interest composed in Prakrit. It may be added that most 
of the works detailed below are in verse. 

The Surasundari-chariya of DhaneSvara was written in A.D. 1038 
in the town of Chandravatl. It is a big romantic work containing 
4000 gdthas which are divided into sixteen parichchhedas. The main 
story narrates in an easy style the love affair of a Vidyadhara chief, 
but many other stories are also included within this framework. 
To the second half of the eleventh century A.D. belongs the work 
of Chandraprabhamahattara which describes the life of Vijaya- 
Chandrakevalin. It contains 1063 gdthds and gives eight stories 
describing the eight different ways of worshipping the Jinas. 

The Makavira-charita of Gunachandra, 66 who belonged to the 
Chandrakullnagachchha, was composed in A.D. 1082. It describes 
the life of Mahavlra on the basis of various legends up to his attain¬ 
ing the supreme knowledge. It also describes the former lives of 
Mahavlra. The work is composed in prose and poetry, employing 
a variety of metres, and contains about 50 Apabhrarhsa verses. The 
language of the work is grammatically chaste. “This is mainly 
due to the influence of classical Sanskrit works, that always exer¬ 
cised their influence over Prakrit throughout its career and later 
became more and more dominant so as to render it servile and imita¬ 
tive. The style of Gunachandra is obviously influenced by writers 
like Kalidasa and Bana, from whose classics he derives many of his 
ideas and expressions. The result of his Sanskrit studies is the use 
of long and intricate compounds, figures of words only based upon 
paranomasia, and rare poetic words only to be met with in Sanskrit. 
It also led to the decrease of purely Desi words which were substi¬ 
tuted by tatsama and tadbhava words”. 56 

The life of Rishabha is described by Vardhamana in his 
Adinatha-charita composed in A.D. 1103. It has 11000 gdthas and 


MINfSty 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



contains many Apabhrarhsa verses. Another work by the same 
author is the Manorama-charita in 15000 gathas and written in A.D. 
1083. Another work describing the life of a Jina and containing 
many Apabhrarhsa verses is the Santinatha-charita of Devachandra, 
the teacher of the famous Hemachandra. The author belonged to 
the Pur^atallagachchha and wrote his work in A.D. 1103. In A.D. 1104 
Santi Suri wrote his Prithvichandra-charita in 7500 verses and in 
A.D. 1108 Devabhadra wrote Parsvanatha-charita, describing the life 
of the 23rd Tirthakara, at Bhrigukachchha. The Sumatinatha-charita 
by Somaprabha was composed in the second half of the twelfth 
century and describes the life of the 5th Tirthakara. 

The greatest Jain writer of the twelfth century was the famous 
Hemachandra who bore the title Kalikdla-Sarvapia. He was born 
at Dhandhuka in A.D. 1088 and died in A.D. 1172. He was patro¬ 
nised by Chaulukya king Jayasimha Siddharaja and was responsible 
for the conversion to Jainism of his successor, king Kumarapala. 
He is the author of various works—scientific and literary. The 
Kumarapala-charita was written by him mainly to illustrate the 
rules of Prakrit Grammar. The last two cantos of the work are 
written in various Prakrit dialects like £auraseni, Magadhi, Paisachl 
and Apabhrarhsa. 

Of the other biographies of the twelfth century mention may 
be made of the Neminatha-charita in 5000 gathas composed by 
another Hemachandra, an elder contemporary of the above and be¬ 
longing to the Maladharigachchha. His pupil Srlchandra wrote a 
big epic, the Miaiisuvratasvami-charita , in A.D. 1135- His co-student, 
Lakshmanagani, wrote Supasanaha-chariya in some 8000 gathas in 
A.D. 1142. Besides narrating the life of the 7th Tirthakara, the 
author also gives various stories to illustrate the vows of Jainism. 
Another Srichandra of the Chandragachchha composed the Sanat - 
kumara-charita of 8127 verses in A.D. 1157. The story of Sanat- 
kumara, the Chakravartin, is full of all sorts of romantic and super¬ 
natural elements. 

There are also some Prakrit works of the type of life stories. 
In the twelfth century Haribhadra wrote the Mallindtha-charita 
giving the life of the 19th Tirthakara. Another work by the same 
author is the Chandraprabha-charita in 8000 verses. Somaprabha, 
a younger contemporary of the famous Hemachandra, is the author 
of the Kumarapala-pratibodha written both in prose and verse. In 
five prastdvas it enumerates various kings of the Chaulukya dynasty 
and contains a dialogue between king Kumarapala and his 
teacher Hemachandra on the precepts of Jainism. Some parts of 
the work are also written in Sanskrit and Apabhrarhsa. Another 


345 



LANGUAGE AND 


ork by the same author, the Siimatinatha-charita, as stated earlier,, 
describes the life of the 5th Tirthakara and also narrates various, 
stories illustrating the principles of Jainism. Towards the end of 
the thirteenth century comes the Malayasundart-katha of unknown 
authorship. It gives the love story of a prince Mahabala and princess 
Malayasundari and also many other popular tales based on miracles 
and magic feats. The prince and the princess are often separated,, 
but are reunited every time. In the end the prince becomes a monk 
and the princess a nun. 


2. Stotras and Didactic Works 

The Jains have composed numerous stotras, many of them being 
in Sanskrit. Of the Prakrit stotras of this period mention may be 
made of the Ullasikkama-thaya of Jinavallabha and the Ajiyasanti - 
thaya of Viraganin. The former is in glorification of Ajita, the 
second Tirthakara, and the latter that of Santi, the 16th Tirthakara. 
The Mahavzra-stava is written in an elaborate style in which the 
same words are used in different meanings. Some of the stotras 
are composed in more than one language. Thus the Shadbhdsha - 
n irmita-Parsvajinastavana by Dharmavardhana, written about 
A.D. 1200, is in six languages, viz . Sanskrit, Maharashtri, Magadhi, 
Sauraseni, Paisachi, and Apabhraihsa. 

The Silovaesamald by Jayakirti is a didactic poem in 116 Prakrit 
gathds. Its date, however, is uncertain. The Gathdkosa by 
Muniehandra (twelfth century A.D.) is a Prakrit anthology of moral 
sayings. Another work of a similar nature is the Bhavavairdgya - 
sataka describing the vanity of existence and such other things. 

Of scholastic interest is the Navapaya in Prakrit, with a 
Sanskrit commentary, by Jinachandra Ganin, written about A.D. 
1015. He has also written Navatattva-Prakarana, a treatise on the 
nine fundamental truths of Jainism, viz . jiva } ajiva, puny a, papa T 
asrava , samvara , bandha , nirjard and moksha . Another important 
work of the eleventh century is the Jivaviydra by Santi Suri in 51 
Arya verses. It discusses the nature of beings after dividing them 
into various classes. In A.D. 1113 Maladhari Hemachandra Suri 
wrote Bhavabhavana in 531 gathds . Devendra Suri wrote in the 
thirteenth century the first five karmagranthas which describe in 
great details the entire doctrine of karman . 


3. Grammars 

. 

The most complete grammar of Prakrit languages was produced 
in this period by the famous Hemachandra. In the eighth chapter 

l 


346 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Siddhahemachandra he deals with Maharashtn, Saurasenl, 
Magadhi, Paisachl, Chulikapaisachl and Apabhramsa. He has also 
supplied us with his own commentary which has come down in two 
recensions, long and short. Hemachandra has also composed a 
Desmamamdla which is a lexicon of Prakrit words. 

After Hemachandra comes Kramadisvara who flourished in 
the twelfth or thirteenth century A.D. The eighth chapter of his 
Samkshiptasarci is devoted to the treatment of Prakrits. In his 
discussion he generally follows Vararuchi. But Trivikrama, who 
flourished in the thirteenth century, follows Hemachandra in his 
Prdkrita-sabddnusdsana. He belonged to the Western school of gram¬ 
marians which is based on the so-called Valrmkisutras. From his 
teaching arose the grammars of Hemachandra and others belonging to 
this school. The other representatives of the school are Lakshml- 
dhara, who composed Shadblidshdchandrika , and Simharaja, the 
author of the Prdkritarupavatdra. The Eastern school of Prakrit 
grammarians which originated with Vararuchi and descended 
through Lankesvara and Kramadisvara is represented by Purushot- 
tama, Ramasarman and Markan^eya. Purushottama’s Prdkritdnu- 
sdsana was written in A.D. 1265 and has come down to us only in 
a single manuscript in Newari characters. The other two authors 
are rather late, Ramasarman’s PrakHtakalpataru being assigned to 
the sixteenth century and Markan$eya’s Prdkritasarvasva to the 
seventeenth century. They all divide Prakrits into four categories— 
Bhasha, Vibhasha, Apabhramsa and Paisachika— and discuss the 
principal Prakrits under Bhasha. 

4. Language 

The various processes of phonetic changes that are observed in 
Pali are carried still further in the Prakrits. Thus the change of 
n > 7 i occurs more in Prakrits than in Pali. The vowels l and u 
are softened to e and 6 and y to i. Surds are often changed to 
sonants and the mute element of aspirates is dropped. There is also 
a tendency to drop uninitial consonants. In morphology, analogy 
has played a great role in the simplification of the inflexional system. 
The dual and dative are wanting in declension and some more termi¬ 
nations are added. The distinction between the masculine and femi¬ 
nine declension is, however, preserved. In conjugation, the roots are 
generally brought over to the a type. Of the various tenses and 
moods those that mostly prevail are the present, the future, and the 
imperative. The past is generally expressed by participial 
constructions. 




347 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



III. APABHRAMSA 67 

1. Literature 


The important works in Apabhrarhia during the period A.D. 
1000-1300 noted below show that they have originated among the 
Jains. Most of them narrate the lives of Jain teachers or heroes 
or are collections of tales preaching the practices of Jain religion. 

1. The Pajjunna-kahci (Skt. Pradyumna-katha) of Simha 
narrates in fifteen cantos the life of Pradyumna Kumara, son of 
Krishna and the 21st Kamadeva out of the twenty-four recognised in 
Jain hierai'chy of remarkable persons. Siddha, who died after writ¬ 
ing the first eight cantos, belonged to Bambhanvada 58 in the domain 
of Ballala. If this Ballala was the Malava king said to have been kill¬ 
ed by Yasodhavala, a feudatory of Kumarapala, Siddha may be placed 
in the early part of the tenth century. The work was completed by 
Simha who added the last seven cantos. 


2. The Kathdkosd 59 of Srichandra contains 53 tales intended 
for moral and religious instruction. It belongs to the tenth or the 
eleventh century A.D. The Sanskrit Prasasti tells us that the author 
was the pupil of Virachandra of the Kundakunda line of teachers. 


3. The Pdrsvapurdna of Padmaklrti describes in eighteen san¬ 
dhis the life of the 23rd Tirthakara. It also probably belongs to the 
tenth or eleventh century A.D. 


4. Somaprabha in the twelfth century wrote a hymn in honour 
of Parsva in an extremely artificial style. 


5. The Sukumala-chariu by Sirihara (Skt. Sridhara) describes 
the life of Sukumara who later became a saint. Paumaeva (Skt. Pad- 
made va) referred to the story of Sukumala Svami in his sermon in a 
Jain temple at Valatfa 60 ruled over by king Govindachandra. The 
poem was composed by Srldhara at the instance of Kumara, one of 
the listeners at the sermon who was directed to Sridhara by the 
saint, on his desire to know more about the story. The work records 
Monday, 3rd day of the dark fortnight of Agrahana in 1208 (pre¬ 
sumably V.S.ziA.D. 1151) as the date of composition. 


6. The Sudarsana-charita of Nayanandi narrates in twelve san¬ 
dhis the life of a Jain hero. The author, who composed his work in 
A.D, 1043, was the pupil of Manikyanandi of the Kundakunda line 
of teachers. 


7. The Kdlasvarupakulakam is a didactic poem in 32 rhymed 
verses. It was written by Jinadatta Suri (A.D. 1075-1154), a con¬ 
temporary of Hemachandra. 


348 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


8 The Neminaha-c,harm 60a was written by Haribhadra, the 
pupil of Srichandra. He was a contemporary of Hemachandra, 
and completed his work in A.D. 1159 on the day of the conversion 
of king Kumarapala. He was also the author of the Prakrit work 
Mallinatha-charita. The work is written in a poetic style describing 
many scenes from nature. 

9. There is yet another Neminaha-chariu (Skt. Neminatha- 
charita) by Lakhamadeva (Skt. Lakshmanadeva) in four cantos. The 
poet was the son of Rayana (Skt. Ratnadeva) and was born at 
Gonanda in Malava. The work does not mention the year of its 
composition though the days of commencement and completion are 
given. The MS. records that it was a gift made in V.S. 1510 
(=A.D. 1453), so that it was composed earlier. 

10. The Yogasara or Dohasara of Yogichandra Muni belongs 
to the twelfth century. It contains 108 stanzas on spiritual didacti¬ 
cism. The Vairagyasara by Suprabhacharya is a similar poem in 
77 doha verses teaching general moral principles of Jainism. The 
author was a Digambara Jain. His Apabhraihsa belongs to the 
Eastern school represented by Ramasarman Tarkavagisa. 61 

11. Amarakirtigani’s Chhakkammovaesa (Skt. Shatkarmo- 
padesa) in fourteen cantos deals with the sixfold duties of house¬ 
holders (viz. worship of god, attendance on the teacher, study of 
sacred texts, self-restraint, austerity, and charity) with illustrative 
stories. Fifth in succession from Amiyagai (Skt. Amitagati), probably 
the famous author of the Dharmapartksha, Subhashitaratnasandoha, 
etc. who flourished at the end of the tenth century, our poet belonged 
to the Mathurasahgha. The poem was composed on Thursday, the 
14th day in the second fortnight of Bhadrapada, V.S. 1247 
(=A.D. 1190), at Godahaya in Mahiyadadesa of Gujjaravisaya, pro¬ 
bably identical with Godhra in Mahikantha Agency in Gujarat. 62 
Amaraklrti records seven other works composed by him, viz. 
Neminaha-chariu, Mahavira-chariu, Jasahara-chariu, Dhammachariya- 
tippana, Suhdsiyarayananihi, Dhammovaesachudamani, and 
JhanapdHu. 

12. Another work dealing with the religious vows of Jain 
house-holders is the Anuvaya-rayana-paiu (Skt. Anuvrata-ratna- 
pradipa) by Lakkhana (Skt. Lakshmana) in eight cantos. Lakshmana 
was the son of Sahula and Jaita of the Jayasa (Jayaswal) family. 
He dwelt at Rayavaddiya on the Yamuna, which was also the resi¬ 
dence of his patron Kanha, the great minister of Ahavamalla of the 
Chauhan family. Chhandavada on the Yamuna was the capital of 
Bharatapala, Ahavamalla’s fourth ancestor. Rayavaddiya and 

349 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


Cmiandavada have been respectively identified with modern Raibha 
and Chandwar near Firozabad in Agra District. 63 

Besides its language and subject matter the work is important 
for shedding light on a whole line of rulers of Chauhan family ruling 
near Agra in the thirteenth century. The work was completed on 
Thursday, the 7th day of the dark fortnight of Kartika, V.S. 1313 
(=A.D. 1256). 


13. The Sanjamamanjari is a work on ethics in 35 dohd verses 
with an exhaustive commentary. It was composed in the thirteenth 
century by Mahesara Suri. It teaches the practice of self-control 
as the sure way to obtain release. 

14. Peculiar interest attaches to the Sandesarasaka > probably 
the only non-religious Apabhrarhia work of the Rasa type, by Abdul 
Rahaman, son of Mlrasena, a weaver of the Muslim community, 
residing in the western part of India. The author was well versed 
in Sanskrit, Prakrit and Apabhraiiisa. The work consists of 223 
stanzas divided into three sections called Prakramas. The first is 
introductory, while in the second section, we have an interesting 
account of the message sent by a love-lorn lady from Vijayanagara 
or Vikramapura * (in old Jaisalmer State) to her husband who had 
gone to Khambhaitta (Skt. Stambhatirtha) or Khambhat a (Cambay) 
to earn riches and had not cared to return for years. The messenger 
is a traveller going to Cambay from Mulasthana (Multan). The last 
section gives a description of the six seasons in the context of 
Virahinl (lady in separation). The portrayal of sentiments is vivid 
and natural, and common experience is found reflected in the picture 
of the various seasons. The work has been assigned to the twelfth 
century A.D. 64 . 


2. Language 


The origin and nature of Apabhrarixsa have been discussed 
above. 64a Vararuchi, the oldest Prakrit grammarian, does not men¬ 
tion Apabhramsa. Hemachandra is the first grammarian to treat this 
language with other Prakrits in his Haimavyakarana, and later 
grammarians like Trivikrama, Lakshmidhara and Simharaja have 
merely followed him. 

Linguistically Apabhramsa occupies a position midway be¬ 
tween the Prakrits of the dramas and the modern Indian languages. 
The tendencies of assimilation of consonant clusters, elision of 
intervocal consonants, and such others observed in the Prakrits 
are carried still further in the Apabhraiiisa. Some of the other 
distinguishing features are the weakening of the final vowels (e.g. 


350 


WNlST/fy 



vowels 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE i 

-ss > -n-, -m- > nasalised - v and nasalisation of 


In declension as well as conjugation many of the suffixes dis¬ 
appear. Thus the distinction between the nom. and acc. sg. is 
completely lost. As in other Prakrits the general tendency in the 
Apabhramsa is to reduce the inflexional system to a particular 
norm. The most distinguishing features of the language are the 
nom. sg. ending in -u, nom. pi. -a, inst. -em and -him, gen. sg. -aha, 
assa and the preponderence of h in terminations of nouns and 
verbs. There is also to be noticed the use of half words -kara, 
- kanna, etc. to emphasise case relations. In pronouns the large 
variety of Prakrit forms is much reduced. In conjugation the 
present and future are of course used; to denote past tense past 
participles are used; though the imperative is employed, optative 
becomes less frequent; the use of fortifying pleonastic affixes 
like - ilia, -alia, -da is also witnessed. To form absolutives we get 
a number of suffixes like - i, - iu, -avi, -evi, - evinu, -eppinu, etc. The 
vocabulary of the language is further enriched by the addition of 
many desl words. 


The Apabhramsa represents an important stage in the develop¬ 
ment of Indo-Aryan languages—a stage “in which the Prakrits die 
and out of which the Bhdshds or vernaculars are born.” Already 
during the preceding period (A.D. 750-1000) Western or Sauraseni j 
Apabhramsa came into use as a pan-Indo-Aryan literary speech 
binding together the spoken provincial dialects. It continued right 
down to the end of the period under review and established itself 
as a literary language, nearest to the vernaculars, from Bengal to 
Western Punjab and Sindh, and from Kashmir and Nepal to 
Maharashtra. The birth of these vernaculars or the New Indo- 
Aryan speeches which gradually came to their own in their respect¬ 
ive areas was the most important cultural event of this period 
(A.D. 1000-1300). 


IV. MARATHI 

Marathi is one of the most important modern Indian languages 
having a very vast literature extending over a period of 700 years, 65 
and so far as the literature of the pre-British period is concerned, 
almost half of it still lies unpublished. 68 It contains a very valu¬ 
able and unique record of the spiritual experiences of the mystic 
saints from almost every class of society in Maharashtra. The 
classical Marathi poetry bears witness to all the poetical excellences 
set forth by the Sanskrit rhetoricians. It is extremely rich in 
ballad-poetry and folk-songs of a superior type, and after the re- 


351 



MIN/Sr^ 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


<SL 


aissance in the nineteenth century, it has produced masterpieces 
which are the pride of any land. 

Marathi, 'with its different dialects, reigns supreme in the region 
which extends from the river Tapi, in the north, to the Tungabhadra 
in the south. Bounded on the west by the Arabian Sea, it includes 
four districts of the Madhya Pradesh, four districts of the Hyder¬ 
abad State, the whole of Berar and ten districts of Maharashtra proper, 
as well as the old Martha States on the border,—not to speak of 
the remnants of the Maratha conquests in the north, in Central 
India, in the south, and the eastern parts of India. Marathi is 
claimed as the mother-tongue by over 21,800,000 souls, and covers 
an area of about 149,120 square miles. 67 


The origin of the Marathi language is shrouded in mystery. 
According to some, it goes back to the early Vedic settlements of 
Agastya in Janasthana, when the first Vedic Apabhramsa must have 
been formed as the earliest nucleus, which grew in the course of 
centuries, owing to several kinds of culture-contacts and vicissitudes 
of fortune, and came to be recognized as Marathi in the early centu¬ 
ries of the Christian Era. The earliest epigraphical record 03 is 
that of the Sravana Belgola Inscription of Chamuiidaraja, the 
Prime-Minister of Rachamalla Ganga, dated A.D. 983, which con¬ 
tains a regular Marathi sentence: “Sri Chdvundarajevi karaviyalem” 
Similarly, the earliest reference to Marathi literature is the quota¬ 
tion of a Marathi song in the well-known work Manasolldsa or 
Abhilashitartha-chintamani of the Chalukya king Somesvara III 
written about A.D. 1130, wherein it is also mentioned that Maharash¬ 
tra women were in the habit of singing om-songs while cleansing the 
rice of its husk. 69 


The first great author of note in Marathi is Mukundaraja (latter 
half of the twelfth century), who wrote, among others, his 
well-known philosophical work Vivekasindhu, in A.D. 1190. He 
was a great Sanskrit scholar, a veritable sage, endowed with 
miraculous powers, a follower of Sri Sankaracharya in his Advait- 
ism, and a spiritual preceptor of Jaitrapala or Jayatpala who 
probably was a petty chief in Berar. Other works ascribed ta 
him are Paramamrita , Pavanavijaya, Mulastambha, Panchikarana, 
etc. They are all philosophical treatises. 70 


Three great religious sects dominated Maharashtra at this time. 
The Natha-sa??ipradd?/a, which is said to have originated with Adi- 
natha Sankara, was renovated by Matsyendranatha, at the begin¬ 
ning of the tenth century A.D. 71 Gorakh-nath, his chief 
disciple, was a great propagator of this School, throughout the 


352 



WNlST/fy, 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE ^ 

gth and breadth of India, preaching the doctrine of Yoga and 
salvation through meditation. There are a few Marathi songs 
attributed to Gorakh-nath, and the remnant of the Goraksha- 
Aviaranatha-Samvada preserves one of the oldest specimens of 
Marathi prose. 72 His disciple Gahininatha was the chief exponent 
of Nathism in Maharashtra. 73 It was he who initiated Nivritti¬ 
natha, the elder brother of Jnanadeva, the celebrated author of 
JncLnesvari which is the crowning achievement of this sect in 
Marathi. It is undoubtedly one of the great masterpieces of the 
world. Though a mere commentary on the Bhagavadgltd , 74 one 
finds in it philosophy and poetry of the highest kind flowing in 
complete unison, sending its readers into veritable raptures on 
account of its sweet melody, homely style, wealth of illustrations, 
depth of feeling, flights of fancy and the most lucid exposition of 
the philosophy of the Bhagavadgltd. Jnanadeva was a precocious 
saint and a very great genius. He wrote this immortal work at the 
early age of 19 only. Amritanubhava is another great work of his, 
dealing with the Upanishadic philosophy, and more than 25 smaller 
works have been ascribed to him, besides a collection of over a 
thousand poems in the Abhanga metre. 76 This Gatha or collection 
of the Abhanga poems and Jnanesvarl are among the chief works: 
of the Varakari -sampradaya which believed in Bhakti or devotion 
as the means of salvation. After receiving his initiation from 
Nivrittinatha, Jnanadeva initiated his younger brother Sopanadeva 
and his youngest sister Muktabal, all of whom were great Vedan- 
tins and known for their saintliness. All of them wrote in Marathi, 
but only a few works of Nivrittinatha, Sopanadeva and Muktabai 
have come down to us. They voluntarily put an end to their own 
life as soon as they thought that the mission of their life was over, 
and when they were just in their twenties. 76 


The Mahanubhava is a reformist sect of the Hindus with a 
philosophy 77 and a code of manners 78 of their own, and was found¬ 
ed by Chakradhara in A.D. 1263. 79 Chakradhara hailed from 
Gujarat, but adopted Maharashtra as his field of action and Mara¬ 
thi as the language of his new faith which he preached in the 
latter part of his life. Like Gautama Buddha he did not leave 
behind him any particular book of his own which could be regard¬ 
ed as the Book of Faith. His teachings have been collected from 
the memoirs of his immediate disciples who were learned Pandits 
and who wrote their works in the first half of the fourteenth 
century. Nagadevacharya, 80 the chief disciple of Chakradhara, was 
the organising genius of the sect to which he gave a definitive form 
and a book of tenets. The self-exclusive rigour of the Vanjasrama 


S.E.—28 


353 



Ml NtSTfty 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

dharma of the caste-Hindus was not observed by this sect which 
threw open the path of self-renunciation ( Sannyasa ) to all. They 
did not believe in the image-worship, but at the same time regard¬ 
ed Srikrishna of Dvaravatl and Sri-Dattatreya of Mahur (Hyder¬ 
abad State) as the most perfect forms of the God-head which are 
believed in by the Hindus in general. A peculiar sanctity is 
attached to the spots and places visited by the Founder, which are 
enshrined and worshipped. After the death of Nagadevacharya 
the sect was split up into thirteen different branches ( amnayas ), 
and they are called after the names „ of the principal disciples of 
Jtfagadevacharya. They had originally thirteen code-scripts which 
were later on increased to about twenty-five. The Mahanubhava 
sect can reasonably boast of having contributed richly to the for¬ 
mal side of Marathi literature, and, after the manner of Sanskrit, 
the Mahanubhava writers have introduced such types of literature 
as the sutras, the commentaries, the expositions, the lexicons, 
works on rhetorics, prosody, and grammar, etc. Like the Bud¬ 
dhists and the Jains they had their legendary biographies and me¬ 
moirs. They even prepared descriptive indices of the place-names 
and of the legends associated with the life of their Founder. Their 
monumental works were written within the first three centuries, but 
•owing to the secretive character of the followers of this sect, most 
of this literature still remains in the dark. 81 

Of the published works, Chakradhara-Siddhanta-Sutre 82 and 
Drishfdnta-pdtha 83 of Kesobasa (written about A.D. 1280) deal with 
the doctrine of the sect, Lilacharitra (A.D. 1288) of Mhalmbhata 84 
is the legendary biography of the founder, Vachchhaharana (about 
A.D. 1278) of Damodara, 86 Rukminisvayamvara (A.D. 1292) of 
Narendra 86 and Sisupcilavadha (A.D. 1200) of Bhaskarabhatta 87 
are some of the longer narrative poems of great poetical value. 
Tjddhavag/itd QQ (A.D. 1300) of Bhaskarabhatta is a Marathi com¬ 
mentary on the 11th Canto of the Bhagavata Pur ana. Mahadaisa 
was their earliest poetess 89 who composed nuptial songs, called 
Dhavale, some time before A.D. 1287 so far as the first part is 
concerned; the second is said to have been written within the next 
16 years. 90 

After Jnanadeva, the literary Maharashtra was dominated by 
the poet-saints of the Bhagavata School who worshipped the God 
Vitthala of Pandharpur. Namadeva 91 was the greatest exponent 
and propagator of this School. They believed in the ultimate 
merging of the Individual Soul into the Supreme Soul, through the 
path of Devotion (Bhakti), which consisted of nine varieties, 
whose common features were the perpetual repetition of the 




354 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


,-Krishna-Hari 3 , or ‘Vitfhala 3 , periodic peregrinations to 
Papdharpur and also to Aland! where Jnanadeva and his living 
burial, fasting on the 11th day of each fortnight of the Hindu calen¬ 
dar month and on Mondays, feeding the Brahmanas and chance- 
guests (atithis), service to saintly persons, abstinence from meat 
and wine, listening to Harikirtanas and reading of religious books. 
This sect, on account of its periodic peregrinations to Pamjharpur, 
was known as the Varakar! -sampraddya, and it is alleged that it 
existed in Maharashtra since the ninth century A.D., or even 
earlier. 92 This sect regarded all castes alike and did not observe 
any restrictions of untouchability, etc., in their religious associa¬ 
tion. 

Namadeva is said to be a contemporary of Jnanadeva and is sup¬ 
posed to have been the youngest of the galaxy of poet-saints who 
belonged to different castes and whose lyrical outbursts are very 
popular throughout the length and breadth of Maharashtra. Gora, 
the potter, headed the list which comprised Sena, the barber, 
Sarhvata, the gardener, Chokha, the pariah, Narahari, the goldsmith, 
Joga, the oilman, etc. 93 Their close association has contributed 
very largely to bridge the gulf between the higher and the lower 
castes in Maharashtra, and by their poetry and saintliness they 
have popularised the teachings of the philosophy of Vedanta in all 
the strata of society. 

Namadeva was a tailor by caste, 94 but was as great a saint 
as he was a gifted poet. He had a very large family consisting of 
more than a dozen members, including his personal attendant 
Janabai, all of whom had turned poets and had, it is alleged, con¬ 
tributed their mite in fulfilling the vow of Namadeva to compose 
a hundred crore Abhaiigas. A small remnant of a few thousand 
Abhangas is all that we have got today, but they show genuine 
marks of rare beauty, possessing sweet melody, naive simplicity, and 
a direct appeal which are generally the distinguishing characteristics 
of spontaneous lyrics. Namadeva’s vigorous and extensive pro¬ 
pagandists tours in the cause of the Bhagavata Dharma and en¬ 
chanting Kirtanas led to the creation of a definite school of 
poetry in Maharashtra which held sway for more than four centu¬ 
ries, and of which the celebrated poet-saint Tukarama was the 
direct product. Namadeva’s fame had spread far and wide 96 in 
his own days and he had the privilege of being quoted in the Gran - 
thastiheb of Guru Nanak, the founder of the Sikh religion. 96 He 
had a long life of 80 years and died at Pandharpur in A.D. 1350, 

Janabai, the female attendant of Namadeva, was a poetess, 
whose devotional songs form a class by itself in the Abhanga 



name ‘Ri 


355 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


:erature. They are known for their simplicity, depth of feeling, 
and all-absorbing devotion. Her life was a life of dedication and 
she had the same unbounded love for Namadeva as she had for 
Vitthala. Though she claimed constant companionship of God, 
she was essentially a woman, and the charm of her poetry is 
heightened on account of this. 

The spread of the Bhagavata Dharma in Maharashtra had 
resulted not only in the fusion of the warring sects of the Vaishna- 
vites and the Saivites in this part of the country, but also affected 
the followers of other religions as well, especially the Muslims, 
who had come under the influence of Kabir. 97 They also wrote 
devotional songs and spread the gospel of toleration in religious 
outlook, recognizing and respecting different manifestations of the 
Supreme Spirit. In literature this new cult laid great emphasis 
on singing the glories of the early youth of the Lord Krishna, on 
the teachings of the Bhagavadgitd and the Bhagavata Purana in 
general and on the stories from the epics like the Ramayana and the 
Mahabharata. The celebrated commentary on the Bhagavadglta, 
by Jnanadeva inspired generations of scholars to vie with him in 
writing commentaries on the Lord’s Song, and we have more than 
a score of them, but none attains the great poetical and intellectual 
height set by the model. The Kirtana -sampraddya, which is 
peculiarly Maharashtrian, gave a great impetus to a colourful 
variety in poetry and music, and the special technique that was 
evolved was strictly adhered to throughout the centuries that 
followed. The first part consists of a spiritual sermon on a suit¬ 
able text, and the second part contains an entertaining story illus¬ 
trating the truth of the philosophical discussion or the moral teach¬ 
ing of the first part, interspersed with music composed by the 
Kirtanakara himself or called to memory from the compositions of 
other poets. It is thus an admixture of prose and poetry of a high¬ 
ly eloquent nature accompanied by excellent music. It was a 
very great and effective weapon in the hands of these religious 
preachers and almost the only recreation of an intellectual type for all 
the classes and the masses. The moral teachings and the philoso¬ 
phical truths were supplied by our Epics and the Ptiranas which have 
dominated the literature of Maharashtra ever since. Many a poet, 
young or old, has chosen to sing of the Ramayana and Mahabharata, 
and more especially of the life of Srikrishna, in general, so that the 
major part of Marathi poetry, from this period onwards, deals with 
topics concerning these only. There are more than twenty epi¬ 
tomes of the Mahabharata and not less than a hundred and twenty 
versions, great or small, of the Ram&yarufi 3 — not to speak of the- 
individual legends and episodes! These great monuments' of Aryan 


356 


misrpy 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



culture have an important part in the formation both of the 
national character and of the peculiar culture of Maharashtra. 

In addition to the utterances of the devotional prayers to 
Vishnu or Vitthala by the poet-saints of the Bhagavata School and 
the Akhyanas (legendary episodes) composed by them for the Kir- 
tanas, we also find the traces, of the Avadhuta cult, of the Jaxigamas 
and the Lingayats, the Ganapatyas and a number of other religi¬ 
ous sects in the poetical remains that belong to the thirteenth and 
the fourteenth centuries of the Christian Era. In this classical 
period, poetry meant essentially a religious poetry," 

V. BENGALI 
1. Language 

The Aryan languages of Eastern India, viz . the three Bihari 
speeches of Bhojpuri, Maithili and Magahi (the latter two are very 
close to each other, and some regard them as dialects of the same 
language), and Oriya and Bengali-Assamese, all originated from the 
MagadhI Prakrit, the evolution of which has been described 
above. 100 

The people of Eastern India, as in the Gangetic plains generally, 
represented a mixture of different races before the Aryan-speakers 
came—Mongoloids (speaking various dialects of the Sino-Tibetan 
languages like Bo$o and Kuki), Austrics, or Austro-Asiatics (speak¬ 
ing various Kol or Munda dialects, which latterly developed into 
Santali and its allied speeches, and also Mon-Khmer dialects, one 
of which is Khasi of Assam at the present day), and the speakers of 
the various Dravidian dialects as in Gangetic India and elsewhere. 
All these three language, culture or racial groups were welded to* 
gether into one Aryan-speaking people after the advent of the Aryan 
language in Eastern India. This Aryan language had attained its 
easternmost frontier up to the southern bend of the Ganga river in 
Eastern Bihar before the time of Buddha. At that time Bengal ap¬ 
pears not to have received the Aryan speech. It would seem that 
from the Maurya period onwards there was a powerful movement 
of Aryan-speakers from Bihar passing on into North and West 
Bengal, and from thence spreading to Assam in the East and to 
Orissa in the South. These Aryan-speakers, themselves of mixed 
origin, as much as the people of Bengal, took with them the speech 
of Magadha; and it was known as Magadhi-Prakrit and later as 
MagadhI-Apabhramsa 101 when the Aryan speech was established in 
Bengal, Assam and Orissa. Definite eastern or Magadhan character¬ 
istics appear to have developed in the entire Aryanised area of 


357 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


Assam, Bengal and Bihar during the closing centuries of the first 
millennium A.D. Bengali, Assamese and Oriya formed a very closely 
connected group, and these languages showed the greatest amount of 
agreement among themselves. On the other hand, Maithili and 
Magahi, as representing a sort of Central Magadhan speech, and 
Bhojpuri, as representing Western Magadhan (as distinct from the 
Ardha-MagadhI still further to the west), also similarly developed 
in the Central and Western Magadhan tract. By A.D. 1000, judging 
from the specimens of Bengali, Assamese and Oriya that we have 
at about this date and a little later, these languages had become fully 
established, although the relationship between Bengali and 
Assamese was a little closer than between these two and Oriya. 
Thus A.D. 1000 may roughly be taken as a convenient date for the 
development of the New Indo-Aryan stage in the history of the 
Aryan speech. About this time, the Bengali language was fully 
characterised, and Oriya was also characterised with a few special 
peculiarities, while Assamese remained still much closer to Old 
Bengali. 

2. Literature 


The oldest specimens of Bengali are to be found in place-names 
and personal names in early inscriptions of Bengal, from the fifth 
century A.D. down to A.D. 1000 and later. This epigraphical mate¬ 
rial has been studied by S. K. Chatterji in his Origin and Develop¬ 
ment of Bengali Language and Literature. The place-names as well 
as the personal names are both indicative of the advance made in 
the language. Connected specimens of Bengali in literature are to 
be found in the fifty Charyapadas which were discovered in Nepal 
by MM. Haraprasad Sastri, and subsequently by one or two other 
scholars, many years ago. Sastri published these Charyapadas in 
Old Bengali along with specimens of Apabhraihsa (Saurasenl or 
Western Apabhraihsa) literature, similarly obtained from Nepal, in 
a volume entitled “Hajar Bachharer Purdna Bahgala Bhashay 
Bauddha Gan O Doha” which was published in the Bengali year 
1323 (A.D. 1916) by the Bangiya Sahitya Parishad of Calcutta. The 
forty-seven Charyapada songs found in this work alone have a claim 
to be regarded as Old Bengali, and the other portions of the work 
are not in Old Bengali, but in a Western Apabhraihsa. These forty- 
seven poems were really parts of a collection of fifty, but owing to 
some pages in the manuscript being missing, three poems have not 
been found; but subsequently their Tibetan translations have been 
discovered and this has enabled us to reconstruct them and complete 
the fifty. These poems relate to the esoteric ideas and practices of the 
Vajrayana School of late Mahayana Buddhism of Eastern India. 


358 


mtsTfy 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



They are in Old Bengali, and it is easy to get their outward sense, 
but for the inner meaning a commentary is necessary. This com¬ 
mentary (by a later writer) has been furnished in the manuscript 
in the Sanskrit language, and it is very helpful in understanding 
the philosophical and other notions behind the poems. The poems 
were composed by a class of religious teachers known as the Siddhas. 
Traditionally they were eighty-four in number, and they were claim¬ 
ed by both the later Mahayana Buddhists of India and Tibet as well 
as by the followers of Saiva Sect of Goraksha-natha (Gorakh-nath). 
Some twenty-four poets are represented in the Charyapadas . They 
composed short lyrics of generally five couplets, in a metre which 
is commonly the Padakulaka metre from which the modern Hindi 
Chaupdi on the one hand and the Bengali Payar on the other have 
both evolved. There are a few slightly longer poems with other 
metres. The style and the technique of these poems were continued 
in later early Bhojpuri, Bengali and Western Hindi poetry, and this 
school, which is represented in the Charyapada songs, also had some¬ 
thing to do with the mediaeval North Indian Sant poets and reform¬ 
ers. The Charyapada poems have been claimed in their language 
as belonging to both Assamese and Oriya, and even to Maithili. All 
these demonstrate how a thousand years ago from now these eastern 
speeches converged into a common basic type of speech—a kind of 
MagadhI Apabhramsa with local variations. 

The Charyapadas have been edited and commented upon by 
various scholars after the first edition by MM. Haraprasad Sastri 
came out—S. K. Chatterji, Muhammad Shahidullah, Prabodh 
Chandra Bagchi, Manindra Basu, and Sukumar Sen. The 
Charyapadas cannot be accorded a very high place from 
literary point of view, though occasionally they breathe a true 
poetic spirit and are marked by beauty of expression, fine concep¬ 
tion and imagery, and a deep sensibility and emotion. Their main 
value and importance are linguistic and doctrinal. 102 They are 
however good lyrics written in a variety of metres. These lyrics 
were evidently meant to be sung, for the manuscript gives the 
names of the rdgas against each. But the main characteristic of 
these verses is their religious and emotional appeal which found 
a fuller development in later Bengali literature in the Sahajiya 
songs, Vaishnava padas , Sakta hymns, Baul songs, etc. The Bud¬ 
dhist Charyapadas may therefore be regarded as the prototypes or 
precursors of these later forms of literary development in Bengal. 

It is not easy to determine the date of these Charyapadas. The 
only positive clue is furnished by the names of the Siddhas who 
composed them. There are traditions about the succession of 


859 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



gurus among these Siddhas, and on the basis of a Nepalese tradi¬ 
tion about one such line of succession, Dr. M. Shahidullah referred 
these compositions to the seventh century A.D. But Dr. P. C. 
Bagehi has shown the unreliable character of the Nepalese tradi¬ 
tion. The general view is that these Charydpadas were composed be¬ 
tween A.D. 950 and 1200, and most probably during the earlier 
part of this period. This is about the time when most of the New or 
Modern Indo-Aryan languages were taking shape. 

Apart from the Charydpadas and the names found in the in¬ 
scriptions mentioned above, other specimens of Bengali literature 
prior to A.D. 1300 are to be found in a few verses in the Prakrita - 
paingala (c. A.D. 1400), which is a treatise on Prakrit and Apa¬ 
bhramsa versification with examples of all the various forms of 
verse-type described. Some verses in this work, which in all likeli¬ 
hood are modified from Old Bengali, have been discussed by S. K. 
Chatterji in his Origin and Development of the Bengali Language 
and Literature. Similarly in the Sanskrit Encyclopaedia, the Mdna - 
sollasa, which was compiled in Western India about A.D. 1130, 
Chatterji has found a few Old Bengali verses and lines in the sec¬ 
tion relating to music and songs. Similarly Sukumar Sen, in the 
first volume of his big book on the history of Bengali Literature, 
notes a few lines in Old Bengali in some early texts in Sanskrit. 
The Charyapada tradition was carried down to late mediaeval times 
in Bengal and, in spite of the Turkish conquest, there was no break 
in it, either in subject matter or in form- The poems in the Prakrita - 
paingala give us specimen of literature in the Brahmanical tradition, 
as the Charydpadas give us the Buddhist Vajrayana tradition. Right 
up to A.D. 1300 these are the only specimens we have of Bengali 
literature. 102a But this is quite enough to give us some of the actual 
vernacular literary forms which were current in Bengal. 

It has been also suggested, although the point has been disputed, 
that in the twenty-four songs of the Gita-govinda of Jayadeva, 
which give us a different type of prosody or verse-form from that 
of classical Sanskrit, we have the reflex in Sanskrit of the vernacular 
or Apabhramsa tradition in literature. Lassen suggested long ago 
that these twenty-four songs were originally not in Sanskrit but in 
Apabhramsa (or some speech like Old Bengali), and then they were 
rendered into Sanskrit and incorporated in the Gita-govinda. Con¬ 
sidering that Apabhramsa song and Old Bengali verses echoing these 
songs of the Gita-govinda have been found in the Prdkrita-paingala 
and other works, this would be quite a justifiable theory. 

Poets in Bengal before A.D. 1300 used not only Bengali, but 
also Western Apabhramsa, in addition to Sanskrit, which was the 


360 




LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



language of the educated classes. As in the Buddhist Dohd-Koshas 
by Saraha and Kariha which have been edited by MM. Haraprasad 
Sastri along with the Charyapadas, and further commented upon 
and translated into French in comparison with the Old Tibetan trans¬ 
lations by Dr. Muhammad Shahidullah, other verses in Apabhrariisa 
composed by writers of Bengal have also been found. The Western 
Apabhramsa was like a kind of Khanboli Hindi of a thousand years 
ago, and was current all over India, people in the various tracts 
using both this Apabhramsa and their local speeches. 

The Old Bengali Literature, in the compositions of the Siddhas, 
has exerted some influence in North India also. Gorakh-nath, 
the great Sant of Northern India and founder of the sect of the 
Kan-phafa Yogis of the Punjab and North India, is intimately con¬ 
nected with the legends of the Siddhas in Bengal. In certain works 
attributed to Gorakh-nath and his disciples, like the Gorakh-Bodh, 
the manuscripts of which have been found in Bikaner and else¬ 
where, we have specimens of poems in a language which is un¬ 
doubtedly Old Bengali but masquerading as a form of “Old Hindi”. 
Any one knowing Old Bengali will find such verses plentifully in 
the works of early mediaeval times, ascribed to Gorakh-nath, which 
have been published by late Prof. Barthwal, and the tradition has 
continued right down to our days. Wandering Saints (Sants and 
Sadhus), and .latterly Fakirs and Darveshes, carried the same reli¬ 
gious ideologies, and the Sant philosophy, from one part of the North 
Indian Plains to the other, whether from West to East or from 
East to West. Through them linguistic influences easily passed from 
one part to other parts of North India. Ancient Bengal in this way 
can be said to have influenced the rest of North India through her 
Charyapada literature. 


C. DRAVIDIAN 


I. TAMIL 


1. Poetry 


By the end of the first millennium after the birth of Christ, 
Buddhist and Jain influence in the Tamil country was nearly 
eliminated and the Brahmanic religion, in its twin forms of Saivism 
and Vaishnavism, was securely in the saddle. The Tevaram and 
the Tiruvachakam hymns and the Vaishnava hymns in the Ndldy- 
tra Prabandham had now a wide currency, and the Nayanars and 
the Alvars were deemed to be at least semi-divine, truly the apos¬ 
tles of God. Tamil ruling chiefs supported the Brahmanic reli- 


361 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



gion with fervour—and occasionally even with fanaticism—and 
gave considerable encouragement to Tamil men of letters. Men’s 
minds were slowly turned to the treasures of Sanskrit literature, 
and poets came forward to give Tamil versions or adaptations of 
standard Sanskrit works. Epics, Purapas, philosophical treatises, 
alamkaraiastras, grammars, all appeared in Tamil, inspired to a 
greater or lesser extent by Sanskrit models. Already, in the Sah- 
gam Age, Perundevanar had rendered the Mahabharata into Tamil, 
but that work is now lost. The poets of the Brahmanic period 
turned their attention to the Ramayana and the Mahabharata or 
other Puranic stories and produced Tamil adaptations, some of 
which at least acquired the dignity and excellence of creative 
literature. During this period, three names stand prominent in 
poetry. Like the three “gems” of Kannada poetry, the three Tamil 
“gems”—Kamban, Ottakkuttan and Pugalendi—were also con¬ 
temporaries, and they too are usually named together. Making all 
allowance for the accretions that the traditional accounts of their 
history have gathered, it seems none the less clear that it was dur¬ 
ing the period between A.D. 1118 and 1178 that not only Kamban, 
Ottakkuttan and Pugalendi, but perhaps also Sekkilar, Avvai IJ 
and the commentator Adiyarkanallur flourished and made it a 
great age in the history of Tamil literature. 

(i) Kamban 

Kamban is undoubtedly one of the greatest figures in Tamil 
poetry. His father died when he was quite young, and hence he 
early came under the protection of a generous landlord by name 
Sadayappa. By and by, Kamban’s unusual talents caught the 
attention of Kulottunga Chola, and the poet went to the king’s 
court. Rivalry between Kamban and Ottakkuttan, the court poet, 
seems to have given rise to many piquant, if not worse, situations. 
The king apparently decided to capitalize the rivalry, and set them 
both to write the Ramayana in Tamil verse. Ottakkuttan fared 
rather badly in the contest, and in a fit of depression decided to 
destroy his poem. Kamban interrupted his great rival’s act of 
vandalism in time to save the Uttara-Kanda, and, along with 
Kamban’s own earlier Kandas, it now constitutes the Tamil 
Ramayana, popularly known as Kamba Ramayana. Comparisons 
are invidious, and there are not wanting partisans who cry up Kam¬ 
ban at the expense of Valmiki, a thing that Kamban himself might 
have deemed sacrilegious. Kamban’s poem is a great Tamil classic; 
and even though it is an adaptation from the Sanskrit original it is 
none the less a masterpiece. Well versed in classical Tamil and San¬ 
skrit literatures, Kamban cast his poem on a heroic mould and 


862 



MINIS r/j,^ 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


gave it the flavour and finish of a typical literary epic. It has been 
remarked that while “Valmlki is diffuse and simple, Kamban 
abridges and elaborates;” it is, perhaps, nearer the truth to say 
that Valmiki’s poem is akin to a vast elemental forest, while Kam- 
ban's is more akin to a limited but luxuriant garden. Here is a 
well-known verse from the Sundara-Kan<Ja, where Sita gives utter¬ 
ance to her joy after listening to Hanuman: 

Be it the demon himself, or another god; or else 

The lord of the monkey host; be it cruelty 


Or pity; here he came, and named my lord, 


Revived my heart, and gave me life; peerless the service! 

In recent years, Kamba Ramayana has been widely popularized 
in Tamil Nad by two enthusiastic ‘tasters' and critics, P. Sri and T. 
K. Chidambaranatha Mudaliar. Although Kamban wrote other 
poems also, he is to the multitude only the semi-divine author of 
the Tamil Ramayana; and yet Sadakopar-anthdthi and Evelupathu 
deserve to be more widely read than they are at present. 


(ii) Oppakkuttan and Pugalendi 

Ottakkuttan often came into conflict with Pugalendi also. 
According to tradition, Pugalendi was the Pamjlyan king's court 
poet. When the Parajyan princess married the Chola king, Kulot- 
turiga, Varaguna Pandya sent Pugalendi as a part of his daughter’s 
dowry to the Chola court. Innumerable incidents are narrated 
about the rivalry of the two court poets, and Ottakkuttan is invari¬ 
ably the loser in every trial of wits! At this distance of time it is 
difficult to sift the truth from the fanciful fabrication of later 
partisans. Probably, all the three poets, Kamban, Ottakkuttan 
and Pugalendi were contemporaries and had frequent opportuni¬ 
ties of coming together. Kamban by his towering genius and 
Pugalendi by his audacious and nimble wit, seem to have as a rule 
got the better of the heavy and proud but meritorious Ottakkuttan. 
On this basis tradition has reared many a fanciful structure and 
the stories are repeated in every life-history of these poets. 

Pugalendi's most important work is Nala Ven'ba, a Tamil ver¬ 
sion of the story of Nala and Damayanti. Written in the flowing 
Venba metre, the poem is one of the most melodious in 
Tamil poetry. Echoes from Sanskrit and the Rural and other 
ancient classics give a peculiar charm to the poem. But the cen¬ 
tral inspiration is Pugalendi’s, and the metrical and verbal felicity 
is all his own; and truly the vivacity and exuberance of his poetic 
art are seen in every stanza of this poem. Pugalendi also compos- 


363 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

ed a number of narrative poems in a flowing metre—somewhat in 
the ballad style—dealing with various Mahabhdrata episodes and 
also popular stories of tradition and history. Some of these poems, 
Alii Arasdni , Pavalakkodi, etc., are on the lips of the common 
people to this day. The verses have a gay and easy swing, the 
language is simple and chaste, and poetry is here seen to come to 
the market-place without vulgarizing itself in the least. An¬ 
other of Pugalendi’s poems, Kalambakam, is a commemoration 
poem in honour of the king of Chenji. 

Ottakkuttan’s Uttara-Kanda, though a little inferior to the 
rest of the Tamil Ramdyana , is still a meritorious work. One verse 
may be rendered as follows: 

The relations desire a bridegroom of noble birth; 

The fathers would rather have 

The undiminishing power of knowledge; 

Wide-ranging riches and the strength they give 
Are chiefly sought by the mothers; 

But the beautiful girls themselves desire only these, 

Youth and grace of form. 

Ottakkuttan seems to have specialized besides in war-chants 
called paranis and ulas, describing respectively war campaigns and 
triumphant processions. Ottakkuttan’s Takka-Yagapparani and 
Muvar-Ula are among the finest specimens in these two classes of 
poems. Muvar-Ula is a group of Vlas dedicated to three Chola 
kings. All things considered, Ottakkuttan seems to have been a 
great master of literature rather than a supreme creative writer; 
and no wonder posterity has come to think of him as a personality 
rather than as a poet. 

(Hi) Avvai 

Various poetical works and innumerable impromptu verses 
are attributed to a woman poet by name “Avvai.” She figures in 
the Sahgam Age as also in the Age of Kamban, and hence it is now 
presumed that there were two Awais, gifted poets both of them. 
Avvai I, supposed to be a sister of the great Tiruvalluvar, wrote 
Attisoodi, Kondraivendan, Miithurai and Nalvali, works which like 
Hamlet have gone into general currency in Tamil speech. The 
second Avvai composed Nannurkovai , Kalviolukkam , Anunthamil - 
malax, and some other works. Several interesting stories are cur¬ 
rent regarding the way in which Awai’s mother-wit turned the 
tables against her contemporaries, notably Kulottunga Chola, Kam- 




364 


misT/ff, 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 




ban and Ottakkuttan. Her repartees are classical in their aptness 
and memorability, her humanity is deep and abiding, her sense of 
humour is radiant and unfailing. The composite “Avvai” is 
certainly the most popular of Tamil poets, verily the beloved 
matriarch of Tamil poetry. One verse from the second Avvai is 
here rendered freely: 


Rare, O rare is human birth; 

Rare, among humans, to be born 
With no impediment in eye, ear or leg; 
Rare, with an unblemished body 
To unite a mind accomplished and wise; 
Rare, for wise and learned minds, 

To engage in acts of piety and pity; 

But these rarest of the rare 


Merit Elysium indeed. 


2. Saiva Siddhanta Literature 

This literature, which is very considerable in quantity and is 
of a very high quality as well, is partly in Sanskrit and partly in 
Tamil. The latter is conveniently studied under two heads: pre- 
Meykandeyan and post-Meykandeyan. The principal figures in 
pre-Meykandeyan literature are Tirumular, the Tevaram and Tiru- 
vachakam hymnists, and the other contributors to the Tirumurais 
like Nambi-Andar-Nambi and Sekkilar. Nambi-Andar-Nambi, who 
belongs to the eleventh century, is sometimes referred to as the 
Tamil Vyasa, because it is due to him that we have the extraordi¬ 
nary collection of Saivite hymns, the eleven Tirumurais. The 
twelfth Tirumurai, the Periapur&iiam, was the work of Sekkilar 
who is usually assigned to the middle of the twelfth century. The 
Periapuranam is a work of hagiology—half history, half myth— 
containing the lives of the sixty-three canonized Saiva saints, and 
the work is held in much reverence and is very popular to this day. 

Although the Sanskrit works of Aghorasiva, Sadyojyotis and 
Bhojaraja had already settled the general outlines of the Saiva 
Siddhanta-sastra, it became a real power and reached the masses 
only when teachers like Meykanda, Arulnandi and Umapati used 
Tamil as the vehicle for the exposition of the Sastras. These 
Tamil Siddhanta-sastras are fourteen in number, of which 
the three most famous are Siva-jnana-bodham by Mey¬ 
kanda Deva, £iva-jnana-siddhiyar by Arulnandi-sivacharya and 
Sivaprakasam by Umapati-sivacharya. Meykanda was, according 


m 

w 


365 


MIN/Sr^ 



to tradition, Sadayappa’s daughter’s son. Since Sadayappa was 
Kamban’s contemporary and patron, Meykan<jla must have flourish¬ 
ed in the fiyst half of the thirteenth century. Although a Vellala, 
Meykai^la was acknowledged as a great teacher. One of his many 
disciples was Arulnandi, a Brahmana, whose voluminous £iva-jnana~ 
siddhiyar is less a commentary on Meykarida’s work and more an in¬ 
dependent work, although generally inspired by £iva-jfidna- 
bodham. Umapati was a disciple of Marai-jnana-sambandhar, him¬ 
self a disciple of Arulnandi. Again, Marai was a Vellala while Uma¬ 
pati was a Brahmana. Umapati brings us to the close of the 
thirteenth century. Corresponding to the four great bhaktas — 
Appar, Sundarar, Manikkavachakar and Sarnbandhar—the Tamil 
Saivas have also these four Santandcharyas ,—Meykanda, Arulnan¬ 
di, Ma,rai-jnana-sambandhar, and Umapati. 

Saiva Siddhanta admits three entities, viz. the Lord (pati), the 
individual soul (pain), and matter (pdsa). The terms, pati , pasu 
and paia, really mean, respectively, master of the herd, the herd, 
and the bond between the two or the entanglement. These are the 
three Padarthas or central categories of Saiva Siddhanta philosophy. 
Wedged between pati and pdsam, the soul now inclines this way, 
lured by His glory, anon staggers that way attracted by the earth- 
crust. Although by asserting the existence of three such eternal 
entities Saiva Siddhanta turns its back on pure Advaita, the Sid- 
dhantins none the less call their philosophy restricted Advaita 
since the relationship between pati-pa$u~p&sam is of the nature of 
an inseparable union or is a unity in diversity. The Lord is the 
subject, and the soul and matter are objects; it is the Lord who 
gives illumination to the soul and support to matter, but is Him¬ 
self uninfluenced by either. 10 2b 

Meykanda’s £iva-jnana-bodham, the corner-stone of the Tamil 
Saiva Siddhanta, is cast in the form of a commentary on twelve 
verses of the Rauravagama. Arujnandi’s Siva-jnana-siddhiyar is a 
more voluminous work, consisting of about 550 verses. The first 
part is devoted to a criticism of various schools of philosophy like 
the Buddhist, the Jain, the Lokayata, the Prabhakara, the Pancha- 
ratra, etc. Arulnandi attempts to show that these philosophies 
are inadequate to meet the clamorous needs of humanity. The 
second part of Siva-jnana-siddhiyar is an elaborate exposition of the 
main tenets of the Saiva Siddhanta. Sivaprakasam by Umapati is 
based on the classical treatises of Meykanda and Arulnandi but is 
neither as cryptic as the former nor as elaborate as the latter, and 
is accordingly the best guide to the Saiva Siddhanta. Umapati 
wrote many other works as well, one of which—the controversial 


366 




—uciiig composed as late as A.D. 1313. Mr. 
Nallaswami Pillai has published English versions of Siva-jnana- 
bodham and Siva-jfL&na-siddhiyaT, while Mr. H. R. Hoisington of the 
American Mission has published an English version of £iva- 
prakasam. 


II. KANNADA 

The leanness of Kannada literature during the eleventh century 
offers a striking contrast to the splendid achievements of the tenth 
and the varied achievements of the twelfth century. However, 
there were two Brahmapa authors during this century, Nagavarma- 
charya and Chandraraja, who wrote respectively Chandrachudz- 
mani-$ataka, a poetic eulogy of vairagya, and Madana-Tilaka, a 
sheer tour de force in technique. During the twelfth and 
thirteenth centuries, there was a succession of eminent Jain 
writers, who nobly carried on the tradition of Pampa, Ponna and 
Ranna. But a new force was also discernible, and presently it 
made its mark in religion, social life, and literature. This was 
the rise of the Vlrasaiva or the Lingayat movement, inspired and 
organized by the great Basava. 

1. Vlrasaiva Literature 

Scholars like Dr. S. C. Nandimath hold that Basava was not 
the actual founder of the Vlrasaiva or Lingayat religion, but that 
he reorganised it and put it on firm foundations. 103 The Virasaivas 
look upon the Tamil Saiva Samayacharyas as their own spiritual 
guides. Besides, the Virasaivas trace their gotra from hoary semi¬ 
divine acharyas, like Revana, Manila, Ekorama, Panclita and Visves- 
vara. Originator or but reorganiser, Basava is certainly the 
dominating figure in the history of Vlrasaiva religion and litera¬ 
ture. 

Basava was born in a Brahmana family in a place called 
Ingaleshwar-Bagevadi in the Bijapur District about A.D. 1125. 
He refused to undergo the upanayanam ceremony and embraced 
the Vlrasaiva faith. He succeeded his uncle as Chief Minister to 
*ung Bijjala of Kalyana. He set up the Anubhava Montcipa, some¬ 
thing analogous to an academy of religious experience, to serve as 
the focal point of the Vlrasaiva religion. Its president was the 
venerable Allama Prabhu, spiritually the most austere among the 
Vlrasaiva teachers. Chief among Basava’s contemporaries were 
Channabasava, Siddharama, Harihara, Raghavanka, Padmarasa 


367 




s THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

nd the woman mystic and poet, Mahadevi Akka. Channabasava 
was the subtle metaphysician of the faith, while Mahadevi Akka 
was its piercingly radiant melodist. Some of the Virasaiva writers 
wrote poetry of the traditional patterns, to which we shall refer 
presently. But the vachana was the unique mode in which Vira- 
saiva writers and poets chose to express themselves. Thus arose 
a very considerable body of “vachana sastra” the work of as many 
as 213 distinct writers, consisting of “twice eighty crores” of 
vachanas. But only a fraction of this colossal output has survived. 
Even so, enough remains to give us an idea of the weight, the am¬ 
plitude and the spiritual depth of this unique literature. 

The vachana sastra no doubt embodied a new philosophy of 
life and religion, not indeed with the rigour and detail of a system, 
but rather through suggestions, exhortations, lyrical heart-search- 
ings, and ecstatic asseverations. The influence of Tamil devo¬ 
tional poetry like the Tevdram and Tiruvdchakam hymns is appa¬ 
rent in the vachanas sustained by bhakti . On the other hand, it is 
not unlikely that the philosophy of Visishtadvaita, as taught by 
Ramanu j ach&rya, gave a suggestive turn to the Virasaiva philoso¬ 
phy of the shatsthala. The shatsthala or the “‘six stages” are steps 
that the individual soul treads on its spiritual journey before it 
reaches and becomes one with God. The eager aspiring soul 
progresses from a feeling of isolation and wretchedness, through 
the intermediate stages of increasing awareness of and proximity 
to God, to the ineffable reality of God-realization and mukti. On 
the way, the devotee exploits the ashtavarana —the eight beneficial 
associates, e.g. the guru, the rudrdksha , the vibhuti, etc.—till at 
last he achieves bayalu nirbayalu or the peaceful void that defies 
and transcends mere understanding. In the social plane, Basava 
advocated the abolition of castes, extolled the dignity of labour, 
and gave women an equal status with men. 


Basava’s vachanas are about seven hundred in number. The 
term “vachana” means literally “sentence;” although a “vachana; 9 
taken by itself, is a pointed or casual observation, the vachana 
sequences appear to have a certain continuity and underlying in¬ 
tensity of purpose. Basava and his contemporaries, eager to reach 
the masses, used the expressive conversational idiom of their time, 
shorn of all Sanskritic profundity and pedantry. Giving up the 
regularity of traditional verse patterns, they nevertheless gave 
music and memorability to the vachanas by having recourse to 
alliteration, balance and antithesis. Like the Japanese haikku, 
the vachana is a unique literary form: like the verses in Tiruvallu- 


' ; ' .. 


368 



MiN/sr^ 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 




var’s Rural , the best vachanas, too, have gone into general currency. 
A few vachanas are here given in a free English rendering:— 


The fire enkindled in the hearth 

may be extinguished with the earth; 
Should the earth itself be ablaze, 

what charm can quench its rage away? 
Should the very embankment drain off 
the water in its confines, 

Should even the fence nibble away 
the corn stalks within, 

Should the mother’s own milk envenom 
her suckling child— 

Should thus the Preserver himself 
Destroyer turn, 

Where lies the anchor of my hope, 

O Lord, Ku^ala Sangama! 


Your grace can stir dry roots 

with the freshness of spring; 

From your grace can the sterile cow derive 
abundant milk; 

Poison itself can your grace transform 
into holy nectar. 

Your grace is the source of all good, 

O Lord, Ku$ala Sangama! 104 - 


Kudala Sangama was Basava’s tutelary deity, to whom he ad¬ 
dressed all his vachanas . Mahadevi Akka likewise addressed her 
vachanas to Mallikarjuna Deva. Here is a rendering of one of 
Mahadevi’s best-known vachanas: 


Ye parrots singing 

in mirthful ease; 

And oh ye swans 

frolicking near the lake; 

And ye joyous cuckoos 

piping full-throated; 

And ye proud peacocks 

strutting up and down in glee, 
over hill and dale— 
tell me, O tell me, 
ye one and all, 
did you ever chance to see, 
my lover, 

my own Chennamallikarjuna! 106 


S.E.— 24 


369 


<§L 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

One other example may be given,—from Allama Prafohu or , 
Prabhudeva. The Virasaiva teachers did not attach importance to 
fasting, dietary self-limitations, and other forms of penance. This 
is seen in the following vachana by Prabhudeva: 

“Those who take a vow of living on milk will be born as 
cats; those living on grams, will be reborn as horses: those 
living on flowers, will become bees; those living on water, will 
reappear as frogs. These shall never have knowledge of 
shafsthala. Guhesvara does not like those wanting in firm 
devotion.” 

Elsewhere Prabhudeva gives fervent expression to the idea of the 
omnipresence of God: 

“Deva! You are in fields, in valleys, in caves and in moun¬ 
tains; wherever we cast our eyes, there You are. Impossible to 
conceive; impossible to see. Here, there, everywhere You are, 

Oh Guhesvara!” 106 

Among other Virasaiva writers may be named Harihara, who 
probably belongs to the latter half of the twelfth century, and was 
the author of Girija-Kalyana and Sivasarana Ragalegalu. The for¬ 
mer is woven round the popular theme of the marriage of Siva and 
Parvatl, while the latter is a series of biographies in verse, comme¬ 
morating the lives of great Saiva and Virasaiva devotees. Harihara’s 
nephew, Raghavanka, is another great figure in Kannada poetry. His 
Harischandra-Kavya has been described as “the most fascinating and 
artistic presentation of that theme in the whole field of Indian lite¬ 
rature.^ 107 His other works include Somanatha Charite and Hari- 
hara~mahatva. It was Raghavanka who first used and popularized 
the shafpadl —the six-lined stanza—as a vehicle of Kannada verse. 

We have space now barely to mention Kereya Padmarasa, 
known also as Tarkika Chakravarti and Sarana Kavi, whose principal 
work is Dilcsha-bodhe in ragale form; Somesvara or Palkurike Soma, 
whose works include Basavannana Pancha Gadya, Sadguru Ragale, 

SiJa Sampadane and perhaps Somesvara Sataka as well; and Deva 
Kavi and Somaraja, both of whom wrote romances. 

2. Jain Writers 

During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, alongside of the 
Virasaiva vachanakaras, many Jain writers also flourished, some 
of them being among the greatest in Kannada literature. Naga- 
chandra 6r Pampa II (“Abhinava Pampa”) wrote Mallinatha 
Parana , the life-story of the nineteenth Tlrthankara, 107 * and a Jain 
version of the Rdmdyana with the title Rdmackandra-charita-purdnou 



370 




MiN/sr^ 



(popularly known as the Pampa Ramayaya). Nagachandra makes 
many departures from Valmiki’s Ramayana, partly with a view to 
emphasizing the Jain atmosphere of the poem and partly with a 
view to minimizing the supernatural elements in the original 
Sanskrit version. The Jain foot-rule with which every episode and 
every character is sought to be measured is apt to be irritating to 
readers familiar with Valmiki’s great national epic. However, 
Nagachandra s ethical tone is unassailable and its dignified style and 
champu form make it a popular literary treasure. Here is an ex¬ 
tract from the work in Mr. Rice’s effective English rendering: 

“Then Ahgada, heir to Kishkindha’s wide soil, 

Determines himself Ravan’s penance to spoil. 

He mounts on Kishkindha, his elephant proud; 

And round him his ape-bannered followers crowd. 

He rides through the suburbs of Lanka’s fair town, 

Admiring its beauty, its groves of renown. 

He enters the palace, goes alone to the fane; 

With reverence he walks round Santlsvara’s shrine, 

And in lowliness worships the image divine. 

When—sudden—he sees giant Ravaija there, 

Seated, still as some mountain, absorbed in his prayer!” 108 

Although there have been subsequent attempts to render the 
Ramayarta into Kannada, Nagachandra’s version still retains its 
position of pre-eminence. 

Prominent among other writers were Nemichandra, author of 
a romance called Lilavati; Janna, author of a Purana on the life of 
the fourteenth Tirthankara as also of the tragically rich poem 
Yasodhara-charitre; Kanti, a woman poet, who was Nagachandra’s 
contemporary; Nayasena, author of the ethical work Dharmamrita; 
and Nagavarma II and Kesiraja, authors respectively of the stan¬ 
dard grammatical works Karnataka Bhdsha Bhushana and Sabda- 
mariidarpana. Nagavarma II wrote also a treatise on poetics entitled 
K&vyavalokana, which remains the standard work on the subject. 
“Nothing is more striking”, says Mr. Lewis Rice, “than the wealth 
of quotation and illustration from previous authors which these 
grammatical writings contain, and this gives them a high scientific 
as well as historical value.” 109 

Throughout this period, Jain writers engaged themselves in 
the devout task of composing Puranas on the lives of the various 
Tirthankaras. Three Puranas were thus composed on the life of 


371 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Neminatha, the twenty-second Tlrthankara; Gunavarma II wrote the 
Pushpadanta Pur ana on the life of the ninth Tlrthankara; and 
Achanna and Kamalabhava wrote on the twenty-fourth and six¬ 
teenth Tirthankaras respectively. Karnaparya’s Neminatha Parana 
incidentally tells the Mahabharata story. 

Mallikarjuna, who lived about the middle of the thirteenth 
century, is known to fame as an anthologist. His Sukti-Sudharnava 
is the Kannada equivalent of a Golden Treasury from the Best 
Kannada Poets. 

III. TELUGU 
1. The Origin 

Telugu, the third of the Dravidian languages to attain a separate 
Individuality and forge its own unique history, is today spoken by 
a little under thirty millions, the great majority of whom are con¬ 
tained within “a semi-circle drawn with the line joining Rajah- 
mundry and Madras as diameter.” Adjoining areas like Hyderabad, 
Mysore, and Orissa account for a considerable number, while there 
are also Telugu-speaking people in small scattered groups all over 
Tamil Nad, just as there are the Podur Dravidas, speaking Tamil, 
in the Telugu country. 

While the Telugu country is called Andhra Desa, its language 
is referred to as Telugu. Much ink has spilt in the attempt to de¬ 
termine whether or not the Andhras and the Telugu-speaking people 
, are one and the same. Three hypotheses have been advanced, in. 
i this connection, on the origin of the Andhras, and these have been 
summarized as follows by the late Dr. C. R. Reddy: 

“(1) A North-Indian Aryan tribe with an Aryan language but 
which adopted non-Aryan culture and thus incurred the contempt 
of the Aryans; (2) A North-Indian non-Aryan tribe which adopted 
the culture and the language of the Aryans; and (3) A South-Indian 
tribe which assimilated Aryan culture and some elements of Prakrit, 
but retained both racially and linguistically its essential Dravidian. 
character.” 110 

The third of the above hypotheses seems to be closest to 
truth. Aryan and Dravidian have acted and reacted upon one 
another in the crucible of South India so long, and often with so 
much fury, that it is an idle enterprise today—and this is especially 
so ih the Telugu country—to seek to dissociate one constituent from 
the other. On the other hand, it seems no less idle to deny the 
Dravidian ancestry—near or remote—of the people as well as of the 
spoken language of Andhra Desa. 




372 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



Telugu, the language of the Andhras, is construed in. different 
ways* Tene in Telugu (like Ten in Tamil) means honey; hence 
Telugu is explained as the language that is as sweet as honey. 
Telugu is also derived from ‘Trilihga’, the country which contains 
the three lingas, at Srisaila, Kalesvara, and Draksharama respec¬ 
tively. The Telugu script is phonetic, after the manner of Sanskrit, 
and bears a close resemblance to the Kannada script. 

We referred in an earlier chapter 111 to the Agastya myth relat¬ 
ing to the origin of Tamil. There is a similar myth relating to the 
origin of Telugu, with even less plausibility. Agnimitra of the 
Krita Yuga, having become blind, prayed to Surya, the Sun-God. 
The latter taught Agnimitra a new language that had efficacy enough 
to restore his eyesight. This new language, Andhra Bhasha, as¬ 
sumes a new manifestation in every Yuga and the language of the 
Kali Yuga is supposed to be the handiwork of Nandivardharta and 
his pupil, Devala Raya. 

2. Desi and Mdrgi 

In their excellent handbook on Telugu Literature in the 
Heritage of India Series, Mr. P. Chenchiah and Raja Bhujanga Rao 
posit “the existence in Telugu literature of two streams; an earlier 
one called Desi, and a later one called Margi ”. u2 Desi literature 
was rural, popular and independent of Sanskrit. Here we feel the 
very heart-beats of the unsophisticated Telugu children of the soil. 
Folk-songs the world over have a certain unmistakable family resem¬ 
blance, since all alike derive their inspiration from what is elemental 
and permanent in human nature. The worker over the plough is 
busy in the countryside, the housewife in her humble cottage cooks 
a modest meal or lulls her child to sleep, and the maid and her man 
talk in terms of love even as they reap and bind the corn* Ageless 
and changeless, these basic realities remain. In Hardy’s words, 

Yet this will go onward the same 
Though Dynasties pass... 

War’s annals will fade into night 
Ere their story die. 

Likewise, the various strains of Desi poetry in Telugu—the 
Ldli Ptitalu (Songs of the Cradle), Javalilu (Love songs), Udupu 
Patalu (Harvest songs), etc.—are as life-giving and perennial as the 
air itself. This Desi or indigenous Telugu literature had “affinity 
with the Dravidian rather than Aryan literature,” 113 since as a rule 
foreign influences do not easily reach the rural population, and this 


373 



miSTty 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


was particularly so in those remote times when means of transport 
and agencies for the dissemination of culture were primitive or scanty. 


The Margi literature was a deliberate concoction at first—a 
rich, exotic and stimulating beverage, meant for the sophisticated 
court and urban population. Nanniah’s Mahabkarata, which was 
composed in the first quarter of the eleventh century, stands at the 
head of Margi literature. A classic like that could not have emerged 
out of a mere vacuum. The inscriptions of Yuddha-Malla and 
Mopur take Margi literature back by a century. And yet, however 
reason may demur, it does appear as though it was Nanniah who, 
working no doubt on a few indifferent models, organized and gave 
form and life to this heavily Sanskritized Margi literature. The 
religious revival was then in full swing. There was an extraordi¬ 
nary desire on the part of the sophisticated to be initiated into the 
mysteries of Sanskrit literature. The Mahabh&rata of Vyasa was 
the ‘open sesame’ to the splendours, the mysteries, the ardours and 
the achievements of the Aryans; and its encyclopaedic range, its in¬ 
numerable evocations of humanity in its diverse attitudes and alti¬ 
tudes, its heights of ethical striving, its tense dramatic situations, 
its vaulting poetry and sobering thought, all seized Nanniah’s ima¬ 
gination and set it aflame. And at that moment formal Telugu lite¬ 
rature was born. 


3 . Telugu Mahabharatam 

Although Nanniah began the great work of giving Vyasa’s 
Mahdbharata a Telugu habitation and a name, he was able to com¬ 
plete only the first two parvas (cantos) and a part of the third, the 
Aranya Parva . Various superstitions are current about the Mahd¬ 
bharata. It is said, for instance, that the whole epic should not be 
read at one stretch, that the Arpnya Parva is something of a dyna¬ 
mite to be handled with care! Nanniah ignored this convention, and 
lo! he became mad and was thereby prevented from completing his 
translation of the third canto and of the epic as a whole. Thus for 
two centuries the Telugu Mahabharatam remained where Nanniah 
had left it. In the latter half of the thirteenth century, however, 
there arose another poet, Tikkanna, who was quite the peer of 
Nanniah. Beginning with the fourth, the Virata Parva , Tikkanna 
completed the translation of the fifteen cantos left untouched by 
Nanniah. It was Errapragada who, fifty years after Tikkanna, took 
up the unfinished Aranya Parva and put the coping stone to the 
grand and glittering arch of the Telugu Mahabharatam . 

Nanniah, Tikkanna and Errapragada (Errana) are the Great 
Trio or the “Kavi Traya” of Telugu literature. Nanniah lived in 


374 


MIN ISTfy 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE v 

reign of Rajaraja Narendra, the Chalukyan ruler of Vengl, and 
attempted his Mahabharata translation on the king's suggestion. It 
is not unlikely that he received some help from his friend, Narayana 
Bhat. Although other works are attributed to Nanniah, he is re¬ 
membered and honoured as the first of the Great Three who reduced 
Vyasa's epic into draksha paka in mellifluous and all but transparent 
Telugu. Although he uses more Sanskrit than Telugu words—in the 
proportion of two to one—his simplicity and ease are irresistible. 
Like Nanniah, Tikkanna also was a Brahmai?a, and in addition to his 


contribution to the Telugu Mahdbhdratavfi 3 he wrote a poem covering 
Rama's life after his triumphant return from Lanka. His style is 
described as that of an intellectual. Tikkanna was not unfamiliar 
with statecraft, and used this knowledge with advantage in his 
rendering of the Udyoga Parva. His style, although realistic, is often 
knotted with a pregnant obscurity and ruggedness. There are times, 
however, when his work is suffused with passion and emotion. The 
scene of the wooing of Draupadi by Kichaka is rightly famous, and 
Dr. P. T, Raju translates a passage from this scene as follows: 


“O delicate Maid! Why glance you not at me, 

The lustrous beauty of your white eyes displaying? 

Why does not your sweet smile double the beauty of your face? 
Lotus-eyed one! Why speak you not Love's word, 

The rays of your pearly teeth accompanying? 

Lotus-faced Lady! Why do you not hint 
Playfully the love of your heart?" 

Thus speaking, the rogue, Kichaka, makes eyes, 

Approaches and longs to hear her sweet words. 114 


Tikkanna's characters and situations are never wooden but are 
rather endowed with abounding vitality. Errana, too, like the 
others, was a Brahmana and besides finishing the Aranya Parva com¬ 
posed two more works, Harivamsa and Nrisimha Purana or Ahobala 
Mdhdtmya. His style is said to be “a happy blend of the styles of 
Nanniah and Tikkanna." 116 Popular appreciation has given these 
three poets titles like Vaganusasana or the lawgiver of the language, 
Kavibrahma or the poet-creator and Prabandha-Paramesvara or 
the supreme lord of the Prabandha. It may be noted here that all 
the three contributors to the Telugu Mahabharatam wrote in the 
champu form, a singular but convincing mixture of prose and 
poetry. The Telugu version is not close to the original like a para¬ 
phrase, but is close in form, spirit, and the general arrangement of 
scenes and even sequence of ideas. There is less philosophy, more 


37 5 




MINIStyj, 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

luxurious description, less depth but more humanity. Just as there 
are partisans of Kamban who say that his Tamil Ramayana is supe¬ 
rior to Valmiki’s, there are not wanting Telugu scholars who claim 
for the Telugu Mahabharatam superiority over Vyasa’s original. 
Kamban, Nanniah, Tikkanna and Errana would themselves be 
shocked by such partisanship, and indeed such judgments defeat 
their purpose. Outstanding as all of them are, Nanniah is the first 
of the Telugu poets and Tikkanna the greatest,—holding positions 
analogous as it were to those held respectively by Chaucer and 
Shakespeare in English literature. And, in fact, Nanniah has been 
described as being more of a poet and Tikkanna as being more of a 
dramatist . 116 

4. The Eleventh and Twelfth Centuries 

Apart from the great work of Nanniah, these two centuries saw 
little original literary activity in the Telugu country. At any rate, 
they are “terra incognita in Telugu literary history .” 117 How¬ 
ever, mention must be made of Pavuluru Mallanna and Eluganti 
Peddanna, both of whom wrote Mathematical treatises in Telugu, 
based on or translated from Sanskrit originals. The twelfth century 
saw the rise of Virasaivism in the Kannada country, and this faith, 
along with the earlier Vaishnava movement initiated by Ramanuja, 
exerted no little influence on Telugu life and letters. Pratapa- 
rudra, the Kakatlya prince, and Somanatha were both Virasaiva 
writers, the latter of whom wrote Basava Puvdiia and Anubhava 
Sara in Telugu. Another twelfth century poet was Nannechoda, 
whose chief work is Kumarasambhavam. This work was only re¬ 
cently discovered by Ramakrishna Kavi in the library of Raja 
Sarbhoji at Tanjore . 118 At one time it was believed to be a pre- 
Nanniah work, but authoritative opinion now gives it a much later 
date, between Nanniah and Tikkanna. Although obviously inspired 
by Kalidasa’s poem, Nannechoda’s Kumar asambhavam is by no 
means a mere copy or slavish imitation of the older and greater poet. 
The following translation of the passage describing the flight of the 
discomfited gods from Daksha’s sacrifice may be quoted in illustra¬ 
tion of Nannechoda’s graphic art: 

Brahma ran to mount his swan and fell 
In fear trembling ... 

Vishnu escaped creeping ... 

To his white elephant Indra ran 

And with his thousand eyes like a peacock appeared 

By hunters chased to the White Mount escaping. 




876 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



like a coward fell across 
His buffalo, while the Ganas hooted. 

He forgot the saddle and the stirrup 
In a hurry of fear. 

Like a weaver Varuna fled ... 

To mount his man Kubera forgot; 

He placed him on his own shoulders instead 
And fled in consternation. 119 


5. The Thirteenth Century 


During the thirteenth century two meritorious versions of the 
Ramayana appeared, and both have maintained their popularity till 
the present time. Of these, the version in couplets attributed to 
Rahganatha is the earlier, and is said to be particularly popular 
in the Ceded Districts. Rahganatha was apparently the court-poet 
of a chieftain by name Buddharaju, and perhaps his guru as well. 
Buddharaju’s sons later added the JJttara Kanda; and from this fact 
it is sometimes argued that Buddharaju himself wrote the earlier 
Kandas and dedicated the work to Rahganatha out of respect. The 
other version of the Ramayana , although a composite work which 
claimed the labours of Hulakki Bhaskara, his son Mallikarjuna- 
bhatta, his friend and his friend's disciple, Ayyalarya and Rudra- 
deva respectively, is nevertheless known as Bhdskara-Rdmayanam. 
This work is in champu form. Although widely read, the two ver¬ 
sions of the Ramayana do not, either of them, reach up to the beauty 
or grandeur of the Telugu Mahdbhdratam. 

Of other thirteenth century writers we may make a passing 
reference to Atharvana, who wrote a grammatical treatise; Ketana, 
who rendered Dandin’s Dasakumdra-charita into Telugu; Beddanna, 
who wrote a book of political aphorisms; Marana, who wrote the 
Markaiideya Puruna; and Manchanna who wrote the Keyurabdhu- 
charita . 


D. NISHADA AND K1RATA 


The cultivated languages of India, Aryan and Dravidian, are 
alone capable of being historically treated in their origins and in 
their early literatures. But for the uncultivated speeches, Dravidian 
on the one hand and Nishada or Austric (Kol or Mun^a, and Khasi) 
and Kirata or Indo-Mongoloid (Sino-Tibetan—Tibeto-Burman and 
Thai) on the other, there is no history. We have no indication what¬ 
ever about the lesser known and backward Dravidian tongues— 


377 


/ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Tulu, Kodagu, Kota, Toda, Kolami, Gondi, Kuvi or Kandh, Oraon, 
Malto and Brahui. It is not unlikely that Kodagu, Toda and Kota 
formed one speech, which approached much more Chen-tamizh and 
Pazhagannada, and Gondi, Kuvi, Oraon and Malto were equally a 
single speech or close dialects of one common North-East Dravidian 
speech. Tulu was nearer Kannada than now, Kolami was merged 
in early Telugu, and Brahui was maintaining a separate and 
vigorous existence over a wider area in Baluchistan and Sindh. As 
there are no specimens of these dialects or speeches available for 
any period prior to the middle of the last century when European 
writers and missionaries took note of them, it is impossible to find 
out in what condition they were nearly a thousand years ago. Topo- 
nomy of the areas where they live and of the surrounding tracts 
might only furnish meagre but nevertheless some very precious 
material for their study. 

The situation is analogous, though even worse, for the Nishada 
and Kirata speeches. As short and convenient native Indian terms, 
indicating the fiinguistico-ethnico-culturaT groups of the Indian 
Austro-Asiatics and the Indo-Mongoloids respectively in their sepa¬ 
rate ensembles, we shall be using these ancient Sanskrit words, 
which have on the whole quite a precise employ from very early 
times. The Nishada speeches were probably in three groups; a 
Kherwari group including Santali, Mundari, Ho, Bhumij, etc., the 
‘KoF speeches of the present day; a Korku group, including Korku of 
the present day and possibly the lost Bhil speeches of Malwa and 
Rajasthan; and the Gadaba-Savara group of Orissa. The difference 
between these groups was very slight a thousand or eight hundred 
years ago. The Nishada people appear to have been spread over 
the whole of India from the Punjab and Kashmir in the North-West 
through the Ganga valley right up to Assam and Burma, with rami¬ 
fications in Central India, the Deccan and South India, and large 
masses of them, more or less mixed with the Dravidians who came 
later and settled among them also in North India (although South 
India we find to be the place where large masses of Dravidian 
speakers were established), became ultimately Aryanised in speech 
and were transformed into the present-day Hindu and other Indian 
people of North India. This was happening ever since the Aryans 
came into India and started expanding along the valley of the 
Ganga. While the transformation was steadily going on, with sub¬ 
stitution of the Nishada (and in the sub-Himalayan slopes and in 
Eastern India of the Kirata, who in those days were divisible into 
a smaller number of groups than at present when speech-differen¬ 
tiation has brought in a large number of dialects) speeches by dia¬ 
lects of Middle Indo-Aryan and then New Indo-Aryan, there was 




378 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE VS 

attempt to preserve specimens of these decaying or moribund 
non-Aryan speeches for which no one, not even its speakers, felt 
any sympathy or interest or curiosity. In this way pockets of 
non-Aryan speech in a more or less Aryanised North India were 
being liquidated, and those non-Aryan speeches, Nishada and Kirata, 
as such, were not preserved even as specimens, being the despised 
vulgar speeches of backward or aboriginal castes or tribes; and any 
oral or written literature which may have existed in them was 
not taken note of. But judging from what we see in later times, 
it is easy and perfectly allowable to assume that the Nishada and 
KirSta peoples, where they were not absorbed in an Aryan-speaking 
Hindu people, did possess a mass of oral literature, as an expression 
of their cultural and socio-religious life—their communal existence. 
Songs, religious and secular (the latter relating to love, hunt, war 
and other matters of fundamental importance to a primitive commu¬ 
nity), were doubtless there, but these have not survived when the 
language passed out of existence, though some of the cachets, the 
situations and figures, and perhaps, metres, may have survived in 
the folk literature in the Aryan vernaculars replacing the non-Aryan 
ones. And the more serious religious literature, including narration 
(in prose or verse, or in both) of legends relating to the creation 
and beginning of things, to the Gods and Goddesses and to Heroes 
and Heroines, possessing a “story stuff” which cannot be lost even 
in translation, would appear to have been adopted in the Aryan 
speeches and to have formed the basis of those popular legends 
and stories relating to divine or semi-divine beings and heroes 
which still live on in the mouths of the people as something essen¬ 
tially connected with their village cults—the legends of the grama - 
devatas and of the persons who obtained their favour. These 
village cults have all been loosely linked up with Puranic Hindu¬ 
ism. In an earlier epoch, prior to A.D. 1000, pre-Aryan legends 
were rendered from current Prakrit versions into Sanskrit and 
found a place in one or the other of the numerous Puranas, Upa- 
purdnas, Sthala-puranas and Mdhdtmyas, and Tantras or even in the 
Mahabharata, and so were raised up to a level of pan-Indian accept¬ 
ance. The old method of adapting popular legends into a common 
Indian heritage of the Sanskrit Puranas continued during the period 
under review, and even beyond that! Witness works like the 
Yogirii-tantra and the Kdlika Purama, and the later Brahmavaivarta 
Purana which all probably belong to this side of the tenth century. 
When these legends and tales could not be exalted to a place in the 
Sanskrit Puranas they were taken over in books in the New Indo- 
Aryan languages which started'extending their literary career from 
this period—books of a supplementary Puranic character like the 


379 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Purctnu of Bengal—in which some legends and cults of pre- 
Aryan Bengal have found a place. A conscious and compact lite¬ 
rary life of the Nishadas and Kiratas as they were becoming Aryan- 
ised cannot reasonably be expected, and there has been quite a 
large inroad of Aryan or Hindu stories and ideas into the original 
mythology and ideology of even those Nishada and Kirata tribes or 
groups which have not formally declared themselves to be Hindu 
or have not been affiliated to Hindudom formally or loosely. Such 
legends are now being collected by Christian Missionaries and 
others, and by scientific ethnologists and anthropologists, from the 
third quarter of the last century onwards. L. O. Skrefsrud and 
P. O. Bodding, J. Hoffmann and A. Nottrott, and Sarat Chandra Roy 
worked among the Kol tribes; Hutton and Mills, Playfair and Endle, 
Stack and Lyall, Gurdon and Shakespeare and Smith among the 
Assam tribes; and recently Verrier Elwin, Shamrao Hivale and W. 
W. Archer have been collecting the folk-tales and songs of the 
Nishada and Kirata peoples of the present day—folk-tales and songs 
which may go back (at least in the case of the tribal legends) to the 
period A.D. 1000-1300, and even earlier. The true implication. of 
these legends and tales has been grasped by Verrier Elwin who, on 
the basis of these as culled from among the Gondi and other non- 
Aryan speaking as well as Aryan-speaking tribes and castes of the 
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Bihar, is compiling what he has quite 
properly and felicitously called ‘an Aboriginal Purania.’ 

Thus in the non-cultivated pre-Aryan Nishada speeches like 
‘Old Kol’ (or Old Kherwari) in which were merged the Santali, 
Mundari, Ho, Kharia and other speeches of the future, ‘Old Bhil’ 
which survives in Korku, and ‘Old Savara’ from which are descend¬ 
ed Gadaba and Sora, there was in all probability an oral literature 
of legends and tales and songs and poems, the prototype of similar 
literature at the present day. Unfortunately none of these Nishada 
languages were ever written down prior to the middle of the last 
century. So nothing more can be said about them. 

With regard to the Kirata speeches in India, the situation 
appears more promising. The earlier the age, the smaller- is the 
number of dialects and languages in a speech family or in one of 
its branches. Eight hundred years from now, probably there was 
a single Naga speech and not the large number of distinct Naga 
speeches or dialects that we see now. So the Bodo speeches of to¬ 
day, the various dialects known as Bodo, Rabha, Mech, Koch, Garo, 
Kachari or Dimasa and Tipra or Mrung, were not yet developed—• 
there was a single Bodo speech, eight hundred years ago, and this 
will be quite reasonable to accept. And this single Bodo, a sort of 




380 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE ^ 

Bodo or Old Bodo, and Old Naga as one and undivided speech, 
were closer to each other than now. The various Kuki or Chin 
dialects of which Meithei or Manipuri is the most advanced speech 
now, formed likewise a single speech, a sort of 'Old Khyan’. The 
position of the other members of the Kirata family is not known— 
e.g. Mikir and the North Assam Speeches, as well as the various 
groups of the Nepal and Sikkim dialects. The language the Ahoms 
brought was Shan, and Old Shan of those days was the same as Old 
Thai or Old Siamese. The Austric (Mon-Khmer) Khasi and Syn- 


teng were also one language which we may call 'Zainteng’ or 'Old 
Jaintia’—an Austro-Asiatic speech spoken by a Kirata people. 

Of all these speeches, three only have written characters—the 
Newari of Nepal, Lepcha of Sikkim and Darjeeling, and Meithei or 
Manipuri of Manipur. The Newars were the original people of 
Central and East Nepal. In the centuries round about Christ and 
during the early Christian centuries, their tribal name Nepala , 
whatever its origin, gave the name to the country. Later, prob¬ 
ably after A.D. 1000, Nepala , or Nepal changed to Newar , and now 
it has been further altered in Newari mouths to Newah . The earlier 
kings of Nepal were either pure Kiratas or mixed Hindu and Kirata. 
Retaining their Kirata (Tibeto-Burman) speech, they came in line 
with the people of Hindu civilization probably 2000 years ago, and 
gradually adopted the Indian script and borrowed words from the 
Aryan language (Sanskrit, the Prakrits and the Bhashas or Modern 
Indo-Aryan speeches like Maithili, Bengali, Kosali, and Gorkhali). 
Sanskrit and other Aryan words now form near about half of its 
vocabulary, if not more, and all its culture-words came from San¬ 
skrit. The Nepali or Newari scholars, prior to the establishment 
of Gorkha rule in A.D. 1767, not only preserved for posterity the San¬ 
skrit literature of Mahayana Buddhism, but also increased its ex¬ 
tent by composing original works and commentaries; and they also 
cultivated their own Kirata language, Newari, and the New Indo- 
Aryan speeches, viz . Bengali, Maithili and Eastern Hindi, and recent¬ 
ly Gorkhali. We may be allowed to assume the existence of a 
Newari literature during A.D. 1000-1300, considering the earlier cul¬ 
tural history of Nepal and the later vigorous literary cultivation of 
Newari in the seventeenth-eighteenth centuries. The oldest Newari 
book that has come to us is a chronicle going back to the eighties of 
the fourteenth century. There is still a rich mass of unexplored 
Newari literature in Nepal and elsewhere, and it is quite conceiv¬ 
able that Newari works going back to the period under review will 
be available. During the early centuries of Turki conquest, Nepal 
was outside the pale of operations of the Turks, but early in the 
fourteenth century, we have repercussions of events in India affect- 


381 




MIN iSTQy 


' Go k^X 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

mg Nepal also, as Hari Singh, king of Mithila, retired into Nepal 
and carved out a kingdom there for himself when his own realm 
was conquered by the Turks (A.D. 1324), 

The Turks came in touch with Assam early in the thirteenth 
century when Ikhtiyar-ud-dln ibn Muhammad Bakhtyar Khaljl, the 
conqueror of West Bengal, made a most ill-conceived expedition 
into Assam, and met with disaster from the Bodo people and their 
rulers. The Ahoms, a Shan people speaking a form of Siamese, were 
not yet in West Assam, having established themselves in East 
Assam in A.D. 1228. The Bodo people, who formed by far the 
largest and most compact Kirata element in North Bengal and 
Assam (Brahmaputra Valley), had already been largely Hinduised, 
but they were rapidly adopting the Aryan language in the form of 
Old Bengali and Old Assamese, and no record of their oral literature 
has been preserved; probably their language was never written 
down, so that it is not possible to say anything about the earlier 
literature in a Bodo speech. In later times, Ahom, the language 
of the new conqueror of the Brahmaputra valley from the east, 
predominated over other Kirata languages, and the Bodo-speaking 
people and their rulers everywhere became supporters of the Aryan 
speech—the Koches, Tipras and Kacharis adopting Bengali, and the 
Habhas, Meches and others adopting Assamese. The Tripura rul¬ 
ing house formally accepted Bengali as their cultural and court lan¬ 
guage from the fifteenth century. 

The Ahom power was established in Assam in the thirteenth 
century. The Ahoms brought their own script (a form of the 
Indian alphabet as adopted by the Thai people from the Khmers of 
the South), and their priests had the living tradition of handing 
down the tribal or national chronicles, called in Ahom Buranjis. 
A number of these Buranjis in Ahom are extant; only one, a late 
one, has been edited and published with an English translation. 
The Buranji literature of Ahom may go back to the thirteenth century, 
but not a single one as old as that is preserved. The Ahoms gra¬ 
dually took up the Aryan Assamese and became completely Hindu¬ 
ised; and their language, preserved till recently only by the fami¬ 
lies of Old Ahom deodhais who ministered to the old tribal religion 
(more and more brought in line with official Brahmanism), is now 
obsolete. But the tradition of writing histories. together with the 
word Buranji meaning “history, or history-book/’ was passed on 
to the Aryan Assamese language from the sixteenth century on¬ 
wards. We have no record of any other kind of literature in 
Ahom. 




382 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 

The Meitheis, the ruling people of Manipur, claim to have been 
in possession of the country from the beginning, and the present 
ruling house traces its origin to Arjuna, the hero of the Mahabha- 
rata. Definite dates are assigned to the rulers of this line from the 
second century A.D., and these become plausible only from the 
tenth century, previous to which kings are made to rule for long 
periods of 99 or 118 or more years which are not humanly possible. 
A fairly early affiliation of the Kuki people of Manipur and the 
Indo-Burman borderland, east of the Botfos, to Gangetic Hindudom 
is quite likely, considering that Hindu (Brahmanical and Buddhist) 
religion and culture passed on through overland routes along the 
Paftikera kingdom (Comilla and Sylhet Districts) through Manipur 
hilis at least in the early centuries of the Christian era. Meithei 
legends, of proper Kirata origin, were synthesised with Hindu 
Purina and Mahabharata legends to give what may be called a 
Manipura Purina,, such as we find in a floating oral form among 
Manipur people (who are now staunch Vaishnavas of the Gaudlya or 
Bengal School, followers of Chaitanya) and in a written form in a 
Manipur chronicle like the late Vijaya-panchaln. In this, the Meithei 
gods have been identified with Puranic deities, and old legends 
not known outside Manipur have been retained. From the days 
of a lengendary king who reigned for 120 years in the second 
century A.D., viz. Pakhangba, known also by his Sanskrit name of 
Yavishfha, a kind of register of records, called the Cheitharol 
Kumpaba, was first started. The early history of Hinduism among 
the Kuki-Chin Meitheis is not known. It is certain that during 
the reign of Kiyamba (fifteenth century—he is credited with an in¬ 
credibly long reign) Vaishnavism was already established in the 
Manipur royal house. Manipuri is now written in the Bengali script, 
which replaced an earlier script, in which the language is said to 
have been written down to about A.D. 1700, during the reign of king 
Charairongba or Pitambara Simha in the second half of the eighteen¬ 
th century. This old and now obsolete alphabet of Manipur is based 
on the Indian system, but the letters have peculiar shapes, and its 
exact affinities are not known. Takhelgnamba and Samsokgnamba 
are two chronicles, among the oldest MSS. in Manipuri in this old 
script, but their exact time is not known. Manipuri has a rich 
ballad literature, and the popular ballads dealing with the romantic 
loves and adventures of the hero Khamba and the Princess Thoibi 
may in their original forms go back to the second half of the twelfth 
century. Khamba and Thoibi lived during the reign of king Lo- 
yamba who ruled from A.D. 1127 to 1154, so that centering round 
the story of Khamba and Thoibi a popular literature may have com¬ 
menced in Manipuri during the twelfth century. 




383 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Siamese, Burmese and Tibetan are three great Sino-Tibetan 
languages outside India which use forms of the Indian alphabet. 
Among Indian Sino-Tibetan or Kirata speeches, Newari, Manipuri 
and Lepcha of Sikkim became written languages through indigen¬ 
ous enterprise. The Lepcha script was devised early in the 
eighteenth century by a king of Sikkim, and its history falls outside 
the scope of the present chapter. Only for Newari and Manipuri 
we can assume some literary life at least during the period under 
review. 


The Khasi people (as Jaintias) came under Hindu influence 
from the fifteenth century ; prior to that there is no evidence of any 
literature in the Khasi speech. In the eighteenth century the 
Bengali script was used in writing Khasi, but from the second half 
of the nineteenth, Christian missionaries have given it a literature 
and stabilised the language by writing and printing it in the 
Roman alphabet. 


1. Vol. iv, Ch. IX. 

2. The Utturanaishadhxya was written by Vandaru Bhatta in the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury. It consists of sixteen cantos. 

3. Keith, HSL. 140. 

4. For a list of the works of Kshemendra, see De, SP, I. 139-43; Kane, HAL. 
XCVIII f; HSP. 254 f. Kshemendra is again referred to while dealing with 
poetry, poetics, story literature, etc. 

5. Keith (HSL. 137) gives the name as Jayaratha. But the printed text (KM, 
1897) and Buhler’s account have the form Jayadratha. According to De (HSL. 
323 n 2) our author was probably the brother of Jayaratha, the commentator 
on Abhinavagupta’s Tantraloka and Ruyyaka’s Alayhkdrasarvasva. 

6. HSL. 332; contra, Das Gupta, op. cit. 678; Keith, HSL. 173. 

7. Code, 1C, VII. 327-33; 447-56; De, HSL. 332; Das Gupta, op. cit. 617; Keith, HSL. 
137; Wintemitz, GIL, III. 73; Krishnamachariar, HCSL. 193. 

8. Kurndrapdlapratibodha, intr; Krishnamachariar, HCSL. 193. 

9. This Vagbhata, who wrote under Jayasimha of Gujarat, need not necessarily 
be identified with the author of the Vagbhatdlarhkdm . Tire Dharmasarmd- 
bhyudaya of Harichandra, describing the life of Dharmanatha, perhaps belongs 
to the fifth or sixth century A.D. cf. Krishnamachariar, HCSL. 146. The Padya- 
chudamani, dealing with the life of Buddha, is ascribed to Buddhaghosha, but 
his identity with the great Pali scholar may be doubted. 

10. For an account of the Jain writers in Sanskrit of the period, see Winternitz, 
HIL, II. 512 ff; 535 f; 555 ff; Krishnamachariar, HCSL. 196 ff. Historical Kavyas 
by Jain writers have been considered in the next section. 

11. Cf. HCSL. 477. 

12. De, HBR. 370. 

13. Keith, HSL. 194 f. 

14. De, JRAS , 1927. 471-7; BSOS, V. 499 f; HSL. 413; contra, Keith, BSOS, V. 27 f. 

15. Fifth edition, p. xx, Leipzig, 1924, 

16. See Vol. IV, pp. 97-8, 183. 

17. See above, pp. 174-7. 

38. Keith, HSL . 161. For an appreciation of Kalhana, cf. Vol. I, pp. 49-50. 

19. See above, pp. 31-2. 

20. Belvalkar conjectured Jayanaka to be the author; the new edition of the poem 
from Ajmer also makes Jayanaka the author. Cf. De, HSL. 360 n 2. 

21. Thi.< along with his Lalitaratnaviala, is known only in name. 

22. And hence identical with the author of Chandraloka. , a popular text-book on 
rhetoric. Cf. De, SP, I. 215 ff; HSL. 462. 

23. The Viravijaya of Krishnamisra and the Sarvavinodanataka of Krishna Ava- 
dhuta are of the same type. 


384 



LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



33. 

33a 

34. 

34a 

35. 

36. 

37. 

38. 


39. 

40. 
40a, 

40b. 

40c. 

41. 

42. 

43. 


44. 

45. 


46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 
49a. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 
54a. 
54 b. 
54c. 
54d, 
54e. 


54f. 

54g. 


The Krishnavijaya of Venkafavarada and the Manmathonmathana of Rama are 
the late varieties of Dima. 

Vol. IV, pp. 180-1. * 

Cf. De, “The Problem of the Mahanataka,” HIQ, VII, Nos. 3 and 4 

Hertel, Streitberg Festgabe , pp. 135 ff, referred to by Keith, HSL, Preface, xi-xii. 

Edgerton, HOS, 26, p. lii. 

For an attempt to reconstruct the original Panchatantra, see Edgerton, the 
Panchatantra Reconstructed , 1924. 

2 1 ? 6 was into Pahlavi as early as the sixth century A.D. and 

H 11 ? Pahlavi translation formed the basis for all other foreign versions (cf. 

voi. lii, p, ). 

R. Sarma, Kalpadrukosa, intro, xxvii. 

. Edited by E. D. Kulkarni. Poona, 1955. 

Cf. op. cit. xl; Gode refers to the quotation from the Medinl in the Varna - 
ratnakara, _ a Maithili work, by Jyotirisvara Kavisekharacharya who was patro¬ 
nised by Harisimhacleva (between A.D. 1300-1325)— N1A, VII. 171-5. 

According to Pathak, Dhanahjaya Srutakirti Traividya wrote the poem shortly 
after 1045 Saka (=: A.D. 1123)— 1A, XIV. 14. y 

. Edited by M. M. Patkar. Poona, 1953. 

one Srutaklrti in A.D. 1123—See previous footnote; also Belvalkar, 

ooCr. 88. 

t. Edited by G. B. Palsule. Poona, 1954. 

SP, I. 337. 

See above, pp. 66-7. 

Kane, HAL. CHI f; HSP. 257-60; De, SP , I. 164-7. 

Cf. Kane (HAL. CV, HSP. 261) who, on the evidence of ancient MSS., considers 
Aiaxa to be as good a Kashmirian name as Alata. De, however, prefers the form 
row? Alaka and Alafa, as it is given in Stein’s Jammu MS (SP, I. 163). 

Mamma * a > See De, SP, I. 157-60; Kane, HAL. 

< vl HSP. 263; Kp^+h. HS L. 394 

Cf. Kane, HAL , CVin-CX; HSP. 265-7, 

SeeJayaddman, edited with introduction, list and index of Sanskrit metres, etc. 
Cf pp°' l 270 'ft 9 kar * and P ubnshed b y ^ Haritosh Samiti (Bombay, 1949). 

Edited by E. D. Kulkarni. Poona, 1953. 

Vol. IV, pp. 201-2. 

Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, Ch. IV. 

For the works of Bhoja, see Kane, HAL. XCVII f, HSP. 249-52; KHDS, I. 276 f* 
719; Catalogus Catalogorum, I. 418; II. 95: III. 90; Bhoja Raja. 69 f; EL I. 231 f : 
VIII. 241-60; Krishnamachariar, HCSL. 500-4; 750 f; 845. 

Kanethinks, with some hesitation, Balarupa to be identical with Balaka (KHDS, 

I. 285). 

De, HBR, I. 357 n 2; also Kane, KHDS, I. 297 f. Halayudha, the author of Brdh- 
manasarvasva and other works, who was the Dharmadhyaksha of Lakshamana- 
sena, has been considered later in this section. 

Kane, KHDS, III. xviii. 

See above, pp. 52-3. 

See above pp. 174-7. 

KrityakaIpataru, Danakantfa, Intr. 24-35; KHDS, I. 290; IV. p. x. 

Cf. pp. 290, 293 f. 

D- in HBR. ]. p. 323; Kane, KHDS, I. 325-7; ITT. xii. 

HBR } 353. For Vratasdgara, cf. 1C, XI. 144; IHQ, XXVI. 330. 

Vyavahdranirnaya, intr. xlix ff; KHDS, III. xix; Gode, Mimdnsd Prakdsa, in. 

lu—lo- 

For other views, cf. HCSL. 293, f.n. 7. 

above, p. ^78. 

Above, Vol. IV. 210. 

For a discussion of the date of this work, cf. Vol. III. 400. 

HPL, II. 613. 

Above, Vol. III. 398. 

The Bhakti Sataka by Ramachandra Kavibharati is in Sanskrit. The author is 
r» i 1 ® rabjrn * n the thirteenth cent. A.D. who was later converted to 
■Buddhism. In stanzas written in ornate style it praises Buddha as the great 
teacher and saviour of mankind. 

Above, Vol. IV. 211. 

Law, HPL, 11, 609-10. Above, Vol. HI. 401. 


S.E.—25 


385 





<SL 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


54h 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 
60a 
61. 
62. 

63. 

64. 
64a 
65 

66 . 


67. 


l 'AnX^Mahlkm-'chlnta was written by Devendra Ga^in in AJ>,.1085 . 

Nos 9 ll. ll and 14 to Apabhiamsa works listed here have been added 

^wSfi- in bad 

Sanskrit with Prakrit verses. , mT re 

Identified with Valad in Ahmedabad District. NUJ, VIII. 81 ff. 

..Above, Vol. IV. 218. 

H. D. Velankar, ABORI, IX. 272-280. 

Cf. NUJ , VIII. 81 ff. 

Cf. NUJ, VIII. 81 ff. 

Cf. Saralesaimafca, Preface, p. 13. 

"M„«hl-Gr.n l b,-suehl" by Shankar G.««h Date. 

Poona, 1943. 

For unpublished works, see: - u;> -d,. r* K Phandorkar It deals 

(i) ‘Maharashtriya Santa-kavi-kavya-suchi -By G. K. Chandorkar. « 

' with authors and their works ranging from Saka 1100 w> Saka 
(ii) Ramadasi Samsodhana, Vols. I-II, Uhuua. _ Vnk I-II 

(iii) M. S. Sarasvati-Mahal Library Tanjore, Marafhi Catalogue, Vols. • 

<V| SwC S* Dhulia, Deccan College roelgradual. Mi Kecmh 

S&s^tsfc. ss^sasy^A ss jjss 

Introduction ^f^nadeW’-A critical and Philological Edition of Jnanesvari, 
Chapter I, pages 73-76, by R. G. Harshe. 

For further information consult: , , 

& WL*.««— W ***** 

(iii) '“Ancient Civilization and Geography of Maharashtra,” by P. V. Kane, 
JBBRAS, No. 21. 

(iv) Prachina Maharashtra, by S. V. Ketkar. _ ,. . p tj Gune, 

(v) “Marathi bhashecha kalanirnaya,” by C. V. Vaidya and F. h>- uune, 

Vividhajridnavistdra, 1922. . , v p K.ilkami 

(vi) Mard(hi hhdsha, udgama va cilcasa,—by K. F. tUilKami. 

(vii) Formation dc la iangue marathe— by Jules Bloch. 

For the summary of different views see: f . T T R , v,v S G Tubule 

. Dr. V o D, S k *S.°trai«n».r«l, 

(A.D. 1060). Cf. “Marathi bhashetlla adya tamrapata, Sahyadn, ’ 

^Maharashtra Sarasota, 4th ed. pp. 13-14 of this work 

only two have so far been published in the G. O. Series, tsarocia. 

As the language of the works of Mukundaraja is modernized there is still 

riTSKSS.’S-tS:*,, Introduction, p,28. The probta.. e«,.n,,- 
ly complicated on account of the conflicting theories of many scholars. 

B r There Tm^o^uch 2 works as Datta-Goraksha-Sarhvdda Goraksha-Kan- 
thadabodlui, Goraksha-m, GorakshakritaY oodnoem, etc. in Marathi, which a e 
scribed to Gorakh-nath (&rt Ramadasi Samsodhana, Vols. I-H). 

GoMa-<jua lZd a few Abhangas exist in the name of Gahinmatha m 

Cb^Natekritatandavavikatah panditaf.kah sphuranti gitayah/Rambhalasyavilasa 

jayati Jnanesvari tasu.’ 


68 . 

69. 

70, 

71 

72 

73 

74 


386 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



75. It is alleged that there were two Jnanadevas and that the author of Jndnesvarl 

Bhlradv^a^ ^ r ° m au ^ or Uathd.—see Jnanadeva va Jnanesvara by 

76. The life of Jnanadeva or Jnanesvara needs careful investigation. The only 

document, supposed to have been contemporary, is “Jnanadevachi 
Adt, by Namadeva in which it is said that Nivrittinatha, Jnanadeva, 
Sopanadeva, and Muktabai were the excommunicated progeny of a sannydsin 
SJ 1 ?- householder. If this is the work of Vishnudasa Nama who was a 
Mahanubhava, it is easy to imagine how this story must have been concocted. 
In the first place, there is no reference to any caste disability in the works of 
Jnanesvara. Secondly, the punishment meted out to their parents, Vitthalpant 
and Rukmimhai does not find support in Dharmasastra. (MM. Sridharasatri 
Pathak, Jnanesvara-darsana, 1.20-39). The Mahanubhava writers are in the 
habit of runnmg down the Brahmamcal works by inventing stones (The story 

? 81 i e «m Ur f Va ^ ra T ^ tance ; ir i the Padma-purdna of Damodara: verses 
1581-1603. See also Vitthalaviru kathana lila referred to by G. K. Chandorkar 
mManbhdva kim Bauddha, pp. 273-74). In every important detail the life of 
Jnanesvara and others is full of conflicting evidence and further researches are 
therefore needed in the matter. c 

77. See Mahdnubhdvdnchem tattvajndna—hy V. B. Kolte, Nagpur. 

78. Mahdnubhdvdhchd ddkaraMarma~hy V. B. Kolte; ’ Mahdnubhdva-Pantha^-bv 

Balakrishnasastn, Nagpur. y 

79 ' ^ G Clumdorkar this sect must have its origin towards the middle 

ViJdha V^ya P p^m A ' V - *** BvMha ’ ^ihasika 

8°. His life is given in a contemporary work called Smriti-sthala, composed chieflv 
by his disciples Narendra and Parasarambisa (A.D. 1308) and edited bv V N 
Deshpande. 

81. Mahanuhdviya Marathi Vdnmaya— by Y. K. Deshpande. 

82. Edited by N. B. Bhavalkar and H. N. Nene, Nagpur. 

83. Ed. by H. N. Nene. 

84. In three parts, edited by H. N. Nene. 

85. Editions of V. L. Bhave and D. S. Pangu. 

86. Ed. by V. B. Kolte. 

87. Ed. by V. L. Bhave. 

88. Ed. by V. B. Kolte. 

89. Adya Marathi Kavayitri , Ed. by V. N. Deshpande. 

9°. The dates quoted here are mostly taken from the Supplement to the Maharashtra 
S&rasvata of V. L. Bhave by S. G. Tulpule, Poona, 1951. f 

91. There is a great controversy regarding the date of Namadeva. If he is a con¬ 
temporary of Jnanadeva, as is usually believed, he could not have written the 
biographies of later saints which are ascribed to him. We have, therefore, to 
believe in the existence of two Namadevas, the earlier and the later Scholars 
are inclmed to regard Namadeva and Vishnudasa Nama as two different per- 
sonahties whose Abhahgas are mixed up in the published Gathas. Again this 
Vishriudasa Nama is believed to have turned Mahanubhava at the end of his 
C ,tr e ? r ' B o^ Ve ^ entl0n - S , a N am?deva who was the disciple of Chakradhara 
till.*., p. 98). There is also a Nama Pathak who was the grandson of Kanho 
rathak, the youngest contemporary of Jnanadeva. He was a voluminous writer 
and it is likely that during the dark ages that followed the Muslim conquest, 
the works of the different Namadevas got mixed up. A thorough research and 

™J?i ytlC ? st ]-i. dy ?? their , w , orks wiU throw some light on the most intricate 
problems of authorship and chronology. 

??• v° r Idrther details, see Vdrakan sampradaydcha itihdsa by S. V. Dandekar, 1927 
1H A*'" 1 W ° rkS ° f 811 theSe SaintS ’ See Sakala - santa -f &tf ^> edited by 

94. For the life of Namadeva consult: 

(i) Bhaktavijaya —by Mahipati. 

Marathi Vanmaydchd Itihdsa, Vol. I. by L. R. Pangarkar. 

( n) Maharashtra Kavi-charitra, Vol. VIII, by J. R. Ajgaonkar. 

(IV) Sn-Namadeva Churitra—by M. A. Mulay. 

9 °' th P 1S th? 4 ^madeva had undertaken a pilgrimage tour of the north in 

tect^n ?hf y i° f ddanadeva, m his early life. His popularity and personal con- 
norfb P .!!io o t ii P . ar ®. Perhaps responsible for his being called back again in the 
north, especially in the Punjab, where he seems to have stayed for many years. 

387 



JHE STRUGGLE F.OR EMPIRE : 


<SL 


96. 


97. 


98. 


He had a number of followers in that region which still possesses many temples. 

Sikh d RelUiion‘ m Vol VI.—by Macauliff; Bhakta-siromani Mmadeva. kj nai 
jwant, nai Padavali- by Mohansingh, Amritsar; Panjabatila Namadeva- 

We P haye h a number of Muslim poets in Marathi, who in mutation °f the^oete 
of the Bhagavata School, wrote devotional songs to Vitthala. Ct. Shaikh 
and others. Hussain Ambar wrote a commentary on the 
magavad'jiUi and Snahamuni a philosophical Veatise caUed Siddnantabodha. 
Shaikh Mohammad has also written several works of this type. 

Moropant alone has composed 108 Rdmayanas of different kinds and in different 

99 Ct ^Stihitiiadarvana, I. 2, which mentions the four highest human objectives,, 
namefy SgZ (dharma), wealth (artha) ambition or desire (kama) and the 
final liberation from the Cycle of Birth and Death (ttloksha). 

1,00. See above, Vol. II, pp. 281 ff. 

102' The following*Engl ish^translation of a Charyapada would convey some idea of 

^e^OceTnlfBeTng^deep, and it flows with mighty force; 

On two sides, mire,—m the middle, no bottom. 

For the sake of dharma, Chafila builds a bridge; 

People who go across pass on in full reliance. 

SDlitting the tree of ignorance, he joins the planks: 

With the strong axe of Advaya (Monism) he strides at Nirvana. 

Do not turn right or left on mounting the bridge: 

Bodhi (Supreme Wisdom) is near—do not go far. 

O ye men, if ye will be goers-across, f 
Ask of Chatila, the master without a peer. 

102a There is in Bengali, as in other languages, a little spruche litera u e P j 
102a 'Id proverbial distichs relating to agriculture, 

q < 5 aee or seer of unknown antecedents, while Varaha-nuhi a is 

well-known astronomer of ancient India, and Khana, his **'i|^* e f' I ”j^ijuslim 
I-Ite Dr Dines Chandra Sen referred these distichs and verses to pre Muslim 
times in Bengal Similar verses and distichs have been found m Assam. 
While a fairly high antiquity is quite likely for this literature, m the form 
which they occur they are very late, and generally m late Middle or earg 
Modern Bengali We cannot refer them to the period, A.D. 1000 to IdUO, m 
their present form, although their extents may be as old as that, or even older. 
102b. This will be discussed in detail in Ch. XVI. L, 

103 A Handbook oj Vlrasaivism (1941), p. 4. R a 

104; S. S. Basawanal and K. R. Srinivasa Iyengar, Musmgs of Basava. A 

Free Rendering (1940), pp. 49, 118. 

105. Ibid., t). 124. „ , 

106. S. C. Nandimath, A Handbook Virasaivzsm , p. 176. 

107 . R. S. Mugali, The Heritage of Karnataka , p. 182. 

107a. Also written as Tirthakara. 

108. Kanarcse Literature , p. 40. 

109 Quoted in Rice, Kanarese Literature, p. 112. ... , . q 

lift Introduction to P. T. Raju’s Telugu Literature (1944) pp. yui and lx ;_ See 
‘ Vol. I, pp. 154 ff on the origin of the people speakmg Dravidian languages. 

111. Vol. I, Ch. XVI, B. 

112. A History of Telugu Literature, p. 38. 

113. Ibid., p. 39. 

114. Telugu Literature (P. E- N. Book), p. 95. 

115. D. Sambamurty, The Indian P. E. N. (August 1939). 

116 Royaprolu Subba Rao in Triveni (June 1939). 

117! Chenchiah and Bhujanga Rao, Telugu Literature, P- M d 

118. A critical study of this work has been published by the Umvers y 
119^ P. T. Raju, Telugu Literature, pp. 94-5. 


388 



APPENDIX 

B. SANSKRIT1C 


VI. GUJARATI 
1. Language 

Although several of the Middle Indo-Aryan (popularly called 
‘Prakrit’) dialects attained literary status at diverse points of their 
history and became eventually standardized, highly stylized, and 
thus quite resistant to revivifying development, the numerous 
spoken idioms concurrent with them naturally remained subject to 
the continuous process of change. 

Udyotana in his Kuvalayamdla. (A D. 779) refers to the distinct 
dialects of merchants hailing from Madhyadesa, Takka, Sindhu, 
Maru, Malava, Gurjara and Lata. 1 But it was not till the end of 
the first millennium after Christ, that the numerous spoken idioms 
all over North India were transformed to such an extent, as to 
justify recognition of a distinctly new stage in the evolution of Indo- 
Aryan, that marks it off from the preceding stage through certain 
well-defined characteristics. Reference has been already made 
above 2 to this third and the last stage of Indo-Aryan, called the New 
Indo-Aryan. 

It is from about this period that the predecessors of the modern 
languages of Rajasthan and Gujarat are found to have followed a 
line of development different from the rest of the S aura sen I group 
which eventually developed into Hindi. 

This Rajasthani-Gujarati group later on, that is, after the period 
here dealt with, further bifurcates into the Jaipuri and Gujarati- 
Marwari-Malwi groups and the latter of these ultimately divides 
into Gujarati, Marwari and Malwi. As preservation of neuter gen¬ 
der and some other traits in Modern Gujarati suggest an unbroken 
linguistic tradition, and as parts of West Rajasthan and North Guja¬ 
rat were known between the eighth and the eleventh century as 
“Gujjaratta” or “Gurjaratra”, 3 it would be more appropriate to call 
the language of that area by the name “Old Gujarati” instead of 
“Old Western Rajasthani” as coined by the late L. P. Tessitori. 4 

The name “Gujarati” is based on the regional name “Gujarata”, 
earlier, “Gujjaratta” (Sanskritized ‘Gurjaratra’), which, on linguis¬ 
tic grounds, 6 can be shown to have the meaning ‘the Gurjaras en 
masse’ and later ‘Gurjaradom,’ ‘the domain of the Gurjaras’. 

389 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




Though the Gurjaras are found by the seventh century A.D. to be 
completely naturalized and absorbed into the Aryan fold, even to 
the extent of never once referring to their origin (they were 
foreigners, according to the more probable view), it is well-nigh im¬ 
possible to believe that their original native speech yielded to the 
idiom of their adopted land without leaving behind any traces what¬ 
soever. It is quite likely that a good portion of the underivable 
‘desya’ element in the exclusively Gujarati word-stock was inherited 
from the native idioms of the foreign settlers—chiefly the Gurjaras. 


We may briefly recount here the most salient features of Old 
Gujarati that for practical purposes can be considered to distinguish 
it from the previous stage. 

In phonology: (1) Simplification of the consonant cluster along 
with lengthening of the preceding short vowel (which was also 
nasalized if the cluster began with a nasal) under favourable condi¬ 
tions. This was the most outstanding feature and Gujarati shared 
it with most of the New Indo-Aryan languages. This development 
is indicative of a basic shift in the earlier accent system and, by re¬ 
establishing the Old Indo-Aryan state of intervocalic stops, it makes 
it possible to borrow Sanskrit words entirely unchanged, in contrast 
with the Middle Indo-Aryan stage, which, in general, modified most 
of the Sanskrit loans. (2) Loss of an intervocalic h in the termi- 
national elements and of -v- in certain positions. (3) Development 
of an intervocalic -l- into the retroflex (4) Unrounding of the 
final -u- to -a-. (5) Contraction of the contiguous vowels. 

In morphology: (1) Greatly accelerated practice of using post¬ 
positions in place of case-terminations. (2) Constitution of the 
forms of the pleonastically extended stems into a separate declension. 
(3) Emergent tendency to employ auxiliary and participial tense 
forms. (4) Use of -tau- instead of the earlier -ihtau- as the pre¬ 
sent participle formative—strictly speaking a phonological 
development. (5) Creation of a new passive present participle in 
~itau-. 


In syntax: Old Gujarati developed various new constructions, 
terms of expressions and usages, several of which (along with some 
of the characteristically Apabhramsa stuff that was conserved in 
OJd Gujarati) continue in living use even to this day. 6 

In vocabulary: Words of ‘desya’ (i.e. foreign, obscure or un¬ 
known) origin and onomatopoetic, reduplicative and jingle ele¬ 
ments were now playing a role far superior to what was found in 
the previous stage. Words of Perso-Arabic origin, which later on 
came to be absorbed in hundreds, were as yet the rarest excep¬ 
tions. 7 


390 


MIN/Sr^ 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



<SL 


The variety of Apabhramsa, which is found in some of the 
illustrative stanzas in the Apabhramsa portion of the Siddhahema 
(c. A.D. 1143) of Hemachandra, reveals several modern traits as 
compared with the Classical Apabhramsa of Svayambhu (not later 
than the ninth century) and Pushpadanta (mid-tenth century) It 
has to a certain extent a transitional character that further 
develops into Old Gujarati and Old Hindi. This is clearly seen 
from the use, side by side, of nominative singulars in -au- as well as 
-a-, 3 of the dative postpositions -tanena- as well as -kehl 3 ; and of 
words retaining an intervocalic -m- as well as those changing it to 
-mu-. 10 These traits later become specialized respectively to Old 
Gujarati and Old Hindi. On the other hand, “even when the 
Modern Indo-Aryan languages had fully come to their own and had 
essayed their beginnings in literature, the Apabhramsa tradition 
continued either in the form of pure Apabhramsa, or in the form 
of a strong colouring of the vernacular with Apabhramsa ortho¬ 
graphy and Apabhramsa vocabulary and idiom, Apabhramsa cachets 
and atmosphere, to give a sort of semi-Apabhramsa semi-NIA lite¬ 
rary speech.” 11 


2. Literature 


The Old Gujarati literature of this period appears to manifest 
but very few basic departures from the just preceding Apabhramsa 
literature in point of literary trends, types, and forms of expres¬ 
sion. It directly inherited and continued a good part of the Apa¬ 
bhramsa literary traditions. Hence, more in case of the literature 
than in case of the language, it is not possible to say exactly when 
Apabhramsa ended and Old Gujarati began. One cannot be quite 
specific on this point, only because much of the Apabhramsa and 
early Old Gujarati literature of the centuries immediately preced¬ 
ing and succeeding A.D. 1100 is either lost for good or remains un¬ 
earthed so far. 


Apabhramsa had developed its own literary forms. Its 
Sandhi-bandha or the epic narrative of the Puranic or the charita 
type which, in its ornateness and elaboration, was a successor of 
the ornate MaMkavya of Classical Sanskrit and Prakrit, is unre¬ 
presented in the earlier period of Old Gujarati literature. But its 
Rasd-bandha, a semi-lyrical, semi-narrative form of modest com¬ 
pass (somewhat reminding us of the Khanda-kavya of Classical 
Sanskrit), continued in Old Gujarati and became more and more 
prolific and altered in its original character with the course of time 
right down to the nineteenth century. 

Besides the Rasa form, Old Gujarati prosody and poetic phraseo- 


391 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

logy, too, supply us with sure indications of unbroken Apabhramsa 
literary traditions. This is further confirmed by the fact that early 
Old Gujarati literature, like Apabhrarhsa literature, has almost 
exclusively a poetic form. Verse in both cases is the only medium 
of literary expression. Another such trait commonly shared by 
these two literatures is that all the available compositions are reli¬ 
gious-didactic, and, with rare exceptions, Jainistic. Most probably, 
however, this is due to historical conditions, and not an indication 
of a total absence of Brahmanical activity in these fields. The 
Jains evidently took far greater and better care for the preservation 
of the manuscripts of their works than was done by the non-Jains. 
But works of pure literature in Apabhramsa and Old Gujarati, being 
of a non-religious nature, could not be expected to have had the 
same favourable chances of preservation. Jain compositions them¬ 
selves, however, can be looked upon as indirect evidence for the 
existence of such purely literary works, because, the former had 
always a derivative character. Jains had a practical approach to 
literature. They valued it as the most effective vehicle for propa¬ 
gating their teachings and ideals, and hence they were ever ready 
to adopt, imitate, and press into service whatever literary languages, 
types, subjects, styles and fashions from time to time became 
popular. 

Some direct evidence for the existence of non-Jain and purely 
literary works is provided by the contents of a few of the illustra¬ 
tive stanzas (e.g, 8.4.339, 442 etc.) cited by Hemachandra in the 
Apabhramsa portion of his grammar Siddhahema . These citations 
are important from another point of view, too. Not only that their 
language, as stated already, forms in certain points a link between 
Classical Apabhramsa and Old Gujarati, but not a few of them, with 
slight changes in spelling or wording, also continue to appear in Old 
Gujarati literature of several succeeding centuries. Hemachandra’s 
Apabhramsa illustrations breathe directness, ease, poignancy and 
freshness that are characteristic of a genuinely popular literature. 
Their themes pertain to love, valour, general morality and wisdom. 
As remnants of a lost poetry that throbbed with full and intense life, 
they are highly precious. 

It should be remembered that for centuries after the employ¬ 
ment of New Indo-Aryan languages for literary purposes, Sanskrit, 
Prakrit and Apabhramsa, too, continued in use side by side with 
them as parallel literary mediums. Most of the early Old Gujarati 
writers were Jain monks, who had as a rule some works in one or 
more of the three classical languages also to their credit. It is clear 
that their compositions in the Desa Bhasha were undertaken with 




392 


LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



•the specific purpose of administering instruction with entertainment 
to the general lay followers mostly having very modest educational or 
spiritual equipment. This fact obviously imposed an inherent limi¬ 
tation on the general character and scope of such works. 


.Most of the twenty and odd Old Gujarati poems that are 
available to us onwards from about the third quarter of the twelfth 
•century A.D. are in the Rasa form, though in view of some literary 
devices and specialised character of the subject-matter they have 
different styles like Rasa, Barahamasd, Matrikd and Vivahala. 

As indicated above, our specimens are, in all probability, Jain 
imitations of the then most popular literary types that have conti¬ 
nued to be productive down to the end of the eighteenth century. 

Ihe Rasa had a long and varied past. It was known to several 
Purapas and Sanskrit rhetorical works 12 as a type of group dance 
specially associated with the divine cowherd Krishna and the Gopis 
and hence, by implication, also with the cowherd community of the 
Abhiras. In rhetoric tradition, Rdsaka is treated also as a variety 
■of minor Riipakas, essentially operatic and involving a big troupe of 
dancing pairs.' 0 Obviously some poetic compositions, too, employed 
as texts for these Riipakas that were performed on festive occasions, 
came to be called "Rasakas”. The general form of these composi¬ 
tions was called Rasa-bandha, and as a characteristic and widely 
popular Apabhraihsa literary genre it has been described, though 
very briefly, by two eminent Prakrit prosodists, Virahanka (before 
the ninth century) and Svayambhu. 14 From their obscure and in¬ 
adequate account, this much at least can be gathered that the Rdsd- 
bandha was a poem having either a specific rhythm-controlled 
organic structure or a sustained form that used one specific metre 
for the general frame, and other choice metres, if necessary, for 
variation. Unfortunately, however, not a single Rdsaka poem of the 
classical Apabhramsa period has been preserved to us, and hence 
earlier stages of the development which culminated in the Old 
Gujarati Rasa remain mostly in the dark. 


The Old Gujarati Rasas, falling within the period under our 
were mostly composed to be sung in accompaniment with 
the ' Rasa dance that was performed usually in Jain temples, espe- 
cia v to celebrate religious festivals. They turned around some 
narrative, biographical, purely doctrinal, or didactic subject, always 
with a religious moulding. 

Th e earliest available Specimens, viz., the Bharatesvara-Bahu- 
ni i giora ( c. A.D. 1170) of Vajrasena and its expanded version, the 
B laratesvara-Bahubali-rdsa (A.D. 1185) of Salibhadra, narrate the 


393 



MINIS 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


thological incident of war between the kings Bharata and Bahu- 
bali, sons of the first Jain Tirthahkara ftishabha. In the latter, 
consisting of fifteen sections (each composed after a specific metrical 
pattern), descriptions of warlike preparations, Bharata’s march and a 
few battle scenes have been done with some power. The diction 
does not lack picturesqueness, nor is the style without vigour. In 
Vajrasena’s poem (which has five sections), on the other hand, the 
sequel is characteristically Jainistic. Bahubali, in the very moment 
of his victory, is shown becoming at once disgusted with the worldly 
life, taking to asceticism, and eventually, as he cures himself of 
pride, attaining omniscience; the account of the previous life of the 
principal characters is briefly touched to illustrate the working of 
the law of karman; and finally, the moral is spotlighted: he who gives 
up pride and deceitfulness and practises contemplation gets very 
rich rewards. 

The Chandanabala-rasa (A.D. 1201) of Asiga, the Jambu- 


svami-chariya (A.D. 1210) of Dharma, and the Gayasukiimala-rasa 
(possibly c. A.D. 1250) of Delhana sketch the instructive life-stories 
of some saints of Jain mythology and legendary history. Chandana- 
bala is known to the Jain tradition as the first prauartira (head-nun) 
in the first monastic order founded by the Tirthahkara Mahavira. 
Jambusvamin was the fourth pontiff in the pontificate that started 
with Mahavira. Gayasukumala (Sk. Gajasukumara) was, according 
to the Jains, a younger brother of Krishna Vasudeva. As an ascetic, 
he remained unswerved in his meditation in the face of extreme 
physical torture, and consequently attained omniscience. Poeti¬ 
cally these compositions hardly contain anything saving them from 
banality. 

Of the remaining Rasas, the Revantagiri-rasa 16 (c. A.D. 1232) of 
Vijayasena eulogizes in four Ka^avas (sections) the greatness of 
mount Girnar in Saurashfra (and especially, of the temple of Nemi, 
the twenty-second Tirthahkara, newly constructed thereon) as a 
place of pilgrimage. The second Kadava weaves in the swinging 
rhythm of the Madanavatara metre a picturesque description of the 
mount. The Abu-rasa (A.D. 1233) of Balhana too commemorates the 
erection of a temple of Nemi on mount Abu by Tejahpala, the 
famous minister of king VIradhavala (first half of the thirteenth 
century). Similarly the Pethada-rasa (c . A.D. 1300), about the mer¬ 
chant Pethada, who took out a mass pilgrimage from Patana in 
Gujarat to mount Satrunjaya in Saurashtra, has a commemorative 


purpose. 

Among the three Rasas of a purely religious-didactic character, 
the Buddhi-rasa (c. A.D. 1200) of Salibhadra is a collection, 
in four sections, of moral sayings, proverbs, pithy maxims and reli- 


394 


MINIS 



gious instructions given as a summary list of “do’s” and “don’t’s”. 
The Jivadayd-rasa (A.D. 1201) of Asiga, consisting of fifty-three 
stanzas, has a similar though more restricted purpose in that it con¬ 
centrates on religious instructions. The Saptalcshetri-rasa 18 (A.D. 
1271) gives in 119 stanzas a detailed description of the seven pre¬ 
scribed channels of religious charity. 

The compositions generally labelled as Barahamdsd, Matrika 
and Vivahala can be aptly described as Rasas that are characterized 
by some special literary device or subject-matter. In the Bar aha- 
masa 3 the theme, preferably of love, is interlaced with the month- 
to-month description of varying seasonal characteristics and of the 
corresponding changes in the life-routine of the people at large. It 
introduces a new variant in the long tradition of seasonal poems 
initiated with the Ritusamhara. Out of the two specimens of this 
type the Nemi-Rdjula-bdrahamdsd of Palhana (c. A.D. 1233) possibly 
served as a model for the later and more poetic Nemindtha-Chatush - 
padikd^ Q of Vinayachandra (end of the thirteenth century). The 
poems describe nature, in the order of the months, from the angle 
of love-lorn and expectant Rajimatl, whose wedding with prince 
Nemi failed to come off because the latter decided at the eleventh 
hour to renounce the world and become a monk. Palhana’s poem 
has fuller descriptions, but it is Vinayachandra who has succeeded 
in giving us, we can say for the first time, a genuine artistic piece. 

The central mood in the Neminatha-Chatushpadika is effectively 
highlighted by delineating the situation in the form of small bits 
of tete-a-tetes between Rajimatl and her confidante. That Vinaya¬ 
chandra had an artistic sense of form, rather exceptional in that 
period, cannot be denied. Its forty chatushpadikds (chaiipdis) are 
organized in thirteen uniformly patterned units. Each unit begins 
with a nature cameo, is followed by the confidante’s loving, com¬ 
forting, and practical advice, and is rounded off with RajimatTs 
words that reveal a heart at once noble, loving, all-dedicating and 
bleeding. 

Another Barahamdsd of the thirteenth century, viz. Jinadharma- 
stiri-baraha-navau is still in the manuscript form. 

The Matrikas give moral and religious instructions in verses, 
each of which begins with a letter of the Sanskrit syllabary in its 
serial order. This device is as old as the Buddhist sacred text 
Lalitavistara. We have got no less than three such specimens for 
our period: the Matrikd-chaiipcfa , 20 the Samvega-mdtrikd 21 and the 
Samyaktvamdi-chaiipdi of Jagadu,—all the three to be dated before 
the end of the thirteenth century. 


895 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


Lastly, the Vivdhala type is illustrated by the Jinesvara-suri - 
samyamasri-vivaha-varnana-rasa 23 (A.D. 1275) of Somamurti. As is 
clear even from the title, in such compositions the occasion of ordi¬ 
nation of some well-known person was metaphorically described as 
his wedding with the lady Self-control. Somamurti’s poem relates 
to the ordination of one Ambatfa (A.D. 1189-1275), who, as Acharya 
Jinesvara Siiri, became well known in the Kharatara Gachchha. 

There are indications that a few other types, too, e.g. Kulaka, 
Phagu , Charchart, Dhavcila, etc. were current in the thirteenth cen¬ 
tury. But the materials being still unpublished, it is very difficult 
to gather positive information about them. 

All these types of compositions remain very popular for cen¬ 
turies to follow. Monk after monk goes on mechanically turning 
out Rasas, Phagus, Mdtrikas, Vivahalas and Charchans with the ad¬ 
mitted purposes of instructing, earning merit and religious drilling. 
Very few of them succeed in reaching the literary level. 

Structurally Old Gujarati Rasas reveal two distinct types; that 
which is made up of a number of sections, each constructed after a 
specific pattern; and that which is constructed throughout in one 
particular measure which is occasionally provided with a refrain 
repeated after every stanza. In the first type the main topic of the 
section runs in rhymed verses (distichs or three-lined) and frequent¬ 
ly it is rounded off with a stanza in a different measure. Of course 
this general pattern permitted some minor variations. The Bhara - 
tesvara-Btihubali-rasa, Revantagiri-rasa, and Pethada-rtisa , among 
others, have this pattern. The other pattern is illustrated by the 
Nemiruitha-chatushpadika , Nemi-Rajula-baraharridsa, Chandanabdla- 
rdsa, Gayasukuwidla-rdsaj and others. 


1. Avabhraihsnlravyatrayi, ed. L. B. Gandhi, GOS. 37, 1927, pp. 92-93. 

2. Above, p. 350. 

3. Ghafiyala Inscription No. 2, v. 60, JR AS, 1895. p. 513; Ghatiyala Inscription 
No. 1, EL IX. 279. For fuller references, see K. M. Munshi, The Glory That was 
Guriaradcsa , Vol. Ill (1st Ed.), pp. 10-13. 

4. L. P. Tessitori, ‘‘Notes on the Grammar of the Old Western Rajasthani” etc. 
M, XLIII, 1914 pp. 21-22. 

5. The nominal derivative suffix -dt (feminine) ‘aggregate, status, office’ is attested 
in Modern Guiarati words, j ivat, ‘germs and small in^ts coll^otiv^lv’ ('rom 
jlv ‘a creature’), Bhilat, ‘the Bliil community* (from Bhil ), thakrdt ‘fief (from 
thdkar ‘a feudal chief). 

6. The usage mat jayia ‘I thought’ recurs in one of the Apabhramsa stanzas of 
disputed authorship found in the fourth act of Kalidasa’s Vikramorvctsvya 
(S. P. Pandit’s edition, Appendix I. st. 7), in a stanza cited by Hemachandra in 
the Apabhramsa portion of his Siddhahema (8.4.377) and in Modern Gujarati 
in f he form merh janiram. 

7. Sdbana , ‘small tent’ (per. sdybdn) is used in the Bharatesvara-Bdhubali-rasa 
(A.D. 1185), ed. Jinavijaya Muni, 1941, st. 135. 

8. Unhau and siala in the Siddhahema, 8,4.343 (1). 

9. Siddhahema, 8.4.425. 

10. Ibid, 8.4.397. 


m 





LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 


11. S. K. Chatterji, lndo-Aryan and Hindi , 1942, 99. 

12. Vide Bhagavata, 10.33.2; Brahma, 188. 21. 31; Natyadarpana of Ramachandra 
and Gunachandra, p. 218; BJuivaprakdsana of Saradatanaya, p. 266. Cf. also the 
definitions of Rasaka given in Dhanapala’s Pdialachchhlndmanidld (word No. 872) 
and in Hemachandra’s Abhidhdnachintdmani (8.62). 

13. BhdvapraJcdsana pp. 263-265; Kavydnusasaiui of Vagbhata, Nimayasagara edi¬ 
tion, 1894, p. 181. 

14. Vrittajatisamuchchaya of Virahahka (ed. H. D. Velankar, JBBRAS, V, 1929)^ 
4.37-38; Svayambhuchchhandas of Svayambhu (ed, H. D. Velankar, JUB, 1936),. 
8.49-50; cf. Chhandonusasana of Hemachandra, Com. on 5.3. 

15. Prachina-Gurjara-kavya-samgraJia, ed. C. D. Dalai, pp. 41-46. 

16. Ibid, pp. 1-6. 

17. Ibid, pp. 25-29. 

18. Ibid, pp. 47-58. 

19. Ibid, pp. 8-10. 

20. Ibid, pp. 74-78. 

21. L. B. Gandhi, Pattanastha-Prdchina-Jaina-Bhdndagdriya-Granthasuchi, p. 190* 

22. Ibid, pp. 78-82. 

23. Jain Aitihasik Gurjar Kavya Samchay, pp. 225-227. 




397 


CHAPTER XVI 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

A. GENERAL REVIEW 

The outstanding fact in the religious history of the period 
under review is the triumphant revival of Brahmanical religion. 
Buddhism disappeared from the land of its birth and Jainism main¬ 
tained its stronghold only in one corner of India, viz. Gujarat. But 
Brahmanical religion had scarcely recovered its dominant position, 
practically over the whole of India, when it had to face the dis¬ 
astrous effects of the destructive inroads of Islam. The full effect 
of this was not apparent till a later age, but before the close of the 
thirteenth century A.D. Islam had effected permanent, though 
scattered, settlements all over Northern India, which were big 
with future consequences. For the first time in the history of 
India, the country was permanently divided, from a religious and 
social point of view, into two distinct entities, the gulf between 
which even seven centuries of peaceful existence side by side has 
not been able to bridge. This religious and social aloofness places 
the Muslim invasion of India on an entirely different footing from 
similar invasions elsewhere. Analogy has been drawn, for ex¬ 
ample, between Saxon and Norman invasions of England and the 
Turkish invasion of India in order to prove that since the invaders 
became the children of the soil, they can hardly be regarded as 
foreigners, and the ‘foreign conquest’ of India is a misnomer so far 
as the pre-British period is concerned. This analogy is however 
fallacious. For while within a century or two of the conquest of 
England by William, the Duke of Normandy, nobody could possi¬ 
bly distinguish the Saxon, Norman or other elements of which the 
English people were composed, it does not require a moment’s 
thought today to draw a clear line between the Hindu and Muslim 
population, even though more than seven hundred years (in the 
case of Sindh, twelve hundred years) have elapsed since the Mus¬ 
lims first settled in the country. 1 Nor can we reasonably visual¬ 
ise a period when this difference will cease to exist. 

It is by way of distinction from the Muslims that the term 
Hindu came into use. It is probable that the name was chosen by 
the Muslims in order to give a common designation to the people 
whom they found in India. This indirectly proves the essential 
unity of the creeds, beliefs and religious practices of the latter, 


398 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 




in the eyes of the former. In any case the term Hindu comes into 
general use during this period and it would be convenient to refer 
henceforth to the Indians, other than Muslims, and their religion 
as Hindu. As is well known, Hindu, a modified form of Sindhu, 2 
was originally a geographical term used by the western foreigners 
to denote, first the region round the Sindhu river, and then the 
whole of India. The Indians, however, never called themselves 
by this name before the Muslim conquest. It was re-introduced 
after that event, with the added significance of a particular form 
of religious persuasion. Historically, therefore, ‘Hindu’ really 
signifies the aggregate of peoples in India and their culture and reli¬ 
gion, as distinguished from Muslims. The common use of the 
term Hindu, as opposed to Buddhist, Jain or follower of any other 
religious sect in pre-Muslim India, is therefore quite erroneous. 


The period under review thus brings into relief the emergence 
of Hinduism as the dominant faith with the menace of Islam as a 
disturbing element. The cloud was not as yet bigger than a man’s 
hand, but ere long it grew in dimensions and cast its doleful shadow 
over the whole land. For the time being, however, this remote 
possibility was not visualised by the Hindus. 


This leads us to one important question, viz. the result of the 
impact of Islam on Hindu religion during the period under review. 
So far as doctrinal changes are concerned, we could hardly expect 
any during the period under review when the Muslims were still 
a merely militant force and had hardly come into close or peaceful 
contact with the Hindus. To the latter, the Muslims were not 
only foreign and mlechchha (unclean and boorish) conquerors, but 
they had deeply wounded their religious susceptibilities by in¬ 
discriminate demolition of temples and destruction of images of 
gods on a large scale. The Hindus would therefore be hardly in 
a mood to take any lesson from the teachings of Islam, and the 
time was too short to produce even any indirect and unconscious 
effect. 


But the Hindus kept themselves severely aloof in order to 
save their purity against the unclean aliens. This led to a change 
in their religious and social outlook and induced them to adopt 
stringent rules in regard to both which vitally affected their pro¬ 
gress and future development. This would form the subject of 
discussion in the next volume. 

While our main attention is naturally drawn to the intrusion 
of Islam as an effective factor in the religious history of India, it 
is necessary to refer to some other features in the evolution of 
Indian religion which characterised the period under review. The 


399 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



most important among these was the growing influence of Tantrik 
ideas over both Buddhism and Brahmanical religion. The high 
ideals of Mahayana, which aimed at the salvation of all and were 
actuated by the noble spirit of universal love for all mankind, soon 
yielded to gross superstitions and immoral practices so far at least 
as the general masses were concerned. Belief in the efficacy of 
mantra, maij^iala and other elements of esoteric practices as the 
easiest means for attaining salvation retarded the growth of spiri¬ 
tual ideas, while the conception of ultimate reality as a duality of 
male and female energy —Upaya and Prajna in Buddhism, and Siva 
and Sakti in Brahmanical religion—, paved the way for the domi¬ 
nance of erotic and sensual practices which undermined the sense 
of moral values. Whatever views may be entertained regarding 
the ideals and practices of Tanti-a in their essence and origin, there 
can be no denying the fact that they led, in not a few cases, to gross 
debauchery and perversion of morals and ethics. It may be con¬ 
ceded that the fundamental principles of Tantra were conceived 
by great minds with the best of intentions, but the way devised 
for salvation was very risky and dangerous to the ordinary and 
unwary devotee and, as could be easily foreseen, most of the pil¬ 
grims fell victims to temptation and perished on the way before 
they could reach the promised land of bliss. 

There has been much speculation regarding the causes of this 
general degradation of religious life in India. It is a significant 
fact that the same period also witnessed a great decline in the 
general intellectual and cultural level of the people in India. But 
whether the first is the cause or the effect of the second, or whe¬ 
ther, and if so, how far, they reacted on each other, it is not easy 
to determine. It has been suggested that the universal appeal of 
Buddhism which brought within its fold peoples of diverse views 
and beliefs, in all stages of cultural development, wrought its 
own ruin. For, in order to satisfy the masses Buddhism had to 
come down from its high pedestal to their level and present itself 
in a popular garb which they could understand and appreciate and 
for which they felt an emotional urge in their own hearts. 
But by an inevitable process it also incorporated to a large extent 
the crude ideas, beliefs and religious practices held by them. A 
popular religion has little scope for an appeal to the intellect, and 
it has to strive its utmost to win the hearts of the people. This 
process, with its inevitable result, was in full swing during the period 
under review. 

But whatever may be the cause, the most regrettable feature 
was the degradation in ideas of decency and sexual morality 
brought about by the religious practices. How far this evil corrod- 


MiNisr^ 



ed the whole society would be plain from a study of contemporary 
literature. A great Sanskrit poet of the period gave a vivid des¬ 
cription of the deva-dasis in a temple of Krishna and added that 
they made one feel as if the goddess Lakshmi had come down on 
earth to attend her lord the god Murari. 3 Contemporary epigra- 
phic records also refer in rapturous terms to the personal charm 
and beauty of the hundreds of deva-dasis assigned to a single 
temple. 4 It is impossible to describe in a modern book some of 
the worst features of Tantrik theories and practices which have 
been described by an eminent Indian scholar to be “at once the 
most revolting and horrible that human depravity could think of,” 6 
Fortunately the esoteric character of Tantrik religion limited its 
field of operation, and it may be conceded that such debased 
forms of religious practices were exceptional and not normal. 
Even then we have to admit that the general effect of such religion 
was calculated to degrade rather than elevate the morals and gene¬ 
ral character of the people at large. 

If we remember that religion in all ages has had a profound effect 
on Indian minds, the state of religion during the period under re¬ 
view cannot be regarded as an isolated topic, but has to be reviewed 
in the context of the general history of India, in particular its poli¬ 
tical history, social and economic condition, development of art, etc. 
The overall picture is one of decadence in every respect as compared 
to the high standard of older times. It may therefore be urged, with 
some degree of plausibility, that the overthrow of Hindu rule was as 
much due to internal as to external causes. The wealth and luxury 
with its enervating effect upon character on the one hand, and the 
degraded religious and social life on the other, sapped the vitality 
of the people and destroyed its manhood. The great fabric of culture 
and civilisation, reared up in course of centuries, was tottering, and 
it was no longer a question of whether but when it would fall. 
Foreign invasions merely accelerated the process of decay and 
hastened the downfall which was inevitable in any case. 

Next to the growing evil of Tantrik practices, and not altogether 
unconnected with it, is the almost complete disappearance of Bud¬ 
dhism from the land of its birth. This question has been discussed 
at some length in the section on Buddhism. It will suffice to state 
here that the principal reason seems to be the destruction by foreign 
invaders of the numerous monasteries in Bihar and Bengal which 
formed the stronghold of that religion. For the rest, it was partly 
assimilated to Brahmanical religion and partly survived in disguise 
or in a modified form in various medieval religious cults, specially in 
Bengal. M. M. Haraprasad Sastri even regarded the very little 


S.E,—26 


401 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

rma-Thakur as a living relic of Buddhism in. 

Bengal. 

The Brahmanical religion has always showed its catholicity by 
absorbing powerful rival religious sects. At a much earlier period 
it brought the cults of both I^rishna-Vasudeva and Rudra-£>iva with¬ 
in its fold. 6 Now it repeated the same process in regard to Buddhism 
by declaring the Buddha to be an incarnation of Vishnu. The deve¬ 
loped doctrines and rituals of Mahayana and Brahmanical religion 
made such a near approach to each other, specially through the 
stress upon faith and devotion, worship of images of numerous 
gods and goddesses, and the use of Sanskrit in liturgical texts, on 
the part of the Buddhists, and the acceptance of the principle of 
ahvrhsd, specially in regard to diet, on the part of the Brahmanas, 
that a merger of the two was not only rendered quite easy but be¬ 
came almost inevitable. The identification of the Buddha with 
Vishnu by means of the theory of incarnation completed the process, 
and Buddhism silently merged itself into Brahmanical religion. 
Even today images of Buddha are worshipped as Siva or Vishnu 
In many places in Bengal. It is also interesting to note that Siva 
and Buddha were identified in Java, and in modern Balinese theology 
Buddha is regarded as a younger brother of Siva. Further, Siva, 
Vishnu and Buddha were all regarded as identical and so were their 
gaktis. These no doubt truly reflected the religious conception of the 
motherland. 

The Jains were more fortunate than the Buddhists. Under the 
patronage of the Later Chalukyas and the Hoysalas Jainism main¬ 
tained for long a position in the Deccan and South India, but with the 
growing influence of Vaishnavism and Saivism it gradually lost its 
importance in both these regions. The Hoysala rulers, though con¬ 
verted to Vaishnavism, supported the Jain religion, but the Cholas 
and the Paijdyas were bigoted Saivas, and are said to have persecuted 
the Jains. The successful revolution of the Saiva Lingayat sect 
against the Kalachuri ruler Vijjala, who was a Jain, was also an 
important factor in the decline of Jainism, specially in the Deccan. 
Due to all these causes, Jainism gradually lost its hold in the Deccan 
and South India before the close of the period under review. 

Jainism was also affected by the assimilating power of 
Brahmanical religion, but to a much less extent than Buddhism. 
This is due to the innate rigidity and conservative character of 
Jainism which enabled it to maintain to a certain extent its special 
characteristics vis-a-vis Brahmanical religion. The result is that 
while Buddhism disappeared from India, Jainism is still a powerful 
force in Gujarat and Rajputana. This is also partly due to the fact 




known cult of 


402 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 




that these two strongholds suffered less from the iconoclastic fury 
of the early Muslim invaders than Bihar and Bengal where Buddhism 
found its last refuge. 

One great thing to be noted about Jainism is that it was never 
subjected to the contaminating influence of Tantrik ideas, which 
proved ruinous to Buddhism and Brahmanical religion in North 
India. The Vaishiiava sects of Southern India were also largely 
free from the degrading Tantrik ideas of the North. This was mainly 
due to the rise of the great Acharyas like Ramanuja and Madhva 
who shed lustre on this age. The great Advaita doctrine of Sankara, 
which had a triumphant career in the preceding period, cut at the 
very root of bhakti-v&da, i.e. the doctrine of love and faith, for if there 
is only one universal spirit, there was no scope for love or devotion, 
which necessarily postulates two separate entities, the lover and the 
beloved, the devotee and the object of devotion. Ramanuja solved 
this problem and placed the bhakti- cult on a Arm philosophical basis 
by expounding the famous doctrine of Visishpidvaita-vdda, which 
was a qualified form of Sankara’s Monism and a reply to his chal¬ 
lenge. In the system of Vaishnavism preached by these Achdryas 
there was no place for the cowherd girls (gopis) 9 an element which 
so profoundly affected the Vaishnavism of the North and ultimately 
degraded it to the level of the gross form of Tantrik religion referred 
to above. 


But the South did not altogether escape the contamination of the 
North. If the Bhdgavata Purana were really composed in South 
India, as many believe, we have an indisputable evidence of the 
dominance of the gopi element. Still later, Nimbarka, a Tailanga 
Brahmana, also stressed the gopi element. Krishna, surrounded by 
thousands of gopis, with Radha as his principal beloved, forms an 
essential element of his doctrine. It is, however, not without signi¬ 
ficance that Nimbarka, though hailing from the South, lived and 
preached in North India with his centre at Vrindavana (near 
Mathura), the reputed centre of Krishna’s dalliance with the gopis< 
The followers of Nimbarka are also mostly to be found in North 
India. The Radha cult preached by him was further stressed by 
Chaitanya in the sixteenth century and it is still the most popular 
aspect of North Indian Vaishnavism. 

The Saivas and Saktas were more affected by Tantrik ideas than 
the Vaishnavas. The jSakti cult almost became a synonym for 
Tantrik rites, often of a degrading character. Among the Saivas 
also, both in the North and the South, sects like Kapalikas and Kala- 
mukhas followed most repulsive and obnoxious practices associated 
with wine and women. 


403 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



The growing menace of Tantrik ideas and practices should not, 
however, blind us to the fact that purer and higher forms of reli¬ 
gious ideas and practices continued to flourish, at least among the 
higher classes, even in those regions in North India which were 
most contaminated by the debased ideas. Further, as noted above, 
there were also large areas, particularly in Deccan and South India, 
where Tantrik influence was hardly perceptible. 

The growth of big temples, both Saiva and Vaishpava, constitutes 
an important feature in the religious development, particularly in 
South India. Rich endowments made to them by kings, merchants, 
and other men of wealth made them not only important centres of 
higher education, but also centres of missionary activity and spiri¬ 
tual inspiration like the Buddhist monasteries of old. The mathas , 
which grew up in large numbers, not only supplemented these acti¬ 
vities, but also took up humanitarian work like feeding the poor and 
tending the sick. It is interesting to note that many Buddhist monas¬ 
teries were actually converted to such mathas. 

Reference has been made above to the persecution of Jains by 
the 6aiva rulers of the South. According to Tamil Puranas, the 
5§aiva religion was firmly established by the cruel torture inflicted 
on the Jains. Specific reference is made to a case of an earlier 
period when 8000 Jains were impaled on stakes. But according to 
some scholars the story is apocryphal. 7 There are also stories that 
Ramanuja and his followers were subjected to persecution by the 
Cholas who were ardent Savvas. It is difficult to say how far these 
stories can be relied upon as true, though some support is given to 
them by the fact that Ramanuja had to withdraw to Mysore and 
live there for more than twenty years, before he could return to 
Srlrahgam. 8 But these cases, even if partially true, form an excep¬ 
tion to the general rule, and on the whole the Hindus, even during 
this period, did not show any lack of the spirit of toleration which 
marked the religious evolution in India throughout the ages. This 
spirit was displayed even towards the Muslims 9 in the face of the 
greatest provocation caused by their iconoclastic fury. 


B. BUDDHISM 
I. DOCTRINAL CHANGES 
1. Tantrik Buddhism 


The development of Tantrism, during the period under review, 
effected a radical change in the outlook and character of Buddhism. 
The Tantras, whether of the Saiva or Sakta schools or of the Bud¬ 
dhists, primarily pertain to the sddhand, i.e. religious exercises or 


404 



MiNisr^ 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


<SL 


practices, as contrasted with any abstract philosophy. They have 
little to do with metaphysical speculations, since their leading 
object is to expound practical methods for the realisation of the 
ultimate truth. These methods and practices, sometimes of highly 
erotic nature, comprise, besides esoteric Yoga, a medley of hymns, 
rites, rituals, etc. So far as theological speculations and philoso¬ 
phical doctrines are concerned, the Saiva and Sakta Tantras accept 
the Brahmanical philosophical systems as authority, and utilise 
their fundamental tenets, while the Buddhist Tantras likewise 
adopt and put to use the Buddhist, or more precisely, Mahayana, 
principles. It should not be supposed that Buddhism, in the pro¬ 
cess of development, had evolved Tantrism at a certain stage of 
its growth, within its own spheres, or out of its own materials. 
For there is absolutely no inherent relation between Tantrism and 
Buddhism proper. In point of fact, Buddhism in the later phases 
of Mahayana had adopted, or had been engrafted into, these esoteric 
principles and practices which had an entirely independent growth 
and an independent history of their own. But, as pointed out above, 9a 
Tantrik ideas may be traced in Buddhism from a very early period. 


Mahayana Buddhism does not recognise Sunyata or perfect 
knowledge 10 to be the highest truth, which, according to its postu¬ 
lation, is a state where Sunyatd and Karuna, are united together. 
Thus the emphasis of Mahayana is divided; as a system of religion 
it is characterised by its stress, no less if not more, on Karuna or 
universal compassion, a feature that is conspicuous by its absence 
in Hinayana. The final goal of Hinayana being the attainment of 
Arhathood, its followers are supposed to dedicate themselves to 
the selfish hankering for personal liberation and to be thus busy 
with themselves only. On the contrary, the avowed object of 
Karuna is to stimulate one to make use of one’s perfect knowledge 
in missionary activities for the welfare of the suffering world and 
the salvation of all beings. These missionary activities mainly 
consist of preaching the gospel to all the laity in order to banish 
their shroud of ignorance and make them realise the truth. 


Silnyata, or perfect wisdom, and Karuna, or universal com¬ 
passion, being associated together, generate in one’s mind, accord¬ 
ing to the Mahayana conception, the Bodhi-chitta, which is that 
mental state in which nothing else remains but a firm determina¬ 
tion to attain bodhi or perfect knowledge, mixed up with a strong 
emotion of compassion for the redemption of all suffering beings 
of the world. The Bodhi-chitta next proceeds on an upward march 
through ten different stages ( bhumis ), and when the last stage, 
known as Dharmamegha, is reached, one becomes a perfect Bodhi- 


405 


MINfSr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


tva. To the Mahayanists, the ultimate goal is not final extinction 
through Nirvaru but to transcend the states of both bhava (exist¬ 
ence in the world of birth and death) and Nirvana (in the sense of 
extinction), and to attain Buddhahood through different stages of 
Boddhisattvahood. Every human being, nay, any creature of the 
world, is, according to Mahayana, a potential Buddha, and has with¬ 
in him all the possibilities of becoming a Samyak-sambuddha , i.e. 
the Perfectly Enlightened One; but this hidden possibility can find 
tangible expression only by the attainment of the Bodhi~chitta f 
which is a unified state of &unyatd and Karund. 


This broad outlook of Mahayana, coupled with the spirit of 
benevolence and humanity, elevated it to the sublimity of a religion 
of love and tender sympathy for all sentient beings, and formed 
an important factor in popularising Buddhism far and wide. For 
the liberation of all people being the sacred pledge of Mahayana, it 
stood out prominently as a religion for all. From this standpoint, it 
had to concern itself with, and accommodate within its fold, folks of 
all grades, shades, and tastes. But this zeal of popularisa¬ 
tion did overstep its limits, and ultimately brought about degene¬ 
ration in Mahayana, inasmuch as an influx of heterogeneous ele¬ 
ments of faith and religious practices into the enclosure of Buddhism 
was rendered inevitable. What is, to the ordinary or plebian sec¬ 
tion of people, a religion, if it be not something that consists of 
belief in a pantheon of gods and goddesses and of the performance 
of rites and ceremonies and some esoteric practices along with the 
muttering of mystic formulas, etc. with which they had been hither¬ 
to only too familiar? So, in order to satisfy the ideas and sentiments 
of what is called the mass mind, manifold ceremonies and rites and 
rituals of very popular and homely nature had to be incorporated, 
and at the same time elements of mantras, dbaranis, mudriis, manda¬ 
tes, etc. introduced into the religion of the Buddha. Gradually, 
however, a section of people of higher intellectual level, too, became 
convinced of the efficacy of the mantra-charms as the simplest and 
most suitable means for the realisation of the ultimate truth. 
Just at this stage of development Mahayana was subdivided into two 
distinct schools, Mantra-yana or Mantra-nay a and Pdramita -yana or 
Puramita-naya y and the former may justly be regarded as the initial 
stage of Tantrik Buddhism. In this stage the emphasis was laid 
mainly on the elements of mantra, dharam, mudra, mm^ala, abhi- 
sheka, etc. But these elements of esoterism have by nature a pro¬ 
pensity to generate beliefs in magic, sorcery, charms etc., having 
their application to gods, demigods, ghosts, goblins, demons, fiends 
and the like. And when to these were added the elements of yoga 
or sexo-yogic practices, it was full-fledged Tantrism. It may 


400 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

us be said that the Mahayana doctrine of Karund was, directly or 
indirectly, responsible for introducing Tantrism in Buddhism. This 
doctrine of universal compassion, as such, was also adopted and 
utilised to the full by the Tantrik Buddhists themselves. All their 


teachings, all their mystic rites and ceremonies and practices, bear 
the impress of Karuiia on them, and every thing they do is professed 
to be undertaken with the set purpose of saving the world from all 
miseries. 


It should, however, be borne in mind that there is no funda¬ 
mental difference between the esoteric scidhana (religious endeav¬ 
ours) of the Brahmanical and Buddhist Tantrism. Both the 
schools lay equal stress upon the theological principles of duality 
in non-duality, and hold that the ultimate non-dual reality possesses 
in its nature the potency of two aspects or attributes, viz. the 
negative and the positive, the static and the dynamic, the principle 
of pure consciousness and the principle of activity. In the Abso¬ 
lute Being these two aspects and attributes lie merged together in 
a state of absolute non-duality. In the process of phenomenalisa- 
tion, however, come separation and duality, which mean bondage 
and suffering, the ultimate escape from which is liberation. The 
final goal of both the schools is to destroy all principles of dualism 
and to attain the final state of non-duality. 

These two aspects of the absolute reality are conceived as Siva 
and Sakti in Brahmanical Tantrism and as Prajna and Upaya in 
Buddhist Tantrism. The terms Prajna and TJpaya are not of its 
coinage but are copiously used also in Mahayana literature, and 
are practically synonymous with Sunyata and Karund respectively. 
Sunyatd is Prajna because it represents perfect wisdom, i.e. know¬ 
ledge of the void-nature of the self and the dharmas. Karund or 
universal compassion is called Upaya because it is the means or 
medium for the attainment of the Bodhi-chitta for the realisation 
of the highest goal. Prajna or Sunyatd (perfect knowledge) re¬ 
presents a static or negative state of mind which separates the indi¬ 
vidual from the world of suffering beings; it makes one observe 
the world of existence from a point of view where there is neither 
suffering nor happiness and, therefore, no opportunity left for dis¬ 
playing the spirit of benevolence; it makes a man altogether static. 
Upaya or Karund, on the other hand, operates in one’s mind like 
a dynamic force, draws one’s attention to the world of suffering, 
and as the symbol of universal compassion removes the miseries 
of the suffering world. Through Prajna , which is the one universal 
principle underlying the diversity of the phenomenal world, one’s 
mind is purified, while Upaya is that principle which brings down 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


one’s perfectly purified mind to this phenomenal world, the world 
around us, where the helpless beings are suffering the miseries of 
life. If Upaya impels one to benevolent activities for the removal 
of sorrow, those moral activities are to be yoked with and conduct¬ 
ed by Prajna Prajnd or Sunyata, standing for perfect wisdom, is 
regarded as absolutely passive and negative aspect of the reality, 
while TJpaya or Karuna, with its active inspiration and because of 
its dynamic nature, is conceived as the active and positive aspect 
of the same. The nature of Prajna is non-existence, and that of 
Upaya existence*, Prajnd - is essencelessness, while Upaya is of posi¬ 
tive nature; so the whole truth is the unity of both these positive 
and negative aspects. 


The first, as also the foremost, innovation that the Tantrik 
Buddhism effected was the conception of these two cardinal prin¬ 
ciples of Sunyata and Karuna or Prajnd and Upaya of Mahayana 
as the female and the male. Accordingly, Prajnd or Sunyata is 
the female, and Upaya or Karuna 9 male. The Tantrik Buddhism 
differs from the Saiva and Sakta Tantras as well as some other Indian 
systems of philosophy in regarding the negative, static or unquali¬ 
fied aspect of the reality as the female, and the positive or active 
counterpart as the male. Nevertheless, the most important thing in 
the Buddhist Tantras is the stress on the union of Prajna and Upaya 
both in the philosophical and in the esoteric Yogic senses. Prajnd 
is declared to be bondage, if unassociated with Upaya, and so is also 
Upaya bereft of Prajnd; when the one is conjoined with the other, 
the two, being one, become liberation. In other words, the truth 
is both Prajnd and Upaya united together. The commingling of 
Prajnd and Upaya, like that of water and milk, in a state of non¬ 
duality, constitutes a state perfectly pure from the defilement of 
reality and unreality and subjectivity and objectivity, and it has 
only to be realised by intuition. 


This ultimate state of non-duality, on the destruction of all 
principles of dualism, is called by the Tantrik Buddhists the state 
of Yuganaddha , which is variously called in other esoteric systems 
as Advaya, Maithuna, Samarasa, etc. One reaching the stage of 
Yuganaddha has attained perfect enlightenment and eternal tran- 
quillitjr and has crossed the sea of birth and death. This is in fact 
perfect enlightenment of Buddhatva, and this is the way in which, 
according to the Tantrik Buddhists, innumerable Buddhas have 
attained perfection. 


The Tantrik Buddhists share in common with other esoteric 
schools the notion that practices of austere penances, difficult vows, 
fasting, going on pilgrimage, etc., only inflict torture upon the body 


408 


MIN ISTfiy 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


<SL 


mind of a man, make him morbid, disfigure his face, and so on, 
but can never bring forth perfection. To them this very approach 
appears to be unnatural, and perfect enlightenment is attainable 
only through an easy process, viz. through enjoyment. This either 
supplements or is supplemented by another conception of moment¬ 
ous consequences, viz. that the male and female represent in this 
world the division that exists in the nature of the Absolute as Updya 
and Prajna (cf. Siva and Sakti), the union of which is the highest 
reality. As such, to obtain the highest spiritual experience, men 
and women must first of all realise themselves as manifestations of 
Updya and Prajnd and be united together in body, mind, and spirit; 
the supreme bliss that emerges from that union is the highest reli¬ 
gious gain. All esoteric sddhand must, therefore, be performed by 
the male and female together, and this is precisely the easy process 
of realising the highest truth. The son of MayadevI, Lord Buddha, 
was the incarnation of Upaya, and his wife Gopa that of Prajnd, 
and the Buddha attained, we are told, supreme bliss (Mahasukha) 
of the nature of Nirvana in union with the Prajnd Gopa. 12 


If in the Buddhist Tantras, therefore, Prajnd, the female aspect 
of the absolute, is viewed as the goddess ( Bhagavatn ), it is also a 
term often used to imply the Mudra, which technically denotes the 
woman to be adopted in the Yogic practice. She is also called 
Vajra-kanya, Yuvatt (young woman) and so on. In some Tantras, 
a beautiful girl of sixteen to be adopted for the sddhand is styled as 
Prajnd, while, again in some places Prajnd is the word for the female 
organ, because it is the seat of all pleasure, which is great bliss 
(Mahasukha). Prajnd and Upaya, as the symbol of the female and 
male, are also called, respectively, the lotus (p adma) and the 
thunder ( vajra ), the former symbolising the female, and the latter, 
the male organ. 


The Yogic practices involving the physical and physiological 
union of the Prajna and the Upaya lead to the inner union of the 
two, and through this Yogic union is produced supreme bliss ( Mahd - 
sukha ) which, according to the Buddhist and all other schools of 
T antra, is the very nature of the Absolute. One realises the Abso¬ 
lute only when one realises one’s own self as perfect bliss. The 
ultimate end is, therefore, to attain this state of perfect bliss. In 
our ordinary life we do feel like experiencing intense pleasure in 
our sex-experiences, but between the sex-pleasure and perfect bliss, 
which constitutes the ultimate nature of our self, there is an abyss 
of difference. The experiences of sex-pleasure, extremely transi¬ 
tory and of defiled character as they are, only fasten us to a lower 
plane of life, as against ministering to our progress towards self- 


409 


Ml UlST/f 



realisation. But the sexo-yogic sadhana of the Tantriks is a 
sadhana which is calculated to be capable of transmuting “even 
gross sex-pleasure into the realisation of infinite bliss in which all 
the activities of the mind are absolutely lost and in which the self 
and the world around are lost in an all-pervading oneness”. This 
is what js reckoned as Nirvana 13 by the Tantrik Buddhists. 

With the identification of Mahasukha with Nirvcma and that of 
the principles of Prajna and Updya with the female and male organs, 
the Mahayana conception of the Bodhi-chitta was destined to 
undergo a thorough change in Tantrik Buddhism. The Bodhi-chitta 
is no more the state of the mind in which reigns only a strong de¬ 
termination to attain perfect wisdom (bodhi), but signifies the pro¬ 
duction of an extremely blissful state of mind through the Yocjic 
union of the male and the female. This is further elaborated by 
the identification of the different philosophical concepts with the 
various parts of the nervous system of the human body and the 
conception of the attainment of the final bliss as a physical process,, 
which is too technical and intricate to be explained here. 

2. Vajra-yana 

This system of Tantrism, compounded with the principle of 
sexo-yogic practice, is conventionally known by the general name 
of Vajra-yana, or the Adamantine path. But perhaps we should 
rather take Vajra-yana merely as the name of a school of Tantrik 
Buddhism, though undoubtedly the largest school. The justification 
of the name of the school is to be sought in its preference of the use of 
the term Vajra in place of Sunyata. In this system Vajra connotes 
the unchangeable adamantine void-nature of the self and of the 
dharmas. Thus Vajra-yana is the way for the realisation of the 
uajra-nature or the changeless and impenetrable void-nature of the 
self and all entities. It has been rightly suggested that Vajra-yana 
may also be designated as &unyata-yana , 14 

Notwithstanding the considerable emphasis laid by Vajra- 
yana upon the secret Yogic practices, absolute confidence was not 
reposed upon them as the only method of realising the truth. This 
is evinced by the high degree of importance attached at the same 
time to the worship of various gods and goddesses of an extensive 
pantheon that it evolved, to the numerous rites and practices that 
it developed, to the efficacies of mantra-charms, mudras , mantjalas, 
and so on. A singular peculiarity that marks out Vajra-yana is 
that it considers everything as vajra. For instance, in worshipping 
a it is not only that the god adored is meditated on as of vajra 
(void) nature, but also the image of the god, the mantras , the pro- 


410 


MINIS r/jy 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


\ses of worship, the worshipper himself, etc., are all supposed to 
be vajra . This vajra bias is so acute in the minds of the followers 
of the system that even the articles of worship including the image, 
flowers, lamp, conehshell, bell, jar, incense, sesamum, fried paddy, 
etc., all bear the mark of vajra on them. The idea underlying this 
apparently queer pursuit is, however, simple; anything stamped 
with vajra before one’s eyes conduces to the realisation of the void- 
nature of the self and the dharmas. 


The most outstanding feature of Vajra-yana is the identifica¬ 
tion of the ultimate reality with the conception of a Lord Supreme 
( Bhagavan ) as Vajrasattva, sometimes also called Vajradhara. This 
monotheistic conception is the most significant departure of Vajra- 
yana from earlier Buddhism. This Vajrasattva is not merely of the 
nature of Sunyata, but is as well the non-dual state of Sunyata and 
Karima. He is thus the Being of infinite wisdom and universal 
compassion. Hence it is that Vajrasattva is often identified with 
the Bodhi-chitta. He who realises Vajrasattva becomes himself 
Vajrasattva. To realise Vajrasattva is to bring home to one’s 
mind that all existence is nothing but Sunyata in its pure nature, 
and as soon as one attains to this knowledge, one becomes Vajra¬ 
sattva. 15 

The evolution of the idea of Vajrasattva as the Lord Supreme 
ushered into being a new and expanded pantheon of gods and 
goddesses in Vajra-yana. Vajrasattva as the Primal Enlightened 
One is Adi-Buddha. The Primal Lord is possessed of five kinds of 
knowledge conceived as his five attributes, from which proceed five 
kinds of meditation (dhytinas ); from these, again, emanate five 
deities known as the five Dhyani-Buddhas or Tathagatas, viz. 
Vairochana, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, Amoghasiddhi and Aksho- 
bhya. These Dhyani-Buddhas, who are the presiding deities over the 
five skandhas or elements whose aggregate constitutes the body, 
have each got a divine consort or Sakti of his own, viz . Vajradhat- 
vlsvari, Lochana, Mamaka, Pan^ara and Arya-Tara respectively. Each 
Dhyanl-Buddha has again a particular Bodhi-sattva as a son as it 
were, and also a particular human Buddha (Mdnushi Buddha). The 
consort of Vajrasattva himself is variously called as Vajra-sattvat- 
mika, Vajra-Varahl, Prajha, Prajha-paramita, etc. We have the 
injunction of many a sddhana that the god to be worshipped is to 
be meditated on as in union with or deeply embraced by his Sakti 
or Prajnci, filled with erotic emotion and as enjoying great bliss 
(Mahasukha). This illustrates the principle of Yuganaddha or 
Advaya. Thus we find that Vajrasattva and some other gods are 


411 



mtSTfty 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


-^depicted in sculpture as “ in sexual union touching at all points of 
contact”, representing the knowledge of non-dual union. 


Some idea of the actual process of worship and nature of medi¬ 
tation in Vajra-yana may be had from the description of a parti¬ 
cular sadhana of a deity. First, the Lord Supreme should be 
meditated on with the five Dhyanl-Buddhas, and then flowers are 
to be offered. Then these five with their five respective Saktis are 
to be adored with offerings of flowers, incense, lamp, etc. Then 
follow some other details including the devotee’s confession of his 
sins before the Lord and taking refuge in the three jewels, Buddha, 
Dharma and Samgha. “Then he takes the resolution of producing 
the Bodhi-chitta for the well-being and deliverance of all, and 
adopts the path followed by the Sugatas and their followers. Then 
he should think of the world, both static and dynamic, as all void, 
and place himself in the void with the mantra, ‘Om, I am of the 
nature of the immutable knowledge, of the void’. Then he should 
realise that all the dharmas are pure by nature and he, too, is pure 
by nature, and then he should read, ‘Naturally pure are all the 
dharmas , pure am I by nature—amen”. Then after some details 
follows the meditation of the self as the Lord himself, and that of 
various gods and goddesses on either side of the Lord with mantras, 
etc. 16 


3. Kalachakra-yana 

Within the fold of Vajra-yana there arose, in or about the tenth 
century A.D., a school known as Kalachakra-yana, which should 
not be regarded as a separate school of Tantrik Buddhism distinct 
from Vajra-yana. The supreme deity in this school is called the 
Lord Sri-Kalachakra. Kdla means the ultimate immutable know¬ 
ledge (Prajna) or the state of Silnyata, while Chakra means the 
cycle of the world process, or the body of the Lord containing the 
potency of the existence of the universe, which is just the principle 
of Updya. Kalachakra, therefore, implies the absolutely unified 
principle of Prajna and Updya , and he is thus the Bodhi-chitta. In 
some Tantras he is characterised as Sunyatd and Karuna unified, as 
the non-dual Lord, and as embracing Prajna. There is, therefore, 
no essential difference between the two conceptions of Kalachakra 
and Vajrasattva. As to other matters also, viz. worship, mantras , 
practices, rites, etc., the principle and method are the same both 
in Kalachakra-yana and Vajra-yana. The difference between the two 
lies in a few distinctive features of Kalachakra-yana, of which one, 
though not the main, is the introduction and predominance in the 
system of a number of gods and their female energies, having awful 
and terrible aspects, though as powerful as the celestial Buddhas 


412 



MIN/Sr^ 



themselves, and of other dreadful fiendesses known as Dakinis, all of 
whom have to be appeased with mantra- charms, magic circles, offer¬ 
ings and sacrifices. One other distinctive feature is the stress on time 
which is the common meaning of the term Kala. Time, with all 
its divisions and subdivisions, viz. moment, hour, day, night, week, 
fortnight, month, year, etc., dwells within one’s body, in which lies 
the whole universe with all its animate beings and inanimate ob¬ 
jects. And Time with its divisions is caused by, or is the produc¬ 
tion of, the vital winds ( vayus ) that remain diffused throughout the 
entire nervous system of one’s body. One who can control the 
vital winds in the nerves by Yogic practices, thereby keeps oneself 
above all influence of the whirl of Time, which is the root cause of 
all miseries including decay and destruction. 17 

The Vajra-yana and Kalachakra-yana completed the evolution 
of Buddhism in India. As we have seen above, some time after 
the seventh century A.D. Hinayana was practically dislodged by 
Mahayana from the mainland of India. After the tenth century, 
Mahayana, too, in its turn, was to a considerable extent eclipsed by 
Vajra-yana, which “revolted against both the monasticism and 
scholasticism of Hinayana Buddhism and the intellectual pedantry 
of the Mahayanists”, 18 and now began to make its triumphant 
headway. It exerted its influence most in the eleventh and twelfth 
centuries A.D., wherever in India Buddhism prevailed at that time. 
The influence of Kalachakra-yana was felt more from the latter 
half of the eleventh century, and speaking generally, its sphere of 
influence was limited to Bengal, Magadha (South Bihar) and 
Kashmir, though subsequently it spread to Nepal. Round these 
two schools a vast body of literature grew up in different Buddhist 
monasteries, while the artists carved out a large number of images 
of deities of the Vajra-yana and Kalachakra-yana pantheons for 
worship in numerous temples that were built up. 

4. Sahaja-yana 

In Bengal, during the Pala period, a section of the Tantrik Bud¬ 
dhists rose in revolt against all conventionalism, ceremonialism, 
muttering of mantras, etc. of Vajra-yana. These rebels, known as 
Sahajiya Buddhists, also made their position distinct by their 
scrupulous abhorrence of high thinking and deep learning, even of 
constructing images and worshipping gods, etc.; for truth, they 
affirmed, was a matter of intuition and could never be attained by 
these artificial and unnatural means. To that end one must pro¬ 
ceed through the natural way, which lies not in discarding the in¬ 
born propensities of human beings and the total annihilation of the 
sex passions, but in sublimating the same. Sahajiya Buddhists, to 


413 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

whom deliberate infliction of any sort of strain on human nature 
was an idea as shocking as it was sickening, would adopt human 
nature itself as the best appliance for realising the truth, and con¬ 
sequently they called their path the easiest, the most straight and 
the most natural (sahaja). The path was one of Yoga practices, 
for the process of Yoga, according to their way of thinking, takes 
its rise from one’s sex impulses. 

The fundamental tenets of these Sahajiyas are known exclusive¬ 
ly from a number of Charyapadas or devotional songs and Dohas 
composed by them. As for the Yogic practices, the Sahaja-yana 
accepts the general Tantrik Buddhist texts as its authority, though 
it invented some new terminologies to suit its standpoint. In the 
matter of sexo-yogic practices, the Sahajiya Buddhists, however, 
went ahead of the Vajra-yanists by laying more emphasis on two 
points, viz. (i) the imperative necessity of making the body 
sufficiently strong and fit before starting with Yogic processes; and 
(ii) conception of an internal female force in the Nirmana-chakra 
(navel region), corresponding to that of the Kwla-kwujtalini sakti 
of the Brahmanical Tantras. 

The sphere of influence of the Sahajiya Buddhist cult was for 
the most part Bengal and probably, to some extent, its western and 
south-western environs. When exactly this offshoot of Tantrik 
Buddhism rose as a distinct school is difficult to determine, but 
many of the poets of the Charyas and Dohas are known to have 
flourished in the eleventh and twelfth centuries during the Pala 
period. In popular mind the term Sahajiya or Sahaja-yana is an¬ 
other name for excesses and debauchery, but the authors of the 
Charyas and Dohas do not seem to have prized morality any less 
than other religious systems do. 19 

II. SPHERE OF INFLUENCE 

There is a general belief that Bengal and Bihar remained the only 
resorts of Buddhism in India after the age of Harsha-vardhana, till 
it was finally extirpated in the twelfth century. But both epigraphic 
and literary records testify to the fact that it had quite a large num¬ 
ber of followers in other parts of India also, even between A.D. 1000 
and 1200. It is true that Buddhism had ceased to be a creative 
force in religion, literature or aesthetics, and was merely a legacy 
of the past in less capable hands. But it is equally true that Bud¬ 
dhism, in a new form, was still a living religion in India during this 
period. This will be evident from the following account of Bud¬ 
dhism, arranged on a regional basis. 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



a 

| 

S 


1. Pala kingdom (Bengal and Bihar) 



In A.D. 1000 the king of Bengal (Gauda) was Mahipala I, 20 
doubtless the most energetic ruler of the line after the great 
Dharmapala and his son Devapala, both from political and religi¬ 
ous points of view. Under him the Pala monarchy once again out- 
i stripped the limits of Magadha to the west, while a galaxy of Bud¬ 
dhist scholars and other celebrities joined hands with him to revive 
Buddhism in Eastern India from the stupor into which it had fallen' 
in the tenth century A.D. After him his son Nayapala strove, not 
without success, to maintain the progress of Buddhism. It suffer¬ 
ed decline during the political troubles that followed, 21 but in the 
reign of Ramapala (c. A.D. 1077-1120) the religion was again active 
and stirring, and a number of scholars, teachers and artists shed 
lustre on the age of the last great Pala king. But this was the last 
flickering of the lamp and Buddhism steadily declined till it was 
finally ousted from the land of its birth by the Muslim raids to¬ 
wards the close of the twelfth century A.D. 

The possession of Magadha gave the Buddhist Pala rulers the j 
mastery over the greatest vihdras or samgharamas of India, viz. 
Nalanda, Odantapuri (Uddandapura, probably near the town of 
Bihar), and Vikramasila (near Bhagalpur), 22 the last two being the 
creation of the Palas themselves towards the commencement of j 
their rule. The vihdras, as is well known, served as Buddhist 
seats of learning, as also citadels of strength of the Samgha, and 
the centres wherefrom radiated the influence of their doctrine and 
culture. As such, they played a very important part in the propa¬ 
gation of Buddhism and maintaining its influence. 

Nalanda, the origin and glorious history of which have been re¬ 
ferred to above, 23 was damaged by fire some time before the eleventh 
regnal year of Mahipala I, but was repaired in that year. Far more 
damaging to it was, however, the rise of Vikramasila, which, we are j 
told, had about this time surpassed Nalanda in fame and renown. 
Taranatha even hints that the professorial board of Vikramasila 
kept watch over the affairs of Nalanda, which amounts to a sort of 
control by the former over the latter. 24 Like Vikramasila in Ma¬ 
gadha, the university of Somapuri occupied a position of pre¬ 
eminence in Bengal ever since the days of Dharmapala. 26 The 
monastery of Somanuri, the site of which is represented by Pahar- 
pur in North Bengal, was in a flourishing condition till the eleventh 
century. The great Atlsa or Atlsa Dipankara resided here when 
he translated into Tibetan, in collaboration with some others, the 
Madhyamaka-ratna-pradipa of Bhavaviveka. 26 We have also a 
stone inscription on a pillar, in. characters of the eleventh century, 


415 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


found in the ruins of Paharpur, recording that the pillar was caused 
to be made by Sri-Dasavala-garbha for the good of the animate 
beings. 27 

About the middle of the eleventh century, the Somapurt-maha- 
vihara was set on fire by the armies of Vangala or South-east Ben¬ 
gal. Even though, some time after, a monk, Vipulasrimitra, under¬ 
took a wholesale renovation of the monastery, 28 it could not be re¬ 
stored to its former glory. About this time Ramapala established 
a new maha-vihdra, in North Bengal, called Jagaddala, which also 
came to occupy an important position in Bengal. Besides Vibhuti- 
chandra and Danaslla, the two most renowned celebrities of Jagad¬ 
dala, the names of some other scholars, e.g. Mokshakaragupta, the 
logician, Subhakaragupta, Dharmakara, etc. are intimately associat¬ 
ed with Jagaddala, where the great Sakyasribhadra is also said to 
have dwelt for some time. 29 


To all these mahd-viharas or universities, richly endowed with, 
royal grants, flocked learners from all quarters of India to receive 
instructions at the feet of the most profound savants of the day. 
Another feature that marked them, and which is historically very 
important, is that they were largely frequented by monks from 
Tibet, specially from the time of Mahipala I. This resulted in 
bringing Tibet closer to India than ever. While, usually on invita¬ 
tion from the Tibetan kings, the viharas used to send forth from 
time to time pre-eminent scholars to the Land of Snow with the 
mission of preaching the gospel of the Buddha or reforming the 
religion there, they also frequently supplied competent monks to' 
that country for translating Buddhist works from Sanskrit into 
Tibetan. Thus the nucleus of a Tibetan Buddhist literature began 
to take shape in Tibet. Gradually, the Tibetans, too, began to study 
Sanskrit under Indian monks both in Tibet and in India and took 
up the task which had hitherto been done by the Indian monks 
only. The influx of the Tibetan monks began to swell more and 
more as time went on, and the universities had, as a matter of course, 
to make commodious provisions for them to learn Sanskrit and be 
LocMvas. The Buddhist Panditas of India, in their turn, found it 
alluring to master Tibetan, in order to permeate Tibet all the more 
with the doctrines of Buddhism by means of Tibetan translations of 
Sanskrit books, and the Indian universities, particularly those of 
Eastern India and Kashmir, became genial centres of the cultivation 
of Tibetan. The growth of the vast Tibetan Buddhist literature- 
was thus due as much to the contributions of Indian scholars, as to 
those of the Tibetans themselves. That literature forms now, for 
the most part, the only extant source of our information regarding: 


416 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



^%Selndian Buddhist scholars and their works during the period under 
review. 

Besides Somapuri and Jagaddala, there were many other less 
known viharas in Bengal in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. 
Among these Devlkota in North Bengal and Pandita-vifrara in the 
Chittagong District of East Bengal deserve particular mention and 
were noted as seats of Buddhist learning and culture. 30 

Amongst the host of Buddhist scholars who kept the light burn¬ 
ing in Bengal and Bihar in the eleventh and twelfth centuries by 
their writings and other exertions, and at the same time propagated 
and popularised the faith, through the medium of translation, in 
Tibet, it is possible to name only a few. Tilopada or Tilopa, alias 
Prajhabhadra, was a celebrity of the Pan^ita-ui/wEra. Nadapada, 
alias Yasobhadra, a Kashmirian by birth, was his disciple, who 
worked for some time, along with Vinayasrimitra and some others 
of Kashmir, in the grand vihdra of Kanakastupa, which is located by 
some in Kashmir, but was really in the district of Tipperah of East 
Bengal. 31 According to the Tibetan tradition he succeeded Jetari 
in the Chair of the North-door Pandit a of Vikramasila, and 
subsequently became the High-priest of Vajrasana. 32 Jetari, 
alias Jetakarna, was the son of one Gaganaghosha, a Brahmana, 33 
and not of Garbhapada 34 nor of king Sanatana of Varendra, 35 as 
tradition would have it. Tradition also makes Nadapada a pre¬ 
ceptor, and Jetari a teacher, of the great Atisa Dipahkara, but there 
is no positive evidence to substantiate it. The distinction of being 
a preceptor of Atisa, however, rightly belongs to Ratnakara Santi, 36 
better known to the Tibetans as Santi-pada, a voluminous writer, 
an eminent logician, and occupant of the Chair of Pandita, a prize 
post at that time, at the East gate of Vikramasila 37 in the first half 
of the eleventh century. His title Rdjdchdrya , 38 if it has any 
genuine significance at all, shows that he was the spiritual guide 
of Mahlpala I. Contemporary with him was Jnanasnmitra of 
Gauda, also associated with Vikramasila. AdvayaVajra, who 
belonged to the same age and was known variously as Advayagupta, 
Atulyavajra, Avadhutapada, Maitiipada, etc., testifying to his emi¬ 
nence, lived in the Devikota-uibara of North Bengal. The next 
exalted figure is Atisa Dipahkara, 39 otherwise called Dipahkara 
Srijnana, undoubtedly the greatest of all Buddhist Panditas of Ben¬ 
gal, and possibly the most outstanding personality in the entire 
Buddhist world after Nagarjuna. He was appointed the High-priest 
of Vikramasila by Nayapala about A.D. 1040-42, but resigned owing 
to the repeated importunities of the Tibetan king Ye-ses-hod and 
his successor Chan Chub, in order to go over to Tibet to reform the 

417 

S.E.—27 



minis;*,. 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


religion thereof. On his way he resided for a year in Nepal. He 
was received with royal honours in Tibet and worked almost 
miracles there during the thirteen years of his great mission, till his 
death in A.D. 1053 at the age of seventy-three. The Tibetans still 
bestow divine honours upon him and he richly deserves them on ac¬ 
count of his literary and missionary activity in that far-off land. An¬ 
other illustrious monk, later by half a century, was Abhayakara¬ 
gupta, a contemporary of Ramapala, and a glory of Vikiamaslla in 
its last days. To him also is attributed the authorship of a good 
many works, mostly on Vajra-yana and Kalachakra-yana, and he 
exerted immense influence on Tibetan thought through his numer¬ 
ous translations. He is said in different anecdotes to have been 
bom in Gauda or in Jharikhanda of Orissa, but in the colophons of 
at least two works of his own he figures as one of Magadha. He is 
still worshipped as a great saint by the Northern Buddhists and 
many stories are current about his various supernatural powers, 40 

Another monk of great repute was Mahdpandita Vibhuti- 
chahdra, son of a king ( raja-putra ) and a celebrity of Jagaddala. 
He was a contemporary of, or just posterior to, Abhayakaragupta, 
and a pretty large number of Vajra-yana and Kalachakra-yana 
works are associated with his name either as an author or as a 
translator or redactor. He also went to Tibet, and on his return 
journey made a halt in Nepal for some time. 41 Another famed 
writer on Tantrik Buddhism of about this period was Dahasila of 
Jagaddala, who must not be confounded with an earlier namesake 
of his of the time of Dharmapala. He made his mark chiefly as a 
translator, and translated without aid more than fifty works into 
Tibetan. 42 


Although all these scholar-monks and others of this period 
concerned themselves primarily with Vajra-yana and Kalachakra- 
yana in their literary activities, some of them, including Jetari, 
Ratnakara-santi, Atisa Dipankara and Abhayakaragupta, made 
contributions to Mahayana literature (Sutra, Mdo-Hgrel) by their 
commentaries and sub-commentaries. 43 A gloss on the Ashtdsd - 
hasrikd Prajndpdramita, entitled Amndydnusdrinl , is ascribed to 
king Ramapala himself. 44 The study of Buddhist logic was also 
not neglected in Bengal in this period and we have logical treatises 
in Tibetan translation of Jetari, Ratnakara Santi, Mokshakaragupta, 


/etc. 

As literature is a fair index of the ideas of people of the upper 
stratum, art normally reflects the popular mind. In matters religi¬ 
ous, art expresses itself through divine images and the temples 
built for them. A large number of Buddhist images belonging to 


4)18 



flits period 45 presuppose a large number of votaries of that religion 
among the ordinary people. 


2. Kashmir 

Another vigorous centre of Buddhism was Kashmir. The 
exodus of numerous missionaries from this region in order to 
spread the doctrine in Tibet and Central Asia had made the valley 
a sort of holy land to the Northern Buddhists. When, after the 
notorious persecution of the Faith in Tibet by Glan-dar-ma 46 , the 
decaying religion was revived a centuiy later, it was mostly the 
Kashmirian sramanas whose services were requisitioned to re¬ 
instruct the people of Tibet in the forgotten Law. 47 

Again, of the number of sramanas who went over to China in 
the tenth and eleventh centuries, some belonged to Kashmir. For 
instance, a Kashmirian sramana went, along with another, prob¬ 
ably named Danapala, of Udyana, in A.D. 980 to China, where the 
emperor commissioned them, both well-versed in the Tripitaka, to 
translate the scriptures from Sanskrit into Chinese. In A.D. 1005 
another sramana from Kashmir repaired to China with some manu¬ 
scripts and a twig of the sacred Bodhi-tree of Bodh-Gaya, which he 
presented to the Chinese emperor. 48 

Within the valley itself Buddhism had in the past found in 
Lalitaditya Muktapida and his grandson, Jayapifia, of the eighth 
century, two powerful Brahmanical kings very tolerant towards 
Buddhism. 49 To the Buddhists of Kashmir, the great Buddha 
image installed by Lalitaditya at his new capital, Parihasapura, 
and the statue of the Great Buddha (Brihad-Buddha) set up much 
earlier by Jayendra, the maternal uncle of king Pravarasena II, in 
the Jayendra -vihara of Srinagara, 60 were objects of great adoration 
even in the eleventh century. When king Harsha (A.D. 1089-1101) 
of the Lohara dynasty, in a fit of rage, gave himself up to the 
destruction of the divine images of Kashmir, these two colossal 
statues of the Buddha were saved, it is said, at the intercession of 
two Buddhists. 61 But this might also have been due to Harsha’s own 
pro-Buddhist leanings, clearly reflected in the hymn entitled Ashta- 
mahdsthana-chaitya-vandand-stava which, along with another hymn, 
Suprabhata-prabhata-stotra, is attributed to his authorship in the 
Tangyur, BZ And it derives further corroboration from the fact 
that it was in his presence, or under his auspices, that the transla¬ 
tion of the P aralokasiddhi of Dharmottara was executed by Bhavya- 
raja of Kashmir in the Ratnarasmi- vihara, at Anupamapura,' 63 But 
king Jayasiriiha (A.D. 1128-1155), the contemporary of Kalhana, 
lacked this catholicity of heart, and broke up images and burnt 
down a vihara at Arigon near Srlnagara, though it was afterwards 


419 


MIN ISTffy. 



rebuilt. 64 Fortunately only few bigots of the type of Jayasiiiiha 
sat on the throne of Kashmir. 


The famous Jayendra-mhara of Srinagara and the Raj a-vihdra, 
founded by Lalitaditya at Parihasapura, which long inspired the 
Buddhists of Kashmir, had played out their part in history by the 
eleventh century A.D. But the two celebrated vihdras, viz. Ratna- 
gupta- and Ratnarasmi-uifiara, in the centre of Anupamapura, 
figure as the greatest centres of Buddhist learning and culture in 
Kashmir in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.® 5 There a vast 
body of literature grew up in Tibetan translation during this period, 
and a considerable part of this corpus of translation seems to relate 
to Mahayana works. 66 

But in Kashmir, as in Bengal, Vajra-yana and Kalachakra-yana 
found a fertile soil and the Tangyur furnishes us with the names of 
a fairly large number of Vajrdchdryas and Kdlachakrachdryas oi 
Kashmir of this period, who made mark as authors, commentators 
and translators. Pre-eminent amongst these are Jnanasrlmitra 
(A.D. 1074) of Anupama-uihara, and Buddhasrijnana, Sarvajnasrirak- 
shita and Sakyasribhadra, called ‘the Grand Pwridita of Kasmira’ 
Among less known scholars may be mentioned Jayananda, Surya- 
gupta, Sumanahsri, Jinamitra, Tilaka-kalasa, Prajnasrigupta, Vala- 
sribhadra, Mahajana and Manoratha, whose dates cannot be fixed 
within precise limits, except that of the first, Jayananda, who 
flourished about A.D. 1050. 

History of Kashmir Buddhism during this period is character¬ 
ised by a lively study of Buddhist logic, and Bhavyaraja 68 and 
Sankarananda 69 are two of the best known products of the valley 
in this domain. Of the former, who was a contemporary of king 
Harsha (A.D. 1089-1101), only translations of three works of Dhar- 
mottara have found place in the Tangyur, but his grandiloquent 
title Kasmira-nyaya-chudamani 60 indicates real contributions to Bud¬ 
dhist logic in some original treatise or treatises written by him. 
Of other logicians of Kashmir, mention may be made of Mahasu- 
mati, bearing the title of Mahdtarkika , 61 Parahitavrata, who trans¬ 
lated the Pramdna-vinischaya of Dharmakirti, 62 and Jnanasrl, the 
author, amongst others, of the Tarka-bhashd . e3 

Apart from sacerdotal, theological and logical works, Kashmir 
produced in the first half of the eleventh century, in Kdvya style, 
the far-famed Bodhisattv-avadanakalpalata , 64 which is a collec¬ 
tion of legendary stories about the deeds of the Bodhisattvas. The 
author of this book, the renowned Kashmir polymath Kshemen- 
dra, died after having composed 107 pallavas of the book. His son, 
Somendra, not only added an introduction and the concluding 


420 


MINISr^ 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



<SL 


chapter, but also wrote the Jimutavahana-Avaddna. Kshemendra, 
who strikingly illustrates in this poem the six transcendental per¬ 
fections of a Bodhisattva, was after all a layman, and celebrated 
the Buddha as an Avatara of Vishnu. This is why some of the great 
Lamas of Tibet have discarded the book as profane. 6 * 5 

Buddhism produced such a salutary effect on the minds of the 
people of the valley that even some kings had insisted upon the 
practice of ahimsa in their daily lives. 66 And it also seems that both 
the Kashmir schools of 6aivism, viz. Spanda and Pratyabhijnd, that 
came into being in the ninth and tenth centuries A.D., had been 
more or less influenced by Buddhism, and this accounts for their 
being more rational and humane in outlook than all other schools 
of Saivism in India. 


3. Madhyadesa 

When, in the first half of the seventh century, Hiuen Tsang 
visited India, most of the Buddhist sacred places were desolate and 
in ruins. 67 With the establishment of the Pala empire the Maga- 
dhan sites again became popular, and in the eleventh, as also the 
twelfth, century an effort seems to have been made to reclaim and 
renovate most of the holy places. An inscription of the reign of 
Mahipala I, at Sarnath, dated in Samvat 1083 or A.D. 1026, records 
the restoration of many monuments as noted above. 68 At Bodh- 
Gaya, too, between A.D. 1000 and 1033 there was an influx of a 
good many Chinese pilgrims who built stupas , etc. 69 And this is 
exactly the period covered by the reign of Mahipala I, who himself 
is glorified in a votive inscription on an image of the Buddha in¬ 
stalled there in the eleventh year of his reign. 70 

Even the long-forgotten name of Kausambi (modern Kosam) 
reappears in the reign of Mahipala I. We know from a record of 
the eleventh year of his reign that the Nalanda-mahdmhara, badly 
damaged by fire, was repaired by a follower of Mahayana, Bala- 
ditya by name, hailing from Kausambi ( Kausambi-irinirgata ). 71 
We have yet another inscription, over the gateway of the fort of 
Karra, referring to Kosamba-mcmdcda or the district of Kausambi, in 
A.D. 1035, 72 which also falls within the regnal period of Mahipala I. 

Likewise, the name Kapilavastu is heard of in a tradition as 
the birth-place of Damodara, alias Advayavajra, 73 one of the illus¬ 
trious Buddhist contemporaries of Mahipala I. Whether the tradi¬ 
tion is genuine or not, it shows that Kapilavastu was about this 
time not a depopulated site. At Kusinara, where the Master obtain¬ 
ed Parinirnma a stone inscription of the eleventh-twelfh century 
refers to a king of a branch of the Kalachuri family, who, a Bud- 


421 


. WHIST/fy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


dhist, is said to have revered, not unusually, the Brahmanical god, 
giva, along with the Buddha and Tara. 74 The evidence of an illus¬ 
trated twelfth century MS. of the Ashtasahasrika-PrajMparamita 
shows that Vaisali had again been famous in the Buddhist world, 
for a temple" of Tara was established there ( Tirabhuktau Vatiali- 
Tdra). Similarly in the Jetavana mound at Sahet-Mahet, the anci¬ 
ent Sravastx, has been found a stone inscription, dated A.D. 1118, 
which records that one Vidyadhara, a counsellor of Madana of a 
line of Rashtrakuta kings in U. P., had established a convent for 
the Buddhist ascetics. 7,5 It offers a stiiking contrast to the day of 
Hiuen Tsang when ‘all was in ruins’ in this region. 76 


After the reign of MahTpala I Sarnath had passed under the 
domination of the Kalachuris of Tripun, and a fragmentary inscrip¬ 
tion found in a monastery there says that in A.D. 1058 in the reign 
of Karnadeva, Mamaka, a devout worshipper and follower of Maha- 
yana, caused a copy of the Ashtasahasrikd-Prajndpdramitd to be writ¬ 
ten, which was presented, along with other things, to the order of 
monks residing there. 77 


Eventually the Sarnath region was incorporated within the 
kingdom of the Gahadavalas of Kanauj. The third king of this 
dynasty, Govindachandra, was not himself a declared Buddhist, 
but his reign is marked by two memorable events in the history of 
later Buddhism. The first is the construction of the stupendous 
Dharmachakra-Jinavihara (Monastery I) at Sarnath by his Buddhist 
wife Kumaradevl, who installed therein an image of the goddess 
Vasudhara. 78 The ruins of this monastery, so far exposed, cover a 
stretch of ground more than 700' from east to west. About the 
same time was added the last encasing of the Dharmarajika stupa, 
which was earlier repaired in A.D. 1026 by Sthirapala and his 
brother. 79 Sarnath thus again became a lively centre of Buddhism, 
which is proved not only by the inscriptions but also by the dis¬ 
covery of a variety of Buddhist images of this period. 

The other notable incident of Govindachandra’s reign is recorded 
in an inscription at Sahet-Mahet, viz. that he, having been gratified 
by the Saugata-Parivrajaka, the Mahapandita Sakyarakshita, a resi¬ 
dent of the Utkala country, and his disciple, the Saugata-Parivra¬ 
jaka, the Mahapandita Vagisvararakshita, a resident of the Cho$a 
country, bestowed as many as six villages upon the community of 
Buddhist friars (Sakyabhikshu) , of which Buddharakshita was the 
chief, residing in the holy convent of Jetavana. 80 Whether this 
convent at Jetavana was the one established by Madana’s counsel¬ 
lor in A.D. 1118 cannot be determined, but Jetavana, where the 


422 


muisr^y 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



Master resided for so many years of his life, was not a desolate 
place in the twelfth century. 

In the matter of religion Govindachandra presents a striking 
resemblance to Harsha-vardhana; both are styled Parama-Mcihes- 
vara in their official records, but both had imbibed a strong inclina¬ 
tion in favour of Buddhism in some period of their lives. In case 
of Govindachandra, the feeling seems to have been considerably 
fostered by the influence of his two Buddhist queens Kumaradevi 
and Vasantadev!. 81 Buddhism thus gained so strong a hold over 
the family that Govindachandra*s grandson, Jayachandra, who was 
originally initiated as a devotee of Krishna, 82 had subsequently be¬ 
come, out of reverence ( sraddhayd ) for a Buddhist monk, Srlmitra 
of Bodh-Gaya, his disciple “with a pleasing heart and an indescrib¬ 
able hankering”. 83 This further shows that Gaya continued to be 
a centre of Buddhism. 

There are other evidences also, vouching for the prevalence of 
Buddhism in Madhyadesa where it is generally believed to have 
been almost in a moribund condition in the eleventh-twelfth 
century. We know, for instance, of a Vajrachaiya of Kosala, 
Vairochanavajra, who flourished not earlier than the eleventh 
century, and was the author of a few works. 84 

In Malava, too, Buddhism had in about the first half of the 
twelfth century an enterprising adherent in Dana-srljhana, styled 
differently as Bodhisattva, Acharya Bodhisattva and Mahdcharya 
Bodhisattva in his different books. 86 Sometimes represented as 
Malavahi Pandita , 86 he was more popularly known as Dhari-Srijha- 
na, implying his residence at Dhara, the capital of Malava under 
the Paramaras, and it may be that he enjoyed the patronage of his 
contemporary Paramara king. 

No Chandella king of Kalanjara (Bundelkhand) is known to 
have directly furthered the cause of Buddhism. Yet Paramardi- 
deva of this dynasty, while registering a grant of land in A.D. 1179 
to several Brahmanas, made the benign provision of excluding 
from it a piece of land lying therein, as that had previously been 
granted to a temple of the Buddha 87 An inscription of Malaya- 
simha, the Buddhist feudatory of the Chedi king Vijayasimha of 
Tripurl, dated A.D. 1193, records the excavation of a big tank, 
obviously on a Buddhist site in Rewa (C. I.), the cost of which was 
met by 1,500 tahkakas specially designed for the occasion, stamped 
with the effigy of the Buddha. 88 The prevalence of Buddhism in 
this region in the eleventh-twelfth century is further attested to 
not only by some other epigraphical and literary evidences but also 


4$8\ 



by several images of Avalokitesvara and Tara, discovered at Gopal- 
pur in the Jabalpur District. 89 


In other parts of North India, however, Buddhism presented a 
sad contrast. From Sindh, where Hiuen Tsang found many monas¬ 
teries and 10,000 followers, an exodus of the monks followed on a 
large scale after its occupation by Muhammad-ibn-Qasim; many 
came to the Kampilya-Mahavihara on the outskirts of Surat, 30 
while some went over to other safe quarters, including Bodh-Gaya. 91 
We have in the Tangyur a work, in Tibetan translation, by a Vajra- 
charya of Gujarat, the Mahapandita Purnavajra, 92 but his date is 
not known. 

4. South India 

Buddhism suffered a steady decline in South India, partly by 
the growing importance of Jainism, but mainly due to the rise of 
Saivism and Vaishpavism, as noted above. 93 But that the religion 
lingered in some form even after A.D. 1000, is proved by literary 
evidences as well as by no fewer than fifteen epigraphs. Of these 
the Larger and Smaller Leiden plates of the Cholas have been refer¬ 
red to above. 94 Of the rest, five belong to Andhra, and six to 
Karnataka. 

The records of Andhra, dating from A.D. 1137 to 1234, show 
that the famous Amaravati stupa was still in good preservation; 
provisions were made for burning perpetual lamps at this stupa as 
also in the temple of the Buddha at Dipaladin, near Amaravati, by 
some individuals of the Brahmanical creed, including some mer¬ 
chants, ladies, and a chief of the Kota family, Keta II, and his 
relations. 96 

Two inscriptions, one at Belgami in the Shimoga, and the other 
at Lakkundi in the Dharwar, District, refer to the worship of the 
Buddha and Tara along with some deities of the Brahmanical, and 
sometimes even of Jain, pantheons, in the self-same temples by 
some followers of Brahmanical religion, mostly merchants, and by 
princess Akkadevi, the elder sister of the Western Chalukya king, 
Jagadekamalla Jayasimha III. 96 An analogous instance of syncret¬ 
ism or universality in religion is to be found about this time in case 
of one Gaganasiva, a Saivite teacher of Orissa, 97 where, again, we 
know of a tenth century ruler, Devananda, alias Dhruvananda, who 
is styied a devout Saiva in one of his records and a devout Buddhist 
in another. 98 

But these illustrations do not really signify the existence of 
genuine or bona fide Buddhism. The donors and patrons were not 
Buddhists and did not even claim to be such. To some of them, 


424 


•V? .m**' 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


the worship of the Buddha was that of an avatarct of Vishnu, and 
in other cases the worship of the Buddha and Tara was merely due 
to the fear of incurring the displeasure, unless propitiated, of the 
two supreme deities of a living pantheon. It is interesting to note 
that some of the real or orthodox Buddhists of South India of this 
time preferred to leave their home and migrate to North India." 
The Tangyur furnishes us with the names of some Vajracharyas 
who belonged to South India and the Deccan. 100 A large number 
of images of both Mahayana and Vajra-yana pantheons, datable in 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and lying in the Mayurbhanja 
region and the Nilgirl States of Orissa, 101 indicate the prevalence 
of both the doctrines in this part of the country during the period 
under review. 

III. THE LAST PHASE 

The brief sketch given above leaves no doubt that Buddhism 
was a living force in many parts of Northern India down to the 
end of the twelfth century. It was, of course, visibly on the decline 
and had long ceased to be a rival of Brahmanical religion, even in 
Bengal and Bihar. The process of assimilation between the two 
was also steadily gaining force, as is evidenced by the recognition 
of Buddha as an avatdra (incarnation) of Vishnu, and the close 
affinity between Brahmanical Tantrism and the later phases of Bud¬ 
dhism such as Vajra-yana and Kalachakra-yana described above. It is 
not unlikely that Buddhism would have been considerably absorbed 
by Brahmanical religion in course of time. But the invasion of the 
Muslims and the ruthless destruction of Buddhist monasteries by 
them finally extinguished the lamp of Buddhism that was still 
flickering in the plains of North India. The vivid description, by 
an almost contemporary Muslim writer, of the wanton destruction 
of the great monastery at Uddandapura (Bihar) and the wholesale 
massacre of its shaven-headed monks, 102 gives us an idea of how the 
great monasteries of Nalanda, Vikramasila and others of less re¬ 
nown met with a sudden and tragic end. 103 These monasteries 
served as the citadels of Buddhism, and with their fall Buddhism 
lost its foothold in India. It found a last refuge in the fastnesses of 
Nepal, 10 -' where it is flourishing even now, though in a modified 
form. But for all practical purposes it vanished from the rest of 
India. 

It is, however, hardly possible that Buddhism, which was once 
such a great religion, could altogether disappear without leaving 
some traces behind. It has been plausibly suggested that it was not 
only fused with Saktism and other Brahmanical Tantrik cults, but 


425 


misr^y 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




also survived ill the guise of such medieval religious cults of Ben¬ 
gal as Nathism, Sahajiya, Avadhuta, Baul, etc. Some have even- 
found in the cult of Dharma a living relic of Buddhism in 
Bengal and Orissa, but this is doubtful. 105 

But howsoever that may be, we get very few traces of Buddhism 
as a distinct religious cult in India after the thirteenth century. 
Buddhism still flourished in the kingdom of Pattikera (Comilla) 106: 
early in the thirteenth century AD. when Muslims had not yet 
penetrated into that region, and a Buddhist king Madhusena was 
reigning as late as AD. 1289 in some parts of Bengal. 107 About the 
same time we find two other Buddhist rulers Asokavalla (or Asoka- 
challa), king of Sapadalaksha (Siwalik hills in U.P.), and his 
feudatory, Purushottamasimha of Kama (Kumayun), building some 
new structures in Bodh-Gaya. 108 They mention in their records 
that Buddhism had decayed, but nevertheless votive records at 
Bodh-Gaya prove that Buddhist pilgrims visited the holy place 
down to the fifteenth century A.D. and even later. 109 Stray references 
to Buddhism occur in a few other records of the thirteenth century 
and even later, and Buddhist manuscripts were copied here and 
there. 110 


We possess contradictory general statements about Buddhism in 
later period. Abul Fazl states that “for a long time past scarce 
any trace of them (the Buddhists) has existed in Hindustan.’’ 11 1 
Although when he visited Kashmir in AD. 1597 he met with a few 
old men professing Buddhism, he ‘saw none among the learned’. 
This is borne out by the fact that Buddhist priests were conspicuous 
by their absence from the motley crowd of learned divines that 
thronged the Ibadatkhana of Akbar at Fatehpur Sikri. 

On the other hand the Vaishnava literature of Bengal refers to« 
a Buddhist community in Bengal as also in South India in the six¬ 
teenth century A.D., 112 and the Tibetan pilgrim Buddhagupta Tatha- 
gatanatha, who visited India in the seventeenth century, saw traces 
of Buddhism not only in Bengal and Orissa, but also in Trilihga 
(Trikalinga), Vidyanagara (Vijayanagara), Karnataka, and some 
other tracts of South India. He also mentions by name a few Bud¬ 
dhists who possessed great supernatural powers. 113 

As noted above, Buddhism found a last refuge in Nepal. The 
popularity and vitality of Buddhism in this region are proved by 
the large number of viharas, Buddhist manuscripts, many of which 
are dated, copied there, numerous images in stone and metal, and 
pictures of Buddhist gods and goddesses.! 14 One of the principal 
viharas of Nepal during the first three centuries following A.D. 
1200, was the Pandubhumi-uihara, where many of the Indian, 



426 


MIN ISTfiy 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



Panditas and Tibetan Lochavas translated many important sacred 
books into Tibetan. Pandubhumi seems to have been one of the 
resorts in Nepal of the Kashmirian monks like Vimalasribhadra, 
Somanatha, etc. while the three leading figures associated with the 
history of this vihdra were Parama-Guru-Dharmaraja-Matidhvaja 
Srlbhadra, Mahanayaka Sakyabhadra and Anandadhvaja Srlbhadra, 
known as the Grand Pandita of Pandubhumi-uih&ra. 116 At Svayam- 
bhu, the capital of Nepal, was the great Nirabhoga-uibara, 116 which 
must be distinguished from the Tibetan vihdra of the same name. 
Another vihdra of Svayambhu that attained celebrity was the Punya- 
dharodaya-uihdra, 117 Of the viharas of Lalitapattana, the greatest 
was the Govindachandra-ui7wira, associated with two illustrious scho¬ 
lars, the Mahapanfata Siddhesvara Vanaratna, for whom we have 
the date A.D. 1384-1468; 118 and his contemporary, Sarvadigvijaya 
Matimat Pum/a-Sagarasena, who was a follower of Yogachara 
school 119 and a native of Nepal. Vanaratna is, however, said to 
have hailed from Sannagara in Eastern India, 120 and this affords a 
clue to the explanation of the expression Sannagariya bhikshus 
which has for long been a puzzle to scholars. Vanaratna was a 
voluminous writer and an assiduous translator, too, 121 while Sagara- 
sena made his mark as a translator only. They found a brilliant 
collaborator in Kumarasri (A.D. 1392-1481), 122 a learned Lochdva 
working in the same vihdra. Another monk of Eastern India, viz. 
Surya of Magadha, followed Vanaratna in Nepal, became his disci¬ 
ple and composed a hymn in praise of his preceptor. 123 In later times 
there grew up at Lalitapattana many other viharas , great and 
small. 124 After the sixteenth century, Nepalese Buddhism became 
more and more stereotyped and unproductive of anything really 
great. There are at present four different sects among the Buddhist 
community of Nepal, which belong to the Vajra-yana system. These 
are the Svabhdvikas, the oldest of the four, the Aisvarikas, and the 
two later developments of these, viz. the Karmikas and the Ydtnikas. 
Many of the Nepalese Buddhists are votaries of Pasupatinatha (Siva) 
as well. 

C. JAINISM 

I. JAINISM IN GUJARAT 

Gujarat was a flourishing centre of Jainism throughout the 
period under review. The Jain influence at the court of the Chau- 
lukya kings of Gujarat may be traced from the time of the very 
founder of the dynasty. A Jain temple, known as Mulabastika, is 
said to have been constructed by Mularaja himself at his capital 
Anahilapataka or Anahilavada. According to the Kathdkosha of 


427 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Srichandra, Mularaja had for his legal adviser (dharma-sthanasya 
Goshthikali) one Sajjana of the Pragvata family of Anahilavada, and 
Srlehandra, the disciple of Sahasrakirti, whose spiritual prede¬ 
cessors were Srutakirti and Sriklrti in the line of Kundakunda, com¬ 
posed the work for the instruction of the family of Sajjana’s son 
Krishna. The prestige that this line of spiritual teachers enjoyed 
in the political world of the period is indicated incidentally in the 
prasasti, where Sahasrakirti is described as “the sinless teacher 
whose supreme lotus feet were worshipped by eminent kings like 
Gahgeya, Bhojadeva and others.” The reference is presumably to 
the Kalachuri king of Chedi and the Paramara king of Malwa. 12 ' 5 

During the reign of Bhima I, his minister Vimala of the 
Pragvata family built, at Abu or Abu, the most magnificent Jain tem¬ 
ple—that of Adinatha. Indian craftsmanship of the age has found its 
best expression here, and the temple, for its rich delicate carving, 
grace, and beauty, is considered to be unique in the world. 126 The 
temple was completed in A.D. 1031, ie. within seven years of the 
demolition of Somanatha by Mahmud of Ghazni. The Kharatara - 
gachchha-pattavali records 127 that minister Vimala of the Porwad 
caste captured the parasols of thirteen Sultans, founded the town 
of Chandravatx, and built the temple of Rishabhadeva on the 
Arbudachala. These activities of Vimala which, of course, had the 
approval of his royal master, Bhima, were probably a reaction to 
the Muslim vandalism exhibited at Somanatha and other places. 

Jainism became more dominant at the Chaulukya court during 
the reigns of Siddharaja and his successor Kumarapala. The latter 
actually became a convert to Jainism under the influence of “the 
most learned man of his time,” the celebrated Hemachandra (A.D. 
1088-1172), and under his inspiration and guidance enriched 
Gujarat with Jain shrines to an enormous extent. During his reign 
Gujarat became a stronghold of Jainism, in respect of followers as 
well as institutions, for all time to come. The secret of this success 
was not any fanatic zeal, but the promotion of understanding 
between different faiths, which is the corner-stone of Jainism and 
was particularly emphasised by Hemachandra in word as well as 
in deed. The continuity of the faith and the prosperity of the fol¬ 
lowers are attested by the temple of Neminatha built in the vicinity 
of Adinatha temple at Abu, mentioned above, by Tejahpala of the 
Porwa<j family, who was a minister of the Chaulukya king Soma- 
simhadeva. It was completed in A.D. 1230. In its beauty of sculp¬ 
tural decoration it is only comparable to the Adinatha temple. To 
these were added numerous Jain shrines and other structures dur¬ 
ing the twelfth and the thirteenth century, the fame of which gave 




428 


WHISTffy 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


<SL 


_ place its new name Devala-Vada or Delwa<jla. Besides Abu. 

Satrunjaya and Girnar in Kathiawad received particular attention of 
the rulers and merchants, whose bounty is reflected in the huge 
and beautiful temples which have since been adorning their peaks. 
The Chintamani Parsvanatha temple at Khambhata (Cambay) was 
built about A.D. 1108 and repaired in A.D. 1295. It records names of 
several devotees from Malwa, Sapadalaksha, and Chitrakuta, who 
endowed the temple from time to time. 


II. JAINISM IN THE DECCAN AND SOUTH INDIA 


At the beginning of the eleventh century, the Western 
Chalukyas and the Hoysalas gained political ascendancy in the South. 
Both these royal dynasties were great patrons of Jainism, and their 
emergence into power proved a great boon for the propagation and 
glorification of the faith. 

Tailapa, the founder of the Western Chalukya dynasty, was the 
patron of the great Kannada poet Ranna. The next king Satyasraya 
received spiritual guidance from a Jain teacher named Vimala 
Chandra Pan^itadeva of the Dravida Safigha. Many other kings 
this dynasty such as Jayasimha II, Somesvara I and II, and Vikrama- 
ditya VI, showed favour to the Jain faith by patronising Jain writers, 
and giving lands to Jain teachers and Jain temples or settlements 
(basti or vasadi). 


As regards the Hoysalas, reference has been made above to the 
legend about the founder of the dynasty who owed his greatness 
to the benedictions of a Jain saint. A Jain saint, Vardhamanadeva, 
is said to have been “foremost in the management of the affairs of 
the Hoysalas,” probably during the reign of Vinayaditya. The next 
two kings had Jain saints as their spiritual teachers. All these kings 
made grants to Jain temples and settlements. Vishnuvardhana, 
the most celebrated and glorious of the Hoysalas, is said to have 
changed his faith under the influence of the Vaishnava teacher 
Ramanujacharya, but there is ample evidence to prove that he con¬ 
tinued to be benevolent and generous towards Jainism all through 
his regime. Even as late as A.D. 1125 he paid his devotions to the 
Jain saint gripala Traividyadeva, built the Jain abode at Chalya, 
and made suitable grants for repairs of the Jain temples as well as 
for the maintenance of Jain saints. 128 According to another stone 
inscription at Belur (A.D. 1129), 129 he made a gift to the Malli 
Jinalaya. In A.D. 1133, he granted a village to the Parsvanatha temple 
in the capital itself, Dvarasamudra, and to commemorate his recent 
victories, he named the God as Vijaya Parsvanatha and his own son 
as Vijaya Narasimha. 130 Here we have a clear indication how 


429 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Vishnuvardhana tried to hold the balance even between his loyalties 
to his ancestral faith and to the faith of his choice. His queen 
SantaladevI continued to be a staunch devotee of Jainism all through 
her life, and made several donations to the Jain temples. Her spiri¬ 
tual guide was Prabhachandra Siddhantadeva, the disciple of 
Meghachandra Traividyadeva. She died by the Jain form of renun¬ 
ciation called Sallekhana in A.D. 1131. Some of the most outstand¬ 
ing ministers and commanders, to whom Vishnuvardhana owed his 
great victories and conquests, were also staunch devotees of the 
Jain faith. Amongst them was Gahgaraja, who built several Jain 
temples, repaired many more and generously endowed numerous 
Jain institutions. His wife Lakshmimati died in accordance with 
the rules of Jain Sallekhana, and her noble husband commemorat¬ 
ed her by an epitaph at Sravana Belgola. Other commanders of 
Vishnuvardhana, who subscribed to the Jain faith and served it 
properly, were Boppa, Punisa, Maniyane and Bharatesvara whose de¬ 
votion to Jain teachers and acts of piety are recorded in several 
inscriptions at Sravana Belgola and other places. Vishnuvardhana’s 
successor Narasimha I paid a visit to Sravana Belgola and endowed 
the Chaturvimsati basadi built by his illustrious general Hulla, by 
the grant of a village. 131 The later Hoysala kings were also patrons 
of Jainism. Two of them, Vira Ballala II and Narasimha III, had 
Jain saints as their spiritual ancestors, and these and others erected 
Jain temples and made rich endowments to them. It will thus be 
seen that the Hoysala kings personally professed Jainism and by 
their active support and patronage Jain temples and other institu¬ 
tions grew and benefited immensely in the South. 

It was not only these predominant royal houses that patronised 
Jainism, but the faith was adopted by several feudatory chiefs and 
small rulers in the land as well. For example, the Santaras, who 
ruled over that part of Karnataka which roughly corresponds with 
the modern Tirthahalli Taluk and its surrounding country, were the 
followers of Jainism from the very beginning. Bhujabala Santara 
erected a Jain temple in his capital Pomburcha and granted to his 
guru , Kanakanandideva, a village for its maintenance. In A.D. 1081 
Nagularasa, the minister of Vira Santara, is described as ‘a fortress 
to the Jain Pharma’. 1 32 The later chiefs also built numerous Jain 
temples and shrines and endowed them suitably with lands and tolls. 
In A.D. 1173, 133 Vira Santara is described as ‘a bee at the lotus feet of 
Jina’. Later on, however, the Santaras adopted the creed of Vira- 
saivism, and this affected the progress of Jainism in that region to 
some extent. During the thirteenth century the capital of the 
Santaras was shifted to Kalasa, and later to Karkala in Tuluva, 

/ 




430 


misTfy 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY VS 

ere they, in spite of their new faith, continued to be benevolent 
towards Jainism. 


The Kangalvas, who ruled over north Coorg and the Arkalgud 
Taluk in the south of the Hassan District of Mysore, and emerged 
into prominence during the eleventh century, were great patrons of 
Jainism. The Kangalva rulers constructed Jain temples and made 
grants for their maintenance till the beginning of the twelfth cen¬ 
tury, when their fortunes declined consequent upon the expulsion 
of the Cholas by the Hoysalas from the land. 

Similarly, the Changalvas of the Changanad (roughly corres¬ 
ponding with the Hansur Taluk in Mysore State), although Saivite 
by profession, were benevolent towards Jainism, as is clearly proved 
by epigraphic records of A.D. 1091 and 1100 134 which make mention 
.of their construction of Jain temples and donations for the same, 
particularly to some of the “sixty-four basadis in the city of Hana- 
soge or Panasoge (in the Yedatore Taluk of Mysore), reputed to have 
been built by Rama the son of Dasaratha.” We possess numerous 
records, both dated and undated, and ranging between A.D. 1000 and 
1300, of solitary rulers and noblemen, in addition to those of persons 
of the merchant class and others, who built temples, installed images, 
performed worship and made endowments for perpetual service of 
divinity and piety, and who even ended their lives by the renuncia 1 
tion of all worldly attachments and by observing fasts in strict ac¬ 
cordance with the Jain faith. Jain temples, shrines, images, tombs 
and epitaphs, found strewn all over the South, amply testify to the 
fact that during this period the Jain religion was extremely popular 
and constituted a living faith of all classes of people from royalty 
to peasantry, inspiring them to deeds of piety and philanthropy 
during life, and affording them solace and hope in death. 


HI ASCETIC ORGANISATIONS AND SUCCESSION LISTS 

A large number of inscriptions, found at Sravana Belgola, re¬ 
cord genealogical lists of pontifical succession for several centuries, 
and afford us an insight into the organisation of monks and their 
activities. The Siddharabasti pillar inscription of Saka 1320 (A.D. 
1398) 135 records the tradition that Arhadbali acquired brilliance by 
his two pupils Pushpadanta and Rhutavali, and that he split the 
Mula-sahgha Kundakundanvaya into four branches, namely Sena, 
Nandi, Deva and Simha, in order to assuage the jealousies arising 
out of the nature of the Age. The earliest mention of the Mula- 
sahgha and Kundakundanvaya is met with in the copper-plate grants 
of the fifth century. Records of the subsequent period show that 
Sanghas, Ganas, Gachchhas, Balis, and Sakhas of monks had grown 


431 



misrfty 



into a very large number by A.D. 1000. During the period of the 
next three centuries we meet with references, in the epigraphical 
records, to the following orders: Mula-sangha, Nandi-sahgha, 
Namilura-sahgha or Mayura-sangha, Kittura-sangha, Kollatura- 
sangha, Nandi-gana, Desl-gana, Dramila-gana, Kanura-gana, Pustaka- 
or Sarasvati-gachchha, Vakra-gachchha, Tagarila-gachchha, Mandi- 
tala-gachchha, Ingulesvara-bali, Panasoge-bali, etc. Epigraphic 
evidence shows that some of the pontiffs of these branches of the 
Digambara Jain community distinguished themselves in the South 
during this period. 

The pontifical succession, as recorded in the North during the 
sam e period, is somewhat different. According to the Svetambara 
Paftavalis, Sarvadeva Suri, the thirty-sixth pontiff (Acharya) in the 
line of succession after Mahavlra, wielded the leadership at the 
beginning of the eleventh century. A few events of his time are 
recorded in the Pattavalis with dates. Dharmaghosha Suri converted 
the chief minister Vimala in A.D. 1011, and Santi Suri Vddi-Vetdla 
of the Thirapadra-gachchha, who composed a commentary on the 
TJttaradhyayana, attained heaven in A.D. 1039. Sarvadeva Suri was 
followed by Deva Suri, Sarvajayadeva Suri, and Yasobhadra Suri 
successively. Of the last it has been recorded that in his time Sri 
Abhayadeva Suri, the author of commentaries on the nine Angas, 
went to heaven in A.D. 1078, or, according to another account, in 1032. 
Yasobhadra’s successor Munichandra, who lived on sour gruel 
(sauvira) only, was the foremost logician and was the author of 
Anekanta-Jaya-Patdka-Panjika, Upadesapada-Vritti and other works. 
He attained heaven in A.D. 1121. During his leadership the 
Punamiya-gachchha was founded by his colleague Chandraprabha 
Suri in A.D. 1102, and for its guidance Munichandra wrote the 
P&kshika-Saptati. The next in succession was Ajitadeva Suri. His 
co-disciple Vadideva Suri is said to have held a disputation with the 
Digambara teacher Kumudachandra at the court of Jayasimhadeva in 
Anahilapattana, and vanquished him; as a result of this the Digam- 
baras were prevented from entering the capital any more. This 
claim is denied by the Digambara sect. Whatever may be the truth,, 
the record is an evidence of the jealousy which had unfortunately 
developed between the two sister communities. The spirit of the 
times is also reflected in the record of a series of splits within the- 
Svetambara sect itself. The foundation of the Kharatara-gachchha 
by Jina Vallabha, the pupil of Jinesvara Suri of the Kurchapura- 
gachchha Chaityavasin, took place at Chitrakuta in A.D. 1147. Nine 
years later the Anchalaka-mata was founded. The year A.D. 1169 
saw the emergence of Sardha-Paurnamlyaka-mata, a branch of the 
Punamiya sect mentioned above, and in A.D. 1193 Agamiy aka-mat a 


432 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


*8L 


__ into existence. In A.D. 1165 minister Bahadadeva is said to 
have carried out some reconstruction work to the Parsvanatha tem¬ 
ple at Satrunjaya. 

The pontifical period of Ajitadeva is also remarkable for the 
activities of Hemachandra Suri, the pupil of Deva Suri. It has been 
recorded about Hemachandra that he was born on the 15th of 
Karttika in V.S. 1145 (A.D. 1088), received initiation at the age of 
five, became a Suri at twenty-one, and attained heaven in V.S. 1299 
(A.D. 1172). In A.D. 1157 he converted king Kumarapala and found¬ 
ed the Punnatala-gachchha. The claim that he was the author of 
three crores of books (Trikoti-grantha-kartd) is, of course, absurd. 
There is, however, no doubt, that no other author has enriched litera¬ 
ture, both in volume and variety, to the extent that Hemachandra 
has done. An account of his literary works has been given above. 136 


Ajitadeva Suri was succeeded by Vijaya Simha Suri who, in 
his turn, was succeeded by Somaprabha Suri and Maniratna Suri 
jointly. This period was marked by the birth of Vastupala and 
Tejahpala (A.D. 1205), their pilgrimage to Siddhachala, and erection 
by the latter of the temple on Mount Abu at an expense of eighteen 
crores of silver. The next pontiff in succession was Jagatchandra 
Suri. He was devoted to austere penances, in recognition of which 
the Nahada Ranas conferred on him the title of ‘Tapa’. It was thus 
that the sixth schism ‘Tapa-gachchha’ was founded in A.D. 1228. 
The next in succession was Devendra Suri, who was much honoured 
by minister Vastupala. During his preaching tours Devendra Suri 
visited Prahladapura where he nominated Vidyananda Suri as his 
successor in A.D. 1266. At Sristambha Tirtha (Khambhata-Cambay) 
he found that Sri Vijayachandra Suri had been following his own 
ascetic practices for the last twelve years without any reference to 
the pontifical head, whom he did not even now care to welcome. 
Devendra Suri, therefore, stayed separately from him, and hence 
his party came to be designated as ‘Laghu-Salika’ as distinguished 
from the party of Vijayachandra Suri which had been settled in the 
place much earlier and was therefore called ‘Vriddha-Salika’. Deven¬ 
dra is said to have toured for a long time in Malwa and died in A.D. 
1270. He was the author of Karma-grantha, Srdddhadina-kritya- 
vritti and other works. 


Devendra Suri’s nominee Vidyananda Suri also died just 
thirteen days after his predecessor, and so Dharmaghosha Suri suc¬ 
ceeded to the pontifical seat. He blessed the merchant Pethadadeva, 
who became the chief minister of the ruler of Maridapa and proved 
his loyalty to the faith by building eighty-four Jain temples and 
causing ‘seven compendiums of knowledge’ (Sapta-JMnakosa) to be 


s . E .—28 


438 


MINISr^ 



produced. He 'also installed the Indramala at Satrunjaya and took 
the vow of celibacy at the age of thirty-two. His only son Jhah- 
jhanadeva installed gold and silver flagstaff at Satrunjaya and 
Urjayanta, and celebrated the event of his spiritual teacher's arrival 
at Mandapachala at an enormous cost. Dharmaghosha Suri is cre¬ 
dited with great magical powers and some of his magical deeds are 
recorded. He died in V.S. 1357, i.e. A.D. 1300. 

IV. LITERATURE 

The literary activity of the Jains during this period was very 
intense, and reference has been made above, in Chapter XV, to the 
Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Apabhraihsa works of a large number of Jain 
writers. The study of the Jain Ardhamagadhi canon was carried a 
step further by Abhayadeva (A.D. 1064), who wrote commentaries 
■on the nine Angas, and by Santi Suri and Devendragani (eleventh cen¬ 
tury), both of whom wrote exhaustive commentaries on the important 
and popular canonical work, the Uttarddhyayana. The literary pro¬ 
ductions of Hemachandra constitute a library by themselves, and 
have been referred to above. 136 Narrative poetry was mainly direct¬ 
ed towards the lives of the Tirthankaras. Santinatha-charita was 
written both by Deva Suri and Manikyachandra, Nemindtha-charita 
by Suracharya as well as Maladhari Hemachandra, and Parsvandtha- 
charita by Vadiraja, Bhavadeva and Manikyachandra. The Nemiduta 
by Vikrama, son of Sangana, though probably of a much later date, 137 
is interesting, as the last line of each verse is here taken from Kali¬ 
dasa’s Meghaduta, and is, thus, a good example of Samasydpiirti 
Kdvya. Vagbhata wrote his N cm inirvdna-Jcavya, mentioned above, 
under Jayasirhhadeva Chaulukya, to whom he pays a tribute 
in his ‘Alankdra’ where, in one of the verses illustrating the 
figure of speech called Samkara, he says that there are only three 
gems in the world, namely, Anahilapura city, king Jayasimhadeva, 
and his Srlkalasa elephant. The Mrigavatl-charitra of Maladhari 
Devaprabha (thirteenth century) contains interesting legends about 
Udayana, Vasavadatta and Padmavatx, reminiscent of Bhasa’s dra¬ 
mas. For short religious stories mention may be made of the Katha- 
kosa of Jinesvara, pupil of Vardhamana (A.D. 1092). As examples of 
literary activity in Malwa we might mention Srlchandra, pupil of Sri- 
nandi, who, under Bhojadeva of Dhara, wrote Pur&nasdra. and com¬ 
mentaries on Padma-charita of Ravishena and Mahapurdna (Apa- 
bhrarhsa) of Pushpadanta. Another poet of Malwa, namely 
Asadhara, deserves a special mention. He is the author of more 
than twenty works, the Sdga.ra-Dharmd7nrita and Andgdra-Dharmd- 
mrita being the most famous and popular. He wandered from place 


434 


MIN/Sr^ 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



<SL 


ace ^ Ue ^ ear of harassment by the Muslim raiders, and makes 
mention of five kings of his time, Vindhya-varma, Subhata-varma, 
i V 1 j una-var ma, Devapala and Jaitugideva. He was reputed as ‘Kali- 
Kalidasa’ on account of his poetic attainments, even as Hemachandra 
became famous as ‘Kalikala-Sarvajfia’. Mahasena wrote his Pradyu- 
mna-charita under Sindhuraja who died about A.D. 1000. Mention is: 
made of his being honoured by Munja. Amitagati, mentioned above, 
claims to have been honoured by Bhoja, Muhja and Sindhula, and 
composed a compendium of Jain philosophy called Panchasamgraha. 
At the court of the Western Chalukya king Jayasimha flourished 
the great logician poet Vadiraja, of whom, besides the works men¬ 
tioned already, we have two works on logic, Pramdna-Nirnaya 
and Ny&yavinischayavivarana, a work on duties of householders, 
Updsakdchdra, a lyrical poem Elabhavastotra and three other works, 
Aradhand, Samayikapathd, and Adhytitmasataka, on meditation and 
spiritual practices. 

Of a very special importance are the contributions of two writers 
of dramas, one of whom flourished in the north and the other in 
the south. Ramachandra (A.D. 1110-1173), a pupil of Hemachandra 
m Gujarat, has given us no less than eleven dramas, namely 
Raghuvilasa, Nalavildsa, Yaduvildsu, Satya-Harischandra, Nirbhaya- 
Bhima-vydyoga, Mallik&makaranda, Raghavdbhyudaya, Rohini-mri- 
ganka, Vanarnald-ndtikd, Kaurnudimitrgnanda, and Yadavdbhyudaya. 
He is also the author of a collection of verses called Sudhdkalasa. 
He, in collaboration with Gunachandra, also wrote Natyadarpan/ci, as 
noted above, and Dravydlamkdra, a work on Jain logic. The 
other dramatic genius of the age was Hastimalla who, according to 
the Prasasti attached to one of his plays, Vikranta-Kaurava, was a 
southerner (Dakshinatya). He is the author of four plays of con¬ 
siderable value from the poetic as well as technical points of view. 
■These are Vikranta-Kaurava , Maithili-kalydna, Anjana-pavananjaya, 
and Subhadrd. The Rdmdyana and the Mahdbhdrata have been 
here, as everywhere else, the chief sources of themes with an origi¬ 
nal colouring suitable to the faith and the genius of the writer. 
Hastimalla’s date is not precisely known, and all that may be said 
with certainty is that he wrote between A.D. 900 and 130o' 


D. VAISHNAVISM 
I. NORTH INDIA 

The doctrine of Vaishnavism underwent profound changes 
during the period under review. The most important of these was 
the gradual dominance of the pastoral life of Krishna and his dalli¬ 
ance with the gopis or cowherd girls. The beginnings or germs of 


485 



all this may be traced in early literature. But the story in its fully 
developed form—the birth of Krishna in the prison of Karhsa, his 
secret removal to the house of Nanda, bringing up by Yasoda, early 
life among cowherds, miraculous acts like holding up of Govardhana 
hill, killing of Putana and Kallya-naga, etc., amorous dalliance with 
gopls or cowherd girls, particularly with Radha, wife of a near i ela¬ 
tion—all these are found in detail in the literature of this period. 
The Bhagavota Purana, which is almost a complete store-house of 
these legends, is generally believed to have been composed in the 
ninth or tenth century A-D., somewhere in South India. Although 
even this late work does not mention Radha, she certainly came into 
great prominence during the period under review. 13Ta The most 
poetic, and at the same time very realistic, description of the amorous 
relations between Krishna and Radha is given in the Gita-govinda by 
Jayadeva, a court-poet of Lakshmanasena (twelfth century A.D.). It 
is a famous lyric poem highly venerated by the Vaishnavas all over 
Northern India, who explain away the erotic elements as allegorical 
or symbolical representation of the highest spiritual ideals. The 
representation of amorous scenes, however, takes a more grossly 
sensual form, bereft of Jayadeva’s poetic charms, in texts like 
Brahma-Vaivarta Purana, which is a later work but probably be¬ 
longs to this period. Whatever may be the value of the explanation 
offered by the Vaishnavas, it is impossible to ignore the vulgar ele¬ 
ments in these erotic pictures and their influence upon the morals 
of the common people. This is sufficiently indicated by the fate 
which overtook Vaishnavism at no distant date in future, when a 
class of this sect came to be a byword for sexual immorality. There 
can be hardly any doubt that this was largely due to the prevalent 
Tantrik ideas and practices to which reference has been made 
above. 

II. SRI V AISHN AY AS 

A refreshing contrast is offered by the development of Vaishna¬ 
vism in South India. Thanks to the Srlvaishnava sect founded by 
Nathamuni, 137b a more elevated form of Vaishnavism prevailed in 
this region. His worthy successors not only maintained the purity 
of the doctrine but placed it on a firm philosophic basis. 

Acharya Nathamuni was succeeded on the apostolic seat by his 
disciple Pun$ankaksha y also called Uyyakondar or “Saviour of the 
New Dispensation”, a title which he received from his preceptor. 
He was a native of Tiruvallar near Srirangam. The third Acharya 
was Ramamisra, who was the guru of the next Acharya, the celebrat¬ 
ed Yamuna chary a, grandson of Nathamuni. Yamunacharya or 


436 




Yamunamuni was born at Vlranarayanapura or Mannargu^i. 
was the son of Nathamuni’s son Isvarabhatta. 



1. Yamunacharya 

It is said that Yamunacharya received the title Alavandar or 
“the victor” from the Chola queen by vanquishing in a disputation 
the Pandit at the court of the reigning Chola king. The king granted 
him some lands with which he began to live a life of luxury. Later, 
at the instigation of his preceptor Ramamisra, he took his residence 
at &rlrangam and spent his life in expounding the doctrines of the 
Visisht advaita sch ool. 

Yamunacharya is stated to have been the real founder of thej 
Visishtadvaita or grl vaish n ava school and to have “laid the founda-l 
tion oiTair the doctrines that go under Ramanuja’s name”. It has) 
been said that had there been no Yamuna there would have been no 
Ramanuja. Yamunacharya is the author of a number of works 
such as the Siddhitraya y Agamapramanya, Gitdrthasamgraha, Malta - 
purushanirnaya and Stotraratna. The Siddhitraya , which contains 
three sections, viz. Atmasiddhi, Isvarasiddhi and Samvit-siddhi, 
demonstrates the real existence of the Individual and Supreme Souls 
and refutes the doctrine of Avidya. The Agamapramanya defends 
the grounds of the orthodox Bhagavata or Pancharatra school against 
Sankara’s criticism. The Gitdrthasamgraha analyses the text of the 
Gita as an exposition of the Bhakti doctrine giving only a subordi¬ 
nate position to the Karma-yoga and Jnana-yoga. 

2. Ramanuja 

Yamunacharya was succeeded by Ramanuja said to have been 
born in Saka 938 corresponding to A.D. 1016-17. 138 At first Ramanuja 
lived at Kanchipura and was a pupil of the Advaita philosopher 
Yadava-prakasa. Having been dissatisfied with the teaching of spiri¬ 
tual monism, Ramanuja began to study the works of the Alvars and 
found solace in them. After becoming the successor of Yamuna¬ 
charya, he settled at Srirangam. In his later years he is said to have 
been persecuted by the Chola prince who was a follower of the Saiva 
faith. As a result Ramanuja is said to have taken refuge in 
A.D. 1096 at the court of the Hoysala prince Vishnuvardhana 138 * 
whom he converted to Vaishnavism. Ramanuja was the author 
of a number of works including the Vedantasdra, Vedwrtha - 
samgraha , Vedantadfipa and the commentaries on the Brahma-sutra 
and the Bhagavad-gita . 

It is said that one of the last directions of Yamunacharya to 
Ramanuja was to compose a commentary on Badarayana’s Brahma - 


437 







THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


siitra. This was absolutely necessary to maintain the doctrine of 
love and grace, the fundamental tenet of Vaishnavism, in the face 
of the theory of spiritual monism which Sankara based upon the 
Brahma-sutra and the Upanishads. According to Sankara’s theory 
there exists only one spirit, and the attributes of the animal spirit, 
such as the feelings of individuality as well as the variety of the 
inanimate world, are due to illusion (mayd) and are unreal. Tims 
according to this view love and piety favoured by the Vaishiiavas 
have room only in the illusive state of the human soul and have no 
place in the world of reality. The Vaishnavas had therefore to 
defend their doctrine by reconciling it with the same Brahma-sutras 
and the Upanishads and to overthrow the doctrine of mdyd on the 
authority of the same works. 

According to Ramanuja’s doctrine, which is called Visisht- 
advaita or qualified monism, there are three eternal principles, viz. 
chit (the individual soul), achit (the insensate world) and Isvara (the 
Supreme Soul). The individual soul and the insensate world are 
the attributes of the Supreme Soul and form his body. The Supreme 
Soul, which exists in a subtle form before creation, develops itself 
in the form of the universe (which in its subtle form before creation 
is called Prakriti) at the time of creation. The Supreme Soul or 
God is the creator, preserver and destroyer of the world. He is 
thus the material and efficient cause of the world and is a composite 
personality having the individual souls and the inanimate world as 
his body. He has no defects and is the grantor of boons to his devo¬ 
tees. He has five different aspects, viz. Para or the highest, Vyuha 
in which he appears in the four forms of Vasudeva, Sankarshaiia, 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha for creation and other purposes, Vibhava 
in which he appears as the ten incarnations, Antaryarnin in which 
he lives in the hearts of all, and Pratimd or idol. The conception of 
the cowherd Krishna and of the relation between Krishna and the 
cowherdesses, including Radha, is absent from Ramanuja’s Vaishna- 
vism. Ramanuja regarded Bhakti to be the same as the Upanishadic 
updsana. or meditation. 

3. Ramanuja’s Followers 

After the death of Ramanuja about A.D. 1137, the Sri-Vaishnavas 
were gradually divided into two sects called Vadakalai ( i.e. the 
school of northern learning) and Tenkalai (i.e. the school of southern 
learning). One class believed that salvation was more easily obtain¬ 
able through the Sanskrit scriptures like the Vedas, Upanishads 
and the Gita than through the Prabandhas, called the Tamil Veda, 
while the other class held the diametrically opposite view. Rama- 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 




nuja himself gave equal importance to both the classes of scriptures. 
But the difference of attitude on this point led to the growth of 
certain doctrinal differences, and ultimately to the division of his 
followers into two distinct sects, about the close of the fourteenth 
century. 

Both the Vadakalai and the Tenkalai agreed as to the necessity 
of saran-agati or prapatti, i.e. self-surrender unto God; but while 
the former laid emphasis on the performance of karma, the latter 
believed that self-effort is unnecessary, as God’s love is spontaneous 
and brings salvation to mankind by itself. The Vatfakalai’s belief 
that Lakshmi is also capable, like her consort, of bestowing final 
emancipation, is not shared by the Tenkalai. Generally the Tehka- 
lai sect is more liberal than the Va^akalai. It provides for the 
teaching of the eight-syllabled formula Om namo Nardyandya to 
all classes of peoples, while the Vadakalai sect omits the syllable 
Om from the mantra when taught to non-Brahmanas. The Tenkalai 
sect favours equal treatment for all castes. 

The two sects trace two different guru-paramparas from Rama¬ 
nuja. According to the Vadakalai, Ramanuja was succeeded by Kuru- 
kesa, the celebrated author of the Six Thousand . His successor Vishnu- 
chitta or Ehgal Alvar, who flourished during the second half of the 
twelfth century, immortalised himself by his Sardrtha-chaiushtaya 
and Vishnuchittiyam (a commentary on the Vishnu Parana). 
Vishnuchitta’s successor was his disciple Varadacharya or Nadadur 
Ammal who was the leader of the Sri-Vaishnavas for the first three 
quarters of the thirteenth century. He preferred Kanchlpuram to 
Srirahgam for his residence and activities. This resulted in the 
development of Snrangam as a prominent centre of the Tenkalai. 
Varadacharya was the author of the Tattvasara , while his interpre¬ 
tation of Ramanuja’s £ri-Bhashya was committed to writing by his 
disciple Sudarsana in his Srutaprakdsika. Varadacharya’s successor 
was Atreya Ramanuja or Appillar, who was succeeded by his 
nephew Vedantadesika or Venkatanatha in A.D. 1290. In the history 
of the medieval Vaishnavism the name of Vedantadesika, who was 
born in A.D. 1269 and died in 1370, is second only to that of Rama¬ 
nuja. His works number more than a hundred. He was equally great 
as a poet, philosopher and controversialist, and wrote both in Sanskrit 
and Tamil. His Tamil works include original compositions like those 
of the Alvars as well as a large number of commentaries. He be¬ 
came famous as Kavitdrkikasimha (the lion among poets and philoso¬ 
phers), Sarvatantrasvatantra (the master of all the branches,of 
learning) and Vedantacharya. By this third name he is invoked by 
all sects and subsects of the Sri-Vaishnavas while beginning the study 


439 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


of the gri-Bhcishya. Vedantadesika acted as an arbiter in a disputa¬ 
tion between Vidyaranya and Akshobhyatirtha, a disciple of 
Madhvacharya, and gave a decision in favour of the latter. 

The Tenkalai sect regards Embar, a cousin of Ramanuja, as the 
latter’s apostolic successor, although he died earlier. Embar’s 
successor was his disciple Parasarabhatta, author of the Sahasrana - 
ma-bhashya. Parasarabhatta’s successor Nanjiyar composed a com¬ 
mentary on the Prabmdhas, called the Nine Thoiisand, while the 
views of Nahjiyar’s disciple Nampillai on the Tamil Veda were in¬ 
corporated in Periya Achchan Pillai’s commentary entitled the 
Twenty-four Thousand. Pinbalagiya Perumaljiyar, another disciple 
of Nampillai, composed the Twelve Thousand , which is a com¬ 
mentary on the Tiruvoimoli, and the Guruparampara , which is a 
biographical work on the succession of the Tenkalai Acharyas. The 
successor of Nampillai was Krishnapada or Vatfakkutiruvidi Pillai 
who composed another commentary on the Prabandhas, called the 
Thirty-six Thousand. This work is generally known as the tdu (ie. 
‘the equal’), probably because it was considered equal to the com¬ 
mentary on the Sri-Bhashya composed by his contemporary Sudar- 
sana, disciple of Varadacharya. The Idu was afterwards made the 
subject of compulsory study by the followers of the Tenkalai. 
Krishnapada’s son and successor was Pillai Lokacharya who was an 
elder contemporary of Vedantadesika. He is regarded as the real 
founder of the Tenkalai sect. His works are believed to contain the 
only correct interpretation of the views of Ramanuja and the Alvars. 
He died some time after the capture and sack of Srirangam in 
A.D. 1327. 


4. Nimbdrka 

The founder of another school of Vaishnavism supporting the 
cult of Bhakti against the doctrine of Maya was Nimbarka who is 
said to have been a Telugu Brahmana residing at the village of 
Nimba. This village has been identified with Nimbapura in the 
Bellary District. His father was a Bhagavata named Jagannatha. 
Nothing is definitely known about the time when Nimbarka 
flourished; but Bhandarkar suggests that he lived some time after 
Ramanuja. His death has been tentatively assigned to a date in 
the second half of the twelfth century. Nimbal'ka lived at Vrinda- 
vana near Mathura and the followers of his school are usually found 
in North India. The Vaishnavas of the Nimbarka school, called the 
Sanaka-sampradaya (i.e. the school founded by Sanaka), wear on the 
forehead two perpendicular lines of Goplchandana with a black 
mark in the middle. They also use a necklace and a rosary made 


440 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


Q 


of the wood of the TulasI plant. 
viz. ascetics and householders. 


They are divided into two classes, 


Nimbarka composed the Vedantaparijatasaurabha, a com¬ 
mentary on the Brahma-sutrai, as well as the Siddhantaratna usually 
called the DasaMoki. Nimbarka was succeeded by his disciple Srini¬ 
vasa who commented on his preceptor’s Vedtintaparijatasaurabha . 
Devacharya, the thirteenth successor on the pontifical seat after 
Nimbarka, was the author of the Siddhantajahnavl on which a com¬ 
mentary called the Setu was composed by the next pontiff Sundara- 
bhatta. The thirtieth pontiff Kesava Kasmlrin ^wrote a commen¬ 
tary on the Brahma-sutra. Harivyasadeva, who was the thirty- 
second in the list of succession, commented on Nimbarka’s Siddhdnta - 
ratna or Dasasloki. 


The doctrines of the Nimbarka school of Vaishnavism resemble 
in some respects those of Ramanuja’s school. But Nimbarka preach¬ 
ed Bhakti in its original sense of love and gave exclusive prominence 
to the conception of Krishna attended by the cowherdesses headed 
by Radha. Ramanuja’s theory about the Supreme Soul being a 
composite personality and developing into the animate and inani¬ 
mate world is not accepted by the Nimbarka school, according to 
which the Supreme Soul (God), the individual soul, and the inani¬ 
mate world are both identical and at the same time distinct from 
one another. They are identical in the sense that the individual 
soul and the inanimate world are entirely dependent on God and 
have no independent existence. Nimbarka’s theory is thus both 
monistic and pluralistic. 


5. Madhva or Anandatirtha 

Madhva or Anandatirtha, whose original name was Vasudeva, 
was born at Belle in the South Kanara District. In the 
Madhvavijaya by Narayana, Madhva is said to have been born in the 
Madhyageha family of Rajatapltha. Madhva or Anandatirtha was 
also known as Pumaprajna and Madhyamandara. He received his 
initiation from Achyutaprekshacharya, otherwise called Purushot- 
tamatirtha, and went on pilgrimage to Badarikasrama from where 
he brought the images of Digvijaya-Rama and Vedavyasa. Later 
he travelled in different parts of the country to establish his own 
doctrine against other schools including the followers of Sankara. 
His pupils were Padmanabhatlrtha, Naraharitirtha, Madhavatlrtha 
and Akshobhyatlrtha. Of these Naraharitirtha was sent to Jagan- 
natha-kshetra (Purl) in Orissa to bring the idols of Rama and Sita. 
Naraharitirtha became the preceptor of the Gahga king Narasimha II 
(A.D. 1279-1306) and is known from several inscriptions with dates 


441 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

ranging between Saka 1186 (AX). 1264) and 1212 (A.D. 1290). There 
is little doubt, therefore, that his guru Madhva flourished in the 
thirteenth century. Bhandarkar suggested that Madhva was bom 
in Saka 1119 (A.D. 1197) and died in Saka 1198 (A.D. 1276). 

ft The followers of Madhva wear on the forehead the mark of two* 
""white perpendicular lines of Goplchandana joined by a cross line on 
the bridge of the nose, together with a dark line in the middle with 
a reddish spot in the centre. They also wear, on various parts of 
the body, especially the shoulders, Goplchandana prints of the vari¬ 
ous weapons of Vishnu. Sometimes permanent prints are made on 
the skin with the help of heated metallic stamps. The Kannada 
country is the stronghold of the Madhvas, i.e. the followers of 
Madhva-Anandatlrtha. There are eight Mathas of this sect, some 
of which were founded by Madhva himself. 

Madhva did not favour the conception of Gopala-Krishna attend¬ 
ed by Radha and the cowherdesses. The Vyuha doctrine also has 
no place in his system. Madhva denies that God is the material 
cause of the world. According to him, God is a substance entirely 
different from the individual souls and the inanimate world. The 
innumerable individual souls, which are distinct from one another 
and are characterised by defects like ignorance, go through a succes¬ 
sion of existences. The relation between God and the individual 
souls is like that between the master and his servant. By serving 
and worshipping God, the individual souls become like God in most 
respects. Madhva enjoins worship of Vishnu as God. He was 
bitterly against Sankara’s theory of Maya . Madhva’s theory of 
creation is based on the doctrine of the Sankhyas. 

Thirty-seven treatises are ascribed to Madhva. The most im¬ 
portant among those are his commentaries on the Brahma-sutra and 
the Upanishads. One of his works, based on the epics and the 
Puranas, is the Bhdratatatparyanirnaya . Large commentaries on 
his works were composed by his followers, one of them being Jaya- 
tirtha, sixth successor of Madhva on the pontifical seat. Jayatlrtha, 
whose original name was Dhontjo Raghunatha, was a native of 
Mangalvedha near Pandharpur. 

E. SA1VISM. 

I. ROYAL PATRONS OF 6AIVISM 

In the previous volume we gave an account of Kashmir Saivism 
and showed how both kings and scholars helped to spread and consoli¬ 
date the doctrine. In the centuries which are covered by the pre¬ 
sent volume Saivism continued to flourish in Kashmir. Of the 




442 




successors of Abhinavagupta who wrote on the Pratyabhijna system, 
mention may be made of Kshemaraja, the author of the Pratya- 
bhijna-liridaya, which is an important manual of the doctrine. The 
tutelary deity of the Royal House of Nepal is Pasupatinatha. In 
Nepal, as elsewhere, Mahayana Buddhism mingled with Saivism, 
and there were mutual borrowings in doctrine and in practice. 

In Assam, the cults of Siva and Vishnu were prevalent. Ratna- 
pala, the most important king in the eleventh century, professed 
faith in both Siva and Vishnu. 

The founder of the Sena kingdom of Bengal, Vijayasena, was 
a devotee of Siva. He assumed the titles of Parama-Mahesvara and 
Arivnshabha-Sankara, and built a Siva temple. His son and succes¬ 
sor, Ballalasena, was also an ardent follower of Saivism. But 
Lakshmanasena, who succeeded his father Ballala, became a con¬ 
vert to Vaishnavism. 

Govindachandra, the Gahatfavala king of Banaras and Kanauj, 
was a Parama-Mahesvara. But he practised religious tolerance and 
patronised the Bauddhas. On the obverse of his gold and copper 
coins are found the figures of a trisula (trident). 

The founder of the Chaulukya dynasty, Mularaja I, was a wor¬ 
shipper of Siva. Among his successors, we find Jayasimha Siddha- 
raja, who was a staunch Saiva, though he patronised Jains like 
Hemachandra, and Kumarapala who visited Somanatha frequently, 
and included in his inscriptions invocations to Siva, even after he 
became a convert to Jainism. 

Bhoja I of the Paramara dynasty of Ujjain and Dhara was not 
only a follower, but also an exponent, of Saivism. One of his works, 
the Tattvaprakasa , deals with Saivism. His brother or cousin Udaya- 
ditya built the Nllakanthesvara temple at Udayapur. The later 
Paramaras were also adherents of Saivism. Ujjain was in those days 
a stronghold of the Saivas, in spite of the fact that Jainism was then 
in a flourishing condition in Western India. 

The Kalachuris of Tripuri, with a few exceptions, were Saivas. 
So also were the Chandellas of Bundelkhand. Kirtivarman of the 
Chandella dynasty patronised Krishna-misra, who wrote the Pra- 
bhodha-chandrodaya, and probably also built a Siva temple at 
Mahoba. 

The Western Chalukyas, whose capital was Kalyana, were of 
Saiva persuasion. Somesvara I (A.D. 1043-1068) was an ardent 
6aiva. During the reign of his son Somesvara II (A.D. 1068-1076), 
Saivism made rapid progress. Vikramaditya VI (A.D. 1076-1126), 
who succeeded his brother after deposing him, was probably a Jain 


443 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


at first; but he became a staunch iSaiva in later life. About A.D. 1156 
Bijjala, claiming kinship with the Kalachuris, usurped the throne. 
It was during his reign that there was a revival of Vlrasaivism 
under the great leadership of Basava. We shall give an account of 
this system of Saivism in the next section. 

The Eastern Chalukyas, the Eastern Gangas, and the Kakatiyas 
were Saivas. They were profoundly influenced by the Virasaiva 
revival. Prataparudra I (A.D. 1162-1185), who founded Warangal, 
was the patron of Somanatha, a well-known Virasaiva writer, who 
was proficient in Sanskrit, Telugu and Kannada. Under the aegis 
of the Hoysalas of Dvarasamudra flourished several Virasaiva 
scholars. Harisvara and Raghav&nka, Devakavi and Somaraja 
were among the men of letters of first rank who popularised Vira- 
saivism. 

From many inscriptions of Mysore we learn that Saivism be^* 
came in that part of India a very popular faith from the twelfth 
century onwards. Even earlier, the Lakullsa and Kalamukha forms 
of Saivism seem to have been in vogue. In an inscription, dated 
A.D. 1078, one ascetic is described as an ornament to the Lakula 
school, and another is referred to as 'a hand of Lakula’. Another 
inscription, dated A.D. 1103, speaks of Somesvara Suri’s contribution 
to the Lakula doctrine. A third inscription, dated A.D. 1177, calls 
certain ascetics upholders of the Lakulagama-samaya. There are 
also other epigraphic records of grants made to scholars of the 
Saiva schools. In some of them are to be found the names of great 
iSivacharyas. 


The Chola kings were great patrons of Saivism. Vlrarajen- 
dra I (A.D. 1063-1070) made an offering of a ruby to Sri Nataraja of 
Chidambaram. In A.D. 1128 Vikrama Chola gave large donations 
to the Chidambaram temple. Similar benefactions were made by 
his successor Kulottunga II (A.D. 1133-1150). Kop-Perunjinga 
(A.D. 1229-78), who started his career as a loyal feudatory of Raja- 
raja III and later declared his independence, was also an ardent 
devotee of god Nataraja. The eastern gopura of the Chidambaram 
temple was built by him. The Pandya kings, like the Cholas, 
continued to follow Saivism. Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I 
(A.D. 1251-c. 1268) gave expression to his devotion to Sri Nataraja 
by. covering with gold the roof of the temple at Chidambaram, 

One of the important features of this age in South India was 
the rising rivalry between Saivism and Vaishnavism. An inscrip¬ 
tion of the Tanjore District, dated A.D. 1160, makes mention of a 
Mahasabha’s resolution prohibiting the association of Saivas with 
Vaishnavas, But generally the kings adopted an attitude of tolera- 


444 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

I, for instance, was well disposed towards the 
Vaishnavas, though he was himself a Saiva; and his sister Kun- 
dava built temples for Siva and Vishnu at Dadapuram in South 
Arcot. District. 

The principal faiths of the day, gaivism, Vaishnavism and 
Jainism, flourished at Kanchi. The Kalamukhas had great influ¬ 
ence in the capital city. There were, besides, the Kapalikas and 
the Pasupatas also. Temples and mathas became important all 
over the country. The ruling princes made rich endowments to 
them and saw to it that their influence with the people grew. 

II. VlRA&AIVISM 

Virasaivism or Lingayatism traces its origin to the five greafy 
religious teachers, Renuka, Daruka, Ghantakarna, Dhenukarna, and ^ 
Visvakarna who, according to tradition, were the earthly manifesta¬ 
tions of the five aspects of Para-Siva, viz. Sadyojata, Vamadeva, 
Aghora, Tatpurusha and Isana. These five teachers are said to have 
incarnated in the Kali-yuga as Revanasiddha, Marulasiddha, Ekorama, 
Paixiitaradhya and Visvaradhya, and expounded anew the ancient 
system of Lingayat. They are referred to as the Panchacharyas, and 
an account of their incarnation is given in the Svdyambhuva Agama. 
They are said to have established five mathas in the different parts 
of India—Kedara in the Himalayas, Uj jay ini in the South, Srisai- 
lam in the East, Rambhapurl in the West, and Banaras in the North. 
These institutions were charged by them with the mission of spread¬ 
ing the Lingayat faith and of safeguarding the interests of, and 
giving a lead to, the Lingayats. 

The names of three of the five Achdryas, viz . Visvaradhya, 
Panditaradhya and Ekorama, are mentioned in the beginning of the 
Basava Purdna; and they are spoken of as old teachers of Virasaiv¬ 
ism. We learn from an inscription at Ablur that one Ekanta 
Ramayya, an ardent worshipper of &iva, defeated the Jains by per¬ 
forming a miracle. He is said to have laid a wager that he vrould 
cut off his own head, and that it would be restored seven days later 
by the grace of Siva. King Bijjala, to whom we have already 
referred, seems to have received news of this miracle; and he 
summoned the Sivacharya to his court where the miracle was 
repeated. According to the Basava Purdna , Basava himself was 
present at the court when the miracle was repeated. But beyond 
Ramayya’s yogic powers, of which there is a record both in the in¬ 
scription and the Purana, nothing is known either of the teacher or 
of his teachings. 




445 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

The greatest name, however, in the history of Vlrasaivism is 
that of Basava, who, though not the founder of the faith, was main¬ 
ly responsible for making it popular in the Kannada country. 
According to the traditional account, Basava was born at Bagevadi 
in the Bijapur District as the son of Madiraja and Madalambike. 
He spent his early days at Kappadi, at the junction of the Mala- 
prabha and Krishna, where a shrine stands, dedicated to Sanga- 
mesvara, “Lord of the Confluence.” Here Basava is said to have 
received a divine call to work for the revival of Vlrasaivism. He 
found a great opportunity to fulfil his mission when he was ap¬ 
pointed prime minister of Bijjala (A.D. 1156-1168) in succession 
to his own maternal uncle who had filled that post till his death. 
Basava’s influence in the realm increased when the king married 
his sister, Padmavati. In concert with Channabasava, the son of 
another sister of his, he pursued a vigorous policy of spreading 
the Virasaiva doctrine through the priests of the faith called 
Jangamas. The other officers at the court carried tales about 
Basava to the king, and accused him of embezzlement. Basava fled 
and, with the help of his numerous followers who accompanied him, 
defeated the king, who was compelled to reinstate him in his former 
high office. True reconciliation, however, there could not be, and 
we possess different accounts of what followed. 

The Lingayat account is that Basava directed one of his disci¬ 
ples to slay the king when he came to know of the latter’s design 
to put out the eyes of two Lingayat devotees, and fled to Saiiga- 
mesvara where he was “absorbed into the Linga”. The Jain version 
is that when the king was camping on the bank of the Bhlma river 
after a military expedition, Basava sent him a poisoned fruit, and 
then fled to Ulavi, at the foot of the Western Ghats, where he threw 
himself into a well to escape capture by the king’s son. 

After Basava, his nephew Channabasava, became the leader; 
and he was helped in his mission by a band of able apostles. The 
Virasaiva movement gradually gained strength, and spread to the 
Andhra country and also further south. A number of mystic bards 
arose, who expounded the doctrine in a popular and catching man¬ 
ner. Their writings are known by the collective name Vacliana- 
sastra, to which a detailed reference has been made above. 138b 
Lven in the humblest of homes in the Kannada country the 
Vachanas are current coin. The pithy epigrams of the Vachana- 
wnters have become proverbial in the popular language. The one 
burden of these writings is to call men back from their career of sin 
and make them turn to Siva for refuge. 




446 


MINfSr^j, 



Virasaivism means the Saivism of the stalwarts or heroic 
Saivism. The name serves to distinguish the VIrasaivas from the 
three other classes of Saivas, viz. the Samanya-, Misra-, and the 
Suddha-Saivas. The first two of these classes worship Siva and 
also Vishnu, while the Suddha- and Vira-Saivas worship Siva alone. 
The Linga they wear on their person distinguishes the VIrasaivas 
from the Suddhasaivas. Hence the name ‘Lihgayats’ is also applied 
to them, and the cult itself is called Lingayata. 

Virasaivism is generally described as a phase of the Agamanta, 
from the fact that Saiva Agamas constitute the basic authority of 
this, as of other forms of Saivism. But the Agamas themselves are 
regarded as texts expounding the Vedic religion. Reverence is paid 
by the VIrasaivas to the sixty-three Tamil saints also, and their 
writings are accepted as divinely inspired. These saints are referred 
to as puratanas in contrast to the later mediaeval saints who are 
called nutana-puratanas. Seven hundred and seventy of these later 
mystics are enumerated, and Basava and his principal disciples are 
included among these. The sayings of the saints, besides the Vedas, 
Agamas and Puranas, are accepted by the VIrasaivas as their autho¬ 
rities in religion and philosophy. The other pramanas admitted by 
them are perception (pratyaksha) and inference (anumdna). 

The Vlraiaiva philosophy is called Saktivisishtadvaita —a term 
which means the non-duality of God (viz. Para-Siva) as qualified 
by Power (or £3akti). When expanded, the meaning of the expres¬ 
sion would be: “There is no duality between the soul and the Lord, 
each qualified by Sakti.” According to this system, therefore, God 
and soul are in an inseparable union through the inalienable power 
called Sakti. The individual soul is neither absolutely identical 
with, nor entirely different from, God. It is a part of which God 
is the whole; it is the body of which God is the Soul. 

As in the other systems of Saivism, so in Virasaivism, Para- 
J§iva is the supreme reality, the one Absolute without a second. 
He is of the nature of existence (sat), intelligence (chit) and bliss 
(ananda). He is all-powerful, omniscient, most glorious, and en¬ 
dowed with all auspicious qualities. The universe of souls and 
matter is but a part of him, a projection of His will. The mani¬ 
festation of the universe, however, does not affect Him in any way. 
He himself does not undergo any change or mutilation. His great¬ 
ness is such that in spite of being the ultimate cause (parama kdrana) 
of the world, He does not suffer any change or diminution. As in 
Kashmir Saivism, so in Virasaivism, Para-Siva is held to be both 
the material and the instrumental cause of the universe. He is 
immanent as well as transcendent. From Him all beings spring 


447 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



into existence; in Him tliey live; end unto Him they return at the* 
end. The Kaivalya Sruti says: "Without beginning, middle or end, 
He is the one all-pervading reality, of the nature of intelligence and 
bliss, without form and wonderful. United with Uma (His consort), 
the Paramesvara is the lord with three eyes and a blue-throat, and 


is quiescent”. 


Sakti is the Power which eternally resides in Parama-Siva as 
His inseparable attribute. It is the ultimate creative principle, 
mula-prakriti or iridyd, which evolves itself into the phenomenal 
universe. The term rndyd in Virasaivism is not to be understood in 
the sense of the principle of illusion in Advaita-Vedanta. j.he 
Siddhantagama interprets the word to mean “that which natuially 
attains to and eternally resides in the supreme Brahman.” As heat 
is to fire and light to sun, Sakti is to Siva, inseparably united with 
Him as His attribute. It is through His Sakti that 6iva becomes the 
cause of the universe. Siva lends His own nature to Sakti; and in 
its discriminative or differentiating aspect (virnarMkhya.), it becomes 
the agent of world-manifestation. Out of Sakti come all beings that 
constitute the universe. This is called creation or srishfi. And in 
pralaya, all return to Sakti and remain therein in a seedal form. 

The individual soul or jwa is a part (arinsa) of Siva; and it 
imagines itself to be different from Him on account of ignorance 
(avidya). The soul is identical with Siva in the sense that it pro¬ 
ceeds from Siva, partakes of His essence, and finds ultimate rest- 
in Him. Having no independent existence, it finally becomes one 
with Him, on the removal of avidya. It is also distinct from Siva 
in the sense that, though sharing in His essence, it does not possess 
the attributes of omniscience, omnipotence, etc. Its powers of know¬ 
ledge and action are limited and imperfect. It is a victim of impu¬ 
rities such as karma and mayd f and is consequently a creature of 
samsara. The Upanishadic simile of sparks and fire is employed by 
the Virasaiva philosophers to explain the relation of the soul to 
God. And since both difference and identity are said to govern the 
relation, the Virasaiva philosophy is a doctrine of bheddbheda (dif¬ 


ference cum non-difference). 


The final goal of the soul is conceived in the Virasaiva system 
as aikya or unity with Para-Siva, the supreme reality. The soul in 
union with Siva enjoys unexcellable bliss. This final state of experi¬ 
ence is technically called linganga-sdmarasya, i.e. identity in essence 
between Linga (Siva) and anga (soul). 

Para-Siva Brahman, which is the supreme reality, is known as 
sthala in Virasaivism. The word sthala means place, position or 
abode. Para-Siva is the home or abode of all beings. He is the 


448 


miST/?y 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


support of all things. In Him the universe exists ( stha signifying 
sthana or residence); and to Him it returns at the end (la signifying 
laya or dissolution). Out of His own will and by the agitation of 
His innate power (sakti), Para-Siva, the supreme Sthala, becomes 
divided into Linga and anga. Linga is Siva or Rudra, and is the 
object of worship or adoration. Anga, which means part, is the 
individual soul, and is the worshipper or adorer. Sakti also gets 
divided into two parts— kala and bhakti, the former resorting to 
Siva and the latter to the individual soul. Kala is responsible for 
the projection of the world from Siva. Bhakti leads the soul from 
bondage to final release. 

The three terms most often used in Virasaiva writings are Guru, 
Jangama and Linga. The Guru is the preceptor who imparts to the 
aspirant spiritual knowledge; the Jangama is the realised soul; and 
the Lihga is the Deity, Siva. 

As aids to progress in faith, Vlrasaivism teaches eight rules 
to be observed, which are called ashpavarana: (1) obedience to a 
guru; (2) worship of a linga; (3) reverence for the jangama as for 
an incarnation of Siva; (4) smearing of ashes ( vibhuti) made of cow- 
dung; (5) wearing of a rosary of rudrciksha beads; (6) padodaka, 
sipping the water in which the feet of a guru or jangama have been 
bathed; (7) prasada, offering food to a guru, linga, or jangama, and 
partaking sacramentally of what is left ; and (8) panchdkshara, utter¬ 
ing the five syllabled formula namah sivaya. At the diksha cere¬ 
mony these eight modes of piety are taught to every Lingayat child.. 

We have already mentioned that the distinguishing mark of a 
Lingayat is the wearing of a Linga on his body. This is called the 
Ishta-linga and is the object of Lingayat worship. The Lingayats 
do not concern themselves with the worship of Siva in public tem¬ 
ples. Some of the other peculiarities of the sect, which are in the- 
nature of reforms, are the following; the diksha ceremony which) 
takes the place of upanayana is performed in the case of girls also, 
and the women, too, have to wear the Linga, like men. The widows 
are allowed to marry, and women are not considered to be polluted 
during their monthly periods. The Lingayats dispense with the rite- 
of offering oblations in fire; and instead of the Brahma-gayatri they 
make use of the Siva-gdyatri. The reformist zeal of the Lingayat 
teachers and the spiritual fervour of the Vachana- writers have com¬ 
bined in making Vlrasaivism the most popular faith in the Kannada 
country. 

III. &AI V A-SIDDHANTA 

Another school of Saivism which flourished in South India during 
the period under review, and which Still claims as its followers a 


S. E_20 


449 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

number of Tamils, is Saiva-siddhanta. An account of the 1: 
gnd teachings of Tamil saints has been given above. The chief of 
these, Majnikkavachakar, Appar, Sambandhar and Sundarar, are re¬ 
garded as the four great teachers of the Saiva faith (samayacharyas). 
They did not expound the Saiva philosophy in any systematic way. 
Their sole aim was to create a fervour in the hearts of the people 
and make them turn towards Siva, relinquishing what they, the 
Siva -bhaktas, considered to be unsuitable forms of faith, viz. Jainism 
and Buddhism. The task of formulating the metaphysics of Saivism 
was left to the later teachers, called the Santanacharyas, preceptors 
of the &aiva metaphysical doctrines. Reference has already been 
made above 1380 to four of them who are reckoned as the most 
important. They are: Meykan^a-deva, Arulnandi-sivacharya, Marai- 
jnana-sambandhar and Umapati-sivacharya- For a knowledge of 
the Saiva-siddhanta metaphysics we must turn to the writings of 
these teachers. 

Meykanda’s Siva-jnana-bodham, written in the first half of the 
thirteenth century A.D., is the basic text of the Saiva-siddhanta 
philosophy. Two of the works listed among the Siddhanta-sastras, 
viz. Tiruvundiyar and Tirukkalirrup-padiydr, were composed by two 
authors, teacher and disciple according to tradition, bearing the 
same name ‘Uyyavanda-deva,’ who came before Meykanda. But 
these two works should be regarded as making the transition from 
the stotras of the Samayacharyas to the sastras of the SanS:ana- 
chary as. It is the Siva-jndna-bodham that provides the Sutras of 
Saiva-siddhanta, stating in a nutshell, as it were, the leading doc¬ 
trines of the system. There is a verse which says: “The Veda is the 
cow; its milk is the true Agama; the Tamil sung by the Four is the 
ghee extracted from it; and the virtue of the Tamil work, full of 
wisdom (bodham) of Meykandar of the celebrated city of Vennai, 
is the fine taste of the ghee.” 

The chief of Meykanda’s disciples was Arulnandi-sivacharya. 
The Siva-jnana-siddhiyar which he wrote is next in importance only 
to the Siva-jndna-bodham.. As it gives an authoritative explanation of 
the bodham, it is held in high esteem by the students of Saiva- 
siddhanta. Arulnandi wrote also another work called Irupavirupadu. 

The other two Santanacharyas, Marai-jnana-sambandhar and 
Umapati-sivacharya, were related as master and disciple. The 
master is not known to have written any work. But the disciple 
amply compensated for this by contributing as many as eight 
treatises to the Siddhanta-sastras. His works are: Tiruvarutpayan, 
Porrippahrodai, Vina-venbd, Kodikkavi, Unmai-nerivilakkcim, 
Sahkalpa-nirakaranam, Nenjuvida-tudu, and Sivaprakasam. Of these 


450 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



the most important work is the last. In the Sahkalpa-nirdkaranam, 
Umapati gives the date of its composition which works out to be 
A.D. 1313. 

One other author, whose work Unmai-vilakkam is included 
among the fourteen Siddhanta-sastras, is Manavachakam-ka^andar. 
He was one of the disciples of Meykanda. His name signifies “one 
who has gone beyond thought and speech.” 

We now proceed to give a short account of the Saiva-siddhanta 
system. The &aiva-siddhanta is a system of pluralistic realism, as 
it recognises the reality of the world and the ultimate plurality of 
the souls. From the fact that the siddhanta writers employ the 
analogies of body and soul, and of consonant and vowel, it may be 
shown that there is some identity of views on an important topic 
as between the Siddhanta and Visishfadvaita. But the Siddhantin 
himself does not favour the characterisation of his system as Visishta- 
clvaita. He claims that his view is the true Advaita. Meykanda 
uses the term ‘Advaita’ to refer to his own system. Tayumanavar 
describes Meykanda as one who saw the truth of pure Advaita. But 
in the interpretation of the term ‘AdVaita’ the Siddhantin differs 
from the Sahkara-Advaitin. What is denied by him by the negative 
expression ‘Advaita’ is not the existence of two, but the duality 
of two. He says: “They are not two”, and not “There are not two”. 
Advaita does not mean absence of difference (bheda-abhdva) but 
similarity (sddrisya). Introducing the metaphysics of the Siddhanta, 
Umapati says in his Sivaprakasam: “We expound here the beauty 
of Saiva-siddhanta, the cream of the Vedanta, whose excellent merit 
consists in its exposition of the Advaita , postulating an inseparable 
relation like body and soul, eye and the sun, the soul and the eye, 
supported as it is by the Dharma of the highest authoritative books, 
and unlike the bheda and bheddbheda and abheda relations illus¬ 
trated, respectively, by light and darkness, word and meaning, gold 
and ornament, set forth by other schools, and which is further sup¬ 
ported by perfectly logical methods, and is light to the truth-seekers 
and darkness to others.” 

The supreme Reality is Siva, the Lord (pati) of all beings. 
Though the human intellect cannot comprehend Siva’s nature, an 
attempt is made to understand His greatness. Siva is superior to 
the Trimurtis, Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra. Even when He is identi¬ 
fied with the Destroyer, His superiority to the other two may be 
easily seen. Brahma and Vishnu are also affected in a way by 
pralaya. Only Siva stands unaffected and exists eternally as the 
supreme Being. Eight qualities are attributed to &iva: independ¬ 
ence, purity, self-knowledge, omniscience, freedom from mala, 


451 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


boundless benevolence, omnipotence, and bliss. The author of the 
Kural describes God as en-gumttan (endowed with eight qualities). 
But there is no limit to the Lord’s greatness. The most comprehen¬ 
sive terms that we can apply to Siva are Sat and Chit. As Sat, God 
is the plenitude of being and is incomprehensible. As Chit or in¬ 
telligence, we can know Him. Sat and Chit are like the sun and 
its light. From these characteristics, all the other attributes of God 
may be derived. It is wrong to think of God as attributeless. What 
is void of qualities would be a mere blank, a night of nothingness. 
When scriptures speak of Brahman as nirgum, what they mean is 
that God is above the gums of Praknti, sattva, rajas and tamas. 

Siva is immanent in the universe and transcendent as well. The 
conception of Ashta-murti brings out the aspect of immanence. 
Manikkavachakar says: 

“Earth, water, air, fire, sky, the Sun and Moon, 

The sentient man, these eight forms He pervades.” 

God is of the form of the universe (visvariipa). “Behold! He is the 
male and the female and the neuter”, sings the bard of the T iruva- 
chakam. The omni-form of the Lord is described by almost all the 
saints. But at the same time, they are conscious of the fact that 
the universe does not exhaust God. Siva exceeds the world. His 
greatness is beyond conception. Meykan$a says that Siva is not 
the object of perception nor the content of thought. Manikkava¬ 
chakar declares that, though the supreme Siva became man, woman 
and what is neither, ether, fire and the final cause, He transcends 
all these forms. Rudra is visuadhika (more than the universe). 

It is to stress the transcendent nature of God that the Sid- 
dhantin conceives of Siva as the operative cause of the world, and 
not as the material cause also. One of the arguments for the exist¬ 
ence of God offered by the Siddhantin, the cosmological argument, 
seeks to establish the efficient causality of Siva in relation to the 
world. The first sutra of Siva-jnana-bddham contains this argument: 
“The universe which is diversified as ‘he’ ‘she’ and fit’, and is subject 
to the states of origination, sustentation and destruction, should 
have a cause which is eternally free and intelligent. That cause 
is Hara (i.e. Siva)”. The analogy of the potter is used to explain 
God’s causality in relation to the world. Mere clay will not trans¬ 
form itself into a pot but for the operation of an active agent, viz. 
a potter. Maya is the material cause of the world, as clay is of pot. 
God is the efficient or operative cause, and is analogous to the potter. 
His Sakti is the instrumental cause, like the potter’s wheel. The 
analogy of the potter, however, should not be pressed too far. God 
has no purpose of His own to be fulfilled through His creation. He 


452 


MINfSr^ 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



is satya-sankalpa and dpta-kama; His resolves are all true, and de¬ 
sires eternally accomplished. He causes the world to evolve, in 
order that the souls may be given opportunities for the riddance of 
their impurities. Of the five functions of &iva, tirodhdna , srishti, 
sthiti, samhara, and anugraha , the first four have the last as the 
goal. And even when evolution takes place Siva remains unaffected. 
Just as the wind causes disturbances only to a part of the sea, evolu¬ 
tion relates to a part of God’s parigraha-sakti . The sun is impartial 
and the same to all things; but because of it, diverse phenomena 
occur; the lotus blooms, the burning glass emits heat, and water 
evaporates. We should understand the nature of Siva in relation 
to the world in a similar way. 

One of the distinctive features of the Siddhanta is that it does 
not countenance the doctrine of Avatdra. The author of the Siva - 
jnana-siddhiyar 139 says that while the other gods are subject to 
birth and death, suffering and enjoyment, Siva, the consort of Uma, 
is free from these. There is no incarnation for 6iva; for incarnation,' 
with birth, death, and other changes which are incidental to it, is 
the result of karma and constitutes sarhsara . This, however, does 
not mean that 6iva does not appear in bodily forms. He appears in 
the form in which He is worshipped by the devotee. Out of His 
great love for the souls, He comes as the guru to save them from 
sarhsara. One of the favourite themes with the Saiva saints and 
hymnalists is the conception of God as Love and Grace. There is a 
well-known verse of Tirumular’s which says that only the ignorant 
distinguish between God (Siva) and Love (anbu), and that wisdom 
lies in identifying the two. 

Besides Siva, the Siddhantin accepts two other ontologically 
distinct and eternal entities, viz. maya and jiva. Believing in the 
theory of sat-karya as he does, the Siddhantin argues that as the 
material cause of the non-intelligent world there must be admitted 
the non-intelligent maya. Maya is so called because the world is 
resolved (ma) into it, and is evolved (yd) from it. It is the primor¬ 
dial stuff of which the universe is made. It provides the souls with 
bodies (tanu) y organs (karana), worlds (bhuvana), and objects of 
enjoyment (bhogya), Being non-intelligent, maya cannot evolve of 
itself. It requires guidance from an intelligent being; and that being 
is Siva. Siva, however, acts on maya , not directly, but through His 
CMt-sakti. Thus guided, maya. projects from itself the tattvas which 
constitute the universe. 

Jiva or soul is by nature infinite, pervasive, omniscient, etc. But 
on account of its association with malas or bonds, it experiences it¬ 
self as limited, finite and parviscient. The three malas that bind 


453 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


e soul are anava, karma and may a. (1) Anava is a connate impu¬ 
rity, and occupies in the Saiva-siddhanta a position similar to that 
of avidya in Advaita-Vedanta. Being connate to the soul, it is 
beginningless. It is the cause of the soul's delusion and the conse¬ 
quent transmigration. (2) The lot of the soul in any particular life 
is the result of its past karma. And in working out its past karma 
it acquires fresh karma. This vicious circle could be broken only 
through the grace of Siva. Even for adjusting deserts to deeds the 
guidance of God is necessary, since karma is a blind force, being 
non-intelligent by nature. (3) The third mala which is may a we have 
already taken note of. 


The jiva is related to Siva as body to soul. God pervades the 
soul as the letter A pervades all the other letters. The relation 
between Siva and jlva is described by the Siddhantin as advaita. 
But f advaita ' to him means, not abheda or non-difference, but ana- 
nyata, non-separateness. As a substance, the soul is different from 
God; in nature it is similar to God. Even in moksha it does not lose 
its personality; as an entity it is unique even then. 

Souls are many, since each has a distinct body, mind, etc. 
When one is born, all are not born; when one dies, all do not die; 
and when one is released, all are not released. The scriptural 
statement that the ‘self is one' does not refer to the souls; it is a 
declaration made about God who is one. Innumerable are the souls, 
and they belong to various types ranging from the egg-born to the 
placenta-born. The kind of birth that a soul takes is determined 
by its previous karma % The birth of a soul as a human being is 
superior to birth in the other species of existence. But the birth 
as a Saiva-siddhantin is said to be the best, as one so born has the 
best chance of release. 


Charyd , kriya, yoga and jndna are the means the soul has to 
adopt for gaining its freedom from mala. Following the path of 
charyd , the soul thinks itself to be the servant of God, and engages 
itself in such acts as cleansing God’s temples, adorning the images 
of God with garlands, praising God, serving God’s devotees, etc. 
When the soul reaches the stage of kriya , it becomes more intimate 
to God and considers itself to be His son. Its service to God becomes 
closer. It invokes God’s presence, and offers Him its love and 
praise. The acts of service are still of an external type. But there 
is a change in the inner attitude which enables the soul to march 
nearer to God. The next stage which is yoga makes the soul regard 
itself as a friend of God. Here the soul withdraws its senses from 
their respective objects, and concentrates its mind on God. The 
three paths we have now considered, charyd _, kriya and yoga , are 


454 


misr/ty 



but preparatory stages which the soul has to go through before it 
is made fit to meet its Lord. The reward of charyd is salokya , i.e. 
residence in the region of God; the fruit of kriyd is sdnriipya, i.e. 
attaining the nearness of God; and the result of yoga is sarupya, i.e. 
gaining the form of God. None of these three acquisitions is to be 
regarded as the final goal. The supreme end is sdyujya or union 
with Siva. This is to be attained only by jnana or wisdom; for what 
binds the soul is ignorance, and the antidote for ignorance is wisdom. 
Jnana-marga, or san-marga, as it is otherwise called, is the last stage 
in the journey to God. All that goes before it is of the nature of 
preparation for this final step. 

The attainment of Sivatva, which is release, is not complete 
mergence of the soul’s being in Siva; for as an existent the soul is 
ever different from Siva. Even after the release the soul continues 
to be a soul and does not become God. It can claim God’s nature 
as its own too; but it cannot claim that it is itself God. What hap¬ 
pens in moksha is this: ceasing to experience through pasa which it 
did in bondage, the soul now experiences through pati (the Lord). 
It has shed its pdsa-jnana and pasu-jnana; its knowledge now is pati- 
jnana . The expression pati-jndna does not mean the Lord’s know¬ 
ledge but the soul’s knowledge through the Lord. 

Moksha is a state of freedom from mala. There is no longer 
any need for the soul to return to empirical life. In moksha the 
soul finds rest, peace and bliss. It enjoys the bliss of Siva, but not 
His fiVe-fold function of creation, sustentation, destruction, conceal¬ 
ment, and bestowal of grace. Thus the entitative difference be¬ 
tween God and soul still continues and will never go. Like the 
combination of the two words l taV and c talai’ in the compound word 
‘tadalai’, in moksha , there is a mystic union of soul with God. 
Moksha is not a state of bare identity; it is the experience of unity- 
in-duality. God is the giver of eternal bliss; and the soul is the 
recipient thereof. They are not two, but two-in-one. This is the 
Advaita of Saiva-siddhanta. 

IV. SlVADVAITA 

Srikantha, who was probably a contemporary of Ramanuja, 
expounded a system of Saivism which is called Sivadvaita. While 
resembling Kashmir Saivism in certain respects and Saiva-Siddhanta 
in certain others, Srikantha’s Saivism has unique features of its own. 
Srlkantha bases his exposition on the Vedanta-sutra, and identifies 
Brahman with Para-Siva who is superior to the trimurtis , viz. Brahma, 
Vishnu and Rudra. Because Srlkantha explains the relation between 
the world of souls and matter on the one hand, and God on the other. 


455 



MIN IST/f 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


the analogy of the relation between body and soul, his system 
has been described as Siva-visishtadvaita. Srlkantha himself calls 
his system so. But unlike Ramanuja Srlkantha does not criticise 
Sahkara’s Advaita. On the contrary, there are indications in his 
writings of his leaning towards non-dualism. A careful reading of 
Srikantha’s bhashya will convince one that this philosopher occu¬ 
pies a position midway between Sankara and Ramanuja. While 
theism is the pronounced doctrine he teaches, he leaves the door 
open for passing beyond to the higher truth, viz. Absolutism. 


God, according to Srikantha, is the supreme Lord who exercises 
the five-fold function of the creation, preservation and destruction 
of the world, and of concealment and grace in respect of the soul 
( srishfi, sthiti, samhara, tirobhava and anugraha). The purpose of 
creation is to redeem the soul. Since impurity is innate in the soul, 
and it could be got rid of only through action, the soul has to pass 
through cycles of births and deaths. For this purpose the Lord 
conceals the soul’s eternal perfection. And when by successive per¬ 
formance of action the soul has become pure and is fit for release, 
the Lord bestows grace on it in consequence whereof it realises its 
own eternal nature, which is in essence the nature of God. Thus 
tirobhava and anugraha are the two ends in the process of perfect¬ 
ing the soul, and the creation, preservation and destruction of the 
world are the intervening links in this chain. 


Brahman is the material as well as the operative cause of the 
world. As the material cause, He is the soul of the universe. As 
the operative cause, He is higher than the universe. He is both 
visvdkdra and visvadhika (immanent and transcendent). 


Brahman effects the manifestation of the world through His 
Sakti or Power. It is by virtue of His Sakti that Brahman is im¬ 
manent in His creation and yet transcendent. The ultimate Reality 
is not a bare identity; it is a unity-in-duality, an identity-in-differ¬ 
ence. Para-sakti is the form of the Lord. She figures as His wis¬ 
dom, strength, and activity. The Lord’s will, knowledge, and 
action are but modes of his 6akti. Through his Ichchha-sakti, the 
Lord desired “May I become many”; by Jnana-sakti He considered 
the means and instruments necessary; with Kriya-sakti He created 
the universe which is like a picture painted on the wall of Ichchha- 
sakti. 


Srlkantha believes in sat-karyci-v-dda and maintains that the 
universe is non-different from Brahman just as the pot is non- 
different from the clay of which it is made. And yet Brahman is not 
completely one with the universe, for He is intelligent, while the 
universe is for the most part non-intelligent. The relation between 


456 


*J RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

an and the world is to be explained on the analogy of the 
soul-body relation. The whole world, consisting of intelligent 
beings and non-intelligent things, is the body of isvara. Ignorance, 
change, etc., affect this body, while qualities like permanence, omni¬ 
science, etc., belong to the Self. 

Srlkantha identifies Brahman with Siva. He sees in the 
Vedanta-sutra “a doctrine of the Supreme Being as Siva, the auspi¬ 
cious one, the Being whose throat shows for all time the mark of 
His grace to His creatures, the consort of Uma who is the Supreme 
Light of Intelligence and Bliss, the three-eyed cause of the destruc¬ 
tion and subsequent re-creation of the Universe.” Srlkantha shows 
how the eight names of Siva, viz. Bhava, Sarva, Rudra, Isana, Pasu- 
pati, Ugra, Bhima and Mahadeva, are applicable to Brahma as de¬ 
fined by the janmadi-sutra. Among the several Upanishadic texts 
that the teacher quotes is the one from the Svetasvatara which 
declares that men can indeed attain release without knowing Siva, 
when they can roll up the skies like a piece of hide. 

Release is attained through realisation of one’s own essential 
nature. But this has to wait till karma fructifies and is fully experi¬ 
enced through enjoyment or suffering. The Lord is impartial and 
wills the release of all. But only those whose karma is ripened are 
released, even as on the rising of the sun only those lotus buds that 
are ready bloom. 

Contemplation of the Lord is the means to release. The soul’s 
saiinsara is due to its beginningless finitude and dependence. But 
this miserable state can be terminated, for it is not of the essence 
of the jiva. The jiva should rise above its limitations by medita¬ 
ting on the glory of Siva. According to the tatkratu-nyaya one be¬ 
comes what one meditates on. By meditating constantly on Brah¬ 
man, the devotee acquires his distinctive characteristics (asadhd- 
rana~gundh). Occasional acts of meditation will not do. Only 
when practised unintermittently and with concentration, medita¬ 
tion will lead to Brahma-sakshatkara. Meditation should not be 
given up at any time; it must continue every day until death. The 
Lord should be contemplated as identical with the self, not as diffe¬ 
rent therefrom. Otherwise, the soul will not be released from its 
bondage ( pasubhava). To go beyond the limitations one must 
identify oneself with the unlimited. 

The enlightened one attains final release from good and evil 
deeds, “not at death, but only on crossing the Viraja, the river that 
constitutes the boundary of Vishnu-ioka, beyond which lies the 
abode of Siva, the region of final liberation and the full attainment 
of self-hood.” Till that stage is reached there is samsara . The en- 




457' 



“Tightened soul departs at death on the path of the gods, sheds all) 
the residue of its impurities at the Viraja, crosses the river, and 
attains final release. Speaking of the devotees of the Non-related 
( niranvaya-upasakas ), Srlkantha says that there is no passing for 
them along the path. 

The soul which has attained release through the intuition of 
Brahman and has become equal to Brahman, enjoys supreme bliss- 
before which the joys of the world pale into insignificance. The 
world is seen now, in its proper context, as a part of the Lord. 
Negatively, release is freedom from pasutva (bondage); positively r 
it is the attainment of bliss ( Sivatva ). The self’s real nature is 
made manifest in release. It regains self-luminosity and acquires 
the auspicious qualities characteristic of Siva. The five-fold func¬ 
tions of creation, etc., however, continue to be exercised by the 
Lord alone. The similarity of the released soul to Brahman is only 
in respect of wisdom and enjoyment. Is it not enough that the 
soul has been redeemed from samsara, and that it no longer returns 
to the world of tears and sorrow? 

V. KAPALA AND KALAMUKHA SECTS 140 

Passing reference has been made above to the great influence 
of the Kapalikas. These, along with the Kalamukhas, represent 
two extremely horrid and repulsive forms of Saivism. 

The Kapalas and Kalamukhas are two distinct sects, though they 
were often confused with one another. According to Ramanuja, the 
Kapalikas (members of Kapala sect) maintained that a man, who was 
advanced in their doctrine, could attain the highest bliss by concen¬ 
trating his mind on the soul seated on the female organ. They wor- 
shipped Bhairava as the great God and attributed great virtues and 
occult powers to drinking wine and eating disgusting substances as 
food. They performed human sacrifices, and believed that by the 
practice of Yoga they could achieve miraculous powers of speedy 
movement. The Kalamukhas held that happiness in this world and 
salvation in the next could be attained by such practices as (1) eating 
food in a human skull; (2) besmearing the body with the ashes of the 
dead and also eating those ashes; (3) worshipping the God as seat¬ 
ed in a pot of wine; and (4) holding a club. Men of other castes 
could become Brahmanas by performance of certain rites, and one 
who undertook the vow of a Kapala became a holy saint. 

The religious devotion of these outlandish sects was reserved for 
the horrid God Bhairava with his wife Chan^ika, wearing a garland 
of human skulls, and requiring human sacrifices and offering of wine 
for his propitiation. It is unnecessary to give any further details about 

458 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



the horrible, almost demoniacal, practices of these sects, which form 
a “ghastly picture of the wild aberrations of the human intellect 
and spirit.” 141 They must have been in vogue from fairly early 
times and their origin may be traced to the terrible form and con¬ 
ception of Rudra. What is, however, significant is their popularity, 
side by side with the highly devotional and philosophical aspects of 
Saivism. 

It would be wrong to think that these sects were quite insigni¬ 
ficant. According to tradition even the great Sahkaracharya had to 
enter into a keen contest with them. Centuries later, Ramanuja, 
Anandagiri and others took note of them, and their beliefs and 
practices find a place in the Siva Parana and other sacred books of 
the Saivas. They also figured in literature of fiction and we get a 
picture of them in the Mdlatimadhava of Bhavabhuti. Srlsaila is 
referred to as the chief seat of the Kapalikas in this drama. A 
female member of this sect, Kapalakuntfala by name and wearing a 
garland of human skulls, carries away, at dead of night, the heroine 
Malat! to the cemetery where her preceptor Aghoraghanfa was to 
sacrifice her before’ the image of Karala-Chamunda. 

There can be hardly any doubt that such extreme sects of Saiv- 
ism reflect the same human tendency and mentality as we find in 
some revolting Tantrik rites mentioned above, and that in some form 
or other they have continued to exercise bewitching influence over 
certain sections of the people. 

F. GENERAL DEVELOPMENT OF PHILOSOPHY 
I. IMPACT OF OTHER CIVILIZATIONS—THE THEISTIC URGE 

Reference has been made above 142 to the early Christian and 
Muslim settlements in India. To what extent and in what way, if 
at all, these extremely monotheistic civilizations affected the thought 
of the country, we have not materials enough to judge. 113 But we 
find that during the period under review there was a theistic urge 
in the philosophy of the land. This finds powerful expression in 
many Vedantic writers who came after Sankara. 

Sankara's efforts had earned a prestige for the Vedanta which 
no other philosophy enjoyed at the time, and re-introduced in the 
minds of men a reverence for the Vedas from which the Vedanta 
professed to spring. Sankara’s Brahma was, however, an impersonal 
being, who could not evoke any devotional emotion, and prayers to 
whom were meaningless. But man in sorrow and suffering requir¬ 
ed a solace. He looked for a god who could show mercy to a sinner 
and secure safety for him in times of need. Jainism and Buddhism 


459 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 

had killed such a god while Jaimini’s Mlmamsa and Kapila's 
Sankhya did no better. Nyaya-Vaiseshika’s god was more a creator 
than anything else. A better god was yet to come. Man’s yearn¬ 
ing spirit, therefore, turned to the Vedas and the higher philosophy 
that sprang from their womb. We thus find thinkers and writers 
with a theistic bent of mind attempting to re-interpret the Vedanta. 


II. RAMANUJA (eleventh-twelfth century A.D.) 


One such great writer was Ramanuja, to whom reference has 
been made above. The line of thought that he followed did not ap¬ 
pear in him for the first time. He was preceded by others in this 
way of thinking. But he surpassed them in clarity and vigour of 
thought and urgency of appeal. So he eclipsed his predecessors and 
gave a lead to many others who followed him. 

The first point of his attack was Sankara’s theory of knowledge 
and his theory of Brahma as a substance without attribute. Com- 
monsense says that when there is knowledge, there must be a 
knower who knows and an object that is known, and knowledge is 
the relation between the two. Sankara demurred to this. Brahma 
was consciousness; but as there was no second to him, he could not 
be a knower in the ordinary sense with an object to be known. The 
world of things and finite selves was unreal, and so Brahma was 
without relation, and without any attribute. There was nothing 
else from which he could be differentiated, and no quality either 
by which he could be differentiated. 


Ramanuja challenged this entire position. Knowledge always 
implied a relation. The world of things and selves was real. It 
was not different from Brahma in essence, but differentiated from 
him by their individuality. Brahma was not a mere ‘is’ without 
any quality. The world is in him like a quality in a thing, like 
heat in fire or weight in a stone. The world is his expression, his 
body, so to say. Brahma is a personal being, having infinite quali¬ 
ties of goodness and purity. He is in fact the same as Vishnu of 
the Vishnu Pur ana and the Vaishnavas. Ramanuja’s commentary 
on the Vedanta-sutras is interspersed with profuse quotations from 
the Vishnu Purdna and other Vaishnava writings. His conclusions 
are based on these quite as much as on the sutras of Vedanta as 
interpreted by him. 


There was another important point on which Ramanuja differ¬ 
ed from Sankara. According to Ramanuja, religious performances 
(karma), as explained and advocated by the Purva Mlmamsa, were 
a necessary preliminary to and a preparation for the study and 


460 


RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 

f the Vedanta. Further, knowledge alone was not enough 
soul. It was to be followed by devotion to God (bhakti) 
which could lead man to his destination. 

HI. OTHER VAISHNAVA COMMENTATORS OF VEDANTA 

(i) Nimbarka (twelfth century A.D.) 

Ramanuja’s philosophy has been called ‘qualified monism’. It 
was so called because, according to it, though the ultimate reality 
was one, it possessed qualities and was thus qualified. The world 
and finite souls were in Brahma like qualities inhering in a thing, 
like light in the sun, Ramanuja was followed in the theistic line 
of thinking by several powerful Vaish^avas. Next in time and 
rank to him was Nimbarka, a Telugu Brahmana, whose philosophy 
has been given the name of ‘dualism-monism’. Like Sankara and 
Ramanuja, he, too, believed that the ultimate reality was one 
and it was Brahma. But unlike them, he thought that the world 
and finite selves were real, too; and they were distinct from 
Brahma. There were thus two realities—Brahma and the other 
than Brahma. So far he was a dualist. But these two reals were 
at bottom and in essence one; for Brahma was the essence of all. 
So far he was a monist. And the relation between Brahma and 
the other than Brahma was that of a whole with its parts. A part 
has no reality apart from the whole of which it is a part, but it is 
not identical with the whole. Again, the whole is not real, away 
from the parts. They have a common existence, a common essence, 
and are yet distinguishable from each other. Between Brahma 
and the world of things and selves, the relation is the same. It is 
a case of identity in difference. But what is important in the 
argumentation is that this Brahma was identical with Vishnu; he 
was a god and a person, who could be an object of devotion and 
love, to whom prayers could be addressed and who could show 
mercy and compassion when these were needed. 

(ii) Madhva (thirteenth century A.D/) 

Another Vaishnava theist who wrote on the Vedanta was 
Madhva. His philosophy was pure dualism. There were two 
categories of reality, according to him; Brahma and that which was 
other than Brahma. This second category included the world of 
plurality of things and the plurality of finite individual souls. The 
two categories were totally different from each other, have been 
so from eternity, and will continue to be so. Things are different 
from one another; so are the finite souls from one another and from 
things and Brahma. The knowledge of these differences is the 


4 



461 


Mi NlST/fy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


ay to escape from the bondage of life. The talk of one reality, 
therefore, is meaningless according to Madhva. But the most im¬ 
portant of his conclusions is that, as in other Vaishnava writers, 
the Brahma of Vedanta is not an impersonal being but is only an¬ 
other name for Hari or Vishnu. He is the one object of worship 
and devotion. 


(iii) Vallabha 

With Madhva and his school, the reaction against Sankara’s 
monism seems to be complete. Monism led to qualified monism; 
this was followed by a theory of monism in dualism; then came 
pure dualism. But a reaction to this reaction set in, and the wheel 
went full circle in Vallabha. Vallabha’s philosophy was Sankara’s 
monism minus the doctrine of illusion (or mayd). The world and 
the finite souls were all real. They were not an illusion. But 
they were not different from Brahma either. All things are Brahma. 
There is absolute identity among them. In Vallabha we have an 
identification of Brahma, not with Vishnu as such, but with his in¬ 
carnation, Krishna of Gokula. This is an advance towards later 
Vaishnavism. Vallabha is thus Sankara revived with a little popu¬ 
lar crudeness and without Sankara’s argumentative subtlety. 

But Vallabha is usually assigned to the end of the fourteenth 
or beginning of the fifteenth century A.D. 144 In speaking of him 
here, before A.D. 1300, we are thus guilty of a slight anachron¬ 
ism. We mention him just to show how the movement of thesis, 
anti-thesis and synthesis was in full swing in Vedanta circles; how 
one proposition powerfully advocated led to a counter-proposition, 
and the conflict of these two to a third. 

We may add that this movement of theism was not confined 
to the centuries in which the above writers appeared, nor to the 
provinces to which they belonged. The influence of Nimbarka and 
Madhva, specially of Madhva, for instance, travelled beyond their 
time and place, and in the sixteenth century A.D. started the 
famous Chaitanya movement in Bengal. Under Chaitanya’s influ¬ 
ence, a new philosophical school arose headed by JIva Gosvami, and 
another elaborate exposition of Vedanta was attempted by Baladeva, 
just to adapt it to the requirements of the new religious cult. 


IV. NON-VAISHNAVA VEDANTISTS 

It was not the worshippers of Vishnu alone who fell back upon 
the Vedanta for a philosophical sanction of their religious cult. 
Followers of other religions also did the same. So far as pure 
philosophy is concerned, the contributions of these writers were 


462 


mist#). 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


not of very great importance. Their chief concern was to suggest 
an identification of Brahma of Vedanta with the god of their wor¬ 
ship. This is not done by any irrefutable logic, but only by citing 
the various names of the deity along with that of Brahma and 
treating them as a string of synonyms. Thus Srikantha, a Saiva 
commentator of the Vedanta-sutras, under the very first sutra, uses 
several names of Siva as implying the same thing as the word 
‘Brahma’ used in the sutra. All this only shows the great prestige 
which the Vedas and the Vedanta, the professed philosophy of the 
Vedas, had earned under the powerful advocacy of Sankara. 

One peculiarity of all these theistic interpreters of Vedanta is 
that they emphasise devotion to God (bhakti) as more important 
and as the true means of man’s salvation. Knowledge is, after all, 
an aid to the production of this spirit of devotion and self-surrender 
to God. 


V. THE OTHER SYSTEMS 


Among the orthodox systems, the Yoga treated man as a psycho¬ 
physical composite, and by prescribing a series of physico-mental 
exercises, it sought to make man’s body and mind suitable for libe¬ 
ration; and on its way to that goal, man might acquire many 
extraordinary and supra-human powers. Instead of being a means 
to an end, these powers may become ends in themselves, and so 
the Yoga captivates the fancy of many men even now. Besides, 
the psychology of the Yoga, though not cast in a modern mould, 
has still a profundity of its own. But, in spite of all this, the "^oga 
soon degenerated into a study of postures and the dispositions of 
the limbs in these postures by which the body could be made hardy 
and disciplined; and also the practice of certain intellectual 
exercises by which occult powers were believed to be attainable. 
Whatever the value of these things may be—and admitting that 
they have great value—they were not philosophy. This form of 
Yoga is usually given the name of Hatha-yoga to distinguish it from 
the higher and philosophical Yoga. 

Sahkhya, on the whole, produced very little literature as com¬ 
pared with the other systems. It continues to be studied even to¬ 
day. But it has not diversified itself into schools like the Vedanta, 
and cannot claim even half the number of commentators as the 
Vedanta. During the period we are reviewing, no writer on San- 
khya appears to have risen to fame. Except Vijnanabhikshu who, 
in the sixteenth century A.D. or thereabout, attempted to give it 
a new orientation, it has had more or less an even tenor of life. 
Its conception of the eternal feminine ( prakriti ) and eternal mascu¬ 
line (purusha) may have suggested metaphors to poets; and it might 


463 


MiN/sr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


§L 


rjmve been at the root of certain conceptions of the Tantras 
sr forms of religious rites or worship. Besides, its theory of gwms 
(qualities) might have affected subsequent thought in general and 
medical science in particular. Charaka, one of the founders of 
medical science in India, appears to have used some of the concepts 
of Sankhya; and others have also followed him. But it is difficult 
to say whether Charaka, who probably flourished in the first century 
A.D., borrowed from Sankhya, or from a common fund of ideas on 
which Sankhya also drew. The theory of guna, for instance, though 
elaborated and emphasised by the Sankhya, is found in other 
spheres of thought also, philosophical as well as non-philosophical. 

The Sankhya conception of male and female principles may 
have influenced dualistic Vaishnavism, specially the cult of Krishna 
and Radha. We hear of such influence from some of the writers 
of the Bengal School of Vaishnavism. And the cult of Hara and 
Gaurl—the concept of God as half masculine and half feminine, 
each half holding the other in eternal embrace—may also have 
received an impetus from Sankhya. But this influence is rather 
vague, and no historical account of it is possible; one can only point 
out parallels. These, however, may also point to the existence of an 
earlier common stock of ideas, from which all borrowed. 

Except in its theory of particularity or individuality (visesha), 
the Vaiseshika did not differ much from the Nyaya. But it continued 
to maintain its separate, though rather subordinate, existence, right 
up to the seventeenth century A.D., when joint treatises on the two 
systems were written by scholars like Visvanatha, Annambhatta and 
others. From that time onward the Vaiseshika has been practically 
merged in the Nyaya system; and the two systems move like twin 
stars across the sky of Indian thought. Sivaditya is perhaps the only 
important writer on Vaiseshika during the period under review. 


We have, however, a different story to tell about the Nyaya. As 
an organ of debate it created a position for itself from which even 
the Vedanta could not dislodge it. In wrestling with Jain and Bud¬ 
dhist logic, it had gained strength. While its metaphysics or its 
theory of the world had been disposed of in the Veddnta-sn.tras, its 
usefulness as a weapon of argument remained. And under the 
leadership of Gangesa in Mithila, about the middle of the thirteenth 
century A.D., it started a new career as a ‘novum organum’■ —as a new 
logic ( navya nyaya), which continued to flourish right up to the days 
of Chaitanya, about which time its centre of activity was shifted to 
Navadvlpa in Bengal. This new logic which was concerned more 
with the sources of knowledge ( pramanas ) than with metaphysics, 
has produced an extensive literature expressed in an unusually stiff 


461 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


language. The weakest link in this chain of literature is that it 
argues and argues about many questions of epistemology, but gives 
us no stable metaphysical conclusions. For this reason, it has often 
been derided as a waste of man’s brain-power, and discussing 
nothing better than whether the pot contains the oil or the oil the 


The Purva Mimamsa also continued to hold a position of influ¬ 
ence. This was due to the fact that it was more directly and more 
intimately connected with the Vedas than any other system. Its 
philosophical importance was not very great, except for a few con¬ 
ceptions, such as karma, which were common to other philosophies. 
With the gradual disappearance of Vedic sacrifices, the influence of 
Mimamsa also began to decline. Its chief importance in subsequent 
times lay in the fact that it supplied the basic principles and rules 
of interpretation which were equally applicable to canonical as well 
as legal writings such as the Smritis. These rules have been utilised 
in expounding Hindu law even in British Courts of justice. 


This system, like the Sankhya and the Vaiseshika, continued to 
be studied through the centuries we are reviewing; but there was 
little progressive development in them to call for a historical narra¬ 
tion. 146 


VI. LATER SYNCRETISM 

Even those who quarrel among themselves unite in presence of 
a common enemy. Towards the end of the period we have travers¬ 
ed, we find a spirit of syncretism prevailing among the philosophies 
of the land. About and after A.D. 1000, India was receiving hard 
blows from the north-west. Islam came as an invader but remain¬ 
ed to rule. Hinduism felt the difference and tried to close up its 
ranks as a measure of self-preservation. In philosophy this ten¬ 
dency is reflected in the attempt to syncretise all the warring systems 
of thought. If all roads in the Roman Empire led to Rome, did not 
all the orthodox philosophies have but one goal to achieve? They 
constituted a graded hierarchy and not battling enemies Each of 
them was suited to man at a particular stage of spiritual and intellec¬ 
tual growth, and all together, step by step, led him to his final desti¬ 
nation, viz. moksha or liberation. This view gradually asserted 
itself in the writings of Madhusudana Sarasvatl (in his Prasth&na- 
bheda) and others. Only the orthodox philosophies—-those, that is 
to say, which owed allegiance to the Vedas—were thus regarded as 
parts of a larger whole. The heterodox philosophies had no place 
in this scheme. They only lead men astray and must, therefore, be 
eschewed. 

465 


S. K.-30 


miST^y 



Vijnanabhikshu, another famous author, possibly belonging to 
the sixteenth or seventeenth century A.D., made a similar attempt 
at syncretism. He wrote both on the Sahkhya as well as on the 
Vedanta, and tried to show that the two systems differed more in 
terminology than in essence. His contention was that the praknti 
of Sahkhya was the creative power of Brahma—an attribute of 
Brahma, and that the theory that Sahkhya denied god or a creative 
personal being, was a misunderstanding. When we remember the 
persistent attack that the Vedanta-sutras make on the Sahkhya con¬ 
ception of unconscious prakriti, Vijhanabhikshu’s attempt at re¬ 
conciliation between the two systems must be regarded as an attempt 
to bring the poles together. Yet the attempt was made. 146 The 
development of this spirit of reconciliation and syncretism, however, 
belongs to a later period. 

The tone of pessimism that pervades the entire range of 
Indian philosophy has often been adversely commented upon by 
western critics. It cannot be denied that there is pessimism 
everywhere,—more in some, less in other systems. It was per¬ 
haps most acute in Buddhism, and may have spread from there 
to infect the other systems. But the Indian mind was not always 
pessimistic. In the Vedas, the gods appear in nature with humane 
feelings, and joy is not always absent. The early Greek 
mind looked upon the world as full of joy and laughter. The 
world was a poem and life was a joyful drama. To the Vedic 
mind also, a similar attitude is not unknown. But when we come 
to the period of philosophy, life has become as dull as a twice-told 
tale, and the world is anything but a glowing poem. It may be 
due to the political vicissitudes through which the country had pass¬ 
ed or to other causes. Whatever the causes may have been, the fact 
was that life was considered a bondage, and philosophy, the means 
of escape. 

Thus the keynote of Indian philosophy is a dominant desire of 
the individual to save his soul and to escape from the evils of life 
in this world. What is markedly absent is the desire 1 to take arms 
against a sea of troubles and by opposing' end them/ to make a better 
world here, to establish an ideal state and an ideal society, to banish 
disease and poverty from society, and to bring the amenities of life to 
every door;—in one word, to make this life livable and this world 
habitable. It. is a limitation of Indian thought that it never paid 
equal attention to social and political problems, and had no social 
and political philosophy of a high order. This is accounted for by 
its presupposition that life is not worth living. 


400 


MINlSr^ 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 
G. ISLAM 



The Arab conquest of Sindh did not materially affect the reli¬ 
gious outlook of either the Arabs themselves or the people with 
whom they came into contact, except, of course, those who were 
converted to the new faith. There was very little religious activity 
among the Muslims in India, as distinct and apart from that in the 
main Islamic centres in Arabia and other Muslim countries. 

It was not till three centuries later, after th e Gh a znav id con¬ 
quest of the Pu njab , that we~Hn3 an' important development among 
the Muslim community inj fadia. This was the appearance of_ Sufi 
saints, 'tlief_ first of w h o m wa s Shaik h Isma‘11 of Lahore . 147 

He was followed by Sha i kh ‘All bin .‘Us man al-Hujwai ri, better 

known under his sobriquet of Data Gan j B akhs h, who died in A.D. 
1072 and whose tomb at Lahore is one of the most popular Muslim 
shrines in the Punjab. He was the author of several wo rks, the 
best known of which is the Kashf al- Mahju b., and migh t be des cribed 
as the fo under of the Sufi cult in India which gained much popu¬ 
larity among thp Muslim masses and has profo undly influenced their 
entire moral and religious outlook. His greatness wasjrecognised 
by Khvaj a Mu‘In-ud-din of Ajmer, th e greatest Sufi saint of India, 
who underwent a course of spiritual purification (cHUIaJ aUhis tomb 
soon after his arrival in India. Another saint of the Ghaznavid 
period who enjoys great fame even today, and still has a large num¬ 
ber of follo wers , known as Sultanis, both among the Hindus and the 
Muslims, was Sayyid Ahmad Sulta n JSakhL Sarwa r, popularly known 
at L akhi Da ta. ~Hedied at Shahkot, a place near Multan, in 577 A.H. 
(~A.D. 1181). His followers are scattered all over the Punjab and 
are specially numerous in the Jalandhar District. 148 One can 
easily form a good idea of the firm hold which these two saints 
have retained through the long centuries over the popular mind, 
from the large number of devotional songs, extolling their spiritual 
merits, which the beggars and the wandering minstrels of the Punjab 
go about singing to the accompaniment of their crude stringed 
instruments. 


As has just been mentioned above, the greatest of the Sufi saints, 
who founded a long line of spiritual descendants that has endured 
even up to the present time, was Kh vaia M uTn-ud-din , a discip le 
of the Per sian saint Kh v aja ‘Usma n Harw ani of C hismT He 
came to Lahore from Ghazni in 556 A.H. (=A.D. 1161 ), and having v 
visited Multan and Delhi, fina lly settled down at A jmer where he 
lies buried now, while his disciple , Qutb-ud-din Bakhtyar _Kaki, a 
native of Ush, took up his resid ence at D elhi. About the same time 


467 


































wmsr/fy 



another saint, Baha-ud-din Zakariya, who was born in Multan and 
had met the famous mystic Shihab-ud-dln SuhrawardI during the 
course of his journeys to Bukhara, Baghdad and Jerusalem, founded 
another branch of Sufi saints in his native town. The renowned 
Persian poet, ‘Iraqi, visited him at Multan and became his disciple, 
while his descendants, Shaikh Sadr-ud-din and Abu‘l Fath Rukn-ud- 
din, carried on the work of spiritual salvation after his demise in 661 
A.H. (=A.D. 1263). His disciples became known by the surname of 
Suhrawardls, as distinct from the Chishtis who were devoted to 
Khvaja Mu'in-ud-din and his successors. It was one of his disciples, 
Makhdum Lai Shahbaz Qalandar, who carried his teachings to Sindh, 
and who, like another saint of that province, Maggar PIr, is revered 
even today by numerous Hindus who know him by the name of Raja 
Bharatri. 149 Their tombs have become popular places of pilgrim¬ 
age for both the communities. Another saint of this period in Sindh 
was Sayyid Jalal Bukhari who came to Uchch in 642 A.H. (—A.D. 
1244), and one of whose grandsons acquired great celebrity under 
the sobriquet of Makhdum-i-Jahaniyan Jahan Gasht. / 

Gujarat was another important centre of activity for th^/mystic 
saints,—Patan, Broach, Rander; Khambayat, etc. each having some 
local saint or another, the best known of whom was Sayyid ‘Muham¬ 
mad Barahman of Patan. It was also noted for the missionaries of 
some schismatic sects, notably the Ismahliya. The Carmathians 
(Qaramita), a particular branch of this sect, were, as a matter of fact, 
very active about this time, and remained so till a much later period, 
so that ‘Ala-ud-dln Khalji had to take stern measures to suppress 
them. Once during the reign of Sultana Raziyya they actually 
threatened Delhi itself, and were driven back with great difficulty. 
But, whereas the Carmathians, true to their old traditions, indulged 
in excesses of all kinds and often adopted a bellicose attitude towards 
the authorities, the Fatimid branch, with its centre in Yemen, was 
busy carrying on its propaganda silently and peacefully, and was 
successful in converting numerous local inhabitants to its own 
creed. When a split occurred in its ranks on the question of suc¬ 
cession to the headship of the community, the followers of one of the 
two rival claimants moved their headquarters to India. Yet another 
branch, the Assassins, also ensconced themselves on the west coast 
of India and the north-west provinces. One of their agents, Shaikh 
Sadr-ud-din, 150 evolved a syncretic creed whereby Hindu gods of 
the triumvirate,—Brahma, Vishnu and Siva,—were not only 
recognised as prophets, but also identified with the Prophet of Islam, 
‘All, and Adam respectively 161 —a clever device by which he could 
win over a large number of adherents among the Hindus. The Aghfi 
Khan is the present head of the larger and more influential of the 


468 




RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


<SL 


twT5 groups into which the followers of this creed became divided in. 
later times 152 , and of which the adherents are now found, not only 
in India, but in some parts of Africa also, where the Indians have 
migrated in recent times. 

Nor were the activities of the Muslim mystics and agents of the 
Batiniya sects confined to the north. The Deccan and the southern 
provinces also provided a fruitful and favourable field. Among the 
well-known southern saints we may mention the names of Sayyid 
Mazhar Wall of Trichinopoli, 163 Sayyid Ibrahim Shahid, Baba Fakhr- 
ud-dm, Shaikh Muntakhab-ud-din, 154 Zari-Zarbakhsh, and Muham¬ 
mad al-Husaini, known as Banda Nawaz Gisu Daraz of Gulbarga, 
perhaps the greatest of them. In Bengal a pupil of Shaikh Qutb-ud- 
din Bakhtyar Kaki, Shaikh Jalal-ud-dih Tabrizi, acquired consider¬ 
able celebrity. Thus by the time the Mamluk Dynasty came to an 
end, Sufi monasteries were already scattered far and wide through¬ 
out the country, and there was a definite spiritual liaison between 
them, although there is no evidence to show that they worked on 
any co-ordinated basis. The Chishtiya school, with its liberal and\ x 
tolerant outlook, and its recogmiiorrof fdr* 
the attainmen Lof spi ritual ecstasy, was now supreme and counted 
the largest number of the common people among its adherents. 

1. This point has been further elaborated in Chapter XVII, in the section ‘Hindu- 
Muslim Relations’. 

2. The Iranians substituted h f for V (cf. Hapta-Hindu for Sapta-Sindhu) and 
used the form Hindu. The Greeks and Romans dropped the initial %* and 
obtained various forms, like Indoi, from which is derived the modern European 
form ‘India’. 

3. Dhoyi, Pavanadutam, v. 28. 

4. N. G. Majumdar, Inscriptions of Bengal, p. 35 (v. 30). 

5. R. Li. Mitra, Nepalese Buddhist Literature, p. 261. 

6. Cf. Vol. I, pp. 162, 187, 203; Vol. II, pp. 432-5. 

7. K. A. N. Sastri, The Pandyan Kingdom , p. 97. 

8. K. A. N. Sastri, A History of South India, p. 412. 

9. Vol. IV, pp. 17, 18 (fn. 26); Vol. Ill, p. 454. 

9a. Vol. IV, p. 259. , n 

10. It consists in the knowledge of the essencelessness of the world or of all that 
appear,—the knowledge of the nature of things as pure void, or of the, void- 
nature cf the self or individual (pudgala) and the dharmas, i.e. entities, or 
objects, or the elements that constitute the universe. Cf. Mahabodhi , July- 
August, 1942, p. 254. 

11. For the view that in Hinayana, too, an Arhat who has attained Supreme En¬ 
lightenment (Nirvana) does not cease to be after death, cf. “The concept of 
Khanda in Buddhism”, by C. D. Chatterjee, in the Bharata-Kaumudi , Pt. I, 
pp. 161 ff. 

12. S. B. Dasgupta, Introduction to Tantric Buddhism , p. 116. 

13. For an elaborate discussion on Nirvana, see B.C. Law, Concepts of Buddhism, 
pp. 76 If. 

14. S. B. Dasgupta, op. cit p. 87. 

15. Ibid., pp. 91-93. 

16. Ibid., pp. 83-85. . , 

17. This account of Tantrik Buddhism including Vajra-yana and Kalachakra-yana 
is mainly based on Dr. S. B. Dasgupta’s two valuable books, viz., Introduction 
to Tantric Buddhism and Obscure Religious Cults as Background of Bengali 
Literature , and also my History of Buddhism in Bengal (in Bengali). 

469 






THE STRUGGLE FOE EMPIRE 


<SL 


20 

21 

22 


23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 


40 

41 


42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 


49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 
61. 
62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66 . 
67. 


, Obscure Religious Cults, p. 86. 

. For details regarding Sahajayana, of. S. B. Dasgupta, Obscure Religious Cults 
as Background of Bengali Literature , pp. 39-128. Also see P C. Bagchi, 
Bauddha~Dharma-o-Sdhitya (in Bengali), pp. 71-79. 

. See above, p. 24. 

. See above, p. 28. 

. For the site of Vikramaslla-vihdra, see S. C. Vidyabhushana, History of the 
Mediaeval School of Indian Logic, p. 151 and fn. 5; JBRS, XXXIV, 1948, pp. 
83-86. 

Vol. III, pp. 580 f. 

. Phanindra Nath Bose, Indian Teachers of Buddhist Universities, p. 36; Schief- 
ner’s Tdranatha: Geschichte des Buddhismus, p. 218. 

Vol. IV, pp. 49, 272 ff. 

Catalogue Du fonds Tibetain de la Bibliotheque NatioTiale, par P. Cordier. 
Vol. II. p. 299. 

. Ann. Rep. Arch. Surv., Eastern Circle, 1920-21, p. 35; ASI, 1922, p. 116. 

EL, XXI, pp. 97 IT. 

1C., I, p. 232. 

Ibid., p. 231. 

Ibid. 

• S. C. Vidyabhushana, op. cit., p. 151. 

, Cordier, op. cit, II, p. 299. 

. Vidyabhushana, op. cit., p. 136. 

, Pag-Sam-Jon-Zang. Ed. S. C. Das, Pt. I, Intr., p. xcvii. * 

. Cordier, op. cit., Ill, p. 282. 

. Vidyabhushana, op. cit., p. 151. 

Cordier, op. cit, III, p. 281. 

. For his traditional life-history, see S. C. Das, Indian Pandits in the Land of 
Snow, pp. 50-76; also Waddell's Lamaism; see Phanindra Nath Bose, op. cit., 
PP* ^6-79; N. N. Das Gupta, Bahgldya Bauddhadharma (in Bengali), pp. 168- 
178; Vangiya Mahdkosha (in Bengali), Vol. II, pp. 369-72. Cf. also above, Vol. 

IV, pp. 447-8. 

For Abhayakaragupta, see IC, III, pp. 86-89. 

For Vibhutichandra, see Vichitrd (Bengali Journal) 1345 B.S., pp. 293-96; 
Banglaya Bauddhadharma, pp. 180-86; IC, V, pp. 215-17; Phanindra Nath Bose 

op. cit., pp. 145-150. 

P^nindra Nath Bose, op. cit, pp. 150-54. 

Bahgldya Bauddhadharma, pp. 192-194. 

Cordier, op. cit, III, p. 285. 

Cf. Ch. XX. 

Vol. IV, p. 447. 

Cf. Marco Polo, ed. H. Yule, Vol. I, p. 168. 

mnasi-o-Marrnavdni (Bengali Journal), 1329 B.S., pp. 481-82, with reference 
to M. Chavannes’ Les Inscriptions Chinoisos de Bodh Gaya in the Revue de 
L histoire des Religions, 1889. Cf. P. C. Bagchi, India and China , p. 56. 
Rajatarangmi, tr. Stein, Book IV, p. 142, v. 200, and p. 167, v. 507. 

Ibid., Book III, p. 103, v. 355. 

Ibid., Book VII, p. 353, vv. 1097-98. 

Cordier, op. cit., II, p. 12. 

Ibid., Ill, p. 452. 

El, IX, pp. 300-02. 

Cordier, op. cit., in, pp. 291, 297, 302, 303, 304, 452, 456. 

Ibid., II, p. 220; in, pp. 291, 294, 297, 302, 303, 304, 374, 412, 437, 447, 452, 453, 
456, etc. * 

Ibid., in, p. 175. 

Ibid., pp. 442, 452. 

Ibid., pp. 443, 449, 453; S. C. Vidyabhushana, op. cit., pp. 142-44. 

Ibid., p. 442. 

Ibid., p. 301. 

Ibid., d. 437. 

S.* C. Vidyabhushana, op. cit., pp. 137-39. 

Bio. Ind., ed. by S. C. Das and H. M. Vidyabhushana, Calcutta, 1888. 

Ibid.. Preface, p. v. 

Cf. Keith, HSL, p. 159. 

HTB, Vol. II, pp. l, 2, 4, 13, 14, 31, 45; etc. 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 


<SL 


96. 


97. 

98. 

99. 


100 . 

101 . 

102 . 

103. 

104. 


105. 

106. 

107. 

108. 

109. 

110 


vjGC p. 25. 

Cunningham, Mahdbodhi, pp. 70-75; B. M. Barua, Gaya and Buddha-Gaya, Pt. 
I, pp. 199-201. 

MASB , V, p. 75. 

JASB. N.S., IV, pp. 106-07. 

JRAS, 1927, p. 694. 

JASB, 1930, p. 139. 

1A, xvil!' pfkl f; Ibid., XXIV, p. 176; also cf. JPASB, XXI, pp. 103 ff. and 
THK, p. 309. 

HTB, II, p. 4. 

B. Majumdar, Guide to Sa.rna.th, 2nd ed., p. 22. 

El, IX, pp. 319 ft'. 

Guide to Sarnath, pp. 28 and 36. 

El, XI, pp. 24-26. 

Ibid., IX, p. 321. 

Ibid., IV, pp. 118-19. 

Cordier, op. cit., II, pp. 130, 218, 220-223, 227, and III, pp. 129, 218, etc. 

Ibid., II, pp. 368, 284, and 358. .. „„„ 

Ibid., Ill, p. 120; for his works see II, pp. 212, 213, 216-17, 230, 294, „58, 368. 
385; III, pp. 83, 120, etc. 

ASI, 1929-30, pp. 166-67. 

El, XIX, pp. 295 ft; also cf. Bh. List Nos. 1251 and 2033. 

El, XVIII, pp. 73-74. , , „ „ 

Ef, XXII, p. 75; H. D. Sankalia, Archaeology of Gujarat, p. 233; also cf. AR, 

p. 309. 

JASB, N.S., IV, p. 105. 

Cordier, op. cit., HI, p. 126. 

See Vol. IV, p. 256 f. Also cf. IA, 1911, pp. 209 ff. 

EL VI, pp. 146 ft., and p. 196; Ann. Rep. on Epigraphy, Madras Govt., 1914, 141 
of 1914, pp. 16-17 and 104-105; Inss. of the Madras Presidency, ed. V. Ranga- 
charya, Vol. II, Gt. 135, p. 763; Gt. 136, p. 763. 

EC, ed. Rice. VII, p. 197 SK. 169; p. 198, SK. 170; pp. 124-27 SK. 100; G. M. 
Moraes, Kadamba-kula, p. 256; IA, XVIII, pp. 270-73; El, XV, pp. 348 ft.; IA, 

X, pp. 185 ft.; AR, pp. 273-74. 

El, XXIV, p. 239 f. D . , . _ .. 

JBORS, XV, pp. 87-91; XVI, pp. 469 ft.; XVII, pp. 196-97; Bh. List No. 

2043; Banerji, History of Orissa, I, p. 203. 

ASI, 1930-34, Pt. I, p. 237, and Pi. CXX, b.; Cordier op. cit II> P- 

XI, pp. 24-26. We learn from an inscription recently discovered m Korea that 
an Indian monk named Dhyanabhadra visited Kanchlpura where he listened to 
a discourse on an Avatamsaka-sutra in the fourteenth century A.D. (Arthur 
Waley, New Li ght- on Buddhism in Mediaeval India quoted in 2oOO years of 
Buddhism published by the Government of India, 1956, p. 8). 

Cordier op. cit., II, pp. 28, 60-61, 220; HI, 213, 236; Nilakanta Sastri, Vie Colas, 

N. Vasu, Are/i". Surv. Mayurbhanja, I, Pis. 39 (2), 40, 44, 45. 46, 48 (4); 49; 50; 
51, etc. 

Tabaqat-i-Nasiri, Bib. Ind. ed., tr. Raverty, pp. 551-52. „ , 

Pag-Sam-Jon-Zang., Pt. I, Intr, p. CXXI. P. N. Bose, Indian Teachers of 
Buddhist Universities, p. 144. . 

This explains the discovery in Nepal of a number of Buddhist MSB. ot the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, written in proto-Bengali script, that was then 
prevalent both in Bengal and Magadha. 

HBR , I. 422 ff.; B. C. Law Vol L pp. 75 ff., 6G9 ff. 

1HQ, IX. 282. HBR, I. 257. 

HBR, I. 228. * _ 

I A, X. pp. 241 ff., Cunningham, Mahdbodhi, pp. 79-80; Barua, Gaya and Bu<t~ 
dha-Gaya, I, pp. 201-05; etc. El, XII. 29-30. 

Barua, Gaya and Buddha-Gaya, I. 210 ff.; II. 72, IHQ, VI. 28. 

H. P. Sastri, Des. Cat. Sans . MSS. ASB, I. 21; Cat. of Buddhist Sans. MSS. in 
the Uni. Lib . Cambridge, C. Bendall, Intr. p. IV, and pp. 69-70; I A, 1875, IV. 
p. 367: H. Kern, Manual of Indian Buddhism , p. 134; Charles Eliot, Hinduism 


471 


MINISr^ 



and Buddhism , II, p. 113; L. A. Wadell, Buddhism of Tibet, 2nd ed., p. 16; etc.; 
Ann. Rep. South hid. Epi. No. 113 of 1904, p. 44; Ibid., for 1920, p. 38, No. 607 
of 191d;Mahabodhi, 1942, p. 166; H. B. Sarkar, Indian Influences on the Litera¬ 
ture of Java and Bali , pp. 285-86; ASI, 1926-27, p. 205; 1929-30, pp. 178-9; El, 
XIX. 261-17; N. Vasu, Arch. Surv. Mayurbhanja, Introd., pp. CXVI ft'., Pag - 
Sam-Jon-Zang., Ed. by S. C. Das, Introd. p. XC. 

111. Ain-i-Akbari, tr. Jarrett, III, 1894, p. 212. Cf. V. A. Smith, Akbar , 2nd ed., 

p. 162 and fn. 1. 

112. JASB, 1895, p. 57. 

113. e.g, Siddha Santagupta, Jogin Dinakara, Guru Gambhiramati, etc. 

114. H. P. Sastri, Cat. of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper MSS. belonging to the Dur¬ 
bar Library, Nepal, II, pp. 51, 59, 78, etc.; also Cecil Bendall, Cat. of Sanskrit - 
Buddhist MSS. in the Cambridge University Library. 

115. For Pandubhumi- vihdra, its celebrities and their works, see Cordier, op. cit., 
II, pp. 13, 15, 16, 67, 100, 114, 196; III, pp. 386, 419, 435-36, 437, 483-84, etc. 

116. Ibid., II. p. 31; III, p. 237. 

117. Ibid., III. p. 276. 

118. Ibid., III. p. 99. 

119. Ibid., III. pp. 248-49 and p. 250. 

120. Ibid., II. pp. 121, 127; III. pp. 99, 116, 125, 249, 250, etc. 

121. For Vanaratna’s works, see Ibid., II. pp. 13, 45, 77, 78, 121, 127; III. pp. 99, 
112, 116, 117, 121, 125, 163, 177, 235-236, 248-49, 250. 

122. Ibid., III. p. 99; also see II. p. 45: III. p. 112. 

123. Ibid., III. pp. 250-51. 

124. Keith and Thomas, Cat. Sanskrit and Prakrit MSS. in the Library of the India 
Office, II, Pt. II, pp. 1411-12, No. 7769. 

125. See above, pp. 61, 66f. 

126. For a description of the temple, cf. Ch. XX. 

127. I A, XI. 248. 

128. Bairadeva temple Stone Ins. EC, V. 149, p. 190. 

129. MAR, 1911, p. 43. 

130. Parsvanatha Basti Ins. EC, V. 124, p. 83. 

131. Bhandara Basti Ins. of A.D. 1159, EC, II. 349, p. 153. 

132. MAR , 1931, p. 198. 

133. EC, VII. 116, p. 38. 

134. MAR, 1925, p. 95; EC, IV. 26, p. 56. 

135. EC, II ( Inscriptions at Sravana Belgola), Revised Ed., Intr., p. 23, Inscr. No. 254 
(text, p. 121, tr., p. 109). 

136. For Hemachandra and his works, see above, pp. 301, 308, 318, 323, 326, 345. 

137. Wintemitz places him in the first half of the seventeenth century A.D., but 
others refer him to the twelfth century. 

137a. For the antiquity of Radha cult, cf ABORl, XXXVI. 231-257. 

137b. Above, Vol. IV, p. 311. 

138. The traditional date of Ramanuja’s birth is 6aka 938 corresponding to A.D. 1016 

or 1017 and that of his death, 120 years later, in A.D. 1137. R. G. Bhandarkar 
accepts the traditional date of his birth, but says nothing of the date of his 
death (VS §76). K. A. N. Sastri accepts both the dates ( History of South India, 
pp. 341-2). A life of 120 years is not, of course, impossible, but appears to be 
doubtful. As epigraphic evidence supports the traditional date of Ramanuja’s 
death, it has been suggested by some ‘That he must have been born some 
time about 1037 and died about 1137”. ( The Cidtural Heritage of India, 1st 

Edition, Vol. II, p. 86). 

138a. See above, pp. 229. 242, 402, 404. 

138b. PP. 368 ff. 

138c. P. 365. 

139. II, 25. 

140. The account of these two sects is based on Bhandarkar, R. G.— Vaisnavism, 
tiaivism and Minor Religious Sects, §96. 

141. Ibid., §97. 

142. See above, Vol. Ill, pp. 450-459. 

143. Some scholars hold the view that the theism of South India, and even monism 
of Sankara, were due to a large extent to the teachings of Islam (Tara Chand, 
Influence of Islam on Indian Cidture). This extreme view is hardly support¬ 
ed by the known facts of Muslim settlement in India, noted above (Vol. Ill, 
pp. 450-57). 


472 


HElLIGlON AND PHILOSOPHY 



<SL 


144. Radhakrishnan, Indian Philosophy. Bhandarkar places the date of his birth at 
A.D. 1479. 

145. Buddhism did not produce any noteworthy writer during this period. Jain 
philosophy has been discussed in connection with that religion. 

146. Indian Philosophical Quarterly , October, 1930, and January, 1931. 

147. Cf. M. Ikram, Chaskma-i-Kauthar, pp. 69 ff. 

148. Ibid „ pp. 81 ff. 

149. The Maggar Pir is known by the Hindu name of Lala Jas Raj. Another saint, 
Khvaja Khizr is called Zinda Pir by the Hindus. 

150. He was a contemporary of Sayyid Jalal-ud-dln Surkhposh who died in 698 A.H. 
(=A.D. 1299). 

151. This is clearly stated in one of the sacred books of the Khojas named Das 
Avatar. 

152. The minor group still lingers in North Punjab and Chitral. 

153. He died in 622 A.H. (= A.D. 1226). 

154. He died about 700 A.H. A.D. 1301). 


47a 


CHAPTER XVII 


SOCIAL CONDITION 

1. SOCIAL DIVISIONS 

The essential features of the Indian social system, as preserved 
in the Smriti tradition of the preceding centuries, are faithfully re¬ 
flected in the commentaries and digests of this period, which deal 
with the rights and duties as well as the status of the four varnas 
on the lines laid down in the Smritis. 

We find, however, some novel views regarding the immunity of 
the Brahmana’s person. Explaining the general law on this point 
Vijnanesvara 1 says that the Brahmana is not exempt from .-punish¬ 
men t ,—a nd dismis se s, the sweeping statement of Gautama-Dharma- 
sastra 2 (namely, tha t the king i s master of a ll with the exception o f 
th e Brahmanas) as a mere eulogy. Quoting another text of Gautama 3 
(which requires the king to grant a sixfold immunity to the Brah¬ 
manas), Vijnanesvara observes that this is not applicable to 
any and every Brahmana, but only to a very learned Brah¬ 
mana, as defined by the author immediately before. Further quali¬ 
fying the above explanation, Haradatta 4 explains that the sixfol d 
im munity is to be granted by the king when the very learned Brah ¬ 
mana (as defined by the author) ha s committed an offence withou t 
p remeditation . The above texts clearly enunciate the principle, so 
very honourable to our authors, that the Brahmana enjoys no com¬ 
plete immunity from punishment. In other passages our authors speci¬ 
fically define the limits within which corporal punishment is permis¬ 
sible for Brahmanas. On the vexed question of immunity of a Brah¬ 
mana desperado (itatayi) our authors seek to reconcile two fundamen¬ 
tal Smriti principles, namely, those of the Brahmana’s complete ex¬ 
emption from the death penalty and the individual’s right of self- 
defence. The general view is that one incurs no blame by killing a 
Brahmana who becomes an atatayi, but this holds good only when it 
is impossible to save one’s self by flight, by striking him with a 
stick or with weapons, and so forth, and not otherwise. Less con¬ 
sistent is the attitude of Smriti-chandrikd, for while the author in 
one place* 5 includes killing Brahmanas in righteous fight in the list 
of practices forbidden in the Kali Age, he elsewhere 6 permits an 
atatayl Brahmana to be killed with impunity in self-defence. 

The high standard of life and conduct prescribed by the Smriti 


474 












SOCIAL CONDITION 

l aw was not always followed in actual practic e. The commentaries 
and digests co ntain references to unworthy Brahmanas who not o nly 
faile d to reach this standard, but were of low~morals or neglected 

the ir~ ordinary* duties and obligations. Eeferences to degraded 

Brahmanas are also found in the contemporary lexicons. The com¬ 
mentaries and digests, following the authority of the Smritis, 
repeatedly place the degraded Brahmanas under a social ban. 

The description of Sudra’s occupation and status in the com¬ 
mentaries and digests of this period follows the old Smriti lines. 
T he views of our authors about the Sudra’s religious, legal and soc ial 

dis abilities in general do not indicate any fresh developmen t. It 
is, however, an index of the increased rigidity of caste differen ces 
that the saving clause allowing a Brahmajta householder to take 
food from four types of Sudras (namely, his slave, his cowherd, his 
family-friend, and his tenant-cultivator) is applied by our authors 
to times of distress 7 or to times of great distress, 8 or lastly is alto¬ 
gether disallowed as one of the forbidden practices in the Kali Age. 9 
In the same list of forbidden practices is included 10 the act of em¬ 
ploying 6udras for cooking food and so forth in the households of 
the Brahmanas and the like. This increasingly narrow attitude 
to wards Sudras is seen at its worst in a few texts quoted or para¬ 
phrased by our authors, wh ich brand them with the stigma of 
un touchabilit y. One should, we read , purify himself by bathi ng 
with-fil othes -pn a fter touching a Sudra . 11 or a Sudra of the inferior 
type. 12 Again we are told 13 that one should fast as a penance after 
touching a Sudra. 




As regards the group of mixed castes Yajnavalkya’s enumera-^ 
tion 14 of those formed in the proper order (anuloma) by hypergam- 
ous unions of upper caste males with lower caste females, and those 
formed in the inverse order ( pratiloma ) as well as those of a mis¬ 
cellaneous character is paraphrased by the commentators. It is re-«s 
produced almost verbatim with slight additions in Smrityarthasara, 

13. We are, however, warned by Vijhanesvara 15 that the list is 
merely illustrative as the number of miscellaneous mixed castes is 
endless and incapable of enumeration. The longest list is given in 
V aijayantl 16 which makes out a total of 64 jatis consisting of sons 
born to the four varnas, the 12 anuloma and pratiloma sons and their 
48 offshoots. There is complete unanimity about the relative status' 
of these groups. The anuloma castes, we read, 17 are twice-born and 
hence entitled to sacraments like investiture with the sacred thread, J 
but the pratiloma castes are impure and as such ineligible for the 
duties of the twice-born castes. 


A different enumeration of the mixed castes and statement of 


475 





















THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Ifeir status occur in Brihaddharma Purdya. 16 The list is said to 
comprise 36 jdtis > but actually it comes up to 41. It consists of three 
grades distinguished as high (20 jdtis), intermediate (12 jdtis) and 
low (9 jdti$)> In contrast with the status assigned to the anuloma 
castes in the commentaries and digests, the Brihaddharma Pumrta 
declares all the 36 castes to have the status of Sudras. The only 
difference is that while the first group is entitled to the services of 
Srotriya Brahmanas as priests, the priests of the two other groups 
are degraded Brahmanas and sink to the level of their ministrants. 


It remains to consider the views of the commentaries and 
digests about the lowest castes (antyas or antyajatis ) of whom the 
Charidalas are the most important representatives. The antyajatis, 
according to the enumeration of Vaijayanti , 19 are seven in number, 

L namely, washermen, leather-workers, Venas, Burulas, fishermen 
(Kaivarttas), Medas, and Bhillas. In this list the third, 
fourth, sixth and seventh names are evidently those of aboriginal 
tribes, while the rest are occupational groups of the lowest order. 
The distinctive feature of the status of the Chandalas, according to 
the Smriti law of this as of the earlier period, was that they were 
placed under a rigorous ban of untouchability. Not only is their touch 
included in a list of acts requiring purification of the body, but accord¬ 
ing to the extreme views quoted or followed by these authors such 
penances are prescribed for their approach within a certain distance, 
for the sight of or conversing with them, for witnessing their shows, 
for crossing their shadows, and for touching them in the second, third 
*or fourth degrees. 20 It is to be rioted that our authors in the same 
\ context quote or follow the extreme texts extending the ban of 
\pntouchability to a number of heretical sects. The list consists of 
Buddhists, Jains, materialists (lokdyatika), atheists (nastika), fol¬ 
lowers of Kapila, Saivas and Saktas outside the Vedic pale (accord¬ 
ing to Smrityarthasdra) , or Saktas of the left-hand sect (according 
to Apararka). 21 


The historical records of this period, imperfect and fragmentary 
as they are, occasionally throw interesting light upon the ways of 
life of the Indian castes. Learned Brahmanas, who adhered for the 
most part to the strict discipline enjoined upon them by their scrip¬ 
tures, are referred to in the royal and other land-grants, as well 
as in the general literature. We have, however, a number of histo¬ 
rical instances of individual Brahmanas and Brahmana families 
normally following the occupations of Kshatriyas. 22 In so far as 
the &udras are concerned there is no reason to doubt that they for 
the most part conformed to the rules and regulations laid down for 
them by the Brahmana canonists. On the other hand there are a 


476 




SOCIAL CONDITION 



iew instances, wnere Sudras, in the teeth of the canonical rule for¬ 
bidding the lower varnas to take up the functions of the higher ones, 
assumed the Kshatriya’s occupations of ruling and fighting. 23 


The ruling families (afterwards called Rajputs) of Northern 
India, such as the Guhilaputras (Guhilots), Pratlharas (Gurjaras), 
Chapas and Chahamanas, and those of the Deccan such as the 
Chalukyas, had entered the stage of history from the sixth and 
seventh centuries onwards. 24 Other families like the Rashtrakutas, 
the Chandellas, the Paramaras, the Kachchhapaghatas and the 
Gahadavalas appeared on the scene in later times. It has been 
held 25 that four of the principal Rajput clans, namely, the Parama¬ 
ras, the Chaulukyas, the Chahamanas and the Pratlharas were des¬ 
cended from Hinduised foreigners (Hunas and Gurjaras), while 
others like the Chandellas and the Gahadavalas were Hinduised 
aborigines (Gonds and Bhars). This theory, however, is not support¬ 
ed by the data of physical anthropology. 26 Support for the above 
theory has been sought to be found in the legend of origin of the 
four clans above mentioned from the sacrificial fire kindled on Mt. 
Abu by the sage Vasishtha for replenishing the Kshatriya-stock after 
its extermination by the sage Parasurama. But the legend has been 
shown to be a very late one. 27 fThe truth is that the Rajputs were 
of different and sometimes of indeterminate origins. In this and the 
immediately preceding periods legends of origin of the Rajput clans 
were invented with a view to their affiliation to the two great 
Kshatriya stocks of Epic and Puranic tradition, namely, the Solar 
and the Lunar races. 28 / 


We have seen elsewhere 29 that the Kayasthas as a caste (as 
distinguished from the profession called by that name) can be traced 
back with the help of literary and epigraphic records to the latter 
half of the ninth century A.D. In the eleventh and the following 
centuries individuals of this caste rose to the highest public offices 
in different tracts. Simultaneously with the rise of the Kayasthas 
to power there arose different legends to account for their origin. 
In the inscriptions of this period we have three different versions 
tracing the descent of the Kayasthas from as many varnas. In the 
first version 30 the Kayastha family in question derived its descent 
from the sage Kasyapa through his son Kusa. In the second version 31 
we are told that after the creation of the Kshatra-uania by Brahma, 
the Kshatriyas were heart-broken by the destructive act of Parasu¬ 
rama, and that those who were not so discouraged were called 
Kayasthas. With this agrees the fact that the Kayastha-family in 
a record above quoted 32 styles itself as Kshatriya. The third 
version 33 tells us that the great sage Kachara. deriving his origin 


477 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


/ 


om God Brahma and having his residence in the town of Kulahcha, 
was gratified with the services of a Siidra and granted him the boon of 
having a son who became the ancestor of the caste of Kayasthas. 

The origin of the division of the Dravidian-speaking peoples 
of South India other than the Malayalam into the right hand 
('Valangai ) and the left hand (Idangai) classes is lost in obscurity. 
We have, however, a few inscriptions of the eleventh century show¬ 
ing how this division had fixed itself in the civil and military life 
of our people by that time. 

The ancient institution of slavery was a well-known feature of 
Indian social life during this period. The law of slavery in the com¬ 
mentaries and digests, 34 however, indicates little or no development 
in comparison with that of the later Smritis. 

The Kathdsaritsdgara gives us frequent sketches 36 of the abori¬ 
ginal tribes indifferently called Bhillas, Pulindas and Savaras who 
lived in the Vindhya hills and forests. These tribes, we learn, lived 
by hunting and they used likewise to plunder caravans passing 
through their forests. The men were dressed in tiger-skins and 
adorned their bodies with peacocks’ feathers and elephants’ teeth, 
while the women were dressed in peacocks’ feathers and wore neck¬ 
laces of strings of the gunjd fruit. They lived on the flesh of deer 
and drank spirits distilled from wine. Their chieftains lived in 
residences covered with elephants’ tusks and adorned with tiger- 
skins and they possessed stores of camels, musk, and “pearls” (ob¬ 
tained from the brains of slain elephants). They observed their old 
custom of offering human victims before their goddess. 36 Bui at 
the same time they were capable of the most loyal service to their 
benefactors and suzerains from the civilised tracts. 




r MARRIAGE 

^The Smriti law relating to inter-caste marriage was generally in 
vogue. But we find that Smriti-chandrika 37 and Smrityarthasdra in¬ 
clude marriages of males of twice-born classes with females of other 
castes (asavarna) in the list of practices forbidden in the Kali Age. 
In the body of rules relating to marriage, however, Smriti - 
chandrika 3B expounds the law on this point in the following way. 
Firstly, marriages with girls of different castes are permissible 
among the twice-born classes after their marriages with girls of the 
same caste (savarnd). Secondly, savarna marriages are necessary 
for the performance of religious rites, while asavarna marriages are 
of an inferior type as being dictated by desire. Thirdly, what is 
meant by the Smriti texts condemning marriages of Brahmanas 
with 6udra women is not the prohibition of such marriages, but their 


478 




SOCIAL CONDITION 



prior performance before marriages in superior castes. The same 
qualified support of asavarya marriages (including marriages with 
Sudras) among the three upper classes is given by Vijnanesvara and 
Apararka. 39 


The old Smriti rules relating to prohibited degrees of marriage 
are repeated and amplified in the commentaries and digests. The s 
late Smriti view relating to the compulsory marriage of girls at an | ^ 
early age is followed by our authors without question, 

While giving a qualified support to the revocation of marriage 
before all the religious ceremonies were completed, our authors 
develop the old Smriti law so as expressly to forbid the re-marriage 
of widows. 40 


As regards royal marriages Vaijayanti 41 gives a two¬ 
fold classification of the king’s wives and concubines. The king’s 
married wives comprise, firstly, the chief queen (tnahishi or mahd- 
devi) who has been consecrated; secondly, the queen ( dev! ) born 
of a royal family; thirdly, the honoured lady (parivriktl); fourthly, 
the dearly beloved lady (vavata); fifthly, the lady who is not the 
daughter of a king (svamini); and sixthly, a lady who has been won 
in war (phalakali). The king’s female favourites who, though not 
married to him, are versed in different fine arts (kala) are called 
ganika and are divided into different classes. According to Mana- 
sollasd 42 the king should select as his queen a girl of Kshatriya 
lineage, young and beautiful, having good manners, bearing auspi¬ 
cious marks on her person and belonging to one or other of the 
best groups after the classification of the Kdmasdslra. To the above 
the author adds 4 - 3 that the king should select as his secondary wives 
(avarodha-vadhu), “for purpose of enjoyment”, young and beautiful 
women of Vaisya and Sudra castes, and he should further engage 
wanton women (vilasirii) having the same physical charms and grati¬ 
fy them with various gifts and personal attentions. 

The Kathdsaritsagara repeatedly refers to the current ideas and 
practices of marriage. The traditional Smriti standpoint regarding 
the guardians’ obligation of suitably disposing of their girls in mar¬ 
riage at the proper time is repeated in such passages as XXIV.23f. 
The further Smriti doctrine that the guardianship of the girl belongs 
to the father and not to the mother is mentioned in another place. 44 
Very often, however, the marriages in the stories, to judge by the 
Smriti standards, are irregular, if not unlawful. We find Brah- 
manas marrying Kshatriya maidens, sometimes by gift of the parents, 
but more often by mutual choice followed by elopements of the girls 
with their lovers, such acts finding favour with kings and princes 
and winning the praise of the narrator. More unorthodox is the 


479 



mtsTfy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


arriage of a Brahmana 4 " 5 with a merchant’s wife won over by his 
heroic exploit in saving her life when deserted by her husband. 

In another story a Kshatriya maiden, being given by her father 
under a threat and against her will to an ugly Brahmana, deserts 
him, and when she is abandoned by three successive Kshatriyas for 
fear of her husband’s persecution, she seeks and obtains the queen’s 
protection after she is vindicated against the Brahmana by a heaven¬ 
ly voice. Other marriages in the stories are altogether unlawful 
from the Smriti standpoint;,such are the marriages of a Brahmana 
with the daughter of a Savara chieftain, 46 of a courtesan with a 
fisherman, 48 and the marriage of a Kshatriya prince with a Chandala 
maiden. 49 Such, again, are the marriages of a Chandala youth with 
a princess and of a young fisherman with another princess. 50 Point 
is given to this protest against the authoritative Smriti rules by an 
incident in one of the stories above named' 51 Here the father of a 
Chandala girl, giving her to a prince of Ujjayini, exacts from his 
father the condition that 18000 Brahmanas living in his city should 
eat in his house. In most of the above stories reconciliation is sought 
to be effected with the Smriti standards by means of a deus ex 
machina in the shape of a heavenly declaration to the effect that 
the low caste persons are really vidyadharas or gandharvas fallen 
to the earth under a curse. But at other times such excuses are 
altogether wanting and the marriages are duly solemnised in the 
gdndharva form by mutual choice. 


Reference may be made to some historical evidence regarding 
marriage. Al-Biruni, with his experience in North-Western India 
in the first part of the eleventh century A.D., corroborates many 
well-known clauses of the Smriti law. Thus he says that marriages 
are forbidden within certain degrees of relationship; that husband 
and wife can only be separated by death, divorce not being allowed; 
and that inter-caste marriages of Brahmanas in. the amdomci order, 
though permitted by the Smritis, had long gone out of use in his 
time. On the other hand he seems to show that the punishment 
of the wife for adultery was more strict than that provided in the 
Smriti law, for he says 152 that the adulteress is driven out of the 
husband’s house and is banished. 


The polygamous habit of Indian kings is proved by contempo¬ 
rary inscriptions. It is likewise testified to (though with much evi¬ 
dent exaggeration) by Marco Polo, who speaks' 53 of “the 500 wives” 
of the king of Ma'bar and “the 300 wives” of the king of Cail, both 
these territories being included in the Fandya kingdom. The elabo¬ 
rate ceremony of self-choice (svayamvara) of Kshatriya princesses 
referred to in the Epics and the Kavya literature, for which there 


480 


SOCIAL CONDITION 



is no precise warrant in the Smritis, is illustrated by the historical 
example of the marriage of the West Chalukya king Vikramaditya 
VI with “the Vidyadhara" (silahara) Princess Chandaladevi. 54 An 
altogether irregular marriage by the Srnriti standards was that of the 
Kalachuri king Lakshmlkarna with Avalladevi, a lady of the Huna 
stock, the issue of this marriage, Yasahkarna, succeeding his father 
on the throne in due course. 


3. THE POSITION OF WOMEN 

As legards the position of the wife, the Sniriti commentaries 
and digests of this period follow more or less the line laid down 
in the Smritis. The husband and other male relations, to begin with, 
must so arrange things that the wife never becomes independent. 
The wife must also be guarded not only against physical but also 
against mental unchastity for the sake of her offspring. This is 
best done in other ways than by keeping the wife in seclusion by 
force. The wife, for instance, should have her mind so occupied 
with the agreeable and compulsory duties of her household that she 
would not have leisure for thinking of other men, and so forth. The 
husband should honour his wife with gifts of clothes, ornaments and 
good food, while the other male relations should do so on festive 
occasions: when the husband goes abroad he must provide for her 
maintenance till his return. 

The laws relating to the supersession and abandonment of the 
wife are repeated in the Smriti-chandrikci after the fashion of the 
old Smritis with a strong tendency to emphasise some points in 
her favour. The wife, we are told, 05 may be superseded on a 
number of specified grounds. Nevertheless the husband in some cases 
(as when the wife is suffering from a chronic disease but is devoted 
to her husband’s welfare) has to ask her permission, and in other 
cases (as when she is barren or produces dead children or female 
children alone) he has to wait for shorter or longer periods of time. 
Even if the superseded wife angrily leaves her husband and is ac¬ 
cordingly made over to her relatives, she must be maintained by 
him. The superseded wife, the author explains, must be given a 
sum equal to what is spent on the second marriage or is (Jiven to 
the second wife, if no separate property ( stridhana ) had been assign- 
’ ed to her, and half this sum along with the stridhana in the con¬ 
trary case. 

If the rules in the Smriti-chandrika thus ensure the wife’s right 
to maintenance in case of her supersession, they provide for her 
residence in her husband’s house as well as her maintenance even 
in the event of her committing adultery. When the wife is guilty 

481 

S.E.—31 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

of slight adultery, she must be maintained, though deprived of 
conjugal rights, till her performance of a penance, 5f Even when 
she commits grave adultery, she must be maintained till her perform¬ 
ance of the prescribed penance, but with bad food and so forth. 
When she is guilty of the grossest adultery she should have her 
hair shaved and made to lie on a low bed and do dirty work, but 
still she should be maintained with bad food and clothes and made 
to live under restraint in a portion of the husband’s house. The 
wanton wife, concludes the author, may be abandoned, but not so the 
wife guilty of gross adultery, because it is possible to fit her for 
conjugal relations by means of penances. 

Reverting to the topic of the wicked and unchaste wife, the 
author says in a later context, 57 that when the wife is a wanton 
she may be abandoned, but she must not suffer mutilation or death. 
The wife may likewise be abandoned when she is guilty of acts, 
not expiable by penance, such as conception by a Siidra male and 
drinking. In this case the wife should be deprived of conjugal 
relations, conversation, personal contact, and sharing in the per¬ 
formance of religious rites, but still she must be maintained with 
bad food and so forth, and made to live in a room near the house. 
Only in extreme cases, as when the wife is guilty of causing abortion 
and attempting to kill her husband, she may be driven out of the 
house. 

Finally the author 58 repeats with the older canonists the penal¬ 
ties of a husband for wrongfully deserting his^good wife. When the 
husband, we read, abandons his wife on grounds other than those 
laid down by the canon, he places himself beyond expiation and 
should be punished by the king like a thief. When he abandons his 
virtuous wife, he should be made by the king, under (threat of) 
heavy punishment, to restore her to her old position. In default, 
he should be compelled by the king to give her one-third of his pro¬ 
perty, and if he is poor, to give her a sufficient sum for her 
maintenance. 

The commentaries and the digests repeat the old rules relating 
to the religious and social inferiority of women. As regards Harlta’s 
classification of women into two classes, namely, those who are 
students of the sacred lore (brahmavddinl) and those who marry 
straight away (sadyovadhu) of whom the former are entitled to 
the investiture of the sacred thread, offering sticks to the sacred 
fire, Vedic study and begging within the household), it belongs, 
says the Smriti-chandrika , 69 to a different time-cycle (kalpa). After 
this it would appear that the reference to female teachers fUpa- 
dhyaya, upddhydyl and ccharya) found in the contemporary lexi- 




482 


MINIS T/f 



SOCIAL CONDITION 


cons, 60 which is indeed as old as Kos'ifca, 61 is no more than a histo¬ 


rical anachronism. The commentaries and the digests repeat the 
Smriti laws making it compulsory for the guardians of a girl to give 
her away in marriage before the attainment of puberty, prohibiting 
social intercourse with abducted women even after their perform¬ 
ance of a penance as prescribed by the scriptures, and declaring 
women to be unfit to give evidence in judicial trials because of their 
proneness to untruth. 


On the other hand our authors indicate a strong tendency not 
only to maintain, but also to increase women’s rights to property. 
Women are exempt from the operation of the law declaring adverse 
possession of land and money for twenty and ten years respectively 
to entail loss of ownership^ because, as Vijnanesvara observes, of 
their ignorance and timidity. The woman’s right to inherit the pro¬ 
perty of her male relations is emphatically maintained by our 
authors, Smriti-chandrika 66 explaining away a Vedic text 64 which 
was held to disqualify a woman for inheritance. The widow, it is 
emphatically maintained, 65 is entitled to succeed to the whole estate 
of her sonless deceased husband provided she is chaste and the pro¬ 
perty was divided at the time of his death. The contrary view 
(Vyasa and grikara) that the widow succeeds to her husband’s 
property when it is small, is rejected by Vijnanesvara, just as the 
view (Dharesvara) that the widow succeeds if she is prepared to 
raise issue to her deceased husband according to the dictates of her 
superiors is rejected both by Vijnanesvara and the author of the 
Smrti-chandrika. The Smriti text giving the widow only a main¬ 
tenance, it is explained, 66 refers to the case of remarried and wanton 
women. Our authors 67 similarly uphold the daughter’s right to 
succeed after the widow. This is based upon rejection of the con¬ 
trary and authoritative view (Visvarupa, Dharesvara, Devasvamin 
and Devarata) that the daughter enjoys this right only when she is 
appointed to raise male issue for a father without sons (putrika), 
Above all, our authors, 68 while quoting the divergent views of the 
older texts about the connotation of the woman’s separate property 
(str’idhana), agree as to the extent of her dominion over the same 
and the special rule of succession applying to it among her heirs. 


The historical references to the position of women, though 
meagre, help us to correct at some points the views of the Brahmana 
canonists above mentioned. Thus we have a number of instances 
showing how queens and princesses, in the face of the Smriti doctrine 
of the perpetual dependence of women, sometimes exercised a com¬ 
manding influence upon the administration of state. In Kashmir, 
SuryamatT, queen of Ananta, rose to be the de facto ruler of the 


483 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


kingdom and ended by persuading the king against the judgment 
of his wisest counsellors to abdicate in favour of their unworthy 
son. The political influence of royal ladies can be traced during 
this period especially in the records of the Deccan and South India. 
We have seen elsewhere 69 how princesses became governors of pro¬ 
vinces and held minor administrative charges under the Western 
Chalukya dynasty of Kalyana. To the instances there given we may 
add a few more, namely, those of queens of Somes vara I and Vikrama- 
ditya VI and of two queens of a Chalukya feudatory. '° In the latter 
half of the thirteenth century A.D. queen Ballamahadevi of the Alupa 
dynasty (in South Canara District) ruled for at least fourteen years 
(Saka 1201-14) with the masculine titles of Mahdr&jadhiraja, Parabala - 
sadhaka, and so forth. 71 As noted above, queen Rudramba, bearing 
the male name of Rudradevamaharaja, ruled the Kakatlya kingdom 
for nearly forty years, and her conspicuous success won the admira¬ 
tion of the contemporary Venetian traveller Marco Polo.' 2 In the 
light of such evidence of the political influence of women in the Dec- 
can and South India, it is interesting to observe that the advent of the 
Sena dynasty of Kannada origin into Bengal brought with it a signi¬ 
ficant change in the formula of the royal land-grants so as to include 
the queen in the list of the king’s informants. 

4. FOOD AND DRINK 

The commentaries and digests develop with almost pedantic 
thoroughness the old Smriti rules relating to prohibited food. In 
this connexion Vijnanesvara and Apararka 73 repeat Medhatithi’s 
list 74 of occasions on which meat is lawful food. On the other hand 
Bhavadeva 76 of Bengal, reflecting no doubt the regional sentiment 
on this point, adopts a very liberal attitude towards eating meat 
and fish. “When lawful meat and fish are eaten,” says he, no pen¬ 
ance is necessary. The penances prescribed by the texts for eating 
meat contrary to the injunctions, and for intentionally eating fish, 
it is explained, have reference only to the prohibited days; and the 
prohibition of Brahmanas to take meat has reference to uncooked 
meat. From the above the author draws the remarkable conclusion 
that one incurs no blame by partaking of fish and meat. The com¬ 
mentaries and digests of the period faithfully follow the views of 
Medhatithi and Visvarupa 76 on the admissibility of drinking wine 
according to caste divisions. Drinking is forbidden to women of all 
the three upper classes. But the 6udras are exempt from all the rules 
relating to forbidden drinks. 

The references in the general literature partly confirm and 
partly correct or supplement the data of the Brahmanical canons re- 


484 


MINIS 



SOCIAL CONDITION 


<SL 


ating to food and drink. The synonym “food of barbarians” 
(mlechchhabhojya) given to wheat in Vaijayanti 77 shows that it was 
not as yet an article of dietary among the Indians. On the other 
hand Vaijayanti 1 s gives us synonyms for various milk-preparations 
which were no doubt in use among the people. From a story in the 
Kathasaritsdgara 79 we learn that rice (or powdered barley), ghee, 
meat-curry, and milk (or wine) constituted the normal dietary of 
affluent merchants. From other stories it appears that on festive 
occasions like marriages the attendants drank themselves to intoxi¬ 
cation. How the women in a king’s train, notwithstanding the 
Smriti injunction to the contrary, freely indulged in drinks, is illus¬ 
trated by an incident in the career of king Vikramaditya VI, 80 We 
also read in the Manasollasa 81 that the king should entertain his 
wives with wines and spirits on the happy occasions of marriages. 
From the stories in Kathasaritsdgara it appears that the kings freely 
indulged in drinking wine in the company of their ministers or even 
of the ladies of the seraglio. Drinking parties were held on festive 
occasions such as family reunions and marriages. 82 The Manasollasa 
describes the king’s dietary in two separate sections called “the 
enjoyment of food” 83 and “the enjoyment of drink.” 84 The king’s 
dietary comprises 86 both vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes. The 
former consists of preparations of rice, pulse and so forth, and the 
latter of those of the meat of the boar, the spotted and other deer, 
the hare, the sheep and the goat, fish, birds, and various other good 
meat. The author describes in this connexion the method of remov¬ 
ing the pig’s hair preparatory to cooking the meat as well as the 
process of cooking the meat of deer, sheep, birds, fish, tortoises, 
crabs and even the rats living in the fields near the banks of rivers. 


The observations of foreign writers about the food and drink of 
the people, while agreeing with the canonical rules in some 
respects, differ from them on other points. Al-Biruni 8 ® gives us a 
list of lawful and forbidden meat of the Indians which is evidently 
derived from the Smritis. The king of the Chola dominion, accord¬ 
ing to Chau Ju-Kua, 8 did not drink wine but took meat and flour- 
cakes. The people of the Pandya (“Ma'bar”) kingdom, according to 
Marco Polo, 88 would not eat beef on any account, though they took 
the meat of other animals that were killed for them by Arab and 
other butchers. In the Kakatiya kingdom (“Mutfili”), according to 
the same author, 89 the people lived on meat, rice and milk. Turn¬ 
ing to the Malabar coast, we are told, 90 that the people of Quilon 
lived on rice and drank wine from palm-sugar (wine from molasses 
in the Smriti lift?). By contrast we read 91 that the very abstemi¬ 
ous merchants from Gujarat (?) living in the Kannada tract ate no 
flesh and drank no wine. 


4S5 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

5. DRESS AND TOILETTE 

The minute Smriti regulations relating to the daily observance 
of the rules of personal hygiene by the Vedic students and the house¬ 
holders are repeated and paraphrased by the commentators," and 
they are arranged under convenient headings in the course of a 
separate section of the digests called ahnika (daily rites and observ¬ 
ances). 93 Among these rules those relating to bathing take an 
important place. 94 Bathing is compulsory for all castes at least once 
a day; the Vedic student being required to bathe once, the house¬ 
holder twice, and the ascetic thrice a day. VaijayanM 95 gives us 
synonyms for embellishment of the body as well as those for bath¬ 
ing of different kinds (with fragrant amalaka, with the juice of all 
medicinal plants, with muddy water, and so forth). The lexicons 96 
again give us synonyms for different types of coiffure such as curl¬ 
ed hair on the forehead in bee-shape, thin hair, bound and un¬ 
bound hair, braided hair, clean and unentangled hair and so forth. 

To Kalhana 97 we owe the interesting information that the 
people of Kashmir before Harsha’s time, with the single exception 
of the king, wore their hair loose and had no head-dress or ear¬ 
rings, that a former commander-in-chief having braided his hair 
and a former chief minister having worn a short coat incurred the 
king’s displeasure, and thlat Harsha introduced into the kingdom a 
general dress befitting a king. In the sculptures of Bhuvanesvara 
temples the male figures are usually clad in the typical dhoti and 
the female figures in softs without any other clothing, while they 
are adorned with ear-ornaments of different kinds, bracelets, arm- 
lets, and ornaments for the legs and the feet. 98 The variety of 
fashions in wearing apparel is indicated in the sculptures of the 
Vaital deul temple, such as stripes set off with zigzag lines, with 
triple lines, with oblique as well as horizontal double wavy lines 
with flowers and a scroll border. 99 Still more varied are the types 
of coiffure of the human figures. 100 Reference to the distinctive 
toilette of the court-ladies of Kuntala, Dravida, Maharashtra, 
Andhra and Gurjara is found in the description of the king’s court- 
scenes in Mdnasollasa - 101 Among the foreign writers Chau Ju- 
Kua 102 observes that the people of Nan-p’i and Ku-lin (Malabar) 
wrap their hair in silken turbans at the time of battle. Of the 
people of Hu-ch’a-la (Gujarat) the same writer says 103 that both 
men and women have double ear-rings and wear close fitting 
clothes, with hoods on their heads, as well as red leather shoes on 
their feet. Equally valuable is the testimony of Marco Polo. In 
Malabar, we are told, 104 men and women, rich and poor, wear only 
a loin-cloth, the king being no exception, and the profession of the 




486 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


was completely unknown. Loin-cloth was also the dress of 
men and women in Quilon. 105 Similarly, according to Friar John 
of Monte Corvino (A.D. 1292-93), men in Malabar went bare-footed 
and naked with only a loin-cloth on, while boys and girls up to 
their eighth year wore no clothes at all. 

But though their clothes were scanty these kings of Southern 
India were fond of jewellery. According to Chau Ju-Kua 106 the 
king of Nan-p’i (Malabar) was dressed in cotton loin-cloth and was 
bare-footed like his subjects, but when going out on an elephant in 
procession he wore a golden hat ornamented with pearls and gems 
as well as golden armlets and anklets. The pomp of the Malabar 
kings was outdone by the rulers of the Pandya kingdom. From 
Marco Polo 107 we learn that the king of Malabar was dressed only 
in a loin-cloth like his subjects. But he wore a necklace entirely 
of precious stones (rubies, sapphires and emeralds and the like), 
a neck-string of 104 (108 ?) great pearls and rubies, three golden 
bracelets thickly set with valuable pearls, pearl-anklets and rings 
on his toes. “What this king wears between gold and gems and 
pearls”, we are told, “is worth more than a city’s ransom”. Of the 
king of Kayal, we are told 108 more briefly that he had upon his per¬ 
son a great store of rich jewels. 

6. STANDARD OF LIVING 

The high standard of living, which appears to have prevailed 
at least among the upper classes in the preceding period, was well 
maintained during these centuries. The extraordinary affluence 
of the rich merchants of Gujarat in the first part of the thirteenth 
century is illustrated by an incident in Act III of the drama 
Moharaja-parajayci of the poet Yasahpala (twelfth century A.D.), 
describing the visit of king Kumarapala to the mansion of a million¬ 
aire ( koflsvara ) merchant of his capital-city. The main building was 
approached by a flight of steps of crystal. Ascending these steps 
the visitor reached the temple with crystal-floor and with walls 
painted with sacred pictures, which enshrined an image of the deity 
in emerald. The mansion contained such huge stores of gold, 
silver, and jewels as to rouse the wonder even of the royal visitor. 
Of the immense riches of courtesans during the eleventh century 
we have an illustration in the description (matching that of Vasan- 
tasena in Mnchchhakatika Act IV) of the palatial mansion of 
Madanamala at Fratishthana in Kathdsaritsdgara . 109 The man¬ 
sion, we read, contained seven enclosures with a train of horses and 
elephants, with stores of weapons and jewels, with numbers of 



487 


MIN ISTfy 



THE STRUGGLE FQR EMPIRE 


attendants and bards, and with players of vocal and instrumental 
music. 


While it appears from the above that the standard of living 
prevailing among the upper classes was fairly high, it reached a 
level of exceptional magnificence among kings. The Manasollasu 
gives us a wonderfully vivid account of the luxurious dress and 
toilette of the king. Describing the king’s banquets the author 
says 110 that he should cause the governors of provinces and so 
forth to be served from gold and silver vessels, while he himself 
should be served from a large golden vessel. When the king takes 
his seat on the lion-throne in the hall of audience with its white 
paved floor, with its pillars of gold, with jewels displayed in their 
proper places, with its coloured walls and its canopy of different 
colours, he is fanned by beautiful women. The king then issues 
through his door-keeper a general summons for attending the 
assembly. Then come in palanquins the royal ladies adorned with 
various ornaments (head-ornaments, ear-rings, necklaces, brace¬ 
lets, finger-rings, waist-ornaments and leg-ornaments) and dressed 


in gorgeous robes, and they take their seats in front to the king’s 
right and left. Other ladies variously adorned with ornaments and 
wearing garlands follow on the back of horses and mares or on foot 
and take their proper seats. Also seated in their proper plac'es are 
the princes adorned with ornaments, the purohita wearing a white 
dress and jewelled ear-rings, the ministers, the provincial gov¬ 
ernors, the feudatory princes and the various departmental officers, 
wearing jackets ( angika ) with long sleeves, turbans and gold orna¬ 
ments. Then comes a miscellaneous group consisting of poets, 
astrologers, plaintiffs and so forth. At the king’s command the 
door-keeper next allows entrance to the subordinate kings desiring 
his protection. The king dismisses the assembled subordinate 
kings, princes, ministers and others by bestowing upon them various 
favours. 111 


Many different types of royal palaces with their distinctive 
characters are described in Samarangana-sutradhara 112 and Mana- 
sollasa .: 113 Describing the plan and construction of the king’s resi¬ 
dence the author of Manasollasa 114 observes that it should be from 
one to nine stories high, it should be whitewashed, it should have 
latticed passages in some parts and dark passages illuminated by 
jewelled lamps in other parts, it should have an ivory fencing and 
pillars of gold or of sandal-wood as well as floor of glass or crystal 
and walls of crystal mirror-like slabs. In the same context we are 
told that the king should change his residence according to the 
seasons. 


488 


SOCIAL CONDITION 



<SL 


The royal processions, as described by the contemporary 
foreign writers, were marked by equal gorgeousness. When the 
king of Malabar went out riding on elephant in state, says Chau 
Ju-Kua, 116 he was preceded by his officers, carried in litters with 
gold-and silver-plated poles, and a section of his large bodyguard of 
foreign women, while another section followed him on horseback. 
These last had their hair done up while their bodies were adorned 
with pearl-necklaces and gold anklets and perfumed with camphor, 
musk and other drugs, and they were protected from the sun by 
umbrellas of peacock-feathers. 

We are in a position to verify the above literary accounts of 
the king’s high standard of living to some extent from the extant 
archaeological evidence. The panels of sculptures of the Liiiga- 
raja and the Konarak temples in Orissa, the Kandarya Mahadeo. 
temple at Khajuraho in Bundelkhand and the Kesava temple at 
Belur in Mysore, as well as the paintings of the Brihadisvara 
temple at Tanjore, to mention a few instances, contain vivid repre¬ 
sentations of royal court-scenes and scenes of royal processions of 
the time. 


7. POPULAR AND ROYAL AMUSEMENTS 

The popular amusements of this period were more or less simi¬ 
lar to those described in the preceding volume. The lexicons 116 
give us synonyms for dolls made of wood or cloth or ivory as well 
as for those made of clay. Playing with balls was a favourite pas¬ 
time for children and for girls, 117 and the “swing” was enjoyed by 
young married women 118 both at home and in the highways 
( rathya ) and so forth. 119 

Dancing, music and dramatic performances were also very 
popular. Mention is made of musical instruments of different 
kinds such as wind instruments, stringed instruments, the lute, 
drums and musical horns with the accompaniment of technical 
terms. 120 In the sculptures of the Bhuvanesvara temples of this 
period we have representations of the vina, the drum, the flute and 
the trumpet. 121 The old Indian game of gambling was evidently 
well known. From the allegorical drama called Mohardja-para- 
jaya of the poet Yasahpala we learn that gambling was very popu¬ 
lar among all classes and sections of the people in Gujarat in his 
time. The author mentions 122 five varieties of this game with ap¬ 
propriate titles including one which was constantly played by kings 
dressed only in a loin-cloth in courtyards, another by merchants’ 
sons who were millionaires, and a third which was played with 
cowries by small boys. Even those belonging to royal families, we 


489 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 

23 were reduced to the position of physical wrecks 
in this game. Another favourite amusement was 
Reference is made in one place 124 to a wrestling con¬ 
test held at Banaras on the occasion of a religious festival (devaya- 
trd) in which a champion wrestler from the Deccan having defeated 
all the local wrestlers was beaten by a young Brahmana who was 
summoned by the king. 


While the amusements of the common people were so varied 
in character those of the kings reached a level of exceptional varie¬ 
ty and magnificence. 


The plan of a king's palace in Samarangana-mti'adJidra^ 2 ' 3 
includes the construction of a music-hall, a theatre, a gymnasium, 
a dancing hall, and a picture-gallery. This shows how enjoyment 
of the fine arts as well as physical exercise was regarded as the 
normal routine of a king’s diversions. The seasonal variations 
of the king’s recreations are described by Bilhana in the course of 
his description of the career of his hero, king Vikramaditya VI. 
In the summer season the king with his women sheltered them¬ 
selves from the mid-day heat in the crystal-floored bathing cham¬ 
bers ( dharagriha ) which were completely protected from the Sun’s 
rays and which emitted jets of water through the interstices. Then 
he enjoyed water-sports in their company in a large tank. 126 In 
the cold season the king, accompanied by the ladies of his house¬ 
hold, started on his hunting excursion. He was preceded by his 
courtesans on horseback while the inmates of his seraglio followed 
him in the rear. 


The fullest and the most original account of a king’s recrea¬ 
tions occurs in the M&nasollasa . 127 We may classify them under 
the following heads:— 

I. Military exercises. The king summoned experts in the art 
of wielding weapons. Then having selected his opponent he exhi¬ 
bits his skill in using different weapons, namely, the short dagger, 
the sword, the bow, the discus, the spear and the mace. 128 

II. Literary exercises. The king asks the poets to recite 
their poems and himself decides their merits and defects. 

III. Elephant sports and the Indian polo. He first arranges 
a race between runners and elephants and then a fight between 
elephants, and ends by giving prizes. The author’s description 
of the king’s horse-sport has a general resemblance to the modern 
polo, but differs in detail. The king divides the horsemen into two 
opposing teams of eight each. Then riding a splendid horse of 
Kamboja breed he starts the play. There are two goal-posts on 


490 


SOCIAL CONDITION 

each side separated by a prescribed distance. The sticks are made 
of cane with a curved end and are encased in red leather while the 
ball is made of wood and similarly covered with leather. The 
party which succeeds in driving the ball through the two goal-posts 
on each side is adjudged as the victor. At the end of the game 
the king having mounted a separate charger exhibits his skill in 
the management of horses. 129 

IV. Combatants’ duels. Referring to a peculiar custom of 
his country, namely, that of a certain type of combatants (technical¬ 
ly called anka) fighting duels with each other, the author classifies 
the men under eight heads according to the occasion of the duel. 
The duel is allowed by the king only when he has failed to persuade ■ 
the men to desist from the same. The king arranges matters so 
that combatants of the same category fight with each other. At 
the signal given by the king the combatants rush forth in pairs to 
fight fiercely with each other. When their limbs are covered with 
blood and their hands and feet are severed the king stops the fight 
with his signal. The victors are given handsome rewards, while 
the relations of those who are killed are given by him suitable 
grants. 130 

V. Wrestlers’ contests. As regards the wrestling contests the , 
author tells us how wrestlers of young age-groups are fed on special 
diet at the king’s expense and are given a severe course of prepara¬ 
tory training in various exercises under the guidance of teachers. 
After the completion of their training the wrestlers with their leader 
approach the king and request him to arrange for an exhibition of 
their skill. The king selects for the contest those who are similar 
in appearance, age and strength. If at the end two wrestlers are 
both found to be extremely exhausted, the king proclaims them to 
be equals. If one is not so exhausted and specially if he has broken 
a limb of his opponent, he is adjudged the victor. The king then 
dismisses the victors with gift of clothes* ornaments and so forth. 131 

VI. Fights of birds and beasts and pigeon-flights. Under this 
head the author mentions in great detail the exhibitions of fights 
between carefully selected, nourished and trained cocks, quails, rams 
and buffaloes on grounds specially prepared for the purpose, for 
the king’s amusement. 132 Pigeons of the best breed which are 
found in the Sindhu country are selected and nourished on proper 
diet at the king’s palace. They are kept in pairs in gold, silver and 
wooden cages. When sufficiently trained the male pigeon is taken 
in cage to a distance and let loose with a letter attached to his neck. 
He can thus cover a distance of thirty yojanas to meet his mate. 133 




491 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


VII. Hunting, hawking and angling. The author describes in 
detail the methods of hunting a boar or a hare with the help of 
trained dogs. 134 Hawks, carefully trained, are taken to a place 
abounding in grass and sheltering many birds. When the grass is 
beaten up and the birds are in flight, the hawk seizes birds on the 
wing at a height invisible to the naked eye. 136 The king amuses 
himself by catching carefully fed fish with a rod and line prepared 
according to specification. 136 


We have similar but much shorter accounts of royal amusements 
in other geographical regions of our land during the same period. 
Nayachandra Suri, author of the Ha 7 nrnira-rn.ahdka.vya, in the course 
of his description of the Chahamana kings of Ranastambhapura, 
tells us how one of them (Prahladana) was engaged in a hunting 
expedition with a company of footmen dressed in blue clothes hang¬ 
ing down to their knees and of fleet hunting dogs with golden neck¬ 
laces, 137 how another king (Jaitrasimha) indulged in water sports, 133 
and how the last king (Hammlra), during the siege of his capital by 
‘Ala-ud-din Khalji, sought recreation with his courtiers for a while 
in an entertainment attended with vocal and instrumental music as 
well as dancing by a reputed female artiste of the town. 139 Of the 
Chola kings we are told by a foreign writer 140 that at their State 
banquets the whole company broke out into song, music and dancing. 


8. POPULAR BELIEFS AND SUPERSTITIONS 

The old beliefs in omens and portents, in astrology, in the signi¬ 
ficance of dreams and so forth continued to have its firm hold on 
the people. The stories in the Kathasaritsagara show how wide¬ 
spread was the popular belief in omens and portents, in auspicious 
and inauspicious times, as well as in charms and spells for witch¬ 
craft. The references in Mdnasollasa show how such beliefs were 
held even in royal and aristocratic circles. Speaking of the king’s 
marching against his enemy, the author 141 gives elaborate descrip¬ 
tions of the auspicious and inauspicious times for its start as well as 
j favourable and unfavourable omens (indicated by the behaviour of 
1 dogs, jackals, lizards and crows). 

Testimony to the superstitious beliefs of the' Indian people is 
borne by contemporary foreign observers. Among the people of 
Ma‘bar, according to Marco Polo, 142 there were experts who dis¬ 
cerned a man’s character and qualities by his look, and who knew the 
meaning of a man’s meeting with a particular bird or beast. The 
people recorded the date and hour of a child’s birth immediately 
after that event, and they did all their acts with reference to astro¬ 
logy and with the advice of diviners skilled in sorcery and magic. 


492 


MINISr^ 


SOCIAL CONDITION 



Illustrating the extraordinary beliefs of “the Abraiman” of “the Lar 
province’" (the merchants of Gujarat), Marco Polo observes 14 ^ 3 that 
they made their purchases when their shadow was of the required 
length, and undertook their journeys when the direction of the swal¬ 
lows’ flight was favourable. 

The strong hold which the veneration for cows had acquired 
over the minds of the people in the preceding period w T as maintained 
during these centuries. The commentaries and digests 144 paraphrase 
the penances prescribed by the Sm^itis for killing and maiming 
cows. Killing of cows even at the honey-mixture (madhuparka) 
ceremony in honour of guests and the sacrifice called gosava is in¬ 
cluded in the list of forbidden practices in the Kali Age. The 
popular belief in the sanctity of domestic cattle is corroborated by 
the evidence of foreign writers. Idrlsi 14 * 5 refers to the great venera¬ 
tion of oxen among the Indians. Speaking particularly of the people 
of Ma'bar, Marco Polo says 146 that they on no account kill oxen or 
partake of beef and that many of them worship the ox. 

The complete ban against sea-voyage imposed by some of the 
canonical authorities of the earlier centuries was repeated during 
this period. Social intercourse with a man of the three upper 
varnas undertaking a sea-voyage, even though he has performed the 
necessary penance, is included in the list of forbidden practices of 
the Kali Age in Smriti-chandrika , 147 while Smrityarthasdra 143 in¬ 
cludes sea-voyage as such in this list. And yet we have the histo¬ 
rical fact that the great Chola Emperor Rajendra Chola I sent a naval 
expedition (c. A.D. 1025) for the successful conquest of the Sailendra 
empire of Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula, and that his successors 
succeeded in retaining this possession for nearly half a century 
afterwards. 149 Equally authenticated is the fact, mentioned in ano¬ 
ther chapter, that Indian merchants, as late as the thirteenth cen¬ 
tury, extended their maritime enterprises as far as the .Persian Gulf 
and Madagascar on one side and South China on the other. Indirect 
testimony to the overseas enterprises of the Indians is also furnished 
by the stories of the Kathasaritsagara. 

9. MANNERS AND CUSTOMS 

We learn from the testimony of Megasthenes that the custom 
of employment of large numbers of female attendants in the king’s 
service is as old as the time of Chandragupta Maury a. In the litera¬ 
ture of the present period we have repeated references to this cus¬ 
tom. The observations of foreign writers corroborate the prevalence 
of the above custom. According to Chou Ku-Fei 160 the Chola king 
employed fully “a myriad dancing girls for his table and escort”. 


49 3 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



according to Chau Ju~Kua, 161 was attended 
500 picked foreign women in his processions. 


A custom prevailing in South India for some time before this 
period was that of self-immolation of selected nobles on the funeral 
pyres of their kings. Abu Zaid, 152 writing a little before our time, 
describes a particular rite observed by some of the Indian kings after 
their accession to the throne. The rite (which according to Nainar’s 
suggestion was identical with the Mamakham or Mahdmakham the 
great sacrifice of the kings of Malabar) consisted in three hundred 
or four hundred “king’s companions” volunteering to partake of a 
i portion of the cooked rice eaten by himself. It is incumbent upon 
all those who partake of this to burn themselves to the last man 
: when the king dies or is slain. Coming to the twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries, we find references to this custom in inscriptions of the 
later Chola kings belonging to the Tamil and Kannada areas. These 
inscriptions 153 record the vows taken by a class of persons called 
Velaikkaris (personal body-guards of a king or chieftain) to die with 
their master. Referring to a similar custom in the P5ndya kingdom, 
Marco Polo 164 says that the king has a number of Barons called “the 
king's Trusty Lieges” who are in constant attendance upon him and 
that they burn themselves with their master’s body after his death. 


We have observed in the preceding volumes how the Smpiti 
law of later times recommended for widows the alternatives of liv¬ 
ing a celibate life (brahmacharya) and burning themselves on the 
funeral pyres of their husbands, with a decided preference in favour 
of the latter. The commentators and the digests of this period have a 
twofold attitude on this point. On the one hand Vijnanesvara and 
Apararka, as well as the author of the Smrityarthasara , express 
themselves more or less strongly in favour of the widows’ self-immo¬ 
lation. On the other hand Smriti-chandrika 156 is equally emphatic 
in its condemnation of this cruel and horrible rite. The histo¬ 
rical records frequently refer to widowed queens, princesses and 
others performing acts of charity and piety. We, however, come ac¬ 
ross instances of ladies of royal and official families burning them¬ 
selves after the deaths of their husbands, and several such instances 
are recorded in the Rajatarangim. 1 56 According to Al-BirunI, the 
widow had to choose between one of two alternatives, namely, re¬ 
maining a widow for the rest of her life, and burning herself; and 
she preferred the latter alternative as she was likely to be ill-treated 
as long as she lived. To this the author adds that the wives of kings 
were burnt whether they wished it or not. It would appear from 
the above that the sati- rite was more widely prevalent at this time 
than was warranted by the Smriti authorities of this period. Evid- 


494 


SOCIAL CONDITION 


enee to the same effect is borne by the epigraphical and other re¬ 
cords. The numbers of the said memorial stones (mastikal and sati- 
kal) in the Kannada tract testify to the wide prevalence of this rite 
in mediaeval as well as modem times. Marco Polo in his description 
of the kingdom of Ma'bar tells us 167 that many women burnt them¬ 
selves with the bodies of their husbands and that they were highly 
praised by all. 

A custom which seems to be peculiar to the Deccan and South 
India at this period, but was destined to be continued down at least 
to the time of the Vijayanagara kings, was that of duel fights. In 
a story of the Kathasaritsagara\, me we are told how when a door¬ 
keeper of a king of Kafichl falsely charged a foreign merchant be¬ 
fore the king with the abduction of his wife, the merchant proposed 
a duel deciding the issue, how after obtaining the king’s approval 
they both entered the list on horseback and fought in the king’s 
presence, and how when the door-keeper was felled down from his 
horse five times in succession, the king honoured the victor as he 
deserved, and deprived the door-keeper of his office and his 
wealth. 169 Marco Polo observes 160 about the people of ‘Cail’ (Kayal 
in the Pandya kingdom), that when a man wishing to offer gross in¬ 
sult to another spits out a mouthful of betel-leaf upon his face, the 
latter seeks and obtains the king’s permission to fight the offender. 
They fight in public with sword and target until one of them is killed. 

A custom mentioned by foreign writers as an illustration of 
the high moral character of the Indians is concerned with the pro¬ 
cess of a creditor’s recovery of his debt. Illustrating the Indians’ 
love of truth and horror of vice, IdiisI says 161 that a creditor meet¬ 
ing his debtor has only to draw a circle upon the ground and make 
him enter it which he never fails to do. The debtor then cannot 
leave the circle without satisfying his creditor, or obtaining remis¬ 
sion of the debt. The same custom is mentioned by Marco Polo in 
his description of the kingdom of Ma'bar. Reference is also made 
to the above custom in a story of the Kathasaritsdgara.'' 62 

The custom of dedicating women (Skt. Devadasis , Tamil 
devaradiyar) to the service of temples, which has been traced by 
us elsewhere 163 to the preceding centuries, was generally prevalent 
during this period. Indeed literary records and inscriptions give 
us the impression that they were regarded as a part of the normal 
establishment of temples. The number of these girls in the temples 
often reached high proportions. The temple of Somanatha at the 
time of its destruction by Sultan Mahmud is stated to have been 
served by three hundred and fifty dancing girls. According to Chau 
Ju-Kua 164 Gujarat contained 4000 temples in which lived over 20,000 


495 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


‘^dancing girls whose function was to sing twice daily while offering 
food to the deities and while presenting flowers. We have the valu¬ 
able testimony of Al-Birunl to the effect that the kings maintained 
this institution for the benefit of their revenues in the teeth of the, 
opposition of the Brahmana priests. But for the kings, he says, 1 ^ 5 
no Brahmana or priest would allow in their temples women who 
sing, dance and play. The kings, however, make them a source of 
attraction to their subjects so that they may meet the expenditure 
of their armies out of the revenues derived therefrom. 


10. GENERAL ESTIMATE OF CHARACTER 

Some light has been thrown upon the general characteristics of 
the Indian people by our descriptions of their social institutions as 
well as their beliefs and practices given above. As regards the insti¬ 
tution of caste, it has been shown that the immunities and privileges 
of the Brahmanas are held by the exponents of the Sacred Law to 
rest still more than before upon a moral basis, in other words upon 
the principle noblesse oblige. On the other hand it is impossible 
to ignore the studied degradation to which important sections of 
the population (the so-called antyajdtis and even in extreme cases 
the Sudras) were condemned by them after the older authorities. 

As regards the status of women it was not made worse in this period 
as compared with the preceding one except in the matter of stricter 
insistence upon the practice of self-immolation of widows on the 
funeral pyres of their husbands. On the other hand a distinct im¬ 
provement of their status is observable in respect of their rights of 
property. 

Of the large-hearted tolerance of the Indians towards foreign 
faiths evidence is furnished by the generous treatment accorded by 
the Chaulukya and Vaghela kings of Gujarat and the Pantfya kings 
of Southern India towards the Muslim settlers in their lands. The 
same attitude is indicated by the complete freedom enjoyed by the 
communities of Syrian Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians, settled in 
Southern and Western India, in the exercise of their religion. 

The contemporary foreign observers on the whole agree in giv¬ 
ing a favourable estimate of the general character of the Indians. 

We may quote in the first place the sober judgment of the great 
Muslim scholar Al-Birunl 166 who has made a striking refer¬ 
ence to the deep-rooted tendency of the Indian mind towards 
self-conceit and depreciation of everything foreign. “The Hindus”, 
he says, “believe that there is no country but theirs, no nation like , 
theirs, no kings like theirs, no religion like theirs, no science like 
theirs. They are haughty, foolish, vain, self-conceited and stolid. 


496 



misr/f y 






SOCIAL CONDITION 


They are by nature niggardly in communicating that which they 
know, and they take the greatest possible care to withhold it from 
men of another caste among their own people, still much more, of 
course, from any foreigner. According to their belief, there is no 
other country on earth but theirs, no other race of man but theirs, 
and no created beings besides them have any knowledge of science 
whatsoever.” The author concludes by tracing the root of this evil 
to its source in the changed habits of the Indians about foreign 
travel. “If they travelled and mixed with other nations”, he says, 
“they would soon change their mind, for their ancestors were not 
as narrow-minded as is the present generation.” In another place 167 
the author, while introducing his account of the Indian law of 
punishments and expiations, pays handsome tribute to the gentle 
manners of the people. “The manners and customs of the Hindus”, 
he says, “like those of the Christians, are based on the principles of 
virtue and abstinence from wickedness, such as never to kill under 
any circumstance whatever, to bless your enemy, and pray for him. 
Nevertheless in the case of Hinduism, as of Christianity, punish¬ 
ments became inevitable, since most people are ignorant and erring 
and they cannot be kept on to the straight path except by the sword 
and the whip”. In contrast with the above a wholly favourable esti¬ 
mate of the Indian character, recalling the similar views of Megas- 
thenes and Hiuen-tsang centuries before, is given by the learned 
Muslim author Idrlsi in the latter part of the twelfth century. The 
Indians, he says, 168 are naturally inclined to justice, and never 
depart from it in their actions. Their good faith, honesty and fidelity 
to their engagements are well known, and they are so renowned for 
these qualities that people flock to their country from every side. 

Lastly we may quote the views of Marco Polo. The people of 
Ma'bar, he says, 169 are very strict in executing justice upon crimi¬ 
nals and in abstaining from wine, but they do not look upon lechery 
as a sin. Of the “Abraiman of Lar” (Brahmanas of Gujarat?) living 
in the Kannada tract, he observes 170 that they are the best and the 
most truthful merchants in the world and live a life of great 
chastity and temperance, but at the same time they are more prone 
to superstitious beliefs in omens and portents than any other people. 
He illustrates these statements by concrete descriptions of the beliefs 
and practices of this class. 


11. HINDU-MUSLIM RELATIONS 


It will appear from the political history sketched above that 
towards the close of the period under review the Muslim Turks had 
permanently settled in large parts of Northern India and formed 
an important community. Their number was as yet very small, as 


497 


S. E.— 32 





MINlSr/f,, 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Spared with the Hindus, but this was compensated to a la: 
tent by the power and prestige they enjoyed as conquerors 


The advent of Islam constituted the first great rift in the 
solidarity of Indian community since the incorporation of the abori¬ 
ginal peoples into the Aryan society. Henceforth there were two 
communities in India-Hindu and Muslim-who formed two en¬ 
tirely separate entities, so far at least as religious and social ideas 
and political and civil rights were concerned. There was, however, 
one significant difference between the two./ The Muslim community 
kept its doors wide open, and not only freely admitted everybody, 
but even pushed people inside it. The result was that the Hindus 
entered into the fold of Muslims in gradually increasing numbers. 
But the case was different with the Hindu society. Though at the 
beginning we hear of reconversion of Hindus who had embraced 
Islamic faith, gradually it adopted a more restrictive attitude and 
practically closed its doors against admission from outside, even fox 
those who once strayed out of it, by force, choice, or accident lhe 
inevitable consequence followed. The Muslims grew in number by 
the conversion of the Hindus, while the Hindu rank was gradually 
thinned. The immigration of fresh bands of Muslims from beyond 
the frontiers of India also swelled their number; but as years rolled 
by, they numerically formed a very insignificant element in the 
growing population of the Muslims, a great majority of whom were 
converted Hindus. 


We do not possess sufficient data to form an accurate idea of 
the means or methods of conversion on such a large scale. I he 
ultra-democratic principles of Islam, restricted to its own commu¬ 
nity, served as a great inducement to conversion in two ways. In 
the first place, as the rigours of the caste system weighed heavily 
upon the lower classes among the Hindus, they would naturally be 
attracted by the position of absolute religious and social equality 
which Islam offered to every Hindu, irrespective of class or caste, 
who embraced the new faith. Secondly, even though for a long 
time political equality was not conceded by the conquering Turks 
to Indian Muslims, the latter were undoubtedly in a far better posi¬ 
tion in this respect than the unconverted Hindus. Offers were open¬ 
ly made to ruling chiefs and high officials that they could continue 
in their present position only if they adopted the Muslim faith. 
The lower officers in civil government, and the majority of military 
ranks, to start with, were naturally recruited, as far as possible, 
from the Muslims. Such temptations must have been too great for 
ordinary men. 


498 


SOCIAL CONDITION 



The denial of civil rights to the Hindus also operated as a great 
factor in their conversion. As mentioned above, 171 the Muslim 
rulers, from the very beginning, imposed civil disabilities upon the 
Hindus, and Muhammad ibn Qasim is said to have enunciated the 
following principle:— 

“He who received the honour of Islam and became a convert 
was exempt from slavery as well as tribute and was not injured. 
Those, however, who did not accept the true faith were compelled 
to pay the fixed tribute ( jizya )”. 

Galling as these distinctions were to any sensitive mind and noble 
spirit, the situation was often rendered much worse by the denial 
of the right of public worship to the Hindus and deliberate indig¬ 
nities and humilities inflicted upon them as a general policy adopted 
by some Muslim rulers. All this will be dealt with in detail elsewhere. 
It will suffice here to state that the position of the Hindus under 
the Muslim rule, at least during the first two or three centuries, 
was most unenviable, and the temptation to secure liberty, privi¬ 
lege and higher status by a change of creed proved irresistible to 
many. 

Peaceful missionary propaganda by the Muslim divines must 
have also played a large part in the conversion. Their religious 
doctrines, enforced by the considerations mentioned above, of which 
they must have taken full advantage, could not fail to produce the 
desired ‘effect’ upon a section of the Hindus. The saintly character 
of some of the Muslim preachers must also have appealed to the reli¬ 
gious minded Hindus. But while these normal means of conversion 
played their part, we cannot ignore the fact that force or violence 
was one of the most fruitful sources of conversion of the Hindus en 
masse, at least in the earlier period. 

We possess a brief account of the Indian expeditions of Sultan 
Mahmud by Al-’Utbi, his Secretary, who “enjoyed excellent oppor¬ 
tunities of becoming fully acquainted with the operations of that 
conqueror.” 172 He very frankly says that “Islam or death was the 
alternative that Mahmud placed before the people,” and his de¬ 
tailed account gives many practical illustrations of it. 173 The usual 
consequence of Mahmud’s victory is thus described by ’Utbl: “The 
victors slew the vanquished wherever they were found, in jungles, 
passes, plains and hills.” Elsewhere he says: “The blood of the in¬ 
fidels flowed so copiously, that the stream was discoloured, notwith¬ 
standing its purity, and people were unable to drink it.” 174 

The word ‘infidel’ in the above extract is significant,—for the only 
way to escape this cruel massacre was to embrace Islam. It was thus 
that Hardat, the ruler of Baran, and his ten thousand followers, 


499 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


s well as the Shah of Qirat and its people saved their lives. There 
must have been many other mass conversions of this type. 175 

’UtbTs account is full of stories of indiscriminate massacre of 
all those Hindus who fell into the hands of Mahmud after the cap¬ 
ture of a town or fort and disdained to save their lives by change 
of religion. We also hear of a large number of such unfortunate 
Hindus being carried away as slaves. Referring to Mahmud’s victory 
over Nidar Bhim, ’Utbi remarks that “slaves were so plentiful that 
they became very cheap.” 176 His detailed account clearly shows 
that these slaves were converted to Muslim faith. 


The policy of Mahmud was followed by some later Muslim con¬ 
querors also. Referring to the Muslim victory in Gujarat in A.D, 
1197, a contemporary Muslim writer says: 


“Most of their leaders were taken prisoners, and nearly fifty 

thousand infidels were despatched to hell by the sword.More 

than twenty thousand slaves fell into the hands of the victors.” 177 
After the capture of the fort of Kalin jar, according to the same 
authority, “fifty thousand men came under the collar of slavery.” 178 


It was a common practice of the Turkish rulers of India to take 
as prisoners the wives, sons and dependants of the vanquished 
Hindu rulers. 179 


The method of temptation was also not wanting. Even the 
Chandella king and Prithviraja were offered immunity from inva¬ 
sion on condition of embracing Islam. The deliberate policy of demo¬ 
lishing Hindu temples and raising mosques in their places, initiated 
by Muhammad ibn Qasim, was followed with zeal and alacrity by 
the Turkish invaders, and the stamping out of idolatry from the 
places conquered by Muslim arms is frequently referred to in glow¬ 
ing terms by Muslim chroniclers. 

It can hardly be doubted that all these acts of terrorism and 
violence facilitated the conversion of the hapless Hindus to Islam 
in large numbers. It had the added effect of completely alienating 
the Hindus from the Muslims. Apart from religious ideas and social 
usages which operated in the same direction, the deliberate demo¬ 
lition of temples, the destruction of images, and the wholesale massa¬ 
cre and enslavement of Hindus by the Muslim conquerors must have 
completely estranged the Hindus from the Muslims. The inevitable 
result was that the Hindus and Muslims formed two distinct and 
hostile communities throughout the period under review. 

The shrewd observer Al-Blruni 180 clearly perceived the great 
gulf that normally separated the Hindus from the Muslims. “The 
Hindus,” he observes, “entirely differ from us in every respect.” 


500 




SOCIAL CONDITION 


<SL 


er mentioning the difference in language, he continues: 
“Secondly, they totally differ from us in religion, as we believe in 

nothing in which they believe, and vice versa .In the third place, 

in all manners and usages, they differ from us to such a degree as 
to frighten their children with us, with our dress, and our ways and 
customs, and as to declare us to be devil’s breed, and our doings 
as the very opposite of all that is good and proper”. Summing up the 
general attitude of the Hindus towards the Muslims Al-Biruni re¬ 
marks: “All their fanaticism is directed against those who do not 
belong to them—against all foreigners. They call them mlechchha 
i.e. impure, and forbid having any connection with them, be it by 
intermarriage or any other kind of relationship, or by sitting, eating 
and drinking with them, because thereby, they think, they would be 
polluted. They consider as impure anything which touches the fire 

and the water of a foreigner.They are not allowed to receive 

anybody who does not belong to them, even if he wished it, or was 
inclined to their religion. This, too, renders any connection with them 
quite impossible, and constitutes the widest gulf between us and 
them.” 


Al-Biruni was one of the few Mussalmans of that period who 
had a genuine sympathy for the Hindus, and we must admit the 
fairness and truth of his denunciation of the Hindu attitude. It is 
also difficult to deny that this attitude, in all its essential aspects, per¬ 
sisted throughout the ages, though somewhat modified, in minor de¬ 
tails, as a result of greater familiarity in course of time. 


Al-Biruni had the candour to admit that “the repugnance of 
the Hindus against foreigners increased more and more when the 
Muslims began to make their inroads into their country”. “Mahmud”, 

he says, “utterly ruined the prosperity of the country, and. 

the Hindus became like atoms of dust scattered in all directions 
Their scattered remains cherish, of course, the most inveterate aver¬ 
sion towards all Muslims”. 


While the Hindus bore the ‘most inveterate aversion’ towards 
the Muslims, the latter also reciprocated the feeling. Their impla¬ 
cable hatred towards idolatry made the Hindus an object of utter 
contempt to them. This feeling animated all the Muslim conquerors 
and is echoed in all the Muslim chronicles. It was as strong in the 
days of Muhammad ibn Qasim as in those of Sultan Mahmud and the 
later Turkish conquerors. Amir Khusrav was not a bigoted Muslim 
divine, nor a holy crusader for that faith. He is regarded as a poet 
of liberal and enlightened views, and the seven hundredth anniver¬ 
sary of his birth was recently celebrated all over India by Hindus 


501 




MiN/sr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


_ Muslims alike. Here is a passage from his description of 
Hindusthan: 


“The whole country, by means of the sword of our holy war¬ 
riors, has become like a forest denuded of its thorns by fire. The 
land has been saturated with the water of the sword, and the vapours 
of infidelity ( i.e. Hinduism) have been dispersed. The strong men 
of Hind have been trodden under foot, and all are ready to pay 
tribute. Islam is triumphant, idolatry is subdued. Had not the 
law granted exemption from death by the payment of poll-tax, the 
very name of Hind, root and branch, would have been 
extinguished .” 181 


If this was the view of a liberal Muslim who lived to¬ 
wards the close of the thirteenth and the beginning of the fourteenth 
century A.D., we may easily conjecture what must have been the 
general attitude of the Muslims towards their Hindu subjects during 
the period under review. If, along with it, we bear in mind Al-Biruni’s 
view of the Hindus, mentioned above, we need not cherish any illu¬ 
sion as to the relation between Hindus and Muslims throughout this 
period, nor feel surprised that the Hindus should strive by all means 
to keep aloof from the Muslims as far as possible. A spirit of un¬ 
compromising animosity prevailed between the two great sections of 
the Indian community, embittered by arrogant contempt on the part 
of the victors, and proud disdain and deep, though vain, resent¬ 
ment on the part of the vanquished. 


The Hindus have left no account describing the state of their 
feelings at this supreme crisis in their life. But one or two casual 
references in contemporary epigraphic records give us an insight 
into their attitude towards the Muslims. Thus in describing the 
successful military campaign of the Hindu king Vijayachandra of 
the Gaha^avala dynasty against the Muslims, the poet suggests that 
“the flow of tears from the eyes of the widows of Muslim heroes 
(killed in battle) quenched the heat (of torment or oppression) of 
the world (caused by the Muslims ).” 182 Visaladeva, the Chahamana 
king, proudly declares that “he once more made Aryavarta (Northern 
India) what its name signifies (abode of the Aryas i.e. Hindus) by 
repeatedly exterminating the Mlechchhas (Muslims, who had render¬ 
ed the name meaningless by their occupation of the country ).” 183 
These expressions reflect the injured pride of the Hindus and their 
deep resentment against the alien conquerors who had trodden under 
feet their religion and culture. 




* 


502 


SOCIAL CONDITION 



12. MUSLIM SOCIETY IN INDIA 



The Arab conquest of Sindh did not effectively alter the social 
condition of either the Arabs themselves or the Indians with whom 
they came into contact, except, of course, in so far as a large num¬ 
ber of the latter, converted to the new faith, gradually adopted the 
manners and customs of the former to a considerable extent. 


Things, however, became very different after the annexation of 
the Punjab by Sultan Mahmud. It has been related above how the 
Ghaznavids established a more or less stable political hegemony in 
the Punjab, which became a regular province of their far-flung empire. 
A free and uninterrupted intercourse was thus established between 
India and the Muslim countries in the north and north-west. Religi¬ 
ous divines, scholars, and poets moved to and fro across the Hindu 
Kush mountains, and many Muslim families from Khurasan, Trans- 
oxiana, Afghanistan and Persia came and settled down in various 
parts of the Punjab, bringing with them the rich cultural traditions 
of these lands. The capital of the new province, Lahore, which, 
after the fall of Ghazni, actually became the capital of the kingdom, 
soon turned into an important seat of learning and culture, rivalling 
Ghazni itself; and the large number of poets and scholars, who flock¬ 
ed to this city, found in it a ready and brisk market for their lite¬ 
rary products. Among them the most outstanding personalities 
were Mas'ud bin Sa‘d bin Salman, born at Lahore, 184 who is said to 
have left behind a dl wan of Hindi poetry, besides two others in 
Arabic and Persian, and Abu’l Faraj Ruyani, his friend and rival, 
who was a native of Ruyan, a village near Lahore. 186 A famous 
scholar Shaikh Hasan SaghanI 186 of Lahore, is also mentioned in 
several historical and biographical works. 


After the final extinction of the Ghaznavid rule in India, and the 
establishment of the Sultanate at Delhi, the new capital soon be¬ 
came a rendezvous of numerous poets, scholars and divines. Their 
immigration from the north and north-west swelled to gigantic pro¬ 
portions, on account of the rise of the Mongols under Chingiz Khan 
and the havoc caused by them in the Muslim countries, during the 
reign of Sultan Iltutmish of the Mamluk Dynasty. The new ar¬ 
rivals were eagerly and generously welcomed by that monarch, 
conscious of the great addition to the splendour of his court by the 
presence of such a galaxy of literary luminaries. We have a long 
list of the poets and scholars who adorned the court of Iltutmish 
and that of his rival, Nasir-ud-dln Qabacha, ruler of Sindh. Among 
these we may mention Minhaj-ud-dln, the author of the Tabaqat-i- 
Nasin, Nizam-ud-dln Hasan Nizami Nishapuri, 187 who wrote the 
history of the reigns of Aibak and Iltutmish, entitled the Taj-ul- 


508 


mi$r/fy 



Ma’dsir, Fakhr-ud-din Mubarak Shah, called Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, the 
writer of SUsilat-ul-Ansdb and a work on military tactics entitled 
Adab cil-Harb ; the poets Baha-ud-din UshI, Taj-ud-din, Riza, Shihab- 
i-Muhinira, and Amir Ruhani, all attached to the Delhi court. 
Qabacha’s court could also boast of a famous scholar aVAufl, the 
author of a well-known work of biography, Lubdb al-Albdb. At a 
later period there lived the great scholar and statesman, Shams-ud- 
dm Dablr, and the Amir Fakhr-ud-dm ‘Amid Sunnaml, 188 both of 
whom were also great patrons of poets and savants. Shah Sultan, 
foster-sister to princess Mah Malik, the daughter of Muhammad 
Ghuri, also distinguished herself by her poetic talents during this 
period. 189 

Another notable development under the Mamluk kings was the 
foundation, for the first time, of several madrassas run under 
state supervision. Following the general practice in Muslim coun¬ 
tries, the Muslims in India did not at first have any regular schools 
or colleges. The mosque was the most popular centre of early educa¬ 
tion where the ‘pish-imam,’ usually a learned man, presided over 
the elementary studies of the children belonging to the locality in 
which the mosque happened to be situated. The usual curriculum 
consisted of the reading of the Quran, practice in calligraphy, and 
the rudiments of the Arabic and Persian languages. For higher 
studies, comprising traditions ( hadith ), jurisprudence (fiqh), logic 
and philosophy, literature (adab), epistolography ( inshd’), prosody, 
etc. the students used to attend the lectures of distinguished scholars 
at different centres. No examinations were held and no diplomas 
(safnads) given, but a student could often get a certificate (shahada) 
from the teacher whose lectures he had attended. Iltutmish built 
two state-sponsored colleges at Delhi known as the Mufizziya and 
the Nasiriya. Following his example, the provincial ruler Bakhtyar 
Khaljl built a similar college at Rangpura in Bihar, and there is 
good reason to believe that several other similar institutions arose 
in other parts of the country. These colleges, in course of time, 
helped in establishing a firm tradition of Islamic learning in India, 
and produced a number of scholars who could hold their own against 
the foreign scholars coming from Arabia, Persia, and Khurasan. 
These scholars now formed a distinct group of the Muslim aristocratic 
society, as many of them were given high state offices and were 
generally well looked after by their royal patrons. Their co¬ 
operation with the rulers was of invaluable help to the latter for 
maintaining discipline and gaining the allegiance of the masses. 


504 



SOCIAL CONDITION 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9 . 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20 . 


21 

22 


23 

24, 

25, 

26, 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 


36. 

37. 

38. 

39. 

40. 


On Yd), II. 4. 

XI. 1. 

VIII. 12-13. 

On Gautama, loc. cit. 

l. 30. 

m. 26-32. 

Apararka on Ydj, I. 168. 

Haradatta on Gautama, XVII. 6. 

Quotation in SC, I. 31. 

SC, loc. cit. 

Quotations in Vij. and Apar. on Yaj, III. 30; Apar. on Yaj, III. 292; SC, II. 311, 
Smrityarthasdra, 78. 3 

Smrityarthasdra, 141. 

I. 91-95. 

I. 95. 

81, 108-11. 

H^13 n i4 ^* )ar ‘ ° n ** ^2, ^5; Smrityarthasdra, 13. 

82, 121. 

ha^na\ll d U UI ' 292 ’ SC> II# 304 ~ 08; Smrityarthasdra, 76-78; Prayaschittapra- 
karana 1 110^* ***' 30 ’ SC ’ 11 ' 310 ~ 1;L i Smrityarthasara, 77; Prayaschittapra- 

258; Ei> ix - 107 f - : xxvn - 280 f - ; l 207 f -= xv - 27 *-• 

EI, VI. 269; XXII. 143 f.; III. 61 t; XI. 319 f.; etc. 

See above, Vol. Ill, p. 590. 

Smith, EHV pp. 340-41, 427-31. 

Cf. Ghurye, Caste and Race in India , 113-14. 

Cf. Ojha, Rdjputdnekd Itihdsa, 2nd Ed. 72-76; Ray, DHNI, II. s,v. 

Cr. the accounts of the different dynasties given above. 

Above Vol. IV, p. 373. 

EI, XXVIII. 100 f. 

EI, XXV. 276 f. 

ARSIE , 229 of 1935-36. 

EI, XXIV. 110 f. 

Vij. and Apar. on Ydj, II. 182-83; SC, III. 460-69. 

XIII. 39 f.; XX. 62 f. ; XXXII. 57 f.; LV. 219 f.; LVI. 22 f.: LXI 142 f* 
LXXI. 4 f.; LXXII. 3 f.; Cl. 283 f.; CIL 37 f. ’ 

Identified in KSS, X. 141 and 190, XX. 62, etc. with Chandika or Durga. 

I. 30 (after Adipurdna). 

I 205-09. 

On Ydj, I. 56-57. 

Vij- and Apar. on Ydj, I. 66; SC, I. 30, 202-03, 220-21; Vij. on Ydj, II. 


41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 

60. 
61. 


Smrityarthasdra, 2. 
106. 31-34. 

III. 1808-10. 


5; 


III. 1810-16. 


CXII. 211. 

Ibid., XXVII. 163 f. 

Ibid., X. 144 f. 

Ibid,, XII. 78 f. 

Ibid., XXVI. 150 f. 

Ibid., CXII. 62 f. 

Ibid., CXII. 88 f. 

CXII. 62 f. \ 

II. 162. 

II. 339, 371. 

Vikramdnkadevacharita, IX. 

SC, III. 572-75. 

Ibid., 568-70. 

Ibid., 576-80. 

Ibid., 575-76. 

SC, I. 60-63. 

Vaij, 174. 22-23: Abh, 214. 187-88. 
n. 3.21; IV. 1.59. 


505 


•••••• ■ 




63 

64 

65 

66 

67 

68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 
74, 
75 

76, 

77, 

78, 

79, 

80, 
81. 
82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86 . 

87. 

88 . 

89. 

90. 

91. 

92. 

93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 

98. 

99. 
100 . 
101 . 
102 . 

103. 

104. 

105. 

106. 

107. 

108. 
109. 

no. 

in. 

112 . 

113. 

114. 

115. 

116. 

117. 

118. 

119. 

120 . 
121 . 
12 2 . 

123. 

124. 

125. 

126. 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Vij. and Apar. on Ydj, II. 25. 

Ill 681. 

Taittiriya Samhitd, VI. 5.82. 

Vi and Apar. loJ^. * 135 ' 36; m 673 - 75; Vvamhdrakanda, 748-49. 

YY' 682-85; VyavaliaraMnda, 750. 

See above. pp.’' 280'f ^ ° n Y “ j ’ 143 ' 49; Vyavaharahiria, 683-95. 

306 ARSIE 672 of 1922; El, XXII. 189 f. 

ARSJB 577, 584, 587 of 1929-30; 241, 247, 336, 341, 342, 343 of 1931-32. 

On Ydj, I. 178-79. 

Vol. IV, p. 386, 

Prayaschittaprakarana , 65-68. 

Above, Vol. IV, p. 387. 

127.53. 

134.138 f. 

LIV. 170 f. 

Vikramdnkadevacharita , XI. 44-68 
III. 1329. 

CXI*!!' 67: XXXIX - 207: XL - 2; XLI H- 64; XXXIV. 93; CHI. 200; CX. 124-30* 
IET. 1342-1601. 

Ibid, 1601-29. 

Ibid. 1345 I. 
n. 151. 

n-cfct (Ed. Hirth and Rockhill), 95. 

Ibid, 360. 

Ibid., 376. 

Ibid , 360. 

yij' and Ap ar . on Ydj, I. 16-17, 98, 100, etc. 

. at, II; Smrityarthasdra, 18 f. 

4 jffl’ 289-350, 482-92; Smrityarthasara, 25-32. 

. loo.112-14. 

. Vaij, 181. 98-102; Abh, 231. 231 f. 

. Kf?T, VII. 922-24. 

i PL XXI1, N ° S ‘ 76a ' 78; XXVII-XXVHI, Nos. 118-43. 

I Ibid, PI. XXV-XXVI,' Nos. 95-117. 

. III. 1185-87, 

■ Op. tit. 88-89. 

. Ibid, 92. 
n. 338. 

II. 376. 

Op. cit. 87. 

II. 338. 

II. 370. 

XXXVIII. 19 f. 

III. 1585-89. 

Ibid, 1161-1244. 

XXX. 

III. 28-66. 

Ibid, 123-29. 

Op. cit. 87. 

Vaij, 137. 11-14; Abh, 404-80. 

Vaij , 171.161-62; Abh. 277.352-53. 

Vikramdnkadevacharita, VII 15-19 
SC, III. 593. - 

Vaij, 145-47. 114-41; Abh, 117.6 f 
Mitra, op. cit I, PI. XXX, Nos. 167-74. 

Mo hardjapardjaya, Act IV, p. 86. 

Ibid, p. 87. 

KSS, XXV. 119 f. 

XV. 18 f. 

Vikramdnkadevacharita, XII. 50-78. 


506 


SOCIAL CONDITION 



129 

130 

131 

132 

133 

134 

135. 

136. 

137. 

138. 

139. 

140. 

141. 

142. 

143. 

144. 

145. 

146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 

150. 

151. 

152. 

153. 

154. 

155. 

156. 

157. 

158. 

159. 

160. 
161. 
162. 

163. 

164. 

165. 

166. 

167. 

168. 

169. 

170. 

171. 

172 

173 

174 

175 

176 

177 

178 

179 

180 
181 
182 

183. 

184. 

185. 

186. 

187. 

188. 
189. 


Ill-IV. 

IV. 3-196. 

Ibid, 661-827. 

Ibid, 829-78. 

Ibid, 879-996. 

Ibid, 997-1226. 

Ibid, 1277-97. 

Ibid, 1298-1328. 

Ibid , 1329-80. 

Ibid, 1381-1432. 

IV. 48 f. 

VI-VII. 

xm. 1-26. 

Chau Ju-Kua, op. c it. 95. 

H. 354 f. 

II. 343-44. 

II. 364-65. 

Vij. Apar. on Yaj, III.264-65; Prayaschittaprakarana, 28-33. 

11341^ Amh Ge ° 9mphers ’ Knowledge of Southern India , 106. 

* I. 30 (after quotation from an unnamed authority). 

. p. 2. 

. Majumdar, R. C., Suvarnadvipa , I. 170-89. 

. Quoted by Chau Ju-Kua, op. cit, 95. 

. Op. cit., 87. 

. Nainar, op. cit, 106-07. 

ARSIE, 267-69 of 1929-30; 122-25 and 202-03 of 1934-35. 

H 339. 

IH. 594-97. 

VII. 103, 478-80; VIII, 367-69, 445, 1440-44. 

II. 341. 

XLIII. 160 f. 

See above p. 491; also Manasollasa, IV. 829-78. 

II. 371. 

Nainar, op. cit. 97. 

LV. 2 f. 

Above, Vol. IV, p. 379. 

Op. cit. 92. 

II. 157. 

I. 19-23. 

II. 161. 

Nainar, op. cit. 97. 

II. 342-43. 

Ibid, 363-64. 

Vol. III. 450. 

HIED , n. 14. 

S. R. Sharma, Studies in Medieval Indian History, pp. 57, 61. 29. 

HIED, D. 34, 40. 

Ibid 43, 222. Also see above, p. 13, and Sharma, op. cit. 29. 

Ibid, 39. 

Ibid, 230. 

Ibid, 231. 

Ibid, 348. 

the Quotations that follow, Cf. Sachau, Alberuni’s India, I. 17-22. 

HIED , III. 546. 

El, TV. 119. 

I A, XIX. 219. 

He says: “My birth-place is Lahore and I am far from Lahore. Alas, Oh 
.Lahore! what joy can there be without you.” 

Great later masters like Anwar! and ‘Urfi have acknowledged his excellence 
as a qasida writer. 

I or him and other scholars, see Zubaid Ahmad, India’s Contribution to Arabic 
Literature . 

s° n of the famous scholar Nizami ArudI of Samarqand, the author 
of Chahar Maqdla. 

™ n ?, am> an old for tified town in the Patiala State (PEPSU). 

Ci. M. Ikram, Chashma-i-Kauthar, p. 120. 

507 


CHAPTER XVIII 


EDUCATION 

In the present chapter we propose to describe in general outline 
the methods and principles of education that prevailed before the 
Muslim conquest. 

!• PRIMARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION 

The records of our period are almost completely silent about 
the methods of primary education. It seems likely that the familiar 
institution of the village school-master, plying his occupation amid 
humble surroundings and receiving his modest pay from the contri¬ 
butions of the villagers, was at work during these centuries. 

As regards mass education in the broader sense of the term it 
was provided by the agency of one of our traditional institutions, 
namely the public recitation of the Epics, the Puranas and other 
religious works which, according to the Smriti law, are accessible 
even to the lowest caste. The inscriptions of this period refer from 
time to time to endowments made by pious donors with this object. 
Among the works forming the subject of popular expositions the 
records of South India mention sectarian scriptures as well as devo¬ 
tional hymns in the vernacular. 

The elaborate scheme of higher education prescribed in the 
Smj-itis for the students of the three upper classes after their in¬ 
vestiture with the sacred thread is repeated in the commentaries and 
digests' with some supplementary explanations. As regards periods 
of study, studentship for long terms is included in the list of prac¬ 
tices forbidden in the Kali Age in Smriti-chandrika . 2 after a quotation 
from the Adi Parana and in Smrityartliasara. And yet the Smriti- 
chandrika elsewhere 3 quotes from the older texts the directions 
about the duties of the life-long student (naishthika-brdhmachdri ), 
who is distinguished from the student who passes on to the state of 
householder after expiration of the period of his training. 

Among the duties of the student daily begging for food occupies 
an important place. The student must beg every morning and 
evening except when he is in ‘distress’. Begging is not an im¬ 
permanent injunction since its non-performance entails a penance. 
The alms sought for should be sufficient for one’s meals and no 
moie. According to the strict interpretation of the Smrityarthasara 


508 


EDUCATION 

a student should beg from the household of a blameless Brahmaija. 
In the opinion of the Smriti-chandrika he should beg first from his 
caste-fellows and, in default, from the Kshatriyas and the Vaisyas, 
but not from the Sudras. According to Vijfianesvara the student 
may beg from the three upper classes and, in times of distress, from 
all the four classes. Among other duties of the Vedic student, we 
are told that he shall avoid honey, meat, unguents for the body 
and collyrium for the eyes except, as the Smriti-chandrika. says, 
when he is required to use them during his illness by the physician. 
The student shall refrain from reviling his teacher or even men¬ 
tioning him by name. He shall also avoid conveyances, shoes and 
umbrellas, singing and dancing, harsh and coarse speech, and so 
forth. He shall not touch or look at women where there is the risk 
of his falling into sin. 

As regards relations between the teacher and the student the 
commentaries and digests explain the circumstances permitting the 
teacher’s receipt of money from his pupils. Learning from a paid 
teacher and teaching for a fee are both admitted to be lesser sins. 
(upapatakas). This ban, however, as Vijfianesvara 4 says, does not 
apply to a student who pays the fees without a prior agreement. 
As Apararka s and the author of the Smriti-chandrika^ explain, what 
is forbidden is teaching by stipulation for payment of a fee, while 
teaching is itself prescribed in the Smritis as a means of livelihood. 
The teacher failing to correct an inattentive pupil by reprimand 
may, according to Smriti-chandrika , 7 beat him. Similarly, accord¬ 
ing to Vijfianesvara and Apararka, 8 beating a pupil should be re¬ 
sorted to only for correction. The beating should be done with rope 
or a split bamboo, and not with the hand, and it should be applied 
not to the head but to the lower part of the body. The violation 
of this restriction by the teacher amounts to an offence punishable 
by the king. The teacher, according to Smriti-chandrika , 9 failing 
to instruct his pupil (other than a Sudra) incurs blame. But the 
student must always study under a Brahmana, learning from a 
Kshatriya or a Vaisya being permitted only in times of distress. 

The commentaries and digests, like the Smritis, are silent about 
a scheme of technical education of apprentices in trades and crafts. 
We have, however, some valuable hints on the system of apprentice¬ 
ship in the Smriti section on Law entitled non-rendition of ser¬ 
vice, 10 which proves the continuance of the old system in its 
essential aspects, 11 

Reference may be made in this connection to Marco Polo’s vivid 
description 12 of the very practical method of training tradesmen’s 
apprentices in the Pan4ya region in his time. When the boys reach 




509 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



tile age of thirteen, we are told, the parents dismiss them from their 
homes with a small pocket allowance for earning their living by 
trade. “These urchins are running about all day from pillar to 
post, buying and selling.’' During the season for pearl-fishing they 
run to the beach and purchase five or six pearls according to their 
ability and sell them to the merchants in their homes. In the same 
way they deal with many other articles. Thus they are trained to 
be very dexterous and keen traders. Testimony to the excellence 
of the craftsman’s training at its highest levels is borne by the 
superb specimens of art and industry attested to by the literary 
records as well as the archaeological remains of this period. 

We have an interesting glimpse into the methods and principles 
of princely education in vogue at this period in Manasollasa .' 3 The 
author says that the princes should be instructed in the Vedas as 
well as military science. When the princes have completed their 
training and have become skilled in mounting horses and elephants 
and in managing chariots, the king shall test them one after another. 
The test applies to their skill in various branches of literature (the 
Vedas, logic, the Dharma-sastras, belles-lettres and grammar), in 
the fine arts, in wielding the bow and other weapons, and in exhibit¬ 
ing their strength as well as steadiness of body and mind. The 
high standards of princes’ training are illustrated at their best by 
the instances of the scholar-kings of this period. Such are the 
mysterious Apararka (otherwise called Aparaditya), Somesvara III 
of the Western Chalukya dynasty of Kalyana, Ballalasena of the 
Sena dynasty of Bengal, and above all the illustrious Bhoja of the 
Paramara dynasty of Malwa. 

II. PRIVATE AND PUBLIC ENDOWMENTS FOR 
PROMOTION OF LEARNING 

We have seen how the Smriti law contemplates the students of 
the upper classes as receiving their higher education at the 
residences of Brahmana teachers. The settlements of the Brahmanas 
in villages and specially on lands (agraham) granted to them by 
royal and other donors, which are frequently referred to in the in¬ 
scriptions of this period, evidently provided ample opportunity for 
such teaching. Side by side with this ancient and venerable institution 
of the Brahmana guru teaching his pupils at his residence, there grew 
up in India from early times larger or smaller establishments spe¬ 
cifically endowed by kings and other donors for the promotion of 
education. The historical records of this period contain numerous 
instances of such educational establishments. In Eastern India the 
great Buddhist monastic University of Nalanda continued to flourish, 


510 


misr/fy 



EDUCATION 


t6ugh probably with less splendour than before, while new monas¬ 
teries like Vikramaslla, Somapura, Jagaddala and Uddantfapura rose 
into importance as centres of learning. 14 In the eleventh century 
A.D. the niafhas of Kashmir became so famous for their learning 
that they drew students, according to the testimony of Kshemendra, 
even from distant Gautfa. In the regions of Madhyapradesa a Saiva 
temple with a mafha and a hall of study was founded by the Queen- 
mother AlhanadevI, according to an inscription of A.D. 1155 . 1 6 i n 
the Deccan and the Kannada country references are made to endow¬ 
ments of land by individual donors for the promotion of learning. 
A Brahmana in the time of Vikramaditya VI 1 e appointed a body of 
104 village-mahajanos as trustees for his gift of certain lands. Under 
the terms of the trust a certain portion of land with a house-site was 
assigned as maintenance (bhattavritti) to a teacher for teaching the 
grammatical work called Nytisa and the MiiTi&ihsd work of Prabha- 
kara, while another portion with a house-site was made over to a 
teacher in Mathematics, Astronomy, Prosody and Grammar for his 


personal requirements as well as for teaching his pupils, feeding 
them once a day, and supplying them with cloth once a year. The 
inscriptions likewise refer to endowments of money for the same 
purpose. The chief Queen of Vikramaditya VI gave money in trust 
to the mahajanas of a village for maintenance of a commentator of 
the sastras, a reader of the Puranas, and teachers of the Rigveda and 
Yajurveda . 1 7 In the same reign a general gave money in trust to 
a body of mahajanas for teaching different branches of learning. We 
also hear of the foundation of educational institutions by individual 
donors, as of a lecture-hall built by king Vikramaditya Vi’s Super¬ 
intendent of religious affairs for teaching Prabhakara’s doctrine of 
Purva-rmrwmsa , 18 of a mafha of the Saiva sect which was at once a 
temple, a college, and an alms-house, 19 and of a mafia founded by 
an astronomer for the study of Bhaskaracharya in the time of the 
Yadava king Siiighana in A,D. 1207. 

In the Kakatlya kingdom a famous Saiva teacher 20 allotted out 
of two villages assigned to him by Queen RudrambadevI certain 
lands for maintenance of a Saiva temple along with a college, 
a feeding house for Saiva mendicants, and so forth. The col¬ 
lege maintained a staff of three teachers of Qigveda, Yajurveda. and 
Samaveda respectively, and five teachers of logic, literature, and the 
agamas. Allotment of land was made likewise to a physician for 
attending upon the resident-teachers, students, and attendants. 
The largest number of records of endowments for learning 
that have come down to us for this period are those of the Imperial 
Cholas. In the reign of Rajaraja I a certain individual 21 endowed 
gold coins for payment out of their interest to one who recited the 


511 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


^mmaveda on a fixed day in the year. In the reign of Rajendra 
Chola I a village assembly created an endowment 22 for maintenance,, 
at fixed rates of paddy per day, of 270 junior pupils studying the" 
four Vedas, the Kalpasutras, and Grammar (according to the work 
called Rupavatara), of 70 senior students studying Grammar and 
Mimarhsa according to the Prabhakara school, and of the teachers in 
these subjects. Reference is made 23 to a college near the temple at 
Kanchlpuram in an inscription of the reign of Rajendra Chola. I. A 
village assembly in the reign of Rajadhiraja I purchased lands 24 for 
maintenance on similar terms of 12 teachers of different branches of 
Vedic literature, 7 other teachers of Vedanta, Vyakarana, 
Rupavatara, Mahabharata, Ramdyana, Manusastra and Vaikhd- 
nasa-s&stra, of 190 students of these branches of learning,, 
and of 10 other students of Vedanta, Vyakarana and the 
Rupavatara. According to another and more important record 25 
king Vira Rajendra created an endowment in land and money in 
favour of a temple of Vishnu as well as the college, the hostel, and 
the hospital attached to it. The college provided for 60 students of 
whom 10 each studied the Rigveda and the Yajurveda, 20 studied 
Vyakarana with the Rupavatara, and the rest comprised Mahapanchar- 
atras, the S a i v a -13 ra h m a.n a s, and the Vaikhanasas studying their res¬ 
pective scriptures. The teaching staff included one teacher of the 
Rigveda, one teacher of the Yajurveda, and a Bhatta for expounding. 
Vyakarana. The students were to receive daily food according to a 
fixed schedule, sleeping mats, and oil for bathing on 51 Saturdays 
of the year. The teachers were to be paid in kind and in cash at 
fixed rates. The cooks and maidservants of the establishment were 
to receive wages at fixed rates. The hospital was provided with 15 
beds. The physician-in-charge was paid at a fixed rate for prescrib¬ 
ing medicines to the teachers, the students and their attendants. 
Provision was also made for one surgeon, two persons for fetching 
medicinal herbs, two nurses and one barber who were likewise to be 
paid at fixed rates. In the reign of king Vikrama Chola, one of the- 
king’s officers 26 endowed lands for maintenance of a feeding house 
for those studying medicine, Grammar, and the Rupavatara, as well 
as for Brahmanas, ascetics, and so forth. A donor in the reign of 
Rajaraja II assigned 27 certain lands for maintenance of Brahmana 
students of the Vedanta coming from the Malayalam country in the 
mafia established by hims elf. 

A curious sidelight is thrown on the sins and follies of student 
life by Kshemendra’s satiric picture 28 on the life of foreign (specially 
Gau$ya) students in contemporary Kashmir. Characteristically 
enough the student figures in a typical list of cheats and rogues 
satirized by the poet in this work. The poet first refers to the- 



EDUCATION 



student’s exceptional physical weakness at his arrival (he is shunn¬ 
ed by the people from a distance for fear of touching a skeleton) and 
his quick gain of strength (he changes at it were into a new body 
by partaking of food and using unguents at sacrifices for which he 
procures his invitation by ostentatious display of his piety and his 
ceremonial purity). Reference is next made to his ignorance and 
self-conceit (though knowing with difficulty the syllable ‘Om’, he 
engages in learned contests with a view to defeating veteran Kash¬ 
mirian scholars and though ignorant of the alphabet he pretends to 
study the Mahabhashya of Pataiijali, Logic, and the Mimamsa work 
of Prabhakara). He is foppish in dress and toilette (he has his nails 
painted with lac-juice, he wears variegated dress and fashionable 
shoes, he decorates his waist with a red sash, and he makes graceful 
gestures with his eyebrows). He is a man of loose morals (he fre¬ 
quents houses of prostitutes and carries on intrigues with other men’s 
wives, he looks like Kubera in the morning with the dangling golden 
ear-rings and his large finger-rings, but he has the look of a demon 
in the evening after his defeat at dice-play). The five spoilers of 
the Gaufia libertine are the gambler, the bawd, the prostitute, the 
leather-worker, and the barber. The student is a man of violent 
habits (he drives out workmen with blows of sticks, demolishes 
students’ residence with stick in hand and with his clothes stuck to 
his body and his matted hair tied up for the strife). He plays the 
bully at sacrifices, at bathing places, at students’ hostels and in his 
dealings with merchants and physicians. He blazes forth with anger 
without any provocation on the occasion of bathing, making gifts, 
performing vows and giving offerings to the manes. 

In all ages and countries the satirist draws upon the rare and 
unusual traits and embellishes them from his own imagination in 
order to provide for cheap merriment. The account of Kshemendra, 
therefore, need not be taken as typical of student life, even in Gauda. 
But it should serve as a corrective to those who fondly believe that 
everything in ancient India was good and glorious. 

In conclusion, reference should be made to the effect of Muslim 
invasion on education. The destructive fury of the early Muslim 
conquerors gave an irreparable blow to indigenous learning in the 
territories brought within their sway. This is indicated by the state¬ 
ment of the great Muslim scholar Al-Biruni about the disastrous con¬ 
sequences of the invasions of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni. “Hindu 
sciences”, he says, 29 “have retired far away from those parts of the 
country that have been conquered by us, and have fled to places 
which our hand cannot yet reach, to Kashmir, Banaras and other 
places”. 


MIN/Sr^ 



1. Vij. and Apar. on Yaj, I. 10-50; SC, I. 67-179; Smrityarthasara, 6-11. 

2. I. 29. 

3. 1. 167-72. 

4. On Y dj, I. 28. 

5. hoc. cit 

6. I. 140. 

7. I. 142. 

8. On Ydj, I. 155. 

9. I. 143. 

10. Cf. Apar. on Yd), II. 184; SC. Ill, 955-6. 

11. Above, Vol. II, p. 587. 

12. II. 344. 

13. III. 1283-1304. 

14. HBR. I, s.v. 

15. EL II. 7 f. 

16. El, XX. 67 f. 

17. ARSIE, 518 of 1915. 

18. El, XV. 350 f. 

19. El, V. 221-22. 

20. ARSIE, 94 of 1917. 

21. ARSIE, 76 of 1914. 

22. ARSIE, 333 of 1917. 

23. ARSIE, 240 of 1930-31. 

24. ARSIE, 176 of 1917. 

25. El, XXI. 230 f. 

26. ARSIE, 159 of 1925. 

27. ARSIE, 276 of 1925. 

28. Desopadesa, VI. 

29. Sachau’s tr., I. 22. 


514 


misr/fy 


CHAPTER XIX 



| 

5 



ECONOMIC CONDITION 


I. THE VILLAGE AND THE CITY 


The rural economy of the Indian people has for centuries been 
centered on what may be called in general terms communities of 
peasant-proprietors, who paid revenues to government under various 
specified heads, but were otherwise, as a rule, left free in the pos¬ 
session of their holdings. It is true that this system was overlaid 
from an early period by the royal grants and assignments of lands 
for various purposes. Such grants and assignments must have led 
to the creation of larger or smaller estates comprising numbers of 
villages. Nevertheless the royal grants and assignments in¬ 
volved as a rule no more than transfer of the king’s dues 
and rights in favour of the donees. In the South, especially, the 
village communities maintained their corporate organisation at this 
period with full vigour. For the contemporary inscriptions fre¬ 
quently record the gift or sale of lands by these bodies and their 
appointment as trustees by pious and charitable donors. While the 
village thus remained, as before, the backbone of the Indian eco¬ 
nomy, there was, as in the earlier period, a vigorous growth of city- 
life. We have, to begin with, an impressive list of cities (including 
great internal marts and sea-ports) furnished by the contemporary 
Indian and foreign evidence. The descriptions of these cities are as 
a rule given in such general terms as to preclude a reconstruction of 
their economic life. The records of the South Indian dynasties, how¬ 
ever, give us occasional glimpses of the extensive commercial activi¬ 
ties of the cities, the value of this evidence being enhanced by its 
incidental character. In a twelfth century inscription of the reign 
of the Western Chalukya Taila II 1 belonging to the Telugu area we 
read how the desi merchants of a city, speaking four different dia¬ 
lects, joined with others in making a pious endowment. This con¬ 
sisted of tolls imposed upon their articles of trade, namely pack- 
horses, musk, saffron, yak-tail, cotton and cotton-thread, beads, tiger- 
skins, women’s clothes, lead, and tin. An inscription of A.D. 1204 2 
relating to the city of Belgaum (in Dharwar District) mentions a pious 
endowment by “an assembly of itinerant traders and all the traders 
of Lata (Gujarat) and the Malayalam country and all the other 
traders of the locality headed by the gold-workers and others and 
the oil-merchants”. An inscription of king Ganapati of the Kaka- 


515 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

tlya dynasty of Warangal, 3 belonging to the first half of the thir¬ 
teenth century A.D., states that the king, renouncing the earlier 
practice of confiscating all cargoes of vessels driven to the port of 
Motupalle by bad weather, granted a charter for levying customs- 
duties upon a few selected articles only (evidently because of their 
high level). iThe articles consisted of sandal-wood, camphor, pearls,, 
rose-water, copper, zinc, lead, silk-thread, corals, perfumes, pepper, 
and areca-nuts. jWe have a remarkable instance of the inhabitants 
of a city and a territorial sub-division regulating the economic life 
of the community in a record 4 belonging to the time of Kulot- 
tuhga III. Here we are told that a certain nddu and nagara assembled 
together in a temple and made an agreement for converting a village 
granted by them into a mercantile town.;' 

II. AGRICULTURE, INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

Agriculture, which has been through the centuries the principal 
occupation of the Indian people, was well cared for during our 
period. A large variety of cereals as well as edible vegetables and 
plants, with their sub-divisions, is mentioned in the lexicons. 5 In 
the description of the king’s dietary in Manasollasa 5 reference is 
made to eight varieties of the rice distinguished by their colour,, 
odour, size, and period of growth, and seven different kinds of beans. 
It further appears from the records that scientific agriculture was 
practised as before in the present period. The cereals were classi¬ 
fied 7 under three heads, namely those grown in pods (scmrudhanya) 
the awned grains ( sukadhcinya ), and rice of different varieties. 
The fields were classified 8 according to their qualities, namely, those 
which were fertile, those unfit for cultivation, those under cultiva¬ 
tion, those lying fallow, and those with a saline soil. They were 
also classified 9 according to the crops grown on them, the quality of 
seeds sown on them, and the number of times they were ploughed. 10 

^ Traditions attribute to the Chola kings of this period the con¬ 
struction of the famous anicuts across the Kaveri river in Tanj ore 
District, which were renovated in much later times by the British 
Government. The most famous of these public works is the Great 
Anicut below the island of Snrahgam which consists of a massive 
darp of unhewn stone, 1080 ft. long and from 40 to 60 ft. broad. 11 

if The descriptions of our authors, both indigenous and foreign, 
help us to identify some of the principal agricultural regions of these 
times. As for cereals Magadha is mentioned for its richness in 
rice, 12 while the rice of the Kalinga country is included in the list of 
its varieties suitable for the king’s dietary. 13 As regards fruits and 
fruit-trees, grapes are mentioned by Kalhana 14 with patriotic pride as 




£>16 




ECONOMIC CONDITION 



<SL 


one of the ordinary products of Kashmir. From the Muslim writer 
IdrisI we learn that date-trees and cocoanut-trees grow at Sandan 
(Sindhudurga in Ratnagiri District) and that cocoanut-trees grow in 
abundance at Saymur (Sirur in South Canara). 16 ‘^s for other 
edible economic products, ginger and cinnamon were produced in 
large quantities in the Pandya kingdom according to Marco Polo, 16 
while camphor grew on the mountain-slopes between Quilon and 
Madura according to Yaqut. 17 Marco Polo, 18 writing evidently on 
second-hand information, observes that “Bengala” (Bengal) pro¬ 
duced spikenard and other spices, ginger, sugar, and other articles. 
According to Idrlsi 19 cardamum grew on the hill-slopes at Fandarina 
(Pandalayani in Malabar for which^see below) in such abundance as 
to be exported to different lands. Malabar, according to Ibn Sa‘Id, 20 
was the country of pepper. In particular it is stated to have been 
grown at Sandan, as well as at Fandarina, Jurbatan and Quilon (all 
in Malabar), according to Idrlsi, Yaqut and Qazwini. 21 Similarly, 
according to Marco Polo, 22 Malabar produced large quantities of pep¬ 
per. As for non-edible economic products bamboo and its varieties 
grew at Kuli (in the Gulf of Cambay), Tana (Thana in Salsette is¬ 
land), Sandan and Saymur according to Idrlsi, and at Quilon accord¬ 
ing to Yaqut and Qazwini. 23 Sandal-wood was a product of the 
Malaya hill (the southern part of the Western Ghats), 24 while Kash¬ 
mir produced yellow sandal which was used as an unguent by kings 
in the rainy season. 26 Saffron is mentioned by Kalhana 26 as one of 
the two ordinary products of Kashmir. Cotton trees of a very 
great height and of a longevity of twenty years grew in Gujarat. 27 
Less authenticated is Marco Polo’s statement 28 that cotton grew in 
Bengal and formed the subject of a great trade. Indigo was pro¬ 
duced in great quantities in Gujarat (including Cambay), and that of 
a very fine quality as well as in great abundance at Quilon. 29 In¬ 
cense of the inferior brown variety was found at Tana. 30 “Brazil 


wood” (sappan) of very fine quality as well as teak grew at Kulam 
(Quilon). 31 

As regards animal products the preparation of silk from the 
cocoons of the silkworm and of wool from the hair of the hilly ram 
was of course widely known. Equally familiar was the use of the 
bushy tail of the Himalayan chamara -deer for preparing flywhisks 
and of musk from the Himalayan musk-deer. ^Elephant’s tusks (or 
ivory) are mentioned by Chau Ju-Kua 32 among the products of the 
Chola kingdom/ The manufacture of leather, which is a very old 
Indian industry going back to Vedic times, was greatly developed in 
some regions during this period. From Marco Polo 33 we learn that 
Tana had a great export trade in leather of various excellent kinds. 
Likewise Cambay 34 had a great trade in very well-dressed hides. 


517 



Gujarat, above all, 36 produced large numbers of dressed skins of 
different kinds (those of goats, of domestic and wild oxen, of buffa¬ 
loes and so forth) as well as “beautiful mats in. red and blue leather, 
exquisitely inlaid with figures of birds and beasts and skilfully em¬ 
broidered with gold and silver wire”. It also produced other cu¬ 
shions (apparently of leather) embroidered with gold. These arti¬ 
cles were in high demand in Western lands; the “sleeping mats”, 
which were “marvellously beautiful things”, and the cushions being 
sold for ten and six silver marks apiece respectively. A more valu¬ 
able industry dating from ancient times was that of the pearl-fisheries 
and the preparation of pearls for ornaments. The pearl-fisheries at 
Sahara (Suparem or Supara in the north of Bombay) and Fufal 
(Bekal, thirty-four miles south-south-east from Mangalore), which 
are referred to by Yaqut, 36 were evidently of slight or no import¬ 
ance. : Chau Ju-Kua 3Y includes pearls among the native products 
in the^ Chola kingdom, but he gives no other information on this, 
point. 1 ne great seat of the pearl-fisheries in this as in other periods 
was the Pantfya kingdom. Marco Polo, writing at the close of the 
thirteenth century, observes 38 that pearls were fished in great quan¬ 
tities in the kingdom of Malabar which in fact was the place from 
which they were spread all over the world. The pearl-shells, he 
says, were found in the gulf between India and Ceylon during the 
season from the beginning of April to the middle of May every year 
and, at an undefined place “some three hundred miles distant”, 
during September and the first half of October. The author gives 
in this connection a vivid description of the fishing operations con¬ 
ducted by the pearl-fishers. They engaged the services of fish- 
charmers as well as a large number of divers for the whole season, 
and had to pay the high royalty of 10% of their finds to the king. 

^The manufacture of textiles, which is a very old Indian industry, 
appears to have been carried on with conspicuous success during 
this period. We can locate some of the advanced centres of textile 
manufacture from the contemporary evidence.? The Manasoilasa 39 
gives us a long list of fabrics for the king’s use after their places of 
origin. The definitely Indian names in this list are Nagapattana 
(Negapatam), the Chola country^Anilavada (Anahillapataka in Guja¬ 
rat), Mulasthana (Multan), Kalinga and Vanga. According to Chau 
Ju-Kua 40 Gujarat produced for export to Arabian lands large quan¬ 
tities of “foreign cotton stuffs of every colour” (chintzes). Marco 
Polo 41 similarly observes that much fine “buckram” (cotton stuffs) 
was produced in the kingdom of Cambay. In Malwa, according to 
Chau Ju-Kua, 42 cotton cloths were such a very common product 
as to form the subject of a considerable export trade. The native 
products of Malabar, according to the same author, 43 included 


518 




ECONOMIC CONDITION 



“foreign cotton stuffs of all colours” (chintzes) and (white) cotton 
cloth. This is corroborated by Marco Polo who speaks 44 of the 
manufacture of “very beautiful and delicate buckrams” in Malabar. 
Coming to the Coromandel Coast we find Ibn Said 46 testifying that 
Ma'bar was proverbial for its arts of washing and dyeing, and that 
it exported “lainas” (coloured silk or cotton cloth). j\gain Chau Ju- 
Kua includes 46 “cotton stuffs with coloured silk threads” and other 
such stuffs among the products of the Chola dominion. Finally, as 
regards the Telugu country, the finest cotton fabrics were produced, 
according to Marco Polo, 47 in the kingdom of “Mutfili” (Warangal). 
From the enthusiastic account of the traveller we learn that this king¬ 
dom produced the most delicate and costly ‘buckrams’ which looked 
like tissues of the spiders’ web and which were fit for any king or 
queen in the world. 

^Stone-cutting, including stone-polishing, is an Indian industry 
going back to the prehistoric culture of the Sindhu valley. The vast 
scale and superb quality of the stone sculpture and architecture of 
this period are illustrated by the numerous examples of stone-images 
and temples scattered all over the country. Reference should also 
be made to the superb stone-terraces around the sacred tanks which 
dreyv the enthusiastic admiration of so gifted a critic as Al-Biruni. 48 

^The art of working metals which, like the manufacture of tex¬ 
tiles, goes back to Vedic times, was pursued with great success during 
this period. * The most fascinating remains of the skill of the iron- 
smiths of this period are the iron-beams, all of unwrought iron, in 
the temples of Bhuvanesvara, Purl and Konarak, and, above all, the 
celebrated iron-pillar at Dhar, the capital of the Paramara kings of 
Malwa. The number of the beams in one of the Purl temples (‘the 
Garden Temple’) alone has been counted as 239, while they reach 
the size of 17' in length and 6" x 4" or 5" x 6" in section. In the 
Konarak temple the beams, though smaller in number, reach even a 
larger size, namely 35' in length and 7” or 7 ’> square in section. 
The iron-pillar at Dhar, now unfortunately broken into three pieces, 
has been estimated to have originally reached a height of 50 , being 
the highest pillar of its kind in the world. 49 

As regards gold and silver work the Manasollasa, in the course 
of its enumeration of the king’s seats, mentions the golden lion- 
throne. 50 Again, while enumerating the king’s bed-steads, it men¬ 
tions those inlaid with gold. 61 The inscriptions frequently record 
the acts of pious donors in decorating temples with gold and in pre¬ 
senting vessels and ornaments of gold and silver to the deities, whose 
images were also sometimes made of gold and silver. Reference has 


519 


MIN/Sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<8L 


been made above to these and other articles of gold and silver in 
connection with the plunder of Sultan Mahmud. 55 

The art of the jeweller was maintained at its old level of excel¬ 
lence during this period. The list of jewels in the lexicons 53 inclu¬ 
des crystal, sun-stone, moon-stone, emerald, ruby, coral, diamond, 
sapphire, beryl (or lapis lazuli), and pearls. We have a full des¬ 
cription (evidently derived from the old works on ratnapuriksha) of 
the sources and characteristics of various gems in the Mdnasollasa , 64 
The list comprises diamond, pearl, ruby, sapphire, emerald, crystal, 
topaz, lapis lazuli, the gomeda gem, and coral- From the testimony 
of Marco Polo- 6 also we learn that diamonds were found abundant¬ 
ly and in large size in the kingdom of “Mutfili” (Warangal), although 
his story of the method of their collection is purely legendary. 


The overland routes connecting India with Western Asia 
go back to the centuries before the Christian era, while those 
linking her with Central Asia and China came into use some 
time later. With the gradual advance of the arms of Islam from 
India’s border lands to her heart in the Ganga valley, the control of 
these routes must have passed entirely into the hands of the Muslim 
rulers. 

Erm¬ 
ine extent and direction of India’s maritime trade are known 

principally from the detailed accounts of the foreign writers/ It 
appears from these accounts that Ma‘bar was a sort of clearing-house 
for the goods of the East and West. As Wassaf says, 66 the products y 
of China, India (sic) and Sindh laden orf huge ships constantly arrive 
at Ma‘bar. To this he adds that the wealth of the isles of the Per¬ 
sian Gulf and the beauty and adornment of other countries from 
Iraq and Khurasan as far as Rum and Europe are derived from 
Ma‘bar which is so situated as to be the key of Hind. Wassaf’s testi¬ 
mony is borne out in part by Marco Polo. Speaking of “Cail” 
(Kayal on the Tamraparnl river) he describes it 67 as a great and 
noble city which was visited by ships from the Persian Gulf and 
the Arabian coast with goods laden for sale. The ports of Malabar 
likewise ranked as international centres of trade. Thus Idris! men¬ 
tions Fandanna as a port of call for ships from India and Sindh. Ac¬ 
cording to Abu Dulaf (quoted by Yaqut), Kawlam (Quilon) was 
a port of embarkation for ‘Uman (in Arabia). 58 From Chou K’u- 
fe'i 59 we learn that Quilon was a port of transhipment of traders 
from the smaller boats of the Arabian sea to the larger vessels of 
the Chinese seas. Chau Ju-Kua 60 observes that Quilon was a port 
of call for ships coming from San-fo-ts’i 61 and its dependencies. Of 
the land of “Nan-p’i” (Malabar) he similarly says 62 that its pro¬ 
ducts were carried to Ki-lo Ta-nung (Perak) and San-fo-ts’i. Marco 


520 


MINISr^ 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 



Polo also observes 63 that ships with their goods came to Malabar 
both from South China and the West, the former preponderating 
over the latter in the proportion of 10 to 1. In particular we are 
told 64 that merchants from South China and from Arabia and the 
Levant came to Quilon with their ships and their merchandise and 
derived great profit from the import as well as the export trade. 
We further learn 66 that Eli, in spite of its want of harbours, was 
visited by ships from South China and other lands in summer, the 
Chinese ships braving the visit the most because of their huge 
wooden all-weather anchors. 66 

Important also for international trade was the Gujarat coast. 
IdrLsi tells us that Barus (Broach) was a port of call for vessels 
-coming from China and from Sindh. Cambay, according to Marco' 
Polo, 6 ' was visited by merchants with many ships and cargoes. 
The same author observes 68 that the products of Gujarat were load¬ 
ed in ships every year for trade with Arabia and other lands. There 
are references to other ports which were evidently of less import¬ 
ance, viz. Bullln (probably an island near Saymur, Shirur in the 
South Canara District), Subara (~ Supara on the Konkan coast), 
Tana (—Thana) Jurbatan (—Srikandaipuram), Sandan (“Sindhu- 
durga in the Ratnagiri District), and Sindabur (mSadasivagatf near 
Karwar, which was a commercial town with fine buildings and rich 
bazaars), where ships cast anchor. 69 

Inscriptions in Upper Burma and Sumatra 70 still commemo¬ 
rate the operations of the great Indian trading corporation of this 
period, known as the Nanadesls, in those lands. /4 To the foreign ob¬ 
servers of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries we are indebted for 
fuller and more direct evidence of Indian maritime and commer¬ 
cial enterprises in the lands of South-Eastern as well as Western 
Asia during this period/ ^rom Benjamin of Tudela, a Spanish Jew, 
who started on his travels to the greater part of the then known 
world in A.D. 1159, we learn 71 that Indian merchants brought their 
commodities for sale to the island of Kish in the Persian Gulf^ one 
of the gredt international marts of ^Western Asia, at that time/* At 
the close of the thirteenth century A.D., Marco Polo 72 Similarly 
noticed that the merchants of India visited Hormos (Hormuz in the 
Persian Gulf) in ships loaded with products of their land for sale 
to the merchants of Western Asia. We are further told 73 that the 
great city of Calatu on the Persian Gulf was visited by numerous 
ships with goods from India. It was not, however, to the Persian 
Gulf alone that the maritime activities of the Indian merchants in 
the West were confined at this period. We learn from Marco 
Polo 74 that the ships of Ma'bar visited the islands of Madagascar 


521 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


and Zanzibar, arriving there in twenty days, while taking more than 
three months for the return voyage because of the strong southern 
current. In the East, according to the same authority, 76 Zayton 
(Chwan-Chau or Chinchew in Fu-Kien), the great sea-port of me¬ 
diaeval China, was visited by all the ships of India with spices and 
other kinds of costly wares. 

We possess a fair idea of the articles of India’s maritime trade 
with the West and the East.^ *As regards imports, we may first re¬ 
fer to the synonym, turushka , given in Vaijayanti , 76 for incense. 
This evidently refers to the frankincense of the coast of Hadhara- 
maut in South Arabia which has been famous from classical times 
and is particularly noticed by Marco Polo . 71 Among other agricul¬ 
tural products cloves, spikenard, and other fine spices were brought 
into Malabar by ships from the East. 78 As these articles are speci¬ 
fically mentioned among the native products of Java and Sumatra,'^ 
they must have come to India from these islands,, Metals formed 
another important article of India’s import across the seas. We 
learn 80 that merchants in their ships brought gold, silver and cop¬ 
per to Java and Cambay, More definitely we are told 81 that ships 
coming from the East to Malabar brought copper in ballast as well 
as gold and silver. As Sumatra has long been famous for its pro¬ 
duction of gold and since it is credited by Marco Polo himself 82 
with a great abundance of treasure, the gold brought to Malabar 
from the East most probably came from that island. This inference 
is supported by the epithet “the product of Suvarnadvipa” applied 
to gold in Vaijayanti . 83 We may recall in this connection the 
foreign synonyms given in Vaijayanti 84 for various other metals,, 
such as Mlechchha for copper, Yavaneshta for lead, Chlnapatta and 
Simhala for tin, and China for iron. As for textiles we have the 
valuable testimony of Marco Polo 80 to the effect that ships from 
the East brought clothes of silk and gold as well as “sendals (a 
silk texture). As some of the great cities of China like Si-ngan fu, 
Ho-kien fu, Pao-ying-Hien, Ngan-king, Chin-kiang fu, and Su-chau 
(to give them their modern names) are specifically stated by Marco 
Polo 86 to be famous for these products, they must have reached 
India from these cities, These stuffs no doubt are to be identified 
with the fabrics of Great China ( mahdchinabhava ) mentioned in the 
Manasollasa 87 among the varieties of the king’s wardrobe, 
reference to the textiles of Ceylonese origin ( Simhaladvipaja ) in 
the same context 88 indicates that other fine stuffs were imported from 
the neighbouring island.* 

'tt remains to mention the most costly and wasteful of India’s 
imports at this period: In the preceding volume we have seen how 


MIN IST/f 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 



Arab and Persian merchants drove a profitable trade in horses with 
the ports of western and southern India. This trade appears to 
have attained phenomenal proportions in the twelfth and thirteenth 
centuries A.D. The Indian authorities of this period, 89 like their 
predecessors, agree in assigning the first rank in their classified list of 
horses to the foreign breeds (specially those of “Vanayu” or Arabia 
and Persia) and the lowest rank to the indigenous breeds, such as 
those of Trigartta, Gurjara, Avanti, Saurashtra and Pariyatra. 
The great volume of India’s import trade in Arab and Persian 
horses is indicated, beyond doubt, by the contemporary foreign 
writers. 898 ^The figures for the imported horses and their, 
prices indicate the extensive drain suffered by the Indian revenues 
from this tradef ^Vassaf 90 refers to an agreement made by a Pandya 
king with an Arab merchant to the effect that he would embark as 
many horses as he could procure from the islands of the Peisian 
Gulf and land them in Ma'barf According to the same author the 
price of each horse was fixed at 220 dlnaras of “red gold,’’ 91 while 
the number of horses exported from the Arabian and Persian ports 
to the Pandya kingdom, Cambay and so forth, reached the huge 
figure of i4,000 valued at 2,2000,000 dlnaras. Writing about the 
Pandya kingdom Marco Polo 92 similarly observes that each horse 
was' sold at 500 saggi (=500 x 1/6 oz.) of gold, while 2000 horses 
were sought for purchase every year by each of the Pandya kings. 
In another place 93 Marco Polo, while describing the import of horses 
from the Persian Gulf into India, tells us that each horse was sold 
at 200 “livres” of Persian money. 94 The necessity for this extra¬ 
vagant demand of the Indians for the horses from the West is traced 
by the foreign observers chiefly to the Indians’ ignorance of the art of 
managing the animals.* According to Wassaf the Indians were so 
ignorant of training horses that even the best animals under their 
management were soon disabled for active work. Marco Polo, 96 
while lamenting the waste of a great part of the wealth of the coun¬ 
try in the purchase of horses, gives three reasons for the same. 
Firstly, no horses were bred in the country. Secondly, the Indians 
had no farriers, and the foreign merchants prevented any farrier 
from going to that country for fear of losing their highly profitable 
trade. Thirdly, and lastly, the Indians, in their ignorance of the 
treatment of horses, fed them with boiled rice and boiled meat and 
various other cooked food. 

^As regards India’s exports to the neighbouring lands beyond 
the seas, we learn from Benjamin of Tudela 96 that Indian merchants 
carried great quantities of spices to the island of Kish in the Persian 
Gulf for exchange with the goods brought thereto by the merchants 
of Mesopotamia, Yemen and Persia. Marco Polo 97 similarly men- 

523 


WHlST/fy. 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


ions that Indian merchants visited Hormuz in ships loaded with 
spices, precious stones, pearls, clothes of silk and gold, elephants’ 
tusks, and so forth which they sold to the local merchants.^ The 
further statements of the foreign writers enable us to specify the 
articles exported from different geographical areas. We learn from 
Chau Ju-Kua 98 that Gujarat produced indigo, myrobolans, and 
coloured cotton stuffs in such abundance that they were exported to 
the lands of the Arabs. Again we learn from Marco Polo that most 
of the manufactures in Gujarat, mentioned above 99 , filled a number 
of ships every year for export to Arabia and other lands. 


III. THE ORGANISATION OF INDUSTRY AND TRADE 

We have seen in the preceding volume what a large part was 
played by the industrial and commercial guilds in the economic life 
of our country during the previous centuries. The same important 
role was played by these groups during the period under review. 

The law relating to guilds and associated groups is treated in 
the commentaries and digests, 100 as in the Smritis, under a dis¬ 
tinctive title called violation of compact ( sa.-rhvid-vycitik.rama) 
otherwise called non-transgression of compact (samayasydnapd- 
karma). We learn from the Smriti-chandrikd that the samuhas 
(groups) had the authority of making compacts ( samaya ) for over¬ 
coming misfortunes like droughts and oppression of thieves and 
kings, and these compacts were binding not only upon themselves but 
also upon the king. Illustrating this statement the author says that 
the naigamas have many such rules as that those disregarding 
messengers in (the uniform of) a jacket are to be fined and that the 
srenls have such rules as that a certain commodity is to be sold by a 
particular sreni and no other. These illustrations show how the 
craft-guilds and the merchant-guilds devised their own rules for 
maintaining their authority and for controlling the market. Ex¬ 
plaining the constitution of samuhas after the Smriti pattern, the 
author observes that because of the differences of minds among their 
members and their unlimited numbers the samuhas are incapable of 
deciding unanimously on the merits and demerits of their business, 
and that, therefore, they should appoint boards of two, three or five 
“overseers of public business” (karyachintalca). Not only the over¬ 
seers of the samuhas, but also those advisers for their good (hita- 
vddins) who do not belong to this body, shall be obeyed by all the 
members. The samuhas themselves, in the first instance, have the 
authority to punish offenders against their regulations. This com¬ 
prises lining one who is hostile to the advisers or denies a speaker 
his opportunity or makes an unreasonable speech, and banishing 

524 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 


from the place of the assembly one who betrays their secrets, or 
creates dissensions among themselves, or is guilty of such other 
offences. When the samuhas are incapable of dealing with their 
members in such matters as stopping the insolence of their chiefs 
(mukhya), the king shall interfere for the purpose of setting the 
offender on his proper path. When the mukhya cannot be made to 
do so even by the king, he shall be deprived of all his property and 
banished from the kingdom, for the king alone is competent to in¬ 
flict such punishments. But the samiiha alone shall exercise this 
disciplinary authority if it is but slightly competent to do so. Re¬ 
verting to the penalties against offending members of the samiiha, 
the author says that the mukhya, who cannot be set by the king on 
his proper path, shall be fined on a graduated scale according to the 
extent of his solvency, and he shall be banished in case of extreme 
urgency. When those guilty of violating the compacts are not 
mukhyas, they shall be fined according to the degree of their guilt, 
and when they are very near the level of the mukhyas, they shall 
be deprived of all their property and banished from the capital. 

We find in epigraphic records frequent references to the acti¬ 
vities of the mercantile and other guilds, which founded pious en¬ 
dowments by voluntarily imposing tolls upon various articles of 
their trade, trusting no doubt to the Smriti clause of law which made 
their agreements binding upon themselves. 101 A famous guild of 
horse-dealers (kudiraichettis) , having their headquarters probably" 
in Malai-mandalam (modern Travancore), is commemorated in a 
large number of inscriptions of the Chola and Pandya kings of this 
period. 102 The great trading corporations mentioned in the preced¬ 
ing volume 103 and their compeers, the Anjuvannam and Vira- 
Vananjus, flourished in South India during these centuries. 
The desa-salatfu-gandar of the 18 districts are mentioned in a Mysore 
inscription of about A.D. 1200. 104 

The great trading corporation of Ndnddesa-Tisaiyayirattu 
Aihnurruvar mentioned above 106 flourished considerably during this 
period. An inscription of c. A.D. 1050 from the Mysore tract, 106 
while recording an endowment by this body (here called the Five 
hundred sviimis of Ayyavole), proudly recalls their high mythical 
ancestry, their long history, the vast scale of their commercial trans¬ 
actions, and their daring and enterprising spirit. They were bom, 
we read, in the race of Vasudeva, Khandali and Mulabhadra; they 
obtained boon from the goddess Bhagavati; they had 32 velomd, 18 
cities, 64 Yoga-pithas, and asramas at the four points of the compass; 
they were born to wander over many countries since the begin¬ 
ning of the Krita Yuga; they visited Chera, Chola, Pandya, 


525 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Maleya, Magadha, Kausala, Saurashtra, Dhanushtra, Kurumbha, 
Kambhoja, Gaulla, Lala, Barvvara, Parasa, Nepala and other 
lands; they penetrated by land- and sea-routes into the regions 
of the six continents; they traded in elephants and horses, 
sapphires, moon-stones, pearls, rubies and other gems, cardamoms, 
cloves, bdellium, sandal, camphor and other perfumes and drugs; 
they sold their goods wholesale or hawked them about on their 
shoulders; they carried their merchandise on asses and buffaloes 
adorned with red trappings. The above claim of the corporation’s 
mythical ancestry is repeated in another record of eleventh century 
A.D. 107 which gives us additional information of its organisation. 
It consisted, we are told, of various sub-divisions coming from the 
1,000 (districts) of the four quarters, the 18 towns, the 32 velapu- 
ram and the 64 ghatika~sthdnas. Another inscription of A.D. 
1050 108 describes them as a samaya (meaning unexplained) and 
states that they were served by regiments of foot-soldiers and 
swordsmen. 109 That the claim of nanddesls to have wandered over 
different lands is based upon fact is proved by two striking refer¬ 
ences. They are mentioned in a fragmentary Tamil inscription of 
1010 Saka (A.D. 1088) from Lobu Tuwa in Sumatra. Again we 
learn from a thirteenth century inscription at Pagan 1 10 that a native 
of Cranganore made a donation in favour of a Vishnu temple which 
had been founded by the nanddesls in that distant city of Upper 
Burma. An important aspect of the activities of the ndnadesis is 
concerned with 500 charters ( virasdsanas) which they are repeatedly 
said 111 to have acquired for themselves. 

Next to the organisation of guilds described above, we may 
mention, that of capitalists’ and labourers’ partnerships. The 
partnership, according to the Smriti-chandrika, is of six classes, 
concerned with trade, agriculture, crafts, sacrifices, singing and 
theft (“at the king’s instigation in the enemy’s country”). As for 
the rights and duties of the partners inter se, we are told that the 
profit and loss as well as the expenditure and the work are to be 
borne by the partners according to the special agreement there- 
orient . A partner is to make good to all the other partners what 
has been lost through his negligence, when he has acted without 
their authority or against their instructions. On the other hand, if a 
partner saves partnership-property by his own exertions from 
thieves, fire, and flood, he shall get one-tenth of the property thus 
saved as his special share. Similar, but not identical, rules are 
applicable to partnership among cultivators and artisans. 

ihe Smriti-chandrika deals with the relation between capital 
and labour most systematically and thoroughly, and lays down in 

526 




MiNisr^ 


ECONOMIC CONDITION 




great detail rules about wages, compensation and liabilities—“the 
labour laws” as they may be called,—which are marked by equity 
and justice. 


IV. GENERAL ECONOMIC CONDITION OF THE PEOPLE 

In the above pages we have furnished sufficient evidence of the 
developed condition of agriculture, industry and trade in India 
during this period. From this it is not unreasonable to infer that 
a high level of economic prosperity prevailed generally among the 
people concerned with those vocations. It is indeed quite natural 
to think that this level varied not only in different parts of the coun¬ 
try but also among the different strata of the population. But in 
any event, the indications of the people’s prosperity which have been 
preserved for us are sufficiently impressive. The opulence of the 
North-indian cities and the exceptional magnificence of their temples 
in the first half of the eleventh century are proved by the accounts 
of the contemporary Muslim chroniclers, referred to above. 112 

If these accounts help us, though indirectly, to realise the 
wealth of certain geographical regions of northern India in the first 
half of the eleventh century A.D., other foreign notices 113 give us 
glimpses into the economic prosperity, by means of trade 
and commerce, of the coastal regions of Western and Southern 
In dia in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Marco Polo 114 de¬ 
scribes the land of Ma'bar as “the best of all the Indies” and “the 
finest and noblest province of the world”. The immense gifts of 
gold and silver as well as jewellery made by kings, queens, 
princesses and others to the temples, such as are recorded repeated¬ 
ly in the inscriptions of South India during this period, testify as 
much to the affluence as to the piety of the donors. 

The above account refers to the economic condition of the 
people before the Muslim invasions began on a serious scale. The 
accounts of the Muslim chroniclers give vivid descriptions of the 
wholesale plunder and devastation of the country, as well as mass¬ 
acre and enslavement of its inhabitants that attended its conquest 
by the arms of Islam. These events could not but disrupt complete¬ 
ly the economic life of the people who thus came under the foreign 
yoke. 


527 



THE STRUGGLE FOE EMPIRE 


<§L 


ARSIE, .16 of 1917. 

2. El XIII, 18 l 

3. ARSIE , 45 of 1910. 

4/ ARSIE, 521 of 1912. 

5. Vaij, 125-28. 31-61; Abh, 471-81; 235 f. 

6. III. 1346-48, 1358. 

7. Vaij, 128. 62-63. 

8. Vaij, 124. 17-18; Abh, 375.4 f. 

9. Vaij, 124, 19-20; Abh , 375.4f. 

10. Vaij, 124. 22-23; Abh, 375.45. 

11. On the above, see Imperial Gazetteer of India, IX, s.v. Cauvery, p. 306. 

12. Apar. on Yaj, I. 212. 

13. Mdnasollasa, III. 1347. 

14. KR,T, 1.42. 

15. Cf. Nainar, Arab Geographers’ Knowledge of Southern India, Ch. I, s.v. Sandan 
and Saymur. For the identification of the above geographical names, see Ibid. 

16. II. 389. 

17. Nainar, loc. cit. 

18. II. 115. 

19. Nainar, op. cit.; Ch. I, s.v. 

20. Ferrand, Relations de voyages et texts geographiques, 340. 

21. Nainar, op. cit; Ch. I. 

22. II. 389. 

23. Nainar, op. cit.; Ch. I, s.v. For the identification of the geographical names*, 
see Ibid . 

24. Vaij , 132.112. 

25. Mdnasollasa , III. 989. 

26. I. 42. 

27. Marco Polo, II. 393. 

28. II. 115. 

29. Chau Ju-Kua. op. cit. 92; Marco Polo, II. 375, 393, 398. 

30. Marco Polo, II. 395. 

31. Yaqut and Qazwiru in Nainar, op. cit, Ch. IV, s.v. 

32. Op. cit., 96. 


33. n. 395. 

34. Ibid, 398. 

35. Ibid , 393, 94. 

36. Nainar, op. cit, Ch. I., s.v. 

37. Op. cit., 96. 

38. II, 331-32. 

39. Ill, 1017-20. 

40. Op. cit., 92. 

41. II, 398. 

42. Op. cit, 93. 

43. Op. cit., 88. 

44. II, 389. 

45. Quoted by Abul Fida in Nainar, op. cit., 55-56. 

46. Op. cit, 96. 

47. II, 361. 

48. II, 144-45. 

49. On the above, see Panchanan Niyogi, Iron in Ancient India, 21-30*. 

50. Ill, 1146-47. 

51. Ill, 1685-86, 1691. 

52. See above, pp. 14, 19 ft; HIED, II. 35. 

53. Vaij, 44. 37-41; Abh , 424-26, 129 f. 

54. II. 403 f. 

55. II. 360. 

56. HIED , III. 32. 

57. II. 370. 


58. On the above, see Nainar, op. cit, s.v. 

59. Quoted in Chau Ju-Kua, op. cit., intr., 24 and 91 n. 

60. Op. cit, 89. 

61. Palembang in Sumatra. 

62. Op. cit, 88. 

63. II. 390. 


528 



65. II. 386. 


66. Eli, the Mt. d’Eli of the Portuguese writers, modern Elimalai, lay in the terri¬ 
tory of the kings of the Southern Mushaka dynasty, whose capital was Kolam 
or Pandalayani-Kollam ( ARSIE , 1929-30, p. 86, summarising the data of the 
recently published Sanskrit work, the Mushikavamsa ). 

67. II. 398. 

68. II. 393. 

69. On Idrisi’s geographical notices with their identifications, see Nainar, op. cit,. 
ch. I, s.v. 

70. El, VII. 197-8. 

71. R. H. Major, India in the Fifteenth Century, intr. xlv-1. 

12. I. 107. 

73. Ibid, II. 450, 

74. II. 412. 

75. II. 234. 

76. 132.111. 

77. II. 442, 445. 

78. Ibid, 390. 

79. Ibid , 272, 284. 

80. Ibid , 395, 398. 

81. Ibid, 390. 

82. Ibid, 284. 

83. 42.21. 

84. 43.25-33. 

85. II. 390. 

86. Ibid , 24, 132, 152, 157, 176, 181. 

87. III. 1019. 

88. III. 1018. 

89. Vaij, 111-12. 94-96; Abh, 499. 300; Manasollasa. IV. 669-75. 

89a.Chau Ju-Kua, op. cit 91 n; Marco Polo, I. 83; II. 340, 370, 395, 43p, 444, 450. 

90. HIED , II. 33-34. 

91. Estimated by Yule at 550 “Western dinaras” or saggi of Marco Polo, II. 349 n. 

92. II. 340. 

93. X. 83. 

94. Estimated by Yule to be £ 193. 

95. II. 340, 345, 450. 

96. R. H. Major, loc. cit . 

97. I. 107. 

98. Op. cit., 92. 

99. See pp. 517 ff. 

100. Vij. and Anar, on Yaj, II. 185-192: SC, III. 520-33. 

101. Cf. El, XVIII. 190 f, XIX. 21 f. for the reigns of the Western Chidukyas of 
Vatapi and the Yadavas of Devagiri respectively. 

102. ARSIE, 201 of 1905, 161 of 1907, 182 of 1926, 196 of 1928, 15 and 16 of 1935-36, 35 
and 77 of 1936-37, 

103. Vol. IV, p. 405. 

104. MAR . 1930, No. 53. 

105. Vol. IV, p, 405; K. A. N. Sastri, Colas, II. 1.419. 

106. EC, VII, SK. 118. 

107. ARSIE , 256 of 1912. 

108. ARSIE, 342 of 1912. 

109. K. A. N. Sastri’s tr., op. cit, 421. 

110. El VTI, 197-98. 

111. EC, IV, Hg. No. 17; VII, SK. No. 118; ARSIE, 256 of 1912. 

112. See pp. 19 f. 

113. See above, pp. 516 ff. 

114. II. 331. 


S, E,—34 


529 


CHAPTER XX 

ART* 

1. ARCHITECTURE 

1. Formation of the Traditional Temple Styles 

The Indian Silpasastras 1 recognise three main styles of tem¬ 
ples, known as the Nagara , the Dravida and the Vesara. The des¬ 
criptions given of them are, however, vague and inadequate, and 
it is not possible at the present stage of our knowledge to equate 
the descriptions of the texts with any of the extant examples of 
Indian temple architecture. The term Dravida indicates that the 
names were primarily geographical. Various texts also contain pas¬ 
sages mentioning the respective regions in which the different 
styles were current, though some of the texts maintain that all the 
styles may be found in all the regions. 2 All the available texts are 
agreed on the point that the Nagara style was prevalent in the re¬ 
gion between the Himalayas and the Vindhyas. 3 The Dravida 
country is well known, and the texts rightly coniine the Dravida 
style to that part of the country lying between the river Krishna 
and cape Kanyakumarl. 4 As will be shown later, the temples 
erected in these two regions in the mediaeval period are sharply 
distinguished from each other, both as regards ground plan and 
elevation. The Nagarja and Dravida styles can thus be explained 
with reference to Northern India and the Dravida country respec¬ 
tively, and the characteristic form and features of each easily deter¬ 
mined. The term Vesara , however, is not free from vagueness. 
Some of the texts ascribe the Vesara style to the country between 
the Vindhyas and the river Krishna. 6 In this region, or more 
properly in the region for some time under the royal dynasty of 
the Chalukyas, a separate style of temple architecture may be 
recognised—a style known to the archaeologists as the “Chalukyan”. 
This style, however, is a hybrid one, borrowing elements and fea¬ 
tures both from the Nagara and the Dravida styles, and does not be¬ 
come clearly distinguished before the eleventh century A.D. Thus, 
having regard to the evidence of monuments, the three styles of 
the Silpa texts can be resolved ultimately into two, viz . the Nagara 
and the Dravida■ 

The Silpa texts, as observed above, are of very little help to 
us in forming an idea of the characteristic form and features of 
thes e thre e styles. They are always distinguished in the texts by 

* The words “Text Figure” in this chapter indicate diagrams appearing at the 
end of the chapter. 


530 








their shapes. As for example, all the texts lay down that a Nagara 
temple is quadrangular all over, 6 i.e. from the base to the stupiJ 
But this feature of the plan is so very general and common that it 
is difficult to consider it as a sure and distinctive cognisance of a 
particular style of temple. The octagonal and circular shapes, 
respectively, of the Dravifa. and the Vesara styles are also too in¬ 
adequate to be regarded as sure and distinguishing marks for the 
styles concerned. Under the circumstances, one has to depend on 
the evidence of extant monuments for a knowledge of the parti¬ 
cular form and features of any one of the styles mentioned in the 
Silpasastras. 


A study of the temples of Northern India reveals two distinct 
features—one in planning and the other in elevation. In plan the tem¬ 
ple is always a square with a number of graduated projections in the 
middle of each side. These projections give it a cruciform shape 
with a number of re-entrant angles on each side. In elevation it exhi¬ 
bits a tower ( sikhara ), gradually inclining inwards in a convex curve. 
The projections in the plan are also carried upwards to the top of 
the sikhara, and thus there is a strong emphasis on vertical lines 
in elevation. On account of this and the prominence of the vigor¬ 
ous and unbroken outline of the tower, it is also known as the 
rekha sikhara. Widely distributed over a greater part of India, 
the Nagara style, as could be expected, exhibits distinct varieties 
and ramifications in different localities, conditioned by the diffe¬ 
rent lines of evolution and elaboration that each locality chose for 
itself. The cruciform plan and the curvilinear tower are, however, 
common to every mediaeval temple of Northern India, wherever it is 
situated and whatever its local stamp might be. In spite of elabora¬ 
tions and modifications in different localities, these two fundamental 
features are always present in a North Indian temple, and may be 
considered as distinctive characteristics of the Nagara style of 
temple architecture. Each of the projections on each face of the 
square plan leaves out a small portion at either corner, and thus 
are formed a number of projecting angles ( asras ) and facets (known 
as rathakas in Sanskrit and raihas in the canonical texts of Orissa). 
In this connection it should be observed that some of the texts 
describe a Nagara temple both as chaturasra (quadrangular) and as 
ayatasra. 8 The latter term has been interpreted as rectangular. 9 
It appears, however, that chaturasrayatdsra of the texts should 
better be taken to mean “square with angles projected” ( ayatasra , 
i.e. asras or angles made ayata or projected). This sense finds con¬ 
firmation in the plan of the Nagara temples which, on account of 
the projections on each face, may appropriately be described as a 
square with projecting angles (chaturasrayatdsra ). 


531 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


'SL 


The fundamental characteristics of a Ndgara temple are, as 
noted above, the cruciform plan and the curvilinear sikhara ; and 
the simplest archetype of this style may be found in a gro^p of 
shrines that were in existence in the sixth century AD The most 
representative examples of the group are the Dasavatara temple at 

PrXbl u 3nd ^ brick temple St B ^argaon (Uttar 

Pradeshh Though belonging to the later phase of the Gupta 

period, they present a distinct deviation from the archaic Gupta type 
of flat-roofed shrines in having each a low and stunted sikhara, 
gradually diminishing towards the top, over the square sanctum 
They may thus be classed with the later Northern Indian sikhara 
temples, of which they are surely the precursors. The Dasavatara 
emple presents again a novel feature, apart from the sikhara in 
the arrangement of three sculptured niches on the three walls 
each as a panel framed by two pilasters on either side. These 
25®“’ along With the projection of the door-frame in the front 
wall, appear to set off the wall in the middle of each face Such 
an arrangement may be regarded as the beginning of a device that 
subsequently developed into the practice of setting forward the 

Sib? AT- Gach Slde of the square, characteristic of the ground plan 
, e , a ® ara te mple of later days. One such projection may al- 

infhe MahaT^T 6 7 ^ brick temple at Bhit argaon and also 
n the Mahadeva temple at Nachna Kuthara, the latter being slight- 

ly latenn date (c. seventh century A.D.) than the Deogarh and the 

n-e baSv n d? mP S? ^ kbaras of the two earl y monuments 
me badly damaged. The Deogarh tower probably shows the use 

M-T r Tth amalaka 7 Whkh further Indicate a fairly big-sized dtna- 
laka as the crowning member of the sikhara —also an inseparable 

° f 'i 6 T lJara temple ' The P-jections on thebodyif 
ie sanctum, whether by sculptured niches or by regular but- 

abo S ve S ’ti aVe been . carried U P the b °dy of the tower in each of the 
’ . . ° examples. These features constitute two other essen 

the waS S o?the 3 the recessed frieze separating 

the walls of the sanctum cella from those of the tower may also be 

found m the early temples of the Ndgara style. The graceful and 

ZhTcZT M T eva temple at Nachna **** -twts a 

nefrest aporoaXto ? ° { } he /7 kara as * goes up, and offers the 
Sfc eleST Vi! u ° f the m9aTa St * le in aI1 character- 

; 1Ck temple of Laksh mana at Sirpur (Madhva 

Pradesh), contemporary to, or only slightly later than the Nachna 
Kuthara monument, also exhibits a form of the tower which is not 
far removed from that of a Ndgara temple. With its oSns and 
antecedents in the Gupta period^ the Ndgara style emerges in its 
typical form and characteristics by the eighth century A.D 


582 


• MiN/$r* 


ART 




The Dravida style was current in the south, 10 evidently in the 
Dravida country, 11 roughly the country between the river Krishna 
and Kanyakumart 12 (Cape Comorin). The texts merely lay down 
that a Dravida prasdda should be octagonal (some say hexagonal) 
from the neck to the top, 13 or, as one or two texts would enjoin, 
from the base to the top. 14 But such descriptions are too vague 
and hardly fit the facts. 16 

The outstanding and common characteristic of the temples of the 
Dravida country is the pyramidal elevation of the tower ( vimdna ), 
which consists of a multiplication of storey after storey, each a replica 
of the sanctum cella and slightly reduced in extent than the one 
below, ending in a domical member, technically known as the stiipi 
or stdpikd, as the crowning element. This storeyed arrangement 
of the tower in gradually receding stages may, therefore, be regard¬ 
ed as a distinct individuality of the Dravida style of temple, though 
in later phases of its history the stages become more and more com¬ 
pressed, so much so that they are almost hidden under a profusion 
of details which become characteristic of the subsequent evolution 
of the style. In plan the Dravida temple presents an inner square 
chamber as the sanctum cella within a bigger square enclosure, 
covered and roofed over, serving as the pradakshina (circumam- 
bulatory passage). The division of the external walls into niches 
by pilasters is also a characteristic element of South Indian temples. 
The convex roll cornice, with chaitya -window motifs, demarcating 
each of the stages, and the little pavilions around the upper storeys 
may also be regarded as peculiar features of the style. 1 he pillar¬ 
ed halls and corridors and the immense gopurams (gateways) are 
invariably associated with temples that are considerably late, and 
may be left out of the present discussion. 

Many of the distinctive elements of what came to be known 
as the Dravida temple style may be found in the second group of 
Gupta temples, mentioned above, 15a which exhibits a building 
consisting of an inner sanctum with a covered pradakshina forming 
a bigger square around. The roof is flat, and in several examples 
(the Parvatl temple at Nachna Kuthara, the Lad Khan, the Kont 
Gudi and the Meguti temples at Aihole, etc.) we find an upper 
storey, which being placed above the inner sanctum cella is neces¬ 
sarily set back. These storeyed structures are in some respects 
analogous to the storeyed pavilions, shown in relief, on the Audum- 
bara coins from the Kangra valley of about the first century A.D. 16 
Structurally, however, such temples cannot be dated earlier than 
the fourth century A.D., and in the early structural buildings we 
find just the rudiments of accumulating storey after storey, in gra¬ 
dually reduced stages, that form the nucleus of the Dravida style of 


533 


mtsTfy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


§L 


The plan of the inner sanctum with a cloistered gallery 
a special characteristic common to this type of Gupta 


na. 

bund is 

temples and a temple of the Dravida style. Again, the scheme of 
the division of the walls of the Dravida temple by pilasters and 
niches may have its origin in the peculiar device of enclosing the 
pradakshina square with thin slabs of stone socketted to pilasters 
placed at intervals, as we have in the Lad Khan at Aihole. In the 
Jain temple of Meguti such a decorative scheme of the exterior 
walls becomes clearly established. The Lad Khan as well as the 
Meguti further show the use of the roll cornice carved with well¬ 
shaped chaitya arches—an essential motif that came to be regard¬ 
ed as a distinguishing mark of the Dravida style of temples. Al¬ 
ready, then, in the Gupta period the distinctive characteristics of 
what came to be subsequently known as the Dravida temple style 
may be recognised in a well-defined group or type of temples. All 
the early examples of the type, however, are found outside the 
limits of the Dravida country, and the association of the type with 
that country is an event that is still to come. But there can be no 
doubt that the Dravida temple is an adaptation of the earlier storey¬ 
ed form of the Gupta temple, enriched further by the addition of 
new elements in the matter of details, which may be said to be of 
local origin. 


It should be remembered, however, that the regional defini¬ 
tion of the two styles comes later, and is not clear as yet. The 
archetypes of what came to be known as the Dravida style had 
originally nothing to do with the Dravida country, and appear first 
in the Deccan and Central India, occasionally also in Northern 
India. Even in the seventh century A.D. the sikhara, archetype of 
the Nagara style, and the storeyed forms occur side by side at 
Aihole, Pattadakal, and Badami. The geographical delimitation of 
the two styles is thus yet to come. 


2. Nagara Style 

The Nagara style of temple architecture had a long and varied 
history. Temples, with distinctive characteristics of the style as 
mentioned above, are found to be widely distributed over the 
greater part of India. According to the Silpasastras the geographi¬ 
cal extent of the Ndgara style coincided with Northern India, 
i.e. the region between the Himalayas and the Vindhyas, and Fer- 
gusson’s nomenclature, the Aryavarta style, is nearly approximate 
in this connection. Actually, however, the style transcends the 
canonical limit far to the south, and temples belonging to the style 
may be seen from the Himalayas in the north to the Bijapur District 


534 


misrfiy 



ART 


in the south, from the Punjab in the west to Bengal in the east. 
With such a vast geographical extent it is natural that there are 
local variations and ramifications in the formal development of the 
style in the different regions, although such local developments do 
not alter materially its basic characteristics. Such variations are 
caused by local conditions, by different directions in development, 
as well as by assimilation of extraneous trends wherever these 
made themselves felt. On account of such wide distribution and 
varied developments, a consecutive historical treatment of the style 
is not possible, except on a regional basis. The different phases of 
the Nagara style will, therefore, be dealt with geographically. 


A. Orissa 


Of all the regional developments of the Nagara style that of 
Orissa is one of the most remarkable. From the seventh to the 
thirteenth century A.D. innumerable temples were erected in Orissa, 
and it has been truly observed that “there are perhaps more tem¬ 
ples now in Orissa than in all the rest of Hindustan put together . 
The activity centred round the sacred city of Bhuvanesvara 
(Bhuvaneswar), a temple town which alone contains hundreds of 
temples, large and small, in various stages of preservation. Along 
the coast the movement extends in the north-east and south-west, 
roughly covering the area of the modern State of Orissa. Circum¬ 
scribed within this area, these temples form, to quote Fergusson, 
“one of the most compact and homogeneous architectural groups in 
India”. 17 This prolific and sustained architectural activity was 
due in a large measure to the patronage of the different dynasties 
of kings, and the preservation of so many fine examples, to the com¬ 
parative immunity of the country from Muslim inroads till a late 
period. The result is that there is more or less a continuous series 
of monuments which enables us to trace the history of this local 
development of the Nagara style with a certain amount of exact¬ 
ness and precision. One other singular fact is that the Orissan 
temples, in spite of an unbroken history of several centuries, 
remain nearest to the original archetype, while other regional 
manifestations of the Nagara style indicate great modifications and 
transformations in course of evolution. As such, the Orissan group 
may be said to represent, to some extent, a pure form of the origi¬ 
nal Nagara style. Its graceful proportions, solemn and unbroken 
outline, and elegant design and decorative scheme enhance the 
beauty of the original archetype, but without any loss of balance, 
strength, or stability. Not only historically, but architectonically 
too, it is the most interesting and instructive series of all the temple 


535 



forms of the Ndgara style, and it is only natural and logical that a 
study of the development of the style should begin with Orissa. 


The earliest temple in Orissa, like the older type of the Gupta 
period, is a single building consisting of a square sanctum, topped 
by a curvilinear tower, with one buttress-like projection in the 
middle of each face. The typical Orissan temple, however, has, 
in addition, the porch hall in front distinguished by a pyramidal roof 
(known locally as mukha-maiidfipa or jagamohana). In the early 
temples the porch hall appears to have been absent. In the Parasu- 
ramesvara temple at Bhu vanes vara (Fig. 3) there is a rectangular 
porch hall roofed over by two sloping tiers forming a clerestory; 
but this porch, too, appears to have been a later addition. In sub- 
' sequent examples, however, the porch hall became a necessary 
concomitant of the Orissan temples. The sanctum with the curvi¬ 
linear tower is known as the rekha deul, whereas the jagamohana 
with the pyramidal roof is called the bhadra or pi$hd deul. Each of 
these two components offers a counterplay in the design of the 
other. 

Orissa had its own canons of architecture,—a set of literature 
which has been edited by a competent scholar who made a thorough 
study of it with the help of local craftsmen, supplementing it by 
personal field observations. 18 As a result of the study of the 
canons the building art in Orissa is found to have a separate and dis¬ 
tinct nomenclature of its own. Each part and each section of the 
building had its particular name, and those describing the essential 
members may, with a certain amount of appropriateness, be used 
with reference to the other temple groups of the Ndgara style. 

The sanctum and the jagamohana in Orissa may each be divided 
along the vertical axis into four distinct sections, namely the 
pishta (pedestal or the platform on which the temple stands), the 
bada (the cube of the sanctum cella or of the porch hall), the ga\i4i 
(or the sikhara, the tower), and the mastaka (or the crowning ele¬ 
ments). The pishta does not appear to have been an essential ele¬ 
ment, as there are important examples where it has been found to 
be absent. The bcida rises perpendicularly straight up to a certain 
height and, in case of the rekha deul, merges into the gandi 
or the sikhara, which gradually inclines inwards in a convex curve. 
Usually there is a section, known as the baran^la, demarcating the 
bo#a from the gandi . The gandi of the rekha is further subdivid¬ 
ed into a number of sections, literally known as the bhumis or 
planes, by ribbed elements at the corners. This ribbed element 
ho doubt represents a sectional amid, known as bhumi-amla for 
demarcating the bhumis, and a substitute, in the body of the gandi, 


536 


MIN ISfy 


ART 



of the enormous spheroid stone, amalaka-sild , that caps the tower. 
In the bhadra deul the gandi is composed of a number of piqlhas or 
horizontal platforms, compressed in height and piled up in the form 
of a pyramid, so that they decrease in size from the bottom upwards. 
I\he pidhas may be arranged in two or more sections ( potala ). 
from the top of the gandi in either case ( rekha and bhadra) , rise 
the different crowning elements, which may be collectively termed 
as the mastaka . First, there is a recessed portion known as the 
beki or the neck (Sanskrit-kantha); above this is the amla (San¬ 
skrit dmalaka-sila or amalasaraka), which is a flattened spheroid 
ribbed at the edges. In the full-fledged bhadra deul an enormous 
member, shaped like a bell and sometimes ribbed at the edges, 
intervenes between the beki and the amid . Next to the amid 
there is the khapuri (literally the skull of the head), which is a flat 
domical member resembling an unfolded umbrella. Above it is 
placed the kalasa or water jar, an important auspicious object in 
Indian religion and ritual. The bdda as well as the gandi is square 
in cross section all through, but the crowning elements are circular, 
and above them all appears the dhvaja or dyudha, i.e. the emblem 
of the particular deity to whom the temple is consecrated. 

In plan the sanctum as well as the jagamohana is plainly 
square inside, but on the exterior the walls exhibit several buttress¬ 
like projections in the middle of each face, on account of which the 
ground plan assumes what may be called a cruciform shape. Each 
such projection leaves out a portion at both the ends, and hence the 
plan is also one of projecting and re-entrant angles. Where there is 
only one such projection in the middle of each face, the wall is 
divided into three vertical sections (literally known as rathas or 
rathakas ), and such a plan is hence known as triratha or composed 
of three rathas , the two on either side being on the same plane and 
the other being set forward a little. In a similar way there are 
pancharatha , saptaratha and navaratha plans, according as there are 
two, three, or four such projections on each face of the cube of the 
bada. The projections on the bdda run along the entire height of 
the gan$i, and the corresponding sections on the body of the latter 
are known as the pagas. Usually there runs a narrow depression 
between the vertical sections, thus demarcating and accentuating the 
projections still more. 

The description given above is more or less true of every tem¬ 
ple of Orissa, early or late. The tendency in evolution is towards 
a greater elaboration, minuter details, and a pronounced accentua¬ 
tion of height. The oldest specimens of the extant temples in Orissa 
exhibit each a triratha plan, and the bada is subdivided into three 


537 


MINIS 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


_jments, placed one above the other along the vertical axis, namely, 
the pabhdga (from pdda-bhdga y the portion of the foot, i.e. the 
plinth), the jangha (shin, i.e. the perpendicular wall portion) and 
the baran$a } i.e. the section that intervenes between the bo$a and 
the gandi. Several temples of this shape and form may still be 
found in Orissa. 


The Parasuramesvara temple at Bhuvanesvara is usually re¬ 
garded as the oldest among the temples of Orissa. Mr. Manomohan 
Ganguli observes that it is probably “dated in the 5th or 6th 
century A.D. at the latest”. 19 This date is palpably wrong, and 
on the basis of a palaeographical analysis of the inscriptions on the 
Navagraha lintel over the doorway of the sanctum the late Mr. R. 
D. Banerji placed the temple in the eighth century A.D., 20 a date that 
seems very probable from the stylistic considerations of the 
temple and its sculptures. Recently another scholar has tried to 
place the temple about the seventh century A.D. on the same palaeo¬ 
graphical grounds. 21 The story of Orissan temples, however, goes 
further back and examples of a still earlier date may be found at 
Bhuvanesvara in the Satrughnesvara group of temples (Fig. 1), just 
in front of the Ramesvara. Though extremely damaged, a straight- 
edged contour of the sikhara may be recognised in each case, and this, 
together with a general appearance of bareness and simplicity, indi¬ 
cates an earlier date for these temples, perhaps not far removed 
from that of the Dasavatara temple at Deogarh. Stylistically, 
again, the tiny shrine, once standing by the side of the Vindusaro- 
vara tank (Fig. 2), appears to have been slightly older than the Para¬ 
suramesvara, though the two temples are so very alike that it is very 
difficult to come to any definite conclusion on this point. The style 
of the carvings of this little temple, now lost, belongs very probably 
to an earlier date, and on this account an earlier date for the temple 
may very plausibly be postulated. 


The small but exquisitely decorated Parasuramesvara temple 
(Fig. 3) may, however, be regarded as a representative specimen 
among the early Orissan temples, and from it should properly begin 
the story of the development of Orissan temple architecture. The 
sanctum is triratha in plan, but on each face there are two subsidiary 
niches on either side of the central niche accommodated in the but¬ 
tress projection in the middle. This mode may just be an anticipa¬ 
tion of the subsequent pancharatha plan. The pabhaga or the 
plinth consists of three simple mouldings. The jangha is occupied 
by three niches on each face, each capped by a tiered superstruc¬ 
ture. The baranda or the section demarcating the bdda 
from the gandi, consists of a narrow recessed frieze of couples of 


538 



MIN ISTfty 



human figures alternating with chess-board patterned panels. 
The gandi is low and stunted, and begins to curve inward from, 
the very bottom, thus resulting in a gradual curvilinear outline. The 
projection of the central niche is carried up and forms the raha-paga 
(i.e. the central papa), while two intermediate pagas (anuraha- 
pagas) are formed on either side as a result of the continuation, 
though not in the same alignment, of the projections of the subsi¬ 
diary niches on the two sides. At the outermost or the corner 
pagas (kcmaka-pagas) the gandi is divided into five planes or stages, 
literally bhumis, by bhumi-amlas. Above the fifth bhumi there is 
a flat tier, known as the bisama, also called the vedZ or altar. The 
gandi is throughout square in cross section, and the sharp edges at 
the corners as well as those of the ratha-paga projections are rigid¬ 
ly maintained. On account of the gradual inward inclination, the 
gandi or the tower ends with the vedi in a much smaller square, and 
next begins the circular section of the crowning elements, the 
enormous amalaka-sila having an appearance of being supported at 
each of the four corners on the figure of a seated lion with two 
hinder parts, technically known in Orissa as the dopichha simha . 
Nothing now remains above the amalaka , but it is possible that it 
was topped by a prism-shaped object, which is the usual finial in 
the early examples of the Orissan group. The height of the 
temple is approximately three times the inside length of the garbha - 
griha or the sanctum, and in form and appearance, in plan and ele¬ 
vation, it has but very little difference with the earlier examples of 
the sikhara type noticed elsewhere. Another significant fact is 
that the bisama, i.e. the tier at which the gaiidi ends at the top, in 
conformity with the early sikhara temples, is square without the 
indentations of the paga projections on the body of the gan<ji ., 

The long and rectangular jagamohana, preceding the sanctum, 
was very probably a subsequent addition, and the joining between 
the two is a bather haphazard piece of work. The rectangular hall 
is topped by a sloping roof formed by flat stone slabs having in 
the centre a sort of clerestory supported on two rows of three 
pillars each in the interior. The Orissan temple is essentially 
astylar and the pillars have seldom a place in the composition of 
the Orissan temples. The pillars in the jagamohana accordingly dis¬ 
appear along with the evolution of the usual type of pyramidal 
jagamohana characteristic of Orissa. The porch hall is approached 
by three doorways, one each on the larger sides and the third in 
front, the last being subsequently closed up by a sculptured slab 
forming a grilled window. Besides, light is admitted into the interior 
of the hall by means of a latticed window of a chess-board pattern 
in one of the longer walls. The sculptured decorations of both the 


539 



MINlSr^ 



jagamohana and the garbha-griha are in elegant taste and, though 
widely separated in time, the Gupta flavour is not yet exinct. 


The temple is not large, the garbha-griha being only 20 feet at its 
base, the entire length with the jagamohana, 48 feet, and the height 
of the sikhara from the base to the top, only 44 feet. The method of 
construction is extremely simple, with stone masonry of large size 
set without mortar and kept in position by their weight and balance, 
strengthened further by a system of interlocking flanges. Simple 
though its construction is, the methods employed in this small shrine 
remained in vogue in Orissa, and were followed in the subsequent 
period even in raising up such enormous piles of structures, as the 
great Lihgaraja at Bhuvanesvara and the far-famed Sun temple at 
Konarak (Konarka). 


The twin temples at Gandharadi in the old Baudh State may 
be mentioned as the next in point of date to the Parasuramesvara, to 
which they are exactly similar in plan as well as in elevation. 
Though there is no clerestory, the roof of the jagamohana rises in 
two receding stages of sloping tiers. A pi$ha with three sloping tiers 
may be seen at Baramba (Cuttack District). In this arrangement 
may be recognised the beginning of the stupendous pyramidal form 
of the typical Orissan jagawohanas . Though the scheme of orna¬ 
mentation is not more detailed and advanced than that of the Para- 
£uramesvara, the rounded corners and the bevelled edges of the 
pa gas indicate that the tendency to refinement from harsh to softer 
contours is well under way. 


The next temple that should be mentioned ii the little shrine 
of MukteSvara (Fig. 4), lying very close to the Parasuramesvara 
at Bhuvanesvara, at a place called Siddharanya or the “forest of 
the Perfect”. It is situated within a quadrangular court enclosed by 
a low wall with panelled sides and battlemented coping. The ap¬ 
proach is through an elegant torana (Fig. 5) or archway supported 
on two richly carved columns rising from a paved court. The 
columns are built in sections and consist each of a square base, a 
sixteen-sided shaft, and a capital consisting of an dmalaka with a 
spread out cruciform vedikd as a support for the arch. The last is 
semi-circular in shape, but built in transverse section with over¬ 
sailing courses. The ends of the arch are shaped as makara heads 
and both the faces are elegantly carved with floral patterns, minia¬ 
ture niches with human heads peeping out, and a pair of female 
figures in recumbent attitude occupying the entire segment of the 
arch. This ornamental appendage to the Muktesvara is unlike any¬ 
thing in Orissa, and the tradition that it was intended for purposes 


540 


ART 

of swinging the god on festive occasions may have some basis 
of truth. 

The temple of Muktesvara is closely similar in design to that 
of the Parasuramesvara, and, like it, stands on a low plinth. The 
plan of the sanctum is, however, a regular pancharatha and the 
jagamohana partakes more of the typical Orissan form of the pidha. 
deul. The latter is surmounted by a pyramidal roof, consisting of 
gradually receding tiers, piled up one above the other, and ultimately 
crowned by the auspicious jar (kalasa) with the majestic figures of 
lions over the pediments of the projections on the three sides. 

The corners of the sanctum tower are carefully rounded off, and 
the edges of the ratha-paga projections are bevelled to a certain 
extent, with the result that the harsh contours of the earlier exam¬ 
ples give place to a really graceful and softened outline of the 
sikhara. In keeping with this, the exterior surface of the temple 
is very richly carved with a luxuriance of ornamental detail sculp¬ 
tured and finished with the greatest care and taste. Every scrap of 
carving is clean-cut and distinctive. Particularly interesting are the 
fine interlacings of a minute design, resembling the chaitya- window, 
which appear on the intermediate ratha-paga projections as well as 
on the upper section of the raha-paga on each face. Executed with 
the greatest skill the design takes the form of a very rich fretwork, 
singular in its appearance in Orissa but a rather common mode of 
ornamentation in the temples of Osia in Rajputana. The bold design, 
consisting of a couple of rounded dwarfish figures on either side of a 
highly ornate chaitya- window device topped by a kirttimukha (Fig. 
6), that appears on each of the rahd-pagas, is also superb and master¬ 
ful in treatment and animation. Moreover, the floral bands, the 
scroll works, etc. lavishly display a remarkable excellence in design 
and a perfect delicacy of execution. The reliefs are bold and im¬ 
pressive; the statuettes jutting out, as it were, of the surface are 
vigorous and full of action, and exhibit charming forms. 

The temple of Muktesvara is one of the smallest of the 
Bhuvanesvara group, being barely 35 feet high, and the sanctum only 
7 feet 6 inches square on the inside. But the parts are so beautifully 
adjusted to one another that the disposition of the whole is elegant 
as well as effective. Further, the artist has adapted his ornaments 
to the scale of his monument in so clever a way that the eye fails 
to detect the smallness of the structure. Hence, in spite of its 
modest size the Muktesvara may be regarded as the most brilliant 
of its class, and it is not without reason that it has been so enthu¬ 
siastically praised by different critics. Fergusson, than whom there 
can be no better judge, describes it as the “gem of Orissan archi- 

541 




MiNisr^ 



Tecture ”, 22 while Rajendra Lala Mitra extols it as “the handsomest 
—a charming epitome of the perfection of Orissan architecture”. 23 
Both of them saw the temple in a dilapidated state and overgrown 
with jungle. But the decay and overgrowth of centuries, though 
they had furrowed its brow and wrought wrinkles on its glistening 
surface, could not entirely efface its pristine beauty and solemn 
grandeur. 

The Muktesvara marks an advance on the form presented by 
the Parasuramesvara and represents the early phase of architectural 
activity in Orissa at its maturity. This advance, however, does not 
signify as yet any definite break with, or departure from, the tradi¬ 
tions and form of the early prototype, and hence the interval bet¬ 
ween the dates of the two temples could not have been very long. 
Scholars are usually inclined to place the Muktesvara temple about 
A.D. 950, i.e, nearly two centuries after the date of the Parasu¬ 
ramesvara. This date, however, appears to be much too late, archi¬ 
tectonically. The exquisite carvings of this pretty little shrine also 
tell the same tale. On these considerations the longest interval that 
separated the two temples does not seem to have been more than 
a century. 


Temples almost similar in shape and design may be found at 
Bhuvanesvara and at other places in Orissa. They range in date 
between the eighth and ninth centuries A.D., and casually this early 
form persists even up to the tenth. It has to be borne in mind 
that temples of this class, no doubt an early manifestation of the 
Nagara style in Orissa, are found to be widely distributed over a 
greater part of India. This is not at all surprising, as each locality 
derived it from a common archetype, current and in vogue in the 
Gupta and post-Gupta periods, and none of them can be said to have 
developed as yet any local and regional characteristic. 


But this plain and early form of the Nagara temple in Orissa 
undergoes a distinct transformation, as a result of evolution, into 
a novel and elaborate type, which may be termed as peculiarly 
Orissan. The tendency in evolution is towards an elaboration and 
refinement of the simpler design of the earlier temple and also to¬ 
wards an accentuation of height. The elaboration is noticed not 
only in the greater variegation of the ground plan, obtained by add¬ 
ing to the number of projections, but also in that of elevation where 
the exterior facade is divided into a larger number of sections along 
the vertical axis. Beginning from the triratha, the plan is gradually 
elaborated into the pancharatha, the saptaratha and even to the nava- 
ratha. Each of these rathas again is further subdivided into a number 
of smaller facets. From the standpoint of elevation the earlier 


542 


' ART 

Orissan temple, in conformity with its archetype, always shows a 
threefold division of the bada, —the pabhaga, the jangha and the 
baratuja. The later Orissan temple, however, invariably exhibits a 
five-fold division of the bada, the jangha itself being divided into two 
sections, the lower ( tala-jangha) and the upper (upara-jdhgha), by a 
course of mouldings, known as the bcindhana or the bond, about its 
middle height. Correspondingly, the mouldings of the pabhaga. and 
those of the baranda increase in number, the former consisting of five 
and the latter of seven in almost every important Orissan temple of 
the later period. In the gandi. the bhumis also increase in number 
and in contour it takes a more perpendicular rise with an abrupt 
inward bend towards the top. The greater variegation in the eleva¬ 
tion of the temple is no doubt necessitated by an urge for increased 
height. 

Along with such minute demarcation of the different elements 
and sections, as mentioned above, there was correspondingly 
a greater variety of decorative detail, and the whole exterior of 
the bada all around is not only covered with rich and elegant mould¬ 
ings, but also with pilasters, niches and figures—human, animal and 
composite—each having its proper and appropriate place in the 
design. The accentuation of height is recognised in the multipli¬ 
cation of mouldings as well as in the general fonn and appearance 
of the gan4i or the sikhara. In the early temples the ratio between 
the length of the sanctum and the total height of the temple is appro¬ 
ximately 1:3, as we have in the Parasuramesvara. But in the tem¬ 
ples which, in plan (multiplication of rathas) as well as in elevation 
(five sections of the bada, multiplication of the mouldings, greater 
details in decoration, etc.), exhibit late features in evolution, the 
ratio increases from 1:4 to 1:5, and in the magnificent Sun temple 
at Konarak the estimated ratio is approximately 1:7. A regular 
correspondence between elaboration and heightening may be observ¬ 
ed all through the history of Orissan architecture. 

Again, a refinement and delicacy of the outline may 
be noticed in the gradual rounding off of the edges at the corners 
as well as in the ratha-paga projections. But in such attempts at 
softening off, the architects took especial care not to break up the 
outline, and the unbroken contour of the tall tower, together with 
the accentuated verticalism of the ratha-paga projections, gave an 
impression of aspiring height and grandeur. In this rounding off of 
the corners and of the edges of the projections may be logically 
traced the origin of the practice of decorating the exterior with 
miniature replicas of sikharas (ahga-sikharas) round the main one. 
The corner pagas, rounded off and with bhumi-amlas at the different 

543 







stages, naturally take the shape of miniature rekhas, and soon these 
begin to appear on the surface of the gandi all around. Thus do the 
different stages of the spire simulate the main one by repeating them¬ 
selves round the body of the gan^i and quite in a logical course too. 
The temple of Rajaram at Bhuvanesvara exhibits a cluster of smaller 
towers round the body of the main gandi (Fig. 10). This may appear 
to be an exotic growth in Orissa, being rather very rare in that 
area. This novel arrangement may be explained as the natural out¬ 
come of a logical evolution following a process of elaboration, refine¬ 
ment and decoration as outlined above. The effect, however, did 
not prove to be happy, as the different miniatures round the body 
of the main tower broke up and dissolved the forceful outline of the 
temple, an outline that was more pleasing and architecturally more 
sound. It might be, that for this reason the process was not followed 
up in Orissa; but it had its full play in Central India, where the 
aspiring outline of the rekha tower was almost effaced by an 
exuberance of turrets clinging to the body of the main sikhara, and 
thus breaking up its contour. The Orissan architects knew where to 
stop, and as soon as it became apparent that the process of evolution, 
when carried to a logical culmination, would lead to a loss of archi¬ 
tectural effect, they gave up the attempt and confined the miniature 
rekhas to the anurdha-pagas only, and casually to the rahd-paga of the 
front facade. They, however, took care that these miniature replicas 
were not obtrusive enough to break up the linear ascent of the 
main tower. 

Thus the sikhara temple evolved a particular and individual 
form in Orissa of which the main features were the five-fold division 
of the hdfla and the miniature replicas of the rekha-sikhara ( ahga- 
sikhara) on the anurdhd-pagas of the main gandi. The rampant figure 
of a lion oh an elephant (gaja-simha), projecting from each face of 
the gav,di, and caryatids, known usually as deul-charanis, above the 
bisama, supporting or appearing to support the heavy amalaka-sila, 
also occur as invariable accompaniments of this characteristic Orissan 
type of temple, and may be recognised to have been among its dis¬ 
tinctive features. The characteristic type of Orissan temple also ex¬ 
hibits an almost perpendicular ascent of the rekha up to a great 
height, taking a pronounced curve only quite hear the top. The in¬ 
crease in the number of sections along the vertical axis is, no doubt, 
a necessary corollary to the increased height of the temple, and an 
aspiration for height is particularly felt all through the course of 
evolution. The above features, being peculiar only to Orissa, may 
be said to be typically Orissan. They begin to apear from the tenth 
century A.D. The five-fold division of the bdda is characteristic not 


544 


only of the body of the garbha-griha but also of that of the 
jagamohana. 

The emergence of the typical Orissan form of the temple may 
be studied with reference to several instructive examples at Bhuva- 
nesvara, namely the Siddhesvara (Fig. 7), the Kedaresvara and the 
Brahmesvara. The Siddhesvara and the Kedaresvara are two decayed 
temples of medium height situated, like the Muktesvara, within the 
precincts of the Siddharanya, and look almost alike in appearance. 
Like the Muktesvara each of the temples is pancharatha in plan. A 
five-fold division of the bdtfa has, however, been obtained by dividing 
the jangha into two sections by three courses of horizontal mouldings 
(bdndhana) about the middle height, though the central ratha forms 
one unit consisting of the usual niche with a tiered superstructure 
reaching the lowermost course of the baranda. The number of mould¬ 
ings in the pdbhdga has increased to conventional five, and the baran¬ 
da, instead of being a recessed frieze as in the earlier temple, has 
taken the form of a number of mouldings projected and recessed 
alternately. At the bottom the gandi is surrounded by miniature 
rekhas, one on each paga, and the figure of a rampant lion (jhampa- 
simha) may be seen projecting from the raha-paga on each face. This 
is a motif that is new in appearance, but a variation of which, the 
lion rampant on an elephant (gaja-simka), became a distinctive cha¬ 
racteristic of later Orissan temples. This particular feature is absent 
in the temples of the earlier group, e.g. the Paraiuramesvara, the 
Muktesvara, etc., where one usually finds instead an inset sculpture 
depicting a particular legend associated with the divinity to whom 
the temple was consecrated. In the Muktesvara, on the front face, a 
sedent lion is placed above the prominent design consisting of the 
figure of a kirttimukha between two dwarfish gana figures, This may 
indicate the beginnings of such a practice, and in the Siddhesvara- 
Kedaresvara group four rampant lions on the four sides of the gandi 
may be recognised to be an advancement on the former design. Above 
the bisama on each rdhd-paga is placed a grinning figure seated on 
haunches, which appears to carry the dmalaka-sila as caryatids do. 
It is these figures which later on came to be known as deul-chdranis. 
Next to the dmalaka-sila. there is the flattened dome-shaped section, 
known as the khapuri, surmounted by the kalasa and the distinctive 
emblem (dyudha) of the god as the crowning finial. It has to be borne 
In mind, however, that the kalasa and the finial are absent in the 
earlier group. The small temple by the side of the Vindusarovara 
(now collapsed) had a prism-shaped object, not unlike the phallic 
emblem, surmounting the amalaka. The Parasuramesvara also possi¬ 
bly had a similar object as the crowning member of the tower. The 
Muktesvara is now found to be crowned by a kalasa, but it is not 

545 

S. E.—8S 




MINIS/*,, 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


n definitely whether it was there originally. The kalasa, an 
auspicious object in Hindu ritual, is a sacred element and there can 
be little doubt that its appearance in conjunction with the distinctive 
emblem of the divinity has been dictated by a sacerdotal necessity. 
Leaving aside the rather doubtful case of the Muktesvara, these two 
important features of the typical Orissan temple are for the first 
time met with in the Siddhesvara-Kedaresvara group. Compared 
to the Muktesvara, with its finished appearance, the Siddhesvara and 
the Kedaresvara, with their thick-set and heavy-shouldered sikharas 
and a general coarseness of ornament, may appear to be rather ar¬ 
chaic. But the features mentioned above clearly mark them, along 
with the Brahmesvara, as a stage in transition from the early Nagara 
form to the typically Orissan one. They present us, in many respects, 
with the beginnings of those individual features that finally became 
established as the distinctive characteristics of the typical Orissan 
temple. Chronologically they may roughly be placed in the tenth 
century A.D. 

The Brahmesvara temple (Fig. 8) with its more finished appear¬ 
ance belongs also to the phase of transition like the Siddhesvara and 
the Kedaresvara. According to an inscription, now lost, it was built 
by Kolavatl, mother of king Uddyotakesari, in the eighteenth year of 
the latter’s reign, which may be placed about the middle of the 
eleventh century A.D. 24 Situated within an enclosure and with four- 
subsidiary shrines ( chaturamarakuli ) at the four corners it makes a 
regular panchayatana group. Although belonging to the same phase 
as the Siddhesvara and Kedaresvara the main temple marks an ad¬ 
vance on both. Apart from its more refined appearance due to the 
rounding off of the sharp edges, the rekha gandi in the Brahmesvara, 
instead of showing a gradual inward curve as in the earlier group, 
rises almost perpendicularly up to a greater portion of its height and 
takes a pronounced bend only towards the top, a contour that is not 
far off from that of the celebrated Lingaraja at Bhuvanesvara. The 
graded heights of the av.ga-sikh.aras on the papas at the bottom of the 
gandi introduce pleasing variations to the rather monotonous effect 
of such a feature in the Siddhesvara-Kedaresvara group where they 
are found to have made their first appearance. The klrttimukha as 
the pedestal of the projecting figure of the rampant lion also appears 
to mark an advance on the design, just a step prior to the evolution 
of the usual conventional motif of the gaja-simha. The jagamohana, 
too, though approximating in shape to those of the Muktesvara, the 
Siddhesvara and the Kedaresvara, has a more refined appearance. 
Further, it introduces new and significant features supplying a defi¬ 
nite connection with the future development of the typical pidha 
deni. The top is surmounted by a domical member and crowned by 


546 


MIN tSTfi y 


ART 



the armlaka-sila and the auspicious jar, exactly as in the jagamoha- 
nas of the typical Orissan temples. But the different elements of 
the superstructure still show rather an assortment of individual 
members without any conscious attempt at co-ordination and inte¬ 
gration that are to come later. Thus, in its characteristic features 
and appearance, the Brahmesvara offers us the nearest approach to 
the great Lihgaraja which is the best and the most representative 
of the Orissan type of the Nagara temple. 

The temple of Rajarani (Fig. 9) at Bhuvanesvara, though appar¬ 
ently an exceptional type in Orissa, 24 "* requires a more detailed treat¬ 
ment in this connection. Standing isolated nearly a furlong to the 
east of the Siddharanya, it looks picturesque by reason of the broad 
expanse of green fields on all its sides. The rather unusual name 
might have been derived from the fine-grained yellow sandstone, 
known as the rajrdnia, of which the temple has been built. Time has 
mellowed its surface to delightful soft shades, varying from pale am¬ 
ber to deep jacinth, which further add a colourful effect to the build¬ 
ing among its natural surroundings. 

The Rajarani certainly marks an advance in the art of composi¬ 
tion over that of the group just mentioned. In general configuration 
the plan of the sanctum (Text Fig. 1) is no doubt in the shape of a 
square, but because of the multiple offsets and projections on each 
face, introduced evidently to give greater variety and play of light 
and shade, it becomes almost circular in appearance. Moreover, the 
sanctum, instead of being aligned on the same plans as the rest of 
the building, is placed diagonally to it. 

In elevational aspect too the Rajarani temple is a departure from 
all the others of the Orissan group. Along with the extreme variega¬ 
tion of the ground plan the main body of the tower is surrounded 
by a number of smaller replicas, clinging to and clustering around 
it (Fig. 10). Although this kind of elaboration was already anticipat¬ 
ed in the previous group, here, in the Rajarani, the tendency gets an 
added emphasis not only in the two anga-sikharas, one above the 
other, on each of the raha-pagas, but also in the separate volume and 
mass that have been given to each. The walls of the sanctum are 
richly and magnificently carved and the individual decorations are of 
rare and singular beauty. But the jagamohana is apparently left 
unfinished. 

Though exotic in Orissa, the Rajarani is really the result of a 
logical evolution, following a distinct course, from the early Nagara 
form in Orissa represented by the Parasurame£vara-Muktesvara 
group at Bhuvanesvara. Though there is a more fluent volume and 
mass in the body of the tower displaying a refinement in curves and 


547 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



contours that denote a more subtle feeling tor form, the design did 
not find favour in Orissa and was ultimately discarded, as men- 
tioned above* INfo one who has seen the Rajaranl temple 
at Bhuvanesvara and those of the Khajuraho group can fail to 
notice the similarity in the shape of this particular deul with the 
s ikharus of the Central Indian type, a type that strikes a new note 
in this aspect of the temple design. Another link with Central India 
may be recognised in the double dmalakas which characterise the 
anga-sikharas of the Rajarapl. The course of evolution, as outlined 
above, had no doubt its fullest and freest play in Central India where 
the exuberance of miniature replicas clinging to the body of the main 
sikhara adds a rich and variegated, though somewhat disturbed and 
restless, effect. 

The majestic temple of the Lingaraja (Fig. 11) at Bhuvanesvara 
represents the Orissan type of temple in its full maturity. The god en¬ 
shrined in it is Siva (Tribhuvanesvara or Bhuvanesvara) from which 
the city takes its name. The sanctuary is situated in the middle of 
a large quadrangular court enclosed by massive walls and with a 
monumental entrance portal in the middle of the east side. t Many 
other subsidiary structures are clustered round the main sanctuary 
pile. Each of these accessory buildings is a work of art, but the 
mind and eye of the spectator always turn towards the enormous 
Lihgaraja with its majestic proportions, its extraordinary means of 
construction and its elegant carvings. 

Like every other temple of magnitude and importance the Lihga¬ 
raja, as it now stands, is made up of four great conjuncts, all disposed 
on the same axis extending from east to west, viz. the bhoga~mando-pa 
(refectory hall), the ndta-mandapa (dancing hall), the jagamohana. 
(hall of audience) and the deul or the sanctuary proper (Text Fig 2). 
They do not all date from the same period; the original temple 
scheme consisted of two elements, the deul and the jagamohana, the 
two ancillary halls of the ndta-mandapa and the bhoga-mandapa be¬ 
ing added, in all probability, about a century later. The sanctum 
proper is characterised by the tall curvilinear tower, remarkable 
for its height and volume, and the halls by pyramidal roofs. The 
deul and the jagamohana, both belonging to the original temple 
scheme, are pahcharatha in plan, and in each there is the corres¬ 
ponding five-fold division of the bdda in vertical segments. The 
mouldings of the pdbhaga, the bdndhana and the baranda and the 
sculptural decoration of the two janghas are richer and more elegant 
in design, but do not produce any idea of monotony or of being over¬ 
done. The niches in the central projection of the bada of the deul, 
except on the east, have each developed into a miniature shrine on 


548 


MIN/Sr^ 



ART 


iofed platform approached by elaborate flights of steps. They 
accommodate the subsidiary divinities, Parvatl, Karttikeya and 
Gaijesa, associated with the mythology of Siva to whom the temple 
is consecrated. The black chlorite figures of these deities are speci¬ 
mens of exquisite carving representing the high watermark of the 
plastic skill of Orissan artists in days gone by. 


Undoubtedly the most impressive feature of the Lingaraja is 
the great tower of the deul (Fig. 12) which dominates not only the 
entire composition but also the surrounding landscape for many 
miles. Nearly 160 feet in height, its stupendous mass is effectively 
broken up by the vertical papas which add to the fluency of its outline. 
The tower, slightly inclining inwards from the top of the baranda, 
speeds up into a parabolic curve near the top. This pronounced taper 
takes off the harshness of the almost perpendicular ascent of the 
tower and introduces pleasingly the recessed beki over which rises 
the ponderous amalaka-sila supported at each corner on a lion with 
two hinder parts (dopichha-simha). Above is the umbrella-shaped 
khapuri surmounted by the kalasa and the trident, the emblem of 
the god installed within. The corners of the tower and the edges 
of the pagas have been rounded off a good deal, but the square cross- 
section is maintained all through the height of the gan^i. Not only 
has the deul grown in elevation, but the height is further accentuated 
by the vertical lines of the pagas, of which the angles of the anu- 
rahas on each face bear miniature representations of the rekha tower 


(aiiga-sikhara). Rising in graded sizes up the entire height of the 
garydi, they help the upward ascent of the tower, rather than break 
it. A harmonious counterplay in the design is afforded by the hori¬ 
zontal mouldings which, carried in lines across the chases of the 
pagas, richly texture the entire surface of the tower. On the raha- 
paga on each face projects the figure of a lion, rampant on an ele¬ 
phant (gaja-siihha), that looks as if leaping in space. With its as¬ 
piring height and plastically modelled mass the sikhava of the great 
Lingaraja is the crowning achievement of this far-famed temple. 


The jagamohana, also co-eval with the deul, is no less magni¬ 
ficent. Like the deul it is pancharatha in plan and shows the similar 
division of the bada into five-fold vertical segments. The super¬ 
structure consists of a pyramidal roof rising in two sections (potalas) 
of superposed horizontal tiers in gradually receding stages. Above 
this square roof rise the circular crowning elements, the beki, the 
bell-shaped fluted member supporting the amalaka-sila, and the 
kalasa finial. The entire height is a little over 100 feet from the 
ground, and with its massive dimensions and decorative scheme the 
jagamohana is a fitting prelude to the deul which soars high up be- 


549 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




the whole; but 


ng a counterplay in the design of the other, 
the nata-mandapa and the bhoga-mandapa, tl 
very much of the same design as the jaqarru 
fit into the architectural scheme of 

of the structures rather inordinatei; 


Of the secondary structures within the courtyard of the Linga¬ 
raja, mention should at least be made of the temple of Bhagavatx 
which is a structural entity of high architectural merit and sculptural 
excellence. Were it not situated beneath the shadow of the mighty 
tower of the Lingaraja, it would have ranked as a production of 
supreme grandeur and magnificence. 

There are a number of votive inscriptions on the temple and its 
adjuncts. But none is earlier than the middle of the twelfth century 
A.D., which must be taken as the farthest limit of the date of the 
temple. Scholars have usually placed the Lingaraja at about A.D. 
1000. 2 ' 5 But in view of the direction of architectural development, 
as outlined above, along with the fixed chronological point supplied 
by the Brahmesvara temple, the Lingaraja has to be dated about 
A.D. 1100, certainly not earlier than the last quarter of the eleventh 
century. 


A number of temples of the typical Orissan class may be found 
at Bhuvanesvara and other parts of Orissa. Few of them aspire to 
the massive grandeur and dignity of the Lingaraja, but all are re¬ 
markable for their rich and finished appearance. Though in no way 
reaching the latter’s standard of excellence, they abundantly testify 
to the prolific prevalence of the type through centuries. Of those 
at Bhuvanesvara mention should specially be made of the temple 
of Ananta Vasudeva (Fig. 13) which, though smaller in size and lesser 
in sanctity, is no less imposing. The only temple dedicated to the 
worship of Vishnu in this sacred fane of the god Siva, it approximates 
the Lingaraja in its general arrangement and in having the four 
necessary adjuncts, all in the same axis and raised over a substantial 
terrace. The ascending heights of the pyramidal roofs of the two 
ancillary halls and the jagamohana provide an effect of which there 
is a parallel only in the celebrated temples of Khajuraho in Central 
India. 


The famous temple of Jagannatha at Purl, still a very sacred 
place of pilgrimage, is, like the Lingaraja, large and massive and 
consists also of the four usual elements within a quadrangular 
court, surrounded by two lines of enclosure walls and approached 
through the outer walls by means of four monumental portals, one 
on each side. The main entrance was on the east where stands a 
monolithic column, the Aruna stambha, transported from its original 


550 


MIN/Sr^ 



site in the precincts of the Sun temple at Konarak. Almost contem¬ 
poraneous with the Lihgaraja at Bhuvanesvara the temple was built 
practically on the same principles and likewise consists of four com¬ 
ponent parts, the two frontal ones being added later, probably 
about the fourteenth century A.D. The* architectural effect of the 
temple, as it stands, is however not up to the mark. In spite of its 
immense sanctity and its impressive size and massiveness the Jagan- 
natha at Puri cannot claim to possess such sublime dignity as that 
of the Lihgaraja, probably on account of the fact that successive 
renovations, carried out at different periods, along with its annual 
coat of lime-wash, have resulted in a loss of its original grandeur. 

The celebrated Sun temple at Konarak (Fig. 14), known as the 
black pagoda from its darkish colour seen from a distance, was built 
during the reign of Narasimha I (A.D. 1238-64). A noble conception 
initiated by a master mind and executed and finished by a master 
architect, it represents the crystallised and accumulated experience 
of several hundreds of years, and ably illustrates the fulfilment and 
finality of Orissan architectural movement. The tide of humanity 
has long drifted away from Konarak, leaving to posterity a supreme 
artistic creation, grand and impressive even in its ruin. 

The temple, now a deserted fragment, is situated in the centre 
of a quadrangular court and is designed in the shape of a huge 
chariot drawn on exquisitely carved wheels by a team of seven 
spirited horses. The approach was from the east where a roofless 
structure confronts the visitor. This structure, the nata-mav4 a pa, 
rests on an elaborately carved podium reached by long flights of 
steps, one on each side. On the east the stairway is flanked by two 
superb lions, each rampant on an elephant (Fig. 16). The motif is 
fairly prolific in Orissan art, but here in these two sculptures we have 
masterful portraits in which the nobility and vigour of the animals 
have been depicted in all truthfulness and vehemence. Unfortunate¬ 
ly, the roof of this pretty little building has tumbled down. But 
to judge from the ruins around and on the analogy of structures of 
similar kind, the building must have been surmounted by a pyramidal 
roof resembling the massive pile that raises up its head behind. In 
its elegant proportions and elaborate carvings, inside and out, this 
battered structure is a suitable prelude to what awaits the visitor 
further on. 

The position of the nata-ma-ndapa as an isolated structure in 
front of the temple proper may be regarded as an improvement on 
the design which joins the four essential components in an axial 
line with the sanctum. The latter prolongs the length of the plan 
inordinately in comparison with its breadth and thus upsets the 


551 



MINI ST/f 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


lance. At Konarak, not only is the nata-mandapa planned as a 
detached building in front of the main temple group, but the bhoga- 
rnandapa also appears as a separate building on one side. Their 
character and location not only proclaim a correct sense of grouping 
and architectural application, but also a reasoned co-ordination of 
all into a pleasing unified scheme with all the necessary components 
without in any way disturbing the balance and harmony of the 
composition. J 

Crossing the nata-mandapa one descends to the courtyard below 
where once stood the Aruna pillar, now shifted to Puri and placed 
in front of the Jagannatha temple there. From this position there 
spreads out before the spectator the enormous temple—the lofty 
towered sanctuary and the pyramidal pile of the jagamohana, i.e. 
the audience chamber, both united to represent the Sun chariot (Fig. 
Id). Soaring high up with its enormous mass borne on wheels the 
temple symbolises, as it were, the majestic stride of the Sun' god 
across the horizon of the sky, and no conception could have been 
more grand and expressive of the cosmic phenomenon which the Sun 
god stands for. 


Apart from its spiritual significance the architectural character 
ot the monument may also be described as superb. Both the sanctum 
and the jagamohana stand on a lofty basement the exuberance of 
which is itself a marvel. The frieze of elephants at the bottom all 
around represents this creature in every mood and action, playful 
and violent, and offers a substantial stylobate on which the ponder¬ 
ous burden rested. The skill with which the artists have portrayed 
every curve and lineament of the animal is proof positive that 
rey must have had ample scope for studying the anatomy 
and appearance of this lordly beast. Above this frieze of elephants 
rise the bold mouldings of the basement which with their deep con¬ 
trasts oi light and shade accentuate the richness of the walls. The 
at ter present a vast panorama of graceful sculptures, separated bv 
rich y adorned pilasters and broken by exquisitely patterned wheels 
oi gigantic shape. Each of the wheels (Fig.. 17) is 9 feet 8 inches in 
diameter, with rims 8 inches deep, axles protruding 11 inches, and 
16 spokes alternatively thick and thin. Some of these are now mere 
hings oi shreds and patches. Those that have weathered the storm 
and stress of centuries are marvels of elaborate and intricate designs, 

the maximum of decoration being squeezed into the minimum of 
space. 


Over this richly sculptured basement rises the temple pile, the 
sanctum and the jagamohana, each pahcharatha in plan and consist¬ 
ing of five vertical sections as is typical in Orissa. Every ratha is 


552 


misT/?), 


ART 



diversified into smaller facets. These divisions and subdivi¬ 
sions, richly embellished with elaborate carvings, are carried up 
along the height of the tower. Not only do they lighten the enorm¬ 
ous mass by introducing pleasing varieties of lights and shades, but 
they also accentuate the soaring verticalism of the monument and 
impart to it a fluency and movement seldom paralleled in any other 
hind of building. 


<SL 


Around the walls of the sanctum, on the north, south and west, 
the visitor sees the Sun god in all his glory in elaborate recessed 
niches on the projection of the central ratha. The lofty curvilinear 
tower of the sanctum has, however, fallen down, and we miss the 
soaring grandeur of the sikhara . But the massive pile of the jaga- 
mohana in front, complete with its ponderous superstructure, partly 
compensates for the loss, and we are in a position to visualise the 
stupendous height of the fabric, when entire. The jagamohana is 
covered by the usual pyramidal roof in three stages (Fig. 15), sur¬ 
mounted by a fluted dome-shaped member and crowned by the gigan¬ 
tic anialaka^ild. This kind of roof, usually associated with the jaga¬ 
mohana in Orissa, is itself highly expressive of the needs and func¬ 
tions which it serves. There is no roof in India where the same 
play of light and shade is obtained with an equal amount of richness 
and constructive propriety as in this instance, nor one that sits so 
gracefully on the base that supports it. Here at Konarak the design 
is perfectly harmonious on account of the added elevation of the 
different stages and the greater volume and plasticity which are im¬ 
parted to this solid pile by the life-size sculptures of lively execu¬ 
tion and alluring beauty that adorn each stage of the roof all around. 
These sculptures, with their superb modelling, the fulness of their 
forms, and their easy and graceful attitude and poses, add a new 
and striking note in the form of the Orissan jagamohanas. 


Within the courtyard other stately buildings adorned the site, 
but only a heap of ruins now- remains to indicate their former splend¬ 
our. On the north and south there are imposing portals, the former 
flanked by two majestic elephants, and the latter by two prancing 
steeds. Architectonically treated, their massive strength and vigour, 
their passion and vehemence, are masterfully portrayed. In the 
whole range of world’s art it would be difficult to find more success¬ 
ful delineation of animal figures. 


At Konarak the extraordinary genius of the architect and the 
sculptor combined to raise a sanctuary in honour of Sun god, the illu¬ 
minator of the universe. Even in its ruin it illumines India and 
her art, and shines forth throughout the world as a momentous crea¬ 
tion of human endeavour. When entire, the temple must have been 


55a 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



T\e of the most exquisitely proportioned monuments ever known. 
Each part and each section harmoniously blended and mingled with 
one another and built up a perfect composition, so diversified and 
yet so marvellously unified. The intricate treatment of the walls 
with figures and decorative motifs of varied forms and manifesta¬ 
tions has created, so to say, an inspired orgy of sculptural magni¬ 
ficence. Yet, everything is ordered and balanced and the entire 
monument vibrates with a rhythm and grandeur, unique in the world. 


Though not coming within the general course of evolution of the 
Orissan type of temple, the Vaital deul (Fig. 18), situated by the side 
of the main road to the west of the Vindusarovara tank at Bhuvane- 
svara, is notable as belonging to a conception that is apparently alien 
to Orissa. It stands on a raised platform within a low enclosure wall 
and consists of a shrine chamber preceded by a porch hall in front. 
Unlike the usual type of the Orissan temple the sanctuary is rectan¬ 
gular in plan (18 feet by 25 feet) and is surmounted by a tower which 
is also of an unusual shape. The jagamohana in front, also of rec¬ 
tangular form and roofed as the jagamohan# of the Parasurame6vara, 
presents a radical divergence in having a small replica of the 
triratha rekha temple embedded at each of its four corners. A similar 
arrangement of four replicas of the rekha at the four corners of the 
porch hall may be found in a temple at Baijnath (Kangra District), 26 
though the hall there is surmounted by a pyramidal roof. Apart 
from its rectangular shape, the shrine proper of the Vaital detd exhi¬ 
bits many novel features. A significant deviation from the usual 
type may be recognised in the form of the gandi which, rising like 
that of the usual type up to a certain height, is surmounted by an 
elongated vaulted roof of two stages with a recess in between, fur¬ 
ther crowned by three amalakas, each with the usual finials, placed 
along the ridge of the upper semi-circular vault. Moreover, the 
ground plan does not show any ratha projection on any face of the 
hada and the exterior surfaces of the walls are treated and diversi¬ 
fied in a manner that is entirely new, not only in Orissa, but also 
in the Nagara style of temple. All around the hada each wall is 
divided into richly patterned pilasters and recesses containing sculp¬ 
tures—an arrangement that is exactly similar to the treatment of 
the walls of the South Indian style of temple. The beginnings of 
such a treatment have already been traced to the storeyed temples 
of the Gupta and post-Gupta periods. As a distinctive decorative 
pattern it becomes clearly established in the seventh century A.D., 
as we see in the Jain temple of Meguti (A.D. 634) at Aihole and the 
rock-cut rathas of Mahabalipuram of about the same period. A 
further link with South India is indicated by the semi-cylindrical 
vaulted roof, clear analogies of which are furnished by the Bhima 


554 


ART 


nesa rathas at Mahabalipuram. Still earlier parallels of the 
shape of the roof, though not extant in structural form, are recog¬ 
nised in relief representations at Bharhut, Sanchi, etc. It should be 
stressed, however, that analogies with the south end with the shape 
of the roof and the manner of treatment of the exterior walls of the 
bada. In their origins both these features were not particularly 
South Indian. Moreover, we miss here the storeyed arrangement of 
the tower which is distinctive of South Indian temples. Apart from 
these, the other essential arrangements of the Vaital deul, including 
the rise of its gandi up to a certain height, exhibit a more general 
conformity with the early Ndgara form as presented in Orissa. 
Hence, though the tower presents a closer alliance with South India 
and the plan is rectangular, the distinctive quality of the architec¬ 
tural treatment of the temple may be regarded as derived from 
the Ndgara style. 

All over the building there is a profusion of carved work, elegant 
and graceful in an extreme measure. The pleasing proportions of 
the sanctum, the skilful disposition of its surfaces and decorative 
elements denote an aesthetic sense of a very high order. Many of 
its decorative elements closely approximate to those of the Parasu- 
ramesvara, with which it is clearly allied in general form and dis¬ 
position of its jagamohana, as well as on stylistic considerations of 
its sculptures. The date of the Vaital deul cannot, therefore, be far 
removed from that of the Parasuramesvara. 

Among the hundreds of temples at Bhuvanesvara the rather 
exotic shape of the Vaital deul marks it as having been derived from 
alien inspiration and assimilating extraneous influences. The shape 
of the temple, however, is recognised in the canonical texts of Orissa 
as forming a distinct class, known as the Khakhard. Miniature re¬ 
plicas of the Khakhard often appear in relief in the surface decoration 
of the Orissan temples of orthodox shape and form, and a likely 
parallel, though much transformed on account of subsequent reno¬ 
vations, may be noticed in the Gauri temple at Bhuvanesvara. 
Another temple of the Vaital deul type may be seen in the little 
shrine of Durga at Badesvara (Cuttack). 27 It is a very near imitation 
of the prototype at Bhuvanesvara and like it also seems to have 
been a structure of remarkable beauty and excellence. A ruined 
temple at Ranlpur Jharial (Patna State) 28 also appears, from its 
plan and arrangements of the bada, to have been a building of the 
Vaital deul type. Outside Orissa the type appears in the Teli-ka- 
mandir at Gwalior (Fig. 20), the Navadurga temple (Fig. 19) at 
Yagesvara (Almora District), 28 and also possibly in the rectangular 
temple, now ruined, at Osia, Rajputana. The Orissan texts of the 



555 



varieties of the Khakhard temple, namely 
uravida 3 the Vardti, and the Kosall. The first no doubt brings 
the South Indian association of the type which is too apparent 
in the extant monuments to be missed. 


Another interesting type of temple in Orissa may be found in 
the three ancient temples within the compound of the modern shrine 
of Ramesvara at Baudh. 30 Each of these temples stands on a raised 
platform and consists of a sanctum eella with its attached portico 
in front. Each is planned on the principle of two squares, placed 
diagonally and intersecting each other at angles of 45 degrees. The 
angular faces thus formed in the exterior walls of the temple give 
it the shape of an eight-pointed star. Each angular face is further 
subdivided into three facets and the entire design presents a charm¬ 
ing arrangement of light and shade, accentuated still more by the 
intricate tracery work, with deep shadows in the interstices, charac¬ 
teristic of the ornamentation of the gantfi. The angularities of the 
plan ascend in bold lines along the height of the gandi and convey 
an appearance of greater height than any of the temples really pos¬ 
sesses. Barring the star-shaped plan the other arrangements of the 
ba$a and the gandi have striking affinities with those of the Bhuvane- 
svara temples of the early phase. Elaborate carvings literally cover 
each one of the temples from the base to the top and the ornamen¬ 
tation is not inconsistent with the early phase of temples at Bhuvane- 
svara. In view of the general shape and form and plastic considera¬ 
tions of their sculptures, these temples may be referred to a date 
not far removed from that of the Muktesvara at Bhuvanesvara. 
Another temple of a similar plan may be recognised in a ruined brick 
monument at Kausuli near Ranlpur Jharial, old Patna State. 31 Only 
one wall of this building now remains. But the exterior face leaves 
no doubt about its plan being obtained on the principle of two in¬ 
tersecting squares, as in the above-mentioned temples of Baudh, 
to which, as the carvings indicate, it was probably co-eval in date. 


This plan of intersecting squares is a rare occurrence in the 
early phase of the history of Indian temple architecture. But, 
along with the addition of graduated projections on each face of 
a square, this principle is also latent, as a parallel measure of ela¬ 
boration, in the variegation of the ground plan and diversification 
of the walls of a Ndgara temple. The former was no doubt the 
almost universal practice, but the latter, not entirely outside the 
scope of possible development of a Ndgara temple, is also known to 
have been in use. A further advance on this simple plan may be 
recognised in a temple within the Nurpur fort 32 the ground plan 
(Text Fig. 3) of which, made of two intersecting squares, has the 


556 


MINIS?*,, 


ART 




angles of intersection filled up. Thus the temple assumes an octa¬ 
gonal shape with small projecting angles between the sides. This 
is one particular direction in the development of this plan. Another 
direction is supplied by the addition to the number of intersecting 
squares, developed particularly in the Chalukyan monuments of the 
eleventh-twelfth century A.D., a direction that clearly explains the 
full-fledged stellate plan of these monuments. 33 


B. Central India 

Central India had been the home of early sikhara temples, and a 
number of shrines in this part of the country provide a moving picture 
of the march of the sikhara style from its archaic beginnings in the 
fifth-sixth century A.D. to the emergence of the Nagara form in the 
eighth. Moreover, temples in this region exhibit different expres¬ 
sions and manifestations which, though belonging to the Nagara 
style in general, present significant varieties in contrast to the 
practically unilateral architectural movement in Orissa. The geo¬ 
graphical position of Central India, accessible to impacts and influ¬ 
ences from the west as well as from the east, might have been res¬ 
ponsible for such varieties. In spite of different expressions we 
may recognise in the temples of this region certain distinctive fea¬ 
tures peculiar to this part of the country. 

In an earlier section, in connection with the emergence of the 
Nagara form, mention has been made of the early sikhara temples 
of Central India. The temple of Lakshmana at Sirpur 34 may be 
recognised as a lineal descendant of the early sikhara style, as re¬ 
presented by the temples at Pathari (Gwalior) and the Mahadeva 
temple at Nachna Kuthara. Built of large-sized red bricks over a 
raised terrace of cell foundations, the temple consisted of the sanc¬ 
tum proper 34 ® and a mandapa in front, with an ante-chamber ( anta- 
rala) connecting the two. The rtian^Lapa, of which only the pillars re¬ 
main, was, in all probability, a later addition, as this adjunct is 
usually found to be absent in other early temples of this kind. The 
sanctum is pancharatha in plan, the rathas being carried upwards 
along the height of the sikhara. Here a greater variegation over 
the plan of the earlier examples is apparent from the addition to the 
number of projections on the outer wall, the gradually receding 
planes on each face thus leading to more attractive effects of light 
and shade. The projections, continued vertically, also emphasise 
the height of the tower. The bada is divided into three sections— 
the pdbhdga, the jdngha, and the baranda, the last consisting of two 
recessed friezes that separate the cube of the bacla from the girdi 
of the tower. The brick temple at Bhitargaon, belonging to a date 


557 




\ THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

al centuries earlier, has also two lines of recessed friezes de¬ 
marcating. the sikhara from the cube of the sanctum. Another 
peculiarity of the Sirpur temple is the triangular dormer opening 
over the doorway in front, a characteristic that is prominent in the 
early brick temples. The mouldings of the pdbhdga and of the 
baranda, as also the ratha projections, are boldly designed. Equal¬ 
ly boldly designed false windows on the central projections on the 
three, sides provide a singular harmony with the doorway in front. 
The principal decorative scheme consists of well-shaped chaitya - 
window motifs, finely cut and pleasingly disposed all over the 
exterior surface. The sikhara, tapering inwards, shows a vertical 
sequence of attached dynalakas at the corners, and though the top 
is damaged, it is easy to imagine, on the analogy of similar temples, 
that a flattened amalaka-sild, supported on a recessed beki, crowned 
the sikhara. The brick-work is particularly good, the surface and 
joints being rubbed down to a beautifully smooth texture with 
bold, well-defined and sharp-cut ornaments. In the perfect dis¬ 
position of its parts and in the richness and refinement of its sur¬ 
face, this battered structure at Sirpur is perhaps unsurpassed 
among the early Ndgara temples of this region. The date of this 
interesting monument is not definitely known, and while some 
scholars place it in the seventh century A.D., others bring it down 
to the ninth. The treatment of the temple indicates a long experi¬ 
ence in the art of building, particularly building in brick, and in 
the light of the stylistic development of the Ndgara temple in the 
different regions its date appears to be midway between the above 
two dates proposed by previous scholars. In Central India there 
had been a prolific activity in brick building about this period and 
fragmentary examples may still be seen in the two battered build¬ 
ings at Kharod (Bilaspur District) 36 and one at Pujaripali (Sambal- 
pur District). 36 

A rather archaic form of the Ndgara temple in Central India 
may be seen in the temple of Vaidyanatha Mahadeva at Baijnath, 37 
a small village, nine miles from Rewa. Unfortunately, a greater 
part of the sikhara has fallen down, but enough remains to provide 
an idea of its plan and elevation. The sanctum is triratha in plan 
and the bdda consists of the usual three sections, the baranda 
consisting simply of a recessed frieze. The sikhara inclines in¬ 
wards and appears, from its preserved portion, to have a stunted 
elevation. The ornament, consisting chiefly of chaitya-'wmdow 
motifs, is simpler in execution. The late Mr. R. D. Banerji was 
inclined to identify the Baijnath temple with the one given by king 
Lakshtnanaraja to the 6aiva ascetic Hfidayasiva, as mentioned in the 
Bilhari inscription. There is, however, no definite evidence to sup- 




558 


ART 



port this tentative, suggestion. In plan, in elevation, and in gene¬ 
ral appearance the Baijnath has a close parallel in the Parasuraines- 
vara temple at Bhuvanesvara and is nearer to the early sikhara 
temples. Hence, stylistically the Baijnath temple appears to 
be anterior to the brick temple of Lakshmana at Sirpur. 
A ruined temple of the Baijnath type and appearance may be 
found at Bargaon. 38 The above temples represent an early 
phase of the Nagara style in Central India and are identical in 
form and appearance to analogous monuments distributed over 
different parts of Northern India and a substantial portion of the 
Deccan. 

An interesting temple with characteristics of the early form 
affords an instructive example in the development of the distinctive 
Central Indian type. This is the well-preserved temple at Baroli (Fig. 
21 ), 39 situated in a wild and romantic spot near the Chambal falls. In 
plan it is pancharatha, but the bdrla is divided into the usual three 
sections. The corners have sharp edges with the usual vertical se¬ 
quence of angle-amalakas. What is interesting is that the recessed 
beki in this temple is surmounted by a large-sized flattened amalaka 
over which is placed again what looks like a second amalaka sup¬ 
porting the kalasa finial. The pagas, again, do not terminate at the end 
of the gantfi but are continued beyond, each in the shape of a triangu¬ 
lar finial that almost touches the amalaka-sild. The double amalaka 
and the continuation of the pagas beyond the top of the gandi are 
characteristics that belong to Central India, being unknown, 
except as aberrations, outside this area. Barring these two inte¬ 
resting features which are peculiar to Central India the temple 
closely agrees to the other examples of the early Nagara form. From 
its shape and appearance the sanctuary appears to date from about 
the ninth century A.D. 

In Central India the direction of development of the early 
Nagara form is practically identical with that as outlined in case of 
Orissa. But the pillared halls, though apparently absent in the 
early phase of the development, come to play a prominent part in 
the composition of a Central Indian temple and become a necessary 
concomitant of the full-fledged local type. In this respect the type 
had had its associations with other parts of India, west as well as 
south. 

A number of temples in Central India indicate a development 
that is essentially identical to that in Orissa. There is the same 
process of variegation by dividing the body both vertically and 
horizontally and by subdividing each such section. In Central 
India the process is carried a little further, For example, a Central 


559 


misTfy 



Indian temple is usually saptaratha in plan and the cube of the bada 
is divided into seven sections by two bandhands, while we do not 
meet with more than five such divisions in Orissa. The jangha, thus 
diversified, horizontally as well as vertically, offers a background 
for a moving pageant of elegant sculptures in various attitudes and 
poses, all conforming to the varied composition of the walls. The 
gandi of the sikhara is also correspondingly diversified by the conti¬ 
nuation of the rathas as pagas, and soon, as already indicated in 
Orissa, by the appearance of anga-sikharas on the body of the main 
tower all around. In Central India the latter process was carried 
to its logical conclusion and clusters of anga-sikharas, clinging to 
the body of the main tower, impart to it a plasticity and volume 
that are unknown in Orissa. Boldly projected and rising up one 
above the other they signify an impatient and restless upward urge 
which, not infrequently, interferes with disciplined movement. 
In the Baroli temple we have already noticed two interesting fea¬ 
tures-—one in the projection of the pagas beyond the top of the gandi 
and the other in two amalakas crowning the sikhara. In the later 
examples such projection, confined to the rahd-paga only, became a 
singular characteristic of the Central Indian temple. The second, 
the double dmalaka , also proved to be distinctive of Central India, 
two amalakas being invariable not only as surmounting the top of 
the main sikhara but also those of the anga-sikharas. 

The place of the vestibule ( antarala ) and the pillared audience 
hall ( mandapa ) in Central Indian temples has already been indicat¬ 
ed. The former has been an inseparable element even from the 
earliest times, and the latter, though probably absent in the earlier 
examples, comes, later on, to occupy an important position in the 
regular temple scheme. Preceding it again there is placed another 
smaller hall (ardha-mandapa), serving as a portico with its entrance 
projected and leading to the tall flight of steps that forms an im- 
piessive approach. All these, one after the other, represent a 
continuous scheme resulting in a plan elongated along the axial 
line, the entire complex of structures being raised over a sub¬ 
stantial and solid terrace. Some of the important Orissan temples 
also exhibit four component elements in axial length, but there the 
disposition and details of the adjuncts are different. Again, the 
halls in Orissa are usually astylar, but in Central India columns and 
pillars form important elements of the scheme. The roof in each 
hall is placed over a dome supported on pillars. These pillars and 
architraves over which the ceilings are placed offer suitable back¬ 
grounds for lavish carvings, and hence the interiors of these halls 
are also richly ornamented in strong contrast to the bare and dull 
appearance of the interiors of the Orissan halls. The halls in 


560 


mtsTftr 



Orissa are closed, but here they are open on the three sides, the 
openings between the pillars forming balconied windows shaded by 
projecting eaves. Along the sides there are seats ( kakshasanas) 
with sloping balustrades. The sides of the mandapa hall form 
transepts in the more developed examples, and they go round the 
sanctum cella and are provided with balconied windows on three 
of its sides. These openings not only provided well-lighted halls, 
in contrast to the gloomy interiors of similar Orissan adjuncts, but 
also throw intense shadows athwart the intermediate portion of 
the building complex providing a significant contrast to the solids 
in the lower and upper sections of the temple scheme. This con¬ 
trast of solids and voids lends an effect which is seldom paralleled 
in any other region of India. 

In the superstructures of these adjuncts and their elevation a 
general likeness may be recognised in the arrangement of the 
pi$hd deuls in Orissa. In Central India, as in Orissa, each of these 
halls is distinguished by a separate roof. Ascending in graduated 
heights they sweep up to the lofty sikhara of the sanctum, suggest¬ 
ive of the rising peaks of a mountain range converging on to the 
highest point. This effect of the elevation may be recognised, to a 
certain extent, in the temple of Ananta V-asudeva at Bhuvanesvara 
(Fig. 13). The roofs are composed of horizontal strata of tiers upon 
tiers in receding stages. The surface texture of these roofs is thus 
essentially the same as in Orissa, with the only difference that the 
bell-shaped member, which we find in the full-fledged Orissan pi$ha 
deul intervening between the last stage of the pi$ha and the ama- 
laka, is absent in Central India. The contour also, instead of being 
that of an Orissan straight-edged pyramid, conforms more to that 
of a domical shape. The last is no doubt dictated by the method 
of interior construction of such roofs in Central India. 

The above characteristics, gradually evolved, together with the 
singular features of the double amalaka and the rahd paga project¬ 
ing beyond the gandi, constitute the distinctive traits of the Central 
Indian type of the Nagara style. The Kandarya Mahadeo temple at 
K haju raho (old Chhatarpur State) represents the most notable crea¬ 
tion of the Central Indian movement. It~has to be stressed, how¬ 
ever, that the type was the result of a gradual evolution, the course 
of which is indicated by several interesting temples in different parts 
of Central India. 

An early phase in the transition is represented by the Visva- 
natha temple at Maribagh (old Rewa State). 40 Pancliaratha in plan 
and with a fivefold division of the ba<jla f the temple shows an 
advancement on the earlier design. Temple type of this kind had 

561 

SE.—86 



WHlST/fy 


<SL 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

a much wider distribution and may be placed between the ninth- 
tenth century A.D. 

Amarkantak, reputed to be the source of the rivers, the Nar¬ 
mada, the Son and the MahanadI, was a very sacred place in ancient 
times and a number of beautiful temples 41 adorned the site in days 
gone by. Many of them are now in ruins, but among the remains 
that still stand there are a few which, on analysis, may be found 
to represent important developments. The temples of Kesava- 
narayaria and Machchhendranatha, situated contiguous to each 
other, are practically identical in design with only slight variations 
in minor details. Each of the temples consists of a sanctum, an 
antarala and a mandapa joined in axial length. The sanctum cube 
in each case is pancharatha in plan and has a fivefold division along 
the vertical axis. The pagas in each project beyond the top of the 
garu}X which is surmounted by two amalakas. The surface of the 
tower is ornamented by shallow-cut chaitya -window motifs of 
tracery-like execution. The body of the cube is sparse of sculp¬ 
tural decoration, except in the central ratha divided into two tiers 
by the bdndhana moulding. The antarala is covered by a straight- 
edged gable superstructure of sharp outline. The mandapa is 
square in plan, with kakshasanas, sloping balustrades, overhanging 
eaves around, and is open on all sides except for the pillars that 
support the roof. The latter consists of a pyramidal superstructure 
(now broken away in case of the Machchhendranatha) rising in 
horizontal tiers, receding gradually, and crowned at the apex by 
amalakas and the usual finials. In the Kesavanarayana the roof 
rests on the pillars that go round the hall, but in the Machchhendra¬ 
natha a group of four columns in the centre has been provided for 
to support the roof, in addition to the pillars around the hall. In 
the Patalesvara temple (Fig. 22), also at Amarkantak, we have an 
identical composition, its plan, elevation and appearance represent¬ 
ing a very close approximation to the Machchhendranatha. 

In these temples the sanctum, the antarala and the mandapa 
form parts of a unified scheme and thus they represent an advance¬ 
ment from the early Ndgara form towards the typical Central Indian 
design. The sikhara over the sanctum with its emphasis on pleas¬ 
ing contour and unbroken mass is still of the early Ndgara form, 
but with its shape and appearance, in its projecting pagas and 
double dmalaka, there is perhaps a faint approach towards the shape 
and appearance of the typical Central Indian temple. 

The triple-shrined temple, traditionally ascribed to Raja Karan 
Dahariya (Raja Kama of Dahala), at Amarkantak belongs also to- 



562 



this phase, though we have a novel design here in the arrangement 
of three sanctuaries on three sides of a central maridapa hall. 


Each of the shrines is saptaratha in plan and consists of seven 
segments along the vertical axis. The seven-fold division of the 
ba^La is an advancement Over the five-fold one, and though inherent 
in the logic of development of the Nagara temple, it is a feature, 
particularly characteristic of the typical Central Indian temple and 
not met with elsewhere. The sikhara in each case sweeps up with 
unbroken contour, the rdha-paga on each face projecting beyond the 
top of the gandi which is crowned by two dmalakas. 

This triple-shrined temple with the superb magnificence of its 
three tall towers of chaste and graceful outline soaring above the 
pyramidal pile of the mandapa in the centre represents a novel de¬ 
sign of temple complex in Central India. Though rare in Central 
India, it was widely prevalent in Western India, including Khandesh, 
and also in the Chalukyan regions in later times. In Central India 
other temples of this design may be found at Deoguna (Jaso State) 
and at Kukdeswar (Indore). 

Closely allied to the Amarkantak group is the great temple of 
Viratesvara Siva at Sohagpur (old Rewa State), 42 which represents 
a further stage in the evolution of the Central Indian type. The 
temple consists of the sanctum, an antarala, a mandapa hall and an 
ardha-mandapa or portico, all on the same axis, one after the other, 
on a common low platform. By the addition of the ardha-mandapa 
in front of the mandapa hall the Central Indian temple complex 
reaches its typical form. In plan the sanctum is saptaratha and is 
correspondingly divided into seven segments along the vertical axis. 
The jangha, divided into three sections by two bandhanas of two 
bands each, serves as a background for three tiers of sculptures of 
elegant shapes and forms that add a richness and variety to the 
sanctum walls, in contrast to the rather tame treatment of these 
wall sections in the earlier examples. The baranda, separating the 
cube of the sanctum from the body of the sikhara, again consists of 
a number of banded mouldings, projected and recessed alternately. 
The sikhara rises in seven pagas with the rahas projecting beyond 
the top of the gandi and is crowned by three dmalakas. 

At the base of the; sikhara there appears a new feature of orna¬ 
mentation, hitherto unknown in Central India. A line of minia¬ 
ture sikhara replicas ( anga-sikharas ) of varying and progressively 
increasing heights surround the body along the pagas , the rdhd on 
each face repeating the pattern on a bigger scale. This kind of orna¬ 
mentation, as already indicated, was latent in the evolutionary 
process of the Nagara temple. In the full-fledged Central Indian 

563 


MINlSr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


temple we have perhaps the most emphatic expression of this mode, 
as we see in the celebrated Kandarya Mahadeo temple at Khajuraho. 
In the Viratesvara at Sohagpur we recognise an early stage of this 
process in which the anga-sikharas cover only the lower portion of 
the main tower. The major portion of the sikhara, left uncovered, 
shows the traceried pattern of chaitya- windows in shallow relief, as 
we have in the early temples. 


The antarala in front of the sanctum is covered, as usual, by a 
gable roof attached to the front face of the sikhara. An advance 
on the harsh outline of this feature in the earlier monuments may 
be recognised in the Viratesvara in the attempt to break up the out¬ 
line into a number of sections. In front of the antarala stands the 
mandapa hall with kakshasanas . In the Amarkantak group this 
component was of square shape. But in the Viratesvara at Sohag¬ 
pur the mandapa assumes a cruciform shape on account of the bal¬ 
conied windows at the sides and the ardha-mandapa projected in 
front. 


The interior of the mandapa hall also offers some instructive 
features. Like the Kesavanarayana and the Machchhendranatha at 
Amarkantak the mandapa roof is supported on the pillars going 
around the hall, there being no additional central group as in the 
Patalesvara. The square is converted into an octagon by massive 
architraves placed diagonally on the supporting pillars and thus 
cutting off the comers. Over this octagonal frame of architraves 
is another octagonal course and on this are supported the overlap¬ 
ping concentric rings of a great trabeate dome, fretted and coved 
all over. In plan, in elevation, in structural means and in decora¬ 
tive scheme the Viratesvara temple at Sohagpur offers the nearest 
approach to the distinctive Central Indian type as represented by 
the magnificent temples at Khajuraho. 

Stylistically and constructionally the temples at Amarkantak and 
Sohagpur represent a distinct phase in the evolution of the Central 
Indian type of temple and have to be placed midway between the 
Viivanatha temple at Maribagh, an example of the general Nagara 
class of the ninth-tenth century A.D., and the typical Central Indian 
temples at Khajuraho, the chronology of which remains still to be 
settled. The Khajuraho temples have generally been placed within 
a century between A.D. 950 and 1050, 43 in the period in which the 
Chandellas of Jejakabhukti were predominant in this region. The 
stylistic and structural considerations, however, tell a different tale. 
The Khajuraho temples, at least the more important ones, represent 
an accumulated and crystallised experience and indicate, in 
every sense, the fulfilment and finality of a long anterior develop- 


504 


ART 


ment. Our knowledge of architectural movement in Central India 
and in other localities does not quite fit in with the above chronology 
of the Khajuraho temples, though it is usually accepted. It is true 
that there have been found inscriptions at the place ranging in date 
from A.D. 953 to 1001, but it is not always clear to which particular 
temples they apply. The usual chronology of these temples, settled 
with reference to such inscriptions, may therefore be regarded as 
rather tentative. No local art movement, much less the Central Indian 
one due to its geographical position, can be regarded as an isolated 
episode. It is generally related to other developments that are taking 
place elsewhere. The direction of architectural movements in 
different parts of India, coupled with the chronological data supplied 
by the temples of known date, would indicate that none of the 
temples at Khajuraho, even those which on account of style may be 
regarded as the earliest, can be dated prior to the second half of the 
eleventh century A.D. The Visvanatha temple at Maribagh belongs 
to the general class of the Nagara style, and with reference to the 
temples of this class in different localities cannot be placed earlier 
than the ninth century A.D. The gradual advancement of this design 
towards the typical Central Indian one, along the lines described 
above, denotes a transitional process covering a rather long period, 
particularly in those days of slow movement. The temples at Amar- 
kantak and Sohagpur, together with temples of identical design and 
form at Khajuraho and other places, belong to this transitional phase 
which may roughly be placed between the ninth and the eleventh 
centuries A.D. In Orissa, as already indicated, the distinctive local 
type comes into view not before the close of the eleventh century 
A.D., and in Central India, too, the typical Central Indian temple 
takes its shape at about the same period. 

But the fact remains that there was a prolific architectural acti¬ 
vity at Khajuraho in the second half of the tenth century A.D., as 
the inscriptions found at the place abundantly testify. It is signi¬ 
ficant again that this activity, so far as epigraphic data are concerned, 
ceased abruptly about the beginning of the eleventh century A.D. 
The first half of the eleventh century A.D. was a critical period for 
the Chandella dynasty, partly owing to the rise of the Kalachuris, 
and mainly on account of the invasions of Sultan Mahmud who 
advanced as far as Kalafijara, not far from Khajuraho. A cruel 
invader, intent on sack, pillage, plunder and iconoclasm, Mahmud 
had left signs of wanton destruction wherever he went, and it is not 
unlikely that the monuments of an earlier building activity at Khaju¬ 
raho, to which the inscriptions amply testify, suffered irreparable 
damage. As noted above, the Chandellas again rose to power in the 
second half of the eleventh century A.D., and the temples that now 


565 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

^stand in all their glory at Khajuraho very probably belonged to this 
period. 

The straggling village of Khajuraho contains at present over 
thirty temples, large and small, in various stages of preservation. 
The monuments are distributed among the three great religious 
systems—Saivism, Vaislixiavism and Jainism—and in each group 
there is one, or more, greater than the rest. In the Saiva group we 
have the Kandarya Mahadeo and the Visvanatha, in the Vaishnava 
the Ramachandra or Chaturbhuja, and in the Jain the Parsvanatha. 
It is these temples, more than any other, which represent the Cen¬ 
tral Indian temple in its best and most complete manifestation. 
In plan and elevation, in form and appearance they are all alike, and 
are to be distinguished only by certain details as regards their 
expression. The temple complex consists of the sanctum ( garbha - 
griha), the antarala, the martdapa and the ardha-tnandapa, with the 
projected portico in front, all on the same axis one after the other, 
and raised on a substantial masonry terrace, the adhishf.hdna or the 
socle. Each temple, so constituted, appears to represent a unified 
design, and sometimes the main temple is flanked at each corner of 
the adkishthana by a supplementary shrine, thus forming a complete 
pane hciyatana group. But the accommodation of a temple within a 
quadrangular enclosure, though customary in other parts of India, 
is unknown to Khajuraho. 

In spite of this general agreement in plan and composition, 
which is evidently due to one and the same stylistic movement, the 
Khajuraho temples can nevertheless be distinguished in the details 
of their expression. The distinctions represent the successive mani¬ 
festations of one single movement, indicating a steady onward 
march, culminating in its most complete expression in the grand 
and magnificent pile of the Kandarya Mahadeo. From the eleva- 
tional aspect the temples may be divided into two broad groups— 
those with repetitions of miniature tower replicas (anga-sikharas) 
attached to the main £ikhara all around, and those without. From 
the standpoint of plan and composition again, two distinct groups 
may be recognised according as there are transepts, forming an inner 
passage of ambulation around the main cella of the sanctum, or not. 
As a general rule, the temples without the transepts around the 
sanctum cella and without the anga-sikharas, precede those that 
possess these significant characteristics with which the typi¬ 
cal Central Indian temple reaches its complete form. 44 Stylistical¬ 
ly, however, the two groups are very close to each other, the one 
representing just a stage prior to the evolution of the other, and, to 
a certain extent, chronological overlappings, usual in such circum¬ 
stances, are not unlikely. 




566 


t 


MIN/Sr^ 


ART 




Following the sequence of evolutionary process, outlined above, 
the account of the Khajuraho temples should begin with the Vamana 
(Fig. 23) and the Adinatha (Fig. 24) temples which are practically 
of an identical design. The sanctum of the former is saptarathu in 
plan, but the cube is divided into five vertical segments only. The 
contour of the tower is not broken up by any superposed miniature 
replica ( anga-sikliara) and its surface is ornamented by minute and 
interlacing patterns of chaitya- windows, looking almost like fret¬ 
work. The sanctum walls below are, however, decorated by elegant 
mouldings and graceful sculptures whose modelling and execution 
are in the best traditions of mediaeval art. To some extent, the 
sikhara has a stunted appearance as in the earlier temples of the 
general N&gara class, and the rdhas also end at the top of the gan&i. 
But such features as the double amalaka and the treatment of the 
walls of the sanctum cube indicate a developed phase of the Central 
Indian architectural movement to which its other elements, like the 
antarnla, the mandapa and the ardha-mandapa together with their 
disposition, are closely related. 


The Adinatha (Fig. 24) represents a small but exquisite struc¬ 
ture by the side of the great Parsvanatha temple. Its mandapa and 
other usual adjuncts either did not exist originally or were removed 
and replaced in modern times by a brick construction, abominable in 
its glaring incongruity. Rising on a high adhish\hdna the sanctum is 
saptaratha in plan and correspondingly has a seven-fold division of 
the bada. The sanctum walls are decorated by three tiers of sculp¬ 
tures, each of alluring beauty and in every way comparable to the 
best temple sculpture of the age. The sikhara rises in seven pagas 
with the rdhas projecting beyond the top of the gaiu^.i and almost 
touching the lower of the two amalakas which surmount the recessed 
beki. What is interesting is that the konakas also continue beyond 
the height of the gandh a feature that gets an added emphasis in the 
great Parsvanatha temple. The shape of the sikhara is more elongat¬ 
ed than that of the Vamana, and the surface, unburdened by any 
duplicated miniature, is richly fretted with delicate interlacings of 
chaitya-opening patterns. It is perhaps the most finished creation 
of the Central Indian architectural movement just prior to the 
emergence of its complete and full-fledged form. 


The majority of the Khajuraho temples, however, belong to the 
second group i.e. with the anga-sikharas clustered around the body of 
the main tower. Interesting examples may be seen in the Bnarat- 
ji or Chitragupta, the Devi Jagadamba (Fig. 27), the Kunwar Math 
(Fig. 25), the Ramachandra or Chaturbhuja (Fig. 26), the Parsva¬ 
natha (Fig. 29), the Visvanatha (Fig. 28), and last, the most impres- 


567 




MIN IST/f. 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


e of all, the Kandarya Mahadeo (Fig. 30). They are funda¬ 
mentally of the same design and composition and consist of the 
characteristic component elements with practically identical arrange¬ 
ments and dispositions. But even within this group there 
is a divergence in an important respect. None of the temples sur¬ 
veyed up till now have an ambulatory contained within the mass of 
the structure. But each of the last four temples of this group, re¬ 
presenting the most complete expression of the Central Indian type, 
has an enclosed inner ambulatory, formed by the extension of the 
transepts of the mandapa hall around the sanctum cella. T his 
ambulatory again has the usual projected window openings on three 
of its sides just as in the frontal parts of the temple complex. The 
temple with the inner ambulatory is known as the sandhara prasdda, 
while the one without as the nirandhara prasada. The earliest ex¬ 
ample of the sandhara prasada, so far as extant monuments are con¬ 


cerned, may be recognised in the second group of Gupta temples. 44 * 
In those days this plan was more or less widespread, being found 
over a large area in the north as well as in the south. But gradually 
the plan became localised in the south. The mediaeval temples of 
this plan in certain regions of Northern India like those of Khaju- 
raho, probably indicate the influence of the building traditions of 
the south. 


In these two well-marked divisions of the temples at Khajuraho, 
with repetitions of ahga-Hkharas on the tower, it is likely that the 
one without the inner ambulatory (nirandhara) is stylistically ante¬ 
rior to that which is furnished with it ( sandhara ), though 
the two are very close to each other, but for this significant distinc¬ 
tion. A minute comparison of the forms and appearances of these 
two divisions of temples and their decorative scheme may also lend 
some support to the hypothesis of a posterior date to the sandhara 
temples. As a rule, the sandhara prdsadas are more elaborate and 
exuberant than the nirandhara ones, their bewildering wealth of 
ornament and variegation indicating the finality of the movement 
just prior to dessication and decadence. 

Among the nirandhara temples of this division the Devi Jaga- 
damba (Text Fig. 4; Fig. 27) and the Kunwar Math (Fig. 25) were 
impressive productions, though the latter is much damaged. Both 
have the same exuberance of sculptures and rich ornamentation, 
pleasingly balanced by the variegated treatment of the sikhara by 
smaller replicas reduplicated all around. In the Kunwar Math, how¬ 
ever, the sikhara is surrounded by regular and successive rows of 
smaller replicas, practically of identical heights, along the receding 
planes of the pagas. In this respect the Kunwar Math strikes a new 


568 


AET 



.note in the sikhara design which has parallels further towards the 
west. 

Of the sandhara temples the sanctum in the Ramachandra or 
Chaturbhuja (Fig. 26) is pancharatha and panchanga, the other tem¬ 
ples showing the seven-fold division horizontally as well as verti¬ 
cally. The extension of the transepts of the mandapa around the 
sanctum forms an inner ambulatory around the garbha-griha , pro¬ 
vided on three sides by projecting windows with sloping balustrades 
and overhanging eaves as in those of the mandapa and the ardha- 
mandapa. Along the entire central zone of the temple complex there 
runs thus a line of voids (cf. Figs. 26 and 28) that gracefully relieves 
the solids in the lower and upper sections. Hitherto such voids have 
been confined to the mandapa and the ardha-mandapa only. Their 
provision on the sanctum walls perfects the design and adds to the 
impressive character of the monument as a whole. The roof of the 
mandapa is nearer to the typical Orissan pidhas, on account of its 
having a pyramidal outline and the bell-shaped member, usual in 
Orissa but unknown in Central India, intervening between the last 
stage of the pyramid and the amalaka. 

The Parsvanatha temple (Fig. 29), the holiest of the Jain group 
at Khajuraho, is one of the most elaborate productions, though much 
reduced in size. It comprises an oblong structural scheme with 
a projected portion at each end of the sanctum—the one in front 
forming the inandapa hall and the other at the back an attached out¬ 
side shrine. Though there is an enclosed passage around the sanc¬ 
tum cella, in continuation of the transepts of the marujlapa hall, the 
projected balconied windows on the sides are singularly absent, thus 
resulting in an almost complete elimination of any voids in the 
temple walls. There is only a small latticed window on the central 
ratha on each face for admission of light and air into the enclosed 
inner ambulatory, but they are so disposed as not to interfere with 
the predominantly sculptural scheme of the whole. The lack of 
contrast between the solids and the voids, that constitutes a striking 
and pleasing characteristic of the Khajuraho temples, gives the 
Parsvanatha a monotonous and overburdened appearance which its 
exuberant wealth of sculptural elegance could hardly compensate 
for. 

Of the gaiva group of temples the most important are the 
Visvanatha and the Kandarya Mahadeo, which illustrate the Central 
Indian architectural movement in its richest and most finished ex¬ 
pressions. In these two magnificent monuments, representing the 
final results of a long anterior development, the experience of suc¬ 
cessive ages is found in a mature and crystallised state. The Visva- 




ha (Fig. 28) is the smaller of the two and stylistically makes the 
nearest approach to the imposing and impressive pile of the Kandarya 
Mahadeo. In plan and composition, in shape and appearance, the 
two are identical, but in the Kandarya Mahadeo the effect is much 
richer and grander, expressive of an abler and more skilful disposi¬ 
tion of its various parts and their decorative elements. 


The Kandarya Mahadeo temple (Text Fig. 5; Fig. 30) stands on 
a high terrace and comprises the usual component elements. In verti¬ 
cal section the temple is seen to be a mountain of masonry with its 
volumes and masses moving in an upward direction until they reach 
the peak. According to the sacred literature, Siva, the god enshrined 
in the temple, has his abode in the Kailasa mountain, and this tem¬ 
ple, which has the appearance of a mountain in exterior elevation,, 
may be described as a fitting sanctuary for the lord of the mountains 
created by human endeavour. 

The sanctum is saptaratha in plan and consists of the seven seg¬ 
ments along the vertical axis. This arrangement is typical of the 
Central Indian temple of full-fledged design. On the lofty basement 
terrace rises the emphatically high plinth or pabhaga sloping up¬ 
wards in a succession of bold mouldings with prominent passages of 
light and shade. Over this rises the central zone of the wall section, 
the jangha, divided into five segments, the two bandhands separating 
the three elaborate tiers of sculptures. Following the alternate pro¬ 
jections and recesses of the plan these life-like forms, “shapely in 
appearance, exquisite in workmanship and of inexhaustible interest”, 
present a moving pageant of sculptured grace. This decorative ar¬ 
rangement constitutes a remarkable characteristic of the Khajuraho 
temples, each building accommodating such friezes in proportion to 
its size. In the Kandarya Mahadeo we have nearly 900 such sculp¬ 
tures, each slightly less than life-size, and it is no wonder that with 
such animated throng of plastic forms ever present on the walls, the 
structure pulsates with a vitality not ordinarily met with in building 
art. 


Several courses of baranda mouldings, admirable again in the 
disposition of light and shade, separate the wall section from that of 
the towered superstructures. Here the analogy with a mountain 
range is complete, not only on account of the graded heights of the 
superstructures of the different components rising and falling alter¬ 
nately and ultimately converging on the main tower, but also in the 
multitudinous peaks, in the shape of anga-sikharas, arrayed round 
the main sikhara, that lead the eye towards the topmast pinnacle 
(Fig. 31). The entire mass of the tower is thus broken up by deep 
indentations and appears to be weightless. The upward urge, thus 


570 


MiNisr^ 



emphasised, though restless in movement, seems to lend to the entire 
monument a striking quality of aspiring verticalism. The ascent, 
though broken up and dissolved in separate volumes and masses, is 
not without a rhythm of its own, as every lineament is principally 
governed by the fundamental scheme laid down in the plan and 
elevational aspect of the entire monument. 

The different adjuncts of the sanctum have their separate super¬ 
structures, graded in height towards the main tower (Text Fig. 6). 
The antarala has the usual gable roof, exquisitely rich in treatment. 
The mandapa and the ardha-maridapa are each roofed by a trabeate 
dome with similar supplementary superstructures clustering around 
and subordinated to it in the same way as are the anga-sikharas to 
the main sikhara. The main superstructure in each is crowned by 
the amalaka and the kalasa. The progressive and repeated ascent 
and descent of the different superstructures converging on the pin¬ 
nacle of the sikhara, as seen in the lateral view, produce a remarkable 
ensemble which is not visible, however, in the front where the several 
roofs seem “to coincide in one comprehensive outline.” 45 Thus 
every lineament, however varied in treatment and articulation, is 
summed up in a final unity. 

The interior of this temple complex, because of the variety and 
multiplicity of its details, is no less impressive. The entrance, which 
is on the east, is approached by a steep flight of steps, imposing in 
its dignity. The exquisitely carved doorway shows a foliated form 
of strut attached to the bottom of the lintel, a pleasing motif repeat¬ 
ed also in the ornamental doorway to the sanctum cella. The frontal 
doorway leads to a passage expanding into the rectangular ardha- 
manfiapa and next to the square mandapa hall, each a hypostyle with 
open sides. The transepts on either side of the mandapa extend 
around the sanctum and connect with the boldly projecting balcony 
windows. The disposition of the interior complex is replete with 
notable features, functional and at the same time highly decorative. 
The ceilings of the different superstructures are no doubt made up 
of oversailing courses of masonry. The limitations of this ele¬ 
mentary structural procedure necessitated the reduction of spans by 
underpinning, and it is this necessary function which the pillars 
effectively serve. We may take, for instance, the roof of the maiida - 
pa hall. The four central pillars support a frame of architraves. The 
square, thus formed, is transformed into an octagon and next the 
ceiling goes up in overlapping concentric courses until at the top 
it is closed by a single disc. A pendant projects downwards from 
this apex which is just below the pinnacle on the summit. Smaller 
trabeated domes cluster around the central dome, just a reflex in 
the interior of the arrangement of the supplementary superstruc- 


571 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


„ . . 1 <SL 

^ares around the main one. This simple arrangement has been given 
a magnificently ornamental treatment and the almost bewildering 
wealth of decoration defies description. The floors of the different 
components of the structure are not on one level and in their dis¬ 
position one may also recognise the same ideas of vertical ascent of 
the monument as seen in the exterior. The ardha-mandapa leads 
up to a raised dais in the centre of the man$a‘pa from which the 
antartila is, again, on a higher level, and finally another series of 
steps leads up to the garbha-griha. Not only in the solid masses of 
the superstructure, but also in the disposition of the hollow parts, 
the same aspiration for verticalism is equally apparent, the former 
leading up to the pinnacle of the sikhara, the latter to the holiest of 
the holies, tSe garbha-griha. 

The Kandarya Mahadeo at Khajuraho represents the finality of 
the Central Indian architectural movement—a consummation of a 
fruitful evolutionary process—and is at once brilliant in its concep¬ 
tion and the most imposing in its perfect finish and grace. Central 
India affords many other temples of this type, but none can equal 
it in its flawless proportions, the orderly and harmonious disposition 
of its various parts, its sculptured grace pulsating with vibrant, yet 
restrained, energy, or in the pleasing ensemble of the various linea¬ 
ments of the superstructure with the aspiring spire of the vimana 
dominating and controlling the entire scheme. Exuberant in de¬ 
tails, architectural as well as sculptural, that may appear to be 
seemingly restless, there is no sign of disorderliness in the entire 
monument, and all have been drawn up in the bold sweep of the 
rhythmically compact sikhara. It fully deserves the high encomium 
lavished upon it by critics of art in modem times. 46 

The Ghantai temple (Fig. 33) at Khajuraho, as it now stands, ap¬ 
pears to be of an entirely different character. It is now in an ex¬ 
tremely fragmentary state and a few pillars that remain represent 
but a mere shell of what was apparently a great conception. The 
pillars are arranged on a moulded plinth in two squares set apart 
from each other, the frontal one evidently constituting the portico, 
and the rear, the mandapa. The antarala and the garbha-griha, 
which apparently stood behind, have now disappeared, and it is the 
absence of these two elements and of the enclosing walls and super¬ 
structures that lends a singular appearance to the monument. The 
pillars now stand alone, and in the beauty of their form and propor¬ 
tions and the chasteness of their ornamentation they evince almost 
a classic dignity. 

A few of the temples representing exceptional types in Central 
India should also be discussed in this connection for completing the 


account of the architectural movement in this region during the 
mediaeval period. The two four-faced square temples at Khajuraho 47 
present unusual appearance when compared to the temples at the 
site already described. They are the temples of Brahma and of Mri- 
tahg Mahadeo (Mrityuhjaya Mahadeva), the former on the east bank 
of Khajur Sagar and the other situated close to the Ramachandra or 
Chaturbhuja temple. Each of them (Text Figs. 7 and 8) repre¬ 
sents a shrine, square on the inside and cruciform outside, the pro¬ 
jection in the centre of each of the four walls being provided with an 
opening. The opening on the east forms the main entrance with a 
flight of stairs in front. In the temple of Brahma the other three 
openings are closed by stone lattices of simple but different patterns, 
but in the Mritahg Mahadeo all the four openings are left clear, the 
eastern one serving as a vestibule leading to the interior of the sanc¬ 
tum from the open portico hall, provided in front, and the other 
three as open balconies. The roof is pyramidal, formed of overlap¬ 
ping courses in gradually receding tiers, almost similar in form and 
construction as the superstructures of the mandapn halls. The type 
is nothing new as it represents the regular form of a mandapa hall 
in different parts of India. The idea of a sanctum with the four 
sides open is, however, novel during this period, and not a little 
interest attaches to these temples because the sanctum in each case 
is roofed over by a pyramidal superstructure, and not by a curvi¬ 
linear sikhara which is the usual rule. In the Bhaskaresvara temple 
at Bhuvanesvara we have an Orissan parallel of this kind of shrine. 

In Central India, apart from the square temples and different 
manifestations of them, we are also familiar with temples of circu¬ 
lar shape and plan. Two representative examples of this group may 
be mentioned here, one at Gurgi Masaun (twelve miles east of Rewa 
town), and the other at Chandrehe, also in the old Rewa State (Text 
Fig. 9). The former is in a dilapidated condition, most of the 
sikhara having gone, but the latter (Fig. 32) is found to be in an 
excellent state of preservation. Both belong to the same conception 
and were approximately of the same period. There is a possibility, 
again, that the two were erected by one and the same person, the 
abbot Prasantasiva of the Mattamayura sect of the Saivas, about the 
middle of the tenth century A.D. 48 Each of the temples has a sanc¬ 
tum, circular both inside and out, with an antarala and an open 
mandapa projecting from the front. 

Anart from the circular plan of the sanctum, which is certainly 
a novel feature, these two temples are closely related to the Central 
Indian architectural movement in the compositional arrangement 
of the different components as well as in the essential features of 
their elevation and scheme of decoration. 

573 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Reference may be made in this connection to a few brick tem¬ 
ples in Uttar Pradesh which offer certain interesting analogies 
to the circular temples at Chandrehe and Gurgi Masaun. Mention 
should first be made of a temple at Parauli in the Kanpur District' 19 
which presents us with a circular plan of the garbha-griha internal¬ 
ly, though externally it is a polygon of sixteen sides with three of 
the sides cut off possibly to form the entrance facade. Other tem¬ 
ples of such external shape and appearance are also found at 
Kurari in the Fatehpur District, 60 where, however, the interior of 
the garbha-griha is of a square plan. As usual in brick architecture, 
each of the temples is covered by a double dome constructed on the 
corbel principle. Because of the clear definition of the different 
faces and deep-cut traceries covering the entire surface from the 
base to the summit, the effect and appearance of each of the temples 
are decidedly good, and it is a pity that none of them is sufficiently 
preserved to enable us to form a complete idea of this type of monu¬ 
ments which indicate, no doubt, a new direction in the development 
of the North Indian temple style. Another temple of an external 
circular shape, though square internally, is found at Tinduli in the 
Fatehpur District. 61 The temple has also an appearance and effect 
not unlike those of the group mentioned above. In this predilection 
for a circular plan, whether in the exterior or in the interior, or in 
both as in the case of the temples at Chandrehe and Gurgi Masaun, 
Central India and the Gangetic region may be found to have inter¬ 
esting links with each other. 

Mention should also be made here of a few other temples in 
Central India built on the principle of circles so far as the exteriors 
are concerned. At Arang in the Raipur District 62 there is a dilapi¬ 
dated temple of the name of Bhand Dewal which, except for its plan, 
offers a general resemblance to the temples of the Central Indian 
type. What is interesting is that though the sanctum is square 
internally, externally the plan is based on that of a circle, and not 
on that of a square which is the usual rule. The circumference of 
the circle has, however, straight faces on the principal directions, 
that to the front having been occupied by the usual frontal compo¬ 
nents of the temple complex. The arcs intermediate between the 
straight faces are each cut up into three right-angled indentations, 
the spaces between these indentations being again straight-faced on 
the periphery of an inner circle running along the recessed points 
of the right-angled indentations. The plan is, no doubt, a novel one 
and has almost the shape of a star if the principal straight 
faces are ignored. Another modification of this principle may, again, 
be recognised in the brick temple of Savari-Narayana (Seori- 
narayana) near Kharod, 63 in the Bilaspur District. In this temple 


AKT 



<SL 


e intermediate arcs of the circle between the straight faces are 
each cut up into five regular right-angled indentations at the back 
and into two in front, the remaining portion of the circle in front 
having been occupied by the frontal adjuncts of the manfapa and 
the portico, now entirely gone. But for the straight faces the plan 
is obtained on the principle of a rotating square round a central 
axis. In principle both the temples belong to the same conception 
and may be said to be of rare occurrence in Central India, but 
characteristic of the temples of the Dakhan. A temple at Rahilya, 
near Mahoba, and the Nilakanthesvara temple at Udayapura, in the 
old Gwalior State, each exhibits a plan like that of the Savarl-Nara- 
yana and indicates a wider distribution for such a type of temples. 
Indeed, such a conception appears to be an extension in Central 
India from regions lying further in the south-west. 


To complete the account of unusual types of Central Indian 
temples reference should be made to the peripteral shrines dedicat¬ 
ed to the worship of the Chaunshat Yoginls associated with the cult 
of Sakti. Such temples are usually characteristic of Central 
Indian territories, though one or two examples may be found far 
beyond the geographical limits of Central India. Generally, such a 
temple takes the shape of an open circular court enclosed by a peri¬ 
pheral colonnade with chapels enshrining the images of the sixty- 
four Yoginis and occasionally of some accessory divinities as well, 
and a principal shrine,—sometimes accommodated in the centre of 
the peripheral chapels, sometimes in the centre of the open court—, 
being occupied by the image of an aspect of Sakti. The Chaunshat 
Yogini temple at Bheraghat, 54 near Jabalpur, is 116 feet in internal 
diameter with eighty-one peripheral chapels together with a central 
shrine containing an image of Uma-Mahesvara. This temple might 
have belonged to the ninth or tenth century A.D., though the possi¬ 
bility of a much earlier date for the shrine cannot be entirely ruled 
out. The Chaunshat Yogini temple at Mitauli, near Padhauli, 56 
may be ascribed to the eleventh century A.D. It is 120 feet in dia¬ 
meter, has sixty-five peripheral chapels and a circular central shrine 
with a man&apa. in front. Circular Yogini temples are also found 
at Ranlpur Jharial (Text Fig. 10) in the old Patna State, 66 at Dudahi 
in the Lalitpur District, 67 and in the old Kalahandl State. 58 All of 
them seem to belong to the early mediaeval period. The type seems 
to have extended as far south as Coimbatore where it is represented 
by a solitary example reproducing its essential elements. The Chaun- 
shat Yogini temple at Khajurahb 59 is rectangular in plan—an excep¬ 
tional design in this kind of temples (Text Fig. 11). The central 
quadrangle measures 102 feet by 594 feet, and is surrounded by 
sixty-four peripheral chapels, all around, and one larger in the back 


575 


MINIS?*.,, 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<8L 


wall, no doubt representing the main shrine. Each of these 


is sur¬ 


mounted by a small sik.na.ra, essentially of Ndgara design, though 
crowned by more than one amalaka in the characteristic Central 
Indian fasnion. The Khajuraho temple seems to have belonged to 
a date slightly later than that of the Bheraghat one. Coomara- 
swamy (,u has made the following interesting observation regarding 
the association of temples of this design. “It may be remarked that 
early examples of similar plans, based no doubt on still earlier Indian 


prototypes, can be recognised in the case of more than one Gandha- 
ran monastery shrine, e.g. Jamalgarhi and Takht-i-Bahi, and so far 
as the rectangular type is concerned, can be paralleled in the cloister¬ 
ed court oMhe Kashmiri shrines, and those of some Jaina temples at 
Girnar anff^ravana Bejgola (betta type) and of the Chalukya 
Kesava temple in Maisur”. 


C. Rajputana 

It is in Rajputana that we have the earliest remains of a struc¬ 
tural shrine, the circular temple at Bairat, in Jaipur, that goes back 
to the third century B.C. Fragments of an amalaka, the crowning 
member of a sikhara temple, unearthed at Nagari, near Chitor, and 
datable in the fifth century A.D., 61 testify to the existence of the 
Sikhara temple in Rajputana as early as the Gupta period. This 
part of the country thus seems to have been familiar with the early 
evolution of the Ndgara temple style from its genesis in the archaic 
sikhaia temples of the Gupta and the post-Gupta phases. But older 
temples of this evolutionary phase have all disappeared, and the 
earliest extant temple of this order in Rajputana may be dated in 
the eighth century A.D. when the Ndgara temple had already emerg¬ 
ed in its distinctive shape and characteristics. 

The straggling village of Osia, 32 miles to the north-west of 
Jodhpur, seems once to have been a flourishing settlement, and con¬ 
tains about a dozen and a half old temples of both Brahmanical and 
Jam affiliations. 62 These temples, now in a sadly neglected state, 
represent two phases of building activity, one early and the other 
late. The former, datable in the eighth-ninth centuries A.D., 
is represented by about a dozen temples revealing a stage in the 
evolution of the Ndgara style in which the regional characteristics 
are yet to appear. The later phase is illustrated by nearly half a 
dozen examples in which the regional characteristics are manifest; 
such regional characteristics, however, hardly represent any new 
trend, but illustrate an almost parallel application of the tendencies 
with which we are already familiar in Central India. 

In form and appearance the temples of the early series are alike 
to one another. Temple No. 1 (Fig. 34), dedicated to god Hari-Hara, 

57 .) 


MINISr^ 



is a characteristic example of the group. It is of the panchayatana 
class, each of the shrines, including the main one, being pahcharatha 
in plan and provided with a shallow projecting portico in front. The 
bada is divided into three vertical segments, and the sikhara, 
gradually inclining inwards with an unbroken contour, is topped by 
an dmalaka. 

Temples essentially of the same style may also be found at 
Jhalrapatan, Ambam and Buehkala, all in Rajputana. One of the 
temples at the last place bears an inscription, dated in Vikrama 
Samvat 872 (A.D. 815), which refers itself to the reign of the Gurjara 
Pratihara king, Nagabhata II. An inscription in the Jain Mahavira 
temple at Osia speaks of the shrine as existing in the tifSte of Vatsa- 
raja, father of Nagabhata II, though the temple itself, as it now 
stands, must have been of a considerably later date. Vatsaraja 
flourished in the last quarter of the eighth century A.D., and these 
two inscriptions may furnish an idea regarding the approximate age 
of the temples of the early series in Rajputana. In plan, in shape 
and in appearance these early Rajputana temples resemble the 
temples of the N agar a order in other parts of India of approximately 
the same period. 

In spite of the smallness of size, each of the temples at Osia, 
Dr. Kramrisch 63 rightly observes, “is a model of clarity in the dis¬ 
position and proportion of its architectural theme.” The elegant 
proportions of the different sections and their chaste ornamentations, 
together with the graceful and unbroken contour of the tower, con¬ 
tribute to make the group one of the most attractive among the early 
Nagara temples. Further, the panchayatana temples at Osia, be¬ 
cause of their exquisite setting and orderly disposition of the central 
and the accessory shrines, form impressive compositions. Thus the 
early series of temples at Osia, in spite of their damaged state, re¬ 
mains as one of the most significant among the entire class of 
Nagara temples. 

Two temples of the early series at Osia (Nos. 2 and 7) show a 
distinct advance in the composition in the addition of a mandapa 
which precedes the principal shrine. The mandapa consists of an 
open pillared hall provided with sloping kakshasanas at the two 
sides and a projecting portico in front. Unfortunately, temple 
No. 2 is much damaged, but in the skilful disposition of its different 
parts and adjuncts and in its profuse, yet refined, embellishment it 
ranks as one of the most pleasing creations of the builders’ art in 
Rajputana. Temple No. 7 at Osia (Fig. 35), dedicated to Surya, is also 
an equally elegant production and is perhaps the finest monument in 
the entire series. Like temples Nos. 1 and 2 it is also of the pahchdya- 

577 

s. R.—37 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




what is interesting is that the attendant shrines seem 
connected by a cloister, parts of which still remain, 
arrangement we have possibly the nucleus of the su 
cloistered composition that is particularly characteristic of 
temples of this region. 


Among the early series of temples at Osia there may also be 
recognised examples which belong to conceptions different from the 
Ndgara. The bhadra or the pidhti temple, so intimately associated 
as the mandapa of the rekha sanctum in the temples of the Ndgara 
design, appears at Osia as an individual conception in this early 
phase. In s the much damaged temple No. 3 at Osia we have apparent¬ 
ly a conception of the rectangular temple with a wagon-vaulted 
superstructure, as we have in the Vaital deal at Bhuvanesvara, the 
Navadurga temple at Yagesvara (Almora District) and the Telika 
mandir at Gwalior. 


This early series of the temples at Osia, though fundamentally 
resembling the contemporary Ndgara temples in other parts of 
India, possesses greater affinities with those of Central India. The 
mahdpishta supporting the temple is characteristic of such monu¬ 
ments both in Rajputana and Central India; but it is usually absent 
in Orissa which was another important centre of the early Ndgara 
temples. The shallow pillared porticos of the Osia temples have 
their parallels in the antardlas of the Central Indian temples of early 
date. With the introduction of the mandapa, inclined kakshasanas 
seem to have been characteristic of such a hall both in Rajputana 
^iftd in Central India. The development of the early design of the 
Ndgara temple respectively in Rajputana and Central India is also, 
to a certain extent, parallel. The distinctive type of a mediaeval 
Rajputana temple, therefore, differs very little from a typical Cen¬ 
tral Indian one. A clustered arrangement of anga-sikharas round the 
body of the main sikhara is a characteristic of the typical Rajputana 
temple as well as of the Central Indian. 


But a Rajputana temple, in spite of its close affinity to a Central 
Indian, lacks many of the distinctive features of the Central Indian 
temple type, such as extension of the pagas beyond the top of the 
gaiidi, a number of dmalakas as the crowning element of the sikhara, 
and division of the bdda into more than three segments ( aiigas )— 
pdbhiiga. jangha and baranda. A typical Orissan temple is charac¬ 
terised by a five-fold division of the ba^a, while a full-fledged Central 
Indian temple has as many as seven such segments in the same 
section. A threefold division of the bdda is characteristic of the 
early Ndgara temple and Rajputana retains it to the last. In this 


578 



Respect and in certain other features, to be noticed later, the temple¬ 
building activity in Rajputana seems to have been allied to that of 
Gujarat and Western India. 

In the later series of the temples at Osia one may recognise 
significant stages in the development of the characteristic type of 
the Rajput temple. Three temples of this group deserve special men¬ 
tion, namely the Jain temple of Mahavira, 63a and the two Brahmani- 
cal temples dedicated respectively to Sachiya Mata and Pipla Devi. 
The anga-sikharas in these temples, though on a lesser scale than 
those of the Central Indian temples, are as emphatic in expression, 
and become characteristic of the developed type of thp .Rajputana 
temple. Though not far removed from the typical Central Indian 
temple, at least in respect of its fundamental design and composition, 
the form and disposition of the pillars and of the torana in front 
add distinctive notes that are found only in Rajputana and Gujarat. 
In the form of the plinth and of its decorative scheme the movements 
respectively in Rajputana and Gujarat also appear to be related to 
each other. The projecting eaves shading the bada and its niches 
are also characteristic of the temples of these two regions. Another 
feature found in the temple of Sachiya Mata is the octagonal dispo¬ 
sition of the pillars in the centre of the mandapa hall supporting the 
shallow dome. This is first met with in structures dating from the 
eleventh century, and in a developed form in the mandapa of the 
temple of Pipla Devi with its orderly arrangement of more than 30 
richly carved pillars supporting the superstructure. This arrange¬ 
ment of the mandapa became characteristic of the Rajput temples of 
the developed type and may be seen in its most bewildering variety 
in the Jain temples of Mount Abu. 

The Nllakanthesvara temple at Kekind and the Somesvara at 
Kiradu, both in Jodhpur, seem to represent fundamentally the same 
design and form as those of the later series of the Osia temples. 
Kiradu has a number of temples, all severely damaged. Among 
these the Somesvara 64 is perhaps the most exuberant in design and 
decorative scheme. Unfortunately, only the sanctum with a part of 
its tower remains along with the shell of what had once been a 
magnificent pillared mandapa. 65 

Kumbharia in southern Rajputana 66 has, again, a number of 
Jain temples which are noteworthy as anticipating further develop¬ 
ment that became characteristic of the Jain temple complexes of this 
region. The temple of Neminatha (Fig. 36), for example, is not funda¬ 
mentally different from the characteristic type of the Rajput temples, 
described above, except that it is situated within a quadrangular 
court. But the double-amolakas crowning the anga-sikharas as well 


579 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


chara are rare in their appearance in a temple of this 
a feature is distinctively Central Indian in charactei 
met with, perhaps as aberrations, outside the limits 
territory. The Parsvanatha temple at Kumbharia is also idenu- 
in form and design, and both the structures probably belong to 


about the eleventh century A.D. 


The mandapa of the Neminatha temple and that of the Parsva¬ 
natha (Fig. 37) introduce certain interesting features. The super¬ 
structure in each case with its tiers of rooflets and amalakas is closely 
analogous to that of the Nilakanfha Mahadeva temple at Sunak in 
Gujarat. T|ie disposition of the interior is, again, highly instruc¬ 
tive. The arrangement in either case seems to be identical. The 
mandapa of the Parsvanatha temple is, however, more masterfully- 
disposed with its central complement of elegant pillars with capitals, 
all worked in good taste, supporting the shallow central dome, the 
richly carved pillars with ornamental arches on the flanks, and the 
surrounding cloister with cells of images approached by smaller 
doorways which effectively repeat the pattern of the larger entrance 
leading to the sanctum. As Kramrisch 67 rightly observes: “The 
Mandapa of the Parsvanatha temple in Kumbharia puts to unique use 
the white Makrana marble of Rajasthan. The gleaming spaciousness 
of the hall, within the internal cloister of cells—evolved particularly 
in Jaina temples—is without equal”. 


An advancement of the above design may be recognised in the 
celebrated group of Jain temple-complexes at Dilwara, Mount Abu. 68 
The group consists of four principal temples, and their accessory 
structures, each enclosed within a quadrangular court. Among these, 
two, built respectively by Vimala and Tejahpala and known as 
Vimala Vasahi and Luna Vasahi (though sometimes called after 
their builders), are conspicuously noteworthy for the exuberance of 
ornamental detail minutely wrought in a manner that remains un¬ 
surpassed even in India which was justly famous for such kind of 
work. 


The first temple is dedicated to Adinatha or Rishabhanatha, the 
first Tirthahkara. It stands within a quadrangular court, approached 
on the east through halls, axially placed, one rectangular and the 
other square (Text Fig. 12). As it now stands, the complex consists of 
the sanctum, placed near the western end of the court and preceded in 
front by mandapa and a portico, the three surrounded by a colon¬ 
naded cloister (Fig. 39) of image-cellas aligned round the enclosing 
wall. In Jain terminology these components are known respectively as 
mulagabhdro, gudha-man^iapa, sabM-mandapa and devakulika. All 
these adjuncts, however, do not seem to have been of the same period. 


580 


The sanctuary itself, built in black stone, appears to be earlier than 
the halls and colonnaded cloister which are in white marble The 
sanctuary is surmounted by a tower which, however, is too low to 
have any architectural effect. The halls in front were erected in 
Vikrama Sarhvat 1088 (A.D. 1031) by Vimala, an officer of the Chau- 
lukya king Bhima I. The colonnaded cloister, again, seems to have 
been later than the halls by about a century. 


The second temple, the Luna Vasahi, is dedicated to Neminatha 
th f. twenty-second Tirthankara, and stands to the north-east of the 
A.mnatha temple. Generally it follows the plan of the latter. Like 
the latter, again, the sanctuary in black stone appears to have been 
earlier than other members of the complex which are in white 

"J a R r 7 b e : fr° nt halls (Fi §- 38 > were put up in Vikrama Sarhvat 

1287 (A.D. 1230) by the banker Tejahpala, brother of Vastupala, who 
built the triple-shrined Jain temple at Girnar in Kathiawar. 


The setting of these temples on the rugged scarp of the hill at 
a height of more than 4000 feet is, no doubt, the most picturesque. 
Externally, the temples are perfectly plain and without any archi- 
ec riral effect, the insignificant spires peeping, as it were, over the 
enclosure walls, and having nothing to commend them to the atten- 
lon o the visitor. A totally different effect, however, awaits him in 
the interior (cf. Figs. 39-41) which, in each case, resolves itself into 
an orderly grouping of richly carved pillars of the portico and the 
mai}4apa in front of the shrine and of the colonnaded cloister around. 

splendid display of sculptors’ skill is spread over the interior in the 
minutely carved, almost fretted and traceried, decoration of the 
pillars, ceilings, doorways and cloistered cells. To quote Cousens, 69 
ic ci isp, thin, translucent, shell-like treatment of the marble sur¬ 
passes anything seen elsewhere, and some of the designs are veritable 
dreams of beauty”. Ordinary chiselling would hardly achieve such a 
delicacy of carving, and there is a tradition that much of it was 
produced by scraping the marble away, the payment to the sculptors 
being made by the weight of marble dust so removed. 


Amongst this exquisite array of delicate carving the domed halls 
in both the temples arrest the admiration of the visitors with an 
almost bewildering awe. In each of the halls the central feature 

2 th 7 J l tag0naI nave su PP° rti ng the shallow trabeate dome over a 
i mg o the eight pillars with light cusped ornamental arches in bet- 
ween. On the octagonal frame of architraves over the arcade of 
pi ais a small bracket at each angle introduces the circle of the 
( , a ^J hl . Cl . 1 , rises 11 in con centric rings till the apex is reached. The 
carving of the pillars is delicate as well as the most intricate. In 


581 


MIN/Sr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


Vimala Vasahi they are all of a uniform pattern resembling those 
of the Surya temple at Mo^hera in Gujarat and fundamentally differ 
very little from those in the Kumbharia temples. In the Luna 
Vasahi, however, the pillars exhibit varieties, particularly in the 
introduction of fanciful motifs. In this later hall much of the vigour 
of earlier work has been lost and the bewildering maze of carvings, 
faultless though in execution, fails to evoke the same aesthetic re¬ 
action that one experiences in that of Vimala Vasahi. 


The exuberance of all this sculptural magnificence reaches its 
climax in the treatment of the vaulted ceilings of the halls. No 
description is adequate to convey a correct impression of the care¬ 
fully wrought infinite detail that meets the eye, layer upon layer, 
till the superbly designed apex is reached. Each of the ceilings is 
built of concentric rings, every one of which carries a beautiful motif, 
delicately carved, while athwart the lower rings is placed a series 
of sixteen brackets with representations of Vidyadevis, or goddesses 
of learning of the Jain pantheon, each contained within its own 
aureole. At the apex the dome culminates in a pendant of exqui¬ 
site beauty hanging like a stalactite from the centre. In Tejahpala’s 
hall the pendant hangs down in a series of gradually diminishing 
rings and is carved in a fashion rivalling the fineness and delicacy 
of filigree work in metal (Fig. 41). 

In spite, however, of the splendid wealth of intricate ornamen¬ 
tation, executed with a perfection seldom achieved by human en¬ 
deavour, architecturally none of the halls can be declared to be free 
from flaw. The multiplicity of infinite plastic detail, repeated in¬ 
numerable times, obscures, to a large extent, the structural proper¬ 
ties in respect of which, again, the fundamental rules of architectural 
composition seem to have been ignored. Even an admiring visitor 
cannot fail to perceive a certain disregard of the laws of proportions 
in the disposition of the different components of the interior. This 
is particularly noticeable in the rather stunted heights of the domes 
which are set too squat to fit in with their diameters. The ceilings 
of the bays of the transepts, particularly in Tejahpala’s temple, are 
too low and the unnecessarily heavy architraves, the “antethesis of 
the fairy lightness of the sculpture and gossamer tracery”, 70 ob¬ 
struct the view of more than one of them at a time, thereby prevent¬ 
ing a general vision of the whole. There is, no doubt, a certain 
beauty in the delicately carved exuberant ornamentation of the halls; 
but even this beauty, endless as it seems, leaves the visitor with 
a sense of tiresome surfeit, and there are very few structural merits to 
compensate for this defect. 


582 



MIN tSTfy 


ART 



D. Gujarat and Kathiawar 



The history of Gujarat and Kathiawar is intimately linked up 
from rather early times, and it is not surprising, therefore, that the 
development of the Ndgara temple in these regions is, to a very 
great extent, identical, and, as already indicated, closely allied to 
that in Raiputana. A geographical proximity of all these regions 
and, to a certain extent, political circumstances might have been 
responsible for such striking affinities. Moreover, the construction 
of these monuments may be traced to a hereditary class of temple- 
builders, known in Western India as the Salats, and the common 
characteristics that are noted in the temple-building activity in these 
regions, bear an impress of their traditional knowledge and skill. 

Before describing the development of the Ndgara temple in these 
regions it is necessary to describe a few temples in Kathiawar which 
represent conceptions that are apparently different from that of the 
Ndgara temple style. 


At Gop in the Barda hills in Kathiawar there is a temple (Fig. 431 
of a rather unusual shape that has been described by Cousens 71 as a 
“stranger” in this region. It is considered to be the oldest structural 
temple in Kathiawar. The monument seems to have been supported 
on a basement of two terraces, the upper, slightly reduced in dimen¬ 
sions than the lower, possibly serving as a pradakshina-patha or 
ambulatory round the sanctum. The terraces, each relieved hori¬ 
zontally at the bottom, and also perhaps at the top, by courses of 
mouldings and vertically along the sides by ornamental niches ori¬ 
ginally containing sculptures, are, however, heavily damaged. The 
perpendicular walls of the sanctum are severely plain except for a 
line of grooves on each side near the top. A few of the grooves 
still contain fragments of wood, 72 perhaps remains of wooden beams 
supporting a roof around the sanctum and covering the upper terrace. 
In that case the roof as well as the walls enclosing the second terrace 
seem originally to have been of wooden construction and have natur¬ 
ally disappeared in course of time. 73 

The walls of the sanctum end at the top in two shallow cornices 
over which rises the roof in two stepped courses, ultimately crowned 
by a graceful domical finial. The lower of the two stepped courses 
is relieved on each side by two chaitya arches and the upper by one. 
The chaitya arches are bold in design and elegant in execution, and 
project each in the form of a dormer. Originally they contained 
sculptures, a few of which still remain in situ. 


As it now stands, the temple at Gop presents a rather unusual 
design and it is difficult to make any definite statement regarding its 


583 


MINIS r/f,. 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


edents and affiliations. Cousens 74 finds certain striking resem- 
ances between this temple and the early Kashmirian monuments, 
particularly the Martand, in two important respects, namely the 
stepped-out pyramidal roof with chaitya arches in the courses, and 
in the trefoil arches seen around the lower terraced basement. Ac¬ 
cording to him the type was introduced in this region from Kashmir 
by the Sun-worshipping ancestors of the Mers. This view of 
Cousens, since accepted by archaeologists including Coomaraswamy 75 
and Percy Brown, 76 suffers, however, from two important flaws. 
The history of the ancestors of the Mers is not yet fully clear and 
it is not definitely known that they originally hailed from Kashmir. 
Secondly none of the Kashmir temples of the type with which simi¬ 
larities are suggested can be dated earlier than the eighth century 
A.D., whereas the Gop temple is admittedly two centuries older. 77 
The absence in Kashmir of any example of the type of a date earlier 
to that of Gop stands at present in the way of the acceptance of the 
hypothesis of Kashmirian origin of the Gop temple. Moreover, when 
closely examined, the Kashmirian analogy seems also to rest on a 
weak foundation. The roof is, no doubt, stepped as in the Kashmiri¬ 
an temples, but the graceful domical finial above, instead of the 
harsh angular point at the top like that in the Kashmirian temple, 
indicates for the monument at Gop a conception other than that of 
the Kashmirian. The boldly projecting chaitya arches are unlike 
the angular pedimental arches seen on the roof of the Kashmirian 
temple, while it is difficult to class the arches around the basement 
terrace of the Gop temple with the distinct trefoils of Kashmir. All 
these would suggest that the conception of the Gop temple was dis¬ 
tinct from that of the Kashmirian. 

On the evidence of the shape of the basement arches in the Gop 
temples Sankalia 78 hesitatingly suggests a Gandharan influence 
through Sindh. But this view also cannot be pressed strongly as 
the fundamental elements of the design and composition of the Gop 
temple have hardly any parallels in the Gandharan monuments. In 
our opinion the two major features in the composition of the Gop 
temple, followed also in several other monuments of the region 
evidently of this class, are the situation of the sanctum within a 
covered ambulatory and the stepped arrangement of the roof. Of 
the first a parallel may be recognised in the plan of what has been 
designated as the storeyed type of Gupta temples. On this analogy the 
stepped arrangement of the roof in the Gop temple may, perhaps, be 
considered as but a slightly different expression of the storeyed con¬ 
ception of the superstructure in the Gupta temple. The bold and 
emphatic steps in the roof of the temple at Gop resemble, though in 
a less pronounced manner, the storeys in receding stages, charac- 


584 


ART 




teristic of the composition of the roof in the Gupta temple and lend 
a plausibility to the suggestion made above. The appearance of 
chaitya arches as gables on the roof is very old and may be traced 
back to the days of Bharhut. There is no necessity, hence, to draw 
upon the doubtful Kashmirian analogy on this score. Cousens 79 has 
further noticed certain analogous features in the temple at Gop and 
in what he describes as “early Dravidian temples” at Aihole and 
Pattadakal; but he regards them as “purely accidental”. To our 
mind, however, such analogies are of greater import with regard to 
the affiliations of the Gop temple, particularly in view of the fact 
that an almost identical plan also characterises the early temples of 
Deccan. Here also among the different shapes of the superstructures 
we have both the storeyed as well as the stepped arrangement. Such 
temples are approx : mately contemporary to the temple at Gop, and 
both may be considered to be but slightly different expressions of 
the same conception. 


In Kathiawar other temples of the same class as that of Gop are, 
found at Than (old Jain temple), 80 Visvavada, 81 Harshadmata 
(Fig. 45), Pindara (Fig. 42), Villesvara, 82 and a few other places. 
In these temples the plan is usually that of a sanctum within a 
covered ambulatory, and the stepped arrangement of the super¬ 
structure is also recognised to be one of their distinctive character¬ 
istics. In these respects, though chronologically later, they may be 
regarded as clear analogues of the temple at Gop. 

The above temples of the Gop class, when closely examined, 
may enable us to determine the progress of the style. The develop¬ 
ment is noticed in the progressive increase of the number of stages, 
in the gradual reduction of the heights of the steps, in more harmo¬ 
nious proportions between the lower and upper elements of the 
structure and in a general refinement of the contours. The temple 
of Siva at Villesvara 83 represents, perhaps, the latest development 
of the type (Text Figs. 13 and 14). It is also the most perfectly pre¬ 
served temple of the group and hence enables us to understand the 
composition and design of the type in a more convincing manner. 
The sanctum is situated within a covered ambulatory and is sur¬ 
mounted by a pyramidal tower of stepped stages in receding tiers, 
each stage on each face being relieved by ornamental chaitya arches, 
gradually diminishing in number from six in the lowermost course 
to one in the uppermost. Each corner at each stage is further 
ornamented with decorative finials. The ambulatory is enclosed by 
walls of stone relieved on the exterior by shallow pilasters that end 
in cornices. A flat roof of stone covers this ambulatory. From the 
increased number of stepped stages—the largest among the temples 


585 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


of the group—the refined pyramidal contour, and the shape and de¬ 
sign of the ornamental arches and finials, the temple may be consider¬ 
ed to be the latest, at least in point of style, among the temples of 
the Gop type. The pilasters on the exterior walls of the ambulatory 
resemble in a general way the pillars in the Elephanta cave, and it 
would not be unreasonable, perhaps, to refer it to the same period 
as that of Elephanta. 

Among the temples of the Gop type in Kathiawar a rectangular 
design of the sanctum may be recognised in the so-called Varaha 
temple at Kadvar. 84 Another such rectangular temple with a dis¬ 
tinctly stepped arrangement of the superstructure is found at Kalsar, 
Here the rectangular sanctum is preceded by a portico, also of rec- 
tangular design (Fig. 44), The superstructure in each consists of 
a few stepped courses, relieved by ch'aitya arches. 

Scholars are inclined to class the Sun temple at Sutrapada 86 
as a temple of the Gop type. Of course, the plan of the sanctum 
with a covered ambulatory has a general resemblance with that 
characteristic of the temples of the Gop group. But the stepped-out 
pyramidal arrangement of the superstructure, with an emphasis on 
the horizontal lines, as we see in the monuments of the Gop class,, 
is entirely lacking here. Rather, the tower with the vertical facets 
on each face, amalalca quoins at regular intervals and the heavy 
amalaka-sila, topped by a smaller one, as the crowning member re¬ 
produces the prominent characteristics of a Nagara sikhara (Text 
Fig. 15), and there can be no doubt that here we have an early 
sikhara temple denoting a stage in the evolution of the Nagara 
style in the region. The plan of an inner sanctum within a 
covered ambulatory and the succession of chatty a ornaments 
on each face of the sikhara might have been responsible for such an 
erroneous classification. The latter ornament is a distinctive charac¬ 
teristic of the early Nagara temples while such a plan is also noticed 
in a few temples of the Deccan, each having a prominent Nagara 
sikhara over the sanctum. From these considerations the Sutrapada 
temple should properly be classed with temples of the Nagara style, 
rather than with those of the type at Gop. Similar is the case with 
the temple at Pasthar, classed by Sankalia 86 with the monuments 
of the Gop type. Here also an archaic sikhara of a low height sur¬ 
mounts the sanctum. In this connection it may be noted that adja¬ 
cent to the Siva temple at Ville&vara, described above, there is an 
example of a Sikhara temple, described by Cousens 87 as represent¬ 
ing “a very early and rudimentary stage of the Northern style”. 
This indicates the possibility of the co-existence, at a very early 
stage of architectural activity in this area, of the temples of the 


586 


miSfyy 



style with those of the Gop type. The plan of an enclosed 
m within a covered ambulatory, seen in several early temples 
N agar a form in this area, might have been inspired by this fact 
simultaneous co-existence. 


The characteristic regional expression of the Nagar a temple 
style m Gujarat and Kathiawar is usually designated as the Solanki 

C i h f lukya or Sol “ kI rulers of Anahillapataka. Many 
of the Chaulukya kings were great patrons of the building art and 
the prolific and magnificent architectural activity during their regime 
was, in a large measure, due to their active and enlightened 
patronage. Their ministers and governors were also zealous patrons 
of arts and culture. By its geographical position Gujarat was the 
hub of international commerce of those days, and merchant princes 
like the brothers Vastupala and Tejahpala, vied with one another 
in encouraging the arts in the most exuberant manner possible The 
common people also shared in such activities by raising up substan¬ 
tial funds by a system of recognised imposts for the gods. It appears 
that the entire community was identified with the artistic move¬ 
ments of the day, and the result was a brilliant upheaval of every 
form of art, particularly of architecture in which the religious zeal 
and devotion of the people found the most emphatic expression. The 
whole area was studded over with monuments, distinctive in design 
a ™ u the u m ° st luxuriant in execution. The majority of the temples 
of this brilliant phase is, however, in ruins, while many have been 
almost completely obliterated. Time and man have wrought havoc 
urmng the once smiling and gleaming monuments to a skeleton of 
their former glory, or into totally shapeless ruins. 


Monuments of the early Ncigara form, prior to the emergence of 
he characteristic Solanki type, are very few in Gujarat and Kathia- 
Wcu. Among the few that remain, some had been classed otherwise 
while with regard to the others their true imports had not been 
always recognised. It is because of this that the characteristic type 
ot the Solanki temple has sometimes been regarded as an individual 
growth m this region, a few scholars even suggesting an evolution 
of the Solanki temple from those of the Gop type. Architectonically 
however, though not geographically, the two groups stand far apart 
and represent two distinctly different conceptions. In the funda¬ 
mentals of design and form there is hardly a common link between 
me two. The prominent features of the Solanki temple belong to the 
agara conception, and in it we have a regional expression of the 
Ncigara temple style. The Solanki temple type is related, at least 
m some measure, as a parallel movement to the other regional mani¬ 
festations of the Ndgara style, so widely distributed over different 
parts of India. 


587 



A few stray and isolated examples of the early Ndgara temple 
still remain in Gujarat and Kathiawar. In respect of form and design 
the oldest Ndgara temple in this area may be recognised in a dilapi¬ 
dated shrine at Rhoda (Gujarat). From its simple design and chaste 
ornamentation (Fig. 46) it seems to be nearer to the Gupta sikhara 
temple and apparently belongs to a date not later than the seventh 
century A.D. The small shrine 88 by the side of the Siva temple at 
Villesvara (Kathiawar) and the Surya temple at Sutrapada (Kathia¬ 
war) 89 belong architectonically to an identical conception. 

A few other temples in Gujarat and Kathiawar help us to trace 
the progress of the Ndgara temple from the simple design of the 
temples of the Rhoda group. A small shrine (Fig. 47) at Pashthar 
(Kathiawar), evidently of the early Ndgara form of triratha shape, 
presents two curious features, viz. the division of the rahd-paga into 
two vertical halves by a deep depression in the middle along its 
height and the appearance of sectional a malakas on the central paga 
at regular intervals corresponding to those of the amalaka quoins. 
In contrast to the rich scheme of the sikhara above, the cube of the 
sanctum below, unrelieved b^ any horizontal moulding or by any 
vertical ratha projection, has a bald and severe appearance. This 
may indicate that originally it was not meant to be seen from out¬ 
side, the sanctum being enclosed within a covered ambulatory, 
perhaps of wood, that has been swept away. The above-mention¬ 
ed shrine beside the Villesvara temple and the small temple (Fig. 
49) adjacent to the Navalakha at Ghumli (Kathiawar), slightly 
advanced in design because of its pancharatha conception, also 
appear from their bare walls to have been provided each with an 
ambulatory of wood. The Surya temple at Sutrapada, already 
discussed, has the sanctum enclosed within a covered ambulatory 
of stone, and it appears that like the temples of the Gop class the 
plan of a sanctum within an enclosed ambulatory was also follow¬ 
ed in the early Ndgara monuments of Kathiawar. It is from this 
composition that one may trace the evolution of the Sandhdra 
prdsada in several of the subsequent regional manifestations of the 
Ndgara style. 

A pancharatha plan of the sanctum is a natural development 
from the triratha , and several temples of this plan, architectonically 
posterior to the triratha group, may also be found in Gujarat as well 
as in Kathiawar. An elegant example of the pancharatha group may 
be seen in a small shrine at Sandera (Gujarat). 90 Exquisite in pro¬ 
portions and with a graceful array of fretted ornamentation of 
chaitya arches the temple may be regarded as one of the most- 
notable monuments of the early Ndgara form in this region, as effec- 


588 


ART 

tive in design and sensitive in treatment as the celebrated Mukte- 
svara at Bhuvanesvara (Orissa). Two small temples (Text Fig. 16) 
at Miani (Kathiawar), 91 dedicated respectively to Ganapati 
and Mahadeva, each of the paiicnaratha plan and preceded by a 
pillared portico in front, are as elegant in design and decorative 
conception as the one at Sandera. The small shrine at Ghumli 
(Kathiawar) might have been as effective, except for the bare 
appearance of the walls. The temple of Ranik Devi (Fig. 48) at 
Wadhwan (Kathiawar) 92 is also essentially of the same conception, 
as above. It seems to be slightly later in date in view of the high 
plinth consisting of more than three courses of mouldings, the divi¬ 
sion of the bdda into five segments by a simple shallow band—an 
apology for the bdndhana —around its middle and a rather attenuated 
form of the sikhara* 3 In Orissa and Central India the increase 
in the number of rathas in the plan is, in a certain measure, related 
to the division of the bdda along the vertical axis. With the pan - 
charatha plan Orissa develops a panchanga btitfa, and to this the 
Orissan builders adhere to in spite of the development occasional¬ 
ly of the saptaratha and navaratha plans. The characteristic type 
of a Central Indian temple is saptaratha in plan, and corresponding¬ 
ly the Central Indian architects develop a saptanga bada. But in 
other regions of the Ndgara style the bada of three segments, 
distinctive of the early Ndgara form, is rigidly maintained. Raj- 
putana, Gujarat, Kathiawar, Khandesh, etc., in spite of the mani¬ 
festations of regional characteristics, all adhere to the three-fold 
division of the bada , and the stray and not too emphatic occurrence 
of a fivefold division, as seen in the Ranik Devi temple and in one 
or two others as well, may be regarded as an aberration in this 
area. 

A battered shrine, known as Muni Bhava’s temple, near Than 
(Kathiawar), 94 shows definite characteristics of the early Ndgara 
temple; but already a development of the design may be recognised 
in the provision of a pillared mandapa in front to which a distinctly 
local character is given by the arrangement of kakshasanas. An in¬ 
teresting feature of this temple is again seen in the full-length figures 
of griffins or rampant lions, repeated in the vertical facets of the 
walls, a motif that is perhaps unique in this area. 

Cousens is of opinion that the old ruined shrine of the god 
Trinetrej§vara which once stood at Tarnetar, 95 about six miles north¬ 
west of Than (Kathiawar), was older than Muni Bhava’s temple. 
The Tarnetar shrine consisted of a sanctum with a mandapa in front. 
As is apparent from the photograph 96 that alone survives, the 
sikhara exhibits an arrangement of anga-sikharas in clusters around 




589 



its body, a motif that is evidently late in appearance. This feature 
is a distinctive characteristic of the Solanki temple, as of several other 
regional expressions of the Nagara style. The awkward manner 
in which the roof of the maiujiapa is sought to be joined to the 
sikhara indicates a certain lack of experience on the part of the 
builders with the elaborate design of the Solanki temple, then just 
in process of formation. The now vanished temple at Tarnetar, 
therefore, probably represented an important stage in the transi¬ 
tion from the early mgara form of temple to that of Solanki. It is 
a pity that no monument now survives to enable us to understand 
this transition better. 

Like other regional expressions of the Nagara style, the typical 
Solanki temple of Gujarat and Kathiawar appears to have received 
its complete form by the close of the tenth or the beginning of the 
eleventh century A.D. The type, so formed, is in a large measure, 
analogous to the fully developed Rajput temple, and the architec¬ 
tural development in these regions seems to have been parallel and 
simultaneous, at least in the later stages of the development of the 
Nagara temple. The affinities, which are not few, have already been 
indicated and need not be repeated here. 

The general scheme of a Solanki temple differs very little from 
that of any other regional expression of the Nagara temple. Funda¬ 
mentally the composition consists of the sanctum and the pillared 
hall or vian$apa (gu^ha-mavdapa as it is known in this area), com¬ 
bined usually in axial length. The exterior walls are broken up by 
vertical chases, projected and recessed alternately, which are carried 
up into^ the elevation producing effective contrasts of light and 
shade. The chases are obtained usually by a system of ratha pro¬ 
jections, as in the temples of the Nagara conception, or occasionally 
in the more developed group by the intricate process of rotating a 
square round a central axis—a process that may be recognised to be 
a different application of the same idea that was responsible for the 
intioduction of the system of addition of ratha projections on the 
exterior walls of the temples of early Nagara form. Occasionally, 
again, in the larger conceptions a detached hall, sabM-mandapa, and 
a kxrti-torana are added in front of each. Sometimes a sacred reser¬ 
voir with flagged steps forms an important element of the temple 
complex, but this is seen only in the more important groups. A few of 
the larger temples seem to have the man^apa halls disposed in more 
than one storey, but the examples themselves are too damaged to 
allow any clear understanding of the arrangements. 

In elevation the scheme of the Solanki temple reproduces the 
same fundamental divisions along the vertical axis as in other re- 


590 


MINIS 


ART 



gional types of the N agar a temple. The temple rises from a high 
socle ( pitha or mahdpishta as it is variously termed), above which 
is the wall surface up to the entablature (called mandovara in 
Gujarat and b&da in Orissa). The entablature serves as a transition 
to the next division, the superstructure along with its crowning ele¬ 
ments. The socle consists of a series of mouldings, sometimes plain, 
usually ornamented with repetitive motifs in an order specifically 
fixed by tradition. The wall surface has a threefold division, corres¬ 
ponding to those of the early Nagara temples and termed respectively 
in Orissa as the pabhdga (plinth), the jangha (wall face) and the 
baranda (transition). No further subdivision of this section, as seen 
in Orissa and Central India, is to be found in the Solanki temple, 
a feature shared also by the Rajput temple. The first of these, the 
pabhdga, not always emphatic in' expression, consists of a series of 
mouldings, and the second, the jangha , shows a grouping of sculptures 
in the vertical chases. The last, the baranda, in the Solanki temple, 
as in the characteristic Rajput type, usually consists of a cornice or 
double cornice, extending in the form of a sloping eave fchajja) in 
the frontal parts. Above this rises the superstructure, the tall curvi¬ 
linear sikhara surmounting the sanctum cella and a low pyramidal 
roof, composed of diminishing horizontal courses, covering the 
mandapa hall. In the characteristic type of the Solanki temple the 
sikhara over the sanctum has clusters of anga-sikharas round its 
body, each a replica of the main tower. As already noted, these 
anga-sikharas in the Rajput and Solanki types of structures, though 
less exuberant than the Central Indian, are equally, if not more, 
emphatic in expression, each having its own volume and retaining 
the four-square shape of the main structure. The roof of the man¬ 
dapa also reproduces a similar motif in the repetitions of rooflets in 
tiers all around. 

In the arrangement of the interior the Solanki temple displays 
notable features. The mandapa hall is definitely peristylar in 
character, and richly carved pillars constitute an essential element in 
its composition. As in the elevation of the temple outside, the 
pillars are also divided into three principal sections, a moulded base, 
an elegantly carved shaft further subdivided into decorative hori¬ 
zontal zones, and the top, referred to by some scholars as “an attic 
portion”, consisting of the capital with its entablature and other ele¬ 
ments. In the earlier of the temples the pillars are arranged along the 
sides of the mandapa hall, while in the later ones they are grouped 
octagonally in the centre of the hall thus dividing it into a central nave 
and lateral aisles, the latter sometimes having additional complements 
of pillars. In the more ornate examples light foliated struts, simulat¬ 
ing flying ornamental arches, are thrown across the nave pillars and 


591 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


they form a very elegant motif rich in treatment. The square hall pro¬ 
jects on the outside, the projections being left open; that to the front 
is meant for entrance; while those on the two sides usually accom¬ 
modate windows and alongside kakshdsanas with leaning parapets. 
Sometimes, though rarely, the latter form additional porticos. The 
dome is supported on an octagonal frame of architraves over the 
pillars and rises in oversailing concentric courses, each course richly 
carved, terminating at the apex in a pendant of exquisite beauty. 
Every element of the composition has been masterfully conceived and 
beautifully treated, so that the interior is as rich and effective as 
the external design of the temple. In external design the Solanki 
temple has its compeers in other zones of the N agar a style; but in 
interior arrangement the Solanki temple, or its parallel, the Rajput^ 
is without any equal. 


The above preliminary discussion of the distinctive character¬ 
istics of the Solanki temple renders it unnecessary to describe in de¬ 
tail the individual monuments. The temple of Nilakantha Mahadeva 
(Fig. 50) at Sunak (Gujarat), happily a complete specimen so rare in 
this area, is regarded as one of the most notable monuments of this 
class. It consists of the sanctum and its mandapa , axially joined, and 
preceded by an open portico in front. Externally the roof of the man- 
$apa is surrounded by tiers of rooflets, each with amalaka and kaJasa 
finial, the top of the dome, raising up its head over the design. Like¬ 
wise the sikhara over the sanctum, one of the most graceful in out¬ 
line, is surrounded by tiers of anga-sikharas , one interesting feature 
in each case being the occurrence of double amalaka , a feature that 
is also seen prominently on the top of the main sikhara. At the 
sides of the mandapa there are inclined kakshdsanas , most effective 
in their spacing and disposition, while every surface, whether on the 
walls or on the pillars, is richly carved in the most elegant manner 
(Text Fig. 17). In respect of design and plastic adornment it has been 
aptly described as a “gem of its kind” by a competent authority. 97 A 
copper-plate inscription of Karna of Vikrama Sarhvat 1148 (A.D. 1091) 
found at Sunak, as interpreted by Sankalia, 98 records a grant 
of land for the maintenance of a tank ( vapi), made at Sunaka (Sunak) 
for the god Mahadeva. This presupposes the existence at Sunak of a 
temple of Mahadeva, which can be no other than the present temple,, 
in the closing years of the eleventh century A.D. Stylistically, how¬ 
ever, the construction of the temple has to be referred to a date appro¬ 
ximately a century earlier. Clear parallels of the Mahadeva temple 
at Sunak may be found in the Jain temples at Kumbharia (South 
Rajputana), usually referred to the eleventh century A.D. In the 
latter an advancement of the interior design is recognised in the* 


592 



ART 


<SL 


anal grouping of the pillars supporting the dome, an arrange¬ 
ment that is yet to come in the Gujarat temple. The Sun temple at 
Modhera (Gujarat), more elaborate in design and enrichment, also 
displays a, grouping of the pillars supporting the dome in an octagon. 
This temple cannot be later than A.D. 1026, and the Sunak temple, 
in which this characteristic design is yet to be reached, may belong 
to a date slightly earlier, perhaps to the close of the tenth century 
A.D. 


Several other temples of approximately the same date and 
essentially identical in conception are found in Gujarat as well 
as in Kathiawar. Only the more important ones may briefly 
be mentioned here. The present temple of Limboji Mata at Delmal 
(Gujarat), though occupying the site of an older structure, seems to 
be of comparatively recent date. But the two subsidiary shrines, 
situated on the south-west and south-east corners of the court and 
dedicated respectively to Lakshmi-Narayana and Surya, “are genuine 
examples of good old work and are exceedingly neat and complete 
little structures—chaste in design and ornament”. 99 These subsi¬ 
diary shrines, essentially of the same style as that at Sunak, may 
furnish an idea of the date of the original temple of Limboji Mata 
which once stood in the centre of the court. The larger of the two 
shrines at Sandera (Gujarat) 100 is also an elegant piece of work 
identical in plan and detail with that at Sunak, though smaller in 
dimensions. The Nilakantha Mahadeva temple at Miani (Kathia¬ 
war) 101 may also, from its style, belong to the same group. The tem¬ 
ple of Hingloji Mata at Khandorna (Fig. 52) and that of Jaisalnatha 
Mahadeva at Asoda (Fig. 53), both in the former Baroda State, belong 
also to this conception, the latter being an eminent example of this 
class. The triple-shrined temple at Kasara (Gujarat), now in ruins, 
is apparently an interesting conception (Text Fig. 18). Round a 
central manqUipa hall with a porch, now gone, on the east, are 
arranged three shrines, each with a Solanki type of sikhara, the 
western, facing the porch, being dedicated to Siva, the northern 
to Vishnu and the southern to Brahma. 102 The shrines as well 
as the mandapa are now found in a battered state; but when 
entire, each was a notable production and the effect of the 
whole was one of impressive grandeur. The triple-shrined temple 
at Parbadi (Kathiawar) 103 with its central mandapa, now gone, is 
essentially of the same style as the one at Kasara and may belong 
to the same date. Another triple-shrined temple, but of a later date 
and dedicated to Jain worship, is found at Girnar (Kathiawar). 104 
Besides, several other remains, such as at Kanoda (Gujarat), 106 
Gorad (Gujarat), 106 Chaubari (Kathiawar), 107 etc. also appear, 
from the style of the fragments preserved, to be affiliated to 


S. E.—S8 


593 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


the Sunak group. As compared to the Sun temple at Modhera, the 
temples of the Sunak group have, on the whole, an older appearance, 
and have to be referred to a period earlier than that of Modhera,' 
preferably towards the close of the tenth century A.D. The fairly 
large number of monuments of this epoch suggests a brisk architec¬ 
tural activity even during the early Solahki regime. 

In the eleventh century A.D. the Solahki temple reaches its 
supieme expression, and among the many monuments that were rais¬ 
ed there were several notable productions, though unfortunately all 
of them are more or less dilapidated. Among these, the Sun temple 
at Modhera (Gujarat) 108 is the most imposing even in its ruin (Fig. 
54). Much of the character of this temple complex lies in its elabo¬ 
rate setting, all elements of the scheme being harmoniously related 
to one another in an organic architectural entity of the most 
impressive grandeur. The entire scheme is raised on a paved 
terrace and resolves itself into three principal components 
(Text Fig. 19). On the east, to which the temple faces, is 
situated a large rectangular reservoir (the sacred kunda) with 
flagged flights of steps on each side interspaced by small shrines 
(Fig- 57). Admirable in lay-out and arrangement, this kunda is itself 
a noble production. At the head of the steps on the western side 
stand two richly carved pillars of the krrti-torana or ornamental arch¬ 
way, behind which is seen the open pillared hall of cruciform shape, 
the sabhd-mandapa as it is known in Gujarat. This hall, aptly 
desciibed as a magnificent pile of pillared splendour,” 109 is placed 
diagonally with the axial line of the next component that consists of 
the sanctum and its adjoined man^apa as one unit. All these com¬ 
ponents are skilfully adjusted to one another in a manner that results 
in the production of an effective unity out of the three seemingly 
separate compositions. 

The sabhd-mandapa (Fig. 56) has four entrances on its four faces 
through ornamental cusped archways between two pillars. In between 
the plan is broken up into a number of deep vertical chases at regular 
intervals. Each angle, so formed, has a dwarf pillar, and the entire 
system is enclosed by a low wall following closely the indentations of 
the plan all around. This wall is surmounted by a continuous para¬ 
pet with kakshdsanas arranged all around. In the upper section 
the small pillars support the entablature of the roof, in the lowest 
stage of which runs a continuous eave (chajja). In the interior the 
pillars are arranged in two rows in the form of a cross, the central 
complement describing a regular octagon for support of the dome 
above. Every single part of the design is exquisitely carved, and 


594 


ART 




in spite of the profuseness of the ornament covering all visible sur¬ 
faces, both inside and out, there is hardly any idea of exaggeration. 

The sanctum and the mamiapa , essentially of the same concep¬ 
tion as in the earlier temples of the Sunak group, each displays not¬ 
able advances in design. The first, enclosed within a covered ambula¬ 
tory > sandhara class, while the second exhibits a central 

complement of pillars grouped in a regular octagon. Over this octa¬ 
gonal nave rises the dome (Fig. 58), the ornamented ceiling of which 
still remains. Fretted ornamental tor anas join the pillars and relieve 
the harshness of the four-square scheme at the top. A shallow vesti¬ 
bule of four pillars fronts the doorway of the inner sanctum. The 
man#apa and the ambulatory of the sanctum are each lighted by 
window openings of an effective design. Externally (Fig. 55), vertical 
chases are formed in the plan by ratha projections, and the ornament 
is as varied and rich, both internally and externally, as in the case of 
the sahhfi-mandapa. In each of these elements the superstructures 
have collapsed. A low pyramidal roof no doubt surmounted each of 
the halls, the maiidapa and the sabha-mandapa , while a typical Solahki 
sikhara covered the sanctum. 109 * Bereft of these necessary accom¬ 
paniments the scheme now appears in a truncated state. But the struc¬ 
tural propriety of the different parts as well as of the whole, the rich 
and varied ornament that matches and blends beautifully with the 
architectural lineaments, and the sense of organic unity, all combine 
to rank it among the supreme creations of Indian genius, A master 
mind conceived the noble scheme, and master artists carried it to 
perfection. An inscription in the back wall of the sanctum of the 
Modhera temple bears a date, Vikrama Samvat 1083 (A.D. 1026), 
which may tentatively be taken as the date of the temple. 

Mention may be made of two other monuments, apparently also 
of the eleventh century A.D. One is the Navalakha temple at 
Ghumli, 110 and the other, also going by the same name, at Sejak- 
pur, 11 ^ both in Kathiawar (Text Figs. 20 and 21). The foliated plan of 
the sanctum of the Sejakpur temple is obtained on the principle of a 
square rotating round a central axis. Richly carved and in the best 
proportions of form and design, each of the Navalakha temples, 
when in its original state complete with the superstructures, repre¬ 
sented a fine conception of eleventh century Solahki work. In the 
Ghumli temple the sanctum is enclosed within an ambulatory and 
the mandapa is disposed in two storeys, likely parallels of the latter 
being found in the larger Sas Bahu temple at Gwalior and in the 
ruins of the Rudra Mala at Siddhapur. 

The Solahki tradition maintains a rich and prolific output in the 
twelfth century A.D. which saw two eminent royal patrons of build- 


595 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

mg art in Siddharaja Jayasuiiha and Kurnarapala. With the former 
is associated the completion of an imposing conception, the Rudra 
Mala or Rudra Mahalaya, at Siddhapur (Gujarat). 112 Unfortunate¬ 
ly it is now completely in ruins, but a picture of its former splen¬ 
dour seems to have survived in a Gujarati ballad which speaks of 
the temple as covered with gold, adorned with sixteen hundred 
columns, veiled by carved screens and pierced lattices, festooned 
with pearls, inlaid with gems over the doorways and glistening like 
flames with rubies and diamonds. Much of this is, no doubt, exag¬ 
geration full of rhetoric; but the impressive character of the concep¬ 
tion is evidenced by the scanty, though colossal, remains. They 
consist of groups of columns of the pillared manQapa, which seems 
to have been in more than one storey, and had three entrance porti¬ 
cos on three sides. The surviving foundations suggest that the concep¬ 
tion with the usual appurtenances occupied a space nearly 300 feet 
by 230 feet. In front there stood a klrti-torana of which one column 
still remains. From the dimensions the Rudra Mala seems to have 
been one of the largest architectural conceptions in this area; the 
rich character of its design is fully evident in the few fragments 
that remain. The temple that once stood at Vadnagar (Gujarat) 113 
might have been larger still, as appears from the size of the surviv¬ 
ing richly carved kirti-torana (Fig. 51). The famous shrine of Soma- 
natha at Somanatha-pattana (Kathiawar) 114 had been built over and 
over again after periodical demolitions at the hands of the Muslims. 
The shrine seems to have been old. After its sack by Mahmud of 
Ghazni Bhima I appears to have rebuilt it. Traces of this rebuilding 
can still be seen in the present ruin which dates from the time of 
Kurnarapala in the latter half of the twelfth century A.D. (Text Fig. 
22). It is much of the same design as the Rudra Mala without, how¬ 
ever, the storeyed disposition of the mandapa of the latter, and of 
nearly the same dimensions. The sanctum was enclosed within an 
ambulatory. The sculptural decoration has well nigh been defaced, 
but enough remains to demonstrate the rich character of the design. 
Near by stand the remains of a few other shrines, of which that of 
Surya, 116 almost entire, has still an imposing effect. The tradition 
represented by the twelfth century temples seems to have reached 
a baroque phase foreshadowing the decline. 

In spite of a brisk activity in the thirteenth century A.D. much 
of the vigour and refinement of the earlier works had been lost. 
The majority of the erections are of Jain affiliation and situated on . 
the sacred hills of Satrunjaya and Girnar (Kathiawar), the eminent 
patrons of this faith being king Kurnarapala in the twelfth century, 
and the merchant brothers, Vastupala and Tejahpala, in the thirteenth. 
The monuments on these two hills, on account of constant reno- 



MIN ISTfy 


ART 



<8L 


vations, have lost much of their original appearance, and are hardly 
of any interest architecturally. The triple-shrined temple of Vastu- 
pala (Text Fig. 23) at Girnar 116 is, however, interesting as illustrat¬ 
ing a rare conception. The imposing pile of the Jain temple at Taringa 
(Gujarat), 117 attributed to Kumarapala, in spite of a restoration in 
the time of Akbar, seems to have retained its original form and design 
to a very great extent. But the fineness of form and ornament that 
characterised the eleventh century Solanki temple had already 
declined. Even the hall of Tejahpala at Dilawana, Mount Abu (Raj- 
putana), in spite of its being a notable creation in certain respects, 
fails to impress from the architectonic point of view. 


E. Deccan 

The Nagara temple style, it has already been observed, extends 
beyond its canonical limits far to the south. Temples of the Nagara 
conception have been found as far south as the K^ishna-Tungabhadra 
basin, while a solitary example, the temple of Ganapati at Hangal, 118 
indicates an expansion of the conception even far into the interior 
of the Kannada speaking area. The Deccan temples of the Nagara 
conception may be divided into two well-defined groups, one early 
and the other late. The early group is confined to Southern Dec- 
can in the Ki'ishna-Tungabhadra basin, while monuments of the late 
series are found scattered over the western part of the upper Deccan, 
mainly in the region of Khandesh and its neighbourhood. In the 
history of the Nagara temple style south of the Vindhyas, they repre¬ 
sent two important movements, separated from each other in time 
and space, as well as, to a certain extent, in respect of stylistic 
progress. 

Temples with early Nagara form of the sikhara are found 
side by side with the Dr&vida at Aihole, Paftadakal, Mahakutesvara 
and Alampur, all situated in the Kpishna-Tungabhadra basin. This 
region seems to have been a sort of meeting ground of the two well- 
marked temple styles, the Nagara and the Drdvi^ia, and it is from a 
blending of the elements and characteristics of the two that one may 
recognise the evolution of what subsequently came to be known as 
the Chalukyan style which, though hybrid in its origin, later on 
constituted a separate and well-defined style of great strength and 
decorative significance. 

Aihole and Pattadakal, lying close to each other, are now decay¬ 
ed villages, but a fairly large number of monuments in different 
stages of preservation still reflect a picture of their ancient pros¬ 
perity. Aihole in the Bijapur District has particularly been describ¬ 
ed as a veritable museum of early structural forms, and the truth 


597 


misr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


this observation is amply borne out by nearly seventy temples, 
scattered around the village, which represent an early and prolific 
phase of building activity, a period of experiments, so to say, in vari¬ 
ous forms and designs. In this medley of forms the Ndgara concep¬ 
tion is prominent in a number of monuments. Temples Nos. 9 (Text 
Fig. 24) and 24 at Aihoje 119 each exhibits a sanctum, triratha in plan,, 
surmounted by a dwarf sikhara of early Ndgara design, and preced¬ 
ed by a pillared hall in front. The sikhara in each case reproduces 
the fundamental characteristics of the early Ndgara towers, as seen 
in other parts of India, and the movement naturally represents one 
among the many widely distributed early activities in Ndgara temple¬ 
building. The Ndgara sikhara seems to have been so popular in this 
locality that temples fundamentally belonging to different concep¬ 
tions, such as the Durga 120 and the Huchchimalligu# 12 i at Aihole, 
are each found to be surmounted by a tower of this conception. 
There is a striking likeness between the sikhara of the Huchchimalli- 


gu<Ji at Aihoje and that of the Paraiuramesvara temple at Bhuvane- 
svara. The latter is usually assigned to the seventh century A.D. 
The tikharas of temples Nos. 9 and 24 at Aihole seem to be more 
ai ehaic in design and appearance. The structural activities at 
Aihole appear to have covered approximately a period of two hundred 
years, from the middle of the fifth to the middle of the seventh 


century A.D., and the archaic sikhara temples in this village may 
probably be assigned to the close of the sixth or the beginning of the 
seventh century A.D. 


I he architectural activities, inaugurated in so promising a man¬ 
ner at Aihoje, were continued at Pattadakal that stands near by. In 
this insignificant village in the Badami District one may still find 
old temples crowded among the mean mud houses of the present 
day. As at Aihoje, here, too, shrines representing both the concep¬ 
tions, the Ndgara and the Drdviqia, are found side by side. Of the 
former conception there are at least five examples among which the 
Papanatha appears to have been the most imposing as rivalling in, 
importance the other grand monument at the site, the celebrated 
Virupaksha, 122 a magnificent production in the early Drdvida style. 
The temples of Galaganatha, 122 Kadsiddhesvara, 124 Jambulinga 125 
and Ka^Iviivanatha 126 represent each a sanctum, triratha in plan, 
surmounted by a low Nagara sikhara which in shape and design re¬ 
semble those at Aihoje and contemporary sikhara temples in other 
parts of India. In the early sikhara temples of the Deccan a great 
divergence seems to be presented, however, by the crowning ele¬ 
ments, particularly the amalaka which is a rather insignificant mem¬ 
ber in comparison with those on their northern prototypes, being 
much too attenuated in girth to fit in with the bisama over which it 


598 


miSTffy, 


ART 



<SL 


iced. This individual treatment of the dmalaka characterises 
these sikharas as representing a Deccanese version of tne early 
Nagara sikhara. 


In the temple of Papanatha 127 at Pattadakal (Fig. 60) the sanc¬ 
tum is enclosed within a covered ambulatory and is preceded by two 
axial halls, the first apparently occupying the position of the vestibule 
(antarala ) and the second constituting the forward assembly hall 
(mantjupa) of square shape with an open portico projected in front 
(Text Fig. 25). The entire composition is raised over a substantial 
plinth of several bold string courses. All around, the walls end at 
the top in a heavy cornice surmounted further by ornamental pavi¬ 
lions. The roof is flat with the sikhara over the sanctum shooting 
high up at the eastern end. The interior is lighted by ornamental gril¬ 
les set between pilasters, while the ambulatory around the sanctum 
has boldly projecting windows, one on each of the three sides. But 
for the tower which is definitely of Nagar a conception, the entire 
composition is essentially one of the Dravida and has a general like¬ 
ness to that of the Virupaksha temple that stands close by. The 
refined contour of the tower of the Papanatha indicates a date later 
than that of any other temple of sikhara conception at the site. It 
may be assigned either towards the close of the seventh or the be¬ 
ginning of the eighth century A.D. 

The Sangamesvara temple (Fig. 59) at Mahakutesvara, 128 lying 
between Badami and Pattadakal, is a neat little specimen of the 
Nagara style. It consists of a sanctum, triratha in plan, and is pre¬ 
ceded by an open pillared portico in front. A collateral shrine on 
either side of the central ratha projection anticipates the developed 
pancharatha plan. In this respect the Sangamesvara has a parallel 
in the Parasuramesvara temple at Bhuvanesvara and may be coeval 
with it in date. 

At Alampur on the west bank of the Tuhgabhadra there is a 
group of six temples, all situated within a walled enclosure. In de¬ 
sign and composition all the temples are essentially identical and 
have a general likeness to the Papanatha at Pattadakal, and may be 
dated about the same period or to one slightly later. The best pre¬ 
served monument of the Alampur group is represented by what is 
known as the Visva-Brahma temple (Fig. 61). 129 Though essentially 
of the same class as the Papanatha at Pattadakal, the different ad¬ 
juncts of the Visva-Brahma temple are found to be in much better 
proportions leading to a far more coherent composition. 

With very few exceptions, the above early monuments of South¬ 
ern Deccan can hardly be said to have belonged wholly to the 
Nagara conception. In the majority of these temples, particularly 


599 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


<n mute ambitious productions, the essential idea that governed the 
composition was more of the Dravida extraction than of the Ndgara, 
the impact of the latter idea being however emphatically expressed 
in each case by the sikhara surmounting the sanctum. Southern 
Deccan, particularly the Krishna-Tuhgabhadra basin where such 
monuments are concentrated, furnished a fruitful meeting ground 
oi two apparently differing conceptions of temples, the Ndgara 
and the Dravida, and it is from an admixture of the characteristic 
elements of the two that there evolved in later days an individual 
style of great prolixity and richness. 


A distinctive expression of the Ndgara temple style is recognised 
m the upper Deccan or Dakhan, as it is designated by Cousens, rough¬ 
ly m the territory between the lower reaches of the Narmada and 
the upper course of the Godavari. The mediaeval monuments of 
us region, situated as they are between two important zones 
of architectural movements—the SolankI in the north and the 
Chalukyan in the south—,bear, in a certain measure, evident signs 
of their impacts. Nevertheless, they have certain remarkable indi¬ 
vidual features which separate them from either, as well as from 
o .her regional types of the Nagara temple style. These rank them 
as a separate expression of no mean interest and significance. 


Perhaps the most distinctive characteristic of the Dakhanese 
expression of the Ndgara temple style is to be noticed in the design 
of the sikhara which is markedly different from that of any other 
regional type. Here, the central offset on each face of the body 
Ie sarictum cube is carried up and continued on the body of the 
si v tara up to its summit as an unbroken vertical band covered all 
through by rich tracery of chaitya- window motifs. These promi¬ 
nent bands, following the main contours of the sikhara on the four 
sides, act, so to say, as spines to keep the latter in shape. The 
segments in between the spines are filled in up to the finial by hori¬ 
zontal tiers of miniature sikharas diminishing in size as they go up. 

. he pnnctple governing the clustering of the aiiga-sikharas round 
ie main one, an inevitable consequence inherent in the logical pro- 
Jf SS evolution of the Ndgara sikhara, is, no doubt, felt also in 

us a ; lanese expression; but here we have a new interpretation 
of the theme m which the disturbing effect on the contours is effec- 
ive y held in check by the strongly pronounced vertical spines. 
The latter, with their emphatic verticalism, keep the ahga-sikharas 
subordinated to the principal design. The Orissan builders, while 
admitting the logic of the ahga-sikharas, also reached a similar solu¬ 
tion, but m a slightly different manner. In Orissa as well as in the 


600 


ART 



<SL 


the sikhara seems to have been of 
greater import, and each region evolved a scheme in which the anga- 
Mkkaras received a treatment whereby they lost their individuality 
and became transformed into mere decorative detail. Kramrisch 131 
is inclined to call this type of sikhara as composite, as in this treat¬ 
ment may be recognised a conscious attempt to combine both the 
principles—that of the single and unencumbered sikhara with that 
of one with smaller replicas clustered around. 


The temple in the Dakhan usually consists of the sanctum and 
the mantfapa, sometimes having the appearance of being placed 
diagonally to each other on account of the great diversity in the 
exterior walls which practically revel in “a great multiplicity of 
angles”. 132 The mandapa has either one approach in the front, or 
three in the front and at the two sides, each such approach being 
through a projected porch. Sometimes three shrines are placed 
round a central mandapa having a projected porch in front to com¬ 
plete the design. The angles in the exterior walls are obtained either 
by the usual system of ratha projections, or on the principle of rotat¬ 
ing a square round a central axis and thereby leading to a foliated 
star-shaped plan. In the latter case the central buttress on each 
face runs parallel with the square plan of the sanctum in the interior 
and carries upward the prominent vertical band that serves as a 
spine of the sikhara . Like the buttresses the foliated angles in bet¬ 
ween are carried up and continued on the sikhara. These, no doubt, 
emphasise strongly the vertical tendency of the entire scheme, and 
possibly to balance and, to a certain extent, to counteract this em¬ 
phatic upward urge a close series of horizontal mouldings is laid 
across the composition in the lower cubical section, while deep 
passages between the tiers of the ahga~sikharas repeat a similar hori¬ 
zontal scheme on the body of the tower. The vertical scheme, as 
well as the horizontal, thus seem to have counterbalanced each other 
in a remarkably effective manner which allows for ever-changing 
chiaroscuro effects up and across the entire composition. It has to 
be noted in this connection that the cubical section, corresponding 
to the bdfia, like that in the early Nagara temple, is divided into three 
main segments. 

The characteristic Dakhanese expression of the Nagara temple 
style, as described above, appears before us as fully formed. Un¬ 
fortunately, no monuments of a transitional stage have yet been 
found to explain the gradual evolution of the type. Two eminent 
expressions of the type, possibly also the earliest in date, have been 
found outside the confines of the Dakhan proper, one in the South 
and the other in the North. But the type does not appear to have 


601 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


been characteristic of any of these regions, where they appear ap¬ 
parently as exceptional occurrences. The mediaeval temples of the 
Dakhan invariably bear the distinctive features of this characteristic 
type which, from its close and intimate association with this region, 
seems to have been its particular heritage. 

The temple of Ambaranatha 133 in the Thana District (Bombay), 
though in a perilously ruinous condition, seems to have been one. 
of the most outstanding monuments of the type (Text Fig. 26). An. 
inscription on the architrave over the northern doorway of the 
mandapa records its erection in the &aka year 982 (A.D. 1060) during 
the time of the Silahara chief Mummuni or Mamvani. The sanctum, 
and the mandapa, seemingly aligned diagonally along the axial line, 
are characterised each by deep and bold vertical chases as well as by 
emphatic horizontal mouldings in the plinth and transition (barancLa). 
The treatment of the exterior walls thus provides for all possible- 
combinations of light and shade up and across the composition. A 
greater part of the sikhara has fallen down and the roof of the 
mandapa is also in a battered state. In the sikhara on each face may 
be seen the characteristically Dakhanese expression of successive 
tiers of ahga-sikharas in between the vertical spines on the central 
faces, the rich and continuous traceried ornamentation of the latter 
being in juxtaposition to the rugged appearance of the segments oc¬ 
cupied by the ahga-sikharas. In spite of the great diversity, a skil¬ 
ful treatment of the different elements has resulted in a unified 
design full of animation and vivacity. 

Balsane in Khandesh has a group of nine temples, all more or 
less battered, though no less interesting. Of these, No. I (Fig. 62). 

a triple-shnned temple,'34 seems to have been an outstanding pro ’ 
due ion ( Text Figs. 27 and 28). Of the same design as that of the 
m jaranatha, except for its triple-shrined composition, this temple 
at Balsane exhibits the prominent characteristics of the Dakhanese 
type in a more developed and crystallised state. No. 4 at Balsane 1315 
consists oi the sanctum and its mandapa, disposed in the charac- 
eristic iashion, and is notable for the foliated star-shaped plan The 
temple of Mahesvara at Patna (Khandesh) 1 3® is also similar in com¬ 
position, but the plan is further elaborated and shows five foliations 
m between the central bands (Text Fig. 29). In this respect, at 
least, it resembles the Nilakanthesvara temple at Udayapura per¬ 
haps the finest monument of the Dakhanese expression.’ The 
Galtesvara temple (Fig. 65) at Sarnal (Kaira District), though in a 
mutilated state, also represents an eminent conception. 

One of the best preserved monuments of the Dakhanese series 
may be seen in the temple of Gandesvara (Fig. 64) at Sinnar, 13T 

602 


misr^ 


ART 



<8L 


out 20 miles to the south of Nasik. It represents a panchdyatana 
group, the principal sanctuary with the four subsidiary shrines at the 
corners being situated on a raised terrace (Text Fig. 30). Besides, 
in front of the principal shrine, dedicated to the god Siva, stands 
a small pavilion for Nandi, the mount of the god. In design and in 
treatment each of the subsidiary shrines, with the plain unencum¬ 
bered sxkhara , is nearer to the Nagara form. But the principal 
temple with its characteristic appurtenances represents the Dakha- 
nese form in a mature state. There is, however, a falling off in the 
quality of sculpture and a general stiffness of outline, on which 
account the monument has been assigned to a period later than that 
of the supreme efflorescence of the type in the latter half of the 
eleventh century A.D. The Mankesvara temple at Jhogda 138 
(Nasik District) and the Amritesvara temple (Fig. 66) at Ratan- 
wa$i 139 (Ahmadnagar District) also belong to this later phase which 
foreshadows a decline. Many other old shrines are scattered through 
the Dakhan, but gradually there is a progressive tendency towards 
heaviness and clumsiness which are very clearly visible in what are 
known in this region as the Hemadpanti temples. 

It is interesting to note that the finest monument of the 
Dakhanese expression of the Nagara temple style is situated far to 
the north of the Dakhan proper. At Udayapura in the old Gwalior 
State stands the venerable pile of the Nilakanthesvara temple 140 
built by the Paramara king Udayaditya, and hence also known as the 
Udayesvara (Fig. 67). It is in a perfect state of preservation, and in 
it may be observed the supreme excellence of the characteristic Dak¬ 
hanese version of the Nagara temple, described above. 140 * On a high 
adhishtMna or socle rise the sanctum and its may4 a P&> the former 
surmounted by a sikhara in its Dakhanese expression and the latter 
by a pyramidal roof, also of the same order. 


On the exterior the sanctum is of a foliated star-shaped plan, 
the points of the star, meaning the chases between the central bands 
on the four faces, being obtained on the principle of rotating squares 
(Text Fig. 31). The central bands themselves remain parallel to the 
square of the garbha-griha. The bada or the cubical section has a pro¬ 
minent plinth, nearly as high as the jdngha above. The socle as well 
as the plinth consists each of a series of bold mouldings, those of the 
former spreading towards the bottom as if to hold the ground in a 
firm grip. The plinth mouldings rise perpendicularly. In shape as well 
as in treatment these mouldings have a general likeness to those of 
the Khajuraho temples. But with these the affinity with the typical 
Central Indian temple ends, and the design, as a whole, follows what 
has been described as typically Dakhanese. 140b The chases in the 
jdngha are in the shape of faceted pilasters as in the Ambaran&tha, 


603 


mtST/fy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


id being angular, because of the star-shaped plan, every one ac¬ 
commodates a sculpture on each of its two sides. The chases are 
terminated by capital shape mouldings above which a cornice, with 
a deep recess intervening, serves as the baranda or transition from 
the cube to the sikhara (cf. Fig. 63). 

The sikhara rises with a slight curvature, the unbroken vertical 
spines, in continuation of the central band below, with their richly 
traceried ornamentation holding it in shape. The vertical as well 
as the horizontal themes, as seen on the perpendicular cube, are 
repeated on the sikhara (Fig. 68). The former finds eloquent ex¬ 
pression in the firm contours of the spines on the four quarters tran¬ 
scending the limits of the bisama and in the arrays of anga-sikharas 
in continuation of the chases in the lower ‘ section, rising in 
succession towards the peak. The latter theme is reproduced 
m the division of the sub-quarters of the anga-sikharas into 
successive tiers by deep horizontal passages in between. The princi- 
pal scheme of the composition is, hence, “a close correspondence of 

? 4 i I i superstructure”, as beautifully expressed by Kram- 
nsch, and this is also noticed in the edges of the bisama, repeating 
the five-pointed star in each of the sub-quarters, and in the rims of the 

’ r ^f P ° nding “ in its CUS P S to t} ie angles of the star-shaped 
... ple ■ , The ma v4apa roof, pyramidal in shape, is composed 
likewise of miniature repetitions of itself in successive tiers converg¬ 
ing to the pinnacle. The mighty gable over the antarala, rising again 
m successive levels, serves as an effective bond between the super¬ 
structures over the sanctum and the manfapa, which are essentially 
* two divergent shapes. Every part is meticulously carved in the 
most elegant taste and the result is a texture of exquisite delicacy 
and variety which, instead of overshadowing the structure, empha¬ 
ses its lineaments in the most effective manner. The entire monu- 

defaH ® umfied desi S n vibrant, so to say, with teeming 

detail. The temples at Arang and Rahilya and that of Savari-Nara- 
yam* near Kharod (all in Central India) exhibit each certain of the 
characteristic features of the Dakhanese temple but not in s o 
complete a degree as the Nllakanthesvara at Udayapura in which 

conception reC ° SniSe * SUpreme manif estation of the Dakhanese 


F\ Sindhu-Ganga Valleys 


Style in ArySvarta and a considerable portion <5 ihe SouI h P wI s ”Z 
known in the regions of the upper belt of Northern India, parti- 
cu arly in the rich riverine plains watered by the Sindhu and the 
Ganga-Yamuna systems. Unfortunately, very few old temples now 


604 


• misT/f 


ART 




survive. The plains are practically denuded of monuments that 
could claim a certain antiquity, and when one recalls the iconoclastic 
fury of the Muslim conquerors from which this wide tract of teffi- 
tory repeatedly suffered, the reason for the extreme scarcity of oid 
architectural specimens would be patent and clear. The few that 
survive of the old monuments are also sadly ruined. A few dilapi¬ 
dated monuments in brick in the Uttar Pradesh are found to 
exhibit the characteristics of the early N agar a design, except for 
their preference for a circular shape. They have already been men¬ 
tioned in connection with the monuments of Central India. In the 
north-west, in the Himalayan regions, are found several temples 
decidedly of early Nagara conception, while in the east, in West 
Bengal and the adjoining region of Chotanagpur, the same concep¬ 
tion is illustrated by a few monuments. Very few examples, 
however, remain to enable us to trace its development in any 
of these regions. The few extant monuments do not lead us beyond 
the suggestion that this vast stretch of territory was familiar with 
the Nagara temple. But whether there was any sustained and orga 
nised activity in Nagara temple building in any of these areas is a 
question that still awaits a satisfactory answer. At any rate, there 
has been found not a single monument in any of these areas that 
might correspond to the magnificent regional manifestations of the 
Nagara style, like the Orissan or the Central Indian, the Solahki or 
the Dakhanese. 

In the Himalayan regions the earliest specimen of the Nagara 
design is possibly represented by a series of monolithic temples at 
Masrur (Kangra). 143 These temples, which are cut out of the rock 
and reproduce the characteristics of the early Nagara temple, may 
belong to the eighth century A.D. At Baijnath (Kangra) 144 there 
is also a group of structural temples of about the ninth century A.D., 
alike in form and design to those of Orissa of approximately the 
same date. Among these, one is interesting for its flat-roofed 
mandapa which has a rekha sikhara embedded at each of its four 
corners, just as we find in the mandapa of the Vaital deul at Bhuvane- 
svara (Orissa). At Chamba 145 there are, again, several temples of 
early Nagara form in which an advancement of the design is noticed 
in the pancharatha plan which characterises each one of them. In 
the larger temples the bada is divided into five segments along the 
vertical axis, also representing an advancement over the early form, 
and this feature connects them with the development of the Nagara 
style as found in Orissa, while a shallow string-course round the 
amalaka^sila is a feature which is particularly Rajput in occurrence. 
Further, an impact of the hill tradition is recognised in a few of 
the Chamba temples in the two superimposed parasols, one over the 


605 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

the other over the arnalaka , each resting on a framework 
of wood and covered by thin slabs of slate. In the hills such a con¬ 
trivance is possibly a necessary feature, being eminently suitable 
for draining off the snow, and is to be found also in the temples of 
Kediaranatha and Vadarinatha in the snowy heights of the Himalayas. 
In the temple of MaMdeva (Fig. 69) at Bajaura (Kulu) 146 we have 
a neat little temple of the tenth century Nagara design. It is rich 
in carved ornamentations and is notable for the three side chapels 
projected from the body of the sanctum, one on each of the free 
sides, containing fine relief sculptures of Ganesa, Vishnu and Durga. 
All the temples, described above, are essentially of early Nagara 
form and design and hardly any distinctive feature that might have 
been due to local inspiration is noticeable in any of them. 

In Eastern India also the Nagara temple seems to have been 
widely known. The monuments that are now extant are, however, 
confined to West Bengal and the adjoining Chotanagpur region. 
In the latter area such temples are mostly found at Telkupi, Para, 
Boram, Dulmi, etc. in the Manbhum District. That the Nagara temple 
was also the prevailing form in different parts of Bengal may be 
inferred from several votive temples in miniature of this design 
found respectively in Northern and Eastern Bengal. 147 Certain sculp¬ 
tures from Bihar 148 also reproduce the form of the Nagara temple 
in relief, thereby indicating its prevalence in the region of Magadha. 

Of the extant temples referred to above, a few can be assigned 
to the period under review, and whether lying in West Bengal or in 
the adjoining district of Manbhum, they are found to have many 
things in common. Apparently they represent one architectural 
movement. The Manbhum temples are small and unpretentious and 
it is in the temples of West Bengal that the movement can be studied 
more profitably. 

The earliest of the temples of the Nagara design in Eastern 
India appears to be temple No. IV (Fig. 70) at Barakar (Burdwan 
District, West Bengal). 149 It consists of a sanctum, the mandapa in 
front being a recent addition not included, in all probability, in the 
original scheme. The sanctum is triratha in plan with a subsidiary 
niche on either side of the central buttress which anticipates the 
pancharatha. The central ratha on each face is occupied by a niche 
capped by a superstructure of tiered stages which is terminated by 
the cornice at the bottom of th e gandi. The supplementary niches 
have similar superstructures which are, however, smaller in height. 
Otherwise, the walls remain quite plain. The gandi rises with a 
slight ingress and is capped by a spheroid arrmlaka-sila. The rdha 
and the konaka pagas are emphasised. Instead of the interlaced 




606 


ART 


patterns, the usual decorative motif on the gandi in 
the early Nagara temples, the surface is covered by relief panels, 
illustrative of various legends, and animal and human motifs. 

In the triratha plan, a cube of three segments, a pabhaga or 
plinth of three mouldings, and the plain form of the sikhara unen¬ 
cumbered by anga-sikharas, the temple No. IV at Barakar reproduces 
the prominent characteristics of the early Nagara temple and fur¬ 
nishes a general resemblance with the Parasuramesvara at Bhuvane- 
svara. At the same time there are several features in it which 
are equally distinctive. In relation to the dimensions of the sanc¬ 
tum, the sikhara in the Barakar temple is not as low and stunted 
as that in the Parasuramesvara. The mouldings of the pabhaga 
exhibit shallow rectangular offsets that are not to be found in the 
Orissan temples. The relief panels on the body of the gandi intro¬ 
duce a new scheme in the ornamentation of the sikhara of the 
Nagara temple. The bhumi-amalakas are rounded in section, and 
these as well as the dmalaka-sila surmounting the gandi have inden¬ 
tations resembling fluted cusps. In this treatment of the amalakas as 
well as in the offset panels on the mouldings of the pabhaga, the tem¬ 
ple No. IV at Barakar appears to have parallels, not in Orissan tem¬ 
ples, but in temples of Western India, particularly in Gujarat. Two 
other interesting features which seem to connect this temple with 
those of the west may also be referred to. The rahd-paga on each face 
is divided into two vertical halves by a recessed line along its cen¬ 
tre. Again, in the upper stages of gandi, the rahd-paga is furnished 
with sectional amalakas. Both these features appear in the temple at 
Pashthar (Kathiawar), described above. These clear affinities of 
this temple with those of the distant west are difficult to explain 
in the present state of our knowledge. Moreover, its link with the 
typical Orissan temple is furnished by the bold and emphatic mini¬ 
ature sikhara shown on the rahd-paga on the front face. The temple 
No. IV at Barakar, as it now stands, offers many problems of which 
no satisfactory solution is possible at present. Its date, hence, also 
seems to be a problematic one. From the general architectonic form, 
however, it does not appear to have been much later in date than 
that of the Parasuramesvara. 

The brick temple (Fig. 71) at Sat Deuliya (Burdwan District, 
West Bengal), 1 also of the Nagara conception, is again interesting in 
certain respects. The ratha plan and the curvilinear tower repro¬ 
ducing in its pagas the ratha shape of the sanctum cube evidently 
connect it with the Nagara conception of temple. The interlaced 
patterns of a variation of the chaitya -window motif on the pagas and 
the unbroken and emphatic contours of the latter are likewise distinc- 

607 



itya -window 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

characteristics of the early Nagara temple. The apparent division 
of the bdda into five vertical segments connects it with the Orissan 
development of the Nagara design. At the top the bdda ends in, 
several courses of inverted offsets forming a projected cornice over 
which the gandi is placed. The top of the sikhara has tumbled down 
and the surface has an extremely battered appearance. In contrast 
to the sikhara with its rich traceried ornamentations with ridge-like 
terminations on the edges of the papas, the body of the sanctum cube 
appears rather plain except for the ratha facets. The projected cor¬ 
nice with the remains of a continuous recess below, coupled with the 
plain appearance of the bdda, may suggest that the sanctum was 
originally enclosed by an ambulatory which has now vanished. What 
is interesting is the absence of bhumi-dmalakas demarcating the 
stages of the gcuidi, and also probably of the usual amalaka-sild as the 
crowning member of the sikhara. The absence of such features from 
the scheme of the sikhara constitutes definite departure from the usual 
Nagara design of the temple. Whatever the explanation of such curi¬ 
ous features, the affiliation of the temple fundamentally to the Nagara. 
design is clear and explicit as noted above, and from its general shape, 
refined contours and decorative scheme it appears to be dated about 
the tenth century A.D. 

One of the finest monuments of the Nagara design in this part 
of India is represented by the Siddhesvara temple (Fig. 72) at Bahu- 
lara (Bankura District, West Bengal). 151 It is made of brick and is 
situated on a low mound, being originally surrounded by eight small 
subsidiary shrines and enclosed by a compound wall, all of which 
are now in ruins. The temple is of the single-celled type, and the sanc¬ 
tum is approached by a vestibule in the thickness of the front wall 
with a triangular corbelled arch opening. It rests on a plinth which 
consists of several courses of elaborate mouldings and is of the ratha 
plan. The bdda or the sanctum cube is divided into five segments 
by three horizontal bands forming the bandhana and dividing the 
jangha into two halves. Besides the division of the plan into rathas 
the plainness of the walls is relieved by niches, those on the central 
rathas being capped by miniature sikharas. Several courses of pro¬ 
jected mouldings separate the bdda from the gandi. The latter has 
a chaste and refined contour, the corners as well as the edges of the 
pagas being rounded off. The whole surface of the gandi is covered 
with intricate traceries of the chaitya- window patterns, scroll-work 
and other designs. Of the last the most interesting are the tiers of , 
miniature sikharas in the lower stages of the rahd-pagas. This is 
a new interpretation of the logical theme of aiiga-sikharas on the 
body of the main Sikhara, not met with so far; but it seems to have 
been characteristic of the Nagara temples of this region as is evident 

60S. 




misT/fy 



ART 


<m the temple known as Jatar deul in the Sunderbuns. The top of 
the temple has tumbled down and the hand of time has been heavy 
on the mouldings and decorative patterns. Yet, considered as a 
whole, this brick monument, because of its graceful proportions, 
elegant contours and chaste style of decoration, seems to con¬ 
stitute one of the outstanding productions of Indian temple archi¬ 
tecture. Coomaraswamy 162 assigns the temple to the tenth century 
A.D. Dikshit 13 thinks this date to be a century or two too early. 
From general architectonic shape and ornamental style a date in the 
eleventh century A.D. may not appear to be unreasonable. At 
Dehar (Bankura District, West Bengal) 1 ^ there are two stone tem _ 

pies, of which the sikharas have gone. The treatment of the cube 
of the bdda in each case resembles that of the Siddhesvara at Bahu- 
ara, and all the three may be regarded as belonging to the same 
conception and to approximately the same period. The brick 
temple, known as the Jatar deul (Fig. 73), in the Sunderbuns (West 
Bengal), 160 when in its original state, seems also to have been an emi¬ 
nent production of this conception. Modern conservation has en¬ 
tirely obliterated its original shape and features, but originally, as 
appears from an earlier photograph, the temple had considerable 
architectural merits and closely resembled the Siddhesvara in plan 
elevation and decorative treatment. 


* mm a study of the temples of the Nagara design in this part 
ol India it appears that they are unmistakably related to the Oris- 
san movement. As a class they are nearer to the early group of 
Orissa than to the typically Orissan, though the link with the latter 
cannot be entirely ruled out. One or two, as noticed above, may, 
again, be found to have significant affinities with the distant western 
movement. These apart, the Bengali temples may also be recognis¬ 
ed to have certain individual features. The Bengali architects dis¬ 
played, to a certain extent, a better sense of reserve and restraint 
than their contemporaries in other parts of India. They exhibited 
a more refined taste in the choice of their decorative patterns and 
their balanced adjustments. The Nagara temples in Bengal may 
ave the grandeur of the massive and stupendous stone monu¬ 
ments seen in other parts of India; but they are surely more elegant 
and graceful, and the brick specimens in particular testify to a fine 

and mature knowledge of the Bengali builders in the science and 
art of building. 


3. Drdvida Style 

The nucleus of the Drdvida temple, as has already been observ- 

1 f t ° reyed f ° rm ° f the Gupta tem P le and the rock-cut rathas 
at Mamallapuram supply an interesting stage in the development of 

609 


S. E.—30 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

the Drdviijia style. The Pallavas were eminent patrons of art and 
architecture. The early phase of the Pallava rule in the south is 
an age of great experiments in methods and forms. The “Cave 
style” of Mahendravarman Vichitrachitta was continued by his son 
and successor Narasimhavarman Mahamalla, but the latter initiated 
a new turn in the rock-cut method by shaping out free-standing 
monolithic rathas from granulitic boulder-like outcrops in imitation 
of structural forms. Eight such rathas 166 are still found at 
Mamallapuram, the seaport city founded by him at the mouth of the 
Palar river, 32 miles south of Madras. 

Every one of the rathas, except the Draupadi, exhibits a storey¬ 
ed elevation of the roof, each storey being terminated by a convex 
roll cornice ornamented with chatty a- window arches ( kudus as they 
are called in this part of the country), each enclosing a human head. 
The walls of the ground storey are broken up by pilasters and sculp¬ 
tured niches, while the upper storeys are surrounded by small pavi¬ 
lions (pancharams). In spite of this general resemblance there may be 
recognised great divergences in shape and form which are, to a cer¬ 
tain extent, determined by the shape and plan of the sanctum cellas. 
The Nakula and Sahadeva rathas each has a rectangular plan round¬ 
ed at one end, and correspondingly the storeyed roof is surmounted 
by a vault with an apsidal back. This form, reproducing the design 
of the Buddhist chaitya halls, gradually went out of fashion. Among 
the other rathas we have the square as well as the rectangular plans. 
In the former the storeyed roof is topped by a domical member, the 
stupi or stupika as it is called. The latter has an elongated barrel¬ 
shaped vault, with gables at the two ends, as the crowning element 
of the roof. In these two forms one may recognise the origin of the 
two fundamental components of the Drdvida temple, the vimana re¬ 
presenting the sanctum with its pyramidal tower and the gopuram 
or the immense gateway leading to the temple enclosure. 

Of the square type of rathas , which furnished the starting point 
lor the Dravida vimana, the Dharmaraja is the most imposing as 
well as the most perfect (cf. Classical Age, Fig. 27). It consists of 
a square ground storey, with open pillared verandahs all around, 
which upholds a pyramidal tower of receding storeys ultimately 
capped by the octagonal stilpikd. Each storey is demarcated from 
the other by a convex roll cornice with chaitya- window arches 
(kw^us), and the upper storeys are surrounded by small pavilions 
(pancharams), Though the sanctum seems to be situated on the 
second storey, the pillared verandahs round the ground storey have, 
more or less, an appearance of an open ambulatory. It is not difficult 
to find in this type an adaptation of the earlier storeyed form of the 




610 


Gupta temple enriched by the introduction of new elements in the 
matter of detail, apparently of local origin. The stupikii or the crown¬ 
ing member is evidently a derivation from those of the min iature 
rock-cut relief shrines at Undavalli (Guntur District). The roll 
cornice appears in the caves of the Mahendravarman period and even 
earlier. The turretted roofs (pancharams ) surrounding each upper 
storey are, no doubt, intended to fill up vacant spaces round the 
horizontal stages so as to conceal, to a certain extent, the storeyed 
elevation and to lend the tower a pyramidal shape. The Dharraaraja 
ratha at Mamallapuram may, in these respects, be clearly recognised 
to be a typical example in which the distinctive elements of the 
Oravida vimana may be said to have emerged and attained their 
characteristic expression. 

Of the two rectangular rathas, the Ganesa is the more interest¬ 
ing. With its storeyed elevation surmounted by a barrel-shaped 
vault with a gable at either end and pointed pinnacles at the top, it 
reproduces, though on a much reduced scale, the distinctive form 
and characteristics of the immense gopuram or entrance gateway to 
the spacious temple enclosure. The rectangular plan is eminently 
suitable for a gateway building and the barrel-vaulted roof is 
certainly the most effective covering for a building of this plan. 
As such the type was selected as a convenient prototype for the 
gateway building, and the fundamental resemblance between the 
shape and form of the simple type of the rectangular ratha, as illus¬ 
trated in the Ganesa, and those of the monumental gopurams of the 
later days leaves no doubt regarding their evident connection. At 
Mamallapuram the rectangular and the square types of rathas ap¬ 
pear side by side, each as an independent conception. Their associa¬ 
tion together to form two important elements of the Dr&vida temple 
•complex is an event that is still to come. 

With its beginnings in two distinct types of the Pallava rock- 
cut rathas of the first half of the seventh century A.D. the Dravida 
style of temple passes through a long process of evolution and 
elaboration under different dynasties of kings who came to be 
politically supreme in the south. From the period of the Pallava 
rulers till the end of the Vijayanagara empire in the sixteenth cen¬ 
tury, and even later, the style maintains a prolific activity, and a suc¬ 
cession of datable monuments, spread over the southern end of the 
peninsula, supplies definite landmarks in the development of the 
stj,le.. Confined within a comparatively small area the movement 
remains, more or less, compact and unilateral in spite of a history 
of approximately a thousand years. This long period may be divid- 
into several well-marked phases. Each succeeding phase starts 


611 


MiNisr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


r ith the heritage of the preceding one, leading the style, along with 
a richer elaboration and maturity, to its ultimate logical fulfilment. 
In fact, there is no real break in the continuity of the tradition, and 
the strongly marked individualities, constituting the distinctive 
characteristics of the style, remain prominent throughout. 


With Narasimhavarman II, also known as Rajasimha Pallava 
(c. A.D. 695-c. 722), the rock-cut method ceased and the ratha type 
was replaced by structural temples. The change to the structural 
method furnished the builders with greater powers and freedom, 
and the results of this change are noticeable in the striking advance 
that was made in the building art even within a generation. To 
Rajasimha’s reign may be assigned several interesting monuments 
of which three seem to have been of immense importance in the 
development of the style as a whole. The earliest of these stands, 
at Mamallapuram and is now known as the “Shore” temple (Fig. 
74)157 on account of its being situated on a point of land that juts 
out into the sea. A formal temple scheme is found to be already in 
a process of formation as the temple proper is placed within a 
quadrangular court enclosed by massive walls. The principal 
feature of the scheme consists of two shrines, asymmetrically 
attached to each other, each having its own pyramidal tower com¬ 
plete with a domical stupiJcd and a pointed finial. The one to the 
east, lacing the sea, is larger in dimensions and was apparently the 
mam shrine dedicated to the god Siva. The western one was con¬ 
secrated to the worship of the god Vishnu. The towered sanctua- 
ries, each with a storeyed elevation terminated by a dome-shaped 
stupikd and with roll cornices and small pavilions at each stage 
c ear ly reveal a derivation from the square type of rathas best 
exemplified by the Dharmaraja. Each tower has gained in height 
and there is a lightness and soaring quality in the attenuated and 
elongated shape of each. It is precisely these qualities which lend 
more rhythm and more buoyancy” isa to these rather loosely knit 
forms. A greater freedom, inherent in the structural procedure 
was, no doubt, partly responsible for these qualities; but this alone 
could hardly account for the effect produced unless a new aspira- 

Finn nnrl K o o n 


L lis aspiration leads to the unified conception of a temple 
scheme in which all the appurtenances, that were to be distinctive 
o the Dravitfa style of temple, are clearly expressed and harmoni¬ 
ous y adjusted to one another. The first example of such a unified 
conception may be seen in the celebrated Kailasanatha temple ^9 
built by Rajasimha Pallava, not long after the Shore temple,’ at 
Kanchipuram (Conjeeveram), the capital city of the Pallava kings 

612 


minis?*,. 



ART 


<SL 


ancient days. This temple complex (Fig. 75), also known as 
the Rajasimhesvara after its royal builder, consists of the sanctum 
with a pyramidal tower and a pillared hall or mandapa (mantapam as 
it is known in this part of the country) with a flat roof, both situated 
in a rectangular court enclosed by a peristyle composed of a series of 
cells (Text Fig. 32). The sanctuary stands near the western end of 
the court and is topped by a pyramidal tower of storeyed elevation of 
great beauty and graceful contours. This constitutes the principal 
feature of the entire scheme and is obviously a development from the 
monolithic prototype of the Dharmaraja ratha. In the pyramidal 
tower there is a far greater harmony in the different storeyed 
stages leading to a more effective design of this kind of superstruc¬ 
ture (Text Fig. 33). “From the somewhat compressed forms of the 
monolithic rathas to the more loosely-knit elements of the Shore tem¬ 
ple, we now arrive at a further effort to present the sikhara (sic.) 
in a suitable architectural form, well-proportioned, substantial, 
yet at the same time rhythmic in its mass and elegant in 
its outlines.” 160 A group of supplementary shrines, each repeat¬ 
ing on a smaller scale the form of the main shrine and attached to 
its free sides, may suggest, again, an advancement of the design of 
the vimdna, There are doubts, however, whether these compo¬ 
nents were included in the original scheme. The peristyle of cells 
with its range of cupolas is also an interesting feature apparently 
connected with the future development of the style. 

In the composition of the Kailasanatha at Kanchlpuram we 
have the first example of the unified design of a temple complex 
with many adjuncts that are to characterise the full-fledged Dravida 
temple. Apart from the vimdna, the pillared hall or mandapa, an 
invariable accompaniment of the Dravida temple, has already made 
its appearance and is placed in front of the sanctum, originally as a 
separate building but later on joined together by an intermediate 
hall forming the antarala . The sanctuary and the maiuLapa stand 
within an enclosed court to which access is now obtained by two 
entrances in the eastern wall on two sides of a rectangular building 
with a storeyed elevation and surmounted by a barrel-shaped vault. 
This building now serves as a subsidiary chapel. From its position 
in the middle of the eastern, i.e . the front, wall axially in a line with 
the mandapa and the vimdna, it is not difficult to find in this building 
the original entrance to the temple enclosure. The shape of this struc¬ 
ture, eminently suitable for a gateway building, and the manner in 
which it has been built and disposed, leave no doubt about its original 
function. The chapel, in which form we now see it, represents 
obviously a later deviation from the original plan. Its derivation 
from the rectangular type of rathas, like the Ganesa, is also clear 


618 



and explicit. With all the appurtenances, like the walled court, the 
gopuram, the pillared mandapa and the vimana, all complete and 
in their proper positions, the Kailasanatha at Kanchlpuram may 
rightly be regarded as one of the key monuments of the Drdvida 
style. 

The Vaishnava temple, known as the Yaikuntha Perumal, 16 * 
at Kanchlpuram is also attributed to Rajasimha Pallava and might 
have been begun not long after the Kailasanatha. Here a more 
developed sense of composition is evident in all the elements of the 
temple complex being combined into one architectural unit. The 
temple stands within a court which is approached by a portico in the 
east (Text Fig. 34). On the outside the walls of the court are relieved 
by pilasters and niches, while on the inside runs a continuous colon¬ 
naded cloister separated from the central complement, the sanctum 
and its attached mandapa, by an open passage for circumambula- 
tion. The maiidapa is a square pillared hall having an entrance 
in front and a vestibule behind which leads to the sanctum cella. 
The sanctum is also square in plan and has a pyramidal tower of 
four storeys capped by the octagonal dome of the stupika with a finial 
(Text Figs. 35 and 36). Each storey is disposed as a shrine, with two 
enclosed ambulatories in the lowest, an ambulatory and an open bal¬ 
cony in the second and an open balcony in the third. Each storey is 
separated on the exterior by roll cornices surmounted by parapets with 
ornamental cupola shapes at intervals, while the walls of the low¬ 
est are relieved by sculptures set between pilasters. In the disposi¬ 
tion of the different elements there is noticed not only a sense of 
unity but also an economy which is responsible for much of the 
architectural character of the monument. The Drdvida temple style 
is already in the process of crystallisation. 

In the second half of the eighth century A.D. the power of the 
Pallavas began to decline and the notable advances, made during 
the previous phase, seem to have received a set-back. Though no 
ambitious productions were taken in hand, the architectural acti¬ 
vities continued, as is evidenced by a number of monuments erect¬ 
ed during this later Pallava phase. Of these, the Muktesvara and 
the Matarigesvara 162 at Kanchlpuram and the great temple at Pana- 
malai 163 are essentially of the same mode and style as those 
associated with the name of Rajasimha Pallavta. Certain smaller 
temples of this later phase, such as the Vadamalllsvara at Oraga- 
dam 104 (near Chingleput), the Tiruttanesvara at Tiruttani 165 and 
the Parasuramesvara at Gudimallam, 166 reproduce the apsidal form of 
the Sahadeva ratha. The movement, however, remained, to a cer¬ 
tain extent, static, but the standard, already achieved, was main- 


614 


MIN/Sr^ 



The rich heritage of the Pallava building traditioh- 
passed on to the Cholas who supplanted the Pallavas as the 
dominant power of the South. 


In connection with the development of the Dravida temple in 
the Pallava period it would be useful to refer to a few productions 
of the style outside the confines of the Dravida country proper. 
One of the most significant is the Virupaksha temple at Pattada¬ 
kal 107 in the Chalukya territory (Text Fig. 37). The temple was built, 
according to an inscription, for LokamahadevI, the senior queen of the 
Chalukya king Vikramaditya II (c. A.D. 733-746) in commemoration 
of his having thrice conquered the Pallavas of Kanchi. There is a 
strong possibility of its design having been inspired by that of the 
Kailasanatha temple at Kanchlpuram. There are epigraphic re¬ 
cords, both at Pattadakal as well as in the Kailasanatha at Kanch!- 
puram, which, read together, suggest that Vikramaditya, after his 
conquest of the Pallava capital, was much impressed by the latter 
temple, and so might have brought builders from the south for his 
own architectural undertakings. The Dravida temple, in its funda¬ 
mental conception, was not new in the Chalukyan territory and 
there are two significant examples of earlier dates, namely the 
Meguti temple at Aihole, 168 built in A.D. 634, and the Vijayesvara 
or Sahgamesvara at Pattadakal, 169 erected by king Vijayaditya 
(A.D. 696-733), father of Vikramaditya II. Some scholars are, there¬ 
fore, inclined to recognise in the Virupaksha temple a natural deve¬ 
lopment of the Dravida conception in the Chalukyan region. But 
the Kailasanatha temple at Kanchlpuram and the Virupaksha at 
Pattadakal show an essential identity in respect of the plan and com¬ 
position. Such an identity is difficult to explain unless there had 
been a closer link between the two. There is every probability, as 
the inscriptions would tend to suggest, that the former was the proto¬ 
type of the latter. 

In shape and form and in matters of composition the Virupaksha 
at Paftadakal seems to be a duplicate of its prototype at Kanchl¬ 
puram. The Vijayesvara temple at Pattadakal belonging to the 
previous reign was also of Dravida conception, but there the 
different elements seem to be cruder in setting. In the Virupaksha 
a greater co-ordination of the different parts and their refined set¬ 
ting and execution represent a distinct advance on the Vijayesvara, 
an advance that was, in all probability, due to its contact with its 
southern prototype. The Trailokyesvara or Mallikarjuna temple 
(Fig. 76), 170 built by Trailokyamahadevi, a junior queen of Vikrama¬ 
ditya II, stands adjacent to the Virupaksha and is of the same general 
plan and design as the latter. 


615 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


< In the Chalukyan territory several temples of the Dram^a con¬ 
ception were built during this phase. But the most outstanding 
monument of this conception in this part of the country, and perhaps 
a unique creation of Indian architectural art, is the famous Kailasa 
at Ellora. 171 An entire temple complex (Fig. 78), completely hewn 
out of the living rock, as it is, it seems to have been a fitting sanctuary 
for the god Siva whose favourite abode is the Kailasa mountain. It 
was built by the Rashtrakuta kings who supplanted the Chalukyas 
in the sovereignty of the Deccan. Possibly begun during the time 
of Dantidurga, it was completed by Krishna (c. A.D. 758-773). The 
scheme resolves itself into four principal elements repeating the 
fundamental pattern of a Drdvi<jia temple as we find in the Kailasa- 
natha temple at Kanchipuram or in the Yirupaksha at Pattadakal. 
Seen as a whole, it has a closer alliance with the latter which, it is not 
unlikely, was its prototype. The differences that are noticed are, in 
a large measure, due to the necessities of the rock-hewn technique. 

The temple itself stands within a rectangular court surrounded 
by cloistered cells and approached in front by a double storeyed 
gatehouse, the precursor of the gopurams of later days. The court 
measures nearly 300 feet by 200 feet. The principal component con¬ 
sists of the vimana and the mandapa , the two occupying an area of 
approximately 150 feet by 100 feet. This unit is raised over a lofty 
plinth, nearly 25 feet high, which forms, so to say, a ground storey 
The plinth is heavily moulded at the bottom and at the top, the inter¬ 
vening space being occupied by a frieze of boldly carved elephant 
(Fig. 77) and lion caryatids seemingly supporting the massive monu¬ 
ment. Over this substantial substructure stand the vimana (Fig. 79) 
and the mantfapa, the latter approached by grand flights of steps in 
the front, i.e. the western side. The flat roof of the mandapa is sup¬ 
ported on sixteen pillars arranged in small groups of four each at the 
corners, thus dividing the hall into cruciform aisles. From the 
marufapa a vestibule leads to the sanctum cella, the tower of w r hich 
rises in four storeys and ultimately ends in a dome-shaped stupika. 
From the level of the court to the apex the vimana is 95 feet in height. 
Around the sanctum cella and enclosing the ambulatory, so to say, 
are arranged five lesser chapels, each repeating, on a smaller scale, 
the principal theme standing in the centre. 

In front of this unit and on the main axis is, again, a detached 
flat-roofed mandapa for the bull Nandi, on either side of which 
stands a free-standing column (dhvaja-stambha) nearly 50 feet high 
from the level of the court, bearing at the apex the trisula or the 
sacred emblem of the god. The double storeyed gatehouse, forming 
the facade of the entire composition, is itself an imposing production, 
and in its gable roof we have possibly, like that of the Kailasanatha 


ART 




germ of the future gopuram. All these units 
seemingly detached, are connected with one anothe 
The entire scheme seems to be unified by an organic rh; 
governs the disposition and proportions of each unit. 


This vast temple complex, completely hewn out of the rock 
with all its elaborate appurtenances, strikes the beholder with a 
sense of wonder and awe when he visualises the stupendous task 
involved in such a process. From this standpoint it is, no doubt, a 
titanic production deserving to be ranked as one of the world’s great¬ 
est creations. Because of the disadvantages of the rock-cut technique 
the monument has been set within a deep pit, but those responsible for 
this unique conception sought to compensate for this defect by rais¬ 
ing the monument on an enormously high podium. Due to the 
technique followed the monument has the appearance of a sculpture 
on a grand scale than of architecture. There is no doubt that the 
sculptor’s art is the supreme fact of this conception, more so because 
of the superb carvings that cover all the free surfaces of the monu¬ 
ment. At the same time it is the genius of a master architect that lends 
unity and rhythm to the entire conception, and in this respect it is 
also a grand piece of architecture. The unique boldness of its tech¬ 
nique and the beauty of its execution have made it widely known, 
and aptly has the Kailasa at Ellora been described as ‘'the world’s 
greatest rock poem”. Among the temples of the Dravida conception 
this is the most northerly one. Apart from its singular technique, 
in the vastness of its scheme, in the orderly treatment of its parts 
and in its superbly graceful execution it is also one of the most 
eminent productions of Dravida architecture. 


About the end of the ninth century A.D. the Pallavas had to 
make way for the Cholas who became the dominant power in the 
South. During the regime of the Cholas the Dravida style of temple 
architecture enters a brilliant and distinctive phase. The produc¬ 
tions of the early phase of the Chola rule are usually small, yet each 
represents a complete formation in which the relation with the 
Pallava tradition remains clear and unmistakable. When compared 
with the productions of the last days of the Pallavas, those of the 
early Chola phase display a certain freshness of spirit that may indi¬ 
cate a revivifying of the style from the dormant state in which it 
had fallen. These initial attempts represent a transition from the 
Pallava to the Chola development of the Dravida temple style. 


Of the monuments of the early Chola phase, the Vijayalaya 
Cholesvara temple at Narttamalai 172 is interesting for its circular 
shrine chamber enclosed within a square ambulatory. The erection 
of this temple is usually attributed to Vijayalaya, the first of the 


617 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


imperial Cholas. The circular shrine is rather an unusual design 
in this class of temples, but the pillared mantfapa, the storeyed tower 
of the vimana topped by the stupiha,, and the diversification of the 
external walls by pilasters and recesses belong evidently to the 
Pallava tradition. 


The initial phase of the Chola development of the Dravida tem¬ 
ple is best exemplified in the Koranganatha at Srinivasanallur 173 
(Trichi nopoly District). It possibly belongs to the reign of Paran- 
taka I (A.D. 907-953). It is of modest proportions and consists of 
the sanctuary and its attached manifapa., the two covering a total 
length of 50 feet. The conception is essentially Pallava. But at 
the same time a more rational attitude is recognised in a simplifica¬ 
tion of its parts that emphasises the “value of plain spaces together 
with due sense of the character and correct location of the archi¬ 
tectural features required for purposes of embellishment”. 174 There 
have also been significant changes in the design and form of the 
pillars. The wall surfaces are divided by pilasters into niches, each 
occupied by a full-length figure sculpture in very high relief, resem¬ 
bling almost a statuary in the round. Another interesting and dis¬ 
tinctive feature, unknown in the previous phase but a characteristic 
element in the decorative scheme of a DrUvitjta temple of the subse¬ 
quent periods, is the string-course with a row of griffin-heads in the 
stylobate. Fundamentally of the same conception as the Pallava 
temples, the Koranganatha at Srinivasanallur heralds also a new 
phase in the development of the Drcivida temple style under the great 
Cholas. 


The Chola power reached its zenith under Rajaraja the Great 
(A. D. 985-1014) and his son Rajendra Chola (A.D. 1012-1044), 176 
and it is to these two monarchs that we owe two supreme creations 
of the Dravufa temple style. Conscious of their unrivalled supre¬ 
macy and vast resources, these two monarchs set about erecting two 
stupendous monuments as lithic testimonies, so to say, to their reli¬ 
gious^ devotion and dignified majesty. The first of these was built 
at lanjore, the seat of Chola sovereignty, by Rajaraja the 
Great, and is known as the Brihadlsvara, otherwise called Rajaraje- 
svara after its royal builder. According to the temple records the 
construction was begun some time about A.D. 1003 and completed 
in A.D. 1010. 176 The second was erected about A.D. 1025 by 
Rajendra Chola in the new capital city of Gangaikondacholapuram 
which this monarch founded in commemoration of his extensive 
conquests. It is in these two grand and lofty temples that one may 
visualise the mighty resources of the Choja power at its height. 

The Brihadisvara temple at Tanjore 177 stands within a walled 


818 


miSTfiy 


ART 



quadrangle, 500 feet by 250 feet, which is preceded by an outer 
court, 250 feet square (Text Fig. 38). The latter, originally intend¬ 
ed for minor shrines and residential appurtenances, is of very little 
architectural interest. The present gopuram in front, i.e. the eastern 
wall, is, again, a much later erection. A second gopuram, situated 
axially to this outer gateway, leads to the principal quadrangle with 
a colonnaded cloister all around. Near the back end of this court rises 
majestically the great vimana (Fig. 80) with the forward comple¬ 
ments of the temple complex—a large mantfapa, a pillared portico 
and a Nandi shrine—combined axially in front. All these structures 
are, by themselves, sufficiently important productions, functionally 
as well as architecturally, but in no way do they interfere with the 
effect of the grand and massive pile of the vimana towering above 
everything in its vicinity. Together they cover a total length of 180 
feet, while the pyramidal vimana rises to a height of 190 feet. In 
dimensions alone the Brihadisvara temple at Tanjore is one of the 
boldest and most daring conceptions of Dravida architecture. No 
less impressive is the architectural treatment of the whole. There 
is a clarity in the disposition of its parts, each organically related to 
the other. This, coupled with a correct sense of decorative scheme, 
leads to the creation of a superb monument, distinguished alike for 
its rhythm, poise and dignity. 

The magnificent pile of the vimana, which constitutes the domi¬ 
nating feature of the entire composition, may be divided into three 
principal sections, namely the upright cube enclosing the sanctum 
cella with its ambulatory, the lofty and massive pyramidal body 
ascending in thirteen diminishing zones, and the crowning element, 
the graceful dome-shaped stupikJa (Text Fig. 39). The first is 82 feet 
square rising to a height of 50 feet from the base. Along the hori¬ 
zontal section this huge mass is broken up by five projecting bays 
alternating with recesses, and this theme, continued right up to the 
top of the pyramidal tower, emphasises the vertical aspect of the 
conception. Along the vertical axis the wall section is divided into 
two equal stages by a bold and heavy cornice-like moulding that 
casts a deep horizontal shadow. The bays, above and below, are 
occupied by image-niches with the sides treated like pilasters sepa¬ 
rated by deep recesses. The pyramidal section of the vimana is 
evidently a derivation from the Pallava prototype, the gradually 
diminishing zones in its composition being clearly reminiscent of 
the storeyed elevation of the earlier towers. In the Tanjore vtmana, 
however, the horizontal aspect of the storeyed stages has been sup¬ 
pressed for the sake of an emphatic vertical contour. The shallow 
horizontal lines separating the zones, intersecting with the vertical 
bays of the lower section continued on the tower, create a beautiful 

61 ft 


MiN/sr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


liMchitectural pattern, the fundamental idea of which is vertical 
all intents and purposes. In this massive pyramidal pile there is a 
sense of strength and stability, and at the same time a rhythmical 
quality of soaring verticalism, accentuated further by the dome¬ 
shaped stupika which, poised over the four-square top of the pyramid 
“like a light but substantial globe”, 178 by its contrast and with flam¬ 
boyant niches at the sides, appears to impart an effect of airy light¬ 
ness to the entire composition. “Unquestionably the finest single 
creation of the Dravidian craftsmen”, rightly observes Percy 
Brown, 179 “the Tanjore vimdna is a touchstone of Indian architec- 
ture as a whole”. 


,*§L 


Within the precincts of the Brihadisvara temple stand a few 
other structures, all subsequent accretions of different periods. Of 
these, the temple of Subrahmanya represents an exquisite piece of 
decorative architecture, richly carved, that equally attracts the 
admiration of the visitor. It belongs to a late date, about the 
eighteenth century A.D. 


About A.D. 1025 Rajendra Cho]a constructed another stupend¬ 
ous monument in his new capital city of Gangaikon$acholapuram. 180 
Built within a quarter of a century, it resembles fundamentally the 
great conception of his father. Unfortunately, it has suffered much, 
and not a little of its spoliation has been due to what K.A. Nilakanta 
Sastri 181 describes as “modern predatory engineering”. It now 
stands amidst the mud huts of the desolate village, a mere stranded 
shell of its former prosperity. 


Like its predecessor, the great temple at Gangaikondachola- 
puram is also contained within an immense walled quadrangle, and 
the remains of a substantial bastion at the south-east angle would 
indicate that this was disposed in the shape of a fortress enclosure. 
Much of the surrounding walls has now disappeared. Within the 
court the principal composition occupies a rectangle, about 340 feet 
by 100 feet, with its long axis from east to west, and consists of a 
large mandapa, 175 feet by 95 feet, and the massive vimdna , 100 feet 
square, with a connecting vestibule. The main entrance in the 
middle of the eastern wall of the mandapa is designed as an impress¬ 
ive portal, while two subsidiary entrances are provided in the 
northern and southern walls of the vestibule, each in the shape of 
a deeply recessed doorway flanked by two domineering figures of 
dv&rapalas on the two sides. The mandapa is a relatively low build¬ 
ing with a flat roof supported on a cluster of pillars, more than 150 
in number, arranged in colonnades in the interior of the hall. In this 
pillared hall, substantial in dimensions, one may recognise the 
nucleus of the “thousand-columned mandapas” that were to consti- 


620 


tute a distinctive feature of the Drdvi^a temple-complexes of the sub¬ 
sequent ages. An individual appearance is imparted to the interior 
by the division of the platform supporting the colonnades along its 
centre by a wide passage at the ground level, with a similar passage 
carried round the entire inner circuit of the hall. The vestibule 
connecting the two principal components, the flat-roofed mandapa and 
the pyramidal vimiancu, has two rows of massive square piers. Its 
roof rising above the level of that of the mandapa, contributes an 
effective ensemble to the exterior elevation of the entire composi¬ 


tion. 

The vimana, though larger in horizontal dimensions than the 
Tanjore one, is only 160 feet high. The treatment of the lower up¬ 
right section is essentially the same as that at Tanjore. But in the 
tapering body above, which consists of eight diminishing zones, 
the introduction of curves, in place of the strongly pronounced 
straight lines in the previous example, adds a richer note to the 
creation of Rajendra Chola. The Chola power in the time of this 
monarch had reached its most affluent state, and this is reflected in the 
increased richness and exuberance of this later structure. As Percy 
Brown 182 aptly comments: “There is a voluptuousness in the later 
structure, the beauty of ripe femininity, in contrast to the masculine 
strength of the earlier type. But in comparing these two architec¬ 
tural productions they present much more than a difference in kind. 
Stately and formal as an epic may epitomise the Tanjore vimana 
while the later example has all the sensuous passion of an eastern 
lyric, but it seems to go even deeper than that. Each is the final 
and absolute vision of its creator made manifest through the medium 
of structural form, the one symbolising conscious might the other 
sub-conscious grace, but both dictated by that ‘divinity which has 
seized the soul’ ”. 

In these two eminent productions of the two greatest monarchs 
of the Chola dynasty the Dravi$a temple style reaches its supreme 
expression. In the mighty sweep of the Tanjore vimana there has 
been achieved a complete balance between stupendous architectural 
mass and aspiring verticality. Here the form dominates the composi¬ 
tion, all ornament, however exuberant, being subordinated and com¬ 
plementary to it. At Gangaikondacholapuram also the architectural 
form remains dominant in the conception, but the ornament has 
grown richer and, though still subservient to the architectural 
lineaments, predicts a restless impatience that seems destined to 
overstep its limits and overflow in plentiful growth. 

After Rajendra Chola the vigorous days of the expanding power 
of the dynasty were over. The style also loses much of its force 


621 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


tends to become more and more ornate and florid. After the 
supreme upheaval it enters a baroque phase in which the activities, 
though practically undiminished, were concerned with productions 
of no more than ordinary interest. In the twelfth century A.D., 
the Chola power was on the decline and in its last stage, engaged in 
a life and death struggle with the rising power of the Pandyas and 
refractory feudatories. This led to the collapse of the dynasty in 
the second half of the thirteenth century A.D. and the Pandyas for 
a time gained dominance in the south. During this Choja-Pandya 
phase a semblance of the former achievement of the style is notice¬ 
able in two productions, the Airavatesvara at Darasuram 188 and 


the Kampaharesvara or Tribhuvanesvara at Tribhuvanam, 184 both 
in the Tanj ore District. The two seem to have been close to each 
other in time and to denote a revived impetus to building art. But 
this impetus is concerned, not so much with the production of any 
robust architectural form, as with the creation of an effect by reite¬ 
ration of the same elements and by increased elegance and richness 
of ornamental detail. The temple-complex grows more elaborate, 
and the formal scheme of the vimana and the mandapa is surround¬ 
ed by several accessory shrines and mandapas 9 all forming a com¬ 
pact group within an enclosure or a number of concentric enclo¬ 
sures, each approached by a gopuram or gopurams. The Darasu- 
ram temple seems originally to have a number of such enclosures 
with a gopuram for each. In this temple one of the mandapaSj 
axially in front of the principal scheme, is designed in the shape 
of a chariot drawn by elephants. During this phase, and parti¬ 
cularly in the Pandya period, increased importance is given more 
and more to the temple precincts than to the main scheme, with the 
result that the latter dwindles in importance in relation to the 
former, more exuberant in design and execution. The gopuram 
comes to occupy a more prominent position in the temple scheme 
and gradually grows to imposing size and dimensions, until with its 
soaring height it dwarfs the vimana standing in the midst of the 
enclosure. The tendencies, noticed in the Pandya period, find their 
fullest expression in the Vijayanagara epoch, during which the exu¬ 
berance of the late Chola and Pandya phases leads, so to say, to an 
unrestricted extravagance. 186 


4. Chalukyan Style 

The Vesara style of Indian temple architecture, according to 
the Silpa texts, was prevalent in the region between the Vindhyas 
and the river Krishna, This style, it has already been observed, has 
been equated by some scholars with what is known to the archaeo¬ 
logists as the Chalukyan style which flourished in the southern parts 

622 


of the Bombay State, or, more precisely, the Kannada country. The 
style seems to have emerged under the rule of the Later Chalukyas 
who dominated the politics of the Deccan for a little over two hun¬ 
dred years beginning from the later part of the tenth century A.D. 
It is known to have reached its ripest expression in the Mysore 
territory under the Hoysalas of Dvarasamudra. 

The Chalukyan style cannot, however, be said to have an in¬ 
dependent origin of its own, but represents “an outgrowth of the 
earlier Dravidian style, so modified in its development by the 
Western temple-builders as to have attained a separate style in their 
hands.” 186 The genesis of the development may be traced back 
to the days of the early Chalukyan kings in the seventh and eighth 
centuries A.D. when, at Aihole and Pattadakal, Drdvi$a as well as 
Ndgara temples were being erected side by side. It is the simulta¬ 
neous co-existence of activities in Dravida and Ndgara temple¬ 
building that provided an opportunity for a certain amount of ad¬ 
mixture of the ideas of the two. The result is a development that 
leads to the emergence, under the aegis of the Later Chalukyan 
rulers, of a separate and individual style which has been referred 
to as intermediate between the Indo-Aryan ( Ndgara ) and the Dravi¬ 
dian ( Dravida ) and described as a mixed or hybrid one. But in the 
making of this style the Ndgara conception played a relatively 
less important part. It is the Dravida conception that forms the 
nucleus of future developments. The influences of the Ndgara 
style are felt in the occasional introduction of a few motifs, in treat¬ 
ment and ornament, which, however, do but little change the form 
and character of the Chalukyan temple that remain fundamentally 
Dravidian. 

The Chalukyan temple, like the Dravida, consists of the two prin¬ 
cipal components, viz. the vimdna and the man4apa, with sometimes 
an additional open mandapa in front. The former is surmounted by 
a pyramidal tower of storeyed elevation with a dome-shaped crown¬ 
ing member, while the latter are covered by flat roofs supported 
on pillars. In course of time there is a marked tendency to com¬ 
press the heights of the storeyed stages of the vimdna. At the same 
time ornamental niche motifs, repeated one above the other up 
the ascent of the tower, simulate the vertical bands of the northern 
spire. In this is felt, no doubt, an inspiration from the Ndgara 
Sikhara. The Chalukyan temple presents further an essential 
divergence from the Drdviqia in not having its cells enclosed within a 
covered ambulatory. 187 The mandapas , again, are usually wider 
in dimensions than the vimanas. In the treatment of the exterior 
walls there seems to have been a blending, again, of Ndgara and 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Dravi(Ju ideas. The walls are broken up by ratha offsets in thc^ 
characteristic Ndgara fashion, further spaced at regular intervals 
by pilasters in accordance with the usual Dravi^a mode. The 
recesses, thus formed, are usually filled up by niches with super¬ 
structures of the Ndgara or of the Drdvida style, thus producing a 
refrain of great artistic beauty. A further elaboration is noticed 
in the stellate plan based on the system of rotating squares. In the 
Chalukyan territory there is only a single example of this plan in 
the temple of Dodda Basappa at Dambal. In the Hoysala temples of 
Mysore the star-shaped plan becomes the usual fashion. A few 
of the Chalukyan temples are distinguished for their multiple- 
shrined compositions in which two, three or four shrines are found 
arranged around a central mandapa hall. Such a composition with 
its multiple towers presents, not unoften, an extremely pleasing 
view, and in this respect a few of the Hoysala temples constitute 
notable and impressive productions. Apart from architectural 
treatment, the Chalukyan temple, or its descendant the Hoysala, is 
also characterised by an exuberant plastic ornament covering all 
the external surfaces which seem to have a richly fretted appear¬ 
ance, from the base to the top. In the interior the pillars and the 
door-frames, as well as the ceilings, are also exuberantly treated in 
the like manner. The pillars themselves sometimes bear evident 
traces of being turned on lathes. All ornaments, whether on the 
pillars, door-frames or ceilings, have usually been imparted a highly 
lustrous polish so as to glow in the dim light in the interior. Consi¬ 
dered as a whole, the Chalukyan temple represents one of the most 
ornate and florid expressions of Indian architecture. 

Of this style there are innumerable remains within the old 
Chalukyan boundaries. The Hoysala mode, its later offshoot, is also 
represented by a large number of temples in the Mysore territory. 
Indeed, there is hardly any village in either of these regions that 
does not contain an old monument, either complete or mutilated, 
and a few of the notable centres usually have more. It is possible, 
therefore, to refer only to a few significant examples which 
help us in following the development of the style. The emphasis 
is more on stylistic sequence than on chronological implications. 

At Kukkanur in the Hyderabad State there is a number of old 
temples of which the Kalleivara 188 is important as marking an 
advance over the older prototype of the Drdvida temple towards 
the direction of the Chalukyan. It consists of the vimdna and the 
marujUtpa. with a connecting vestibule between the two and a pro¬ 
jecting Nandi porch in front (Text Figs. 40 and 41). The exterior 1 
walls are effectively broken up by slender pilasters at regular inter- 



WNlST/fy. 



ART 


<SL 


vals with occasional insertion of a shrine or an identical structural 
motif in the recesses so formed. The introduction of structural 
motifs in place of figure sculptures, characteristic of this part of 
the scheme in the Drcivi^a temple, represents a notable modifica¬ 
tion in the scheme. Further, the storeyed stages of the tower are 
reduced in height, and the domical apex, with a double curve, also 
introduces a significant innovation. Again, a gable-shaped motif 
in the middle of each storeyed stage on each face indicates the 
beginning of that simulated vertical band up the height of the tower 
which is so distinctive of the later Chalukyan temples. In these 
respects the Kallesvara at Kukkanur, though retaining a distinct 
DrdvigLa shape and outline, exhibits a leaning towards the Chalu¬ 
kyan form that is soon to emerge. 


The next notable step in the formation of the Chalukyan style is 
supplied by the Jain temple at Lakkundi 189 or Lokkigundi, as it 
was known in the ancient days, situated seven miles to the south¬ 
east of Gadag in the Dharwar District. Coarse-grained sandstone 
of the earlier prototypes is replaced in this temple by a fine-grained 
black chlorite schist, and the size of the masonry is also much reduc¬ 
ed. This change, continued in the later temples, enabled the artists 
to treat the surfaces in greater detail and ornament, and the ten¬ 
dency henceforth is towards a rich and florid expression which lends 
such a distinctive character to the style. “The change in the 
material”, Cousens 190 observes, “was conducive to the change in 
the style”. 


The Jain temple at Lakkundi (Text Fig. 42) seems to have 
been the earliest among a number of old monuments at the place 
and its style is not far removed from that of the Kallesvara at Kuk¬ 
kanur. It consists of the vimdna, an intermediate vestibule and a 
manfiapa with a forward open pillared hall, all axially combined, 
The treatment of the exterior surfaces is generally of the same man¬ 
ner as that in the Kallesvara, but a greater ornamental effect has 
been introduced by a rich motif which takes the shape of a small 
pilaster surmounted by a turret and arched over by a cusped scroll 
of the most beautiful character rising from two slender pilasters 
at the flanks. The wide projecting eave, with a straight-edged in¬ 
cline, around the open pillared hall, is not only a useful feature but 
also a notable innovation in as much as it becomes a characteristic 
feature of the later development of the style. 


Of this formative phase there are many other examples in diffe¬ 
rent parts of the Chalukyan territories. The Muktesvara temple 
at Chauddadampur 191 on the eastern boundary of the Dharwar 
District is a neat little structure that indicates a further advance 


s. e.— «o 


625 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



in the development of the style (Text Fig. 43). The wide eaves 
over the porches are now double curved in outline, and in con¬ 
formity with this a smaller eave of the same character runs around 
the rest of the building. Such eaves henceforth constitute regular 
features in the temple scheme. It is interesting to note that the 
pillared porches of the man^apa are enclosed by kakshdsanas, 
evidently a northern feature. The ornaments on the exterior walls 
are far richer and bolder and a greater amount of surface decora¬ 
tion is applied to the mouldings of the plinth. The tower has at¬ 
tained the typical Chalukyan form. The storeyed stages, now 
considerably reduced, are fairly obscured by the exuberant plastic 
detail that covers the surfaces. The niche-facets in the middle are 
fully emphasised and, repeated one above the other, simulate more 
completely the vertical band that characterises the northern 
sikhara. The domical crowning member “sits closer down upon 
the top” 1 * 2 and has a double flexion with a horizontal band in the 
middle. 

Of the same formative phase as the Muktesvara are the temples 
of Siddhesvara at Haveri 193 (Text Fig. 44), Somes vara at Haral- 
halli 194 and Siddharamesvara at Niralgi, 196 all in the Dharwar Dis¬ 
trict. Among these the Somesvara with its triple towers has an im¬ 
pressive appearance, and the three, along with the Muktesvara at 
Chauddadampur, might belong to the close of the eleventh or the 
beginning of the twelfth century A.D. 

In the twelfth century A.D. the style reaches its maturity and 
supreme expression. This phase is illustrated by a fairly large 
number of temples in different parts of the Chalukya country. 
One of the most significant temples that illustrate the style at its 
best is that of Kaislvisvesvara at Lakkundi, 196 which in its present 
shape dates from the latter half of the twelfth century A.D. It is 
a double-shrined temple, the second shrine facing the principal 
complex axially on the east (Text Fig. 45). The storeyed arrange¬ 
ment of the tower is, no doubt, there, though a superabundance of 
decorative detail almost masks the horizontality of its conception. 
Moreover, in the centre of each side the diminishing repeats of tre¬ 
foil niches up the ascent of the tower emphasise strongly a vertical 
urge just in the manner of the prominent vertical bands of the 
northern Sikhara. From the base to the top the entire exterior sur¬ 
face is encrusted with rich ornamental detail, bold in design and 
exuberant in expression. The deep and crisp plinth mouldings 
produce a sparkling effect of light and shade. On the walls may be 
seen the usual motifs characteristic of the style, but treated with 
a sense of volume and depth unknown in the monuments of the 


626 




"earlier phase. The embellishment of the tower, rich as well as vari¬ 
ed, is far more delicate and refined, while the decorative treatment 
of the doorways excels anything seen up till now. Each doorway 
(Fig. 83) is a perfect example of delicate and intricate chiselling, 
and some of the bands are so undercut as to resemble fine filigree 
or lace work. The temple of Kaislvisvesvara, on this account, has 
been regarded as one of the most eminent productions of decora¬ 
tive architecture. There might have been a certain idea of volup¬ 
tuousness in its exuberant ornamentation, but the scheme, as a 
whole, is perfectly balanced so as to express the style at the zenith 
of its power. 

An equally effective production, expressive of the high water¬ 
mark of Chalukyan style, may be seen in the temple of Mahadeva 
at Ittagi 197 in the Hyderabad State, built in A.D. 1112. It forms 
the central scheme of a number of structures raised on a terraced 
platform, and is the only one now in a fairly tolerable state of 
preservation. The inscription recording its erection styles the 
temple as devalaya^chakravarfi or ‘the chakravartl among temples’, 
and this title seems to be fully deserved. In the balanced and 
harmonious proportions of its parts, in the orderly disposition of its 
exuberant ornamentation, all elegantly wrought, the Mahadeva 
temple at Ittagi may rank as one of the best examples of its class. 
Cousens describes it as “probably the finest temple in the Kanarese 
districts after Halabid in Maisur”. 198 

The Mahadeva temple at Ittagi is larger in dimensions than 
the Kaslvisvesvara at Lakkundi and its decoration seems to be even 
more elaborate than that of the latter. It consists of the usual com¬ 
plements of the sanctum, the vestibule and the man^apa, together 
with another open hypostyle hall in front, aligned axially from west 
to east (Text Fig. 46; Fig. 81). The hypostyle with its original range 
of sixty-eight pillars 199 of varied and complicated designs is itself an 
imposing conception. A central complement of four pillars of the 
most bewildering pattern supports a coffered ceiling, the triangular 
space left at each corner being worked out into a rich fretwork of con¬ 
voluted arabesque of the most spirited workmanship. A small anta- 
rala with the figure of the bull connects this hypostyle with the man- 
$apa which is of the usual design with two approach porticos on the 
two opposite sides. The carving of the doorway is, again, a marvel of 
decorative workmanship. With regard to the ornamental work on 
the pillars and door-frames Meadows Taylor 200 says, “no chased 
work in silver or gold could possibly be finer”, and this description 
is fully deserved. The exterior walls of the mai^apa as well as of 
the vimana (Fig. 82) carry the usual decorative scheme, bold and 


627 


MiNisr^ 


■ *?§K 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

richly wrought, and the tower above is, again, a rich fretwork of 
sculptured designs. The rich and elaborately worked trefoil repeats 
successively one above the other, the soft and graceful curves in 
the contours and the breaking up of the prominent roll mouldings 
of the earlier temples by deep cusps with ornamental repeats are 
all designed to accentuate the verticality of an otherwise horizontal 
conception. In the appearance of this tower, superbly conceived 
and delicately wrought, one may recognise the nearest approach to 
that of the Hoysala temple which represents the ripest manifesta¬ 
tion of Chalukyan style. 

Among the many temples of this mature phase of the style a 
few other monuments deserve special mention. One is the temple 
of Mallikarjuna at Kuruvatti 201 in the district of Bellary (Text Figs. 
47 and 48). It consists of the sanctum, the connecting vestibule and 
the mawlapa, forming a compact group, together with a large pavilion 
for Nandi, which is a separate structure, placed axially in front. 
The pillars in the interior of the maridapa as well as in the portico 
are richly patterned in the usual manner, but particularly interest¬ 
ing are the boldly carved leaning figure brackets on the upper parts 
of the pillars supporting the architraves above. Such flying 
brackets had also been employed in other temples, but they have 
mostly been removed. At Gadag (Dharwar District) 202 there is, 
again, an important group of temples, mostly in a mutilated state. 
Of these, the temple of Sarasvati is interesting as showing the plan 
of an inner sanctum within a covered ambulatory, this being the 
only occurrence of such a plan among the Chalukyan temples. The 
temple of Somesvara (Text Fig. 49; Fig. 84) is also an interesting 
one. In the division of its wall section into two stages, in the intro¬ 
duction of the figure sculpture as a decorative element of the wall,, 
and, to a certain extent, also in the treatment of the plinth mould¬ 
ings it supplies definite points of contact between the Chalukyan 
temple and its offshoot, the Hoysala. 

The only specimen of a star-shaped plan within the Chalukya 
territory is the temple of Dodda Basappa or Dodda Vasavanna 
(Fig. 85) at Dambal 203 (Dharwar District), and in this respect it 
supplies another point of contact with the Hoysala temple, in which 
the stellate plan is the usual one. The principle governing the stel¬ 
late plan has been discussed more than once. A square rota¬ 
ting round a central axis and stopping at regular intervals in 
course of the rotation would result in a plan of foliated points, 
like those of star, touching the periphery of a circle at points 
equidistant from one another. This plan, wherever found, is 
characteristic of the sanctum only, but here at Dambal not only 




628 


MINISr^ 


ART 



<SL 


sanctuary, but also its attached nuin$,(ip(i, is star-shaped in plan. 
The former is designed by the square stopping at six equidistant 
points and the latter at eight. The result would be twenty-four 
foliated angles in the plan of the sanctum and thirty-two in that of 
the mcm$apa, the two giving an outline, as Cousens says, 204 “of a 
serrated 8” (Text Fig. 50). But because of the junction of the two 
components and the introduction of the two entrances in the latter 
on the south and the east, the former has only nineteen and the latter 
only twenty-one foliated angles. The angles of the plan, carried 
up the walls and continued on the tower, result in a sparkling effect 
of light and shade along with an accentuation of the verticality of 
the conception. The temple seems to have been the furthest from 
the Dravida conception which forms the starting point in the develop¬ 
ment of the Chalukyan temple, and if the intermediate stages 
had not been known, it would have been difficult to establish its link 
with the prototype. The storeyed stages have now been transformed 
into mere string-courses, but the serrated angles effectively break 
up the horizontal conception with the prominent vertical offsets that 
are carried right up to the top of the tower. The topmost member 
of the tower, now much compressed, has also the serrated indenta¬ 
tions, in conformity with the plan of the lower section, and looks 
not unlike the ribbed dmalaka-sila of the northern sikhara. The 
predominantly angular scheme may likewise be recognised in the 
treatment of the pillars of the southern portico. The date of the 
temple is uncertain, but from its style it may be placed somewhere 
about the latter half of the twelfth century A.D. In the Dodda 
Basappa temple at Dambal we have perhaps an extreme manifesta¬ 
tion of the Chalukyan temple which already seems to have lost its 
early vigour and tends to become insipid. 

The Chalukyan style reaches its highest development and the 
peak of plastic ornamentation in the Mysore territory under the 
Hoysalas of Dvarasamudra. There are nearly eighty temples in the 
Hoysala mode in different parts of this territory, and their link with 
the Chalukyan temple is clear and obvious. The scheme of the Hoy¬ 
sala temple is, on the whole, similar to that of the Chalukyan. 
Multiple shrines grouped round a central manfiapa constitute a 
favourite composition in the Hoysala modes and with this the Chalu¬ 
kyan temple is also familiar. What the Hoysala builders did was 
to elaborate the design to the extreme, as apart from double and 
triple-shrined compositions there may be seen also quadruple and 
even quintuple-shrined temples. In the grouping of a number of 
shrines in a single composition the Hoysala mode cannot, hence, be 
said to be distinct 205 from the Chalukyan. For the sanctuaries the Hoy¬ 
sala builders usually preferred a stellate plan, and of this the Dodda 


629 



WNtsr/fy 



Basappa temple at Dambal in the Chalukyan style furnishes a not¬ 
able instance. The stellate plan, as noted above, is also met with 
occasionally in several of the regional expressions of the Nagara 
temple style. The typical Hoysala temple usually stands upon a 
high and wide basement with its sides aligned to those of the build¬ 
ing it supports. The wide terrace left around served the purpose 
of an outer ambulatory, there being none in the interior. 

In the architectural treatment of the surfaces the Hoysala tem¬ 
ple presents, no doubt, certain divergences, but these divergences 
result not so much from the practice of an altogether different mode 
as from an attempt to impart a greater plastic exuberance to the 
walls. The lofty plinth, sometimes nine or ten feet in height, is 
divided by a number of prominent horizontal bands with exquisite¬ 
ly carved designs, animal as well as floral, each band being separated 
from the next by a deep recessed shadow. Friezes of elephants, 
horses, grotesques, birds, narrative panels, etc., occasionally alter¬ 
nating with floral arabesques, occupy these bands, the place of each be¬ 
ing defined by a specific convention. The beginnings of such a treat¬ 
ment of the plinth may be recognised in a few of the eleventh century 
Chalukyan temples, as noted above, but in the Hoysala temple the 
bands have increased in number and variety, and are characterised 
by an amazing plastic exuberance, the like of which has not been 
met with before. 

A continuous cornice or projecting eave around the entire struc¬ 
ture terminates the wall section. In the maydapa this section is in 
a single stage and is occupied by kakshdsanas with perforated grilles 
above, each between moulded pillars regularly spaced. In the 
vimdna the wall surface is divided in two stages by a lesser cornice. 
The upper stage, patterned by pilasters and mural shrines, follows 
a conception already established in the Chalukyan temple. The 
treatment of the lower one signifies a notable development. This 
stage is occupied by a continuous frieze of sculptures, representing 
divinities, apsarasas, etc., each under a foliated canopy. Each is an 
independent element, exquisitely carved with a minute elaboration 
of detail, and can scarcely be regarded as an architectural piece. In 
the Hoysala temple the vimdna walls supply a vast sculptured pano¬ 
rama of Hindu mythology in all its manifold details. It is to be 
noted that such a treatment of the vimdna walls, apart from the 
plastic exuberance which is typically Hoysala, seems to have been 
anticipated in the Somesvara temple at Gadag mentioned above. 

The tower of the Hoysala temple is, no doubt, derived, in the 
ultimate analysis, from the Drdvujla, the horizontal tiers of mouldings, 
diminishing as they go up, being clearly reminiscent of the storeyed 


030 


ART 

stages of the latter. At the apex the much compressed parasol¬ 
shaped member may also be recognised to have its prototype in the 
dome-shaped stupikd of the Dravi^a vimana. At the same time the 
Chalukyan tendency of emphasising the vertical aspect is equally 
evident in the chases of the stellate plan below being carried up 
and leading to a fluted texture of no mean artistic beauty. The hori¬ 
zontal and the vertical systems that make up the tower may seem 
to have balanced each other; but the succession of miniature turret¬ 
like motifs on each fluted chase registers an emphasis on a vertical 
tendency. An extreme variegation of the principal compositional 
elements by numerous facets, string-courses and the like, though 
exquisite as specimens of applied art, eventually results in a dis¬ 
solution of every purposeful form and outline. Moreover, com¬ 
pared to the horizontal dimensions the Hoysala temple seems to 
have a much too low elevation. But this apparent defect is, to a 
certain extent, minimised by its situation within an enclosed court 
which prevents its contrast with larger objects. Within the court 
the temple has the appearance of a richly carved casket in sandal 
wood or ivory, and in works of this kind the Mysore craftsmen had 
been justly famous for centuries past. 

A study of the typical features of the Hoysala temple leaves 
no doubt as to its being an offshoot of the Chalukyan, It illustrates 
a rich and exuberant expression of those tendencies which charac¬ 
terise the Chalukyan movement. Nevertheless, the Hoysala temple 
fails to impress the visitor architecturally. The general idea con¬ 
veyed by a temple of the Hoysala mode is that it is the work, not of 
a builder, but of a sculptor. The amount of decorative work and 
sculpture distributed over the surfaces of a single temple is enorm¬ 
ous. The Hoysalesvara temple at Halebid, one of the latest in the 
series, will sufficiently illustrate this. Each decorative band of the 
plinth extends to a length of over 700 feet, the lowest alone having 
as many as 2,000 figures of elephants in various attitudes and moods. 
And to realise more fully the enormity of the task involved one 
has to note that there are nine such bands constituting the plinth 
(cf. Fig. 86). In the lower stage of the vimana the frieze of sculp¬ 
tures, each of more than half life-size icf. Fig. 87), occupies a length 
of some 400 feet. The upper stage of the vimana walls, the cornices, 
and the mandapa with its richly patterned pillars, kakshasanas and 
perforated screens are likewise covered with an exuberant incrusta¬ 
tion of plastic detail. Every work is deeply undercut and intricately 
chiselled with a dexterity that seems to be unrivalled. Technical 
skill apart, one wonders when he realises, perhaps with a sense of 
awe, what stupendous labour and patience have been expended in 
the production of a single monument. It is not without a sense of 




631 


MIMS/*,, 



appropriateness that the Hoysala temple has been described as 
“sculptors’ architecture'’. As Percy Brown 206 says, “these Mysore, 
temples owe their character more to the sculptor than to the mason. 
Gone is the structural basis, the fundamental framework evolved 
through the experience of the previous workers in the field, and 
in its place is an arrangement of manifold planes, projections and 
courses of masonry, each intricately carved and beautiful in itself, 
even beautiful in aggregation, but not, as a whole, amounting to a 
work of significant architecture in the full sense of the word.” 

There is a large number of temples in the Mysore territory 
illustrating this sculptors’ architecture. Many of the more im¬ 
portant conceptions are without any superstructures, which were 
either never completed or have fallen down. In most cases it is the 
substructures, i.e. the plinths and the walls, which alone remain. 
These with their amazing display of sculptural exuberance enhance 
in a greater measure the plastic character of the style. The most 
typical and well-known examples which enable one to have a complete 
picture of the style are the Kesava temple at Somnathpur, the Chenna 
Ke£ava at Belur and the Hoysalesvara at Halebid. 

Of these the first was erected about A.D. 1268 and is one of the 
latest of the series, but it is still in a perfect state and illustrates the 
Hoysala mode in its full maturity. 207 It has a triple-shrined composi¬ 
tion and is situated within a quadrangular court with a cloister of cells 
all around. The temple (Text Fig. 51; Fig. 88) stands on a high 
terrace and, with three shrines arranged on three sides of a central 
mantfapa which is projected in front as an open hypostyle, it 
assumes the shape of a cross, the greatest length and breadth 
respectively being 87 and 83 feet. Each of the shrines is of a stellate 
plan, the wide terrace below also following its indentations. Each 
of the shrines is surmounted by a tower, also stellate in shape, which 
rises to a height of 30 feet. The dimensions of the building are, 
no doubt, moderate, but all parts are perfectly balanced in their pro¬ 
portions and completely in accord with one another. The effect of 
the whole, set within a cloistered court, is elegant as well as pleasing. 
The fundamental scheme and the disposition and embellishment of 
its parts are in the characteristic Hoysala manner, already described. 

The Chenna Kesava temple at Belur 208 is a much larger conr 
ception. Here we have a number of temples and other accessory 
structures enclosed within a walled court, measuring 380 feet bv 
425 feet and approached by two gateways in the eastern wall. The 
principal temple, that of Chenna Kesava, dates from A.D. 1117 and 
is situated in the centre, with other temples and structures distri¬ 
buted around it without any symmetrical arrangement. Nevertheless, 

632 


•on account of their rich embellishment the assemblage on the 
whole looks picturesque. The Chenna Kesava consists of a sanctum 
of stellate plan and a pillared mai^apa, having deeply recessed 
sides, with a connecting vestibule between the two, the whole being 
raised on a substantial terrace following the indentations of the 
complex in all its details (Text Fig. 52). Both inside and out 
there is a rich overlay of ornamental detail; but with the tower over 
the sanctum gone, the appearance cannot be said to be architecturally 
much impressive. 11 

The Hoysalesvara temple at Halebid 209 has been regarded as 
the “highest achievement of the Chalukya-Hoysala school of archi¬ 
tecture”. 210 Halebid or Halebidu, now a straggling village in the 
Hassan District of Mysore, represents the site of the ancient city of 
Dvarasamudra, the capital seat of the Hoysala kingdom for nearly 
two centuries. The ancient city is marked by the walls that once 
enclosed it; but there is nothing within, except the remains of a 
number of temples, Brahmanical as well as Jain, which now consti¬ 
tute the only records of its former splendour and intense religious 
activity. One of these was the Kedaresvara, 211 perhaps the ‘chapel 
royal' of the Hoysala kings. A drawing of the temple, made in the 
beginning of the nineteenth century A.D. and now in the Mackenzie 
collection (Library of the Commonwealth Relations Office, London), 
shows the building as complete. Fergusson 212 described it as 
“a gem of Indian architecture” and had deplored the state of 
utter neglect which left it a prey to rank vegetation that had already 
begun to eat into its core. In spite of his warning and recommenda¬ 
tion for protective measures, nothing practically was done to save 
this important monument of antiquity. 

The Hoysalesvara (Fig. 89) is the principal temple in this city 
of ruins. It was, no doubt, a grand conception, but much of its 
architectural character has been impaired by the total absence of 
its superstructure which had probably never been completed. It is 
usually assigned to the middle of the twelfth century A.D. But the 
style of its elaborate plastic work already shows a certain loss of 
early quality and vigour marking a decline in the tradition. This 
might indicate a rather late date for the beginning of the concep¬ 
tion which remained incomplete, the work having probably been 
stopped with the fall of the kingdom in the early years of the 
fourteenth century A.D. 

In double-shrined temples it is the usual practice to place the 
two shrines facing each other with the ma-n^apa connecting the two. 
But the scheme of the Hoysalesvara consists of two temples of the 
same dimensions, situated side by side and joined to each other by 

SSS 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

their adjoining transepts (Text Fig. 53). Cut into two halves, 
each would be a complete structure with a sanctum and a 
pillared rnantjiapa with an intermediate vestibule between the two 
and a detached pillared pavilion in front. Each sanctum is of a 
stellate plan and the attached rnandapa has recessed sides, the two 
being skilfully joined by a substantial buttress on either side. The 
entire scheme is raised over a wide terrace closely following the 
indentations of the elaborate plan above. The pavilion in front of 
the southern sanctuary is a more ambitious and elaborate structure. 
That of the northern is much smaller in dimensions and 
simpler in disposition. It is in these frontal adjuncts that one may 
recognise some lack of harmony in an otherwise balanced configu¬ 
ration, and the question remains whether these frontal pavilions 
were parts of the original conception. 

The effect of the interior with closely set pillars of overwrought 
detail is one of congestion, if not of confusion. But the exterior ele¬ 
vation (Fig. 89) has certain redeeming features in spite of the exuber¬ 
ance of plastic treatment. The different sections along the vertical 
axis are beautifully adjusted to one another in their harmonious pro¬ 
portions. The numerous vertical chases, textured by horizontal 
sculptured bands and friezes of plastic shapes (cf. Figs. 86 and 87), 
all deeply cut with minute eleboration of detail, lend to the exterior 
a variegated effect of light and shade. The plastic quality, however, 
with signs of tautness and stylisation, is not of very high order. 
Still, the treatment is good enough for effect. An “unending wealth 
of relief work”, says Percy Brown, 213 “was distributed over the 
exterior surface of this temple, but it is the incredible intricacy 
with which each detail of this extensive conception was treated that 
is so overwhelming, filling the spectator with astonishment. In the 
marvellous minuteness of its technique alone, there is no thought 
of time, space or limitations of any kind. . . . The temple at Halabid 
is the supreme climax of Indian architecture in its most prodigal 
plastic manifestations.” 

5. Exotic Types 

Apart from buildings of the three styles, described above, there 
are types of structures which are either entirely exotic in shape or 
form, or represent developments that are quite significant. In the 
secluded valley of Kashmir Lalitaditya Muktapi^a (c. A.D. 724-760), 
one of the most famous of the Kashmir monarchs, inaugurated a 
golden era of building activity. The earliest monuments of this 
phase belong to Buddhism, and of these, the group of buildings 
at Parihasapura—a stupa, a monastery and a chaitya —was conceived 


in imposing dimensions. Each of these buildings reproduces the 
characteristic form of the type and calls for little comment. 

The most prolific activity of this classical phase is recognised in 
the erection of Brahmanical temples. 214 The type, once established, 
remained uniform throughout. The typical Kashmir temple is 
peripteral in composition. The temple is situated within a quadran¬ 
gular court enclosed by a peristyle of cells and approached by one 
or three porticos. The portico itself is a monumental composition, 
and the peristyle a broad and imposing conception. This kind of 
conception is also noticed in India proper, and in Kashmir this compo¬ 
sition might have been derived from the Buddhist establishments. 
But apart from this, the Kashmir temple has a special character of 
its own which excludes it from the general course of Indian archi¬ 
tectural movement, as outlined above. To a certain extent, the 
temple in Kashmir has a distinctly un-Indian appearance, and this 
is particularly emphasised by its pillars, the treatment of wall sur¬ 
face, and the elevation of its superstructure. It has a double pyra¬ 
midal roof obviously derived from the usual wooden roofs common 
in Kashmir. There is a triangular pediment enclosing a trefoil niche 
on each of the three sides with a similar pediment over the door¬ 
way in front, the pediments being repeated on each stage of the 
pyramidal roof. The pillars are fluted and surmounted by capitals 
of the quasi-Doric order. Another speciality is the ceiling of the 
roof, either of wood or of stone, which takes the form of a lantern 
formed by overlapping intersecting squares. These features lend a 
distinctive character to the Kashmir temple and betray certain 
extra-Indian inspiration. One of the earliest conceptions, and per¬ 
haps the most impressive even in its ruins, is the celebrated Sun 
temple of Martand (Text Figs. 54 and 55), built by Lalitaditya, and 
this appears to have been the model for the subsequent ones. Other 
typical temples may be found at Vangath, Avantipura (Avantesvara 
and AvantisvamT, the latter (Text Fig. 56), like the Martap<J, constitut¬ 
ing another touchstone of the type), Patan, Payar, Buniar, and 
Puranadhishthana or Pandrethan. The type was confined within 
the limits of Kashmir. Its influence on the design of the Gop temple 
in Kathiawar cannot be proved, as noted above. 

In the other extremity of Northern India the excavations at 
Paharpur (RajsKahi District, North Bengal) 215 have laid bare the 
remains of a temple which some scholars declare to be of a type 
entirely unknown to Indian archaeology. The colossal structure, 
measuring 356'6" from north to south and 314' 3" from east to 
west, occupies nearly the centre of the immense quadrangle forming 
the monastery, the far-famed Somapura mahavihdra of old. The 


685 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


d-plan 218 consists of a gigantic square cross with angles of 
projection between the arms (Text Fig. 57). The temple 
(Fig. 90) rose in several terraces, with a circumambulatory gallery, 
enclosed on the outer side by a parapet wall around the monument, 
in each of the two upper terraces. Access to the first and second 
terraces was obtained by the extensive staircase provided on the 
north. 

This apparently complex plan becomes very simple when the 
monument is examined and studied from the top downwards. 


Dikshit 217 appears to be right in observing that “the plan of the 
Paharpur temple was the result of a pre-meditated development of 
a single central unit, in which future expansion was in a sense pre¬ 
determined in a vertical direction, that is in the setting up of new 
floors, etc. but not laterally”. A hollow square pile in the 
centre, shooting high up above the terraces, provides the pivot round 
which the entire plan of this stupendous monument has been con¬ 
ceived. The walls of this lofty central unit form a sharp square, 
and in order, most probably, to relieve this monotony,- provision was 
made in the second upper terrace for a projection, consisting of a 
chamber and an ante-room, on each face, leaving out a portion of 
the whole length of the square at either corner. This arrangement 
resulted in a cruciform shape with one projecting angle between the 
arms of the cross. The circumambulatory passage with the parapet 
wall was made to run parallel to the outline of this plan. A similar 
rectangular projection on each side was also added on the first, i.e. 
the next lower, terrace thus variegating the plan still more. The 
basement conformed to the alignment of the first terrace structure 
with the result that the angular projections in the plan of the first 
terrace and that of the basement were three each between the arms 
of the cross, to which an additional projection was added by the 
staircase landing just in the middle of the northern arm. An en¬ 
closure wall, strictly conforming to the basement plan, with only 
a slight deviation near the main staircase, runs round the monu¬ 
ment. There are reasons to believe that this complete plan from 
the basement to the top, along with the different component ele¬ 
ments, belongs to a single period of construction, and the evidences 
of later repairs, additions and alterations did not fundamentally 
affect the general arrangement and plan. An earlier prototype of 
the Paharpur temple has been reported to have been discovered at 
Lauriya Nandangarh in North Bihar. 218 But so far as can be 
gathered from the published reports and reproductions, the angles 
of the Nandangarh monument appear to be purely decorative and to 
have originated from an entirely different conception. The dispo¬ 
sition of the angles is different at Nandangarh, and every re-entrant 


03 6 



AKT 


v*~ to ilThas been strengthened with a buttress. The peculiar airange- 
ment of the projections of rectangular structures round the base¬ 
ment at each lower level, which resulted in the projecting and re¬ 
entrant angles that we see at Paharpur, is absent at Launya 
Nandangarh. The Paharpur monument may be said to have its own 
distinctive characteristics and no exact parallel has so far been found 


elsewhere in India. It should be noted that the existing basement 
of a later structure within the monastic quadrangle 219 at Pahiarpur 
seems to be a close replica of the main temple. Here the plan is 
more perfect and symmetrical with the provision of approach-steps 
in all the directions, instead of in the north only as we have in the 
main temple. 


It has been suggested by Dikshit 220 that the main shrine of this 
colossal edifice was situated at the top, i.e. on the third terrace, and 
consisted of a square cella with a circumambulatory verandah all 
round. The evidence, now before us, is, however, against any such 
inference, and in view of the extremely mutilated condition of the 
monument at the top it is difficult to follow Dikshit s line of argu¬ 
ment on this point. If such had been the case, the grand staircase 
on the north ought to have extended beyond the second terrace to 
reach the third. There are definite indications, however, that it ter¬ 
minated with the second terrace and no access to the third terrace, 
if there had been any, had been provided for in the original monu¬ 
ment. The hollow square pile forming the central unit of this stu¬ 
pendous structure exhibits a brick-paved floor inside ‘'roughly at the 
level” of the second terrace with its projected chambers. But no 
access to this inner square from the chambers has been found, nor 
is there any evidence that there was originally such an access which 
had been blocked up at a later period. Under the circumstances, 
the paved platform in the centre of the hollow square, which had 
been strengthened by a deep soling of bricks and several courses of 
offsets, does not appear to have served any function, except to add 
to the solidity of the foundation of the lofty walls of the central 
square. So far as the arrangement of the temple goes the sanc¬ 
tuary could have neither been situated at the top nor inside the cen¬ 
tral square pile. 


Regarding the plan of the temple Dikshit has made one plausi¬ 
ble suggestion that a four-faced (Chaturmukha, Chaumukha) Jain 
temple, which existed very likely at the site, might have furnished 
the barest model 221 of the present structure. This is a pertinent 
suggestion which is worth more serious consideration than has been 
given to it. In this connection we should also take into account a 
particular type of temples at Pagan in Burma, 222 which may be re- 


637 




MIN'S 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


as an adaptation of the Chaumukha shrines of the Jains. 
The type represents a square temple with four figures of Buddha, 
set in recessed niches, on the four faces of a solid masonry pile 
standing in the centre of a surrounding corridor or corridors and 
approached by entrance vestibules on one or more of its faces. The 
Pagan temples seem to offer a striking analogy to the plan of the 
second terrace of the Paharpur temple, and may be compared with 
profit for the many problems that surround this unique Indian 
monument. The walls of the central square pile at Paharpur do 
not exhibit any evidence of being provided with niches, but, bear¬ 
ing in mind the analogy of the Pagan temples and of the Chaumukha 


shrines, a suggestion that images were installed in the ante-rooms 
on the second terrace does not appear to be quite improbable. It 
is to be noted that these ante-rooms still bear traces of brick plat¬ 
forms abutting on the walls behind, and these were probably intend¬ 
ed as pedestals of the images that were once set on the four sides 
of the central square pile. 


The walls of the temple were built of well-burnt bricks, laid 
in mud mortar, and considering the materials used, it is remarkable 
that after a lapse of so many centuries parts of it are still standing 
to a height of about 70 feet above the ground level. The plainness 
of the walls is relieved on the outer face by projecting cornices of 
ornamental bricks and bands of terracotta plaques, set in recessed 
panels, which run in a single row all around the basement and in 
double rows around the circumambulatory passage in the upper 
terraces. In contrast with these terracotta plaques, the lower part 
of the basement is embellished with a number of stone sculptures in 
high relief, which are almost wholly Brahmanical, but extraordi¬ 
narily varied in style. 223 


The main fabric of the temple belongs to a single period of 
construction, most likely to the time of Dharmapala who was res¬ 
ponsible for the foundation of the monastery around it in the latter 
part of the eighth or the beginning of the ninth century A.D. The 
temple has been exhumed in an extremely fragmentary state and 
the form of the superstructure, the method of roofing, and other 
details are difficult to ascertain now. Marshall 224 assumes the temple 
to have been a “garbha-chaitya” or a hollow pagoda. Such was also 
the view of R. D. Banerji 225 who described the main shrine of the 
temple as consisting of a “hollow-roofed chamber”. But hollow-roofed 
shrines are extremely rare, if not unknown, and it is reasonable to 
infer that the temple was capped by some sort of superstructure. The 
terraced arrangement of the structure would appropriately suggest 
a roof rising in receding tiers over the vaults spanning the different 


638 


ART 


> 

[ambulatory corridors. The square masonry pile in the centre, 
on the analogy of the Pagan temples, may be said to have supported 
a curvilinear sikhara as the crowning element of this colossal edi¬ 
fice. This sort of roof and superstructure suits not only the analogy 
of the Pagan temples, but also the evidence of shrines shown in 
relief in East Indian sculptures or sketched in miniature in East 
Indian manuscript illuminations. At Pagan the central pile is solid¬ 
ly designed. But at Paharpur, probably to reduce the weight of 
the stupendous building and to guard against resultant sinking, it 
was left hollow, though sufficient stability for the accumulating 
weight, as the monument rose up, has been ensured in the enormous 
girth of each of the four walls. 

The temple type at Paharpur has been frequently described as 
entirely unknown to Indian archaeology. The Indian literature 226 
on architecture, however, often refers to a type of building, known 
as sarvatobhadra, which should be a square shrine with four entran¬ 
ces at the cardinal points and with an ante-chamber on each side 
(chatuhsdla-griha ). It should have uninterrupted galleries all 
around, should have five storeys and sixteen corners and many beau¬ 
tiful turrets and spires. The temple at Paharpur, as now excavated, 
approximates in general to the sarvatobhadra type as described in 
Indian texts on architecture. It is a many-terraced temple, each 
terrace approximating to the height of a storey, consisting, perhaps, 
of a votive shrine in each of the four projected faces and surround¬ 
ed by a continuous circumambulatory passage in the second terrace, 
with further projections and passages at the next lower terrace to 
extend the building commensurate to its height, a measure that re¬ 
sults in so many projecting and re-entrant angles of the ground plan. 
Thus in Indian temple architecture the type does not appear to have 
been quite unknown. It is only the disappearance of the other 
examples that has been responsible for the view that the Paharpur 
type is a novel one in Indian temple architecture. The Sastras 
enjoin such a type for the kings and the gods, and if our reconstruc¬ 
tion of the elevation of the temple is accepted, a fair popularity of 
the type in Eastern India is evidenced by representations of this 
type of shrines in the sculptures and paintings hailing from this 
region. Many of the mounds in Bengal, that can still be traced as 
rising in terraces, may perhaps reveal, on excavation, other remains 
of such a type of temple. The ruins of a temple, generally similar 
to the Paharpur plan, but of much smaller dimensions, have acci¬ 
dentally been laid bare at Birat (Rangpur District, North Bengal). 227 
Prom the standpoint of elevation, with a tiered roof of several stages 
surmounted by a curvilinear tower as the crowning superstructure, 
the Paharpur temple seems to have combined two distinctive fea- 



639 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


lures of two of the prominent types of Indian temple architecture, 
the j Bhadra and the Rekha as they are known in Orissa, and may, 
for the sake of convenience, be described as the Bhadra-Rekha type 
of temple. From the representations of similar temples in the sculp¬ 
tures and paintings, the type may be taken to have been character¬ 


istic of Eastern India. 

The importance of the type of temple laid bare at Paharpur in 
the history of Indian colonial art and architecture in South-East 
Asia is immense. Unfortunately, it is not possible here to enter into 
a detailed discussion of this question. It is sufficient to say that 
this type of temple in Eastern India profoundly influenced the archi¬ 
tectural efforts of Further India, specially Burma and Java, the ori¬ 
gins and associations of which had been taxing the archaeologists 
since the time of James Fergusson. The square temples at Pagan, 
in Burma present remarkable points of similarity with the Pahar¬ 
pur temple. 228 The points of divergence between the two are also 
many, and though the shape of the Paharpur monument might have 
afforded a possible scope for imitation by the Burmese builders, 
there must be recognised a fundamental difference in the general 
conception and arrangement of the Pagan temple as a whole. Dik- 
shit refers to Chandi Loro Jonggrang (Fig. 91) and Chandi Sewu 
in Central Java as offering the nearest approximation to the plan 
and superstructure of the Paharpur temple. “The general view of 
the former'’, Dikshit writes, “with angular projections, truncated 
pyramidal shape and horizontal lines of decoration reproduces the 
prominent characteristics of the Indian monument." The plan of 
the main temple of the Chandi Sewu also strikingly resembles the 
plan of the second terrace of the Paharpur temple. To this may be 
added further the terraced elevation and unbroken eircumambula- 
tory galleries in both the Javanese monuments, exactly as we find 
them at Paharpur. The Paharpur temple belongs clearly to an ear¬ 
lier period, and the close connection between Eastern India and the 
Archipelago is an established fact. In view, therefore, of the closer 
similarity between the Paharpur temple on the one hand and the 
two Javanese ones on the other, “the possibility is clearly suggest¬ 
ed of the Indian monument being the prototype." 229 


n. SCULPTURE 

1. GENERAL REVIEW 

A. Growth of Regional Schools 

The eighth and ninth centuries saw the consolidation of that pro¬ 
cess of conscious regionalism that had made itself felt already in the 
seventh century. For a whole millennium, roughly from about the 


640 



ART 


<SL 


century B.C. to about the seventh century A.D., Indian art ad¬ 
mits, despite local variations due to local tastes and visions, of a 
common denominator at each different stage of evolution and ful¬ 
filment. Towards the end of the seventh and beginning of the 
eighth century A.D. the regional spirit gradually asserts itself. The 
classical tradition of an all-India art lingers for one or two centu¬ 
ries, but the regional spirit gradually gets the better of the Indian. 
This regional outlook reacts on other aspects of culture as well. 
The local scripts and dialects begin slowly to take shape, with a 
strong accent on the autochthonous traits, during the next two cen¬ 
turies, and it is in this period that we have to seek for the genesis 
of all major scripts and languages of mediaeval and modern India. 


B. Mediaeval Trend 

Plasticity of the fully rounded and modelled form had been the 
most significant characteristic both of classical Indian sculpture and 
painting. A movement now starts towards summarising the round¬ 
ed volume in the direction of flat surface and linear angles. Swel¬ 
ling and smooth round lines develop sharp edges; compositions tend 
to become linearised with emphasis on sharp angles, horizontals, 
verticals, and diagonals; and curves that had so long been convex 
turn into the concave. Already in some of the reliefs of the fifth 
and sixth centuries (for example, in a few fifth century reliefs from 
Nagari, Chitor; sixth century Dhamek stupa frieze of abstract geo¬ 
metric patterns; early seventh century relief on a bronze bowl illus¬ 
trated by Coomaraswamy), 230 one witnesses the presence of certain 
of these traits. But sculpture being essentially and intrinsically 
three-dimensional, and plasticity of the fully rounded and modelled 
form having been the most important exponent of the classical tra¬ 
dition, it resisted for long the intrusion of these ‘mediaeval’ ele¬ 
ments. But painting, which is essentially two-dimensional, offered 
much less inherent resistance to the new conception of form. In 
the ninth century wall-paintings at Ellora we find these traits as¬ 
serting themselves so emphatically and exuberantly as to suggest 
past practice over a considerable period of time. Here the gliding 
modelled lines are replaced by sharp and thin lines, modulated cur¬ 
ves by sharp and pointed angles, and roundly modelled surfaces by 
flat coloured spaces. It did not take long for sculptural art to be 
touched by this new art form which evidently opened up a new 
field for further exploration. Both in painting and sculpture (main¬ 
ly in terracotta) this new conception of form had far-reaching re¬ 
sults in store. How they were registered through the ages will be 
evident from a consideration of West-Indian and Rajput sculptures 


641 





of the tenth-twelfth centuries, West-Indian, mainly Gujarati, book 
and textile illustrations of the twelfth-fifteenth centuries, Burmese 
painting of the eleventh-thirteenth centuries, early Rajput minia¬ 
tures of the sixteenth-seventeenth centuries, Bengal terracottas and 
wood-carving of the seventeenth-nineteenth centuries, and certain 
Deccani and Orissan miniatures of the seventeenth-nineteenth cen¬ 
turies, to mention only a few. 

The ‘mediaeval’ trend was not valid for the whole of India, nor 
was its impression registered everywhere at the same time. It was 
most visible in Western India, namely Gujarat, Rajputana, Central 
India and certain Himalayan tracts. But, despite isolated instances 
of earlier date, the mediaeval conception of form does not become 
general in these regions before the tenth century, and then it grows 
with time within the regions just referred to. So far as sculpture 
is concerned, other regions of India, mainly Eastern India, Deccan, 
the Far South, remain more or less untouched by this conception 
and draw in the main from the rich heritage of the classical tradi¬ 
tion. 

C. Cult-images and Canonisation 

The pivot of early mediaeval sculpture is the human figure, both 
male and female, in the form of gods and goddesses and their attend¬ 
ants. Such gods and goddesses were there in the preceding centu¬ 
ries as well, when their iconography came to be formally fixed ac¬ 
cording to basic principles of mathematical proportion, balance, and 
other relations on the one hand, and lakshanas and lanchhanas re¬ 
quired by the myths, legends, and ideologies of respective cults on 
the other. This fixation of the iconography of cult-images whether 
in the garbha-griha or on the walls of temples—was the result as 
much of creative artistic experience as of the integration of the 
religious experience by the artist himself. The value of the image 
during the Gupta and post-Gupta periods does not lie simply in its 
being an intermediate symbol to help realising an ultimate object; 
it is realisation itself, both artistically and spiritually, and since it 
is so, the value is connected with artistic quality as well. What was 
thus born from within the creative genius came now to be fashioned in 
strict accordance with minute regulations laid down in the canonical 
texts. The cult-image was mainly conceived as an object to be used by 
the devotee to help concentrating his mind for realisation of an ulti¬ 
mate object outside the image itself. The image had thus no in¬ 
herent relation, either with the devotee or with the artist; it existed 
apart and was identical neither with his inner experience nor with 
his ultimate object. Such instrumental and intermediary value of 


042 


Ihef cult-image conditioned in the main the attitude of the artists, as 
they usually worked for the devotees who happened to be their 
patrons. With ever-increasing demands such images had to be 
turned out in hundreds, and since their value lay solely in the ser¬ 
vice they rendered as an instrument, they did not call for transfu¬ 
sion of the artist’s creative or spiritual experience into the object 
of his creation. 

In a situation like this, the majority of the cult-images that 
were meant to be worshipped, especially those that were popular 
and hence in great demand, namely, Vishnu, Surya, Uma-Mahes- 
vara, Buddha, etc., did not attain a very high degree of artistic ex¬ 
cellence. A procession of endless monotony of form uninformed by 
any inner experience and without any registration of individual 
creative genius, meets the eye. It is only in rare instances that 
images were expressions of the artist’s creative genius and attain¬ 
ed high artistic standards. But such examples are few and far 
between. Yet, it cannot be denied that the standard of average cult- 
images of the period maintains a fair level even as objects of art; 
that they do so was to a great extent due to accumulated knowledge 
of a high order and inheritance of a rich and prolonged experience 
on the one hand, and well and correctly laid regulations of mathe¬ 
matical relations, of artistic proportion and balance, and of ritual 
and iconography on the other. In elasticity and transparency, in 
illumination and depth of feeling and experience, therefore, early 
mediaeval sculpture can bear no comparison with that of the classi¬ 
cal age to which these qualities belong. Canonisation of past ex¬ 
perience—creative and spiritual—ultimately resulted in thinning 
the experience itself, and a thinned experience, though capable of 
producing good art, cannot produce great art. 

Since the cult-images of early mediaeval art rest on the assured 
foundations of a regulated and canonised structure of form, it main¬ 
tains a more or less uniform standard of quality in all art-regions 
of India. There is hardly any major deviation anywhere, any evi¬ 
dence of a novel experience or any tangent shooting in any new 
direction. Everywhere the art moves within the limits of estab¬ 
lished practice and within canonical injunctions; and within each 
art-province it moves forward along the arrow line of time in more 
or less uniform pace. Curiously enough, the creative climax of each 
art-region is not reached at one and the same time all over India, 
but at different periods. In Bihar and Bengal it is reached in the 
ninth and tenth centuries; in Orissa in the twelfth and thirteenth; 
in Central India in the tenth and eleventh; in Rajputana in the 
tenth; in Gujarat in the eleventh; and in the Far South in the tenth 


648 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


turies. It is in the Deccan alone that the story is one of increa¬ 
sing torpor and petrifaction; indeed, Deccan ceases to be a sculptu¬ 
ral province after the eighth century. 

Since the image is an object to help concentration of the mind, 
it faces the devotee full and square, and its attributes, flexions, and 
attitudes are all gathered on the surface, so as to draw the devotee’s 
eyes straight on them and fill his mind with its entire and total 
presence. Whether the image is a relief in various grades or 
worked in the round, it is always conceived and executed in term 
of the surface as well as of the vertical plane. In seated^md stand¬ 
ing figures the vertical direction is obvious, but even in reclining 
images the emphasis is more on the verticality than on the horizon¬ 
tal rest. The attendant divinities or parsva-devatas, whether ac¬ 
companying the main image in the sanctum or appearing separately 
in the niches of the outer walls of temples, are also treated on the 
same principle as those of the cult-images themselves; in rare in¬ 
stances there is a relaxation of canonical and iconographic injunc¬ 
tions. They are also relaxed where minor divinities like dikpalas 
are concerned. 


D. Non-iconic Figure Sculptures 

A large part of the art of these centuries is primarily religious, 
and whatever secular themes are handled and find place on the 
outer walls of the temples are accepted as serving the needs of a 
life religious in aim and inspiration. It therefore reflects inevit¬ 
ably the experience of past centuries as well as of contemporary 
life; not the experience of any individual but the integrated expe¬ 
rience of the cults and communities themselves. It is not the cult- 
images alone that have well-established types which are hardly 
ever transformed by any peculiar personal artistic experience, but 
other figures also conform to more or less standardised types within 
each art-province, and hardly reveal any personal attitude or expe¬ 
rience of the artist. 

The multitude of figures relate themselves to a large variety of 
motifs and subjects. There are narrative reliefs, legendary illus¬ 
trations, historical or semi-historical scenes, music and dance scenes, 
mithuna couples in a variety of poses and attitudes, toilet scenes, 
domestic scenes and scenes of daily life, array of warriors and ani¬ 
mals, drummers, flute-players, etc., the rampant leogryph, and the 
woman and the tree (salabhanjika), among many other motifs. 
Some of these, as for example, the woman and the tree, the leogryph, 
the dikpalas, and the mithuna couples are repeated almost ad nau¬ 
seam, to impress on the onlooker, it seems, the insistence and ever- 


644 


presence of certain fundamental principles of life. Floral and vege¬ 
tal devices are almost conspicuous by their absence; even when, if 
at all, they make their appearance, they are formally mechanical 
and stereotyped, and have hardly any place or importance in the 
entire composition. They are relegated to the borders or to the 
background whence they impart but a decorative value to the re¬ 
liefs. On the other hand, early mediaeval art is rich in abstract 
geometrical devices, throwing deep light and shade and with lines 
cut in flat and sharp angles and edges. Such devices are to be found 
in abundance, endlessly repeated either as border decorations or 
independently by themselves. Like the floral-vegetal devices, they 
have hardly any relation with the composition of relief. Animal 
or human figure, tree or floral-vegetal design, abstract devices, etc. 
—all receive in the hands of the artist equal share of importance; 
accent is distributed evenly over all or on none; but since the 
figure sculpture, mainly human figure, is the pivot round which 
everything moves, it catches the eye before anything else, not by its 
accent but by its quantity and recurrence. Grouping of these figures 
is, however, thoroughly disintegrated; they are juxtaposed in rela¬ 
tion to space but are not inherently related with one another by 
psychological and narrative ties. Figures are shown as if loosely 
distributed on the surface of the stone; they do not emerge from it 
and have thus lost the direction of forthcoming from the stone it¬ 
self. They just exist there against the ground of the stone without 
any effort, and have to be accepted as granted, as it were. Despite 
gaiety and movement of the subjects, clever display of light and 
shade in the reliefs, variety of poses and attitudes in front, profile, 
and more frequently, three-quarter views, and difficult, agitated, 
nervous, sensuous, flexions of the body there is no evidence of the 
dynamic urge of the stone itself to blossom into such forms. The 
centuries of dynamic becoming of form from unformed depths have 
been left behind. 

By the beginning and middle of the twelfth century, all reser¬ 
ves of experience seem to have completely been drawn upon. In¬ 
deed this century witnesses complete disintegration of Indian crea¬ 
tiveness. Attention to meticulous details, elaboration of essentials 
and non-essentials alike, over-ornamentation, and canonisation of 
basic creative principles led to a sort of mechanical grace, elegance, 
and perfection, and exhibited superb mastery of the craft itself. 
But the end of Indian creativeness was already drawing near when 
Islam finally swept it away. In isolated regions, as in Orissa, the 
persistence of the classical mind and tradition, the irrepressible 
urge of the Indian mind to express itself in terms of a living and 
dynamic naturalism and sensuous love of the physical body with 


645 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



all the ecstasy it is capable of, postponed the disintegration till as 
late as the thirteenth century (in Konarak, for example). In the 
South also, it was checked by a new experience of religious emo¬ 
tionalism of a new type of bhakti that flowered in a series of por¬ 
traits, in metal, of Saiva and Vaishnava saints till as late as the 
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. 


2. EASTERN INDIA 
A. Bihar and Bengal 

Generally speaking, East Indian sculptures of the period are 
carved out of black chlorite (kashp-pdthar), either of fine or of 
coarse grain. Metal images are cast in brass or octo-alloy ( ashta - 
dhdtu), A few images of gold and silver have also come down to us, 
and wood-carvings also are not unknown. But, whatever the mate¬ 
rial, it does not, as a rule, determine the characteristics of art which 
are common to stone, metal and wood. Little or no concessions are 
made to the material itself except in such items as ornaments which, 
in metal, are wrought with more precision and fineness, or the linear 
direction which, in wood, is shown as following its grain. 

The pivot is the human figure, in the full bloom of youth, ra¬ 
diant and vibrant, and combining in itself both spiritual and mun¬ 
dane suggestiveness, frankly physical and sensuous. It is not un¬ 
likely that this sensuous suggestiveness of a really spiritual mood 
was due at the bottom to an inner experience of erotic nature de¬ 
rived from sexual yoga or Tantrik inspirations, doubtless canonised 
by the respective cults. 

Eastern India, comprising Bihar and Bengal (also Mayurbhanj 
and to a large extent Orissa), carries on, almost uninterruptedly 
and without any intrusion of the mediaeval trend, the classical tra¬ 
dition of vision and experience as well as of form, albeit much 
thinned and superficial. Indeed, nowhere else did the classical tide 
and tradition of the past centuries persist with such tenacity and 
strength and for so long a time. The more important specimens 
of East Indian sculpture are all cult-images, worked more or less 
strictly according to formulas enunciated by authors of the dhyd - 
nas. Nevertheless they maintain, in varying degrees in different 
regions and at different times, a classical dignity and serenity in 
their bearing, and yet their charm and sensuousness have a spell of 
allurement that is at once physical and spiritual. 

Eighth century East Indian sculpture may be regarded as be¬ 
longing to the final phase of classical Indian tradition. The facial 
and physiognomical type is a Gupta survival. A boldness of corn- 


646 



ART 



position in solid masses, more noticeable in the stone sculptures 
than in the bronzes, with a tender modelling of heavy bodily forms 
characterises the work of this transitional phase. In Bihar this tide 
and tradition persist for a longer period, far into the ninth and 
tenth centuries, and the Western part of Bengal shares in this per¬ 
sistence for some time yet. In South, North, and Eastern Bengal, 
however, the regional element of sensuousness and refinement as¬ 
serts itself with power and strength earlier than was the case in 
Bihar and West Bengal. A considerable difference in facial fea¬ 
tures, emotional characteristics, and decorative details is also to be 
admitted throughout between the products of Bihar and Bengal, 
but this does not disturb the common denominator to any appre- 
ciable extent. 

The ashta-dhatu (made of eight metals) images of Nalanda (cf. 
stone image of Avalokitesvara, Fig. 93) and Kurkihar (Fig. 94) 
mark the creative climax of ninth century plastic vision and idiom. 
Sturdily conceived, the physiognomical mass is modelled with a 
soft pliability, and the facial expression is one of tender affection 
and allurement. Even in stone sculptures, despite a metallic ring, 
the modelling suggests a contented and calm sensuousness. Bold¬ 
ness of plastic conception persists and the swelling of plastic masses 
is more evident in the metal images than in the stone ones. The 
ideal art form is one of soft fleshiness within definite outlines. 

Out of the soft fleshiness controlled within definite outlines the 
tenth century evolves a powerfully massive form of the body which 
is shaped with a disciplined vigour, and shows a conscious strength 
that seems to swell the outline from within (cf. Fig. 92). In isola¬ 
ted instances this is controlled by a strict discipline even to the 
extent of petrification of the flesh (Fig. 95), but in most cases it is a 
soft and tender discipline, and the vigour is spread out on to the 
surface. This vigour transformed the softness of the fleshy form 
into mighty roundness. Almost all specimens are moulded into high 
relief and the trunk limbs are all pregnant with the subdued vigour 
of a robust form. Throughout the century East India retains this 
high quality and standard. The modelling still retains its sensu¬ 
ousness. though expressed within a disciplined form. In other 
respects the tenth century retains, to a large extent, the quality 
of the ninth. The facial type is the same, equally full, but some¬ 
times a bit longish. The flexions of the body are slightly on the 
increase, so that we have increasing curves in the outlines of the 
figures. 

The end of the tenth and the beginning of the eleventh century 
transform the vigour and strength of bodily form into one of cons- 


647 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

gracefulness and elegant mannerism (Fig. 96). Understand¬ 
ably a slender bodily type comes to be favoured. The deep broad 
outlook of the tenth century becomes somewhat thin and circums¬ 
cribed, and the elegance of the physiognomical form gradually be¬ 
comes more evident. The legs have stiffened to a great extent and 
given up all elasticity, even in postures that suggest movement. 
The elegance of the modelling and sensitiveness of the facial ex¬ 
pression, however, persist throughout. 

In the twelfth century the slender body-type and the formal 
treatment of the preceding century are retained, but the modelling 
becomes petrified. The sensitiveness of the facial expression dis¬ 
appears and is replaced by a serious heaviness; the legs become al¬ 
most column-like without any elasticity. The relief, in three or 
four architectonic units, is covered by dense and heavy multitudes 
of accompanying figures and decorative details which grow more 
and more sumptuous and elaborate, and ultimately cover the com¬ 
positional scheme altogether (Fig. 98). Not only the modelling 
but also the volume becomes petrified and gradually loses its plas- 
tic significance. Ornaments are inordinately lavish and sumptuous, 
and are not organically connected with the figures. Flexions of the 
body are extended to the utmost limit; bends are employed to their 
last possibilities (Fig. 97), but the expression of movement is only 
that of pattern without any suggestiveness. Despite voluptuous and 
full curly lips and doubly curved eyebrows, facial features become 
pointed almost to a triangle, and rigid, without any deep spiritual 
significance (Fig. 100). 

Here and there one, however, comes across a new artistic ins¬ 
piration, a new creativeness amid a system that was already on its 
way to suffocation by material exuberance. A spontaneous power 
of modelling in a completely round form inspires a tough and vigo¬ 
rous artistic form in some rare specimens, and in spite of sumptu¬ 
ousness of ornaments and a precise outline it reveals a conscious 
dignity and strength, a freshness of elemental experience that could 
yet save the art from final stagnation. But that was not to be. Left 
to itself, the art could yet find out new channels or new experiences, 
but all chances were set at rest by the rapid rush of Islam. 

East Indian art of the twelfth century represents mainly the 
art of the period of the Senas, and a cross-section of the literature 
and culture patronised at the Sena court reveals the attitude of 
material exuberance that one notices in Sena sculptures. Even reli¬ 
gious themes — both in art and literature — are endowed with a 
worldly consciousness and almost physical charm and grace (Fig. 
99). The Gita-govinda of Jayadeva, for example, may be regarded as 




648 


AKT 



!ss of the Sena 
ition, but there 
xperience came 
;d in the Sena 
earlier periods 
> allow and en- 


a literary counterpart of the voluptuous sensuousness of the 
art. In its origin it had no doubt a religious inspiration, but 
is also no doubt that what was basically a spiritual 
to be overshadowed by a worldly trend develope 
court. Sensuousness and grace were properties of 
of Bengali art as well, but it was left to the Senas to 
courage them to degenerate into mere worldly lavishnes 


It is not impossible that the explanation for this mechanical 
worldly lavishness of Sena sculptures is to be found in the strain 
of their foreign blood. Contemporary South-Indian sculpture is 
equally lavish in its worldliness, mechanical and rigid in vision and 
execution, but lacking the grace and animation of Sena images 
which were direct legacies from earlier Pala sculptures. 

The art-form of Eastern India during these four long centuries 
proceeds in a wavering line; sometimes favouring a fleshly form 
frankly sensuous, sometimes an abstract form equally sensuous, not 
frankly but suggestively, both tendencies working within the strict 
rigours of canonical tradition. The art seems to have derived its 
charm and peculiar character from an oscillation between the 
reality of the flesh and the reality of abstraction, perhaps between 
two minds, one deeply imbued with the sadhana of the Tantra that 
knows this physical body to be the abode of heavenly bliss, and the 
other aspiring to abstract the godliness in man out of his material 
body itself—the sadhana of Brahmanical Hinduism. In striking 
contrast to this ideological oscillation between the two tendencies, 
is the gradual evolution of the composition. It begins with quite 
simple flexions and attitudes of the body and simple decorations 
and ornamentations; but with the progress of time the flexions and 
attitudes of the body become excited and agitated, decorations and 
ornamentations, playful and frivolous. This tendency from simple 
and quiet to agitated and frivolous general appearance proceeds in 
a steady straight course. In any case this tendency seems to have 
worked itself up to such exaggerations that it came to sit heavily 
on the art itself, and when finally Islam came and with it came 
also a change in the Court, and for a time, in the socio-religious 
Institutions and establishments, the art was suffocated, if not to 
immediate death, at least to immediate stagnation. 

Summarily speaking, the four centuries and a half of the rich 
Eastern school of Bihar and Bengal are characterised by high tech¬ 
nical accomplishment and a kind of mechanical grace and elegance. 
The outlines are sharp and clear and the modelling is almost metal¬ 
lic. The school sent its reverberations to Kashmir, Nepal, Tibet 
and a few sub-Himalayan tracts in the north; nearer home to Mayur- 


649 


MINISr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



bhanj; and, beyond the seas, to Burma, Siam, Java, Sumatra, and 
Ceylon. The more important centres of the school were Nalanda, 
Kurkihar, Bodh-Gaya, Rajagriha and Champa in Bihar; Rajshahi, 
Dinajpur and Bogra, in North Bengal, and Dacca, Tippera and Syl- 
het in East Bengal, all now included in East Pakistan. Regional 
variations in facial type and expression and in appearance and 
treatment are noticeable, but they do not reach out of the lines of 
the common denominator. West Bengal products and those of Bihar 
go together, while South Bengal cultivates a sort of happy and 
subtle contentment different from the alluring charm and elegance 
of North and East Bengal. 

B. Orissa 

As in Bihar and Bengal, so in Orissa, the flow of Gupta classi¬ 
cal tide persists with consistent vigour. The soft and mellow lines 
and curves and full but delicate and subtle plasticity of volume con¬ 
tinue in subdued vigour till they are replaced by flowing but firm 
sinuous lines, quicker flexions and tough,-firm, round, modelling of 
a sturdier plastic volume—elements that presumably were the gifts 
of a new vision, a new ideal other than that of the bygone age. In¬ 
deed, onwards from roughly about the tenth century, not only in 
Orissa but throughout India, the birth of a new vigour is un¬ 
mistakable in its plastic expression which retains the balanced pro¬ 
portion of the classical frame, but bids good-bye to its cultured re¬ 
finement, spiritual grace, and subtle elegance, and seeks to produce 
instead a sturdier physiognomical type held within firm but ample, 
flowing lines, and gripped by a large, round and tight modelling. 
This is true as much of the cult-images as of the non-iconic figure 
sculptures, including those of animals. 

From the specimens collected so far, and from the extensive 
ruins strewn all over and around Lalitagiri, Udayagiri and Ratna- 
giri (Cuttack District), it is clear that the locality was once, in the 
seventh and eighth centuries, an important Buddhist centre that 
encouraged and patronised the art of sculpture in embellishing its 
temples and monasteries. Wrought in decomposed khondalite or 
chlorite schist the Buddhist images from these sites, notably from 
Lalitagiri and Kendrapara, carry on, on the whole, the East Indian 
classical tradition, especially in the essential linearism on which not 
only the slight tribhanga attitude but the rhythm of the entire com¬ 
position rests, including that of the lotus stalk. But they lack the 
subtle delicacy and spiritual grace of contemporary Nalanda work, 
for example; instead, they are more expansive and spread out on 


650 



MIN/Sr/Jy 


ART 




the plane, more stern, and held by a more firm and solid composi¬ 
tion. 


Contemporary or slightly later (i.e. ninth century) sculptures 
from Udayagiri and Ratnagiri, whether Buddhist or Brahmanical, 
are heavier in appearance and treatment, though yet generously 
graceful in their slight dbhanga and tribhanga attitudes. Not only 
are they heavier, they are also more sturdily built, fully but tightly 
modelled; at the same time they retain the pliable amplitude and 
flowing sinuosity of their outlines. Relatively, they are slightly 
shorter and perhaps also coarser in physiognomy than the compara¬ 
tively slenderer figures of Lalitagiri. From the tenth century on¬ 
wards the sculptural art of Udayagiri and Ratnagiri, and of Jajpur 
and Chauduar, is a part of the contemporary art of Baudh and Bhu- 
vanesvara, Puri and Konarak, and may be viewed together. The 
only point of difference to be noticed is the more intimate relation 
of the former group with the contemporary art of Bihar and Ben¬ 
gal, especially in the manner of modelling almost fully in the round 
and that with a metallic smoothness. At this stage, too, the sculp¬ 
tures of this group retain their ample sinuosity of the outline. A 
second point to remember is that the mediaeval tradition, unlike 
the Bhuvanesvara-Puri-Konarak group, but like contemporary 
Bihar and Bengal, made no intrusion in Cuttack till as late as the 
thirteenth century. 

Khiching, the old seat of the patron goddess of the early Bhanja 
kings, Kinehakesvan or Khijjiiigesvari, in Mayurbhanj, was another 
important seat of Orissan sculpture, lying geographically as well as 
artistically between Bengal and Orissa. Datable in the tenth and 
eleventh centuries, these sculptures, Brahmanical in affiliation, are 
all modelled roundly, tightly, and largely. Indeed, their breadth, 
fullness, and amplitude of modelling and movement impart to them 
a sturdiness of form and appearance, accentuated further by their 
relative dimensions, and marked by almost metallic sharpness, pre¬ 
cision, and smoothness which is lightened, however, by an emotional 
expression spread over the face in a smile and distributed over the 
surface of the whole body. While the qualities of largeness and 
round amplitude of modelling and movement are shared by Khiching 
with the rest of contemporary Orissa, the psychological expression 
of the faces and the metallic smoothness and precision are more 
closely related to contemporary Bihar and Bengal, 

Typically Orissan sculptural art can best be viewed and studied 
at centres like Bhuvanesvara, Baudh, Purl, and Konarak. Together 
they cover a period of five centuries, from the eighth to the 
thirteenth, and except in the case of the cult-images either installed 


651 



MIN/$7fy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


the sanctum in the garhha-griha or placed in the important niches 
sunk in the exterior of the temple, the figure sculptures constitute 
an essential part of the temple-surface and can be understood only 
in that context. As Kramrisch says, ‘architecture in Orissa is but 
sculpture on a gigantic scale’. In other contemporary monuments, 
the temples do not themselves blossom in figure sculptures and 
images; rather the latter are applied on the exterior walls and in 
the niches as decorations or according to sastric injunctions; even 
the almost roundly modelled sculptures and panel-like reliefs in 
frames, as the case may be, seem as if they were applied on to the 
walls from outside. But in the monumental structural temples of 
Orissa, the relationship between the temple body and the figures is 
altogether of a different order. To begin with, in the eighth (or 
seventh) century reliefs of the Parasurame£vara temple (Fig. 101), 
for example, the figures, though very free in their agile movements, 
are yet very much bound down to the plane of the temple-surface. 
As time moves forward the pagas and the rekhas of the deul 231 
begin to thrust themselves forward from the ground base of the 
temple-body; a deeper contrast in surface and depth results and the 
ornamental decorations keep pace with it. Simultaneously the figures, 
too, which are part of the temple-body, seem to step out in increas¬ 
ing roundness of volume, so that in the reliefs of the Rajaran'I (Fig. 
103) and the Lingaraja (Figs. 104 and 106) the figures are connected 
with the ground by a vertical line of thread as it were. The figures 
are thus fully thrust out in the open space. Still later, at Konarak, 
where everything is on an epic scale, the consummation is reached 
in the thirteenth century, when the figures in relief are still more 
fully exposed, and independent figures are cut out in completely 
round volumes of the temple-body itself as it were. Indeed the 
magnificent singing and dancing figures on the upper storeys (Fig. 
105) of the Arka temple are part of the temple-body and yet apart 
and away from it, fully, roundly and independently emerged into 
space. 


Unless they are meant to be dignifiedly static, also perhaps 
somewhat mechanical, as the Surya images of Konarak, even the 
cult-images (Fig. 102), despite iconographic regulations of a rigid 
order, are informed by a dynamic vitality, and a monumentality of 
composition and largeness of form and bearing,—effects that are 
directly due to an amplitude of movement and dignified modelling. 
These qualities are seen at their best in the large-size images of 
Karttikeya, Ganesa, and MahishasuramardinI in the exterior niches 
of the Lingaraja temple, in certain images from Jajpur and Chauduar, 
Purl and Khiching. In all such cult-images, the pliability and 


652 


MiNisr^ 



amplitude of the sinuous outline is a distinguishing feature which is 
in a great measure responsible for the sturdy vitality. 


The non-iconic figure sculptures, which are much more numer¬ 
ous at Bhuvanesvara, Puri and Konarak, have all these qualities and 
some others besides. They are further characterised by a delightful 
abandon of feeling, emotion and action, an almost innocent but 
ecstatic joy of living, a rich luxuriousness of appearance, an intense 
love for the human body and all that this body is capable of yielding 
in terms of life-experience. 

So much ado has been made about the frank eroticism of the 
figure-sculptures of Puri and Konarak that a word need be said here. 
Mithuna subjects have never been taboo in Indian art, and a creative 
sensuousness has ever been regarded as an important source of 
energy, of vital urge in life—as much in religious and spiritual quest 
as in the quest for expression—in certain schools and aspects of 
Indian sadhand. Sanchi and Amaravati knew it, Mathura was more 
than conscious about it, and in the Ellora scene of Siva and Parvati 
in rapturous yet self-forgetful kissing embrace the mithuna idea of 
this sddhana finds a most creative expression. Indeed it was accept¬ 
ed as a normal, nay essential part of life without any shame or 
secrecy attached to it. So is it at Puri and Konarak, where admit¬ 
tedly the eroticism is not only in the sensuous suggestiveness but 
in the depiction of sexual acts in the widest possible varieties of 
poses and attitudes known to the Kamasastras. But what is re¬ 
markable at Konarak, if not at Puri—the difference is presumably 
as much due to the attitude of the artist as to his efficiency as a 
craftsman—is the fact that even in those scenes that depict a sexual 
act there is a sort of delightful detachment in the actors themselves. 
They take it so easy and in such a nonchalant manner that there 
is not the slightest suggestion of a mischief being done or a shameful 
act being gone through. 

The temples of Orissa and Khajuraho show the extent reached 
by Indian craftsmen in giving concrete form to this very subtle and 
complex view of life. It is true that contemporary Orissa was touch¬ 
ed by the Tantra, and the sensuous love of, and joy in, the human 
body as caught hold of in the figures of Orissan temples may have 
been due to Tantrik inspiration; but it is not necessary, in the light 
of the interpretation set forth above, to explain the erotic scenes 
and scenes of sexual acts by referring them to Tantrik practices 
about the currency of which we have no definite evidence in contem¬ 
porary Orissa, much less at Khajuraho. The present writer can bear 
witness to the fact that he has seen Oriya villagers of the present 
day look at the panorama of life stretching before their eyes on 


65 3 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


walls of Konarak with as much unconcern and detachment as 
belong to the figures themselves, while the middle-class educated 
.students either shrink or glance at them through a corner of their 
bashful eyes! 

In the eighth century reliefs of the Parasuramesvara temple 
(Fig. 101), the figures are physiognomically short and, since the 
temple surface binds them closer to its ground, are treated in some¬ 
what flattened volumes. This results in a sort of heaviness which 
is partly compensated by free and round movements of the body. 
In the ninth century this heaviness persists despite increasing free¬ 
dom of movement and luxurious vivacity of mood and appearance, 
for example, in the reliefs of the Vaital deul. In the tenth century 
a refined elegance not only in the physiognomical form but also in 
the plastic treatment of the rounded volume lends to the figures of 
the Rajarani (Fig. 103) temple a decidedly sophisticated grace. In 
the following century, however, this elegance is translated in terms 
of sturdiness and strength, and in the reliefs of the Lingaraja (Figs. 
104 and 106) and Brahmesvara temples figures are fully rounded and 
the sensuous modelling of the volume is informed by a vigour born 
from within. The twelfth century retains this quality (the reliefs 
of the Kedaresvara temple, Bhuvanesvara, of the Jagannatha tem¬ 
ple, Puri), but in a slightly coarser manner. The thirteenth century 
recaptures the grace and elegance and also the tough roundness of 
the eleventh and pushes them to their natural consummation in the 
reliefs of the Arka temple at Konarak. Indeed grace and elegance 
have ever been a distinguished quality of Orissa sculptures, but it 
was left to the artists of the Rajarani, Lingaraja and Konarak to 
exploit them to the fullest limit. 


Simultaneously, decorations in details of the temples in gene¬ 
ral and of the reliefs and figures in particular were steadily on the 
increase. Each succeeding century added to the profusion of details 
and ornamentations, both architectural and decorative, till by about 
the thirteenth century, grace and elegance were both suffocated to 
extinction, if not at Konarak, at least in other contemporary temples. 
Whether these devices are floral-vegetal, or geometrical, or stylised 
and patternised architectural elements like the chaitya- window, the 
Orissan artists’ attempt to exploit them to the best advantage for 
the purpose of intricate display of light and shade, makes itself 
known even from such early temples as the Parasuramesvara. 
Added to the deep contrasts in light and shade afforded by the deco¬ 
rative devices were the pagas and rekhas stepping out more and 
more on to open space so that all intervening spaces also were intri¬ 
cately alternated by deep contrasts of light and darkness. Such 


654 


MIN/Sr^ 


ART 



ART 

ay of light and darkness, accentuated further by the steppinj 
^mto open spaces of the figures as well, build up a consistency 
that is at once balanced and harmonised. It is this consistency of the 
interplay of light and shade that makes the Orissan temple a living 
organism and lends to the figure sculptures their intense liveliness. 
Taken out of their context the decorative devices and the figures 
lose much of their live reality. 



Mediaeval trends in Orissa do not seem to make themselves felt 
earlier than the eleventh century, and when they do, as in certain 
reilefs of the Lihgaraja and Brahmesvara temples and also in cer¬ 
tain reliefs now stored in the Konarak Museum, they may and often 
do occur side by side with reliefs, or even in the same relief side 
by side with figures that are frankly inspired by the classical 
tradition. 


A word must be said in respect of the animal sculptures of 
Orissa. At Konarak we have some of the best elephant reliefs of 
Indian art, though in smaller dimension, on the walls of the im¬ 
mense base-structure. The large, almost life-size, ones are im¬ 
posing and impressive more by their volume than by their inherent 
artistic quality. The huge and spirited caparisoned steeds that drag 
the twelve wheeled chariot forward, are equally impressive, more 
by their bearing and straining mood than by the concretised vision 
of their dynamic naturalism or by the sensitivity of their plastic 
volume. An antelope frieze on the walls of the Muktesvara temple 
is, however, endowed with these very qualities and catches the ani¬ 
mals in their essential form. 


3. GANGA-YAMUNA VALLEY 
Specimens of sculpture, belonging to the ninth and the three 
succeeding centuries, are extremely rare, so far as the Punjab plains 
and the Ganga-Yamuna valley are concerned. This is mainly due 
to devastation wrought by Muslim iconoclasts from the days of 
Mahmud of Ghazni to those of Aurangzeb. If a small (26 inches) 
Mathura Vishnu relief, datable towards the end of the tenth or 
beginning of the eleventh century, and a few broken or damaged 
pieces from Mirzapur and Sarnath can be relied upon as furnishing 
indications, it seems the Ganga-Yamuna valley belonged to the com¬ 
mon denominator of the contemporary art of Bihar and Bengal, 
more closely of Bihar to which the region was geographically conti¬ 
guous. These cult-images, mainly Brahmanical, are characterised 
by the same physiognomical type and form, the same precision of 
features, and the same almost metallic smoothness that distinguish 
the stone sculptures of contemporary Bihar and Bengal. An earlier, 


655 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

' perhaps early tenth century, version of the same East Indian tradi¬ 
tion is reflected in a Vishnu statue from Sultanpur (Etah District) 
characterised by a softer modelling and not so conscious elegance 
of eleventh century examples. Like the East Indian tradition again 
the Ganga-Yamuna valley remains throughout untouched by 
mediaeval trends (Figs. 107-110). 

4. CENTRAL INDIA 

Occupying, geographically, an intermediate position between 
the East and the West, Central India—extending from the borders 
of Rujputana and Gujarat in the west (roughly from Ujjayini and 
Mandasor) to Allahabad in the east—holds an intermediate position, 
artistically too, in the history of mediaeval sculpture. Her pro¬ 
ducts, from the tenth to the thirteenth, turned out under the aegis 
and patronage of the Chandellas of Jejakabhukti and the Parama- 
ras of Dhara, reflect an admixture of both the East Indian tradition 
of Bihar and Bengal and that of Rajputana and Gujarat where the 
mediaeval trends found their most congenial home. While Garhwa, 
Mahoba and Khajuraho preserve the more important relics of the 
Chandellas, the Paramara tradition is stored at Dhar and Mandor 
in Indore and Gwalior. Formally and psychologically they are 
different, though a common denominator is admissible. 

Throughout, in Central India of the Chandellas and the Para- 
maras as in Mahakosala of the Haihayas, classical volume has be¬ 
come ampler, but grows increasingly stereotyped, which means a 
tunning down of the inner vision and consequent and correspond¬ 
ing loss of plastic sensitivity. But it reveals the sensuous charm 
that resides in the physical body (Figs. Ill and 116) and imparts 
u a ligures a somewhat mechanical grace and conscious perfection. 
The modelling has definitely become stagnant, but has a smooth¬ 
ness that gives elegance to the somewhat dull volume. With in¬ 
creasing loss of plastic sensitivity and growing dullness of the am- 
p e and round volume, conscious movements and flexions of the 
ody round its axis show a corresponding increase to create an im¬ 
pression of more and more intensity of feeling and life (Fig. 115). 

e iving breath that endows the body with the dynamism of life 
uas now ceased and the flesh moves no longer; instead the conscious 
flexions and movements, often violent and intense, of the body are 
now the only exponents of life consciously passionate and arduous. 

this is nowhere more in evidence than in the Buddhist sculp¬ 
tures, all turned out presumably from the workshop of one chitra- 
kara ,, in this case, a sculptor, Sri Satana, described in one of the in¬ 
scriptions as sakala-silpa-vidya-kusalah (adept in all arts), of Mahot- 




65 6 



fagara, modern Mahoba, associated with the Chandellas of Jejaka- 
bhukti, and known for long to have also yielded Brahmanical and 
Jain sculptures. A smooth and placid charm and a sort of mechanical 
grace and perfection worn round the balanced and full round con¬ 


tours of the body are unmistakable in the images of Simhanada 
Lokesvara (Fig. 119) and Padmapani Lokesvara, and also, though in 
a lesser degree, in that of Tara. That this charm and grace are more 
in the bhangas and bhaiigis , i.e. in the flexions and modes, than in 
the plastic quality which is itself stilled into a placid sheet over the 
body, will be evident from a comparison of these figures with that 
of the Buddha seated in bhumi-spcirsa-mudrd. In the latter case 
where there is no scope for presenting the body in flexions, the figure 
fails to catch the grace and charm of the other figures, yet it happens 
to be a work presumably by the same artist. But while in all such 
examples the character of the ‘classical’ volume and the amplitude 
of vision and form persist with vigour and meaning, in others, main¬ 
ly Jain cult-images and decorative fragments, the specifically 
mediaeval trends of sharp outlines and pointed angles, formed by 
jerking limbs flung with vigour and by sharp noses and angular 
chins thrown forward, are equally potent and active and lend to the 
composition a somewhat different colour and meaning. 

Garhwa sculptures are also characterised by the same grace and 
charm of a still, placid modelling, and of conscious flexions and 
movements of the body. But Chandella figure-sculptures can be 
seen at their best on the walls of the Brahmanical and Jain temples 
of the temple city of Khajuraho in Bundelkhand, a city which in the 
richness and magnificence of its architecture and sculpture, stands 
very near to the temple-city of Bhuvanesvara. The temples of 
Khajuraho pulsate with human activity (Figs. 114 and 115) but the 
figures, including those of human beings and animals ( sdrdulas , for 
instance), do not belong to the temples themselves in the sense the 
Orissan figures do. They are fully and roundly modelled, if not in 
the amplitude of dimension as in Orissa yet in large proportions, but 
are, for all practical purposes, independent of the flat ground of the 
temple. The outlines are deep and sharp, but have not the ample 
sinuosity of the Orissan outlines, an evident consequence of the 
‘mediaeval’ grip into which Khajuraho found itself caught. The 
treatment of the plastic volume is generally tight and still, which 
is sought to be somewhat compensated by the sharp and pointed 
movements of the stiff limbs that are otherwise without any sensitive¬ 
ness. Yet in the flexions and movements, there is a conscious in¬ 
tensity that is often violent and seems to turn the body in all its 
joints to their utmost breaking point, with an evident eye to 
emotional, frankly erotic provocation. The Khajuraho figures are 


S.E.—42 


657 



^5_^&msciously and purposely erotic and sensuous; this they express 
suggestively and not by innocent and hence frank and unashamed 
libidinous acts as in Orissa. The coquettish languor of Khajuraho 
has nothing to compare with the innocent detachment of Orissa or 
with the creative and virile sensuousness of earlier Mathura and 
Vehgi regions of the post-Christian centuries. 

Decorative ornamentations at Khajuraho, indeed in Chandella 
art in general, show an amalgam of ‘classical’ and ‘mediaeval’ gram¬ 
mar and composition existing side by side, often in one relief, some 
time separately, some time integrated into one complete pattern. 
Besides Khajuraho, there were other centres in Bundelkhand where 
the ‘mediaeval’ grip was equally, if not more, potent, as for example 
at Chandpur in Jhansi. Here, in some of the sculptures of the Maha- 
deva temple (twelfth century) the entire plastic context is broken 
up into rectangular and triangular fragments and the whole com¬ 
position is sharpened by linear and angular movements. Evidently 
the mediaeval tendencies were gradually getting the upper hand. 
But in some examples from Khajuraho the persistence of the classi¬ 
cal tradition is shown at its best and purest in the subtlety of model¬ 
ling, in the sensitivity of the linear movement, and in the largeness 
and consistency of composition. Such examples are no doubt rare, 
but prove nevertheless the strength and vitality of the tradition. 

Paramara art was prolific in its sculptural output, but hardly 
did it ever reach a high tide of aesthetic achievement. Though 
bound geographically to what was known as Western Malava, its 
products really belong to the contemporary Rajputana idiom. The 
greatest builder and lover of art of the dynasty was Raja Bhoja 
(c. A.D. 1000-1055). The image of Sarasvatl (Fig. 117), installed by 
him in the main hall of his Sarasvatl Mandir (temple), a sort of a 
university of learning at Dhara, his capital, shows Paramara sculpture 
at its best. Other specimens can be seen at Mandu, at the local museum 
at Dhar, on the walls of the Nllakantha or Udayaesvara temple at 
Udayapur, built by Udayaditya Paramara, within the enclosures of 
the Mahakala temple at Ujjayini, and other places including Indore. 

Largely and vigorously conceived and modelled in ample 
dimensions, the figures are informed by ‘classical’ value of form. 
They are free from jerky movements and intense flexions, and do 
not seem to feel the weight of the heavy roundness which character¬ 
ises their youthful body. The face, also fully and vigorously modell¬ 
ed, wears an expression of blankness and is lighted up neither by 
any pleasure of the senses nor by any inner experience, urge or in¬ 
spiration. Despite youthfulness and vigorous round modelling, 
plasticity hangs in suspense or is stilled into stagnation; this 


658 


ART 

goes along with a pair of rigid and heavy legs equally lifeless. 
Mediaevalism touches ornamental devices and jewelleries; the latter 
are sharply cut and are just laid on the body with which they have 
no organic relation; ‘classical’ decorative ornamentations are also 
flattened and linearised as far as possible, while specifically northern 
patterns of sharp and flat contrast in light and darkness (as in chess¬ 
board and diamond patterns) are common. 

5. VINDHYA AND MADHYA PRADESH 

In the region extending from Allahabad to Jabalpur, the temple¬ 
building activity was carried on on a considerable scale, under 
the aegis of the Haihayas of Tripuri, in the tenth and eleventh 
centuries, at Bheraghat (near Jabalpur), Satna, Dudhahi (Laiitpur 
District), Ranipur (Sambalpur), Rewa and other places. 

It should be remembered that this entire region has ever been 
the home of a large segment of our aboriginal population, and it is 
significant that they have stamped a strong impress not only in the 
physiognomy but also on the form and medium of the mediaeval 
Haihaya art. On the ground of the common mediaeval denomina¬ 
tor of north-Indian art the aboriginal element is deeply marked. 
Not in a few figure-reliefs a new facial type, squarish in cut, with 
swollen cheeks, big mouth and eyes closed as if in solemn pride in 
its own importance, goes hand in hand with a short-featured body 
that is swelled into heavy round masses as if by pressure from with¬ 
in, and which is borne on a still pair of legs. Though controlled 
by sharp outlines deeply cut, the bulging plastic mass, fully model¬ 
led, is frankly reminiscent of the ‘classical’ volume, but the sharp 
bends of joints of limbs, particularly at the knee and the elbow, of 
the main and subsidiary figures, and sharp facial profiles of the 
latter with their pointed noses and chins (Fig. 113) are clear mani¬ 
festations of the specifically ‘mediaeval’ trends. Moreover, the 
subsidiary figures are conceived and executed in an altogether 
different manner, thinner and sharper in appearance and form, 
very much unlike the heavy and swelling roundness of the main 
figures. But the most distinguishing characteristic of Haihaya 
sculptures is the overcrowding of the reliefs with such a multitude 
of things as not to leave any space for breathing as it were. Indeed 
they are so many and so heaped one on the shoulder of another— 
men, women, architectural and decorative elements, all in heavy 
round volumes in high relief,—that the reliefs appear heavy and 
cumbersome. Crowded details seem to sit heavily on the composi¬ 
tion and it looks as though the structure would fall to pieces by 
their very weight. 




659 




6. RAJPUTANA 


Mediaeval Rajputana sculptures hail from such diverse sites 
as Vasantgarh and Devangana, both in the old Sirohi State, Palta 
(Bikaner), Osia Dilwara (Mount Abu) (Figs. 118 and 121), Harshagixi 
(Jaipur), (Figs. 112 and 120), Chitor, and Mandor, among other 
places, and are spread over practically the whole of the mediaeval 
period, from the tenth to about the seventeenth century. In point of 
style they range from full recognition of ‘classical’ values side by 
side with acquiescence to ‘mediaeval’ pressure to complete nega¬ 
tion of the ‘classical’ and full assertion of the ‘mediaeval’. 

At Vasantgarh, from the stylised sun-window of a temple of 
the tenth century, peeps out the head of a Buddha distinguished by 
a largeness of treatment and a sensitivity of modelling comparable 
only to similar faces from Khajuraho. The pure, organic and con¬ 
sistent quality of the face unmistakably betrays the debt it owes 
to the ‘classical’ vision and form as interpreted by contemporary 
artists in Central and Eastern India, including Orissa. A series of rich 
floral-vegetal designs encircles the face just referred to. These designs 
are evidently borrowed from the ‘classical’ store-house, but, at the 
same time, it is seen at once that they are not roundly modelled, 
but are flattened out on the surface with sharp perpendicular cuts 
at the edges. This flattening out of modelled volumes and deeply 
and sharply cut edges are directly traceable to ‘mediaeval’ pres¬ 
sure. Much more than anywhere else in Rajputana, contemporary 
(i.e. tenth century) Osia sculptures adhere more closely to the* 
classical tradition with its vigorous modelling of a youthful body 
spreading itself in the amplitude of its mass. The same vigorous 
and also tough modelling gives life and strength to the reliefs of 
the Purana Mahadeva temple of Harshagiri, also belonging to the 
tenth century. 

About this time, i.e. the tenth century, Chandravati, in the old 
Brijnagar state, in Eastern Rajputana, seems to have become a 
great centre of artistic activity, where one can follow the history 
of the art of Central India and Eastern Rajputana in its finest mani¬ 
festations throughout the mediaeval period. A number of Chandra- 
vati-Patan sculptures, now in the Brijnagar State Museum, and a 
few in situ, can stylistically be assigned to the tenth and eleventh 
centuries. By their heavy roundness of the weighty mass with 
hardly any suggestion of flexibility and linear movement, they be¬ 
long more to contemporary Central Indian idiom than to that of 
Rajputana. Impressive in largeness and amplitude of the plastic 
mass, they are somewhat stolid and withdrawn in their facial and 
physiognomical expression, due no doubt to the stagnated modell- 


660 


MiN/sr^ 


ART 



<SL 


ing; but the outlines are less sharp and more flowing and sinuous 
than average contemporary Rajputana products. Classical values 
persist in the following i.e. eleventh century Rajput sculptures, but 
while the pliability of the soft modelling continues, the linear ele¬ 
ment grows harder and stiffer so that the flexions of the body 
appear to be rigid, and an elaboration of jewelleries and decora¬ 
tions takes place. These are cut in sharp edges and are not plastical¬ 
ly conceived, so that w T hen the jewelleries are laid on and round 
the large round volumes, they do not become their integral parts. 
Thus the ‘classical’ and the ‘mediaeval’ tides enter into an incongruous 
combination. The reliefs of the original Mokalji’s temple at 
Chitor, rich in sculptural wealth, are datable in the eleventh 
century. 


In the twelfth century a conscious elegance sets in and makes 
the figures and their composition thinner and lighter by sharper 
outlines, deeply cut, and pointed lines and angles. The concave 
curve in the bodies and legs—a resultant effect of the ‘mediaeval’ 
pressure on the line—is also on the increase. The stele composi¬ 
tion is also broken up into small fragments, with reference to the 
main figure, and loses thus the dynamic integration and co-ordina¬ 
tion of ‘classical’ composition; undoubtedly this, too, has been due 
to the emphasis on the sharp linear arrangement. 


In the thirteenth century this thinning down of the plastic context 
by an increasing emphasis on the sharp and pointed angularity of the 
limbs and features of figures and on the solely linear and frag¬ 
mentary aspect of the composition, is in the ascending grade along 
with the increasing concavity of curves. An elaboration of details 
of decoration and ornamentation, very skilfully, delicately and 
minutely worked out, goes side by side with a cumbersome and 
crowdy composition. Nowhere are these characteristics so clearly 
and subtly brought out than in the ceiling reliefs of the Neminatha 
Temple (Jain) of Mount Abu, built by Tejahpala in A.D. 1230 
(Figs. 41, 118 and 121). It must be remembered that the entire 
temple and its decorations are worked out of white marble which 
made possible chiselling or scraping in such a delicate and minute 
manner. But when Coomaraswamy says that this minute and deli¬ 
cate decorative work is “one of those cases where exuberance is 
beauty”, he pays a tribute that does not seem to be fully deserved. 
The exuberance of the Tejahpala temple decoration is not the exu¬ 
berance of fertile and dynamic nature that one sees at Sanchi, for 
example, essentially creative by its very nature and character. The 
very deeply undercut and delicately scraped designs with their sharp 
edges and deep contrasts in light and darkness result in a kind of 


661 


MINISr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOE EMPIRE 




mechanical grace, and are clear evidence of very skilled workman¬ 
ship, but are hardly any evidence of creative endeavour. The 
figure sculptures, too, are mechanically conceived and executed, 
and are hence thin in creative experience. Over-elaboration of 
details crowds and encumbers the compositional context, and the 
richness of design is not, in this case at any rate, born of an exu¬ 
berant, vibrant life full to the brim and overflowing it. 

The Mount Abu decorative and figure sculptures betray un¬ 
doubted ‘mediaeval’ characteristics some of which persist in Rajput 
sculpture through the subsequent centuries, and in Rajput paint¬ 
ing as well, in an altogether different context, till the nineteenth. 
The sharp emphasis on the line and its pointed angularity and on 
the concave curve can be witnessed in a Rasa-llla relief from the 
palace of Bir Singh Deo Bundela at Datia built in the early seven¬ 
teenth century (A.D. 1605-27), appearing in the context of con¬ 
temporary features and fashions. 


But mediaevalism in the art of Rajputana has a history earlier 
than even the tenth century, particularly in decorative devices, 
patterns and designs. Details of decoration, of an old temple at 
Mandor, show very clearly and pointedly how ‘classical’ themes and 
designs were made to shed off the rounded plasticity of their volu¬ 
mes and were gradually thinned and flattened out and sharpened in 
the edges, which human faces, turned in their sharp profiles, were 
made to thrust their beak-like noses into space. The Mandor temple 
and its decorations are datable in the eighth century. 


7. GUJARAT 

Gujarat has been one of the earliest targets of Muslim icono- 
clasm and throughout the late mediaeval period she suffered from 
periodic devastations of her numerous shrines. Almost all the older 
temples have been all but entirely destroyed; but from the ruins of 
temples and temple-cities, scattered all over Gujarat and the adjoin¬ 
ing territories, ruled over by the Chaulukyas from the middle 
of the tenth century, one can form an idea of the rich architectural 
and sculptural achievements of the region from about the eleventh 
to about, the seventeenth century and later. The more important 
centres are Siddhapura, Modhera, Taraga which is not very far 
from Siddhapura, Girnar, Satrunjaya, Dabhoi, and Jhinjuved. 

Not much need be said about the mediaeval art of Gujarat, for 
what has been said about the contemporary art of Rajputana applies 
to a great extent to this westernmost branch of mediaeval Indian 
sculpture. Indeed part of Western Rajputana. including Chitor and 
Mount Abu, really formed, culturally, a part of Gujarat during the 


662 





period (and even politically, at times, during the suze- 
the Chaulukyas), just as Eastern Rajputana formed a pa 
West Malava country. 


Mediaeval features are perhaps more conspicuous in Gujarat 
than in contemporary Rajputana, but this is more manifest in con¬ 
temporary book-illustrations than in sculpture. Indeed, in Rajput 
sculptures the line, though sharp, is still flowing in uninterrupted 
flux as a remnant of the classical tradition, and maintains the balanc¬ 
ed poise of the same tradition, but the more one travels further to¬ 
wards the west, the more does one witness the line seized by a 
nervousness under the stress of which all curves tend to be angular 
and concave and the poise gets disturbed. A sort of nervousness 
and tension grips all figures despite their evident vigour and power 
expressed in the forward thrust of the trunk of the body and over¬ 
done movements of the round slender limbs. Due to the nervous 
sharpness of line and pointed angularity of movements, the compo¬ 
sition is broken up into fragments not inherently related by any 
dynamic and integrated vision. Verticals, horizontals, and diagonals 
are spread out over the whole surface without much care for the 
plastic context. In appearance the figures are still endowed with 
grace and smoothness (Figs. 123 and 124) inherited from past genera¬ 
tions, but without much corresponding feeling and understanding. 


The decorative devices, jewelleries, etc. tend more and more 
towards flatness and sharpness, cut deeply and sharply in the edges, 
and grow increasingly rigid like the figure sculptures themselves, 
and also intricate and elaborate, without any integrated relation 
with the plastic body. 

And thus finally in the seventeenth century this direction 
reaches a stage when both Rajputana and Gujarat seek a renascence 
of sculptural art through an unsuccessful appeal to the classical 
sources. 


8. PUNJAB HILL STATES 


The Punjab Hill States, sheltered by the Himalayas, were not 
as isolated from the main currents of North Indian life and culture 
as is often supposed. Chamba, Kangra, Kulu, and Kumaon have 
preserved sculptures of images and decorative patterns in relief that 
originally formed part of temples some of which are still extant, as 
for example at Brahmor and Chatrarhi in Chamba and Masrur in 
Kangra. 

Reference may be made to the wooden door facade 232 of a 
temple exquisitely carved in relief in what remained of the classical 
Gupta tradition of the Ganga-Yamuma valley as interpreted in these 


MH 


misT/f 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

■ •* 

remote hill states. Even a century or more later (ninth century), 
some traces of the suavity, grace and poise of Gupta classicism and 
its softer, not subtler, treatment of plastic volume in full round 
forms can still be seen in the reliefs of the monolithic temple of 
Masrur in the Kangra valley. The simple naivete of the hill-people 
seems to have stamped itself in these reliefs in the attitude and ex¬ 
pression of these short-featured figures as much as in the somewhat 
coarse and summary treatment of the modelling. In the following 
century, or somewhat later, classical qualities are given full value 
in a number of cult-images in stone from Chamba (Bhagavati image 
in the village shrine of Svaim in Himagiri pargana and Siva figures 
on the Chandrasekhara temple at Saho, for example). The masks 
of Munjunidevi from Kulu 232a and the Siva from Harsar 
(Chamba) also belong to the same conception of form. Whether 
carved fully in the round or nearly so, these figures are powerfully, 
though coarsely, modelled, in heavy and stately proportions, fully 
expressive of concentrated energy to which the face responds with 
a calm dignified composure. The jewelleries and the decorations 
are as much integral parts of the modelled mass as of the stelae 
composition. Here in these images lineaments drawn from Hellenis¬ 
tic Gandhara are clearly perceptible in the treatment of the drapery 
and in the proportion and treatment of some of the reliefs. Hardly a 
touch of the ‘mediaeval’ factor is perceived in these reliefs which 
seem to have stored up the classical values with feeling and under¬ 
standing, and yet that in a manner very much different from what 
was happening in contemporary Eastern India. 

But alongside, and earlier than anywhere else in the North, the 
‘mediaeval’ factor makes itself felt in a number of inscribed metal 
images from Chamba. On palaeographical grounds most of them 
are datable towards the beginning of the eighth century, and a few 
in the ninth and tenth centuries. The eighth century images, exe¬ 
cuted by a craftsman ( karmina) named Gugga, and the tenth (or 
eleventh) century ones of Vishnu and Kali, from Sahu and Markuta, 
all in Chamba, are mechanically conceived and characterised by 
sharp outlines deeply cut and a hard petrified treatment of the plas¬ 
tic volume of a somewhat elongated physiognomy. Indeed, the em¬ 
phasis on the sharp and incisive outline gives definitive character 
to these figures that register the ‘mediaeval’ impact, though in a very 
thin and subdued way. 

Yet, from these hill states, particularly Chamba, have come 
down to us the biggest series of fountain stones cut into low T flat 
reliefs showing abstract patterns and not so much icons, except in 
the later ones, or scenes of edification, enjoyment and activity. In- 




664 




^deed such weaving of mere patterns in square and rectangular 
panels with floral, vegetal and geometric designs and human and 
animal figures (serpent forms playing an important part) is unknown 
to the ‘classical’ conception. This pattern-making, as we see in 
these fountain stones, seems to reflect a very ancient art-practice, 
and Kramrisch is right in assuming that “the earliest and simplest 
of these stones could be ancestors of the roundels of Bharhut,” al¬ 
though those that we have cannot be dated earlier than the tenth- 
eleventh century. The floral and vegetal designs, undoubtedly of 
‘classical’ origin, are flattened out, sharply incised, and made to fit 
in with the flat geometrical designs of square and diamond shapes 
equally flat and sharply incised. The non-iconic and some of the 
iconic figures are also similarly treated. These low reliefs of the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries are indeed the progenitors of later 
Rajput painting; and it is in these that we witness ‘mediaeval’ fea¬ 
tures in their relatively unadulterated aspect, particularly in the 
decorative patterns on the skirts of female figures on such fountain 
stones as those of Ajayapala (A.D. 1225) at Sai Churah. They are 
on a par with almost similar designs on the contemporary Jain minia¬ 
tures from. Western India. 

9. KASHMIR, NEPAL AND TIBET 

Kashmir had intimate relations with the Punjab Hill States, 
especially in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, if not earlier still. 
Her geographical position made her amenable to influences from the 
Hellenistic west on the one hand and Tibet on the other. From 
about the end of the seventh and beginning of the eighth century 
Eastern India was also drawn within the orbit of her intimate rela¬ 
tions. Her art therefore reflects the impressions that her people 
were able to receive from these historical associations. But very 
few of sculptural records of pre-Muslim centuries have survived the 
zeal of iconoclasts that were not always Muslims. The numerous 
idols of gold and silver installed by Lalitaditya, on which Kalhana 
bestows so much praise, were all destroyed, more than two centu¬ 
ries before Muslim rule was established in the Valley, by Harsha, 
“that Turushka,” as Kalhana calls him, “who appointed a special 
official called devotpatana-riayaka or ‘prefect for the destruction of 
gods’ 

Recent excavations, mainly at Harwan, have unearthed terra¬ 
cottas and stucco fragments belonging to different periods, that 
frankly betray Gandhara Hellenistic inspiration from the north-west 
side by side with such Gupta classical qualities as are witnessed in 
Buddha and Bodhisattva figures of the fourth and fifth centuries 
from Hadda and Bamiyan. All such earlier examples, including 


665 



Buddha-Bodhisattva figures from Pandrethan, are explainable by 
the common denominator of contemporary Indian art. 


It is very significant—a fact not yet sufficiently known and 
understood—that the Himalayan countries of Kashmir, Nepal and 
Tibet come out of their mountain seclusion and enter the arena of 
Indian history and culture, almost simultaneously, from about the 
seventh century onwards. Kashmir maintained this intimate asso¬ 
ciation till she was overrun by the Muslims, and Nepal and Tibet, 
until very recent times. It is equally significant that all these re¬ 
gions, more particularly Nepal and Tibet, for reasons well known, 
were in more intimate cultural contact with Eastern India than with 
other regions of this vast sub-continent. The seclusion and conser¬ 
vatism of the hills helped Nepal and Tibet retain and store up 
whatever was received from Eastern India of the Palas during the 
eighth and the three subsequent centuries and more, and carry on 
the East Indian mediaeval tradition of art, almost untouched and" 
uninfluenced by any other element, till very recent times. 

In mediaeval sculptures of Kashmir (ninth to twelfth centuries), 
too, contemporary East Indian tradition stamps its strong impress, 
in form and treatment as well as in physiognomy. There is evidence 
to show that images from Bengal were imported into Kashmir dur¬ 
ing these centuries. 233 But the East Indian elements of mechani¬ 
cal grace and elegance and metallic precision are interpreted in 
Kashmir, at least in a few instances, in stolid and clumsier terms. 
Others are merely a local rendering of typical East Indian stone 
sculptures and bronzes, to such an extent that without a label or 
definite information it is difficult to say whether a particular speci¬ 
men is Kashmiri or East Indian. The elegant bronze group of Padma- 
p&ni accompanied by his two 5-iaktis, with an inscription of the reign 
of Queen Didda (A.D. 980-1003), is an instance in point. But even 
at this stage Gandharan suggestion of Hellenistic drapery remains 
potent. 

Side by side, mainly in the Brahmanical sculptures from Avanti- 
pura (Fig. 125), there runs a current of artistic tradition which re¬ 
flects the contemporary art of the Punjab Hill States, Rajputana, 
and Gujarat. A short-featured physiognomy, stiff and somewhat 
heavy in appearance, is treated in a manner not very far removed 
from petrification of its plastic mass. This is held by an equally 
heavy and coarse outline. 

The excavations at Harwan have yielded large quantities of 
moulded tiles, datable in about the fifth century A.D., representing 
horsemen in northern caps and cloaks; men and women seated in 
balconies or standing in graceful poses, or moving with Gandharan 


666 





cornucopias etc., or dancing and drumming; fighting cocks, running 
deer, lotuses and fleur-de-lys motifs etc. Reminiscences of Hellenis¬ 
tic Gandhara are easily seen in some of the facial types, head-dresses 
and ear-ornaments, not the least in the drapery. But what is more 
interesting is the fact that all these are executed in very low relief 
with very little of modelling; the decorative devices, whether floral 
or vegetal, are linearised as far as possible, and pure geometrical 
designs are not also rare. Northern inspiration behind these designs 
and moulded decorations is perhaps undeniable, and it is not un¬ 
likely that they entered Kashmir in the wake of the Yueh-chis, the 
&akas, and the Kushanas, from Central Asia and China. 

Nepalese stone sculptures of the ninth and the four succeeding 
centuries are rare but not altogether unknown. They belong frankly 
to the denominator of contemporary East Indian art and do not call 
for any special attention. What really counts are the metal images 
(cf. Fig. 126), generally of brass or copper, or some other kind of 
powerful alloy, of very competent craftsmanship and of refined 
elegance and precision. They are quite numerous and distributed in 
various museums and private collections in India, Europe and Ame¬ 
rica. These images seem to have been turned out of workshops in 
considerable numbers in order to satisfy the demands of a growing 
Buddhist and Brahmanical laity. Stylistically they belong to the 
Pala tradition of Eastern India, but are often of superior workman¬ 
ship. From about the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, with in¬ 
creasing hierarchisation and stabilisation of Lamaistic Buddhism 
which Nepal came to share with Tibet, a hieratic stylisation of artistic 
form set in; the sap exhausted itself and what was once organic and 
vital slowly degenerated into a mechanical and stereotyped form. 
But, as already pointed out, the seclusion and conservatism of the 
hills helped to store up to a very large extent the accumulated expe¬ 
rience of centuries till very recent times, and this evidently accounts 
for those highly meritorious metal images of skilled workmanship, 
produced in considerably later periods, that meet our gaze from time 
to time. The number of such images is, however, very small, and 
the large majority of Nepalese metal images of later dates are 
mechanical and highly stylised. 

Contemporary Tibetan art, too, is best known by its metal 
images, but it should be remembered that they are, for the most 
part, of Nepalese origin inasmuch as they happen to be works exe¬ 
cuted by artists brought from Nepal. But the Tibetan metal images, 
even at their best, are qualitatively at a lower level than those of 
Nepal. Stylistically, they too are inspired by, and affiliated to, the 
East Indian tradition, but those recently brought to light by Tucer 


667 


MIN/Sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


from. Western Tibet, though formally East Indian, reveal neverthe¬ 
less a vitality and strength that seem to be born of a living experi¬ 
ence of the cult they professed and practised. 


Till Tucci’s explorations in Western Tibet our knowledge of 
Tibetan art was confined to the metal images alone, and to a consi¬ 
derable number of paintings of a later period. We now know of 
stone sculptures, terracottas, and paintings, besides metal images, 
that can be dated in the early mediaeval period, i.e. from about the 
ninth and tenth to about the thirteenth century. They all belong 
to the well-known East Indian tradition. The terracottas are al¬ 
most all Buddhist seals and are so much like contemporary seals 
found at different sites of Bihar that some of them at any rate seem 
to have been imported from Eastern India. The stone sculptures are 
of the usual East Indian variety in style and form, but more coarsely 
executed and tend towards increasing stylisation of which the late 
mediaeval Tibetan metal images, despite violent gestures and move¬ 
ments and good craftsmanship, are typical examples. 


10. DECCAN 

By about the end of the eighth century all creative inspiration 
and effort in the Deccan sculptures had entered a stalemate after 
ceaseless activity of very deep and abiding significance for about 
three centuries. Yet temples were built and decorated with sculp¬ 
tures and images made for purpose of worship. In Ittagi and Gadag 
in the Dharwar District, as well as in Hyderabad, under the aegis of 
the Western Chalukyas of Kalyana, and at Somnathpur, Belur, 
Halebid, and Palampet, all in Mysore, under the aegis of the Hoy- 
salas, early mediaeval Deccan has left a crop of sculptural art by 
no means poor in output, but certainly so in creative achievement 
and potentiality. 

What at Ellora, Aurangabad, and Badami was conceived in im¬ 
measurable depth, strength and superhuman power, and formed in 
vigorous breadth and expansiveness, is now in Western Chalukyan 
art, conceived mechanically without any inner ‘elan’, that is, with¬ 
out any corresponding experience, and the broad expansiveness is 
just in space to suit decorative purposes. The decorative and orna¬ 
mental devices that frame or encase such compositions are evidences 
of intricate and skilled craftsmanship no doubt, but are often over¬ 
crowded and cumbersome and seem to hang heavily on the figure- 
compositions as well. The figures are all in very high relief, in cer¬ 
tain instances, in the round for all practical purposes, and deeply 
undercut, and also elaborately decorated. But life has gone out ox 
them; the modelling has hardened to a considerable degree, poses 


668 


misTfy 



and attitudes are stiff despite traditional movements in appearance* 
and distended limbs and gestures lack the power and vigour of eighth, 
century Deccanese composition. The bracket figures of many temples 
afford instances on the point; descendants of the early and well- 
known woman-and-tree motif they are intended to be sensuous, but 
their stiff and hard treatment as well as over-ornamentation render 
them lifeless, and they fail to convey any feeling of voluptuousness 
or even suggestive sensuousness. They are just appearances, not 
creative forms. 

The skill, richness, and intricacy of decorative devices and orna¬ 
mentations reach their fullest abundance in the temples of Balagami 
and Halebid. “.... In the unfinished Hoysalesvara temple at Hale- 
bid the unstinted labour expended in carving a stone that is soft 
when quarried but hardens on exposure has clothed the entire build¬ 
ing in an almost incredibly abundant parure” The long and elabo¬ 
rate friezes of animals (Figs. 86 and 87), real and mythical, and of 
scenes from the R&muyana, and large panels of images (Fig. 122) 
and bracket figures, carved in high and frequently in altogether 
round relief, all appear as if pressed on to the surface, and are almost 
suffocated by elaborate and intricate, but stagnant and ponderous- 
ornamentation. Despite gestures and movements of vigorous action 
the composition is static, absolutely uninformed by any inherent 
dynamism. A hardened modelling makes the plastic mass look 
heavy like a load, made heavier and more static by the unorganie 
relation with the body, of the intricate and heavy jewelleries formed 
by deep and sharp cuts. Indeed, the sharp and intricate carvings, 
certainly evidence of highly skilled craftsmanship, are artistically 
very poor and without any significance. Whatever plasticity was 
still left is choked by them. The end is not very far off. 

11. SOUTH INDIA 

South India, on the other hand, carries on the ‘classical’ tradi¬ 
tion, as transmitted by the Pallava idiom, in a purer form, sounder 
conviction and a more vital manner; and this is done through cen¬ 
turies, save for slight and occasional intrusion by the ‘mediaeval’ 
factor, till as late as the end of the eighteenth century and even 
later. The inheritance, artistic skill and creative urge of the artists 
and craftsmen exploited the patronage of the Cholas of Gangai- 
kondapuram (c. A.D. 850-1100), the Pandyas of Madura (c. A.D. 1100- 
1300), the Yadavas and Tuluvas of Vijayanagara (c. A.D. 1350-1600), 
and the Nayakas of Madura (c. A.D. 1600-c. 1700 and later). The main 
centres of Chola activity were Gahgaikondapuram itself and Srinivasa- 
nalur: the Pai^dyan monuments are principally situated at Srlrangam, 


G69 


MINlSr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 

Tiruvannamalai and Kumbakonam; the Yadavas and 
, among other places, at Kaiichlpuram, Vellur and 


Vijayanagara; and the Nayakas concentrated chiefly at Madura. 
The lofty and massive virnanas and gopuras of these magnificent 
temple cities are all covered with elaborate and sumptuous reliefs 
of figures deeply and roundly cut; and these figures constitute in 
the main the South Indian store-house of stone-sculptures during all 


these centuries. 


All Chola sculptures of the tenth and eleventh centuries are 
endowed with a tough vitality and are modelled vigorously, but leave 
the surface as if in a state of animated flexibility. Plastically they 
have relation with contemporary Deccanese sculptures, but reach a 
much higher level which is maintained throughout successive cen¬ 
turies. The Pallava idiom is here given a new interpretation in 
tougher and more dignified rendering of plastic mass, treated in 
full roundness of form and arranged in graded relief. With their 
full weight on the ground, these figures of disciplined strength, 
marked by inner composure, and modelled with all the smooth ten¬ 
derness of live flesh, are eloquent expressions of that natural dyna¬ 
mism of life that had ever been the aim of Indian sculpture. The 
same attitude is marked in the organic relationship of the body and 
the jewelleries which are treated as a part of the body-model* 
ling itself,—a conception of form which was one of the planks on 
which the ‘classically’ Indian modeller took his stand. 


Towards the end of the eleventh or beginning of the twelfth 
century, in certain instances, somewhat slight hardening of treatment 
seems to have set in, and parts of the body are accented in modelling. 
But on the whole there is no lowering of artistic integrity nor any les¬ 
sening of creative vision. Indeed, in some of the examples, said to 
be from the Karnatak which is evidently doubtful, and once belong¬ 
ing to the Loo collection of Paris (illustrated by Rene Grousset), 
Choja stone sculptures reach the highest level of ‘classical’ form in an 
age when ‘classical’ values everywhere else in India were rather at a 
very low ebb. Here is indeed what seems to be a renascence of the 
seventh-eighth century art of Mamallapuram and Ellora in a more 
soft and sedate version. A slender and elegant physiognomical 
form is here upheld by steadied curves; the powerfully built body 
is mellowed by the softness of the linear movement as well as by a 
slowly gliding outline defining the limits of the plastic mass treated 
with a subtle softness of touch. Indeed, South India since the days 
of the Pallavas had never experienced such noble conception of form, 
so happy and yet so supple. Rene Grousset dates them in the four- 


670 


MINlSr^ 



ART 


<SL 


th-fifteenth centuries; presumably they cannot be later than the 
twelfth. 


The Vijayanagara stone sculptures of the fourteenth-fifteenth- 
sixteenth. centuries have two different directions, and both can be 
met with on the walls of the monuments of the royal citadel. The 
rectangular panelled reliefs of the Amman shrine of the Hazara 
Rama Temple or the panel of the Throne Platform representing the 
Holi festival, for example, are deeply cut and the figures are all 
but roundly formed. They are still characterised by whatever was 
left of the modelled mass and mannered stiffness of the movements 
of the body and the limbs. But what is important is that there are 
compositions (e.g. the Holi scene) which are characterised by sharp 
angular movements that jerk the ‘classical’ rhythm, very much like 
lie jerky movements in the Kathakali dance. Here is indeed a 
different vision creeping in or making itself felt, but is not fully 
co-ordinated yet. In other compositions, e.g. in the reliefs on the 
Amman shrine, the classical rhythm is continued with whatever 
plastic flexibility was still attainable. The reliefs on the Sati stones 
belong to this category, but reflect the folk-version of the same. The 
decorative devices are, as a general rule, flattened out and are cut 
sharply at the edges, a sure sign of the ‘mediaeval’ idiom. 

But tne specific ‘mediaeval’ factor is more conspicuous in the 
reliefs of the Throne Platform where all figures are flattened out 
in very low reliefs with sharp outlines. Especially in the human 
figures are the acuteness and pointed angularity of lines most marked 
•and some of the female figures at any rate are but translations in 
stone, as it were, of contemporary Gujarati miniatures. Composi- 
tionally, too, the figures lack plastic connectedness as in Gujarati 
miniatures. Of all segments of South Indian art during all these 
centuries, it is in such Vijayanagara reliefs that the ‘mediaeval’ 
factor asserted itself, more or less in an isolated way. 

The subsequent art of Madura ignores the ‘mediaeval’ factor 
altogether and takes up the thread where Vijayanagara left it and 
brings it up to date. But already in the meanwhile ossification had 
set in > an( * now the plastic feeling increasingly becomes more and 
more deadened. Modelling becomes hardened and overstrained, out¬ 
lines sharp and hard and yet more heavy in feeling, and the linear 
movement still and rigid. Side by side intricate over-elaboration 
of decorative devices and ornamentations and sharp and stiff render¬ 
ing of jewelleries, as if laid on the bodies as separate volumes, are 
also on the increase. All these disturb and destroy the plasticity 
of form, and eventually pronounce the judgment of death on plastic 
creativity altogether. This is what happened in Madura of the 


671 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


seventeenth and the following century, at least so far as stone sculp¬ 
tures and wood carving were concerned. 


South Indian art of the tenth and the six or seven subsequent 
centuries is particularly known, and deservedly so, by its metal 
images which, by virtue of their special importance, have to be 
discussed separately. They are mostly cast in copper or bronze, 
though rarely also in brass. Dated or datable Chola metal images 
are not hitherto known, but Coomaraswamy suggests that images of 
Saiva saints, said to have been set up in temples by Rajaraja Chola, 
may have been really metal images, and Kramrisch dates at least 
one metal image of Kall 233a from Senniyanvidudi, Tan j ore 
District, early in the tenth century. Coomaraswamy and Aruna- 
chalam date the great series of metal images in South Indian style 
found at Polonnaruva in Ceylon in the thirteenth century; Aiyangar 
places the series of Vaishnava metal images of South India also in 
the same century. The great series of typical Nataraja images (Figs. 
127 and 129) in metal seem to begin from about the eleventh or 
twelfth century during the Chola period, not earlier, and continued 
to be made till as late as the early nineteenth century. The main types 
represented in the remarkable galaxy of South Indian metal images 
are the various forms of Siva (Fig. 133), especially the Nataraja 
(Figs. 127 and 129); Parvati (Figs. 128 and 131); the Saiva saints, 
Manikkavachakar, Tirujnia-sambandar, Appar, and Sundarar 
(Fig. 132), all of whom lived before the tenth century; Vishnu and 
Lakshmx; Krishna; Rama; the Vaishnava saints called Alvars; and 
figures of royal donors. 


The question of dating and, necessarily also of stylistic evolu¬ 
tion, of these figures, mostly cult-images, is relatively unimportant, 
for the simple reason that their artistic form and style throughout 
these long centuries hardly go through any process of evolution, 
but maintain a certain high level where they seem to have become 
fixed. And yet, generally speaking, quite a considerable number 
of images are informed by a vigour or fervour and an artistic effici¬ 
ency which unmistakably reflect the mutual response the artist and 
the created object enjoyed between themselves. Standardisation 
certainly is there, but not stylisation of artistic form, and the objects 
are not just image patterns divested of creative urge. To maintain 
a fixed artistic form at high level, with relatively full creative urge, 
through almost a millennium of changing circumstances, is indeed 
a phenomenon in the history of art, as much in the history of human 
progress, which is worth consideration. Presumably it presupposes 
a life and society that maintained unimpaired their original faith 
and conviction in certain forms and feelings, emotions, and ways of 


672 


MiNisr^ 



ART 


<SL 


irrespective of the changing social and economic pattern into 
which their lives were set. But it is the more surprising, so far as 
South India is concerned, since while contemporary stone sculp¬ 
tures show signs of ossification and exhaustion, the metal images are 
wrought, not mechanically but with considerable amount of creative 
vigour and skill. 

These images, being cult-images, are almost invariably present¬ 
ed in full frontal view, but are modelled fully in the round; the backs 
and sides receive almost as much attention as the front, and there 
is a definite tendency to twist the figures in slow and graceful flexions 
and round off the contours and volumes. The purity and smooth¬ 
ness of the body surface and the line add charm to the otherwise 
tight modelling of the plastic mass that seems to be disciplined by 
exercise. These qualities are maintained through centuries, though 
in later images of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries there is 
an attenuation of the physiognomical form and the outline grows 
more and more sharp; but, throughout, an elegant poise and a sort 

dignified balance—both heritages of the classical tradition_are 

steadily maintained. 

Two series of South Indian metal images may be singled out 
for special mention: the Nataraja series and that of Saiva saints 
and Vaishpava Alvars. The Nataraja (Figs. 127 and 129) is the 
formal symbol, the visual image, of the cosmic dance of Siva. In the 
most consummate realisations by the artists of the profound symbo¬ 
lism of the dance, there is a poise, rhythm, and balance that can 
only be compared with that of the Buddha images of Sarnath and 
the monumental Mahesamurti of Elephanta. But while the Buddha 
image symbolises the ‘pure Being’, the Nataraja symbolises the 
‘Becoming’, as Coomaraswamy puts it. ‘Becoming’ connotes eternal 
flux which is in the dance itself, and yet, in the eyes of the artist 
and the devotee, it is held as rest that is within the divinity him¬ 
self even while dancing. This very difficult and profound symbo¬ 
lism has been nevertheless concretely visualised by the South Indian 
artist and interpreted in terms of line and plastic volume. While 
compositionally the movement of the dance is spread out in space 
dynamically, the linear movement itself is gracefully and steadily 
poised and balanced, and the plastic treatment of the volume shows 
no accent or tension at any given point. Dynamic movement or 
eternal flux is thus admirably integrated with accentless, tensionless 
inner rest and calmness. 

In the equally significant, if not equally spectacular, figures of 
Saiva and Vaishnava saints—also cult-images from the point of view 
of the artist and the devotees and actually worshipped-—the element 

673 


S. E.—43 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


bhakti supplies the creative urge that endows these figures with 
a charm unique in character. These mortal beings, bathed in humi¬ 
lity and devotion (cf. Fig. 130) and surrendered in body and soul to 
the One they held as the Supreme Being, came to be regarded as 
saints in later times, and inspire the same emotions of humility, 
devotion and surrender in the hearts and minds of multitudes who 
hold them in respect and adoration. It is these emotions of a pure 
heart that are interpreted in contemporary plastic terms, in sugges¬ 
tive and significant flexions and gestures and individualised expres¬ 
sions as reside in the eyes and the mouth and the general demeanour 
of the face. 


12. GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 

It is now clear that the specifically ‘mediaeval* factor was ac¬ 
cepted and interpreted in different ways, according to the degree of 
consciousness of mental and emotional responses, or in accordance 
with the depth of impact felt and understood, in the various regions 
of this vast sub-continent. How it was done and what principles 
were followed in the respective provinces of art have been sought 
to be briefly laid bare in the foregoing pages. 

It is further clear that the two storehouses of the classical 
values and tradition were Eastern and South India which, through 
centuries, drew upon their respective stores, the latter till the entire 
store was run out, the former till its career was cut short by the 
Muslims. Everywhere else in India the ‘mediaeval* impact was felt 
in varying degrees, and it is significant that those were the regions 
where the northern ethnic stock was most potent, especially in 
Malava, Rajputana and Western India. But nowhere does the un¬ 
diluted ‘northern* or ‘mediaeval* factor make an impress except in 
painting and textile designs, before the sixteenth or seventeenth 
century. Indeed, the creativity in the rich and complex structure 
of early mediaeval sculpture (till the thirteenth century) lies in the 
balance it is able to maintain between the flowing and plastic aspect 
of the ‘classical* tradition and the linear and angular aspect of the 
‘mediaeval*, and the degree of success or failure in this task is a sure 
measurement of the artistic merit of the sculptors. 

The words ‘classical* and ‘mediaeval* have only qualitative, i.e. 
attributive significance, and are chronologically invalid in the pre¬ 
sent context. ‘Classical* qualities of plasticity, viz. accentless distri¬ 
bution of rounded volume and a flowing naturalism, persist in South 
India for centuries even after the thirteenth, i.e. in a period labelled 
‘mediaeval* chronologically. Elsewhere also these qualities appear 
sporadically in different regions of India in the chronologically so- 


674 


miST/ty 


a** ■ 

ART 

‘mediaeval’ period, as for example, in a wooden figure of 
Krishna, the flute-player, now preserved in the Calcutta Asutosh 
Museum. On the other hand ‘mediaeval’ or northern qualities begin 
to be potent from about the eighth century in Rajputana (sculpture) 
and the Deccan (painting), and become effective and pervasive by 
about the tenth and eleventh centuries, at any rate so far as North 
India is concerned, and as time pushes forward, assert themselves 
more and more, especially in painting and textile designs, though 
less in sculpture, sculpture being three-dimensional. Yet to what ex¬ 
tent this three-dimensional art can be flattened out on to the surface, 
and interpret subjects in terms of sharp lines and angles and create a 
new vision and experience of life, may be seen in the terracottas of 
seventeenth and eighteenth century Bengal, in the Gujarati book- 
illustrations of the twelfth and the following four centuries, in 
Rajasthani and Paharl miniatures of the sixteenth and the following 
three centuries, in the textile designs of Gujarat beginning from the 
thirteenth, and in those of Bengal (Murshidabad Baluchar Sofiis), 
Orissa (Sambalpur designs), and Madras (Calico prints), to cite only 
a few examples. 

Except in the South of India, all creative utterance in plastic 
terms came practically to a standstill after the thirteenth century, 
and there have been no great and original formulations since then. 
The essentially humanist emotional movements of the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries in Northern India (as for example, the 
Chaitanya movement in Bengal and of Kabir, Dadu and Nanak else¬ 
where) and the bhakti movement of the South have been responsible 
for a considerable amount of plastic work of average standard in 
wood and terracotta and also in stone, but they are at their best 
informed by a lyrical quality and a homely warmth, not unoften 
monotonous in their repetition of themes and patterns. A cross-sec¬ 
tion of contemporary literature in the different provincial languages 
of India also shows that this, too, was characterised by similar 
emotional qualities and certain set themes and patterns. A stag¬ 
nation in the fundamental life-process is perhaps undeniable, and 
this was presumably inevitable in a life essentially rural and agri¬ 
cultural in outlook and actual living. That the South retained its 
classical vitality longer than the North is perhaps due to the fact 
that the South, for historical reasons, successfully maintained, 
through her maritime trade, outside contacts that helped to keep 
her in a state of relatively more quickened consciousness. Literary 
works like the Rama-charita-manasa of Tulsidas and Chaitanya- 
charitamfita of Krishnadas Kaviraja—the only two great North 
Indian works, both surcharged with the emotional contents of bhakti 
—are great so far as they are rich in classical values of dignity and 




675 



via Hi i° 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




poise and largeness of proportion. But such works are rare and 
they have no counterpart in contemporary plastic art. Indeed crea¬ 
tive plastic formulations of three-dimensional volume as a quest for 
expression and beauty have long ceased to be, so far as this vast 
sub-continent is concerned. 


And here is a point in the history of Indian life and culture that 
does not yield to a sufficiently reasonable explanation. The plea of 
rural-agricultural life and outlook is only a tentative one and can 
hardly be emphasised even as a sufficiently important, far less deter¬ 
mining, factor at the present state of our knowledge. 


III. PAINTING 


1. THE ‘MEDIAEVAL* FACTOR 

Plasticity of the fully rounded and modelled form had been the 
most significant characteristic, as much of Indian painting up to the 
last phase of the work at Ajanta and cognate centres, as of Indian 
sculpture, till about the eighth century A.D. This is a quality which 
may legitimately be called ‘classical*, and this vision and tradition, 

I we have seen, show themselves at their best at Ajanta, Bagh and 
Badami. The most essential formal characteristics of this tradition 
are: (a) the modelling quality of the line that brings out in full the 
three-dimensional rounded volume of the mass as well as its plasti¬ 
city; (b) the modelling quality of colour obtained by the employ¬ 
ment of colour-shades and colour-tones and by laying on high lights, 
wherever necessary, to suggest different planes; (c) the quality of 
brush work which is always free and firm and aims at bold, sinuous 
and rounded flexibility, especially at the outlines; and (d) a flowing 
and mellow linear rhythm. These are indeed the pivotal qualities 
of early Indian painting and they impart that sculpturesque plastic 
I roundness which is such an essential characteristic of the murals of 
| Ajanta, Bagh and Badami (fifth to seventh century A.D.). But these 
! murals do not represent the total exhaustion or the end of the classi¬ 
cal tradition. Under-currents of this tradition or its continuity, al¬ 
beit within smaller range and in subdued intensity, can, for example, 
be witnessed in the paintings on the walls of the Kailasa temple 
(eighth century A.D.) of Ellora in the Deccan, the Jain shrine at 
6ittanpava£al (seventh century A.D.), the Vishnu shrine at Tirumalai- 
puram (seventh century A.D.), the Kailasanatha temple at Kanchl- 
puram (eighth century A.D.) and the Brihadisvara temple at Tanjore 
(eleventh century A.D.), all in South India, but more pronouncedly 
in the now well-known MSS.-illustrations of Bihar and Bengal, 
Nepal and Tibet (tenth to thirteenth century A.D.). 


676 


ART 

mediaeval tradition is more complex in character, more 
expansive in geographical connotation, and also more immediate in 
ethnic significance. The essential characteristics of this tradition 
are: (a) sharp, acute line without its modelling capacity, and also 
without the steady flow of the ‘classical' period. This line—quickly 
and sharply drawn—is the main exponent of the ‘mediaeval’ tradition; 

(b) sharp, jerky, and pointed angles, particularly sharp and pointed 
limbs when and where they form angles—for example, at the elbow 
and the shoulder—, the sharp and peaked nose, the crescent lips with 
angles acutely turned upwards, the eyebrows, and long wide swollen 
eyes projected sharply and pointedly beyond their actual extension; 

(c) jerky movements, in angles and curves, of the body and its dis¬ 
tended limbs, that produce a nervous animation quite different from 
the composed energy and latent dynamism of the ‘classical’ tradi¬ 
tion; (d) total absence of colour-modelling and hence, also, of plasti¬ 
city, which results in an appearance of flatness of the volume of the 
contour that resides entirely on the surface; (e) richness of varie¬ 
gated patterns, motifs, and designs, all gathered and adapted to the 
grip of sharp curves, angles, and points; and (f) an intense prefer¬ 
ence for designs and patterns of decoration that are basically and 
essentially geometrical and abstract, as distinct from decorative de¬ 
signs and patterns in steadily moving, swaying and deeply cut, 
modelled, and rounded curves, curls, scrolls, etc. of the ‘classical’ 
tradition, derived basically from the vegetal and animal world. 

These specific characteristics were presumably being borne on 
the shoulders of the northern peoples, perhaps even from pre- 
Christian centuries, more particularly from the days of the Sakas 
and Kushanas, in recurrent waves of immigration, and are hence, for 
convenience’ sake, called ‘northern’. Modern researches, mainly , 
by Strzygowski and his colleagues, have sought to show that the sharp . 
curves and point pattern and the sharp-quick line of nervous agita¬ 
tion with their logical concomitants were widely prevalent among 
the nomads of Central Asia, especially among those of Turk 
and Mongol extraction. These Turk and Mongol nomads, at 
any rate, seems to have been the most active carriers of this 
aesthetic vision and artistic tradition. But the manner in which 
they reached India, the stages through which they passed, and the 
definite elements of which they were composed, can only be guessed, 
and not determined as yet with any amount of certainty. That the 
elements which we see in India were the accumulated results of a 
continuous ethnic fusion of northern racial elements that poured into 
the plains of India from the steppes of Central Asia, hardly admits 
of any doubt. The Sakas and the Yueh-chis (of whom the Kushanas 




677 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




were only a facet), the Abhlras, the Hutias and probably also the 
Gurjaras were all Central Asian nomads. By about the fifth and 
sixth centuries A.D. the Huyas came to disturb the social and politi¬ 
cal fabric of a large part of India and presumably to introduce certain 
elements of nomadic forms into India as well as into Afghanistan and 
Iran with which countries India, especially Western India, maintain¬ 
ed intimate relations through centuries. It is most likely that the 
heterogenous elements of perhaps more than one tradition, brought 
in by repeated waves of immigration, spread over more than half a 
millennium, resulted in a very slow but steady fusion. Indeed, it 
must have been a long process of history for these peoples and their 
culture to send their roots deep down into the soil of the land where 
their lot was cast, and then grow from within, as a plant indigenous 
to the soil itself. The art forms that are most expressive of the 
specific ‘northern’ traits are not thus exactly what one sees in 
‘northern’ nomadic art, but as modified by the impact of, and response 
to, the ‘classical’ measure that had hitherto been all-pervasive in 
India. Already in some of the reliefs of the fifth and sixth centuries 
one witnesses certain definite northern traits; but sculpture being 
essentially and intrinsically three-dimensional, and plasticity of the 
fully rounded and modelled mass having been the most important 
exponent of the ‘classically’ Indian tradition, it resisted for long the 
infusion of the ‘mediaeval’ or ‘northern’ emphasis on the linear ac¬ 
cent, the stiff concave curves, and sharply cut edges and angles. On 
the other hand, the classical tradition had by the seventh and eighth 
centuries all but exhausted its potentialities and was now ready to 
welcome new conceptions of form. Those were ready by the hand 
and were already available in stray instances and isolated regions. 


But, painting, which is two-dimensional, offered much less in¬ 
herent resistance to the ‘northern’ conception of form. In the ninth 
century murals at Ellora we find these traits asserting themselves 
so emphatically and exuberantly as to indicate past practice over a 
considerable period of time. Here the gliding and modelling lines 
of Ajantfi are replaced by sharp and thin lines, modulated curves by 
sharp and pointed angles and roundly modelled surfaces by flat 
coloured spaces. With Ellora, however, the ‘mediaeval’ tradition 
came to stay, and steadily through centuries built up within the con¬ 
fines of India and also outside—in Burma, Siam, and Java, for ex¬ 
ample—a history of its own. For some time after Ellora the tradi¬ 
tion flowed as an undercurrent but nevertheless influenced and 
transformed the classical tradition by helping the gradual subsidence 
of the impact and consistency of its modelling and diminution of its 
volume by sharpening the modelled and rounded line, and by the 


678 


introduction of certain geometric forms and motifs. This stage is 
reflected in the mural paintings of the Jain shrine at iSiftanpavasal 
and the first layer of paintings on the walls of the temple at Tiru- 
malaipuram, both in the South. By about the eleventh century it 
begins to make itself felt in some of the miniatures of Eastern India 
(Nepal, Bihar and Bengal); but from the twelfth to the fifteenth 
century the tradition is seen actively at work at different localities 
spread all over India. In murals, so far as extant examples go, it 
is registered in the earlier layer of paintings at Tirumaruttikunram 
and the second layer of paintings at Tirumalaipuram, both in South 
India, and in the Panchatantra paintings on the ceiling of a m<m$apa 
of a Vishnu temple at Madanpur in the Lalitpur District of Central 
India,—to mention only a few examples. In book illustrations it 
was extensively in use in West Indian, mainly Gujarati, miniatures, 
and in limited range, in East Indian MSS.-illustrations and copper¬ 
plate drawings. Simultaneously it makes itself felt in Javanese 
sculpture of Panataran temples, of which the later Javanese Wayang 
Beber is a lineal descendant, also in contemporary murals in Pagan, 
Burma, and in Siam. Textile surfaces offered a very rich field for 
the practice of this tradition, and at least from the thirteenth century 
onward West Indian textile designs, and later, those of the Deccan, 
the South, Orissa, and Bengal, register its import in clear unequi¬ 
vocal terms. In Rajasthan and Pah&di miniatures of the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries, this mediaeval tradition had been the 
most dominant inspiration and perhaps the most important stylistic 
determinant,—a fact which has not yet been sufficiently understood 
and recognised. This remark applies equally to the Deccanese and 
Orissan miniatures, roughly, and perhaps wrongly, designated as 
Deccani Mughal, and belonging to the seventeenth and subsequent 
centuries. That the large majority of terracottas and wood-carvings, 
and a very large segment of pafa (wooden book-covers) and pata 
(scroll) paintings of the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries also be¬ 
long to the same phase of Indian art has also to be remembered in 
this connection. 

Here, then, is a new culture and civilization with a new vision 
and aesthetic creed which, basically, was ethnically conditioned, and 
must have coloured and transformed the Indian way of life and 
thought in other directions also than in art. But the lineaments of 
this integration have not yet been clearly and sufficiently made out. 
In plastic art, at any rate, classicism from now onwards is only a 
heritage which is certainly never forgotten altogether but which is no 
more informed by any creative urge at the same time, and surrenders 
its place to the 'mediaeval’ or ‘northern’ factor which becomes the 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

common denominator, particularly in painting, drawing, and 
decorative designs. The factor no doubt feels the pressure and 
strength, in varying degrees in the various regions and schools of 
art, of the classical heritage; they interact, but at the same time 
each remains separately cognisable from now on, till the end of the 
nineteenth century. 


<SL 


2. ELLORA (c. A.D. 750-800) 

A number of temples excavated from the living rock at Ellora 
(Kailasa, Indrasabha, Ganesa and Lankesvara temples, for example) 
have their ceilings painted in panels. There are also traces of 
painting left on the ceilings of the Dasavatara and Dhumar temples, 
on the lintel and door jambs of the Kailasa temple and on the walls 
of the three storeyed excavation, as well as on those of the Indra¬ 
sabha temple, besides others, all at Ellora. There can be no doubt 
that these represent only a fraction of the paintings of a religious 
establishment of deep cultural significance, one of the richest in 
contemporary India. 

While Aja^ta affords a study in depth and solidity, and 
emphasises the diagonal direction of coming forward of the figures 
from the deep formless, and emerging on the surface as forms, the 
paintings on the ceiling of the western porch of the Kailasa tem¬ 
ple at Ellora present a study in surface and is a simple statement 
of collateral existence on the plane. In the latter case, figures are 
not born of any impact of coming forth from depths; they are just 
visible and look as if laid out weightlessly on or in between 
conglobulated cloud patterns (or aquatic decorative devices), equal¬ 
ly thin and shallow and hence weightless. Not alone the clouds 
that form the ground of the paintings, but the figures, too, 
seem to float or swim or emerge or soar effortlessly and look as 
if all volume and heaviness and density have been pumped out of 
them and replaced by weightless vapour. The conglobulated 
clouds look so many weightless masses of carded wool or cotton 
bordered by globular or cusped, and thin or deep black outlines; 
the figures have legs that have not to carry the weight of the body, 
but bent in acute angles; they also soar or float like the arms and 
hands, and the slim weightless bodies look" as if suspended in space. 
Whatever roundness of modelling and density the clouds or the 
figures have is only by way of inheritance or remembrance of a 
past practice; they are all thin and shallow in texture and lay-out, 
and do not reside in the dense, consistent and surcharged atmo¬ 
sphere of Ajanta. And, since the vaporous clouds, thin and shal¬ 
low figures, decorative devices, and everything else reside on the 


680 


misr/fy 


ART 



surface, practically without any modelling, the line in its varied 
rhythms becomes the most important exponent of these paintings. 

The composition of these Ellora paintings is measured out in 
rectangular panels with thick flat borders; they have been conceiv¬ 
ed within given limits of frames that hold the paintings. In this 
matter, so far as the paintings on the ceilings are concerned, they 
followed the architectural scheme of the division of the ceiling into 
a large-size central lotus, on the four outer sides of which are two 
huge rectangles, an inner and an outer one. What was originally 
conceived as murals laid out on the limitless expanse of the walls, 
was thus made to fit in within bordered rectangular panels, not 
only on the ceilings but on the walls as well. Space in the sense 
of Aja$ta does not exist at Ellora. In the former case all spaces 
are surcharged with a density born of the impact of the figures 
bodying forth from the depths; in the latter there is nowhere any 
density or consistency, and this is sought to be compensated by fill¬ 
ing up the entire ground with all sorts of figures, men and women, 
decorative devices, clouds, fantastic animals, etc. 

The technique of preparing the ground for these murals is the 
same as that of Aja^ita, and the colours too are the same; black, 
white, yellow and earth reds (Indian red, terre-verte or buff earth) 
and buff, all applied rather thinly and without any modelling. In 
the first layer of paintings, however, the colours are darker than in 
the second. The outlines are drawn sharply in thick black or deep 
red. 

The two layers of paintings on the ceiling of the western porch 
of the Kailasa temple are separated in time by about a century; 
but the above remarks apply equally to both, despite stylistic 
variations in detail in one and the same layer, which shows, inci¬ 
dentally, that different styles commingled irrespective of the age 
of the two layers. This means that the two layers belong to one 
and the same tradition. 

Two main varieties of stylistic form and treatment are clearly 
discernible in these paintings of the Kailasa temple. The majority 
of the figures and movements belong to the classical tradition of 
Ajancfca, that is, they are somewhat roundly modelled in colour and 
have also a modelled outline, but with considerable thinning down 
•of the consistency of the modelling itself. Nor is there any sign of 
the impact of coming forward as in Aja^ta. Correspondingly with 
the figures, the clouds in such panels are also roundly modelled 
masses with modelled outlines in deeper shade of the same colour 
or in deep red; coloured in dark or white they contrast sharply with 
the white or dark colour of the figures. But they have not the 


681 


MiN/sr^ 


am STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




density or consistency of Ajan^a clouds and are considerably thin¬ 
ner. The paintings in the Lahkesvara, Indrasabha and Gai>esa 
cave temples belong to this variety. The physiognomical type 
of the figures in such compositions is closely related to those of the 
Pallava rock reliefs of Mamallapuram and the reliefs of the Viru- 
paksha temple at Pattadakal. A slim attenuated body endowed 
with agile and smooth limbs and a longish face is lightly borne by 
a pair of long slender legs. The body and the supple limbs seem 
to be suspended from the strong pair of shoulders and the expanded 
chest wherein lies the centre of gravity. Despite the comparative 
roundness of the volume brought about by the livingness of breath¬ 
ing, the bodies seem to soar or float weightlessly and gracefully, 
as if poised in mid-air (compare the figures in the Gangavataraija 
relief at Mamallapuram) in the midst of the floating clouds which 
constitute their abode. Light and transparent draperies and flying 
scarves only emphasise this flying vision of the figures themselves. 
In one aspect at least some of the painted figures at Ellora (Kailasa 
temple) try to emulate the corresponding type in stone sculpture; 
it is in the convex curve of the chest and abdomen brought about 
by the forward thrust of the chest. In sculpture, this curve, which 
reflects the energy and strength of the figures, is attained by modell¬ 
ing the plastic volume; in painting, which doubtless is slighter in 
total effect, it is the work of the outline drawn with zest and power. 


The other form and stylistic variety is to be seen in a type of 
figures and clouds mainly linear in treatment and practically with¬ 
out any modelling of the plastic volume, i.e. bodies from which 
volume has all but evaporated. Such figures and clouds are de¬ 
fined by thick and desiccated outlines in black, and the clouds turn 
themselves on to edges formed of deep or shallow curves entwined 
by cusps, scrolls, and dots. It is in such compositions that the 
‘mediaeval’ factor is comparatively more pronounced than in the 
other variety. In the latter also the general thinning down of the 
roundness of volume and outline has been due to the impact of the 
‘mediaeval’ tendency. Indeed, at Ellora, the line is the main ex¬ 
ponent and not the modelled mass, which can directly be attributed 
to the mediaeval grip. 


Yet, the ‘classical’ tradition of modelling of the mass and the 
outline as well as the illusion of the impact of coming forward from 
the depths is not ignored altogether. They are, to begin with, 
accepted so far as they are remembered as a heritage, and then, 
stage by stage, they are caught by the ‘mediaeval’ grip that causes 
steady subsidence of the classical values. 


For example, in the paintings in the inner rectangle of the 


682 



MIN IST/f, 


ART 



ceiling of the western porch of the Kailasa temple (Fig. 134) there is 
the scene of a lotus pool on the wavy waters of which large-sized lotus 
leaves are tossed and turned upon themselves, and elephants mad¬ 
ly sport in joy in their midst—a favourite theme in literature. 
Here the figures of elephants appear emerging somewhat from the 
depths; they are toughly and roundly modelled. The turning back 
of the cup-shaped lotus leaves is also treated in round but tight 
plasticity; their rims are round and heavy. Certainly the echoes 
of Ajanta are listened to with attention; but at the same time flat¬ 
ness of the human faces, the peak-pointed nose, the disposition of 
the arms and the palms on the surface and increasing disregard of 
foreshortening have all been due to the intrusion of the mediaeval 
factor. 

In the paintings of the outer zone of the rectangle, however, 
there is practically an all but complete subsidence of the impact of 
the modelling of the mass as well as of the line. The latter is drawn 
sharply, fluently and incisively, and as outline to the cloud-forma¬ 
tions it is fixed with curves and dots. Figures of Ajaij^esque affilia¬ 
tion are nowhere; they generally belong to the Pallava form, and 
in a few instances the local idiom of Ellora is employed. But the 
most characteristic features of these figures are the sharp twist of 
the head and pointed angular bends of the arms, both away from 
the body animated by jerky angular movements, the concave curve 
of the closed lips, the sharp peaked and projected nose, the long- 
drawn wide-eyes. Here is then a new vision of form; a new source of 
energy that not only transforms the figures in their lineaments, 
but transforms the composition correspondingly where everything 
else also responds equally fluently and vibrantly. 

This ‘mediaeval’ grip slowly and steadily settles down and, 
stage by stage, not necessarily in chronological sequence, the diffe¬ 
rent phases can be followed in the paintings on the ceilings and 
walls of the cave-temples of Ellora. The ‘mediaeval* grip is not all 
pervasive, but it transforms the classical vision and is itself trans¬ 
formed by it. 

There can be no doubt that despite the rich significance of a 
new creative vision that asserts itself with force and insistence, the 
paintings of Ellora do not, at any stage or in any of its phases, reach 
the level of those at Bagh, Ajanta and Badami, either aesthetically 
or intellectually. Ellora employs all the glowing colours and tones 
with subtle nuances known to Ajaiyta, but much of the charged 
density and consistency of the latter has evaporated, and a prefer¬ 
ence for conspicuous contrasts makes the paintings appear some¬ 
what frolicky. 


683 


MIN ISTfy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



3. SOUTH INDIA (c. A.D. 1100-1300) 



Remnants of Indian wall-paintings south of the Deccan plateau 
and belonging to this period are still to be found, for example, on the 
walls of the Vijayalaya Chollsvara temple at Narttamalai in the old 
Pudukkoftai State (c. A.D. 1100), of the Bphadlsvara temple (Fig. 135) 
at Tanjore (c. A.D. 1100), on the brick built walls affixed in front of 
the cave (c. A.D. 1100), and also on the cave walls (c. A.D. 1300-1350) 
at Tirumalai in North Arcot, on the walls of the Sanglta-mandapa 
at Tiruparuttikunram, Kanchipuram (c. A.D. 1387-88), and the 
Uchayappa-mafha at Anegundi of about the same date. It is not 
unlikely that paintings of the period, yet unknown to us, exist on 
the walls of other South Indian temples. Caves and temple walls 
were painted over as soon as they were excavated and built; and, 
generally speaking, the dates of paintings are roughly those of the 
monuments, themselves. But in certain instances, as for example 
in the Vijayalaya Chollsvara temple at Narttamalai where repairs 
had to be undertaken at a later period, or where the first layer was 
painted over by a second or more layers of painting, the fixation 
pf dates of later paintings becomes a difficult problem, and one has 
to take recourse to the question of stylistic evolution and variation. 


The Vijayalaya Chollsvara temple at Narttamalai seems to have 
been built originally in the ninth century; subsequently it was 
struck by lightening, necessitating extensive repairs, presumably 
towards the end of the eleventh or beginning of the twelfth century. 
To judge from their style, the paintings that are all spread on the 
walls of the arc£/ia-maudapa of this temple, seem to have been 
executed not long after the repairs to the temple were carried out. 
From the meagre vestiges that are still preserved, it is clear that 
the temple was Saiva; large-scale painted figures of Mahakala, Devi, 
and Siva Nataraja are still visible, along with other minor figures. 
Stylistically the figure of Mahakala is stereotyped, but its affinity 
with the slightly earlier painting of Siva as Tripurantaka in the 
Bfihadisvara temple at Tanjore is unmistakable. Later Choja 
characteristics are also evident in the form and shape of hair deco¬ 
ration, karanujLa mukufa, costumes, etc. of the Devi. Outlines of 
figures are inv&riably in red, and the colours extensively used are 
terre-verte, yellow and red of varied tones, green, black, and white; 
high lights in white are used on finger tips. Chola forms and 
physiognomy are apparent, and ‘classical’ values of full rounded 
volume are gratefully remembered, though with lessened consist¬ 
ency of colour-modelling. A flattening on the surface, clearly 
perceptible, is due certainly to pressure of the ‘mediaeval’ factor; 
but while the classical plastic form and treatment of modelling 


684 


persist in such examples as in a fragment of a standing female 
figure with folded hands, the finger tips of the hand being 
touched by high lights (to the right, in the second recess 
from entrance), the mediaeval form makes itself felt nowhere so 
strongly as in another fragment of two rows of flying figures whose 
faces and busts, flattened out on the surface, are shown in three- 
quarter profile, and noses, eyes, and mouths are drawn in sharp, 
pointed angular lines (in the second recess, to the right, from the 
entrance). Undoubtedly the latter is more vital and vibrant in its 
diction and mood. The former, that is the classical type or what¬ 
ever residues are left of it, is closely related to the almost con¬ 
temporary (eleventh century) wall-paintings in the Brihadisvara 
temple at Tanjore built by the great Rajaraja I. 

The paintings of the Brihadisvara temple are tucked away 
under its 190 ft. high vimana in a dark passage around the main 
cella of the temple. There are two layers of paintings on the walls, 
of which the upper layer is slowly peeling off, exposing to view 
the lower, i.e. the earlier one. To judge from style, there does not 
seem to be a long lapse of time between the two layers of paintings. 
Like that of the Narttamalai, the subject matter of these paintings 
is frankly Saiva, and the scenes representing Siva in his abode of 
Kailasa, with his saintly devotees, as Nataraja and Tripurantaka, 
in the company of ganas, gandharvas, apsaras, and so on, are laid 
on the walls in large and forceful compositions. The technique, 
as usual, is that of tempera, and the paintings are executed on 
a surface of soft lime plaster—presumably composed of powdered 
conch-shell or mother of pearl—of uniform thickness of an egg¬ 
shell. The outlines are drawn in light red or brown, later on 
deepened by black or reddish browns. Pigments used for contours, 
backgrounds, and decorations are yellow ochre, red ochre, terre- 
verte, brown earth, white, black, and lapis lazuli blue. Much of 
the classical consistency and depth of colour application have 
somewhat evaporated, making the figures look flatter and thinner 
in the context of volume. Nor, compositionally, are the figures 
connected in any inherent relationship; some of the groups are 
schematically arranged in horizontal panels, one below the other. 
Exceptions are rare, as in the two panels representing Siva and 
saint Sundara, and Siva as Tripurantaka, respectively. 

But, as in those of the Narttamalai, the classical volume is still 
remembered and there is a conscious attempt at giving it as much 
value as possible, with the help of broadly modelled lines, ample 
curves and colour tones. Seated figures have still their graceful, 
though conventional, bhangas, and dignified movements; but the 


685 


MIN tST/}y 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


ding figures are devoid of any inner plasticity and look stiff and 
inelastic. The grip of the ‘mediaeval’ factor is, however, unmistak¬ 
able in the treatment of the face, shown invariably in three-quarter 
profile, with fish-shaped eyes drawn sharply to pointed angles in 
both directions, long beak-like sharply pointed nose and pointedly 
angular chins—all set on a squarish face and contrasting sharply 
with a pair of roundly modelled, fully plastic lips drawn in double 
curves. The two modes and visions, ‘classical’ and ‘mediaeval’, 
thus commingle in these paintings and, acting and reacting on each 
other, transform themselves. But, on the whole, the South adheres 
more tenaciously to the former than adopt and integrate the latter. 


Almost contemporary with the Narttamalai and Brihadisvara 
(Tanjore) temple paintings are those of the first layer on the brick 
walls of the outermost chamber on the second storey of the 
Lakshmisvara manidapa at Tirumalai. But stylistically they belong to 
a slightly different diction and variety than those of the Narttamalai 
paintings. The subject matter of the Tirumalai paintings is Jain 
in inspiration. In the preserved vestiges on the back wall and the 
adjacent one, against dark black background, Devas, Devis, Ganadha- 
ras, and nuns, animals, etc. are arranged in panelled sectors border¬ 
ed by rows of karhsas , festoons and lotuses, and surrounded by gan - 
dharvas and kimpurushas . Full frontal or three-quarter faces with 
eyes wide open look out intently towards a definite point; the 
hands of figures are held in anjali pose. But whether the subject 
is human beings, demigods, animals, or vegetation, the treatment is 
invariably flat, and volumes are gathered on the surface; hardly 
anything is left of the body-shaping colour modelling of the classical 
tradition. The lines, too, have lost much of their modelling quality, 
and despite good draughtsmanship, also much of their bold vigour. 
The mediaeval grip is evident in the sharp lines and angles, beak¬ 
like pointed noses, up-line curves, and flat treatment of ornaments. 
White has been extensively used at Tirumalai along with different 
varieties and grades of ochre and terre-verte, also grey and red; 
use of mixed and impure colours, mainly in ochre and terre-verte, 
and black background seem to have been a special feature at Tiruma¬ 
lai. The paintings on the outside of the brick fagade also belong to 
the same category. 


The second layer of paintings at Tirumalai is still visible on 
the ceiling of the outermost chamber, referred to above, and on the 
walls of the adjacent rock-cut cave. Here the volume has thinned 
out further and the figures are completely gathered on the surface. 
The lines have become further sharpened and the bhangas have all 
lost their plastic flexibility. 


686 



miST/fy. 


ART 



4. WESTERN INDIA (c. A.D. 1100-1300) 

From all that we know of the settlements of ‘northern’ peoples 
from the beginning of the Christian era to about the eighth century 
A.D., their impact seems to have been strongest in Western India, 
mainly in Gujarat and West Rajputana, and to an extent, also ir? 
Western Malwa. It is thus in the nature of things that ‘northern’ or 
mediaeval traits are most marked in those regions, especially in 
Western India and Rajputana, and this is true more in the realm 
of painting than in that of sculpture. But, despite isolated examples 
of earlier date, the ‘mediaeval’ conception of form does not become 
general and all-pervasive before the twelfth century A.D. 

The geographical position of Gujarat and the adjoining terri¬ 
tories made them centres of great international trade, whence the 
arterial routes to the heart of Northern India lay through Malwa 
and Rajputana. The inland trade was mostly in the hands of the 
Jains who had always been zealous guardians of past traditions and 
great patrons of their religion, art, and culture. Their monastic 
establishments of which bhamd&ras or libraries were invariable in¬ 
tegrals, especially those of Marwar on the one side and Kathiawar 
en the other, were not only important centres of artistic activity, 
but also provided, at a later date, much needed asylums to artists 
and others who fled from other parts of Gujarat in the worst days 
of Muslim invasion and oppression, and enabled them to organize 
new art-centres and continue the tradition more or less uninter¬ 
ruptedly. Even before the Muslim invasion of Gujarat, the fertility 
of her central alluvial plains and the wealth of her trade and com¬ 
merce helped the growth of a rich art under the aegis of the 
Chaulukyas. Indeed, Chaulukya sculpture and architecture are 
much more elaborate and sensitive than those patronised and 
brought into existence by the Paramaras or the Chahamanas. Quanti¬ 
tatively also the Chaulukyas seem to have reared up monuments 
far greater in number and richer in the profusion of sculptural and 
decorative details. Their political and cultural suzerainty in the 
twelfth century extended to Kutch and Saurashtra on the one hand 
and Malwa and Marwar on the other, and the Chaulukya art spread 
m Rajputana as far as Chitor, Bikaner, and Osia. In A.D. 1222 the 
Chaulukyas were superseded by the Vaghelas who, so far as Raj¬ 
putana is concerned, continued the Chaulukya tradition, though 
somewhat decadent by now. The invasion of Qutb-ud-din Aibak 
in A.D. 1197 and the conquest of GujarSt by the Khaljls a century 
later led to the disintegration of the Chaulukya and Vaghela art- 
centres of the country, and fleeing of artists to such places as Kathia¬ 
war, Idar, Mt. Abu, Achalgadh, Dungarpur, and Pawagadh where 

687 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


local Hindu rulers offered successful resistance to the Muslims up to 
the fifteenth century. In these localities and particularly in the Jain, 
monasteries and temples, the rich heritage of Chaulukya art, mainly 
Jain in religious inspiration, was given a new span of life, though 
in a rather degenerate and complicated manner. Sheltered within 
the monasteries and cut away from the general life of the people, 
the art was stylised and increasingly influenced by hieratic con¬ 
ventions. 


The first thing that arrests one’s attention in the Gujarati paint¬ 
ings is that these are all invariably MSS.-illustrations in miniature, 
executed on palm-leaf, and later, from about the middle of the four¬ 
teenth century, on paper which was gradually supplanting palm- 
leaf as a writing material. But palm-leaf was not altogether given 
up till the beginning, at any rate, of the fifteenth century. A con¬ 
nected sequence of these paintings is available in a large number 
of MSS. both dated and undated (to which approximate dates can 
be ascribed on stylistic considerations), that range from about the 
beginning of the twelfth to about the end of the fifteenth century. 

More than four centuries of these MSS.-paintings in miniature, 
despite a common denominator that belongs to the strong ‘mediaeval* 
factor, do not, however, represent one integrated style in a regular 
process of evolution. The common denominator is easily known 
by the sharp, pointed lines flatly laid in thin or thick strokes, by 
the almost flat laying of colours in two-dimensional effect with but 
the slightest suggestion of modelled plasticity, by the treatment of 
the eyes, nose, and body-joints that are given an accentuated ap- 
v pearance and effect by an emphasis on sharp pointed angles and 
lines, by the flat treatment of all decorative and architectural devices, 
and no less by certain geometrical decorative designs that are typi¬ 
cally ‘northern’. It is needless to point out that all these stylistic 
characteristics and the flat, essentially two-dimensional, aesthetic 
vision and treatment are ‘mediaeval’. 

I Despite this common denominator, the long and rich series of 
* ^ West Indian miniature painting shows varieties of style that merit 
consideration. There is one class of painting the compositions of 
which are relatively simple, with but few figures set against a back¬ 
ground which is also simple and without any accessory details of 
architecture, room-hangings or other decorations; details of jewel¬ 
lery and intricate designs of costurhes being rather suggested than 
actually worked out. The line-strokes in such examples are rela¬ 
tively thick, the curves are full and steady, and the drawing sure 
and unfaltering. Of human figures, profiles and three-quarters are 
given preference, and eyes, noses, chins, beards, costume-hangings 


688 



AKT 




or frills, finger-points, etc. are all drawn in sharp pointed angles. A 
very characteristic feature is the treatment of the eyes which are 
drawn in two parabolic curves with sharp pointed sides set on the 
same level, the eye-lashes being drawn in sharp and extended bow¬ 
like curves. Even in profiles or almost profiles both eyes are shown, 
with one eye drawn projectedly somewhat out of its context. Earli¬ 
est examples of this class are a couple of paintings in a palm-leaf 
MS. dated in A.D. 1127 (Santinatha Temple Bban<Jar, Cambay; MS. 
No. 6.2). In this version the West Indian miniatures have certain 
parallels with contemporary East Indian miniatures, especially in 
poses and attitudes of figures, the quality of the line, and slight sug¬ 
gestion of plastic modelling of the body-contour. 


There is yet another style of West Indian miniature painting, 
known already from about the middle of the twelfth century A.D., 
which reflects the ‘mediaeval’ tendency in a still more pronounced 
manner. In the examples of this style the lines are equally sharp 
but have not the fineness of the class just referred to above. They 
are moreover broken and somewhat desiccated, not drawn in one 
sweep; they are also joined in pointed angles which do not integrate. 
Nor is there any attempt to crowd the composition with too many 
details; the few accessories that fill the spaces as well as the main 
figures themselves are all summarily and perhaps somewhat roughly 
worked out. There are also definite evidences, in some examples, 
of shading which is done by the use of colour and a shaded line. 
In the poses and attitudes as well as in the formal appearance and 
treatment there is unmistakably a conscious vigour which seems to 
be partly traditional, partly drawn from some submerged folk style. 
A peculiar treatment of the eyes seems to be characteristic of this 
class of miniatures. They are drawn not horizontally on one level, 
but separately On different levels; this is clearly noticeable at the 
nose where the corners of the eyes meet, one inside corner placed 
considerably below the level of the inside corner of the other. 
Earliest examples of this class of paintings can be seen in a MS. 
(No. 1155), dated A.D. 1161, belonging to the Viravijayaji Sri Jaina 
SvetSmbara Jnana Mandir Rhandar at Chavi, near Baroda. 


To whatever class of the common denominator these paintings 
belong, and despite their pictorial and decorative quality, their glow¬ 
ing colours of red, yellow, blue, and gold, West Indian miniature 
painting is highly stylised and conventional, cold and mechanical. 
They are intellectually conceived and despite their bright and glow¬ 
ing pigments there is little of emotional warmth in the general effect. 
But technically they are examples of perfect craftsmanship and of 
pure pictorial significance. In their generally cold and mechanical 


6S9 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

effect they perhaps reveal the inner meaning and psychology of Jain¬ 
ism to which the majority of the paintings owe their origin and 
inspiration. 

5. EASTERN INDIA (BENGAL, BIHAR), NEPAL AND TIBET 

Specimens of painting datable earlier than the Pala culture- 
period have not yet been found anywhere in Eastern India or Nepal. 
Extant specimens of early paintings in Eastern India, up to the 
thirteenth century at any rate, are illuminations on palm-leaves and 
paper of MSS. and on wooden covers of MSS. Besides, so far as 
Bengal is concerned, we have at our disposal at least three engraved 
drawings on copper-plates that may be said to belong to about the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The MSS.-illuminations are almost 
all, with but rare exceptions, of Vajrayana Buddhist inspiration; but 
the engraved drawings are all Brahmanical, 

Since there is hardly any appreciable major stylistic difference 
between the illuminations of Bihar and Bengal or Bengal and Nepal, 
at least till as late as the thirteenth century A.D., they may con¬ 
veniently be studied as belonging to one and the same school. 
These miniatures, it is important to remember, do not represent a 
separate style of book-illustration; they are, in fact, mural paintings 
in reduced dimensions, and can in no way be compared with the 
truly characteristic phase of book-illustration that constitutes a fasci¬ 
nating chapter in the history of painting in Persia, China, mediaeval 
Europe and late mediaeval India. Nor can they be said to have any¬ 
thing to do with primitive or folk-painting; in fact they reveal an 
already developed form and technique intimately linked with an 
art practice and tradition that must have existed in the form of large 
wall-paintings or MSS-illuminations that carried the earlier tradi¬ 
tion of Bagh and Ajan^a in an uninterrupted sequence. These small- 
scale paintings, executed within the narrow dimensions of a MS. 
page, may easily be thrown mechanically on the wall in any magni¬ 
fied scale and yet would not suffer in the least in either the movement 
of the line, for example, or the compactness of the composition. 
Truly speaking, these paintings are large scale murals in reduced 
dimensions. 

The colours used are orpiment yellow, white, indigo blue, Indian 
ink-black or kajjal, cinnabar red, and green which appears to be a 
mixture of orpiment and indigo, unlike the green of Ajan^a. All these 
colours are used in different shades. The general colour arrange¬ 
ment, on the whole, of the divinities at any rate, is mostly determined 
by monographic requirements. Neither Indian red or any ochres 
nor ultramarine seems to have been used. Tonality of colours is 




690 


MiNisr^ 


ART 




practically unknown, but high lights are given by the application 
of white. The outline is drawn either in black or red, and seems to 
have been sketched out first and later on filled in with colour. 

Usually the composition of these illuminations follows certain 
well-known schematic principles of balance. In most of them the 
main divinity, always relatively larger, stands or is seated in the 
centre, against a background either of an architectural design or of 
an oval or semi-round aureole, or inside a terraced temple decora¬ 
tion, flanked evenly on two sides by lesser divinities of the man^ala , 
in single or double, straight or circular, rows as their number may 
require. When the main divinity occupies one side, the lesser ones 
of the manqUila occupy another. Vacant spaces are filled by flying 
semi-divine beings, vegetal and ornamental decorations, architectural 
motifs, or similar other devices. 

With the help of dated MSS. it is possible to arrange these 
miniatures in a rough chronological sequence, but such a sequence 
would be hardly worth while, for it hardly shows any stylistic evolu¬ 
tion. Formally and psychologically they are conventional, and in¬ 
evitably betray a traditional outlook. Indeed, the trend and 
tendencies seem to have remained fixed, more or less, during the 
three centuries beginning from the eleventh. Life seems to have re¬ 
mained stagnant all the while within the confines of the monasteries. 

East Indian miniature paintings are, stylistically speaking, 
painted equivalents of contemporary plastic art of the Palas and 
Senas, both in outer form and inner meaning. So far as the plasti¬ 
cally modelled mass is concerned, what the sculptor achieves by 
gradations in three dimensions at his disposal, the painter does with 
his colours applied with varying degrees of thinness or consistency, 
as well as with the help of linear inflexions. The modelled mass 
is held by definite but sinuous lines, flowing steadily and modelled; 
the flowing curve of the contour of the body and the lower abdomen 
as well as the sensitivity of the finger curves are unmistakable heri¬ 
tages of the classical tradition. The best specimens of this tradi¬ 
tion can be seen, for example, in the illuminations of two Pra)nor 
pdramita MSS. executed in the 5th and the 6th year of king Mahipala 
(Cambridge Univ. Coll. No. Add. 1464 and ASB. Coll. No. 4713—Figs. 
.140 and 141—respectively), the Ganfavyuha MS. (Fig. 136) in the 
possession of Roerich, and another Prajnd-pdramitd MS. (ASB. 
Coll. No. A. 15) dated in the Nepalese era 191 (A.D. 1071). In the 
best examples, subtle transmission in the modelling of colour is fully 
valid (Fig. 142); equally valid is the modelling quality of the sinuous 
line increasing and decreasing in thickness in accordance with the 
degree of the surging roundness of the contour. But even in such 


m 


MINISr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




examples there are indications of increasingly thinning down of the 
plasticity or stagnation of the plastically modelled treatment. The 
modelling quality of the line in such examples may or may not be 
left untouched. In the Cambridge MSS. referred to above, the faint 
and stereotyped colour modelling does not, however, affect the line 
which is still vital in its modelling capacity. The illuminations of 
a MS. in the Boston Museum (No. 20589) dated in the 4th year of 
Gopala (III ?), of the well-known Sawamura MS. and of the Vreden- 
burg MS. (Fig. 137), for example, belong to this category. But in 
certain illuminations, for example, in the Cambridge MS. No. Add. 
1643 dated A.D. 1015, the lines are weak, brisk and faltering; they 
seem to be broken or desiccated and have lost their steady uninter¬ 
rupted flux. In some examples they are even sharp and hectic. 
Also, whatever modelling in colour is evident, is desiccated and 
disintegrated. But in the same MS., e.g., the one with the label 
“Samatafe Jayatunga Lokanatha,” the line is not so crisp and 
short-featured, but is equally unrefined by any grace or senti¬ 
ment. Modelling in colour is also faint and thin (cf. Fig. 138). 
This is equally evident in the illuminations of another MS. 
(ASB. No. 4203) dated in the Nepalese era 268 (A.D. 1148). They 
seem to have a distinctly Nepalese flavour and idiom which is mark¬ 
ed by the absence of any trace of modelling in the coloured surface, 
the upward stiffening of the pale-like erect bodies, and the curt 
and broken, almost stagnant, character of the line. In certain ex¬ 
amples, even of earlier date, the tendency towards linearisation is 
unmistakable, and this tendency appears side by side, sometimes 
even in the same painting, with the thoroughly ‘classical’, i.e. 
plastic treatment—undoubtedly an evidence of the ‘mediaeval’ 
interpenetration into the ‘classical’ conception. An illumination, 
reproduced on pi. XXXIII (right topmost panel) of Coomaraswamy’s 
Portfolio of Indian Art, illustrates, even better than those already 
referred to, this ‘mediaeval’ element in East Indian painting. 
But the clear character of this ‘mediaeval’ factor can best be seen 
in a few twelfth and thirteenth century copper-plate drawings, those 
from Sunderbans and Chittagong, for example. 234 In both these 
drawings the modelling quality of the line is fully valid; it is still 
flowing, alert and sweeping; but wherever there is the slightest pre¬ 
text, it loves to indulge in brisk curves and pointed angles. The 
lines of the face, when shown in profile or three-quarters, form 
angles or sharp curves in a beak-like nose or in an almost angular 
chin, and the bow-like curves of the brows or rims of the upper 
lips are extended as far as they would permit, much in the same 
manner as in contemporary West Indian miniatures. 

It is easy to discover a superficial resemblance between this 


6f)2 


MINIS 


ART 



<SL 


tradition of East Indian miniatures and drawings and that 
of Western India and Rajputana. Certainly both belong to the 
‘mediaeval’ conception and manner of treatment, but there is yet 
a marked difference. The line in the Western tradition is flaming 
and pointed, angles are sharp almost to a geometrical point, and 
though there is the same predilection for brisk and extended curves, 
they are not unoften broken and are drawn without any warmth of 
feeling or emotion. On the other hand the East Indian line is 
sensitive and emotional, and has a melodious lyricism even in its 
sharpness and desiccation. The ‘Western’ line has nothing but flat 
and hardened surface to control within its limits, but the East 
Indian line, with its sensitiveness, tempered lyricism, and short or 
extended curves as the case may be, shows off the roundness of the 
mass that is confined within its boundaries. The rich and glowing 
and summarily laid colours of West Indian miniatures have nothing to 
compare with the subdued tones and modelled plasticity of East 
Indian colours, thinly or consistently applied. 


East Indian manuscript-illuminations refer to the regnal years of 
the Pala kings, but those from Nepal are invariably dated in the 
Nepalese era, and Nepalese paintings comprise not only MSS.-illu- 
minations but also prabhas, painted banners, and painted wooden 
MSS. covers. Dated and illuminated MSS. are known onwards 
from the eleventh century and dated banners from the sixteenth, 
though painted Nepalese banners, ascribed to dates onwards from 
A. D. 900, were discovered at Tun-huang. 


The Tun-huang painting banners are but painted counterparts 
of contemporary East Indian sculpture, and that in an inferior 
version. The figures are thin, as if without a substance. The line 
is alert, round and sweeping, but there is hardly any modelling of 
colour which is usually massed together in blotches or distributed 
on flat surfaces. Whatever the postures, the attitude of the figures 
has hardly any inner meanings—or even an artistic significance. In¬ 
deed, these are some of the essential features that characterise 
Nepalese paintings from the very outset. 

These features are also evident in the MSS.-illuminations; in 
the earlier ones (eleventh century A.D.) the line has a largeness, a 
simple vivacity, and some kind of an emotional quality. At this 
stage Nepalese painting is but a component of contemporary East 
Indian MSS. painting. The paintings of the ASB. MS. No. A. 15 (Fig. 
139) and Cambridge MS. Add. 1643, for example, belong to this phase. 
But already in the twelfth and succeeding centuries there is a pro¬ 
gressive desiccation of colour-modelling, and a lessening of the 
modelling capacity of the line which, moreover, has a tendency to- 


693 



THE STRUGGLE-FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


wards becoming crisp, dry, and brittle; curves, too, become shorter 
and clipped. Sharp and hectic ‘Western’ lines and pointed angles 
also make their intrusion. Not only do Nepalese paintings at this 
stage throw aside the refined elegance and exuberance and the 
continuous, sensitive flux of the 'Eastern’ line, but compositionally, 
too, they bid good-bye to the continuous and sweeping rhythm of 
the East Indian composition and adopt one that is clipped and 
divided in single units. The figures stiffen increasingly; they are 
erect and vigorous, and yet without any substance, accentuating their 
angles whenever they bend sideways. These are characteristic 
Nepalese tendencies that are evidenced till as late as the sixteenth 
century, as applied to Indian themes and formulations. The paint¬ 
ings of the ASB. MS. No. 4203 (dated N. S. 268 = A. D. 1148), of 
the Durbar Library MS. of the Nityahnikatilaka (dated N. S. 515 
.= A.D. 1395), and that on the wooden cover of a MS. of about 
A.D. 1200, for example, belong to this phase. 


1. Mayamata, Chaps. XIX and XXI; 1SGDP, Patala XXX; Tantra-samuchchaya, 
Pafala II; Suprabheddgama , Chap. XXX ( Kesara of this text is apparently a 
mistake for Vesara); Kdmikdgama, Patala XUX; Kasyapa-silpa, Chap. XXV; 
SR, Chap. XVI; Samaranganasutradhdra, Chap. LVII (this text replaces Vesara 
by Vurdta ); Ap.-p. (MS. in S. K. Roy collection, Fol. 51) omits Vesara and 
mentions, along with Ndgari and Dvavidi, Lafi and . Vairatx ; an inscription from 
Holnl (Bellary District) adds Kdlinga to the list of Nagara, Dravida, and Vesara 
(Annual Report of the Assistant Archaeological Superintendent, Southern Cir¬ 
cle, for Epigraphy, for 1915, pp. 40-90). 

2. Sarvdni sarvadeseshu bhavant-xtyapi kechana (ISGDP); Sarvam sarvatra sam- 
matam (Kdmikdgama). 

3. ISGDP; SR; Kasyapa-silpa; Kdmikdgama. The Ap.-p . confines the Ndgari 
(Nagara) style to Madhyadesa ( Ndgari Madhyadese tu) and mentions Ldfi (L&fi 
Ldte prakirtita) and Vairafi (Vairdfx tu svadesajd), evidently of La{a and Vi¬ 
rata regions, as separate styles, along with the Ndgari and Dr&vitjii. On the 
evidence of the monuments Ldfi and Vairdtx should be considered as ramifica¬ 
tions of the Nagara style. Kalinga of the Holal inscription is, likewise, a regio¬ 
nal manifestation of the Nagara style. 

4. ISGDP; SR. 

5. Kdmikdgama; ISGDP ; SR. The interchange of the Dr&vida and the Vesara 
regions, as we have in the Kaiyapa-silpa, is evidently a mistake. 

6. SR; Tantra-samuchchaya. 

7. Kdmikdgama: Mayamata. Here stupi means the top of the sikhara and should 
not l>e confused with the domical crowning member (technically called stupi 
or stupikd) of the Dr&vida temples. 

8. Chatxtrasrdyatdsram y an-N agar am 'ixirikirttitam — Kdmikdgama; Mayamata. 

9. IC, Vn, pp. 74-75. 

9a. Cf. Volume III, p. 514. 

10. Dravidx dakshine bhdge — Ap.-p. 

11. Dravi^asyochito deso Dravidah si/dnna chdnyathd — ISGDP; SR. 

12. Krishnddi-Kany&ntam—Kami lea gama . 

13. Mayamata; ISGDP; Suprabheddgama; Tantrasamuchchaya ; SR; Kdsyapa-Silpa. 

14. Kdmikdgama; Mayamata. 

15. The description of the ISGDP that a Dravida temple may also be square below 
the neck and octagonal above has a general likeness with the early mediaeval 
temples of the Dravida country. 

15a. Vol. Ill, pp. 501-7, 514. 

18. HH4. fiefs. 116 and 117: A. Cunningham, Coins of Ancient India, p. 68, pi. IV, 2. 

17. J. Fergusson, HIE A, IT, n. 92. 

18. N. K. Base. Canons of Orissan Architecture. Calcutta. 1932. 

19. M. Ganguly, Orissa and her Remains—Ancient and Mediaeval, p. 307. 

694 






'RASBL, XV, pp. 109-14. 

22. H/EA, ll, p. 07. 

23. R. L. Mitra, Antiquifie* of Onssa, II, p. 91. 

24. J RASBL, XIII, pp. 63-73. See above, d. 211. 

24a. Another temple of this type may be seen in the Pakr-a Bhimesvara at Bhuva- 
nesvara. 

25. Cf. HU A, p. 115. This date is usually accepted by scholars. 

26. The author is indebted to Sri N. K. Bose, Calcutta University, for this informa¬ 
tion. 

27. JASB, VII, pp. 828-29, pi. XL. 

28. Information kindly supplied by Sri N. K. Bose, Calcutta University. 

29. ASI, 1928-29, p. 16, pi. IV(a). 

30. JBORS, XV, 65-68, pis. IV and V; ASC, XIII, 118-19. 

31 Sri N. K. Bose, Calcutta University, kindly supplied the information. 

32. ASI, 1904-05, pp. 116-20, pis. XXXVI and XXXVII. 

33. For a general account of the Orissan temples the following may be consulted: 

R. L. Mitra, Antiquities of Orissa, 2 vols.; 

HIE A, II, pp. 92-111; 

R. D. Banerji, History of Orissa, II, chapter on Architecture; 

Percy Brown, Indian Architecture (Buddhist and Hindu), pp. 122-32. 

34. ASC, kVII, p. 28; ASI, 1909-10, pp. 11-14; 1922-23, pp. 49-50. 

34a. See Classical Age, Fig. 32. 

35. ASC, II, pp. 201 ff.; ASI, 1909-10, pp. 15-16; 1924-25, p. 33. 

36. ASC, XVII, p. 8; ASIWC, 1903-04. p. 50; ASI, 1909-10, p. 16. 

37. MASI, No. 23, pp. 61-62, pi. XVIII (b). 

38. Ibid., p. 66, pi. XVIII (a). 

39. HIE A. II. r,p. 133-34. 

40. JDL, XXIX, Article No. 8. • , __ 

41. For temples at Amarkantak, MASI, No. 23, pp. 53-60, pis. XIII-XVT. 

42. MASI, No. 23, pp. 48-53, pis. X-XII. 

43. HIE A, n, p. 141; HI/A, p. 104; Br. LA., p. 133. , , 

44. It should bo remembered, however, that the sanahara garbhagriha and anga- 
sikharas on the main tower do not always go together, the former being re¬ 
cognised only in a few temples of the group. Temples of the s&ndhara class 
are also found in Western India. 

44a. Vol. El, pp. 501-507. 

45. Stella Kramrisch, KHT, II, p. 367. 

46. Ibid , p. 372. 

47. ASC, II. pp. 427-28, 430-31. 

48. MASI, No. 23, pp. 32-35. 41, pis. I and VI. 

49. ASC . XI, pp. 46-47; ASI, 1908-09. pp. 17-18. 

50. Ibid/pp. 20-21. 

51. Ibid , p. 20. 

52. ASC, VII, pp. 160-62. 

53. Ibid, pp. 199-200. 

54. Ibid , IX, pp. 60-74. 

55. ASI 1915-16, pt. 1, p. 18. 

56. HlEA, IT, p. 51. t t A 

57. P. C. Mukherji, Report on the antiquarian remains in the Lalitpur district, 

pi. 39. 

58. ASC „ Xm, pp. 132 ff. 

59. HIE A, II, p. 51. 

60. HIT A, p. 110. 

61. KHT, n, p. 348. , A _ 

62. For a general account of these temples reference may be made to AST. 1906-07, 
d. 42; 1908-09, pp. 100-115. The site was known as TTkela. as known from a 
fragmentary inscription in the Mahavlra temple at Osia. For the date of the 
Buohkala Inscription of Nagabhata II, see El, IX, 199. 

63. KHT . n. p. 404. , # . , t 

63a. The Mahavlra temple seems to have an interesting history covering a period of 

several centuries. According to a fragmentary inscription, the original shrine 
of Mahavlra seems to date back to the period of Vat«ari*ja. the Guriara PratT- 
hara king in the last auarter of the eighth century A.T). Subseauentlv it fell 
into disrepair and a certain amount of renovation work was undertaken by a 
merchant, named Jinodaka, in Vikrama Samvat 1013 (A D. 956). Finally, 

695 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


in Vikrama Sarhvat 1075 (A. D. 1013) the ornamental torana was set 
up by two individuals whose names are lost. The style of the temple 
with the bikhara of the sanctum surrounded by clusters of ahga-sikharas 
belongs to the eleventh century A.D., though the evidences of the earlier 
history of the shrine are fully supported by the varied forms of the pillars 
of the mandapa, of the porch and of the toratia in front. The sikhara 
itself was put together with old materials about a century back, but it essen¬ 
tially retains the form of the eleventh century A.D. The original shrine of 
Sachiya Mata may go back to the eighth century A.D. But the present temple, 
can hardly be earlier than the twelfth when, according to an inscription, dated 
Vikrama Samvat 1234 (A.D. 1177) the jahghaghara was furnished with certain 
sculptures by a banker of the name of Gayapala. 

64. Br. LA., p. 148. 

65. KHT, II, pi. LXXVI. 

66. Stella Kramrisch, Art of India , pis. 132-33. 

67. Ibid, p. 210. 

68. For a general account, reference may be made to HIEA , II, pp. 36-43; Henry 
Cousens, AAWI, pp. 46-49; Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp. 147-48, 149. 

69. Henry Cousens, AAWI, p. 46. 

70. Ibid, p. 47. 

71. Henry Cousens, Somnath, p. 37. 

72. The author is grateful to Sri N. K. Bose, Calcutta University, for this in¬ 
formation. 

73. Henry Cousens thinks they were made of stone— Somnath, p. 37. 

74. Ibid, p. 6. 

75. HU A, p. 82. 

76. Br. LA., p. 159. 

77. James Burgess, Report on the antiquities of Kathiawar and Kach, p. 7; H1IA, 
p. 82; Br. I.A., p. 159. Recently a radio-carbon test of the wood fragment, 
found in the Gop temple, was conducted by Dr. Syamadas Chaterji in the phy¬ 
sics Laboratory, University College of Science and Technology, Calcutta. 
According to the test, Dr. Chaterji reports, the wood fragment is approximately 
1400 years old. The view of the archaeologists, who place the temple in the 

century A.D., is thus confirmed by a scientific method of dating objects. 
H. D. Sankalia (AG, p. 59) is inclined to ascribe the temple to the fifth century 
A.D. 

78. H. D. Sankalia, AG, pp. 57-59. 

79. Henry Cousens, Somnath, pp. 6-7. 

80. Ibid, pi. XLVI1I. 

81. Ibid, pp. 44-45. 

82. Ibid, p. 40. 

83. Ibid, p. 40; H. D. Sankalia, AG, pp. 59-62. 

84. Henry Cousens, Somiiath, pp. 38-39; H. D. Sankalia, AG, pp. 60, 63. 

So. Henry Cousens, Somnath, pp. 7, 41; H. D. Sankalia, AG, pp. 59, 62; Br. LA., 
p. 159. 

86. H. D. Sankalia, AG, p. 60. 

87. Henry Cousens, Somnath, p. 40. 

88. Ibid, p. 40. 

89. Ibid, p. 41. 

90. James Burgess, AANG , p. 109. 

91. Henry Cousens, Somnath, pi. XC. 

92. Ibid. pp. 53-54, pi. LVI. 

93. H. D. Sankalia (AG, pp. 83-84) is inclined to include the Ranik Devi temple 

fl t and the above-mentioned temple at Sandera among the examples 

of the SolankI temple. But the above distinctive features, chara^ter^tfc of the 
early Nagara temple, are too emphatic, and it is difficult to class them otherwise. 

94. Henry Cousens, Somnath, pp. 51-52, pis. LII LIV. 

95. Ibid, p. 51. 

96. Ibid, pi. LI. 

97. Br. I.A, p. 145. 

98. H. D. Sankalia, AG. p. 74. 

99. James Burgess. AANG, p. 88. pi. LXVH. 

100. Ibid. p. 109. 

101. Henry Cousens, Scwmath, pp. 69-70, pi. LXXXVIII. 

102. James Burgess, AANG. p. 107. 

103. Henry Cousens. S(rmnath. p. 62, PI LXXt. 

104. HIEA, n, pp. 133-34, Fig. 281. Triple-shrined temples, though rare in con- 

696 





105 


106. 

107. 

108. 


109. 

109a 


110 

111 

112 

113 

114 

115 

116 

117, 

118. 

119. 

120 . 
121 . 
122 . 

123. 

124. 

125. 

126. 

127. 

128. 

129. 

130. 

131. 

132. 

133. 

134. 

135. 

136. 

137. 


138. 

139. 

140. 

140a. 

140b. 


141. 

142. 

143. 


ART 


ception, are found over a wide region, as for example, in Central India, in 
Knandesh, and in the Kannada districts. 

James Burgess, AANG, p. 110. Only the maiujUipa is now left. From three 
entrance porticos H. D. Sankalia is inclined to class it with the triple-shrined 
group (AG, p. 43). But neither the plan, nor the character of the remains 
would warrant such an assumption. 

James Burgess, AANG , p. 11. 

Henry Cousens, Somnath, p. 63. 

James Burgess, AANG, pp. 75 If; HI/A, p. Ill; Henry Cousens, AAWI, pp. 37- 
39; Percy Brown, Br.LA ,, pp. 145-47; H. D. Sankalia, AG, pp. 73, 84 ff; Ben¬ 
jamin Rowland, AA7, p. 178. 

Henry Cousens, AAWI , p. 39. 

. An individual feature of the typical SolahkI temple is the beaded amalahasila 
surmounting the sikhara. That such a member was also the crowning element 
of the sikhara of the sanctum of the Mo^hera temple is indicated by the frag¬ 
ment of a huge dmalaka found among the ruins that lie scattered round about. 
Henry Cousens, Somnath , p. 36; AAWI, p. 42; Percy Brown, Br. 1.A p. 148. 
Henry Cousens, Somnath , pp. 57-58; AAWI, pp. 42-43; Percy Brown, Br. LA., 
p. 148. 

. James Burgess, AANG , pp. 60-69 and pis.; Henry Cousens, AAWI, pp. 36-37• 
Percy Brown, Br. I.A., pp. 148-49. 

. James Burgess, AANG , p. 84 and pis.; HIEA , II, p. 136; Henry Cousens, AAWI, 
pp. 36, 37. 

. Henry Cousens, Somnath, pp. 1 ff; AAWI, pp. 40-42; HIEA, II, p. 134-35. 

. Henry Cousens, Somnath, pis. XH-XIII. 

. HIEA, II, Fig. 281. • • 

. James Burgess, AANG , p. 115. 

. Henry Cousens, CAKD, p. 92, pi. LXXXVII. 

. Ibid, pp. 41-44, pis. XHI-XV, XXII. 

. Ibid, pis. IX. XL 
. Ibid, pis. XII, XIH. 

Ibid, pis. XL, XLV. 

Ibid, pp. 72-73, pi. LH. 

Ibid, p. 73, pi. m. 

Ibid, p. 73. 

Ibid, p. 72. 

Ibid, pp. 68-70, pis. XLIX, L; Henry Cousens, AAWI, pp. 24-25; Percy Brown, 
Br. I.A., p. 83, pis. XLV, XLVII. 

Henry Cousens, CAKD, pi. XXVI; Stella Kramrisch, Art of India, p. 203, pi. 57. 
Ibid, p. 205, pi. 76. 

For mediaeval monuments of the Dakhan reference may be made to Henrv 
Cousens, MTD; AAWI, pp. 51-57; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., pp. 152-55. 

Stella Kramrisch, KHT, I, pp. 218-19. 

Henry Cousens, MTD, p. 7. 

James Fergusson, HIEA. II. p. 147; Henry Cousens, MTD, pp. 13-18 pis. III-V, 
IX; AAWI, pp. 52-54, pi. 43: Percy Brown, Br. I.A., pp. 153-54, pi. XLV. 

Henry Cousens. MTD, pp. 23-24, pis. XVI, XXI, XXII; AAWI, p. 57, pi. 46; 
Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 154. 

Henry Cousens, MTD, pp. 24-25, pis. XVIH, XXI; AAWI, p. 57; Percy Brown, 
Br. LA., p, 154. 

Henry Cousens, MTD. pp. 28-29, pis. XXV. XXVH, XXVHI. 

Fergusson, HIEA, n, pp. 144-46, pi. XXV, Figs. 343, 344; Henry Cousens, 
MTD, pp. 36, 39, pis. XLII, XLIII, XLVII, XLIII; AAWI, pp. 54-55, pi. 44; 
Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 154, pi. XCIX. 

Henry Cousens, MTD, pp. 41-43, pis. LIH, LV; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., pi. XLV. 
Henry Cousens, MTD, p. 55, pi. LXXX. 

^ SC « X IT ^ p1 ' VI; James Fergujgon, HIEA, n, p. 147; Stella Kramrisch, KHT, 
l p. 256, n, pp. 389-96, pis. XT.TTT -T.TT 
See above, p. 68. 

Percy Brown (Br. LA., p. 139) thinks that the Udayapura temple shows “by 
its style an affinity to the Chandella group of temples at Khajuraho.” But 
none of the temples at Khajuraho exhibits this characteristic design which is 
pre-eminently Dakhanese. 

Stella Kramrisch, KHT, IL p. 391. 

Ibid, p. 391. 

ASR f 1912-13, pt. 1, pp. 27-29; 1915-16, pp. 39-48. 

697 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


144. 

145. 

146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 

150. 

151. 

152. 

153. 

154. 

155. 

156. 


157. 

158. 

159. 

160. 
161 . 
162. 

163. 

164. 

165. 

166. 


ASR, 1905-06, pp. 17 ft. 

For Chamba temples reference may be made to ASC, XIV, pp. 109-114. 

ASR, 1909-10, pp. 18-24. 

JISOA, II, pp. 135-36, HBR, I, pp. 499-500, figs. 82, 84, 104. 

R. D. Banerji, Eastern Indian School o/ Mediaeval Sculpture, pis. XIX(b>. 
XC(a), XCIV(b). 

ASC, VIII, p. 154; JISOA, I, pp. 125-27, pi. XXXVI; HBR, I, p. 499, fig. 81. 
ASR, 1934-35, p. 43, pi. XIX(a); HBR, I, pp. 500-01, fig. 85. 

ASC, Vin, p. 202; ASR , 1921-22, pp. 84-85; 1922-23, pp. 58-59; A. K. Coomaru- 
swamy, HUA, Fig. 213; JISOA , II, pp. 139-40; HBR, I, p. 501, fig. 86. 

A. K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA, p. 108. 

ASR, 1927-28, p. 41. 

JISOA, H, pp. 140-41; HBR, I, p. 501, fig. 88. 

JISOA, IX, p. 141; HBR, I, pp. 501-02, fig. 89. 

A. H. Longhurst, Pallava Architecture ( MASI , No. 17); James Fergusson, HIEA r 
I, pp. 331-38; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., pp. 96-97; Benjamin Rowland, AAI, pp. 
180-81; A. K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA , pp. 102-104. 

James Fergusson, HJEA , I. p. 362; A. K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA, p. 105; 
Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp. 98-99; Benjamin Rowland, AAI, p. 183. 

Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 98. 

James Fergusson, HIE A, I, pp. 357-59; A, K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA , pp. 104-05; 
Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp. 99-100; Benjamin Rowland, AAI, p. 183. 

Percy Brown, Br. LA., p. 100. 

James Fergusson, HIE A, I. pp. 359-60; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 100. 

Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 100. 

A. K. Coomar*\swamy, HIIA, p. 105. 

Percy Brown, Br. LA ., p. 100. 

Ibid. 

Ibid. 


167. James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 352-57; Henry Cousens, CAKD, pp. 61-66; AAWI 
pp. 22-23; A. K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA, p. 95; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., pp. 83-85: 
Benjamin Rowland, AAI, p. 168. 

168. Henry Cousens, CAKD, pp. 29-32; A. K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA , p. 95; above. 
Vol. Ill, p. 506. 

169. Henry Cousens, CAKD, pp. 60-61. 

170. Ibid, pp. 66-68. 

171. James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 342-46; A. K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA, pp. 104-05; 
Percy Brown, Br. I.A.. pp. 89-90; Benjamin Rowland, AAI, pp. 183-86. 

172. K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, Colas ( 2nd Edn.), pp. 699-700. 

173. Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp. 102-03; K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, Colas, pp. 705-06. 

174. Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 103. 

175. See above pp. 234 OF. 

176. Sastri, Colas , p. 184. 

177. James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 362-64; A. K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA, p. 122; 
Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp. 103-04; Benjamin Rowland, AAI, p. 189; K. A. Nila¬ 
kanta Sastri, Colas, pp. 710-13. 

178. Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 104. 

179. Ibid. 


180. A. K. Commoraswamy, HIIA, p. 122; Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp. 104-05; K. A. 
Nilakanta Sastri, Colas, pp. 713-14. 

181. Colas, v. 713. 

182. Percy Brown. Br. LA., p, 105. 

183. Ibid. p. 108: K. A. Nilakanta Sastri, Colas , pp. 717-19. 

184. Colas, pp. 720-22. 

185. Percy Brown, Br. LA.. pp. 109 ft; Benjamin Rowland, AAI, pp. 190-91. 

186. Henry Cousens, CAKD. p. 17. 

187. The only exception is the Sarasvatl temple at Gadag (Dharwar District). See 
Ibid. pp. 110-12: pi. CXX. 

188. James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 426-27; Henrv Cousens, CAKD. pp. 75-76; 
AAWI, p. 28; Percy Brown, Br. LA„ pp. 175-76. 

189. Henrv Cousens, CAKD, pp. 77-79; AAWI, pp. 27-28; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., 
p. 176. 

190. Henry Cousens, CAKD, p. 77. 

191. Ibid. pp. 83-84; Percv Brown. Br. I.A., p. 176. 

192. Henrv Cousens, CAKD, p. 83. 

193. Ibid, pp. 85, 87. 


698 , 



ART 


<SL 


197 

198 

199 


200 , 

201 . 

202 . 

203. 

204. 

205. 

206. 

207. 

208. 

209. 

210 . 
211 . 
212 . 

213. 

214. 


215 


216 

217. 

218 

219, 

220 . 
221 . 


222 . 

223. 


224. 

225. 

226. 

227. 

228. 

229. 

230. 

231. 

232. 

232a. 

233. 
233a. 

234. 


Ibid, p. 89. 

Ibid, p. 88. 

James Fergusson, H1EA, I, pp. 428-29; Henry Cousens, CAKD, pp. 79-82: AAW1 
pp. 29-30; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., pp. 176-77. 

Fergusson, HIE A, I. pp. 424-25; Henry Cousens, CAKD, pp. 100-02; 
AAWI, pp. 30-31; Percy Brown, Br. LA., p. 177. 

Henry Cousens, AAWI, p. 30. 

Cousens speaks of the hall as having sixty-eight pillars. Percy Brown also 
follows his description. But the published plan (Henry Cousens, CAKD, 
pi. CV) shows only fifty-six pillars, twenty-six of which support the roof, 
while the remaining, over the kakshdsanas, carry the eaves. 

Meadows Taylor, Architecture of Dharwar and Maisur , p 47 
James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 429-31; Henry Cousens, CAKD, p. 103; Percy 
Brown, Br. J.A., pp. 177-78. ’ y 

James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 429-31; Henry Cousens, CAKD , pp. 109-113: 
Percy Brown, Br. LA., p. 178. 

Janjfs Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 431-32; Henry Cousens, CAKD, pp. 114-15: 
AAWI, p. 32; Percy Brown, Br. LA., p. 178. 

Henry Cousens, AAWI, p. 32. 

Percy Brown would class the Hoysala temple as “distinct from all others” 
because of this conformation. Br. 7.A., p. 168. 

Ibid, p. 170. 

James Fegusson, HIEA, I, pp. 437-38; Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp. 170-71* Benia¬ 
min Rowland, AAI. p. 193. 

James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 438-441; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 171. 

James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 444-50; Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp 171-73 
Ibid, p. 171. 

James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 442-43; Percy Brown, Br. I.A., p. 172. 

James Fergusson, HIEA , I, p. 443. 

Percy Brown, Br. LA., p. 173. 

James Fergusson, HIEA, I, pp. 251-72; A. K. Coomaraswamy, HIIA, p. 143; 
Percy Brown, Br. LA., pp. 185-94; Benjamin Rowland, AAI. pp. 119-20. For 
detailed accounts of the Kashmir monuments reference may be made to R. C. 
Kak s Ancient Monuments of Kashmir , 

1922-23, pp. 116-23; 1925-26, pp. 107-13, 141; 1926-27, pp. 140-149, 119; 
1927-28, pp. 38-39, 144-45, 101-11; 1928-29, pp. 97-98; 1930-34, pt. I, pp, 113-18; 
Paharpur. 

ASI, 1930-34, pL xvii; Paharpur, pi. I. 

Ibid, p. 7. 

ASI, 1935-36, pp. 55-66, pi. xix-xxi; 1936-37, pp. 47-50, pi. xxi. 

Paharpur , p. 25, pi. xx(b). 

Ibid, p. 8. 

Dikshit uses the word ‘outline* (Ibid, p. 7) which pre-sup poses an earlier struc- 
ture that served as the nucleus for additions and amplifications at different 
periods. As it stands now, the temple belongs wholesale to a single period of con¬ 
struction and if any earlier structure existed it served as a model for the pre¬ 
sent monument, which was conceived on a much grander scale, and not as a 
nucleus for later additions and accretions. 

JGIS, IX, pp. 5-28. 

The problem of the occurrence on the basement of stone sculptures of varied 
style, a few of the earlier dates, has been discussed in detail by the present 
writer in IC, VII, pp. 35-40 and sketch, and also in HBR, I, pp. 508-09. 

Illustrated London News, January 29, 1927, p. 160. 

ASI, 1925-26, p. 109. 

Brihat-samkita, LII. 36 also relevant commentary; Matsya Parana, Ch. 269, 34- 
35: JISOA, n, p. 137. 

ASI. 1925-26, p. 113. 

JGIS, IX, pp. 5-28 and plates. 

ASI, 1927-28, p. 39. 

OZ, 1930, PI. 33. 

See above, pp. 536 ff. 

Brahmor wood-carving of Chamba, c. A.D. 700. Cf. Vogel, Antiquities of 
Chambd, PI. VII, etc. 

HIIA, Fig. 273. 

Cf. Vol. IV. r>. 134. 

KTS. Fig. 112. 

HBR, I, 555. 


699 




TEXT FIGURES 





Fig. 1 

Bhuvanesvara, Rajdr&ni 
Temple: Plan 



Fig. 2 

Bhuvanesvara , Lihgardja 
Temple: Plan 


700 









MINIS 



ART 




tCALt 

*** • * •* a _«_* fut 


Fig. 3 

Nurpur Fort, Temple: Plan 


701 

























the struggle for empire 


<SL 



Fig. 4 

Khajuraho, Devi Jagadambd temple: Plan 


















































MINfSTyjy 




Fig. 7 
Khajur&ho , 
Brahma temple: 
Plan 



Fig. 8 

Khajurako, Mritahcf Mah&deo 
Temple: Pian 


703 




















THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Chandrehe , Circular temple: 
Plan 




Fig. 10 

R&nlpur Jharidl, Circular Yogint temple: Plan 

. 704 , 


Fig. 11 

Kkajuraho , Chauhshat 
Yogrini temple: Plan 






























MiNisr^ 




Fig. 13 

V tile.i vara, Siva temple: Plan 


. Fig. 14 

Villeivara, Siva temple: Elevation 


S. K.—*5 


705 

























































































































WNISTffy 




Fig. 17 

Sunak, Nxlakanpha Mahddeva temple: Elevation 


Fig. 18 

Kasara, Triple-shrined temple: Plan 
707 


ART 














































THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




Fig. 19 

Mother a> Sun Temple: Plan 



Fig. 20 

Ghumli, Navaldkhd temple: Plan 
70S 




































MIN/Sr^ 


ART 




Fig. 21 

Sejakpur, NavaUikha temple: Plan 




Fig. 22 

Somanathapattana: Somanatha temple: Plan 
* , 709 


i 

































































Fig. 23 

Girndr. Triple-shrined temple: Plan 
























ViaNV 4° 




Fig. 25 

Paffadakal: Papanatha temple: Plan 


711 




























































Fig. 26 

Ambamatha . Siva temple: Plan 

" 1 M k’-r"'". 


712 









ART 



Fig. 28 

Balsane, Temple No. 1: Elevation 



























• misty 



Fig. 29 

Patna, Mahesvara temple: Plan 



Fig. 30 

Sintuir, Conrfesvara ternple: Plan 
714 







































































MiNisr^ 




715 

















































Fig. 32 

Kanchipuram, Kaildsanctha temple: Plan 



Fig. 33 

Kanchipuram, Kaildsandtha temple: Section 
716 













MINfST-^ 



Fig. 34 

K&nchipuram, Vaikunfha Pemmal temple: Plan 


717 




















THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 
































of INDIA 




Fig. 37 

Paftadakal , Virupdksha temple: Platt and Elevation 


ART 


Fig. 38 

Tanjore, Brihadisvara temple: Plan 
719 






























































Fig. 39 

Tanjore , Brihadisvara temple: Elevation 


720 


















MIN/STXy 



4 



Fig. 41 

Kukkanxtr, Kallesvara temple: Elevation 
721 


S. E.—4<J 
















































THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




Fig. 42 

L akkundi, Jain temple: Plan 



Fig. 43 

Chauddadampur , Muktesvara temple: Elevation 


722 


















































^SINIW • 



Fig. 44 

Haveri, SiddheSvara temple: Elevation 



Fig. 45 

Lakkundi , K&sxvisveirvara temple: Plan 


723 



































THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




[smsi 



Fig. 48 

Ittagi, Mahddeva temple: Plan 







Fig. 47 

Knruvutti, MaUik6rjuna temple: Plan 
724 


I 




















































art 




Fig. 48 

Kuruvatti , Mallikarjuna temple: Elevation 


725 






















THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




Fig. 49 

Gadag , Somesvara temple: Plan 



Fig. 50 

pambal, Dodda Basappa temple: Plan 
720 
































Fig. 51 

Somnathpur, Kesava temple: Plan 



Fig. 53 

Halebid, Hoysalesvara temple: Plan 











































MINIS 



Fig. 54 

Martantf, Sun temple: Plan 



728 


imiiminxiiii 





































































Fig. 57 

Paharjmr, Great temple: Plan 







































MINIS r/fj. 


CHAPTER XXI 




COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

1. DECLINE AND FALL OF THE SAILENDRA EMPIRE 

The rise of the Sailendra Empire in South-East Asia has been 
described above. 1 At the beginning of the eleventh century A.D. 
this mighty empire was being ruled by Sri Chuqlamapi-varmadeva. 
In A.D. 1003 he sent two envoys to China who reported that a Bud¬ 
dhist temple had been erected in their country in order to pray for 
the long life of the Emperor. This probably means nothing more 
than a common courtesy shown by one Buddhist king to another, 
but may be taken as an evidence of friendly and frequent inter¬ 
course between the two countries. 

Chudamani-varman also maintained friendly relations with the 
great Chola Emperor Rajaraja the Great. 2 An interesting evi¬ 
dence of this is furnished by a very long record engraved on twenty- 
one copper-plates, now preserved in the Leiden Museum, and there¬ 
fore known as the Leiden Grant, or rather Larger Leiden Grant, 
to distinguish it from another—Smaller Leiden Grant—in the same 
Museum, recorded on three plates. The Larger Grant, written in 
Sanskrit and Tamil, records that Chudamani-varman, king of 
Kadaram, commenced the construction of a vihara or Buddhist 
monastery at Nagapaftana, modern Negapatam, and a village was 
granted for its upkeep by the Chola king Rajaraja in the twenty- 
first year of his reign, i.e. A.D. 1006. The monastery, which was 
named after the Sailendra Emperor, was, however, actually com¬ 
pleted by his son and successor Sri Maravijayottuhga-varman. 
Rajaraja also probably died! in course of the construction, for the 
actual edict for the grant was issued, after the death of Rajaraja, 
by his son R&jendra Chola. 

This interesting record naturally recalls to our mind the simi¬ 
lar activity of another Sailendra Emperor, Sri Balaputra, more than 
a century and a half earlier. 3 He, too, built a vihara at Nalandh 
and received a grant of five villages from the Pala Emperor Deva- 
p§la. These two instances serve as unique testimony to the long 
and familiar intercourse between the Sailendras and their mother¬ 
land. 

Sri Maravijayottuhga-varman ascended the throne some time be¬ 
fore A.D. 1008 when he sent three envoys to China. The Larger 


730 




miST/fy 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


<§L 


Leiden Grant has preserved some particulars about him. It in¬ 
forms us that he was ‘born in the Sailendra family, was the lord of 
Sri-vishaya, had extended the suzerainty of Kataha and had Makara 
as the emblem of his banner.’ SrI-vishaya is undoubtedly the same 
as Sri-Vijaya, mentioned before 4 , and Kafaha—written as Kadaram 
in the Tamil portion—is now represented by Keddah in the Malay 
Peninsula. As Chudamaiji-varman is referred to as the ruler of 
Kadara only, it may be concluded that Keddah was the main seat of 
the Sailendra Empire which included Sri-Vijaya. 


The friendly relation between the Sailendra Emperors and the 
Chojas is proved not only by the Leiden Grant, but also by refer¬ 
ences in old Tamil poems to the commercial relations between their 
countries. An old Tamil poem refers to ships with merchandise 
coming from Kalagam to the great port situated at the mouth of the 
Kaveri river. Kajagam, which a later commentator equates with 
Kadaram, is almost certainly to be identified with Keddah. 


In view of all this it is somewhat strange that ere long war 
broke out between the Sailendras and the Cholas. The cause of this 
war is unknown and we are dependent for such information as we 
possess of it on the Choja records alone. The earliest reference 
to it occurs in a Choja record, dated A.D. 1017-8, which tells us that 
Rajendra Choja’s forces crossed the ocean and conquered Kataha. 
Full details of this expedition are given in several inscriptions of 
Rajendra Choja, dated between A.D. 1024 and 1043, in almost 
identical words which may be translated as follows:— 

‘And (who) (Rajendra Chola) having despatched many ships in 
the midst of the rolling sea and having caught Sahgramavijayottun- 
gavarman, the king of Kadaram, along with the rutting elephants 
of his army, (took) the large heap of treasures, which (that king) 
had rightfully accumulated; (captured) the (arch called) Vidya- 
dhara-torana at the “war-gate” of the extensive city of the enemy; 
6r I-Vi jay a with the “Jewel-gate,” adorned with great splendour, and 
the “gate of large jewels;” Pannai, watered by the river; the ancient 
Malaiyur (with) a fort situated on a high hill; Mayirudihgam, sur¬ 
rounded by the deep sea (as) a moat: Ilangasoka undaunted (in) 
fierce battles; Mappappajam, having abundant (deep) waters as de¬ 
fence; Mevilimbangam, having fine walls as defence; Valaippandtiru, 
possessing (both) cultivated land(?) and jungle; Talaittakkolam, 
praised by great men (versed in) the sciences; Madamalihgam, firm 
in great and fierce battles; Ilamuridesam, whose fierce strength was 
subdued by a vehement (attack); Manakkavaram whose flower- 
gardens (resembled) the girdle (of the nymphs) of the southern; 


731 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


•gion; Ka^aram, of fierce strength, which was protected by the 
neighbouring sea/ 


Most of the conquered countries, mentioned in the above pass- 
age, cannot be definitely identified, but Malaiyur is undoubtedly 
the same as Malayu (or Jambi) in Sumatra, 6 Manakkavaram is 
Nikobar Islands, and Ka^aram is of course Kataha or Keddah. As 
to the rest, most of them have been located with great probability 
either in Sumatra or in Malay Peninsula. The passage seems to 
indicate that Rajendra Chola first conquered various subject-states 
of the Sailendra Empire, and then concluded his campaign by 
taking possession of Kadara itself. It is probable, but by no means 
certain, that there was an encounter at the very beginning, between 
the main forces of the Sailendra Emperor and Rajendra Chola, in 
which the former was defeated. This defeat was followed by the 
other Chola conquests which extended practically over the whole 
of the eastern coast-region of Sumatra and the Central and South¬ 
ern parts of Malay Peninsula, including the two capital cities Kataha 
(or Kadara) and Sn-Vijaya. The view that the conquered countries 
were vassal-states of the SaiJendras is confirmed by the fact that 
many of these are included in the list of subject-states of the Sailen- 
dra Empire by the Chinese writers of a later date, such as Chau Ju- 
Kua, to whom reference will be made later. 

As the detailed account of this oversea campaign occurs for 
the first time in an inscription dated A.D. 1024-25, which otherwise 
repeats the accounts of the (inland) conquests given in earlier re¬ 
cords, it is probable that the great and decisive victory took place 
not long before that date. This may appear to be inconsistent with 
the (act that the conquest of Kataha is already referred to in a record 
dated A.D. 1017. But it is just possible that the war was a prolong¬ 
ed one. It commenced in or shortly before A.D. 1017 with a success¬ 
ful Chola naval attack against Kataha in that year and ended with 
the decisive victory, mentioned above, five or six years later. We 
learn from a record of Virarajendra, a successor of Rajendra Chola, 
that the latter burnt ‘Kataha, that could not be set fire to by others’. 

It is as difficult to account for the sudden outbreak of the war 
as for the almost complete collapse of the 6ailendra power. But 
a few salient points may be noted. In the first place, the Cholas had 
completed the conquest of the whole eastern coast of India up to the 
mouth of the Ganga, before Sending the oversea expedition on a 
large scale. Secondly, the geographical position of the Sailendra 
Empire enabled it to control almost the whole volume of maritime 
trade between Western and Eastern Asia. Perhaps the dazzling 
prospect of securing this rich volume of trade for himself prompted 


732 


WNIST/fy 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION V 

ndra Chola to undertake the hazardous conquest, as soon as the 
possession of the naval resources of the entire coast of India 
placed at his disposal well equipped ships and sailors necessary 
for this purpose. 


But whatever may be the cause, the Chola success was complete 
for the time being. But it could hardly be of long duration. Apart 
from the inherent difficulty of maintaining hold upon distant lands 
beyond the sea, the internal troubles of the Cholas referred to 
above 6 made the task almost an impossible one. Nevertheless, the 
successors of Rajendra Chola tried hard to maintain, at least the 
nominal suzerainty, if not effective power over these lands. Thus 
Virarajendra (A.D. 1063-70) claims to have conquered Kadaram. 
But this very fact shows that in spite of the great victory of Rajen¬ 
dra Chola and his claim to have destroyed Kadara, that kingdom did 
not cease to exist and must have shaken off even the nominal suze¬ 
rainty of the Cholas. According to the record of VIranajendra, he 
conquered Kadaram, but ‘was pleased to give (it) back to (its) king 
who worshipped (his) feet.’ But this did not end the struggle. For 
Kulottunga Chola (A.D. 1070-1120) again claims to have destroyed 
Kadaram, while a Chinese account represents the Chola as a vassal 
of the Kad&ra kingdom or its succession state in the second half of 
the eleventh and the beginning of the twelfth century. These contra¬ 
dictory statements indicate the continuance of the struggle with 
alternate success and reverse of both the parties. 


But even during this period occasionally there was quite friend¬ 
ly relation between the two. The Smaller Leiden Grant dated in 
the 20th year of Kulottunga Chola (A.D. 1089-90) says:— 

“At the request of the king of Kidara, communicated by his 
envoys Rajavidyadhara Samanta and Abhimanottunga Samanta, 
Kulottunga exempted from taxes the village granted to the Bud¬ 
dhist monastery called Sailendra-Chudamani-varma-vihara (i.e. the 
one established by king Chudamani-varman as referred to in the 
Larger Leiden Grant)”. 


After Kulottunga Choja we have no further evidence of any 
pretension of the Choja rulers over their oversea empire. The 
internal history of the Chojas during this period, sketched above, 7 
also does not make it likely. We must therefore admit that after 
fruitless efforts of a century the Cholas finally abandoned their 
claims over Sumatra and Malay Peninsula. Thus ended the first 
and the last enterprise of an Indian ruling family to maintain suze¬ 
rainty over countries beyond the sea. 

The Chinese evidence leaves no doubt that the kingdom of 
KatSha or Kadaram continued and soon became again very powerful. 


783 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

although we can trace the existence of this kingdom, called San- 
r o-tsi by the Chinese, for nearly three centuries more, we hear no 
more of the Sailendra dynasty. It is true that the kingdom of the 
Sailendra rulers, noted above, is called San-fo-tsi by the Chinese, 
and Zabag by the Arab writers, and these names figure continuously 
in the Chinese and Arab documents from tenth to fourteenth century 
A.D. It is, therefore, not unlikely that the Sailendras continued to 
rule over it in the twelfth century or even later, but of this we have 
no positive evidence. The name Sailendra occurs only in the re¬ 
cords of India, Java and Malay Peninsula, but as these sources fail 
us, so far as the history of this kingdom is concerned, we cannot be 
sure if the rulers still belonged to the Sailendra family. It would 
be, however, convenient to designate the kingdom of San-fo-tsi or 
Zabag as the Sailendra Empire up to the very end in order to 
emphasise the continuity of the State of which there is no doubt. 
The Arab writers EdrisI (A.D. 1154), Kazwini (thirteenth century), 
Ibn Sa'id (thirteenth century) and DimaskI (fourteenth century) all 
refer to the power and glory of Zabag, but it is not certain whether 
they refer to conditions in their own time or merely quote from old 
writers. The Chinese chronicles are more helpful. Reference is 
made to two embassies in A.D. 1156 and 1178 showing that San-fo- 
tsi still maintained diplomatic relations with China. Some time 
about A.D. 1225 a Chinese official named Chau Ju-Kua wrote a very 
interesting account of this kingdom, based exclusively on oral in¬ 
formation furnished by Chinese and foreign traders. According 
to him San-fo-tsi was a great centre of trade and the seat of a 
powerful empire. The possession of the Strait of Malacca enabled 
it to control the maritime trade between the Eastern and the 
Western World. Chau Ju-Kua also gives a list of fifteen States 
which were dependent upon San-fo-tsi. These were mostly in 
Malay Peninsula, but a few were situated in Java and Sumatra. 
We may thus hold that at the end of the twelfth century A.D. and 
the beginning of the thirteenth, San-fo-tsi was a rich and powerful 
kingdom. The name of a king of this period Maharaja Srlmat- 
Trailokyanaja-mauli-bhushana-varma-deva is known from an in¬ 
scription, dated A.D. 1183, found at Chaiya in Malay Peninsula. 
The names of the Sailendra kings also ended in varma-deva, but it 
is difficult to say whether Trailokyariija was a remote descendant 
of Chudamani-varma-deva. 


Another king Chandrabhanu is known from an inscription at 
Chaiya, dated A.D. 1230, and the Ceylonese chronicle Chulavamsa. 
We learn from the latter that a king of Javaka, called Chandra¬ 
bhanu, sent two expeditions against Ceylon between A.D. 1236 and 
1256. On the first occasion he devastated the whole island but 


734 


VUHlStffy 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

. :L wati forced to withdraw. On the second occasion Chandrabhanu’s 

army was reinforced by a large number of Pantfya, Chola and other 
Tamil soldiers. After some initial success Chandrabhanu was 
completely defeated and fled with his life leaving his family and 
treasures behind. 

There is no doubt that Javaka is the same as Zabag, the Arab 
name of the Sailendra Empire. It is to be noted that Ceylon is 
included among the vassal states of San-fo-tsi by Chau Ju-Kua, and 
however incredible it might appear at first, the above account of 
the Ceylonese chronicles offers a satisfactory explanation. It may 
be presumed that Chandrabhanu’s success, grudgingly admitted by 
the Ceylonese chroniclers, was more substantial at least for some 
time, though it ended in a disaster. In any case, the strange 
episode preserved in the Ceylonese chronicles testifies both to the 
substantial accuracy of Chau Ju-Kua’s account and of the great 
power of the Sailendra Empire in the first part of the thirteenth 
century A.D. 

But the foolish enterprise of Chandrabhanu must have cost the 
empire dear. In an inscription, dated A.D. 1264, Ja(avarman Vira 
Pandya 8 claims to have defeated and killed the Savaka king, and 
in another, dated the following year, he includes the king of Kada- 
ram among the host of rulers conquered by him. There is hardly 
any doubt that the Savaka, or the Javaka, king and the king of Ka?la- 
ram refer to one and the same ruler, and he is most probably 
Chandrabhanu himself or his successor. It is also very likely that 
the enmity between Chandrabhanu and the Pandya ruler was not 
unconnected with the ill-fated expeditions to Ceylon. The defeat 
and death of Chandrabhanu also most probably took place in India, 
after his disastrous retreat from Ceylon, for had Jafavarman sent 
a naval expedition against Malay Peninsula there would have been 
more explicit references to it. 

It appears from the Chaiya Inscription that Chandrabhanu was 
originally the ruler of a vassal state of San-fo-tsi and seized 
supreme power by a successful rebellion. Similar defection of an¬ 
other vassal state about the same time is noticed by Chau Ju-Kua. 
The^ disruption thus begun was hastened by the catastrophic end 
of Chandrabhanu, and full advantage was taken of it by the two 
rising powers—the Thai state in Siam and the kingdom of Malayu, 
backed by Java. Hemmed in between these two powerful 
neighbours in the north and the south, San-fo-tsi lost its position 
of supremacy and sank into a local power. It continued this in¬ 
glorious existence till its conquest by Java some time before A.D. 
1377. From the beginning of the fifteenth century A.D. San-fo-tsi 




786 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


passes from our view. But the Annals of Keddah, ancient Kada- 
ram or Kataha, the homeland of the Sailendra Emperors, have pre¬ 
served the traditional account of seven Hindu rulers of the State, 
the last of whom adopted Islam in A.D. 1474. Such was the ignoble 
end of the great maritime empire which was established by the 
Hindus in the eastern sea and ruled in glory for more than five 
hundred years. 

2. DECLINE AND FALL OF THE KAMBUJA EMPIRE 

The death of Jaya-varman V in A.D. 1001 was followed by 
civil war among several rival candidates to the throne till Surya- 
varman I finally triumphed over his rivals about A.D. 1010. In 
order to prevent a similar situation in future the king made his 
district officers, numbering more than four thousand, to take an 
oath, in the presence of the sacred fire, the Brahmanas and the 
acharyas, offering unswerving and lifelong homage and allegiance 
to the king and dedicating their lives to his service. 

The king probably adopted Buddhism, for his inscription con¬ 
tains invocation to Buddha as well as to Siva, and he had the posthu¬ 
mous name Nirvanapada. He is also described as a great scholar, 
versed in Bhashya, Kavya, six Darsanas (systems of philosophy)' 
and Dharmaiastras. 

The precautions adopted by this scholarly king against civil 
war and revolution proved illusory. Troubles broke out im¬ 
mediately after his death in A.D. 1049. He was succeeded by 
Udayaditya-varman who “was crowned emperor by his ministers”. 
In other words there was no legitimate or peaceful succession, but 
an influential party in court placed its nominee on the throne. 
Revolutions broke out almost throughout his reign, and there was 
a disastrous invasion by the king of Champa. In the midst of all this 
tragedy the king died in A.D. 1066, and the royal guru (preceptor), 
along with the ministers, placed his younger brother Harsha- 
varman on the throne. 

Harsha-varman’s reign is chiefly noted for his two unfortunate 
foreign expeditions. On an invitation of the Chinese Emperor he 
sent an army in A.D. 1076 to help the Chinese military expedition 
against the Annamite kingdom in Tonkin. But it had to retreat 
after the defeat of the Chinese. Some time before A.D. 1080 he 
sent an army to invade Champa, but it was defeated and its com¬ 
mander fell into the hands of the enemy. 

These disasters probably worsened the internal political situa¬ 
tion in Kambuja, and we find a rival king Jaya-varman VI ruling 


736 





in the north and north-east in A.D. 1082. This political division 
continued till Surya-varman II, the second successor of Jaya- 
varman VI, again brought the whole kingdom under his authority. 


Surya-varman ascended the throne in A.D. 1113. The Kam- 
buja inscriptions refer to his great victories in general terms and 
add that he marched into the countries of the enemies. Although 
very vague, the claim was not without foundation, for details of 
his several expeditions to Annam and Champa have been preserved 
in the records of those countries. 

Surya-varman’s efforts to conquer the kingdom of Annam, 
to the north of Champa, however, proved disastrous. We learn 
from the Annamese Annals that between A.D. 1128 and 1150 he 
sent no less than four armies with auxiliary fleet, which also 
received help from the Cham army. But they had all to retreat 
with serious loss. At last when Champa made a separate peace 
with Annam, Surya-varman decided to punish her and, to make 
amends for his failure in Annam, invaded Champa. His early 
expeditions were successful, and the northern part of Champa was 
made a vassal state of Kambuja, known as the kingdom of Vijaya. 
But his attempt to reduce the southern part of Champa proved a 
costly failure. He sent two expeditions, in A.D. 1147 and 1148, but 
both were defeated by king Jaya Hari-varman of Champa. Then 
the latter took the offensive and defeated the Kambuja forces. The 
Kambuja ruler of Vijaya, a brother-in-law of king Surya-varman 
II, as well as a number of Kambuja generals fell in the battle. 

But in spite of these reverses Surya-varman must be regarded 
as a powerful king ruling over a vast empire. He resumed diplo¬ 
matic relations with China which were interrupted since the eighth 
century A.D., and sent two embassies in A.D. 1117 and 1121. The 
Chinese Emperor conferred high titles on the king of Kambuja 
whose dominions are said to have extended from Champa to Lower 
Burma and included the northern part of Malay Peninsula up to 
the Bay of Bandon. He is also said to have maintained 200,000 
war elephants. The Chinese account thus shows that in spite of 
internal troubles the Kambuja empire had been growing in power 
and extent since the eleventh century A.D. 

The great glory of the empire stands today before the world 
in the shape of its monuments. Surya-varman II has earned un- 
djing fame by constructing the famous temple known as Angkor 
Vat, which is justly regarded as one of the wonders of the world, 
we know a great deal of the religious life of the king. He was ini¬ 
tiated into the mysteries of Vrah Guhya (the Great Secret), prob¬ 
ably a Tantrik cult, by his guru Divakara Partita and performed 

737 


s. E.—47 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


various sacrifices including Koti-homa, Laksha-homa and the Maha- 
homa. 

The last known date of Surya-varman is A.D. 1145. The his- 
tory of Kambuja during the next 35 years is very obscure. There 
were revolutions at home and disasters abroad. Several expeditions 
were sent against Champa, but in spite of initial successes they 
ended in costly failures. Then the king of Champa, Jaya Indra- 
varman VII, took the aggressive and invaded Kambuja with a big 
army. For seven years the war went on without any decisive 
result. At last the Cham king equipped a fleet and sent a naval 
expedition in A.D. 1177. He seized the capital city, plundered it, 
and then retired, carrying an immense booty with him. The king 
of Kambuja, Tribhuvanaditya-varman, was killed in course of this 
conflict or shortly after, and was succeeded by Jaya-varman VII in 
A.D. 1181. 

Jaya-varman VII was the last great ruler of Kambuja, and 
fortunately we know a great deal of his military campaigns, religi¬ 
ous foundations and works of public utility. 

The most notable event of his reign was the long-drawn war 
with Champa. In A.D. 1190 Jaya Indra-varman VIII, king of 
Champa, invaded Kambuja. The Kambuja king sent against him 
a strong army under Sri Surya-varma-deva, a refugee from Champa 
living in his court. The Kambuja general obtained a complete 
victory and even captured the king of Champa. Champa now lay 
prostrate before the victor. Jaya-varman VII divided the kingdom 
into two parts. He appointed his own brother-in-law, Surya Jaya- 
varma-deva, ruler of the northern part with Vijaya as its capital, 
while the victorious general Surya-varma-deva was placed in 
charge of the southern part with his capital at Rajapura. 

But soon a successful revolution in the north placed a local 
chief Rasupati on the throne of Vijaya. Jaya-varman VII sent an 
expedition against Vijaya, and desiring probably to conciliate the 
Chams by making the captive king of Champa ruler of Vijaya, sent 
him along with the expedition. The Kambuja troops were joined 
by Surya-varma-deva, and under his leadership won a complete 
victory. Rasupati was defeated and killed and Vijaya was captured. 
But Surya-varma-deva now ascended the throne of Vijaya and unit¬ 
ed the whole of Champa undei* him. The disappointed Cham king 
Jaya Indra-varman VIII advanced against Surya-varma-deva but 
was defeated and killed. 

In A.D. 1193 and 1194 Jaya-varman VII sent two expeditions 
against Surya-varma-deva who had so flagrantly flouted his autho- 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

rit yi but the latter gained an easy victory. For nearly ten years he 
was left in peace. But a third expedition was sent under Dhana- 
patigrama, an uncle of Surya-varma-deva, who also was a refugee 
in Kambuja court. Dhanapatigrama defeated his nephew and be¬ 
came the ruler of Champa in A.D. 1203. 

But the new ruler had a hard time before him. Revolutions 
broke out in various parts of the country, and as soon as these 
were put down war broke out with the Annamites in A.D. 1207. A 
series of battles followed during the next eleven years or more in 
which victory more often inclined to the Annamites. 

The almost continuous series of wars in Champa since A.D. 1190 
must have proved a great burden to Kambuja and at last, in A.D. 
1220, the Kambujas evacuated the country. Most probably Jaya- 
varman VII was not alive at this time and the defeat and disgrace 
of Kambuja, both in Annam and Champa, followed a few years after 
his death. But in any case he is entitled to the credit of conquering 
Champa and making it a vassal state, thereby extending the frontier 
of the Kambuja empire to the China Sea on the east. 

On the west also Jaya-varman VII seems to have attained 
conspicuous success. For according to the Chinese chronicles Pagan 
was annexed to Kambuja towards the close of the twelfth century 
A.D. Pagan was at that time the seat of a powerful kingdom in¬ 
cluding nearly the whole of Burma. It is not likely that the whole 
of it was conquered by Jaya-varman VII, and he probably annexed 
only the southern part of it, adjacent to Siam, which was then sub¬ 
ject to Kambuja. Jaya-varman VII thus ruled over a vast empire 
which touched the Bay of Bengal on one side and the Sea of China 
on the other, and included the central regions of Indo-China and 
the northern part of Malay Peninsula. 

The religious foundations and works of public utility undertaken 
by Jaya-varman VII were on a scale befitting the mighty empire 
over which he ruled. The account of royal donations contained in 
the Ta Prohm Inscription makes interesting reading and reveals the 
magnitude of the resources and depth of religious sentiments of the 
king. It concerns the Rajavihara, i.e., the temple of Ta Prohm and 
adjuncts where the king set up an image of his mother as Prajna- 
paramita. It is not possible here to record all the details but a few 
facts may be noted. Altogether 66,625 persons were employed 
m the service of the deities of the temple and 3,400 villages were 
given for defraying its expenses. There were 439 Professors and 
9i0 scholars studying under them, making a total of 1409, whose 
food and other daily necessaries of life were supplied. There were 




739 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

altogether 566 groups of stone houses and 288 groups of brick. 
Needless to say that the other articles, of which a minute list is 
given, were in the same proportion, and they included huge quanti¬ 
ties of gold and silver, 35 diamonds, 40,620 pearls and 4,540 other 
precious stones. All these relate to a single group of temples. 
The inscription informs us that there were 798 temples and 102 
hospitals in the whole kingdom, and these were given every year 
117,200 Widrikds of rice, each khdrikd being equivalent to 3 maunds 
8 seers. In conclusion the king expresses the hope that by his pious 
donations, his mother might be delivered from the ocean of births. 

Of the 102 hospitals mentioned above, the site of 15 can be 
determined by means of inscriptions which record their founda¬ 
tions. These inscriptions are almost identical and lay down detailed 
regulations about the hospitals. They give us a very good idea of 
the system of medical treatment organised by the state, but require 
separate treatment and cannot be discussed here. 

An inscription in the temple at Pra-khan also supplies similar 
details. It refers to the establishmeht of 121 vahni-grihas for the 
convenience of pilgrims and other travellers. These were evidently 
of the nature of dharmasdlds in India. Reference is made to the 
images of deities, 20,400 in number, made of gold, silver, bronze, 
and stone; the royal endowments for their upkeep including 8,176 
villages and 208,532 slaves; and 514 separate temples and 2,066 minor 
or accessory constructions. It is said that the water for ablution in 
the annual festival of the temple was carried by Suryabhatta and 
the other Brahmaa^as, as well as by the kings of Java and Annanv 
and the two rulers of Champa. 

A very interesting reference is made to the queen of Jaya- 
varman in one of his inscriptions. When the king first went to 
Champa she showed her conjugal fidelity by performing hard auste¬ 
rities of diverse types and of long duration. She was then initiated 
to Buddhism by her elder sister. It is said that the queen performed 
a ceremony by which she could see before her the image of her ab¬ 
sent husband. After her death the king married her elder sister and 
asked her to teach the Buddhist doctrine in various convents. 

The reign of Jaya-varman VII marks the end of the most glori¬ 
ous period in the history of Kambuja which may be said to have 
comprised the eleventh and twelfth centuries A.D. It was during 
this period that the Kambuja empire reached its widest extent and 
produced the most notable monuments which still extort the admi¬ 
ration of the whole world. These will be discussed elsewhere in 
this chapter. It will suffice here to state that Jaya-varman VII made 
no small contribution in this direction, if, as is now generally held. 




he really built the famous capital city of Angkor Thom whose ruins 
cannot fail to evoke, even today, a mixed feeling of awe and 
reverence in the minds of the visitors. 


As noted above, the date of the death of Jaya-varman VII can¬ 
not be fixed with certainty. He was succeeded by Indra-varman II 
who died in A.D. 1243. The next king known to us is Jaya-varman 
VIII who abdicated the throne in A.D. 1295-96 in favour of his son- 
in-law Srindra-varman. The son of Jaya-varman VIII made an at¬ 
tempt to seize the throne, but was defeated by Srlndra-varman who 
mutilated and imprisoned him and ascended the throne in A.D. 
1296. This king also abdicated in A.D. 1308 and was succeeded by 
Srindra-Jaya-varman the same year. Another king Jayavarma- 
Paramesvara ascended the throne in A.D. 1327. He is the last king 
referred to in the Kambuja inscriptions. The subsequent history 
of Kambuja is only known from Khmer chronicles of a late date 
which cannot be regarded as trustworthy sources. 

The history of Kambuja during the thirteenth century is thus 
veiled in obscurity. The withdrawal from Champa and defeats in 
Annam undoubtedly indicate the loss of power and authority, while 
frequent abdications, struggle for succession, and paucity of infor¬ 
mation suggest a troublesome period. The occupation of Siam by 
the Thais, to which reference will be made later, also tells the same 
tale. As a matter of fact the growing power of the Thais on the 
west and the Annamites on the east ultimately spelt ruin to Kambuja. 
But, nevertheless, Kambuja remained a powerful kingdom down 
to the end of the thirteenth century A.D. When Kublai Khan, the 
great Mongol Emperor, conquered Champa and sent envoys demand¬ 
ing allegiance of Kambuja, she had the courage to resist. Next an 
ambassador was sent to Kambuja in A.D. 1296, evidently with the 
same purpose. Cheu Ta-Kuan, who accompanied the ambassador, 
and wrote a very interesting memoir on Kambuja, says that the 
embassy achieved its object. But this may be doubted, for a Chinese 
historian, writing in A.D. 1520, positively asserts that neither Java 
nor Kambuja paid homage to the Imperial court even once during the 
Mongol period. Cheu Ta-Kuan’s description of the capital city and 
of the wealth and splendour of the king and the nobles leaves the 
impression that Kambuja was still a powerful kingdom with a well- 
organised administrative system. But the palace intrigues and 
conspiracies which were particularly rife in his time exercised a 
baneful influence on the government. All this will be evident from 
Cheu Ta-Kuan s graphic account of the king (SrTndra-varman) which 
may be summed up as follows: 


741 



MINIS r/^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<§L 


I have heard it said that formerly the kings seldom went out 
of their palace; for they were afraid of assassins. The new king is 
the son-in-law of his predecessor, who was very fond of his daughter. 
She stole the golden sword (insignia of sovereignty) and carried it 
to her husband. Her brother revolted but was defeated by the new 
king who cut off his toes and kept him confined in a dark dungeon. 
The new king always covers his body with a coat of mail which 
neither knife nor arrow could pierce. Thus clad he dares go out of 
his palace. During my stay for more than a year I have seen him 
come out only on four or five occasions. When he goes out the pro¬ 
cession is led by a body of horsemen, followed by flags and music. 
Then come a troop of palace-girls, 300 to 500 in number, clad in 
embroidered clothes and with flowers in their hair. They carry big 
torches (or candles) which are lighted even in day time. These are 
followed by two other troops of girls, one carrying precious vessels 
and ornaments of gold and silver, and the other, the body-guards of 
the king, carrying lance and shield. Then follow carriages, deco¬ 
rated with gold, drawn by goats and horses, princes, mounted on 
elephants, queens and royal concubines in palanquins and carriages 
or on elephants. Lastly comes the king on elephant, holding the 
precious sword by his right hand' and surrounded by a large number 
of men on elephants and horses to protect him. The elephants have 
golden trappings, and hundreds of white and red parasols, decorated 
with gold, and some of them, with staff of gold, add to the beauty 
of the procession.” 


Cheu Ta-Kuan mentions that in the recent wars with the Sia¬ 
mese the region round Angkor was utterly devastated. As we shall 
see later, this refers to the growing power of the Thais, who had 
conquered Siam and, under their great king Ram Kamheng, carried 
their victorious arms to Lower Burma on the west and to the heart 
of Kambuja on the east, toward the close of the thirteenth century 
A.D. The Annamites also gradually conquered nearly the whole of 
the kingdom of Champa by the fifteenth century. Being hard pressed 
by these two pitiless aggressive neighbours Kambuja was gradually 
shorn of power and prestige and sank into a petty state. At last 
the king of Kambuja threw himself under the protection of the 
French in A.D. 1854 and the once mighty kingdom became a petty 
French Protectorate. 


3. FALL OF CHAMPA 

For nearly half a century Champa enjoyed the respite from 
Annamite invasions brought about by the conciliatory policy of 
Hari-varman II. 9 Regular embassies were sent to China, and though 


742 


mtST/fy 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 





in A.D. 1021 the Annamites made a sudden raid on the camp of 
Bo Chanh which protected the northern frontier of Champa, the 
relation between the two countries was on the whole a cordial one. 
But there could be no doubt that the Annamite court was a source 
of potential danger to Champa. When civil war broke out in Champa 
during the reign of Vikranta-varman IV, at first his son, and then 
the entire garrison of Bo Chanh sought refuge with the Annamite 
Emperor (A.D. 1038-39). But the final rupture was brought about 
by the insolent aggression of Jaya Simha-varman II who ascended 
the throne in A.D. 1041. In A.D. 1043 he harassed the Annamite 
coast with his navy but was forced to retreat. Phat Ma, the Anna¬ 
mite Emperor, now sent a joint expedition by land and sea which 
completely routed the Cham army. The king lay dead on the battle¬ 
field with 30,000 soldiers and the capital city was ravaged by the 
victorious army. The Annamite Emperor returned with a huge 
booty and a large number of prisoners, including all the women of 
the palace. It is said that one of these, when summoned to the royal 
vessel, threw herself into the sea, preferring death to dishonour, and 
the Emperor, admiring her fidelity, gave her a posthumous title 
meaning “very chaste and very sweet lady”. 

With Jaya Simha-varman II ended the dynasty which came into 
power in A.D. 989 after the Annamite usurpation. It was not till 
A.D. 1050, six years later, that we find a new king Jaya Parames- 
vara-varma-deva Isvaramurti, who was descended from the old royal 
family of Champa. The new king was faced with a heavy task. The 
repeated incursions of the Annamites had exhausted the resources 
of the kingdom and weakened the central authority. Taking ad¬ 
vantage of it the provinces, particularly Panduranga in the south, 
repeatedly rebelled, and the Kambuja rulers also invaded the king¬ 
dom at least twice, during the last half of the tenth century A.D. 

The new king sent a powerful army against Panduranga and 
completely subdued it. It is said that “all the people of Panduranga 
were seized, together with oxen, buffaloes, slaves and elephants,” 
and though half were later released in order to re-establish the city, 
the other half were distributed as slaves to various religidus 
establishments. 

The king next turned his attention to Kambuja which was then 
being distracted by civil wars. 10 He sent an army under Yuvaraja 
Mahasenapati, who had distinguished himself in the campaign against 
Panduranga. The Yuvaraja inflicted a crushing defeat upon the 
enemy and took the town of Sambhupura. He destroyed a large 
number of temples there and distributed the Khmer captives among 
the temples of Champa. 


743 


MINfSr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


Jaya Paramesvara-varma-deva also considerably repaired the 
damages done to religious institutions during the preceding period. 
He re-installed the image of the famous goddess of Po Nagara, and a 
large number of temples and viharas were restored or newly built 
and suitably endowed. He maintained friendly relations with both 
Annam and China and sent regular embassies to these courts. 

The reign of Jaya Paramesvara-varma-deva was thus a very 
successful one and largely healed the wounds from which Champa 
was suffering. Great credit is due to the king who found the king¬ 
dom suffering from total disintegration and left it a happy, peaceful, 
united, and powerful state. He died in or shortly after A.D. 1059. 

Unfortunately the peace and prosperity of the kingdom tempted 
.Rudra-varman, the new king of Champa, to throw off the yoke of 
the Annamites. In A.D. 1062 he sent an ambassador to China asking 
for help against the Annamites, but without any success. Neverthe¬ 
less he openly commenced hostilities in A.D. 1068. The result was 
disastrousy The Cham army fought bravely, but was routed, the 
king himself was made a prisoner, and the Annamite Emperor cele¬ 
brated his triumph in the capital city Vijaya. After burning this 
city and its suburbs, he returned to Tonkin with the royal captive 
and 50,000 prisoners of war (A.D. 1069). 

Rudra-varman obtained his release by ceding three northern 
districts of his kingdom which included the whole of Quang Binh 
and the northern part of Quang Trl. It was a great blow to the 
power and prestige of Champa, and paved the way for the final con¬ 
quest of this kingdom by Annam. 

On his return to Champa Rudra-varman found that several per¬ 
sons had proclaimed themselves kings in different parts of the coun¬ 
try. This state of chaos and confusion continued for nearly ten 
years, after which Hari-varman, v one of the rival claimants, estab¬ 
lished his authority over the greater part of the kingdom. 

Hari-varman IV was now faced with the task which had con¬ 
fronted Jaya-Paramesvara-varman twenty years before, and acquitted 
himself with almost equal credit. He successfully resisted the Anna¬ 
mite invasion of A.D. 1075. He defeated the Kambuja troops 11 at 
Somesvara and captured the prince Sri Nandana-varma-deva who 
commanded the army. He re-united the whole kingdom, with the 
probable exception of Panduranga in the south. He then restored 
the*£&$nples, as well as religious institutions and endowments, and 
also re-artablished th£ edifices and the city of Champa which had 
suffered so' much in the hands of the Annamites. He probably as- 
sfem^p^he title Utkrishta-raja (good king) at the time of his coro¬ 
nation^ and there is probably a great deal* of truth in the official 


744 




COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


pg&dgyrie that 'the king of Champa became prosperous as of old’. 
In A.D. 1081 he abdicated the throne, at the age of 41, and took to 
religious life. But he died within a month and was followed on the 
funeral pyre by 14 of his wives. 


The young son of the king, a boy of 9, ascended the throne 
under the name of Jaya Indra-varman V, but the distracted kingdom 
required a strong man at the helm of affairs. So, we are told, the 
boy king with all the generals, Brahma^as, Kshatriyas, Pandits, as¬ 
trologers, learned men, masters of ceremonies, and the wives of the 
late king Hari-varman IV, approached his younger brother, Yuva- 
raja Mahasenapati Prince Pan with a request to assume the royalty. 
The Yuvaraja ascended the throne under the title Parama-bodhi- 
sattva and gave a good account of himself. He quelled the disturb¬ 
ances in the kingdom and recovered Pai^lurahga after completely 
defeating the usurper who had been wielding authority there since 
the conquest of Champa by the Annamites in A.D. 1069. The king, 
who thus once more restored the unity of Champa, maintained 
friendly relations with Annam by sending regular tributes. 


On the death of this king in A.D. 1086 his nephew Jaya Indra- 
varman V, who had abdicated in A.D. 1081, again ascended the throne. 
Once more the peace and prosperity of the kingdom tempted the Cham 
king to try his strength with Annam in order to recover the three 
northern districts ceded in A.D. 1069. As usual, he tried to induce 
the Chinese Emperor to make a common cause with him against 
Annam, but failed. Nevertheless, being instigated by a refugee from 
Annam, and misled by his false statements about the internal 
dissensions in that country, Indra-varman invaded Annam in 
A.D. 1103 and conquered the three ceded districts. But he was soon 
defeated and compelled to abandon them. To avoid further troubles 
he immediately sent tribute to Annam and lived in peace. 


For more than thirty years after this Champa enjoyed peace 
and prosperity. But troubles broke out again in the reign of Jaya 
Indra-varman VI who ascended the throne in A.D. 1139. As noted 
above, fcurya-varman II, the contemporary king of Kambuja, was 
involved in a long-drawn war with the Annamites and could easily 
enlist the sympathy and support of Champa. But when the joint 
expeditions repeatedly proved a failure, the king of Champa (the 
predecessor of Jaya Indra-varman VI) withdrew from the alliance 
with Kambuja and resumed payment of tribute to Annam. Surya- 
varman therefore decided to punish the faithless ally and invaded 
Champa in A.D. 1145. He gained a great victory and made himself 
master of Vijaya. Jaya Indra-varman VI was either killed or made 
a prisoner. In any case he passes from our view. But a new king 


745 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


ie in Pan^uraiiga in the south, and on his death in A.D. 1147 his 
son and successor Jaya Hari-varman VI continued the struggle 
against Kambuja. The Kambuja general Sankara, aided by the 
troops of Vijaya, advanced against him, but was signally defeated 
in A.D. 1147. Next year “the king of Kambuja sent an army thou¬ 
sand times stronger than the previous one”, but Hari-varman again 
completely defeated them. 


Hari-varman now felt powerful enough to take the offensive 
and advanced towards the north to reconquer Vijaya. The Kam¬ 
buja king hastily consecrated Harideva, the brother of his first queen, 
as king of Vijaya and “commanded various generals” to protect him. 
In the battle that followed “Jaya Hari-varman destroyed Harideva 
with all his Cham and Kambuja generals.” Then the victorious 
king was duly consecrated and ascended the throne in A.D. 1149 with 
due pomp and ceremony. 

But the troubles of Hari-varman were not yet over. The bar¬ 
barous mountain tribes of Champa, collectively known by the 
general designation of ‘Kiratas’, invaded the kingdom, probably at 
the instigation of the Kambuja king. Although the Kiratas were 
defeated in a pitched battle, Vahsaraja, brother of Hari-varman’s 
queen, joined them and was proclaimed king. Although Vahsaraja 
was defeated along with his Kirata allies, he sought protection in 
the Annamese court. The Annamese Emperor declared him king of 
Champa and sent him back with a large army which was, however, 
completely defeated by Hari-varman in A.D. 1150. Then civil war 
broke out, first at Amaravatl (A.D. 1151) and then at Panduranga 
(A.D. 1155), but was successfully put down. Having thus complete¬ 
ly triumphed over both internal and external enemies the great and 
heroic king lived in peace, devoting his attention to the restoration 
of temples and the repair of damages. 

Hari-varman was far-sighted enough not to assume a haughty 
attitude towards Annam in spite of his victory. He maintained 
friendly relations by sending tribute and rich presents. He also 
demanded, and received, from the Chinese emperor the same dignity 
which his predecessors enjoyed. 

It is fortunate that no less than seven inscriptions of this great 
king have been preserved which enable us to follow in minute de¬ 
tails his truly remarkable career. A hero of hundred fights, he 
showed remarkable ability alike in war and peace. He saved the 
kingdom when it was threatened with ruin, and once more set it 
on the way to peace and prosperity. 

Hari-varman died shortly after A.D. 1162 and the kingdom was 
soon occupied by an usurper named Jaya Indra-varman VII. He 


746 





MINISr^ 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

paid regular tributes to Annam and sent an ambassador to China 
asking for investiture from the Emperor. The presents which the 
ambassador offered were all plundered from Arab merchants. As 
soon as the Emperor came to know this, from the complaints of the 
merchants themselves, he refused to accept the presents or to invest 
the king. This is an interesting incident illustrating the inter¬ 
national etiquette of those days. 

The most notable event in the reign of this king was his long- 
drawn war with Kambuja ending in the capture of its capital city 
by means of a naval expedition in A.D* 1177 which has already been 
described above. 12 The king also made rich donations to various 
temples, and it seemed as if the old power and prosperity of Champa 
were revived. An interesting record of this reign contains the text 
of an oath of allegiance taken by three dignitaries of the realm to 
the effect that they and their children will fight for the king in case 
of war as long as they live. There was a similar institution in 
Kambuja where a class of chiefs, called Sanjak, were bound by oath 
of allegiance to defend the person of the king or prince. We have 
actual records that the life of a prince was saved on two 
different occasions by the deliberate self-sacrifice of four Sanjaks. 
The king not only bestowed wealth, favours and honours on their 
families, but also installed their statues in a shrine. When the 
prince died his statue was also placed in the same shrine by the side 
of those of his four faithful Sanjaks. 

The aggressive policy of Jaya Indra-varman VII was followed by 
the next king known to us, viz. Jaya Indra-varman VIII. But the 
ruler of Kambuja with whom he had to fight was made of different 
stuff. I he Cham king was not only defeated but taken captive to 
Kambuja (A.D. 1190) and his own fate and that of his kingdom have 
been described above. 13 

When the forces of Kambuja withdrew from Champa in 
A.D. 1220 after an occupation of thirty years, a grandson of the 
famous king Jaya Hari-varman VI ascended the throne under the 
title Jaya Paramesvara-varman IV. The whereabouts of this king 
and his father, whom his records refer to as king Hari-varman, 
during the reign of the two usurpers Jaya Indra-varman VII and 
VIII are unknown to us. But he probably concluded a peace with 
Kambuja where he had lived as an exile for some time, and was 
formally consecrated to the throne in A.D. 1226. He ruled in peace 
and was succeeded by his brother Jaya Indra-varman X, who was 
murdered by his sister’s son in A.D. 1257, The regicide then ascend¬ 
ed the throne and was formally consecrated in A.D. 1266 under the 
name Indra-varman XI. 




747 





His reign is chiefly memorable for the Mongol invasion. When 
the great Kublai Khan invited the king of Champa (and other rulers 
of Asia) to come and pay homage, the latter offered submission. 
Kublai thereupon treated Champa as part of his empire and appoint¬ 
ed two viceroys to administer it. Although the king submitted, even 
to this humiliation, his proud son Harijit refused to yield. He 
organised the people and the viceroys left the country. The Cham 
king gave further provocation to the Khan by arresting and im¬ 
prisoning his ambassadors to Siam and Malabar. Kublai now sent 
a powerful expedition under Sagatu, and as Annam refused passage, 
the troops were carried in 1,000 vessels. They landed unopposed, 
and a pitched battle took place in January 1283. The Chams fought 
obstinately for six hours and then retreated. Sagatu conquered a 
large part of the country, but Indra-varman retired with his army 
to fastnesses of mountains and refused to yield. It was also report¬ 
ed to the Mongol camp that he had sent embassies to Annam, Kam- 
buja and Java asking for military aid. Sagatu attacked the en¬ 
trenched position of the king on the mountains and inflicted great 
losses on the enemy, but Indra-varman eluded his grasp. In 
A.D. 1284 Kublai sent further reinforcements, but things continued 
as before. Kublai thereupon decided to send a strong army by land, 
and as the Annamese Emperor again refused homage to the Khan 
and passage through his territory, he declared war against Annam. 
The Mongol troops advanced from China in the north and Champa 
in the south, but were decisively defeated by the Annamite Emperor. 

Champa was thus saved from further troubles and Indra-varman 
placated the great Khan by sending rich presents. The king, who 
heroically sustained this arduous struggle, died shortly afterwards 
and was succeeded by his son, the brave prince Harijit, who ascended 
the throne under the name Jaya Simha-varman IV. 

The new king dispensed with all marks of vassalage of Kublai 
Khan and also stopped the usual payment of tribute to Annam. He 
had married a princess of Java, named Tapasi, and was eager to 
marry a princess of Annam. The court of Annam coldly received 
his proposal, but he was so much infatuated that he even ceded two 
northern provinces of his kingdom as price of this marriage. Thus 
was Champa dismembered a second time in favour of Annam. 14 

Jaya Simha-varman IV died in A.D. 1307, soon after this marri¬ 
age, and was succeeded by his son Mahendra-varman. The cession 
of the two northern provinces rankled in the minds of the people 
and frequent incursions and rebellions followed. Thereupon the 
Annamite Emperor invaded Champa and gained an easy victory. 
Mahendra-varman was made prisoner and his brother was entrusted 


748 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


'SL 


:h the government of Champa as “Feudatory Prince of the Second 
rank” (A.D. 1312). 


The kingdom of Champa had now practically become an Anna- 
mite province. The new ruler made an attempt to throw off the Anna- 
mite yoke, but being defeated took to flight. Thereupon Ch am ps 
was ruled by military chiefs as viceroys of the Annamite Emperor. 
These viceroys, however, soon declared themselves independent and 
carried on a prolonged warfare with Annam, with occasional truce, 
for 150 years more. In A.D. 1470 the Annamite Emperor sent a 
fleet containing 100,000 men and himself marched at the head of 
150,000 soldiers against Champa. He seized the capital city Vijaya 
and annexed all the territory up to cape Varella. The petty chiefs 
that ruled over the small territory that yet remained (viz. the modern 
districts of Khan Hoa and Binh Thuan) were at the absolute mercy 
of the Annamites, but they still bore the proud name of the king 
of Champa and received Chinese investiture as such. One of them 
made a last desperate effort in A.D. 1543 to get rid of the Annamese 
yoke but was defeated and put in an iron cage. The Annamites 
annexed the Cham territory up to the river of Phanrang and the 
seat of the kingdom of Champa was removed to Bal Chanar at 
Phanri. In A.D. 1822 the last phantom king of Champa, unable to 
bear the oppression of the Annamites, took refuge in Kambuja with 
a colony of exiles. Thus ended the long and glorious history of 
the Hindu kingdom of Champa which lost its very name and was 
called Annam after the conquering tribe. 


4. JAVA 

Java was rescued from the great catastrophe, which over¬ 
whelmed it in A.D. 1007, 16 by the exertions of Airlangga, the son- 
in-law of the late king Dharmavamsa. Airlangga, then only six¬ 
teen years old, hid himsq)f>in a monastery with only a few follow¬ 
ers, for three years. In A.D. 101(7 some people, evidently parti¬ 
sans of Dharmavamsa, met him there and hailed him as the legiti¬ 
mate king. He was formally consecrated in A.D. 1019 and prob¬ 
ably established his authority over a small strip of territory 
extending from Surabaya to Pasuruhan. By A.D. 1028 he grew 
sufficiently powerful to make an attempt to recover the lost king¬ 
dom. He had to fight with a number of chiefs who set up as 
independent rulers in different parts of the country, and after al¬ 
most continuous warfare for seven years, succeeded in re-establish¬ 
ing his authority over the whole of Java (A.D. 1035). 

Airlangga next devoted his attention to restoring the material 
prosperity of the country. He improved trade and agriculture and 


749 




one of his inscriptions gives a long list of foreign countries whose 
people used to visit Java for purposes of trade or other reasons. 
They include a large number of localities in India as well as Annam 
and Cambodia. Airlangga was a great patron of literature, and in 
his old age, abdicated the throne and took to religious life 
(A.D. 1042). The details of his life, given in an inscription now 
preserved in the Calcutta Museum, show that he possessed a unique 
personality and had an eventful career. He was probably buried 
at Belahan, and it is generally believed that the fine image of 
Vishriu on Garuda, found at that place, is the actual portrait of 
Airlangga, and the first of a long series of divine images, depicting 
royal portraits, which have been found in Java. 

Before his death Airlangga had divided his kingdom into two 
parts and bestowed them upon his two sons. Of these the western 
kingdom with its capital at Kadiri rose into greater importance and 
ultimately absorbed the other. We know the names of a large 
number of kings who ruled at Kadiri during the twelfth century 
A.D. Among them Jayavarsha, Kamesvara (I or II) and Jaya- 
bhaya have been immortalised by the great poets who flourished 
in their courts. Indeed the Kadiri court witnessed the most 
flourishing period of Indo-Javanese literature to which reference 
will be made later. 

It appears from the account of Chau Ju-Kua 16 that the king¬ 
dom of Kadiri (which he refers to as Sho-po or Yava) was very 
powerful and ruled over the whole of Java with the exception of 
Sin-to, i.e. Sunda in W. Java, which was a dependency of San-fo- 
tsi, 17 and Su-ki-tan which cannot be exactly located. Chau Ju-Kua 
gives a list of 15 states, in and outside the island of Java, which 
were all dependencies of Sho-po. Eight of these were situated in 
islands whose inhabitants were mostly barbarous. The two most 
important of the states were the island of Bali and south-western 
part of Borneo, and the rest probably refer to the smaller eastern 
islands of the Archipelago. 

The Kadiri period, which thus laid the foundations of the Java¬ 
nese Empire, also witnessed a high degree of development both in 
art and literature. It may thus be regarded as a prominent land¬ 
mark in the political and cultural history of Java. 

Kritajaya, the last king of Kadiri, met with a tragic end. A 
detailed account of this is given in Pararaton, a historical chro¬ 
nicle of Java, which is not, however, always reliable. It is said 
that the king asked the clergy to make obeisance to him and so 
they left in a body and sought refuge with Angrok, the son of a 
peasant and a highway robber in early life, who had murdered his 


750 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


*8L 


__ ei ’ ^ ie governor of Tumapel, married his widow, and made 

himself ruler of the territory to the east of Mount Kavi. Taking 
advantage of the quarrel between the king and the clergy, Angrok 
openly declared himself king under the title Rajasa. He twice 
defeated Kritajaya in A.D. 1222 and annexed Ka^iri. The new 
kingdom which united nearly the whole of Eastern Java came to 
be known as Singhasari, after the name of its capital. 

The end of the royal dynasty of Katfiri, which traced its descent 
from the old house of Mataram, snapped the bond with old tradi¬ 
tions and Central Java. This is probably the reason why, with the 
foundation of Singhasari, the old Hindu culture and civilisation 
gi a dually faded away and purely Javanese elements came into 
prominence. 

Rajasa, as well as his two sons who succeeded him, were 
assassinated. Then came Vishnu-vardhana, who died a natural 
death in A.D. 1268. He was succeeded by his son Kritanagara whom 
he had already anointed king and associated with his government 
in A.D. 1254. 


Kritanagara was a remarkable king in many respects and had 
an eventful reign. Unfortunately the two texts, Nagara-Kritagama 
and Pa.rara.ton, which form our main sources of information, differ 
radically in their estimate of the king. The latter represents him 
as a foolish and worthless debauchee who spent all his time in eat¬ 
ing and drinking, and left the cares of government in the hands of 
wicked men. The former, which is also the earlier text, on the 
other hand describes him as “well-versed in the sixfold royal policy, 
expert in all branches of knowledge, quite at home in Buddhist 
scriptures and eminently righteous in life and conduct”. The 
truth, as always, seems to lie in the middle. Most probably the 
king was an ardent follower of Tantrayana form of Buddhism to 
whom drinking wine and some other obnoxious practices were 
parts of religious rites and ceremonies. 


As to his political capacity, Kritanagara undoubtedly was a 
powerful king who established his position securely at home and 
sent expeditions to foreign countries. He re-established the supre¬ 
macy of Java over Bali, whose king was brought prisoner to Java 
in A.D. 1284. There is no reason to doubt the statement in Nagara- 
Kritagama that his authority was established over Pahang (Malay 
Peninsula), Malayu (Central Sumatra), Gurun (Gorang), Bakula- 
pura (S. W. Borneo), Sunda (W. Java) and Madhura (Madura 
island). Marco Polo (A.D. 1292) also describes Java as a prosper¬ 
ous kingdom, under a great king. It was very rich and noted for 
its trade and commerce. 


751 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

The first expedition against Malayu, which was sent in 
A.D, 1275, established the authority of Java in the very heart of 
Sumatra. An inscription, dated A.D. 1286, found at Padang Roco 
in the Batanghari District (Sumatra), clearly proves that the king¬ 
dom of Malayu which extended far into the interior of Sumatra y 
formed a vassal state of Java. As subsequent events proved, it was 
from this military stronghold in Sumatra that Java ultimately ex¬ 
tended her authority over the whole of that island. As such it may 
be regarded as a great achievement of Kritanagara. 

The Pararaton , however, attributes the downfall of the king 
to this unwise military expedition. For while Java was thereby 
denuded of troops, Jayakatvang, the governor of Ka^iri, revolted 
and marched against the capital city. The king sent his main army 
under his two sons-in-law against the rebel army coming by the 
northern route, which was defeated and driven back. But a more 
powerful rebel army coming stealthily by the southern route 
suddenly reached the capital and stormed the palace. The king 
and his minister, who were found drinking wine, were both killed 
on the spot, and Jayakatvang established (or re-established) the 
supremacy of Ka<Jiri over Java. 

Whatever we might think of the details in the above account 
of Pararaton , the main facts seem to be correct. The king, 
passionately devoted to Tantrik Buddhism, evidently neglected 
administration, for we hear of at least two other revolutions before 
the final coup de grace given by the governor of Ka<Jiri. 

The success of Jayakatvang of Ka^iri was, however, shortlived. 
Vijaya, one of the two sons-in-law of Kritanagara who led the 
royal army against the rebels in the north, founded a small princi¬ 
pality at Majapahit and entered into a conspiracy with the governor 
of the island of Madura. But the end of Jayakatvang was really 
brought about by a series of strange events. 

In A.D. 1281 the great Mongol Emperor Kublai Khan had in¬ 
vited the king of Java to come in person to the Imperial court to 
pay homage to him. 18 Kritanagara refused, and at last, irritated by 
repeated orders, sent back the Chinese ambassador after mutilat¬ 
ing his face. Kublai thereupon sent a big military expedition to 
Java in A.D. 1292. Vijaya, in order to utilise the expedition to his 
favour, offered submission and joined the Mongols against Jayakat¬ 
vang who made preparations to defend his country. Jayakatvang’s 
army was, however, defeated; his capital city was stormed, and he 
himself was made a prisoner and later killed (A.D. 1293). 

Vijaya, freed from Jayakatvang, now left the Chinese camp on 
some pretext, collected a large force and attacked the Chinese army 




752 


MINlSr^ 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


<SL 


on its way back from Kajiri. Vijaya was forced to fall back, but 
thPir C ? t eSe ge " erals could not c0me t0 an y agreed decision about 

SaSr y g0t the troops m the ships and ret ™ d 

to a 7inV he /r? h ° f dayakatvang ’ the kingdom of Kadiri came 
to an end and Vijaya became undisputed master of Java with 

ajapahit as its capital. By a strange irony of fate the Mongol 
expedition, which came with the avowed object of punishing Krita- 
nagara, really avenged his foul murder upon his enemy and heiped 

e re-es a ishment of his family. No less strange is the fact that 
Vijaya, who betrayed the Imperial army, succeeded in establishing 

Emperor and smt 

in aV) 6 ioof d0m -j f Maja P ahit > wh ich was brought into existence 
in A.D. 1293 amid strange circumstance, ere long became the 

nucleus of a mighty Hindu empire which continued its existence till 
the sixteenth century A.D. 

5. BALI 

. T, ; e * sla . nd of BaIi enjoys the unique distinction of being the only 
anaent Hindu colony in the East which still follows the Brahmani- 
td religion. Bali imbibed Hindu culture and civilisation from quite 
an early period as has been noted above. ie It was intimately connect, 
ed with Java and very often politically subordinate to it ,20 bu t there 
is no doubt that originally it derived its culture directly from India 
and was in no way a mere product of the Indo-Javanese colony or 
civilisation, as is supposed by many. This is best proved by a large 
number of inscriptions on stones and copper-plates, and other anti¬ 
quities going back to the eighth century A.D. Both the language 
and subject-matter of these records leave no doubt that the civilisa¬ 
tion flourishing in Bali had a distinctive character of its own and 
was not merely an offshoot of Indo-Javanese culture. 

These inscriptions have preserved the names of no less than five 
in u kings and a queen ruling in the tenth century A.D The 

q^ lieS i° f ^ e ff is Ugrasena whose known dates are A.D. 915 and 
, ' Then follow Tabanendra-varma-deva (A.D. 955), Chandra- 

Stfr""*- 1 AD 9621 ■ Janasadhu-varma-deva 
(A.D. 975) and queen Sri-Vijaya-mahadevi (A.D. 983). Another 
inscription, without date but probably belonging to the tenth 
century, mentions Sri Kesari-varman, lord over all neighbouring 
provinces who overcame Gurun and other localities. Neither the 
relation between these kings nor any further particulars of their 
reign are known. 


s, K.- 


753 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


As mentioned above, 21 Bali was conquered by Java towards 
the close of the tenth century A.D. and was ruled by Mahendra- 
datta, alias Gunapriyadharmapatni, along with her husband Uday- 
ana (or Dharmodayana-varma-deva), the parents of the famous king 
Airlangga. 22 The queen died before A.D. 1011, and the latter 
alone ruled till at least A.D. 1025. Next we hear of Marakata- 
pangkaja-Sthanottunggadeva, but whether he was an independent 
king or acknowledged the supremacy of Java, it is difficult to say. 
Airlangga no doubt ultimately asserted his full suzerainty over Bali, 
and the king, mentioned in ten copper-plates with dates ranging 
between A.D. 1049 and 1077, was most probably his younger 
brother. 


Bali probably regained independence in the twelfth century and 
we know the names of several kings such as Sri Suradhipa (A.D. 1115- 
1119), Sri Jayasakti (A.D. 1133, 1150), and Paduka £ri Maharaja Ilaji 
Jaya Pangus. The last named is known from 13 inscriptions (one 
dated in A.D. 1177 and the rest in A.D. 1181) which describe him as 
the suzerain king ruling over a circle of seven states in Bali (Bali- 
dvipa -mandala), but the genuineness of these records is not beyond 
question. Next we hear of two other kings, Sakalendu (A.D. 1201) and 
Bhatara Paramesvara (A.D. 1204). Shortly after this Bali must have 
been conquered by Java. Chau Ju-Kua includes it among the vassal 
states of Java, though he expressly says that Bali and Tanjungpura 
(S. W. Borneo) were the most important among them. Bali be¬ 
came independent again soon after the fall of Ka$iri and we know 
of king Adilahchana ruling in A.D. 1250. But Kritanagara conquer¬ 
ed it again and captured its king. 23 


The tragic end of Kritanagara once more enabled Bali to throw 
off the yoke of Java. The generals of Kublai Khan, while return¬ 
ing from the expedition to Java 24 in A.D. 1293, brought to the 
Emperor a letter in golden characters and rich presents from the 
king of Bali. For nearly half a century Bali remained an inde¬ 
pendent state. But the growing empire of Majapahit tried to re¬ 
establish the supremacy over this island. The king of Bali fought 
hard to maintain his independence, but was totally routed by a 
strong force sent from Java in A.D. 1343. Henceforth Bali formed 
an integral part of the Majapahit Empire for nearly a century and 
half. Then, towards the close of the fifteenth century A.D., the king 
of Majapahit, unable to stem the tide of Islam, took refuge with his 
followers in Bali. His example was followed by many Javanese 
who wanted to retain their old religion and culture. The history 
of Java was thus continued in Bali which retained its political auto¬ 
nomy till the Dutch established their suzerainty over the whole of 


754 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 



land and incorporated it in their empire in A.D. 1911. But 
Bali received a large influx of Javanese element after the fall of 
Majapahit and soon became the last stronghold of Indo-Javanese 
culture and civilisation, a position which it happily maintains even 
today. 


So strong has been the historic association with Java that most 
of the inhabitants of Bali style themselves with pride as “men of 
Majapahit’’, and only a few primitive tribes are called, by way of 
contrast, “indigenous people of Bali.” 


6. BURMA 


Popular tradition or philology derives the word Brahma (the 
original of the anglicised form Burma) from the Sanskrit word 
Brahma. It is, however, more probable that it was the Sanskritized 
form of the tribal name Mramma(uar. Myamma and Bhama). 

The Mrammas form the principal element in the population of 
Burma, which is undoubtedly a mixture of many peoples and tribes. 
They came from their original homeland in Tibet along the valley of 
the Brahmaputra and Chindwin rivers, and it has been suggested that 
the tribal name was derived from the Brahmaputra. In any case, 
it is certain that the Burmans are ethnically connected with a large 
number of tribes, now living on the eastern border of India, such 
as the Nagas, Kukis, Mishmis, Lepchas, Abors and Bhutiyas. It is 
probable therefore that they came into contact with Indian cul¬ 
ture on their way to Burma. If the traditions, narrated above, 25 
are to be believed, they received one or more bands of Indian colo¬ 
nists among them after they had settled in the country. Later, the 
Mrammas came into contact with the Hinduised Pyus, Mons and 
other primitive tribes, and all these coalesced into the modern 
Burmans. 

There is no doubt that even up to the tenth century A.D. the 
Mrammas were rude and unlettered, as compared with the Pyus and 
Mons. How they first came into prominence it is difficult to say. 
The most likely explanation seems to be that when the power of 
the Pyus declined on account of pressure from the Thais in the 
north and Mons in the south, the Mrammas poured in large num¬ 
bers and gradually acquired political ascendancy. 

The Burmese national era starts from A.D. 638 and is general¬ 
ly believed to commemorate the foundation of the Mramma power in 
Pagan. But this is very doubtful. The association of the Mram¬ 
mas with Pagan probably does not go back beyond the ninth century 
A.D., and according to some chronicles the city was founded by 
king Pyanpya in A.D. 849. The Burmese chronicles contain 


755 


misty,. 



legends of a number of kings of Pagan, but it is not till the eleventh 
century A.D. that we can clearly follow the main outline of their his¬ 
tory with the help of contemporary inscriptions. These inscriptions 
enable us to correct the dates given in the chronicles and to restore 
the Indian form of royal names. To take a concrete example, the 
chronicles tell us that Anawratha became king of Pagan in 
A.D. 1010. But we know from the inscriptions that the king’s 
name was Aniruddha and that he ascended the throne in A.D. 1044; 
further, that the classical name of Pagan was Arimardanapura. 

The accession of Aniruddha may be said to have introduced a 
new era in the history of the Mrammas. Although the prevailing 
religion was a debased form of Tantrik Buddhism the king was 
converted to the pure Theravada by a Brahmana monk of Thaton, 
and gradually this new form ousted the old. He asked for the co¬ 
operation of the Mon king of Thaton in this great religious reform, 
and sent an envoy asking for copies of the sacred texts. The re¬ 
quest was refused and the envoy was insulted. Thereupon Ani¬ 
ruddha marched with an army, completely conquered the Mon 
country, and brought its king captive to Pagan. But the defeated 
Mons really conquered the Mrammas. Aniruddha brought back 
with him from the Mon country all the Buddhist monks along with 
sacred texts and relics carried by 32 elephants, as well as a large 
number of artisans and craftsmen. This brought about a complete 
transformation of the culture of the Mrammas. They adopted the 
Mon religion and scripture and learnt the art of writing with the 
help of the Mon script. Thus the Mon form of Hindu culture com¬ 
menced a new career in Pagan. Even the classical example of 
vanquished Greece captivating Rome was surpassed by the way in 
which the Mrammas thoroughly imbibed the Hindu civilisation 
from the Mons. 

Aniruddha extended his kingdom in all directions. Nearly the 
whole of Burma, excluding Tenasserim, was brought under his rule; 
even the Shan chiefs in the east acknowledged his suzerainty. He 
conquered N. Arakan and probably advanced within the frontiers 
of India. The Burmese chronicles represent Pattikera in Tippera 
District, Bengal, as bordering on his kingdom. The king married 
an Indian princess and the chronicles give a long account of her 
journey to Burma. 

The two outstanding achievements of Aniruddha were the 
political union of Burma and the introduction of the Hlnayana 
form of Buddhism which still prevails in that country. He carried 
out great irrigation works and built numerous temples and monas¬ 
teries. His name and fame spread to the island of Ceylon whose 


756 



king asked for his help in both political and religious matters. He 
set Burma on the path to regeneration through Hindu culture which 
it has followed ever since. 


On the death of Aniruddha in A.D. 1077 the Mons of Pegu 
made an attempt to recover their independence. They advanced 
up to Pagan and killed the new king. But they were defeated by 
Kyanzittha, another son of Aniruddha, born of the Indian princess, 
who was formally crowned in A.D. 1084 under the title Sri 
Tribhuvanaditya-dharmaraja. During his rule many Buddhists 
and Vaishnavas from India settled in Burma. The king is said to 
have fed eight Indian monks with his own hands for three months, 
and on hearing from them the description of Indian temples designed 
the famous Ananda temple. Whatever we might think of this story, 
there is no doubt that this masterpiece of Burman architecture was 
designed on Indian model. The king not only built other temples, 
but also repaired (‘newly constructed’ according to chronicles) the 
holy temple of Bodh-Gaya in India. He married a Chola princess 
and sent a diplomatic mission to China which was given precedence 
over that of the Cholas. He sent an expedition to South Arakan 
which acknowledged his supremacy. Tenasserim was also added 
to his kingdom. 

Kyanzittha was succeeded by his daughter’s son Alaungsithu 
(A.D. 1112-1167). His reign was full of troubles. Rebellions in South 
Arakan and Tenasserim were suppressed, but the king in his old 
age was murdered by his son Narathu who also killed many members 
of the royal family including his step-mother, the princess of Patti- 
kera (Tippera District). The father of this lady took revenge by 
sending eight of his best guards, who entered the palace in the dis¬ 
guise of priests and killed Narathu (A.D. 1170). His son Narasimha 
succeeded him, but was killed after three years by his younger bro¬ 
ther Narapatisithu. During the reign of this king Ceylonese Bud¬ 
dhism was introduced in Pagan in A.D. 1192, and ultimately re¬ 
placed the Mon Buddhism which had prevailed since the days of 
Aniruddha. 

The three kings who reigned after Narapatisithu were all de¬ 
voted to religious activities, and one of them, Jayasirhha, built the 
Mahabodhi temple in imitation of the famous temple at Bodh- 
Gaya. The next two kings were of opposite character. The second 
of these, Narasimhapati, who ascended the throne in A.D. 1254, boast¬ 
ed that he swallowed three hundred dishes of curry daily and had 
three thousand concubines. In A.D. 1271 Kublai Khan sent envoys 
asking Burma to accept his suzerainty. 26 Not only did the Burmese 
king refuse the demand and execute a Chinese ambassador sent to 


757 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


him in A.D. 1273, but he also twice invaded some border states 
which had submitted to China. On the second occasion (A.D. 
1283) the Burmese army was defeated with heavy loss and the king 
fled from his capital city. Revolt broke out on all sides and the 
king was murdered (A.D. 1287). The Mongols now struck a deci¬ 
sive blow. A grandson of Kublai Khan marched to Pagan which 
perished “amid the blood and flame of the Tartar terror”. 


The Mongol conquest was followed by a complete political dis¬ 
integration and cultural decay. The country was divided into a 
number of petty principalities and the stories of the interminable 
fights, intrigues, cruelty and treachery of their chiefs fill the pages 
% of the chronicles. Thus passed away the united kingdom of Burma, 
s|i mp by Aniruddha, after a glorious existence of more than two 
centuries, and nearly three centuries elapsed before it regained any¬ 
thing like its former position in the sphere of politics and culture. 


7. SIAM 

The beginnings of Hindu colonisation in Siam may be traced 
to the first two centuries of the Christian era. Archaeological re¬ 
mains and other evidences leave no doubt that here, too, as in the 
neighbouring regions in Indo-China, the Hindu culture and civili¬ 
sation were firmly established and entirely transformed the charac¬ 
ter of the people. But our knowledge of its political history is very 
meagre. Its northern part came under the influence of the Mons, 
and we have referred above to the kingdom of Dvaravatl that flourish¬ 
ed in the seventh century A.D. and various small principalities, 
known from local annals, that grew up in Laos in later times. The 
southern part of Siam formed a part of the kingdom of Kambuja 
from early times and, as noted above, the Kambuja empire at 
its greatest extent included the whole of that country. It is only 
after the decline of that empire in the thirteenth century A.D. that 
Siam became an independent political unit. But this was accom¬ 
plished, not by the children of the soil, but by a new race of immi¬ 
grants from the north, known as the Thais. As this race dominated 
the history of Indo-China during the next five centuries and caused 
the overthrow of the Hindu kingdoms of Kambuja and Champa, it 
is necessary to review their history at some length. 

The Thais are a Mongolian tribe, probably ethnically related to 
the Chinese, and originally lived in the southern and south-western 
part of what is now known as China. They migrated in early centu¬ 
ries before and after the Christian era, and set up various principali¬ 
ties spreading over the whole of the uplands of Indo-China to the 
east of Burma and the north of Siam, Kambuja and Champa. Two 


758 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

groups of these, which settled in Yunnan and Tonkin, came to be 
more powerful than the rest. The latter, known as the Annamites, 
whose long struggle with Champa has been referred to above, 
derived their civilisation from China. The former, however, 
came under the influence of Hindu culture and civilisation from 
an early period. Their country, corresponding to modern Yunnan 
in SooUj China, was called Nan-chao by the Chinese, but it was 
known in Indo-China. as Gandhara. One part of it was also called 
VMeha- .rajyc^ f ,,| ; nd. its capital was known as Mithila. The people 
used an of Hindu origin. Local traditions in Yunnan affirm 

hai AvalokiteSvara came from India and converted the region to 
Buddhism* It is sa'id that when, towards the close of the eigh* 
century 'Mb., the ruler of this kingdom became enamoured 
Chinese civilisation, seven religious teachers of India rebuked it 
king. In the first half of the ninth century A.D. a Hindu monk namer 
Chandragupta, born in Magadha and therefore designated Magadha, 
led a brilliant career of a thaumaturgist in Yunnan. There was in 
Yunnan the famous Pippala cave, the Bodhi tree, the sacred hill 
Gridhrakuta and many other localities associated with Buddhism. A 
Chinese traveller of the tenth century A.D. refers to a local tradition 
that Sakyamuni obtained Bodhi near Lake Ta-li in Yunnan. The 
Buddhist influence in Yunnan is still attested by two bells of the 
eleventh century with inscriptions in Chinese and Sanskrit. The king 
of Nan-chao had the title Maharaja and also another Hindu title, 
which means the king of the east. According to local tradition the 
royal family was descended from Asoka. Rasid-ud-dln, writing in 
the thirteenth century, not only calls the country Gandhara but as¬ 
serts that its people came from India and China. All these demons¬ 
trate that the Thais of Yunnan had imbibed Hindu culture and civi¬ 
lisation to a very large extent. 

The Thai kingdom of Nan-chao or Gandhara threw off the yoke 
of China about the middle of the seventh century A.D. and soon grew 
very powerful. A century later the state was strong enough to 
invade China and, after repeated successes, its ruler assumed the title 
of Emperor in A.D. 850. The T’ang Emperor took this as an insult 
to him and a prolonged war followed, in which China was repeatedly 
defeated. In A.D. 884 the Emperor of Gandhara married a daughter 
of the Chinese Emperor and peace was established between the two 
powers. 

The Hinduised Thai kingdom of Gandhara flourished till A.D. 
1253 when it was conquered by the Mongol Chief Kublai Khan. The 
extinction of this great Thai state coincides with, and perhaps ac¬ 
counts for, the general movement of the Thais towards the south 
and west. One branch of them, the Ahoms, proceeded north and 




759 


MIN ISTfy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



<SL 


conquered Assam, while another, the Shans, got possession of Upper 
Burma. A third branch went south and conquered gradually the 
whole of Laos and Siam. » dftfe 


There were Thai kingdoms on the eastern borderland of Burma, 
as well as in the Mekong valley, long before the thirteenth century. 
But these were petty principalities, and it is not till the thirteenth cen¬ 
tury that we find powerful Thai states in both these regions. The 
history of the Thais in Burma (known as the Shans) need not detain 
us here, as we are concerned here with the Thais in Siam. 


The first Thai kingdom of importance was that of Sukhodaya 
(Sukotai) in central Siam. It was then the seat of Kambuja governor 
in Siam. When a revolt broke out, the Kambuja general sent to quell 
it was defeated by two Thai chiefs who occupied the town. One of 
them, Kun Bang Klang, was consecrated as king of Sukhodaya with 
the title of Indraditya, some time about the middle of the thirteenth 
century A.D. During his reign the countfy received a tremendous 
wave of Thai immigrants, presumably those who fled from Nan-chao 
or Gandhara after its conquest by Kublai Khan. 


Partly on account of these reinforcements, and partly on ac¬ 
count of the weakness of Kambuja, Indraditya was able to extend 
his dominions on all sides by constant fights with his neighbours. 
But it was during the reign of his son Ham Kamheng that the new 
kingdom reached its widest extent. This king, whose known dates 
are A.D. 1283 and 1292, has left a long inscription which gives us a 
detailed account of his life and reign. 


The record gives a long list of conquered countries which in¬ 
clude, besides a number of Thai states in Siam, Hamsavati or Pegu 
in Lower Burma and Nakhon Sri Thammarat in Malay Peninsula. 
It appears that after the Kambujas had lost their power in Siam, 
in the thirteenth century, a number of independent Thai states arose 
there and probably most of them had to acknowledge the suzerainty 
of Ram Kamheng. Two Thai states, which sent many embassies 
to China between A.D. 1282 and 1323, are called by the Chinese 
Si-en and Lo-hu. There is no doubt that they represent respectively 
Shyam and Lvo or Lopburi. Shyam, which has been anglicised into 
Siam, originally denoted only the northern part of the country, and 
stands here for the kingdom of Sukhodaya. It is no doubt due to 
the supremacy of this kingdom that gradually the whole country 
came to be known as Shyam or Siam. But the Chinese account shows 
that even towards the end of the thirteenth century, Lopburi, to the 
south of Sukhodaya, in the Lower Menam Valley, was an important 
state, and bore a separate name. But in spite of the existence of one 
or more such independent or semi-independent states we may well 


760 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

■believe that Ram Kamheng established a very powerful kingdom 
whose influence was felt as far as Lower Burma in the north and 

iv Peninsula in the south. It was almost certainly Ram Kam- 
hfcug who carried his victorious arms to Kambuja and devastated 
the region round Angkor as testified to by Cheu Ta-Kuan. 27 

But these brilliant victories alone do not constitute the sole 
claim of Ram Kamheng to the title ‘Great’. His record gives a long 
list of his works of public utility which would do credit to any ruler. 
Ke erected large and beautiful temples and placed in them bronze 
images of Buddha, one of which was 18 cubits high. Palaces, monas¬ 
teries, lakes, parks and groves of fruit-trees beautified the city and 
the people enjoyed peace and prosperity. In a long passage the 
king enunciates his ideals of charity and justice. In particular he 
mentions the device of hanging a bell in front of the gate by ringing 
which all petitioners for justice could have direct access to the king. 

Ram Kamheng als.q claims to have introduced the art of writing 
among his people. Although the words of the inscription are not 
■quite clear, it would seem that he did not invent the Thai script 
but a particular style of it which was known after him and came 
into general use. This Ram Kamheng script is derived from a cur¬ 
sive form of the Khmer script of Kambuja and was a great improve¬ 
ment upon the Thai script which was in use before his time. 

Even making due allowance for the natural exaggerations in 
a royal prasasti, the long record of Ram Kamheng, found at Sukho- 
■daya, presents before us a unique personality, great in arts of war 
and peace, and an enlightened ruler with progressive ideas much in 
advance of his age. 

It is not necessary for our present purpose to follow the subse¬ 
quent history of the Thai kingdom in full details. The grandson of 
Ram Kamheng took the pompous name Suryavamsa Rama Maha- 
dharmarajadhiraja at the time of coronation in A.D. 1347. He was 
a devout Buddhist who studied the Tripitakas and at the same time 
set up images of Siva and Vishnu. But he was not successful as a 
ruler and gradually the Thai principality of Uton, which took the 
place of Lopburi after conquering it, rose into importance. In A.D. 
1350 its ruler proclaimed himself to be an independent king. He 
transferred his capital to a new city called Ayodhya (Ayuthia) and 
assumed the title Ramadhipati. Soon Ayodhya became the leading 
state and the rulers of Sukhodaya became, at first vassal chiefs, and 
then merely hereditary governors. 

The kingdom of Ayodhya gradually extended its authority over 
Laos and a considerable part of Kambuja. It occasionally suffered 
serious reverses in the hands of Burmese kings, and the city of 




761 


WNIST/f 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


'dbya was destroyed by one of them in A.D. 1767. The capital 
was then removed to Bangkok where a representative of the old 
dynasty still occupies the throne. As in Burma, Buddhism is still 
the prevailing religion in Siam, and this has kept up her cultural 
association with India and Ceylon. 


8. CULTURE AND CIVILISATION 

The Hindu civilisation, which had taken deep root in the soil 
continued its progress unabated during the period under review' 
practically in all the countries whose political history has been 
discussed in the preceding sections. The general picture of society 
and religion, sketched above, 23 mostly holds good for this period 
also, and we shall therefore confine ourselves to a few characteristic 
features which distinguish this period. 

1. Religion 

Of the three principal religious sects, Saivism still maintained 
the dominant position, but Buddhism made a great headway in 
Kambuja. King Surya-varman I 23 had the posthumous name Nir- 
vanapada. It was a fairly general practice to give such posthumous 
names, indicative of religious persuasion, to deceased kings We 
may therefore, regard him as the first Buddhist king of Kambuja. 
Another great Buddhist king was Jaya-varman VII,so the grand 
monarch of Kambuja. The Ta Prohm Inscription throws a great 
deal oi light on the principles and practices of Buddhism. After men- 
tioning the rich donations made to a temple 31 the king expresses the 
hope that as a result of this piety, “his mother might be delivered 
from the ocean of births”. It is full of noble sentiments befitting 
a pious Buddhist king. The motive which inspired him to establish 
the hospitals, 102 in number, is described as follows:_ 

The bodily pain of the diseased became in him (king Jaya-var¬ 
man VII) a mental agony more tormenting than the former For 
the real pain of a king is the pain of his subjects, not that of his 
own (body).” This noble sentiment combines the idealism of the 
Kaufilyan king with the piety and humanity of Asoka. 

But the darker side of Buddhism also made its appearance. The 
degraded form of Mahayana, known as Tantrayana, took deep root 
in the soil, especially in Java and Sumatra. Its influence can be 
traced in the eleventh and twelfth centuries A.D. by the parts play- 
ed by Tantnk teachers during the reigns of Airlangga and Jaya- 
bhaya. The further progress of this debased form of religion'in 
the thirteenth century is illustrated by king Kritanagara. 32 This 
great king was undoubtedly endowed with talents of a high order, 

762 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

and was believed to be an incarnation of Jina, but he indulged, per¬ 
haps in sincere faith, even in such obnoxious practices as pancha - 
makara and sddhana-chakra . A terrible and repulsive image of Bhai- 
rava, now at Leiden, is regarded by some as a representation of this, 
king, but whether this is true or not, this hideous, naked and corpu¬ 
lent figure, amid human skulls, personifies the obnoxious religious 
faith of the time. 

It is probable that this Tantrik form was introduced from 
Bengal where we find similar degradation of Buddhism during the 
later Pala period. As in Bengal, here also Tantrik ideas permeated 
Saivism; and there was a rapprochement between the two, notably 
in Kambuja and Java. The process reached its logical conclusion 
by the identification of Siva, Vishnu and Buddha, as well as of their 
Saktis (goddesses). In modern Balinese theology Buddha is regard¬ 
ed as a younger brother of Siva, and a similar Siva-Buddha cult also 
existed in Java. 

This syncretism is well illustrated by king Kritanagara who 
was known both as Narasimha-murtti (an incarnation of Vishnu) 
and Siva-Buddha, and was represented after his death by an image 
of Siva-Buddha. His father was also represented, after death, by 
the images of both &iva and Buddha, and the latter’s cousin, though 
called Narasimha-murtti, was represented by an image of Siva. 
These not merely indicate toleration of, and even faith in, different 
gods, but also a belief that these different gods are identical. 

We have many other instances of the apotheosis of the kings 
and queens, and the construction of divine images, named and 
fashioned after them. The queen of Angrok, 33 and the queen- 
mother of Jaya-varman VII 34 were represented as the Buddhist god¬ 
dess Prajnaparamita, the Vishnu of Belahan probably represents 
Airlangga, 36 while the Hari-Hara image of Simping preserves the 
physical features of king Kritanagara. There are probably other 
portrait-images of gods and goddesses which cannot be definitely 
identified. 

It may be due to the influence of the Tantrik ideas, that the 
royal gurus (preceptors) occupied a pre-eminent position. In any 
case we come across quite a large number of them, particularly in 
Kambuja, who wielded great power and authority even in political 
matters. Sankara Pandita had played a leading part in placing 
Harsha-varman III 36 on the throne, while Divakara Pandita was a 
prominent figure during the reign of Jaya-varman VI 37 and his two 
successors. Sometimes we hear of kings getting priests from abroad 
in order to perform special ceremonies. An inscription records how 
such a priest was brought by a fleet of barges and grand festivities 




7G3 






Miwsr^ 



held in his honour were attended by kings from other islands. 
Most likely this priest was brought from India, for intimate asso¬ 
ciation continued between these countries. Acharya Chandrakirti, the 
High Priest of Suvarnadvipa, proceeded to Vijrasana (Bodh-Gaya) 
in order to acquire a thorough knowledge of the Dharma. His fame 
was so great that even Dipankara 38 went to Suvarnadvipa and stay¬ 
ed there for twelve years as his pupil. 

To what extent pomp and ceremony became a part of Buddhism 
is indicated by the description of the spring-time festival in seven 
verses of the Ta Prohm Inscription of Jaya-varman VII. 39 It was 
celebrated every year from the 8th to the 15th day of the bright half 
of the month of Chaitra. Dancing by girls formed an important part 
of the ceremony, and offerings were made to the three gurus, thou¬ 
sand Devatas, and to the 619 divinities, while 1000 learned persons 
such as Bhikshus and Brahmanas were entertained. Bhagavan and 
Bhagavati, together with the gods Vira, Sakti,and others, were to 
make the pradukshiuu (circumambulation). 

The account of Cheu Ta-Kuan 40 also shows that Buddhists no 
longer followed the puritan code of old times. The monks ate fish 
and meat and offered them to the Buddha. Some of them had palan¬ 
quins with golden pole and gold-handled umbrellas and the king 
consulted them about serious affairs. There were no Buddhist nuns. 

The same authority tells us that the Taoists, i.e. the followers 
of the Brahmanical sects, are called Pa-sseu-wei, which probably 
stands for the Pasupatas. They worshipped only a block of stone 
(i.e. a linga) and their religion was not so prosperous as Buddhism. 
There were, however, Taoist nuns. 

It would thus appear that towards the close of the thirteenth cen¬ 
tury A.D. Buddhism was growing at the cost of Saivism. Evidently 
this process continued till, in course of a few centuries, Buddhism 
ousted all other forms of religion, as we see in Cambodia today. 

In Burma, too, Brahmanical religion was completely ousted by 
Buddhism. Here, as in Siam and Ceylon, the prevalent form was 
Theravada or Hinayana Buddhism, though the Mahayana or Tan- 
trayana doctrines, which so strongly affected Sumatra, Java, Kam- 
buja and Champa, were not altogether unknown. There is another 
common feature in Burma and Ceylon. Both the countries adopted 
Pali, the language of the sacred texts, as a classic which has evolved 
a new literature and continued its unbroken career down to the 
present time. The same thing is also true of Siam, though to a 
much less extent. 


764 


tmisr#y 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 
2. Social and Economic Condition 


The caste system still formed the basis of the society. The 
Buddhist king Surya-varman I 41 is said to have ‘established the divi¬ 
sion of castes', while Harsha-varman 42 caused the duties of the four 
castes to be strictly observed. But the rules about the inter-mar¬ 
riage were somewhat different as we find even Brahmana girls being 
married to Kshatriyas. 

The social condition on the whole does not differ substantially 
from that in the preceding period. 43 But fortunately we have a de¬ 
tailed account of the manners and customs of Kambuja, the most 
flourishing Indian colony at this period, written by Cheu Ta-Kuan 
in A.D. 1296-97. 44 Such an account by a discerning eye-witness is 
of inestimable value in forming a correct idea of the culture and 
civilisation of a people, and we may therefore quote a few important 
points from his sketch. 

The king, the nobles, and the high officials formed an aristo¬ 
cracy which was sharply distinguished from the mass of people. 
Even the size and structure of a house were determined by the offi¬ 
cial rank of its owner. The common people did not dare use tiles 
for their roofs which were thatched. 


The most striking thing about the dress of the people was that 
women as well as men (including king and queen) kept the upper 
part of their bodies uncovered and walked barefooted. 45 Rich and 
poor alike used only a loin cloth, adding a scarf when they went out. 
All had their hair tied up in a knot. 

Cheu Ta-Kuan describes the wealth and luxury of the upper 
classes. The palace and other buildings were magnificent. He 
refers to a golden bridge with two golden lions on each side, golden 
Buddhas, golden towers, golden window frames, tiles made of lead 
and square columns with 50 mirrors in the council chamber. Pearls 
and jewellery were worn by the rich in profusion while the highest 
officials used palanquins with a golden pole and four umbrellas with 
golden handles. 

The king maintained a big harem in addition to five queens. 
He sat with his principal queen at the golden window of his palace 
so that the people from below might see them. There were vari¬ 
ous amusements and festivities in the palace such as fire-works on 
New Year eve, bathing of Buddha images, collected from all over 
the country, on a particular day in the fifth month, music, dancing, 
boar and elephant fights in the eighth month, and a jovial proces¬ 
sion of the people before the palace in the ninth month. 

The king personally tried cases. Trial by ordeal was in vogue 


765 


misTfty 



for serious 
mutilated. 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 
crime the accused was buried alive in 


<SL 

a ditch, or 


Four harvests were gathered in a year. The valuable products 
were ‘plumes of the king-fisher, ivory, horn of the rhinoceros and 
wax. The chief imports were gold and silver, silk stuffs tin 
porcelain, vermilion, paper and saltpetre. The trade was carried 
on chiefly by women. 


Astronomy was very popular and even women could make 
calculations about auspicious and inauspicious days. 

The monks were in charge of the education of the laity, and 
even the school-going children were instructed by them. The 
general spread of education is testified to by inscriptions’ from 
which we learn that knowledge was held in high respect, and even 
many of the kings were highly learned. We get frequent reference 
to learned divines and a large number of eminent Brahmana fami¬ 
ly who for generations kept up a high standard of scholarship. 
The ministers and high officials, including ladies, followed in the 
footsteps of the kings and the high traditions of the earlier period 46 
were fully maintained. 

I>ut in spite of the high level of culture there were disquieting 
signs of the coming doom. It was evident that the source of the 
stream that fed up the civilisation of the colonies in this distant 
region was gradually being dried up. Indian inspiration being 
gradually weakened, the primitive indigenous elements began to 
assert themselves. This can be easily discerned in the gradual 
transformation of art and literature. In general the indigenous 
language came to the forefront and began to replace Sanskrit, and 
new local elements introduced in art led to its rapid degradation. 
Though all this was not fully apparent during the period under re¬ 
view, signs of the coming change were not wanting. 

In the social and moral life also we come across some elements 
which seem to be an assertion of primitive instincts over artificial 
refinements introduced by Hindu civilisation. Reference may be 
made for instance to certain customs which are noted by Cheu Ta- 
Kuan as being common among all classes of people in Kambuja. 
We are told that men and women of the family, without any clothes 
on, took their bath together in a big cistern. Sometimes even two 
or three families used the same cistern and bathed together in this 
way. Even in the river outside a town thousands of naked women, 
including those of noble birth, took their bath before the full gaze 
of the public who could “see their whole body from head to foot”. 
Even more obnoxious was the practice, universally prevalent, 
whereby a virgin had to be deflowered by a monk, either Buddhist 


766 




MiN/sr^ 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 



^©p-Saiva, who was specially engaged by the parents for the purpose. 
Customs like these were not absolutely unknown in India, but they 
were confined to a very small section of people and looked upon 
with opprobrium. Whether Kambuja owed them to India, or made 
a gift of them to the motherland, it is difficult to say. It would also 
appear from what Cheu Ta-Kuan says that the ideal of chastity, 
even among the married women in Kambuja, was not very high. 
On the whole there is hardly any doubt that there was a great 
lowering of the ethical standard specially in relation to sexual 
morality. 


3. Literature 


The study of Indian literature was widely prevalent in all the 
colonies, but nowhere else, except in Java, it led to the growth of 
a powerful indigenous literature. The Indo-Javanese literature 
passed through three distinct stages. Its earliest phase is generally 
known as Old-Javanese literature which flourished for nearly five 
hundred years from A.D. 1000 to 1500. This phase came to an end 
with the passing away of Hindu rule in Java and was replaced by 
what is called New-Javanese literature. The phase of literary acti¬ 
vity in Bali, introduced by the Javanese who had migrated to that 
island after the Muslim conquest, is known as Middle-Javanese. 

The Old-Javanese literature, with which alone we are concern¬ 
ed here, derives its subject-matter mainly from Indian literature, 
though there is often considerable deviation from the Sanskrit 
original texts with which we are familiar today. Its poetry 
follows rules of Sanskrit metre and it has a strong predilection for 
using Sanskrit words and quoting Sanskrit verses. 

The earliest specimen of this literature, so far known, is an 
Old-Javanese version of a Sanskrit work Amaramala, a lexicon like 
Amarakosa, written under the patronage of king Jitendra of the 
Sailendra dynasty who is not known from any other source. But 
the most famous work in this literature is the Old-Javanese Rarna- 
yana which was probably composed by Yogisvara in A.D. 1094. It 
is not a translation of the Sanskrit work, but is based on the story 
of Rama which ends with the reunion of Rama and Slta at Lanka, 
and shows some divergence from the text of Valmlki. 

Next in point of importance is the prose translation of Mahd- 
bhdrata which closely follows the original epic but is more con¬ 
densed. The three parvas, Adi-, Virata-, and Bhishma-, were writ¬ 
ten under the patronage of Airlangga 47 towards the beginning of 
the eleventh century A.D. while five other parvas were added later. 

Then follow a large number of political works known as Kaka- 


767 




MIN IST/fy 



win (from Kavi meaning Kavya), based on some epic theme. The 
Arjuna-vivaha (eleventh century) gives the story of Arj una’s. 
asceticism and his fight with Siva, disguised as a hunter, and 
Nivata-Kavacha, the demon who attacked the gods, as well as his 
amours with Menaka, Suprabha, Tilottama and others. The 
Krisknayana deals with the famous episode of the abduction of 
Rukmini by Krishna and his consequent fight with Jarasandha. The 
death of Indumati, the queen of Aja, as soon as a garland of flowers 
fell from heaven upon her body, forms the theme of Sumanasantaha. 
Both works were written at the beginning of the twelfth century.. 
The greatest work of this class, which has always enjoyed a very 
high reputation in Java, is Bh&rata-yuddha written by Mpu Sedah 
in A.D. 1157. This, as well as Harivamsa, deals with the well-known 
episode of the Mahabhdrata, and was written during the reign of 
Jayabhaya, king of Ka^iri. Among other works of this class may 
be mentioned Smaradahana (burning of the cupid by Siva), Lub- 
dhaka (glorification of Sivaratri festival), Bhomcikavya (defeat of 
Naraka by Krishna), and Krishnantaka (death of Krishna and the 
destruction of his family). All these, except the last, were written 
during the Kadiri period. 48 There are many other works of this 
class which cannot be dated even approximately. In addition to 
these, there are other Kakawins not dealing with epic themes. 
These include lexicons, works on metre, and works of didactic, 
philosophic and erotic character. 

There is also a large number of prose works. Some of these 
hre based on themes derived from the epics. Others belong to the 
Purana class of which the most important is the Brahyndnda-purcina 
w T hich closely follows the Sanskrit model, and even repeats the 
usual preamble, viz. the recitation of the text by Roriiaharshana, 
dimng the rule of Adhisimakrishna. The other Puranas, such as 
Adi-purana and Bhuvana-puraiia, contain many well-known 
Puranic myths and legends but we cannot trace these texts to any 
Sanskrit original. 

The texts dealing with religious doctrines, mode of worship 
and philosophical principles form an important class of Old-Java- 
nese literature. The secular works include historical, linguistic,, 
medical and erotic texts. It is impossible even to refer to them 
in the short compass of this chapter. But enough has been said to 
indicate the vast mass and the varied contents even of the first phase 
of the Indo-Javanese literature, known as Oid-JaVanese literature. 

It may be added that the stories contained in the Sanskrit original 
or the Old-Javanese works based on them, were illustrated in 
sculptures in Java. In Kambuja and other colonies also we find 


768 



the themes of the two great epics illustrated in sculptures. All 
these show the great influence which Indian literature exercised 
upon the art and literature of the various colonies 


4. Art 
(i) Kambuja 

In the domain of art Kambuja towers head and shoulder above 
the rest. A general view of the city of Angkor Thom 49 and of the 
monuments round about it creates a solemn impression of dazzling 
brilliance which does not suffer any diminution on a closer exami¬ 
nation of the remains. Indeed it may be said with perfect truth, 
that no other equal space on earth can show anything comparable 
to Angkor monuments in massive grandeur. It is not possible 
here to attempt such a description, even of the most famous monu¬ 
ments of Kambuja, as would convey a fair idea of their nature and 
artistic excellence. I shall therefore refer only to a few typical 
specimens. 

The Angkor Vat is justly regarded as the grandest of the monu¬ 
ments in Kambuja. The name simply means the temple (Vat) of 
the city (Angkor —nagara). It was built by Sux % ya-varman II 60 and 
dedicated originally to god Vishnu. The whole monument looks like 
an island in a lake, being surrounded by a moat, still full of water. 
This moat, which runs round the boundary walls of the temple, has 
a total length of two miles and a half, and is more than 650 feet 
wide. It is spanned by a stone causeway, 36 ft. wide, which leads 
to a huge g&puram or gateway of large dimensions. A paved avenue, 
520 yds. long and raised some 7 ft. above the ground, connects this 
gateway with the temple situated in the centre of an extensive 
courtyard. 

The main temple consists of a series of concentric courts, rising 
in several stages, one above another, from the centre of the topmost 
of which rises the shrine with a high sikhara that dominates the 
whole. Each of the courts is surrounded by a gallery, i.e. a long 
running chamber with vaulted roof supported by a wall on one 
side and square columns on the other. It has a verandah on the 
inner side with a half-vaulted roof of lower height. The first or 
lowest gallery measures 265 yds. from east to west and 224 yds. 
from north to south. A staircase from it leads to the second gallery 
which is similar in character, but supports four grand towers at the 
four corners. A grand staircase leads to the third or highest gallery 
which supports a conical tower at each corner and encloses a square 
courtyard measuring 200 ft. on each side. The sanctuary, placed 

769 

S.'B.—W 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

in the centre of this courtyard, and connected by four galleries with 
the four sides of the third gallery, is crowned by a sikhara or tower 
which rises to a height of 215 ft. and dominates the whole surround¬ 
ing area by its majestic grandeur. 

In addition to the principal galleries there are other connecting 
galleries, and the walls of all of these are covered with continuous 
friezes of bas-reliefs and other sculptures. The scenes, largely drawn 
from the Indian epics, cover a wide range, embracing almost all 
phases of human and animal lives, and are full of life and move¬ 
ment. The vast lengths of galleries, covered by these graceful and 
refined bas-reliefs, show the decorative art of Kambuja at its best. 
The Angkor Vat thus combines vastness of dimension with minute 
decoration, and it may be truly said of its artists that they conceived 
like giants and finished like jewellers. 

There are many other temples of huge dimensions, marked by 
the two chief features which distinguish Angkor Vat, viz. the pyra¬ 
midal character and the galleries. But there is no space to refer to 
them, except Bayon, which is regarded as the masterpiece of Kambuja 
architecture. It has the form of a pyramid of three stories crowned 
by a tower. The first storey consists of a gallery about 500 ft. long 
from, east to west and 330 ft. from north to south. The plan is com¬ 
plicated by porches in the second gallery with other smaller galleries 
running at right angles to the main gallery. The third storey sup¬ 
ports a central tower, conical in shape and with a circular base. It 
has balconies on all sides and is crowned by four diademed heads, 
probably of Brahma. Its summit is at a height of about 150 ft. from 
the ground-level. There are terraces, balustrades, cells, verandahs 
and separate buildings in the courtyard and the sculpture is of a 
high quality. 

No description of the monumental grandeur of Kambuja can 
be concluded without some account of Angkor Thom, the capital 
city built by Jaya-varman VII, about a mile north of Angkor Vat. 
We have a description of this city from the pen of Cheu Ta-Kuan 
who was deeply impressed by its wealth and grandeur. The actual 
remains today also convey a fair idea of its past glory. 

The town was surrounded by a high wall made of limonite, 
and just beyond it, by a ditch about 110 yds. wide. There were five 
huge gates in the wall, two on the east and one each on the other 
sides, which gave access to the heart of the city by means of five 
grand avenues each 33 yds. wide. Each gateway was preceded by 
a paved causeway over the ditch. ' 

The ditch has a total length of nearly 8£ miles and its sides 
are paved with enormous blocks of stones. The balustrade of the 




770 


misT/f, 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 



causeway was made of figures of giants pulling at the body of a huge 
serpent whose expanded hoods must have formed its ends. But all 
these are now ruined. 

The gateway consists of a huge arched opening more than 10 
yds. high and 15 ft. wide with chambers on both sides. This open¬ 
ing is surmounted by four huge heads placed back to back, with 
smaller figures in the intervening spaces, and in a line below the 
chins. Lower down, the opening is flanked on either side by a small 
projection composed of a nicely decorated figure of an elephant with 
three heads, its huge broad feet trampling on lotus leaves and the 
three trunks plucking at aquatic flowers. This decoration, the huge 
opening and the majestic figures of heads above render the gate of 
Angkor Thom one of the most impressive and artistically superb in 
the whole world. 

The old capital was almost square in shape, each side measuring 
nearly two miles. The grand avenues passing through the gates on 
the south, west and east (centre) converge towards the temple of 
Bayon described above which occupied almost the central position 
of the city. 

To the north of the Bayon is the great public square, a sort 
of forum about 765 yds. long and 165 yds. wide, the border of which 
is occupied either by monuments or their principal gateways. Two 
grand avenues, one from the northern and another from one of the 
eastern gateways, converge to this forum. The buildings around it 
are the Bapuhon, the Phimeanakas, the Terrace of Honour, Prah- 
Pithu and two other structures, commonly, but not very accurately, 
referred to as the ware-house and the terrace of the leprous king. 
To the north of the enclosure of the Phimeanakas are the ruins of an 
edifice known as Prah-Pahlay. These are all Brahmanical struc¬ 
tures. But a few Buddhist chapels are found scattered about all over 
the dense jungles which now spread everywhere over the ruins of 
this splendid city of old. 

No great town has probably suffered greater devastation from 
man and nature than Angkor Thom. This magnificent city, which 
would favourably compare with Rome in the days of Nero, was for 
centuries entirely covered with vegetation and forests. But the 
huge quantities of potteries, bricks and tiles scattered all over the 
area indicate the density of population in the palmy days of the 
city. From a study of the extant ruins it has been inferred that the 
people mostly lived on the five grand avenues and round the numer¬ 
ous tanks whose beds still lie scattered over the whole area. 


771 


MiNfsr^ 



(ii) Other Colonies 


The undoubted grandeur and brilliance of the monuments of 
Kambuja should not blind us to the fact that the period under re¬ 
view witnessed great activities in art in almost all the colonies. 
In Java the end of Sailendra dynasty closed a brilliant epoch such 
as never occurs twice in any country. But great monuments were 
built in Eastern Java such as the temples known as Chandi Kidal, 
Chan^i Singhasari and Chai^i Jago, all built in the thirteenth 
century. The roof of the first, which is the earliest of the three, is 
built of horizontal courses, but its pyramidal shape gives it a distinct 
character and introduces us to a new type of art in which we can 
clearly mark the triumph of local ideas over Indian tradition. The 
plan of the other two and the reliefs of the third are still more 
East-Javanese in character, and mark a definite break with the art- 
traditions of Central Java. Thus began the decadence which was 
not, however, fully manifest till the subsequent centuries. The same 
conclusion may be drawn from sculptures, but with an important 
exception. The sculptured reliefs show a very much debased charac¬ 
ter, and a great gulf—greater than in architecture,—separates them 
from those of Central Java. But curiously enough the divine images 
in the round are of old style and show considerable excellence and 
continuity of art tradition. The Vishnu of Belahan and the Hari- 
Hara of Simping, both representing royal features, 61 are very beauti¬ 
ful, but the finest in the whole series is the image of Prajnaparamita 
found in a Singhasari temple, and now at Leiden. Her lovely form 
and calm divine expression recall the best days of Javanese art, but 
the rapturous praise, sometimes bestowed upon it, seems to be some¬ 
what extravagant. For it lacks the vitality, refined elegance, and 
the mystic touch of divinity that clearly distinguish the Buddha 
images of Barabudur. It is a great work of art, but much inferior 
to the masterpieces of Central Java. 

Many temples and images were made in Champa, but none of 
them is of conspicuous merit or calls for any special consideration. 
In Burma, the rise of the kingdom of Pagan in the eleventh century 
ushered in a great period of artistic activity, and many pagodas or 
temples were built by successive kings. There are remains of no 
less than 800 or 1000 temples in the city of Pagan itself which ex¬ 
tended along the Irawadi with an average depth of two miles. The 
greatest of them all is the Ananda Temple of Pagan, which was built 
by Kyanzittha 62 and is justly regarded as the masterpiece of Burman 
architecture. It occupies the centre of a spacious courtyard which 
is 564 ft. square. The main temple, made of bricks, is square in 
plan, with a gabled porch projecting from the centre of each face, 

772 



COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 

the total length, from end to end, on every side, is about 290 ft. 
It contains a colossal standing Buddha image, 31 ft. high. The 
walls of the temple, 39 ft. high, are crowned by a battlemented para¬ 
pet above which rise in succession two roofs having a curvilinear 
outline. Above these are four receding narrow terraces which serve 
as the basement of a North Indian sikhara crowned by a complete 
stupa instead of an dmalaka. There are ringed pagodas, small stupas 
and figures at the corners of the successive stages of the roof. Apart 
from the graceful proportion and the symmetry of design, the 
beauty of the Ananda temple is enhanced by sculptured stone slabs 
and glazed terracotta plaques that adorn its walls. The stone- 
reliefs, eighty in number, and some of the plaques illustrate the 
principal episodes of Buddha’s life, and 926 plaques depict the 
Jataka stories. 


In spite of the somewhat unique character of the plan there is 
no doubt about its Indian origin. This is clearly emphasised by 
Duroiselle who has made a special study of the subject in recent 
times and written a monograph about it. He remarks: 

‘‘There can be no doubt that the architects who planned and 
built the Ananda were Indians. Everything in this temple from 
sikhara to basement, as well as the numerous stone sculptures found 
in its corridors and the terracotta plaques adoring its basement and 
terraces, bear the indubitable stamp of Indian genius and craftsman¬ 
ship. . . In this sense, we may take it, therefore, that the Ananda, 
though built in the Burmese capital, is an Indian temple.” 

We do not know much of the early artistic activities in Siam, 
but the remains clearly indicate that Indian art served as the main 
influence and model, both in architecture and sculpture. The most 
distinctive architectural type in Siam is what is known as Prang, 
a square temple with a very high roof consisting of a number of 
low stages which, taken together, have the aspect of a curvilinear 
sikhara. This has been a fashionable mode of building since the 
fourteenth century, and was no doubt evolved from earlier examples 
which were made up of a curious blend of the sikharas of North and 
South India. 


1. Vol. rv, pp. 411-415. 

2. See above, p. 234. 

3. Vol. IV, p. 414. 

4. Vol. IV, p. 411. 

5. Vol. m, pp. 639 f. 

6. See pp. 243 f. 

7. See pp. 245 ff. 

8. See above, p. 258. 

9. Vol. IV, p. 426. 

10. See above, p. 736. 

11. See above, p. 736. 


12. See p. 738. 

13. See p. 738. 

14. See above, p. 744. 

15. Vol. IV, p. 431. 

16. See above, p. 734. 

17. See p. 734. 

18. See above, p. 741. 

19. Vol. Ill, p. 642. 

20. Vol. IV. pp. 429 f. 

21. Vol. IV, p. 429. 

22. Vol. IV, p. 431. 


773 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


23. See p. 751. 

24. See p. 753. 

25. Vol. Ill, p. 637; IV, pp. 431 f. 

26. See above, p. 741. 

27. See above p. 741. 

28. Vol. IV, Ch. XIV, VI. 

29. See p. 736. 

30. See above, p. 738, 

31. See above, p. 740. 

32. See p. 751. 

33 . See p. 750. 

84. See p. 740. 

35. See p. 750. 

36. See p. 736. 

37. See p. 736. 

38. Vol. IV, p. 447. 


39. See p. 740. 

40. See above, p. 741. 

41. See p. 736. 

42. See p. 736. 

43. Vol. IV, pp. 433 f. 

44. See above, p. 742. 

45. This practice still prevails 
and was evidently also 
Java in old times. 

46. Vol. IV, pp. 441 if. 

47. See p. 749. 

48. See p. 750. 

49. See p. 741. 

50. See p. 737. 

51. See pp. 750,763. 

52. See p. 757. 


<SL 

in Bali, 
true of 


774 


LIST OF BIBLIOGRAPHIES 

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
I. Original Sources: Literary Texts and Translations. 

(1) Indian Sources: 

(A) Brahmanical: 

(i) Epics; 

(ii) Pura^as; 

(iii) Philosophy 

(1) Minxaihsa 

(2) Nyaya 

(3) Samkhya 

(4) Vaiseshika 

W' ^' (5) Vedanta 

(6) Yoga 

(iv) Dharmasastra; 

(v) Historical Works; 

(vi) Polity; 

(vii) Lexicography; 

(viii) Grammar; 

(ix) Astronomy, Astrology and Mathematics; 

(x) Medicine; 

(xi) Poetics, Dramaturgy and Metrics; 

(xii) Erotics, Music, Architecture, etc.; 

(xiii) Prose Romances and Champus; 

(xiv) Katha; 

(xv) Anthologies; 

(xvi) Belles-Lettres. 

(B) Buddhist: 

Pali and Sanskrit 

(C) Jain: 

Maharashtri and other Prakrits 

(D) Apabhramsa: 

(E) Muslim: 

(2) Non-Indian Sources: 

I (A) Arabic 


} m 

r (B) 

Chinese 


(C) 

Tibetan 

ii. 

Original Sources 


(i) 

Inscriptions 


(2) 

Coins 

iii. 

Modern Works 


a) 

Histories of the Period 


(2) 

Histories of Literature 


(3) 

Religion and Philosophy 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Chapter I 
Chapter II 


Chapter XXI 
775 



<SL 


Mahabharata 


R&mayana 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

I. ORIGINAL SOURCES: 

LITERARY TEXTS & TRANSLATIONS 

(1) Indian Sources 
(A) BRAHMANICAL 
(i) EPICS 

(Bom. Ed.) with the comm, of Nilakan(ha. 

Ed. by R. Kinjawadekar. Poona, 1929-33. 
(Cal. Ed.) Ed. by N. Siromani and others. BI. 
Calcutta, 1834-39. 

(Kumbhakonam Ed.) Ed. By T. R. Krishna- 
charya and T. R. Vyasacharya. Bombay, 
1905-1910. 

(Southern Recension) Ed. by P. P. S. Sastri. 
Madras, 1931 ff. 

(Critical Edition) I. Adiparvan. Ed. by V. S. 
Sukthankar. Poona, 1927-33. 

II. Sabhaparvan. Ed. by F. Edgerton. Poona, 
1943-44. 

III. IV. Aranyakaparvan. Ed. by V. S. Suk¬ 
thankar. Poona, 1941-42. 

V. Virataparvan. Ed. by Raghu Vira. Poona, 
1936: 

VI. Udyogaparvan. Ed. by S. K. De. Poona, 
1937-40. 

VII. Bhishmaparvan. Ed. by S. K. Belval- 
kar. Poona, 1945-47. 

VIII-IX. Dronaparvan. Fasc. 25, 28. Ed. by 
S. K. De. Poona, 1953-55 (in progress). 

X. Karnaparvan. Ed. bv P. L. Vaidya 
Poona, 1950-54. 

XI. Salyaparvan. Ed. by R. N. Dandekar. 
Poona, 1955 (in progress). 

XII. Sauptikaparvan. Ed. by H. D. Velan- 
kar, along with Strlparvan.” Ed. by V. G. 
Paranjape. Poona, 1956. 

XIII-XVI. Santiparvan. Ed. by S. K. Belval- 
kar. Poona, 1949-55. 

l ra L s ' ky K. M. Ganguly. Published by 
P. C. Roy. Calcutta, 1884-96; New Ed. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1926-32. . 

En ftJ rans ' M • N - Dutt - Calcutta, 1895- 

1905. 

(Bengal Recension) Ed. by G. Gorresio. Turin 
1843-67. 

(North-Western Recension) Ed. by Pandit 
Ram Labhaya, Bhagavad Datt and Vishva 
Bandhu Sastri. Lahore, 1923-47. 

776 


misr^ 


general bibliography 



Agni Purayta 
Bhagavata Purana 


Bhavishya Purana 

Brahma Purana 

Brahmanda Purana 
Brahmavaivarta 
Purana 

Brihannaradiya 

Purana 

Garuda Purana 

Harivamsa 
Kurma Purana 

Lihga Purana 
MdrJcandeya 
Purana 


(North and South) Ed. with the comm, of 
RamabhiramI by Vasudevacharya. Bombay, 
1902. 

(South) Published by R. Narayanaswami 
Axyar, with the help of S. Kuppuswami Sas- 
trigal, S. Krishna Sastrigal, Padmanabha 
Sastrigal and Ramachandra Dikshitar. With 
Index. Madras, 1933. 

(Critical Edition) Ed. by Raghu Vira. First 
Fasc. Lahore, 1938. 

(Critical Edition) Balakanda. Ed. by A B 
Chandorkar. Poona, 1953. 

Eng. Trans, by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1892-94 
Trans, into English verse, by R. T. H. Griffith 
Benares, 1915. 

(ii) PURANAS 

Ed- Mitra - 3 vols - BI. Calcutta, 1873-79. 
Ed. ASS. Poona, 1900. Eng. trans. by M N 
Dutt. Calcutta, 1903. * 

Ed. with French trans. by E. Burnouf, and con¬ 
tinued by Hauvette-Besnault and Raussel 
5 vols. Paris, 1840-98. 

Ed. with Srldhara s comm, by V. L. Panshikar. 

12 vols. Bombay, 1920. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1895. 

Eng. trans. by Swami Vijnanananda. SBH. 
Allahabad, 1921-23. 

Eng. trans. by S. Subba Rao. Tirupati, 1928. 
Eng. trans. by J. M. Sanyal. Calcutta, 1930-34. 
Published by Venkateswar Press. Bombay, 

Ed. ASS. Poona, 1895. Venkateswar Press. 
Bombay, 1906. 

Pub. by Venkateswar Press. Bombay, 1913. 
Pub. Venkateswar Press. Bombay, 1909-10. 

Ed. ASS. Poona, 1935. Eng. trans. by R N 
Sen. 2 vols. SBH. Allahabad, 1920-22. 

Ed. by P. Hrishikesha Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 
1891. ’ 

Ed. by R. S. Vaidya. Bombay, 1962 V.S. (1906). 
Ed. with a comm, by V. L. Panshikar. Bombay, 
1924. Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta 
1908. 

Ed. by R. Kinjawadekar. Poona, 1936. 

Ed. by Nilamani Mukhopadhyaya. BI. Calcutta, 
1890. 

Ed. by J. Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1885. 

Ed. by K. M. Banerjee. BI. Calcutta, 1855-62. 
Eng. trans. by F. E. Pargiter. BI. Calcutta, 
1888-1905. 


777 




misr^ 



Padma Purdna 

Siva Purdna 
Skanda Purdna 
Vardha Purdna 

Vdyu Purdna 

Vishriu Purdna 

V ishnudharmottara 
Purdna 

Parthasarathi 

Miira 

» 

» 

Anandajnana 
Gahge£a 
Ke£ava Misra 

Vardhamana 

Vijnanabhikshu 


THE STRUGGLE EOH EMPIRE 

Ed. by J. Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1876 
Ed. ASS. Poona, 1907. 

Eng. trans. by a Taluqdar of Oudh. SBH. 2 
vols. Allahabad, 1916 17. 

Ed. by V. N. Mandlik. ASS. 4 vols. Poona, 
1893-94 

Pub. by Venkateswar Press. 7 vols. Bombay. 
1927. 

Pub. by Venkateswara Press. Bombay, n.d. 
Ed. by G. P. Raverkar. Bombay, 1909-11, 

Ed. by P. Hrishikesha Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 
1893. 

Ed. by R. Mitra. BI. 2 vote. Calcutta, 1880*88. 
Ed. ASS. Poona, 1905. 

Bombay, 1889. 

Eng. trans. by H. H. Wilson. 5 vols. London, 
1864-70. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1894. 

Pub. by Venkateswar Press. Bombay, 1912. 

(iii) PHILOSOPHY 

(1) Mimamsa 

Nydya-ratna-mald. Ed. by Gangadhar Shastri. 
Ch. SS. Benares, 1900. 

Sastradipika . Ed. with two comms. by L. S. 

Dravid. Ch. SS. Benares, 1913-16. 

Eng. trans. of Tarkapdda , by V. Venkata- 
ramayya. GOS. Baroda, 1940. 

Tantra-ratna. Ed. by Ganganatha Jha. 
PWSBTS, No. 31. Allahabad, 1930-33. 

(2) Nyaya 

Tarka-samgraha. Ed. with intr. by T. M. Tri- 
pathi. GOS, 3. Baroda, 1917. 
Tattva-chintdmani. Ed. by Kamalakanta Tar- 
kavagtea. BI. Calcutta, 1888-1901. 
Tarka-bhdsha. Ed. by S. M. Paranjape. Poona, 
1909. Eng. trans. by G. Jha. IT, ii. Ed. by 
N. N. Kulkarni, with Eng. trans. by G. Jha. 
Poona, 1924. 

Nyaya-nibandfia-prakasa. Nyaya-vdrttika- 
tdtparya-parisuddhi of Udayanacharya, with 
a gloss called Nydya-nibandha-prakdsa by 
Vardhamanopadhyaya. Ed. by V. P. Dvive- 
din and L. S. Dravida. BI. Calcutta, 1911-24. 

(3) Sdmkhya 

Samkhya-pravachana-bhdshya. Ed. by R. 
Garbe. HOS, 2. Cambridge, Mass., 1895. 
German trans. by R. Garbe. Leipzig, 1889. 

778 



misr^ 



Nimbarka 

Ramanuja 

Sriharsha 

Srlkaotha 

Vallabha 

Bhoja 


general bibliography 


<SL 


(4) Vaiseshika 

Sapta-padarthi. Ed. by A. Winter. Leipzig, 
1893; Ed. with notes, by V. S. Ghate. Bom¬ 
bay, 1909. German trans. ZDMG, LIII. 328 
ff. 

Kirarvavali-prak&sa. Kiraridvali with the 
comm, of Vardhamanopadhyaya, Ed. by MM. 
Sivachandra Sarvabhushana. BI. Calcutta, 
Badri Natha Sastri. 
PWSBTS, No. 45. Benares, 1933. 

(5) Vedanta 

Vedanta-kalpataru on Bhamati (Brahmasutra 
Sankara-bhashya with Bhamati of. Vachas- 
pati Misra, Kalpataru of Amalananda and 
Parimala of Appayya Dikshita). Re-edited 
by Pt. Bhargava Sastri. Bombay, 1938. 
Sutra-bhashya on Vedanta-sutra. Ed. by Ra- 
ghavendracharya. 4 vols. Mysore, 1911-22. 
Eng. trans. by S. Subba Rau. Madras, 1904. 
Vedanta-parijata-saurabha, a comm, on the 
Veddnta-sutras. Ed. by V. Dvivedin. Ch. 
SS. Benares, 1910. 

Eng. trans. of Vedanta-parijata-saurabha of 
Nimbarka and Vedanta-kaustubha of Srini¬ 
vasa with annotations by Roma Bose 2 
vols. BI. Calcutta, 1940 ff. 

Sri-bhashya, a comm, on the Vedantasutras. 
Ed. by Ramanatha Tarkaratna. BI. Calcut¬ 
ta, 1888-91. 

Ed. with notes in Sanskrit by Vasudeva Sastri 
Abhyankar. BSS. Bombay, 1914-16. 

Ed. by J. J. Johnson. Benares, 1916. 

Eng. trans. by G. Thibaut. SBE, XLVIII. Ox¬ 
ford, 1904. 

Eng. trans. by M. Rangacharya and M. B. 

Varadaraja Aiyangar. Madras, 1899. 
Khandana-khanda-khadya. Ed. with the comm 
<« Anandapurna, etc. by Ganganatha Jha. 
Ch. SS. Benares, 1904-14. 

Saiva-bhashya, a comm, on the Vedantasutras. 
Ed. in Pandit, vi-vii. 

Anu-bhashya, a comm, on the Vedantasutras. 
by H. C. Vidyaratna. BI. Calcutta, 1888- 
97. Ed. with a comm, by S. T. Pathak. BSS. 
Bombay, 1921-26. 

(6) Yoga 

Rajamartanda. Ed. and Trans, by R. Mitra. 
Bl. Calcutta, 1883 . 

Yoga-sutras with Rajamartanda and other 
comms. Ed. by Dhundiraja Sastri. Kashi SS. 
Benares, 1930. 

779 




Aniruddha 

Apararka 

Ballalasena 

Bhavadevabhafta 

Deva^riabhatta 

Govindaraja 

Halayudha 

Hemadri 

Jimutavahana 

99 

99 

Kullukabhatta 

Lakshmidhara 


<SL 

IRE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


(iv) DHARMAsASTRA 

Haralata. Ed. by Kamalakrishna Smrititirtha. 
BI. Calcutta, 1900. 

Pitridayitd. Ed. in Sanskrit Sahitya Parishad 
Series, No. 6. Calcutta, n.d. 

Comm, on Yajnavalkya-smnti. ASS. 2 vols. 
Poona, 1903-04. 

Danasagara (partially published). Ed. with 
Bengali intr. and trails, by S. C. Kaviratna. 
Calcutta, 1914-19. 

Pr&yaschitta-prakarana. Ed. by Girisa Chan¬ 
dra Vedantatirtha. Rajshahi, 1927. 
Smriti-chandrikd. Ed. by L. Srinivasacharya. 

6 vols. Mysore, 1914-21. 

Ed. by J. R. Gharpure. Bombay, 1918. 

Eng. trans. by T. K. Iyer. Madras, 1867. 

Eng. trans. by J. R. Gharpure. Bombay, 1948 ff. 
Comm, on Manu-smriti (Printed in Manu- 
smriti with the comms. of Medhatithi, etc. 
Ed. by V. N. Mandlik. 3 vols. Bombay, 1886). 
Brahmana-sarvasva. Ed. Benares, V. S. 1935. 
Ed. by Tejaichandra Vidyananda. Calcutta, 
1924. 

Chaturvarga-chint&mani. Ed. by Bharata- 
chandra Siromani. BI. Calcutta, 1873-1911. 
Daya-bhaga, with the comm, of Krishna Tar- 
kalankara. Calcutta, 1829. 

Eng. trans. by H. T. Colebrooke. Reprinted. 
Calcutta, 1910. 

K&la-viveka. Ed. by Madhusudana Smritirat- 
na and Pramathanatha Tarkabhushana. BI. 
Calcutta, 1897-1905. 

Vyavahara-'indtrikd. Ed. by Asutosh Mooker- 
jee. MASB, II. 5. Calcutta, 1910-14. 
Manvarthamuktavall (comm, on Manu-smriti) 
Ed. by J. Vidyasagara. Calcutta, 1874. Ed. 
Bombay, 1929. 

Kritya-kalpataru. Ed. with an intr., etc., by 
K. Y. Rangaswami Aiyangar. GOS. Baroda. 

I. Brahmachari-kanda, 1948. 

II. Grihastha-kanda, 1944. 

III. Niyatakala-kanda, 1950. 

IV. Sraddha-kanda, 1950. 

V. Dana-kanda, i941. 

VIII. Tirthavivechana-kanda, 1942. 

IX. Vrata-kaiida, 1953. 

X. Suddhi-kaoda, 1950. 

XI. Rajadharma-kanda, 1944. 

XII. Vyavahara-kanda, 1953. 

XIV. Moksha-kanda, 1945. 

780 





GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Srldhara 


9f 

Varadaraja 

Vijnanesvara 


, Arisiihha 

/ Balachandra Suri 
Bilhaa^a 

Hemachandra 

Jayanaka 

Jonaraja 

Kalhana 


<SL 


Acharadarsa. Bombay, V. S. 1941. 

Smrityartha-sara. Ed. by Ranganatha Sastri 
Vaidya. ASS. Poona, 1912. 

Vyavaha.ra-nirvM.ya. Ed. with an intr., etc., 
by K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar and A. N. 
Krishna Aiyangar. Adyar, 1942. 

Mitdkshara, a comm, on the Ydjnavalkya- 
smjiti. Ed. by Babu Rama. Calcutta, 1812. 

Ed. by Bapu Shastri Moghe. Bombay, 1882. 

Ed. with Vtramitrodaya, by Narayana Shastri 
Khiste. Ch. SS. Benares, 1924-29. 

Eng. trans. (Acharadhyaya) by S. C. Vasu 
SBH. Allahabad, 1909-18; (Vyavaharadh- 
yaya, fasc. 1) by M. L. Sandal. SBH. Allaha¬ 
bad, 1927; by J. R. Gharpure. Bombay, 
1936 ff. 

(v) HISTORICAL WORKS 

Sukrita-saiiilcirtana. JASS. Bhavnagar, 1917. 

Vasanta-vilasa. Ed. by C. D. Dalai. GOS. 
Baroda, 1917. 

Vikramtinkadeva-charita. Ed. with an intr. by 
G. Biihler. BSS. Bombay, 1875. 

Ed. by Ramavatara Sarma. Benares, 1927. 

Ed. by Shastri M. L. Nagar. PWSBTS, No. 82. 
Benares, 1945. 

Kumarapdla-charita or Dvyasraya-kavya. San¬ 
skrit (cantos i-xx) Ed. by A. V. Kathvate. 2 
parts. Bombay, 1885, 1915. 

Prakrit (cantos xxi-xxviii) Ed. by S. P. Pandit. 
BSS. Bombay, 1900. 

2nd revised Ed. by P. L. Vaidya. Poona, 1936. 

Prithviraja-vijaya. Ed. with the comm, of Jo¬ 
naraja by S. K. Belvalkar. BI. Calcutta, 
1914-22. 

Ed. by G. H. Ojha and C. S. Guleri. Ajmer, 
1941. 

Dvitiya-Rajatarangini. Ed. by P. Peterson. 
BSS. Bombay, 1896. 

Rdjatarangim. Calcutta, 1835 (also consists of 
the works of Jonaraja, Srlvara and Prajya- 
bhatta). Ed. with critical notes by M. A. 
Stein. Bombay, 1892. 

Ed.'by Durgaprasad. BSS. 2 parts. Bombay, 
1892-94. 

Eng. trans. by J. C. Dutt. 2 parts. Calcutta, 
1879-87. 

Eng. trans. with an intr., comm, and appendi¬ 
ces, by M. A. Stein. Westminster, 1900. 

Eng. trans. by R. S. Pandit. Allahabad, 1935. 

French trans. (Historie des rois du Kachmir) 
with comm, and notes by A. Troyer. Paris, 
1840. 


781 


MIN/Sr^ 


.tf* • G0 C 



^/' Merutunga 



Padmagupta alias 
Parimala 

Sandhvakaranandi 


Bhoja 

Chanclesvara 

Hemachandra 

Sukra 


Bhoja 

Dhananjaya 

Hemachandra 

» 

Kesavasvamin 

Mahesvara 

Mahlpa 

Mahkha 


<SL 

TOE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Prabandha-chintamani. Ed. by Ramachandra 
Dinanatha. Bombay, 1888. 

2nd Ed. Re-edited by Durgashanker Sastri. 
Bombay, 1931. 

Ed. by Muni Jinavijaya. SJS. Santiniketan, 
1933. 

Eng. trans. (Wishing-stone of Narratives) by 
C. H. Tawney. BI. Calcutta, 1894-1901. 
Navasahasdnka-charita. Ed. by V. S. Islam- 
purkar. BSS. Bombay, 1895. 

Rama-charita. Ed. by H. P. Sastri. MASB, v. 
Calcutta, 1910. 

2nd Ed. Ed. by R. C. Majumdar, R. G. Basak 
and N. G. Banerji. Rajshahi, 1939. 

(vi) POLITY 

Yukti-kalpataru. Ed. by Isvara Chandra Sastri. 
COS. Calcutta, 1917. 

Nlti-ratndkara (or Rdjanlti-). Ed. by K. P. 

Jayaswal. Patna, 1924. 2nd Ed. Patna, 1936. 
Laghv-Arhannlti. Ahmedabad, 1906. 

Nitisara. Ed. by G. Oppert. Madras, 1882. 

Ed. by B. K. Sarkar. New York, 1915. 

Eng. trans. by M. N. Dutt. Calcutta, 1896. 

Eng. trans. by B. K. Sarkar. 2nd Ed. Allaha¬ 
bad, 1923. 

(vii) LEXICOGRAPHY 

Ndmamalikd. Ed. by E. D. Kulkarni and V. D. 
Gokhale. Poona, 1955. 

Namamdld. Ed. by Shambhunath Tripathi. 
Banaras, 1950. 

Abhidhana-chintamani. Ed. by Babu Rama 
and Vidyakara Misra. Calcutta (1807). 
Ed. by Bohtlingk and Rieu. St. Petersburg, 
1847. 

Ed. by Hargovindas, Bechardas and Muni Jina¬ 
vijaya. 2 vols. Bhavnagar, 1914-19. 
Anekartha-samgraha. Vienna, 1893. 
Desmamamdla. Ed. by R. Pischel and G. Biih- 
ler. BSS, XVII. Bombay, 1880. 2nd Ed. by 
P. V. Ramanujaswami. Poona, 1938. 
NaMlrthd.rnavasa.mkshepa. Ed. by T. Ganapati 
Sastri. TSS. Trivandrum, 1913. 

Visvaprakasa. Ed. by Pandit Rathagopala 
Bhatta. Ch. SS. Benares, 1911. 
Anekdrthatilaka. Ed. by M. M. Patkar. Poona, 
1947. 

MankhakoSa. Ed. with extracts from the 
eomms. and three indices by Th. Zachariae. 
Vienna, 1897. 


782 



mmsTff y 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Medinlkara 

Purushottama 

Yadavaprakasa 

Anubhutisvarupa- 

charya 

Bopadeva 

tt 

Hemachandra 

99 

'Kshirasvamin 

Lakshmldhara 

Markan^eya 

Purushottama 

Purushottamadeva 

Sarartadeva 

Sarvananda 

Trivikrama 

Vardhamana 


Medinikosha. Calcutta, 1884; Kashi SS. Bena- 
res, iyio. 

TriMydasesha. Ed. with a comm, by C A See- 
lakkhandha. Bombay, 1916. 

Vat jay arm. Ed. by G. Oppert. Madras, 1893. 

(viii) GRAMMAR 

S CalcSua? m4 ra ^’ Ed by J ' Vid y §s5 § ara - 
Ed > with the comm, of Chandrakirti by S. 

Kudai. 4th Ed. Bombay, 1926. 

Mugdhabodha. Ed. by Bohtlingk. St. Peters¬ 
burg 1847. Many editions in Bengal 
Kamkalpadrumci. Ed. by G. B. Palsule. Poona, 

Dhatupatha. Ed. with the author’s own comm 
by J. Kirste. Vienna, 1899. 
SiddhahemasabdanuMsana. With a comm, bv 
the author and Haima Dhatupatha. Sri Jain 
Yaiovijaya Series. Benares, 1905. 

author by Shri 

KshiratorangriTu (comm, on Panini’s Dhatupa¬ 
tha) Ed. by Br. Liebich. Breslau, 1930. See 
below under “Sarvananda”. 
Shadbhashachandrika. Ed. with critical and 
expl. motes by K. P. Trivedi. BSS, 71. Bom- 
Day, 1916. 

Pr akritasaryasva. Pub. in Granthapradarsani, 
No. 3. Vizagapatam, 1927. 

Pr w /c ft £a r^^ ias0 ^ a - • Ed - with notes by Luigia 
Nittx-Dolci. Paris, 1938. h 

Panbhdsha-vritti, Jnapaka-samuchchaya,, and 
Karaka-chakro. Ed. with intr., app,, etc. by 
D. C. Bhattacharya. Rajshahi, 1946 
Durghata-vritti Ed by T. Ganapati Sastri. 
TSS. Trivandrum, 1909. Ed. et traduit par L 
Renou. Vols. I II. Paris, 1940 ff. P 

7 ‘&r t a (Amarakosa, ed. with Amara- 
Kshirasvamin and Tikdsar- 
vasva of Vandyaghatlya Sarvananda by T. 
r , 9 ana P atl Sastri. TSS. Trivandrum, 1914-17) 
Praknta-sab danuMsana. Ed. with his own 

e,C '’ by P L ' V “ dya - 
Ei >>7 J- Eggeling. 


Ballalasena 


(ix) ASTRONOMY. ASTROLOGY AND 
MATHEMATICS 

Adbhuta-sagara. Ed. by Murali Dhar Jha. 
Benares, 1905. 


783 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Bhaskaracharya 


Satananda 

Srldhara 

Bhoja 

Chakrapanidatta 

Palakapya 


<3L 


Siddhanta-siromctni: Ganitddhyaya. Ed. by B. 

D. Sastri. Kashi SS. Benares, .1929. 
Goladhyaya. Ed. by G. D. Sastri. Kashi 
SS. Benares, 1929. 

Bhasvati. Benares, 1883. 

Ganitasara or Trisati. Ed. by M. Ramanuja- 
charya and G. R. Kaye. Leipzig, 1913. 

(x) MEDICINE 

Rdjamdrtav4a. Ed. by Vaidya Jadavii. Bom¬ 
bay, 1924. 

Chikitsa-sara-samgraha. Ed. by J. Vidyasagara. 
Calcutta, 1888. Ed. with Sivadasa’s comm. 
Lahore, 1925; 2nd Ed. Lahore, 1931. 
Hastyayurveda. Ed. by Sivadatta. ASS. 
Poona, 1894. 


(xi) 

Allaraja 

Bhoja 

9t 

Hemachandra 

Hemachandra and 
others 

Jayadeva 

ft 

Jayakirti 


POETICS, DRAMATURGY AND 
METRICS 

Rasa-ratna-samuchchaya. Ed. with intr., 
notes, and app. by R. N. Dandekar. SJS. 
Bombay, 1945. 

Sarasvati-kanthdbharana. Ed. by A. Borooah. 
Calcutta, 1883-4. Ed. KM. Bombay, 1934. 

Sringara-prakasa. Ed. by G. R. Josyer. 
Mysore, 1955. 

Chhandonusdsana . Bombay, 1912. Chs. IV- 
VII. Ed. by H. D. Velankar. JBBRAS, 
XIX.27-74; XX. 1-46; also in “Jayadaman” 
(see below). 

Kavyanusasana . Ed. by Sivadatta and Parab. 
KM. Bombay, 1901. Ed. with comms., intr., 
etc. by R. C. Parikh and R. B. Athavale. 2 
vols. Bombay, 1936. 

J ayadaman (comprising J ayadevachchhandah, 
Chhandonusdsana of Jayakirti and of Hema¬ 
chandra, and Vrittaratnakara of Kedara). 
Ed. with intr., list and index of Sanskrit 
metres, etc., by H. D. Velankar. Bombay, 
1949. 

Chandraloka. Ed. by J. Vidyasagara. 2nd Ed. 
Calcutta, 1906. Ed. with the comm, of Ap- 
payya Dlkshita by Govinda Shastri. Bom¬ 
bay, 1895. Ed. with the comm, of Padma- 
nabha Misra by N. S. Khiste. Kashi SS. 
Benares, 1929. 

J ayadevachchhandah (See above under “Hema¬ 
chandra and others ,, ) 

Chhandonusdsana (See above under “Hema¬ 
chandra and others”) 


784 



MIN ISTfy 



Kshemendra 

» 

Mahimabhatta 

Mamma^a 


Ramachandra and 
Gunachandra 

Ruyyaka 

Saradatanaya 

Sobhakara Misra 

Vagbhata 

Vidyadhara 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Vrittaratnakara. Ed. with a comm, of R. K, 
Bharati by C. A. Seelakkhandha Maha 
Sthavira. 3rd Ed. Bombay, 1926. Ed. with 
a comm, of Bhatta Narayana Bhatta and intr. 
and notes by V. S. Varakale. Kashi SS. 
Benares, 1927. See also above under “Hema- 
chandra and others”. 

Auchityavichdracharchd. Ed. in KM, i. 115 ff. 

Ed. in Haridas SS. Benares, 1933. 
Suvrittatilaka. Ed. in KM, ii. 29 ff. Ed. in Hari¬ 
das SS. Benares, 1933. 

Vyaktiviveka. Ed. with the comm, of Raja- 
naka Ruyyaka by T. Ganapati Sastri. TSS. 
Trivandrum, 1909. Ed. with the comm, of 
Rajanaka Ruyyaka and the Madhusudanl. 
Kashi SS. Benares, 1936. 

Kavyaprakasa. Ed. with expl. and illu. notes 
by M. Ch. Nyayaratna by order of E. B. 
Cowell. Calcutta, 1866. Ed. with the comms. 
Udyota and Pradlpa, by V. S. Abhyankar. 
ASS. Poona, 1911. Ed. with the Samketa of 
Manikyachandra. ASS. Poona, 1921. Ed. 
with Samketa by R. Shama Sastry. Mysore, 
1922. Ed. with the comm, of Jhalakikar by 
R. D. Karmarkar. 6th Edn. Poona, 1950. 
Eng. Trans, by Ganganatha Jha. Rev. 
Ed. Allahabad, 1925. 

Natyadarpana. Ed. with intr. and notes by 
G. K. Shrigondekar and L. B. Gandhi. GOS. 
Baroda, 1929. 

AlamkJdra-sarvasva. KM, 35. Bombay, 1893. 

Trans, by H. Jacobi. ZDMG, LXII. 
Bhdvaprakdsana. Ed. with an intr. and notes, 
by Yadugiri Yatiraja Swami and K. S. 
Ramaswami Sastri. GOS. Baroda, 1929. 
Alamkara-ratnakara. Ed. with intr. and ap¬ 
pendices, by C. R. Devadhar. Poona, 1942. 
Vagbhatalamkara. Ed. with the comm, of 
Simhadeva Gani. KM, 48. Bombay, 1915. 
Ekavali. Ed. with the comm, of Mallinatha, 
intr., notes, etc. by K. P. Trivedi. BSS. Bom¬ 
bay, 1903. 



(xii) EROTICS, MUSIC, ARCHITECTURE, ETC. 

Ballalasena Adbhutasdgara. Ed. by Murali Dhar Jha. 

Benares, 1905. 

Bhoja Sdlihotra. Ed. by E. D. Kulkarni. Poona, 1953. 

>, Scirnarangana Sutradhdra. Ed. by T. Ganapati 

Sastri. GOS. 2 vols. Baroda, 1924-1925. 
Jyotirlsvara Panchasayaka. Ed. by Sadananda Sastrin. 

Lahore, n.d. 

Kokkoka Ratirahasaya. Ed. by Sadananda Sastrin. 

Lahore, n.d. 


78.5 


8.E.—50 


MIN/Sr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<8L 


Sarhgadeva 


SomeSvara 


Bhoja 

Ogleyadeva 

Sotfdhala 

V idyachakra vartin 

Budhasvamin 

Kshemendra 

Purnabhadra 

Somadeva 


Amitagati 

Jalhana 


Narapatijayacharyd. Meerut, 1900. 
Sangitasamayasdra. Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. 

TSS. Trivandrum, 1925. 

Sangita-ratndkara. Ed. with the comm of 
Chatura Kallinatha by M. R. Telang. ASS. 

Poona > 1897. Ed. with the comm, of 
Kallinatha by S. Subrahmanya Sastri, with 
C..K Raja. 4 vols. Adyar, 1943, 
1944, 1953, 1954. Eng. trans. with detailed 
., n I ot , es V b 7 C- K Raja. Vol. I. Adyar, 1945. 
Abnilashitarthachintamani . Ed. by R. Shama 
Sastry. Part I. Mysore, 1926. M&nasollasa 
(otherwise known as Abhilashit&rthachinta- 
mara ) Ed. by G. K. Shrigondekar. GOS. 2 
vols. Baroda, 1925, 1939. 

(xiii) PROSE ROMANCES AND CHAMPuS 

RS-mayana-champii. Ed. with the comm, of 
Ramaehandra Budhendra by K P Parab 
Bombay, 1898. 

Gadya-chintamani. Ed. by T. S. Kuppuswami 
Sastri. Madras, 1902. 

Vdayasundarl-katha. Ed. by C. D. Dalai and 
,, E. Krishnamacharya. GOS. Baroda, 1920. 
Gadyci-karndmrita. Bombay. 

(xiv) KATIIA 

Brihatkathdslokasamgraha. Ed. with critical 
and expl. notes and French trans. by F 
Lacote. 28 vols. Paris, 1908-1929. 
Brihatkathamanjarl. Ed. by Sivadatta and 
Parab. NSP. 2nd ed. Bombay, 1931. Ed. 
and trans. by S. Levi. JA, 1886. 
PancMkhy&naka. Ed. with intr., parallel pas¬ 
sages, etc., by J. Hertel. HOS. 3 vols. Cam¬ 
bridge, Mass., 1908-12. 

Kathasaritsdgara. Ed. with trans. by H. Brock- 
haus. 3 vols. Leipzig, 1839-66. Ed. by 
Durgaprasad and Parab. NSP. 4th Edn 
Bombay 1930. Eng. trans. by C. H. Tawney. 

2 vols. Calcutta, 1880, 1887. Reprinted with 
intioduction, notes and terminal essay, etc., 
by N. M. Penzer. 10 vols. London, 1924-28. 

(xv) ANTHOLOGIES 

Subhdshitaratnasandoha. Ed. by Bhavadatta 
and W. L. Panshikar. NSP. 2nd Ed. Bom¬ 
bay, 1909. 

Suktimuktavali. Ed. with intr., appendices, 
etc., by E. Krishnamacharya. GOS. Baroda’ 
iy«*8. 


786 



mtSTty 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Sridharadasa 


Vallabhadeva 


(Note: 


Abhayachandra 

Abhayadeva 

Amarachandra 

Arisimha 
'S Bilhana 


Dhananjaya 

Dharmakumara 

Dhoyi 


Govardhana 

Gumani 

Hastimalla 

Jalhana 

Jayadeva 


Saduktikarxiamrita. Ed. by Ramavatara 
Sarma. BI. Calcutta, 1921 (2 fasc). Ed by 
Ramavatara Sarma, with intr. by Har Dutt 
Sharma. Lahore, 1933. 

Subliashitavali. Ed. by P. Peterson and Dursa- 
prasad. BSS. Bombay, 1886. 

(xvi) BELLES-LETTRES 

References to important published works are given here, 
lull details about published works and MSS. will be 
found in Histories of Sanskrit Literature by De and Das 
Cupta, Keith, Knshnamachariar, Winternitz, etc. Jain 
authors have been included in this section as also earlier 
under historical works, polity, lexicography, grammar, 
poetics and anthologies.) 6 

Padmananda. Ed. with intr., indices, app. 

etc., by H. R. Kapadia. GOS. Baroda, 1932.' 
J a yantavijaya. Ed. by Bhavadatta and Parab. 
NSP. Bombay, 1902. 

BalabhSrata. Ed. in Pandit (O.S) iv-vi 
Benares, 1869-71. Ed. by Sivadatta and 
Parab. KM, 45. Bombay, i.894. 

Sukrita-samkirtana. Ed. in JASS. Bhavnagar, 
1917. 

Chaurapanchasika. Ed. with the comm of 

by R Von Bohlen. Berlin, 1883. 
Ed. KM, xiii. 145-169. 

KaryMundari. Ed. by Durgaprasad and Parab. 
NSP. Bombay, 1888. 

Iiaghava-Pandaviya. Ed. with the comm, of 
Badarinatha by Sivadatta and Parab. KM 
49. Bombay, 1895. 

Sdlibhadra-charita Ed. in Yasovijaya Jaina 
Grantha Mala. Benares, 1910. 

Puvanaduta. Ed. by Manomohan Chakravarti 
PP- 53-68). Re-edited by 
Chintaharan Chakravarti. Calcutta, 1926. 
Aryasaptasati. Ed. with the comm, of Ananta 
by Durgaprasad and Parab. NSP. 2nd Ed 
Bombay, 1895. 

Upadesasataka. KM, ii. 20 ff. 

Anjanapavanaiijaya and Subhadra-Natikd. Ed. 
with intr., etc., by M. V. Patwardhan. Bom¬ 
bay, 1950. 

Mugdhopadesa. KM, viii. 125 ff. 

Gita-govinda. Ed. by Baku Rama. Kiderpore, 
1808. Ed. with the comms. Rasikapriya and 
Rasamahjari by M. R. Telang and W. L. 
Panshikar. NSP. 7th Ed. Bombay, 1929. 

787 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Jayadeva 

Jayasimha Suri 

Kanakasena 

Vadiraja 

Kaviraja 

Krishna Misra 


Kshemendra 

» 


» 

»> 


V 

Kulasekhara 

» 

Lakshmana 

Acharya 

Lolimbaraja 

Madana 

Balasarasvati 

Maladharin 

Devaprabha Suri 
Manikya Suri 

Mahkha 


Nagaraja 

Nayachandra Suri 


Prasannciraghava. Ed. by Govindadev Sastri, 
Benares, 1868. Ed. by K. P. Parab. NSP. 
Bombay, 1893. Ed. by S. M. Paranjape and 
N. S. Panse. Poona, 1894. 
Hammira-rnada-mardana. Ed. by C. D. Dalai, 
GOS. Baroda, 1920. 

Yasodhara-charita. Ed. by T. A. Gopinatha 
Rao. Sarasvati Vilasa Series. Tanjore, 1912. 
Raghava-PancUtviya. Ed. with the comm, of 
Premachandra Tarkavaglsa. BI. Calcutta, 
1854 (Reprinted by Bhavadeva Chatterjee, 
Calcutta, 1892). Ed. with the comm, of 
Sasadhara by Sivadatta and Parab. NSP. 
Bombay, 1897. Ed. in Granthamala with the 
comm, of Lakshmana Suri. Bombay, 1889. 
Prabhodha-chandrodaya. Ed. by H. Brockhaus. 
Leipzig, 1845. Ed. with comms. by V. L. Pan- 
sikar. Bombay, 1924. 

Bharata-manjarl. Ed. by Sivadatta and Parab. 

NSP. Bombay, 1878. 

Charucharya. KM , ii. 128 ff. 

Darpadalana. KM, vi. 66 ff. 
Dasavatdra-charita. Ed. by Sivadatta and 
Parab. NSP. 2nd Ed. Bombay, 1930. 
Desopadesa and Narmamala. Ed. with intr. by 
Madhusudan Kaul. Poona, 1923. 

Kalavilasa. KM, i. 34 ff. 

Ramayana-manjari. Ed. by Bhavadatta and 

Parab. NSP. Bombay, 1903. 

Samayarndtriha . Ed. by Durgaprasad and 
Parab. NSP. 2nd Ed. Bombay, 1925. 
Sevyasevakopadesa . KM, ii. 79 ff. 
Subhadra-Dhancinjaya. Ed. by T. Ganapati 
Sastri. TSS. Trivandrum, 1912. 

Tapati &amvarana . Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. 

TSS. Trivandrum, 1911. 
ChanfokuchapanchcLsika. KM, ix. 80 ff. 

Harivilasa. KM, ix. 94 ff. 

Partjdtarnanjari (or Vijayasri). Ed. by E. 

Hultzsch. Leipzig, 1906. 

Paiufrava-charita. Ed. by Sivadatta and Parab. 
NSP. Bombay, 1911. 

Yasodhara-charita. Ed. by Hiralal Hansraj. 

Jamnagar, 1910. 

Srikantha-charita. Ed. with the comm, of 
Jonaraja by Durgaprasad and Parab. Bom¬ 
bay, 1900. 

BhdtHLsataka. KM, IV. 37 ff. 
Hammira-mahakavya. Ed. by N. J. Kirtane. 
Bombay, 1879. 

788 


MINIS?*, 


GENERAL bibliography 



Odeyadeva 

Vadlbhasimha 

Prahladanadeva 

Ramabhadra 

Ramachandra 

Ramachandra 


Ramachandra 

Kavibharati 

Ravivarman 

Sambhu 

Sahkhadhara 

Kaviraja 

Somadeva 


Somaprabha 
S Somesvara 

^ Sri Harsha 


Subhata 

Udayaprabha Suri 
Umapatidhara 
Utprekshavallabha 
Vagbhata 


Kshatrachu&irwni. Ed. by T. S. Kuppuswamv 
1905^ ® arasva ^ Vilasa Sei’ies. Tanjore, 

Parthapar&krama. Ed. by C. D. Dalai. GOS. 
Baroda, 1917. 

Prabuddha-Rauhineya. Ed. by Muni Punva- 
vijaya. JASS. Bhavnagar, 1917. 
Kaumudi-Mitrdnanda. Ed. by Muni Punva- 
vijaya. JASS. Bhavnagar, 1917 
Nalavilasa. Ed. by G. K. Shrigondekar. GOS. 
Baroda, 1926. 

Nirbhaya-BhUma Ed. by Hargovinda Das and 
Bechar Das. Yasovijaya Jaina Granthamala. 
Benares, 1911 (2437 Vlra Era) 

Bhaktisataka. Ed. by Haraprasad Sastri with 
Eng. trans. JBTS, 1 , 1893, pt. 2 , pp. 21-43 
P^dyumnabhyndaya. Ed. by T. Ganapati 
Sastri. TSS. Trivandrum, 1910 
Anyoktimuktalatdsataka. KM., ii. 61 ff 
Latakamelaka. Ed. by Dureaiarasad a ,„i 
Parab. NSP. 3rd Ed. Bomb" ® 1923 a " d 
Lahtamgraliartja-miaka Partially edited IA, 
pw 20 jT ■£■ ?rmr by F - Kiel horn. Gottinger 

Text ln Rom »" 

♦SSTOSTitt KM ■ v ■ 124 - 142 - 

S NSp“Sbaf iM2 SiVada '* a and Par “ b - 

Ki BoSr? 8 8S Ed ' by A - v - Ka,hvate - DSS - 

- Ed- With Mallinatha’s 

1886 p/?' tI ld I aSagara - 2 Voh ■ Calcutta, 
0;,,. Fd Wlt . h * he comm, of Narayana by 

fr£'« 

?atd.x„ K a .^ and ^ i - 

D «Sy | |} U »« 2 r d Jrmi 

'™" s K b y L H. Gray. JAOS.' XXXIL 

Ptitijdtaharana. Ed. and trans. by G A Grier¬ 
son. JBORS, III. 20-98. y 
Bhikshapana. KM, xii. 54-163. 

Sundarisataka. KM, ix. 100 ff 

^NsTtSbay^ a " d Parab ' 

789 



A/ 


Vastupala 

Vafcsaraja 

Vidyanatha 

Vijayapala 

Visaladeva 

Yasahpala 

Yasaschandra 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Nararmrdyandnanda. Ed. by C. D. Dalai and 
R. Anantakrishna Sastri. GOS. Baroda, 
1916. 

Riipakashatka. Ed. by C. D. Dalai. GOS. 
Baroda, 1918 (comprising Kirdtarjunlya, 
Samudramanthana, Rukmimharana , Tri- 
puradaha, Karpura-charita and Hdsyachuqia ~ 
mani ). 

Pratdparudrakalydna. Ed. Grantha-ratnamala. 
Bombay, 1891. 

Draupadlsvayamvara. Ed. by Muni Jinavijaya. 

JASS. Bhavnagar, 1918. 

Harakelindtaka. Part of text in Roman ( 1A, 
xx. 201-212). Ed. by F. Kielhorn, Gottinger 
Festschrift , 1901, pp. 16-30. 
Moharajapaindjaya. Ed. by Muni Chaturvijaya. 
GOS. Baroda, 1918. 

Mudritakumudachandra . Ed. Jaina Yasovijaya 
Granthamala. Benares, 1906. 

(B) BUDDHIST: 

PALI AND SANSKRIT 



(Note: Important references to published works are given here. 
„ Further particulars will be found in Geiger, Law and Win- 
ternitz given under “Histories of Literature” below.) 

AbhidhamTYiatthc^samgaha of Anuruddha 

Ed. by T. W. Rhys Davids. JPTS, 1884. 1 ff. 
Eng. trans. by S. Z. Aung. Ed. by Mrs. Rhys 
Davids. PTS. London, 1910. 

Abhidhanappadipikd of Moggalana 

Ed. by W. Subhuti. 2nd Ed. Colombo, 1883. 
Ed. by Muni Jinavijaya. Ahmedabad, V. S. 
1880. 


Anaqatavamsa of Kassapa 

Ed. by J. P. Minayeff. JPTS , 1886. 33 ff. 

Attanagaluvihdravaihsa 

Ed. and trans. by J. d’ Alwis. Colombo, 1887. 

Bhaktisataka of Rarnachandra Kavibharati 

Ed. with Eng. trans. by H. P. Sastri. JBTS, I, 
1893, pt. 2, pp. 21-43. 

Bodhivamsa of Upatissa 

Ed. by S. A. Strong. PTS. London, 1891. 

Chulavamsa (being the more recent part of the Mahavamsa) 

Ed. by W. Geiger. PTS. 2 vols. London, 1925- 
27. Eng. trans. by W. Geiger and Mrs. R. 
Rickmers. London, 1930. 

Ddthdvamsa of Dhammakitti 

Ed. and trans. by B. C. Law. Lahore, 1925. 


790 


mtsrfy 


GENERAL bibliography 




Jinacharita of Vanaratana Medhamkara 

Ed. and trans. by W. H. D. Rouse. JPTS, 
1904-05. 1 ff. Ed. and trans. by C. Duroi- 
selle. Rangoon, 1906. 

Jinalamkara of Buddharakkhita 

Ed. and trans. by James Gray. 1894. 
Ndmarupaparichchheda of Anuruddha 

Ed. by Buddhadatta. PTS. London, 1914. 
Padasddhana of Piyadassin 

Ed. by Dhammananda and Nanissara. 
Colombo, 1887. 

Pajjamadhu of Buddhapriya 

Ed. by E. R. Gooneratna. JPTS, 1887. 1 ff. 
Ed. by D. G. Koparkar. Ahmednagar, 1953. 
Rasavahinl of Vedehathera 

Ed. and trans. (German) by W. Geiger. Miin- 
chen, 1918. Selected stories ed. and trans. 
into German by F. Spiegel, Anecdota Palica. 
Leipzig, 1845; Sten Konow, ZDMG, 43. 297 ff. 
Rupasiddhi of Buddhapriya 

Ed. by A. Griinwedel. Berlin, 1883. 
Saddalakkhana of Moggalana 

Ed. by H. Devamitta. Colombo, 1890. 

Saddamti of Aggavamsa 

Ed. by Helmer Smith. 5 vols. Paris, London, 
Leipzig, 1928-54. 

Saddhammopdyana 

Ed. by Richard Morris. JPTS, 1887. 35 ff. 
Subodhalamkara of Sarhgharakkhita 

Analysis and text. Ed. by G. E. Fryer. JASB, 
XLIV, pt. 1, pp. 91 ff. 

Telakapdhagatha Ed. by E. R. Goonaratne. JPTS, 1884. 49 ff. 
Thupavamsa of Vachissara 

Simhalese Edition. Ed. by Dhammaratana. 
Paeliyagoda, 1896. 

Vuttodaya of Saihgharakkhita 

Ed by G. E. Fryer. JASB, XLVI, pt. 1, pp. 369 


(C) JAIN 

(Note: Important works in Maharashtri and other Prakrits are in¬ 
cluded in this list. For works in Sanskrit by Jain authors, 
see earlier under (vi) Polity, (vii) Lexicography, (viii) 
Grammar, (xi) Poetics, etc., (xvi) Belles-Lettres, etc. For 
further particulars and full details of published works re¬ 
ference may be made to Winternitz, History of Indian Lite¬ 
rature, Vol. II; for details about MSS., reference may be 
made to Velankar, Jinaratnakosa.) 

Dhanesvara Surasundarn-charita . Ed, with notes by Muni- 

raj Sri Raja Vijayaji. Jaina-Vividha-Sahit- 
ya-Sastra-Mala, I. Benares, 1916. 

791 



Jinachandragani 

Lakshmanagani 

Ramaiarman 


Sirhharaja 

Somaprabha 

Abdul Rahaman 

Haribhadra 

Jinadatta Suri 

Mahesvara Suri 
Yoglndu 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


M ahavira-charita. Pub. in DLJ Series No 75 
Bombay, 1929. ’ 

DeMn&mamala. Ed. with critical notes, glos¬ 
sary, and a historical intr., by R. Pischel and 
G. Biihler. BSS. Bombay, 1880. 2nd Ed. by 
P. V. Ramanujaswami. Poona, 1938. Ed. 
with intr., etc., by Muralydhar Baneriee. 
Calcutta, 1931. J 

Kumarapala-charita. Ed. by S. P. Pandit BSS 
Bombay. 2nd Ed. Revised by P. L. Vaidva 
Poona, 1936, J ' 

Siddhahemachandra. Adhyaya VIII. Text (in 
Transkription) mit Wortverzeichnis, Uber- 
setzung u. Elauterungen hrsg. von R. Pischel. 
2 lie. Halle, 1877-80, Ed. by P. L. Vaidya as 
an App. to Kumarapalacharita (above). 

A civ at at tv apr nkaro.ua. Ed. with two comms. 
in Atmananda Grantha Ratnamala, No. 10. 
Bhavnagar, 1912. 

Supasanaha-chariya. Ed. by Pandit Hara- 
( govind Das Seth. Benares, 1918. 

“The SaurasenT and Magadhi Stabakas of 
Ramasarman”. Ed. by G. A. Grierson. IA, 
ISVI. 1 ff, 13 ff; LVII. 21 ff; 41 ff; 49 ff. 

‘I, 1 *- Apabhraiiisa Stabakas of Ramaiarman”. 

by G- A - Grierson. IA„ LI. 13 ff; 21 ff; 
Jb11. 1 ff. 

Prakritarupdvatara. Ed. by E. Hultzsch. Lon¬ 
don, 1909. 

K.umd.iapalapratibodha. Ed. with intr., etc. by 
Muni Jinavijayaji. GOS, 14. Baroda, 1920. 
1929 an< * * rans ' by L. Alsdorf. Hamburg, 


(D) APABHRAMSA 

Sa-rhdesa Rdsaka. Ed. with intr., notes, etc., by 
Jina Vijaya Muni and Harivallabh Bhayani. 
SJS, 22. Bombay, 1945. 

Sanatkurruira-charitam: ein Abschnitt aus 
Neminatha-charitam. Ed. by Hermann 
Jacobi. Miinchen, 1921. 

Kdlasvarupakulakam (pub. in Apabhraihsa- 
Kdvya-trayi. Ed. by L. B. Gandhi. GOS, 37. 
Baroda, 1927). 

Sanjama-manjan. Ed. by P. D. Gune. ABOR1, 
I. 157-166. 

Paramatmaprakasa and Yogasara. Ed. with 
critical intr.. Sanskrit Chhaya, etc., by A. N. 
Upadhye. Bombay. 1937. 


792 


MIN/Sr^ 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


MUSLIM 


<SL 


W' (E) 
an-i-Akbari of Abu’l Fazl 

Ed. by H. Blochmann. BI. 2 vols. Calcutta, 
1867-77. Eng. trans. by H. Blochmann (Vol. 
I) and H. S. Jarrett (Vols. II-III). BI. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1868-94. Vol. I. 2nd Ed. Revised by 
D. C. Phillot. 

Diwan-i-Salman of Khwaja Mas’ud bin Sa‘id bin Salman 

Ed. by Abu-’l Qasim Akhwani. 

Tehran, 1879. Extracts Trans. HIED, IV. 
Futuh-us-Salatin of Isami 


Ed. by A. M. Husain. Agra, 1938. 
Gulshan-i-Ibrahimi of Muhammad Qasim Firishta 

Lithographed at Bombay, 1832. Lucknow, 
1905. Eng. Trans, by Briggs. London 1827-29 
(See Ta’nkh-i-Firishta ). 

Habib-us-Siyar of Khvand Mir 

Bombay, 1857. Extracts Trans. HIED, IV. 
154-212. 

Khulasat-ul-Akhbar of Khvand Mir 
Kitab-ul-Hind of Al-Biruni 

Eng. Trans. (Alberuni's India) by E. C. Sa- 
chau. London, 1914. 

Kitab Zain-ul-Akhb&r of Mahmud Gardizi 

Ed. by M. Nazim. Berlin, 1928. 
Muntakhab-ut-Tawdrikh of ‘Abd-ul-Qadir BudaunI 

Ed. by W. N. Lees, Kabiruddln Ahmad and 
Ahmad ‘All. BI. 3 vols. Calcutta, 1864-69. 
Eng. Trans, by G. S. A. Ranking (Vol. I), 
W. H. Lowe (Vol. II), and T. W. Haig (Vol. 
III). BI. Calcutta, 1884-1925. 

Rauzat-us-Safa of Mir Khvand 


Text. Tehran, 1274 Hijri. Eng. trans. by E. 
Rehatsch. Ed. by F. F. Arbuthnot. 5 vols. 
London, 1891-94. 

Tabaqat-i-Akbafi of Nizam-ud-din Ahmad 

Ed. by B. De (Vols. I and II) and by B. De 
and M. Hidayat Hosayn (Vol. III). BI. Cal 
cutta, 1913-27, 1931, 1941. Eng. Trans, by 
B. De. BI. 3 vols. Calcutta, 1913-40. 
Tabaqat-i-Nasiri of Minhaj-ud-din b. Siraj-ud-dln 

Ed. by W. N. Lees, Khadim Husain and Abdu’I- 
Hayy. BI. Calcutta, 1863-64. Eng. trans. 
m .. by H. G. Raverty. BI. Calcutta, 1873-97. 

Taj-ul-Ma asir of Hasan-un-Nizami 


Extracts trans. HIED, II. 204-43. 
Tarikh-i-Alm (Khazain-ul-Futuh) of Amir Khusrau 

Ed. by Syed Moinul Haq. Aligarh, 1927. 
Extracts trans. HIED, III. 67 ff. Eng. trans. 
by M. Habib, Campaigns of ‘Ala-ud-din 
Khalji. Bombay, 1931. 


793 


misTf},, 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


rikh-i-Baihaqi of Abu-’l-Fazl Baihaqi 

E< 3- by W. H. Morley. BI. Calcutta, 1861-62. 

Ta’rikh-i-Firishta of Muhammad Qasim Firishta 

Lucknow, 1905. Eng. Trans, by J. Briggs. 4 
vols. London, 1827-29. Reprint. Calcutta, 
1911. 

Ta’rikh-i-Firuz Shahi of Shams-i-Sii'aj ‘Aflf 

Ed. by Wilayat Husayn. BI. Calcutta, 1888-91. 

Ta’rikh-i-Firuz Shdhi of Ziya-ud-din Barani 

Ed. by W. N. Lees, S. Ahmad Khan and Kabir- 
ud-din. BI. Calcutta, 1860-62. Extracts 
trans. HIED,, III. 93-268. 

To. rikh-i-Guzida of Hamd-Ullah. MustaufI Qazvlnl 

Text and abridged trans. E. J. W. Gibb Memo¬ 
rial series, No. XIV. Vols. I (Persian text) 
and II (Abridged trans. and indices, by 
Brown and Nicholson). London, 1911, 1914. 

Ta’rikh-i-Yamirfi of Al-'Utbi 

Ed. by Ali, Lahore. Trans, by J. Reynolds. 
London, 1858. Extracts trans. HIED, II. 
14-52. 

History of India as told by its own Historians. 
8 vols. London, 1866-77. Vol. II. Reprint¬ 
ed with Introduction by Mohammad Habib, 
Commentary by S. H. Hodivala, and Supple¬ 
ment by Khaliq Ahmad Nizami. Aligarh, 
1952. 

Studies in Indo-Muslim History. Bombay, 
1939. 


Elliot, Sib H. M. and 
Dowson, John 


Hodivala, S. H. 


Buzurg ibn 
Shahriyar 


Ferrand, G. 


Chau Ju-Kua 


(2) NON-INDIAN SOURCES: 

(A) ARABIC 

Kitab ‘Ajdyab-ul-Hind or Livre des Merveilles 
de L’lnde, Texte Arabe par P. A. Van der 
Lith; traduction Francaise par L. Marcel 
Devic. Leide, 1883-86. Eng. Trans. (The 
Book of the Marvels of India) by L. Marcel 
Devic. London, 1928. 

Relations des Voyages et Textes Geographiques 
Arabes , Persons et Turks—Relatifs a T Ex¬ 
treme-Orient du VHP au XV11P siecles. 
2 vols. Paris, 1913-14. 

(B) CHINESE 

His work on the Chinese and Arab Trade in 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries entitl¬ 
ed Chu-fan-chi. Translated from the Chinese 
and annotated by F. Hirth and W. W. Rock- 
hill. Academy of Sciences. St. Petersburg, 
1912. 


794 


MINISr^ 



Aiyeb, K . V . Sub- 

RAHMANYA 

Bhanbarkar, D . R. 

Butterwobth, A. 
and Chetty, 
VfiKTTGOPAL 
Chhabra, B* Ch., and 
Rao, N. L. 
Hiralal 

Hultzsch, E. 

Krishnamaciiarlu, 

C. R. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(C) TIBETAN 
German trans. by F. A. von Schiefner (Ges- 
chichte des Buddhismus in Indien). St. 
Petersburg, 1869. Eng. Trans. (History of 
Buddhism in India) by U. N. Ghoshal and 
N. Dutt. IHQ, III. 60-68; 508-9; 803-7; IV. 
530-3; V. 715-21; VI. 334-44; VII. 150-60. 
VIII. 247-52; X. 551-7; XXVII. 239-49; 
XXVIII. 41-50. Extracts trans. into English 
by W. L. Heeley. 1A, IV. 101. 

II. ORIGINAL SOURCES; 

(1) Inscriptions 

South Indian Inscriptions. 2 Vols. (ASI, N1S, 
Vols. 52, 53). Madras, 1928, 1933. 

“List of Inscriptions of Northern India”. Ap¬ 
pendix to El, XIX-XXIII. 

Collection of the Inscriptions on copper plates 
and stones in the Nellore District. 3 vols. 
Madras, 1905. 

“Ten Years of Epigraphy (1937-46)”. Ancient 
India, No. 5, pp. 46 ff. 

List of Inscriptions in the Central Provinces 
and Berar. 2nd Ed. Nagpur, 1932. 

South Indian Inscriptions. 3 vols. (ASI, NIS, 
Vols. 9, 10 and 29). Madras, 1890-1929. 
Bombay-Karnataka Inscriptions. Madras, 
1940. 



Majvmdar, N. G 


Inscriptions of Bengal Vol. III. Rajshahi, 
1929. 


Mira 8 hi, V. V. 
Fanohamukhi, R. S. 
Peterson, F. 

Rangaoharya, V. 
Rice, Lbwis 


Inscriptions of the Kalachuri-Chedi Era. CII, 
Vol. IV. Ootacamund, 1955. 

Karnataka Inscriptions. 2 vols. Dharwar 
1941, 1951. 

A Collection of Prakrit and Sanskrit Inscrip¬ 
tions. Pub. by the Bhavnagar Archaeologi¬ 
cal Department. Bhavnagar, (1905). 

Inscriptions from the Madras' Presidency. 
3 vols. Madras, 1919. 

Mysore and Coorg from Inscriptions. London, 


Sastbi, H. Krishna 
Sewell, R. 

Sreenivasachar, B. 

p. 

SUBHAMANIAM, T. N. 

(Also Epigraphia 
South Indian 
etc.) 


South Indian Inscriptions. 2 vols. (ASI NIS 
Vols. 44, 49). Madras, 1924, 1926. 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 
Ed. by S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar. Madras, 
1 y o< 6 . 

A Corpus of Inscriptions of H. E. H. Nizam's 
Dominions. HAS, No. 13. Hyderabad, 1940. 
South Indian Temple Inscriptions. 3 vols. 
Madras, 1953-55. 

Indica, Epigraphia Carnatica, Annual Report on 
Epigraphy, Annual Report on Indian Epigraphy, 


795 




MINIS Tfty 



Allan, J. 


Baneiui, R. D. 

Brown, C. J. 
Cunningham, A. 


Elliot, W. 
Rapson, E. J. 
Singhal, C. R. 
Smith, V. A. 


Wright, H. N. 


Bhandakkar, R. G, 


Haig, Sir Wolseley 

J O IT V E ATJ -DUBREUIL, 

G. 

Lane-Poole, Stanley 


'/ Majumdar, R.C. (Ed.) 
</ Ray, H. C. 

Sarkar, J. N. (Ed.) 
Sastri, R. A. Nila- 

KANTA 

»> »» 

f* »» 

Smith, V. A. 

Thomas, Edward 

Tkifatht, R. S. 
Vaiijya, C. V. 

Venkataramanayya, 

N. 


\ Dasovpta, S. N. (Ed.) 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 
(2) Coins 

Catalogue of the Coins of Ancient India (in the 
British Museum). London, 1936. 

Prachina Mudra, (in Bengali). Calcutta, 1322 
B. S. 

Coins of India. Calcutta, 1922. 

Coins of Mediaeval India from the seventh cen¬ 
tury down to the Muhammadan Conquest. 
London, 1894. 

Coins of Southern India. London, 1896. 
Indian Coins. Strassburg, 1897. 

Bibliography of Indian Coins. Bombay, 1950. 
Catalogue of the Coins in the Indian Museum , 
Calcutta, including the Cabinet of the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal. Vol. I. Oxford, 1906. 
Catalogue of Coins in the Indian Museum, 
Calcutta, including the Cabinet of the Asia¬ 
tic Society of Bengal. Vol. II. Oxford, 1907. 

III. MODERN WORKS: 

(1) Histories of the Period 

Early History of the Deccan. BG. Vol. I, Part 
2.'Bombay, 1896; 2nd Ed. CW, III. 1-198. 
Poona, 1927; 3rd Ed. Calcutta, 1928. 
Cambridge History of India. Vol. III. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1928. 

Ancient History of the Deccan (Trans, from 
the French by V. S. Swaminadha Dikshitar). 
Pondicherry, 1920. 

Mediaeval India under Mohammadan Rule. 
London, 1903. 

The Mohammadan Dynasties. London, 1894. 
History of Bengal. Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 
Dynastic History of Northern India. 2 vols. 
Calcutta, 1931, 1936. 

History of Bengal. Vol. II. Calcutta, 1948. 
Colas. 2nd Ed. Madras, 1955. 

History of India. Vol. I. Madras, 1950. 
History of South India. Madras, 1955. 

Early History of India. 4th Ed. Oxford, 1924. 
Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of Delhi. Lon¬ 
don, 1871. 

History of Kanauj. Benares, 1937. 

History of Mediaeval Hindu India. 3 vols. 
Poona, 1921-26. 

The Early Muslim Expansion in South India. 
Madras, 1942. 

(2) Histories of Literature 

A History of Sanskrit Literature. Classical 
Period. Vol*I. Calcutta, 1947. 



796 


MINlSr^ 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Frazer, R. W. 
Geiger, W. 


Gowen, H. H, 
Kane, P. V*. 


Keith, A. B. 

»> M 

KRISHNAMACHARIAR, 

M. 

Law, B. C. 
Macdokell, A. A. 

WlNTERNITZ, M. 


>♦ )f 


Brandarkar, B. G. 


Bhattacharyya, 

H. B. (Ed.) 

>* 99 

Dasgtota, S. N. 
Farquhar, J. N. 
Kane, P. V. 
Radhakrishnan, S. 

VlDYABHUSHANA. S.C. 

Zimmer, H. * 


Studies in the History of Sanskrit Poetics. 

2 vols. London, 1923, 1925. 

Literary History of India, London, 1898. 
Pali Litemtur und Sprache. Strassburg, 1916. 
Eng. trans. (Pali Literature and Language) 
by B. K. Ghosh. Calcutta, 1943. 

History of Indian Literature. New York, 1931. 
History of Alahkara Literature. 2nd Ed. 
Bombay 1923; 3rd Ed. (History of Sanskrit 
Poetics). Bombay, 1951. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. Oxford, 1928. 
Reprint 1941, 48, 53. 

Sanskrit Drama. Oxford, 1924. Reprint, 1954. 
History of Classical Sanskrit Literature. Mad¬ 
ras, 1937. 

History of Pali Literature. 2 vols. London 
1933. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. London, 1900 
Reprint, 1928. 

History of Indian Literature. (Eng. Trans, by 
Mrs. S. Ketkar). 2 vols. Calcutta, 1927, 
1933. 

Geschichte des indischen Literatur. Band 
III. Leipzig, 1920. 

(3) Religion and Philosophy 

Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
Systems. Strassburg, 1913. Indian Edition. 
Poona, 1938. 

The Philosophies. Cultural Heritage of India. 

2nd Ed. Vol. III. Calcutta, 1953. 

The Religions. Cultural Heritage of India. 2nd 
Ed. Vol. IV. Calcutta, 1956. 

History of Indian Philosophy. 5 vols. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1932-55. 

Outline of the Religious Literature of India. 
Oxford, 1920. 

History of Dharmasastra. 4 vols. Poona, 
1930-53. 

Indian Philosophy. 2 vols. London, 1923, 1927. 
History of Indian Logic. Calcutta, 1921. 
Philosophies of India. Ed. by J. Campbell. 
London, 1953. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(Note: In the Bibliographies to the different chapters, full refer¬ 
ences to the Original Sources and Modern Works, mentioned 
earlier, are not given,gave in exceptional cases.) 

797 


Al-Biruni 


ArUttt 


BaihaqI, Abu-’l-Fazl 
FarrukhI 


Firishta, Muham¬ 
mad Qasim 

Hamd-Ullah 

Mustaufi 

Qazvini 


Ibn-ul-AsIr 

Khvand Mir 

Mahmud Gardizi 

Minhaj-ud-din b. 

Siraj-ud-dln 

Nizam-ud-dTn 

Ahmad 

TJnsuri 

Elliot, Sir FT. M. and 
Do wson , Pr<rfeasor 
John 
Habib, M. 

Haig, Sib Wolselby 
Nazim, M. 

SkbINJS, F. H. B. and 
Ross, E. Denison 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


CHAPTER I 

GHAZNAVID INVASIONS 

Original Sources 

Ta’rikh’l-Hind. Text and Translation. S. C. 
Sachau. Trubner’s Oriental Series. London, 
1910. 

Ta’rikh-i-Yamirti. Lahore. Extracts trans. 
HIED , II. Extracts trans. in Medieval 
Indian History (pp. 34-66) by Sri Ram 
Sharma (1956). 

Ta’rikh-i-Baihaqi. Bl. Calcutta, 1862. Ex¬ 
tracts trans. HIED> II. 

Divoan. Extract in Nazim’s Life and Times of 
Sultan Mahmud of Ghazna, Appendics K. 
and M. 

Ta’rikh-i-Firishta. Eng. trans. by Briggs. 
London, 1827. 

Ta’rikh-i~Guzida. Text and abridged Trans. 

E. J. W. Gibb Memorial Series, No. XIV, 
vols. I (Persian Text) and II (Abridged trans. 
and indices, by Brown and Nicholson). 
London, 1911, 1914. 

Al-Ta’rikh uLKdmil . Ed. by Tornberg. Ex¬ 
tracts trans. HIED, II. 

Habib-us-Siyar . Extracts trans. HIED, IV. 
154-212. 

Kitdb Zain-ul-Akhbar. Ed. by M. Nazim. Ber¬ 
lin, 1928. 

Tabaqdt-i-Nasiri. BI. Calcutta, 1864. Eng. 
trans. by H. G. Raverty. Calcutta, 1880. 

Tabaqat-i-Akbari, BI. Eng. trans. by B. De. 
BI. Calcutta, 1913. 

Divan. Tehran, n.d. 

Modern Woi'ks 

The History of India as told by Its own Histo¬ 
rians . 1867-1877 (vol. II, p. 434, Appendix, 

“Mahmud’s Expedition in India”). 

Sultan Mahmud of Ghaznin. Aligarh, 1927. 

The Cambridge History of India. Vol. III. 
Cambridge, 1928. 

The Life and Times of Sultan Mahmud of 
Ghazna. Cambridge, 1931. 

Heart of Central Asia. London, 1899. 



MINlSr/f/' 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


CHAPTER II 


NORTHERN INDIA DURING ELEVENTH AND 
TWELFTH CENTURIES 

(i) DYNASTIES OF BENGAL 
Original Sources: Literary and Inscriptions 

Pavanaduta. Ed. by C. Chakravarti. Calcutta, 
1926. 

Gaiulalekhamala. Rajshahi, 1319 (B.S.). 
Inscriptions of Bengal. Vol. III. Rajshahi, 
1929. 

Tabaqat-i-Ndsirl. Calcutta, 1864. Trans, by 
H. G. Raverty. Calcutta, 1880. 
Rama-charita. Ed. by R. C. Majumdar and 
others. Rajshahi, 1939. 

PagSam-Jon-Zang. Ed. by S. C. Das. Calcutta, 
1908. 

Modern Works 

Baiigalar Itihasa (Bengali). 3rd Ed. Calcutta. 
Palas of Bengal. MASB, V, 3. Calcutta, 1915. 
Gauda-rajamala. Rajshahi, 1319 B.S. 

Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow. Calcutta. 
1893. 

“Origin of the Varman and Sena Dynasties”. 
IHQ, XII. 607-12. 

The History of Bengal. Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 
The Early History of Bengal. Calcutta, 1939. 
Dynastic History of Northern India. Vol. I. 

Calcutta, 1931 (Ch. VI). 

The History of Bengal. Vol. II. Calcutta, 1948. 
Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien. Trans, 
by Anton Sehiefner. St. Petersburg, 1869. 
Extracts trans. by W. L. Heeley. IA, IV. 101- 
4. Eng. trans. by U. N. Ghoshal and N. Dutt. 
IHQ, III. 60-68; 508-9; 803-7; IV. 530-3; V. 
715-21; VI. 334-44; VII. 150-60; VIII. 247-52; 
X. 551-57; XXVII. 239-49; XXVIII. 41-50. 

(ii) DYNASTIES OF ASSAM 
Original Sources: Inscriptions 

Bir attachARYA, P. N. Kamarupa-sasanavall. Rangpur, 1338 (B.S.). 

Modern Works 

Bartja, K. L. History of Assam. Shillong, 1933. 

Gait, E. History of Assam. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1926. 

Ray, H. C. Dynastic History of Northern India. Vol. I. 

Calcutta, 1931 (Ch. V). 

(iii) DYNASTIES OF NEPAL 
Original Sources: Literary 

Bhn’imu,, C. Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit MSS. at 

Cambridge. Cambridge, 1886. 

799 


Dhoyi 

Maitbeya, A. K. 
Majumdar, N. G. 

MlNHAJ-UD-DIN B. 

SlRAJ-UD-DIN 

Sandhyakaranandi 

Sump a Mkhan Po 


Banerji, R. I). 

»» >» 
Chanda, It. P. 

Das, S. C. 

Ganguly, D. C. 

Majumdar, R.C. (Ed.) 
Paul, P. L. 

Ray, H. C. 

Sarkar, J. N. (Ed.) 
Takanatha 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Gakottly, D* C. 


Haldar, B. K. 


Catalogue of the Sanskrit MSS. in the British 
Museum. London, 1902. 

Catalogue of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper 
MSS. belonging to the Durbar Library, 
Nepal. Calcutta, 1905. 

Modern Works 

“A History of Nepal and Surrounding King¬ 
doms”. JASB, 1903. 

An Account of the Kingdom of Nepal. London, 
1811. 

Nepal. 2 vols. London, 1928. 

Le Nepal. 3 vols. Paris, 1905. 

Dynastic History of Northern India. Vol. I, 
Ch. IV. 

History of Nepal. Cambridge, 1877. 

(iv) DYNASTIES OF BIHAR 

“Mithila during pre-Mughal Period”. JASB, 
1915. 406-32. 

Le Nepal. Vol. II. 

DHN1 , I, Ch. VI. 

For the Gupta dynasty, cf. JBORS, V. 582 ff. 

(v) DYNASTIES OF UTTAR PRADESH 
Original Sources 

Prithviraja Raso. Ed. by S. S. Das. Benares, 
1904. 

Prithvirdja-vijaya. See above, under '‘General 
Bibliography”, I, A,v, “Historical Works.” 
Tcij-ul-Ma'dsir. Extracts trans. HIED, II. 
Al-Ta’rikh ul-Kamil. Ed. by Tornberg. Ex¬ 
tracts trans. HIED , II. 

DiwcLn-i-Salmdn. Ed. by Abu-’l Qasim Akh- 
vani. Tehran, 1879. Extracts trans. HIED, 
IV. 

Tabaqat-i-Nasiri. Calcutta, 1864. Trans, by 
H. G. Raverty. Calcutta, 1880. 
TaWikh-i-Firishta. Trans, by J. Briggs. Vol. I. 
Calcutta, 1827. 

Rambhamanjari. With a comm, by Rama- 
chandra 6astri. Bombay, 1889. 

Modern Works 

“Early History of the Gahadavalas”. PAIOC, 
VII. (IRQ, IX. 951-6). 

“Historical Information in the Prakrita-Pain- 
galam”. IRQ, XI. 564-9. 

“The Historical Value of Dlwan-i-Salman”. 
Islamic Culture, XVI. 

“Some Reflections on Prithviraja Rasa”. 
JBBRAS , 1927, III. 203-11. 


Bendall, C. 
Sastri, H. P. 

Bendall, C. 

Kirkpatrick, Col. 

Landok, Percival 
Levi, Sylvain 
Ray, H. C. 

Wright, D. 

. Chakravarty, M. 

Levi, Sylvain 
Ray, H. C. 


Chand Bardai 

Jayanaka 

Hasan-un-Nizaml 

Ibn-ul-AsIr 

Khwaja Mas’ud bin 
Sa‘Id bin Salman 

Minhaj-ud-din 

Muhammad Qasim 
Firishta 
Nayachandra 


800 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Ramkaran 

Ray, H. 0. 

Rett, Bisheshwar 
Nath 

Sanyal, N. B. 

Sur, A. K. 

Syamal Das 


Tripathi, R. S. 


“History of the Rathors”. Sir Asutosh Moo- 
kerjee Silver Jubilee Volumes, III. 2.255 ff. 
“Gahacjavalas of Varanasi and Kanyakubja”. 
DHNJ , Vol. I, Ch, Vlil. 

“The Rashtrakutas and the Gaha<Javalas”, 
JRAS y 1930. lllff. 

“The predecessors of the Gahaijiavalas of 
Kanauj” JASB, 1925. 103-106. 

“Gahatfavalas of Kanauj”. IHQ, V. 86-102. 
“The Antiquity, Authenticity and Genuine¬ 
ness of the Epic called Prithvlraja Rasa, and 
commonly ascribed to Chand Bardai”. 
JASB , 1887, LV. 5-65. 

History of Kanauj . Benares, 1937. —. 


(vi) THE KACHCHHAPAGHATA AND THE 
YAJVAPALA DYNASTIES 


Cunningham, A. 

Minhaj-ud-dln 

Muhammad Qasim 
Firishta 

Nizam-ud-dln 

Ahmad 


Original Sources 
ASC, II. 

Tabaqat-i-Nasiri (See above, under “General 
Bibliography”). 

Ta’rikh-i-Firishta. Vol. I. Eng. trans. by J. 
Briggs (See above, under “General Biblio¬ 
graphy”). 

Tabaqat-i-Akbari. Trans, by B. De. Calcutta, 
1913. 


Modern Works 

Garde. M. B. “The Jajvapala or Jajapellas of Narwar”. I A, 

XLVII. 241. 

Mitra, R. L. “Vestiges of the kings of Gwalior”. JASB, 

1862. 391-424. 


(vii) THE CHANDELLA DYNASTY OF 
JEJAKABHUKTI 


Cunningham, A. 
Hasan-un-Nizami 
Krishna Misra 

Minhaj-ud-din 

Muhammad Qasim 

Smith, V. A. 


Original Sources 

ASC , II, X, XXI. 

Taj-ul-Ma’asir. Extracts trans. HIED, II. 

Prabodha-chandrodaya. Bombay, 1924. Trans, 
by J. Taylor. London, 1862. 

Tabaqat-i-Nasiri (See above, under “General 
Bibliography”). 

Ta'rikh-i-Firishta (See above under “General 
Bibliography”). 

“The History and Coinage of the Chandel Dy¬ 
nasty of Bundelkhand”. 1A, XXXVII. 114- 
48. 


Modern Works 


Bose, N. S. 
Ray, H. C. 


History of the Chandellas of Jejakabhukti. 

Calcutta, 1956. 

DHNI , Vol. II, Ch. XI. 


S.E.—51 


801 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Cunningham, A. 
Hibalal 

Mibashi, V. V. 

Banerji, R. D. 

Ray, H. C. 

(viii) 

‘Abd-u-lah Wassaf 
Amir Khusrav 

Hemachandra 

Madana 

Merutuhga 

Padmagupta 

Prahladana 

Somesvara 

Ganguly, D. C. 

Ray, H. C. 

(ix) 

Balachandra 

Charitrasundara 

Forbes 

Hasan-un-Nizami 

Hemachandra 


<SL 


THE KALACHURI DYNASTY 
Original Sources 

ASC, IX, XVII. „ T „ 

List of Inscriptions in the Central Provinces 
and Berar. 2nd Ed. Nagpur, 1932. 

Inscriptions of the Kalachuri-Chedi Era . Cor¬ 
pus Inscriptionum Indicarum, Vol. IV, Pts. 1 
and 2. Ootacamund, 1955. 

Modern Works 

The Haihayas of Tripuri and their Monuments. 

MASI, No. 23. Calcutta, 1931. 

DHNI, II, Ch. XII. 

THE PARAMARA DYNASTY 
Original Sources 

Tazjiyatu-l-Amsdr. Extracts trans. HIED, III. 
24. 

Ta’nkh-i-‘Alal. Aligarh, 1927. Extracts trans. 
HIED, III. 67. Eng. trans. (Campaigns of 
‘Ald-ud-din Khalji) by M. Habib. Bombay, 
1931. 

Dvyasraya-kavya. Bombay. Extracts trans. 
I A, IV. 72 ff. 

pdriidtamanjari. El, VIII. 96-122. 

Prabandha-chintamani. Bombay, 1888. Trans, 
by C. H. Tawney. Calcutta, 1901 (see above, 
under “General Bibliography”). 

Navasahasdhka-charita. Bombay, 1895. Ex¬ 
tracts trans. 1A, XXXVI (See above, under 
“General Bibliography”). 

Pdrthaparakrama Vyayoga. GOS. Baroda, 
1917. 

Surathotsava. Bombay, 1902. 

Modern Works 

History of the Paramdra Dynasty. Dacca, 1933. 

DHNI, II, Ch. XIV. 

THE CHAULUKYAS AND THE 
VAGHELAS 

Original Sources 

Vasantavildsa-Mahukavya. Baroda, 1917. 

Kumarapala-charita. JASS, No. 57. Bhav- 
nagar, 1917. . 

Rds Mala. Ed. by H. G. Rawlinson. Oxford, 
1924. 

Tdj-uUMa’asir. Extracts trans. HIED, II. 

Dvyasraya-kavya. Bombay. Extracts trans. I A, 
IV. 72 ff. 


802 



Jayasimha 

» 

Merutunga 

Minhaj-ud-din 

Nizam-ud-din 

Rajasekhara 

Somaprabhacharya 

Somesvara 

Jf 

Udayaprabha 


Bhagavanlal Indra- 
ji 

Majumdaji, A. K. 
Bay, H. C. 

(x) 


Chand Bardai 

Chandrasekhara 

Hasan-un-Nizami 
Jayanaka (?) 
Lakshmldhara 


Merutunga 

Minhaj-ud-din 

Muhammad Qasim 
Firishta 

Muhanota Nuinsi 7c 
Khyata 

Nayachandra Suri 


Bhandarkar, D. R. 
Ganguly, D. C. 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Hamrruira-mada~mardana. GOS. Baroda, 1920. 

Kumdrapala-charita. Bombay, 1926. 

Vastupdla-Tejahpdla-prasasti (Hammira-mada- 
mardana, Appendix I). 

Prabmdha-chintfimani. Bombay, 1888. Trans, 
by C. H. Tawney. Calcutta, 1901. 

T abaqdt-i-Ndsiri. Trans, by Raverty. 

Ta baqat-i-Akbari. Trans, by B. De. Calcutta, 
1913. 

Vastupala-prabandha. GOS, VII. 197. Baroda, 
1917. 

Kumdrapala-pratibodha . GOS, XIV. Baroda, 
1920. 

Kirtlikaumudi. Bombay, 1883. 

Surathotsava. Bombay, .1902. 

Sukrita-kirti-kallolini (Hammlra-mada-inarda- 
na, Appendix II, pp. 67-90). GOS, X. 
Baroda, 1920. 

Modern Works 

“Early History of Gujarat.” Bombay Gazet¬ 
teer, Vol. I, Pt. I. Bombay, 1896. 

Chaulukyas of Gujarat. Bombay, 1956. 

DHNI, II, Ch. XV. 

THE CHAHAMANA DYNASTY 
Original Sources 

Prithviraja Rdso. Ed. by M. V. Pandia and S. S. 
Das. Benares, 1913. 

Surjana-charita. Ed. by J. B. Chaudhury. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1951. 

Taj-ul-Ma'asir. Extracts trans. HIED . II. 

Prithvirdja-vijaya. BI. Calcutta, 1914-22. 

Viruddha-vidhi-vidhvamsa. Extract. Cat. of 

Sans. MSS. India Office Library, Pt. Ill, p. 
490. 

Prabandha-chintamard. SJS. Santiniketan, 
1933. 

Tabaqat-i-Nasiri. Trans, by Raverty. Calcutta, 
1873-97. 

Ta’rikh-i-Firishta. Trans, by Briggs. London, 
1827-29. 

Hindi Trans, by R. Dugada. Benares, Samvat 
1982. 

Hammira-mahakavya. Bombay, 1879. 

Modern Works 

“Chahamanas of Marwar”. El, XI._67ff. 

“Historical information in the Prakrita Pain- 
galam”. 1HQ, XI. 564-9. 

“A New Light on the History of the Chaha¬ 
manas”. IHQ, XVI. 567-73. 


803 


Haldar, It. R. 

Ray, H. C. 

S yamal Das 

Tod, J. 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

“Some Reflections on Prithvlraja Rasa”. 

JBBRAS, 1927. 203-11. 

DHNl, Vol. II, Ch. XVI. 

“The Antiquity, Authenticity and Genuine¬ 
ness of the Epic called the Prithvlraja Rasa, 
and commonly ascribed to Chand Bardai.” 
JASB, 1887. 5-65. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan. Ed. by 
W. Crooke. Oxford, 1920. 

(xi) THE GUHILA DYNASTY 



Amir Khusrav 


Malik Muhammad 
Jayasi 

Muhammad Qasim 
Firishta 


Bansejee, A. C. 
Dtttt, S. C. 
Ojha, G. H. 

Ray, H. C. 

Tod, J. 


Abu-’l-Fazl Baihaqi 


Abu Sa'id ‘Abdu¬ 
llah Baizawi 
Hamd-Ullah 
Mustaufi 
QazvinI 

Khwaja Mas’iid bin 
Sa'id bin Salman 
Minhaj-ud-din 

Muhammad Qasim 
Firishta 
Nizam-ud-din 
Ahmad 


Ganguly, D. C. 


Original Sources 

Ta’rikh-i-AlM. Ed. by Syed Moinul Haq. Ali¬ 
garh, 1927. Extract trans. HIED,, III. Ex¬ 
tract Trans, by M. Habib. JIH, 1929. 369-73. 
Padumavati. Ed. by G. A. Grierson and S. 
Dvivedi. BI. Calcutta, 1886-1911. Eng. 
trans. by A. G. Shirreff. BI. Calcutta, 1944. 
Ta’rikh-i-Firishta. Trans, by Briggs. Vol. I. 
London, 1827. 

Modern Works 

Rajput Studies. Calcutta, 1944. 

“The First Saka of Chitor”. IHQ,, VII. 287-300. 
History of Rajputana (Hindi). Ajmer, 1936 
ff. 

DHNI, Vol. II, Ch. XVIII. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan. Ed. by 
W. Crooke. Oxford, 1920. 

(xii) YAMINI DYNASTY 
Original Sources 

Ta’rikh-i-Baihaqi also known as Ta’rikh-i- 
Sabuktigin. Calcutta, 1862. Extracts trans. 
HIED i II 

Nizamii-t-Ta’nkh. Extracts trans. HIED, II. 

Ta’nkh-i-Guzida. Text and abridged Trans. 
E. J. W. Gibb Memorial Series. Vols. I and 
II. London, 1911, 1914. 

Diioan-i-Salrndn. Tehran, 
trans. HIED , IV. 

Tabaqat-i-Nasin. Calcutta, 

Raverty. Calcutta, 1880. 

Ta’rikh-i-Firi$hta. Trans, by Briggs. 

1827-29. 

Tabaqdt-i-Akbari. Trans, by B. De. Calcutta, 
1913. 

Modern Works 

‘‘Historical Value of 
Islamic Culture, XVI. 


1879. Extracts 


.1864. 


Trans, by 
London, 


the Diwan-i-Salman” 


804 


misfy 



<SL 


Haig, Sib Wolseley 


(xiii) 


Jonaraja 

Kalhapa 


General bibliography 

The Cambridge History of India. Vol. III. 
Cambridge, 1928. 

DYNASTIES OF KASHMIR 
Original Sources 

Dvitiya Rdjatarangini. Ed. by P. Peterson. 
Bombay, 1896. Trans, by J. C. Datta. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1887. 

Rajatarangini. Ed. and Trans, by M.A. Stein. 
Bombay, 1892; Westminster, 1900. 

LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 

Palos of Bengal 

[A large collection of inscriptions will be found in GawjUi-lekha- 
rmid by A. K. Maitreya.] 

Bangarh Copper-Plate of Mahipala I. El, XIV. 324. 

Sarnath Stone-Inscription of the reign of Mahipala I. I A, XIV. 
139 

Gaya Krishnadvarika Temple-Inscription of the reign of Naya- 
pala. JASB, LXIX. 190. 

Nimdighi (Manda) Stone-Inscription. IHQ. XVII. 207. 

Manahali CP. JASB, LXIX, Pt. I. 68. 

Dinajpur (Bangarh) Pillar-Inscription. JASB, N.S., VII. 619. 
Irda C.P. of Kamboja Nayapala. El, XXII. 150. 

Kamauli CP. of Vaidyadeva. El, II. 350. 

Varmans of East Bengal ,. 

Samantasar CP. of Harivarman. Bhdratavarsha, 1344 (Bengali 

Sam), 169. 

Bhuvaneswar SI. of the time of Harivarman. IB, III. 25. 

Belava CP. of Bhojavarman. IB, III. 14. 

Senas of Bengal 

[A large collection of inscriptions will be found in Inscriptions 
of Bengal, Vol. Ill by N. G. Majumdar.] 

Deopara SI. of Vijayasena. El, I. 305. 

Naihafi CP. of Vallalasena. El, XIV. 156. 

Rajavadi CP. of Lakshmanasena. El, XXVI. 1. 

Madhainagar CP. of Lakshmanasena. IB, III. 106. 

Edilpur CP. of Kesavasena. IB, III. 118. 

Devas of Samatata and Vahga 

Chittagong CP. of Damodara, Saka 1165. IB,, in. 158. 

Mehar CP. of Damodara, S. 1156. El, XXVII. 

Adavadi CP. of Dasaratha. IB, III. 180. 


Dynasty of Patfikem 

Mainamati CP. of Ratjavahkamalla, S. 1141. IHQ, IX. 
Assam 

Bargaon CP. of Ratnapala. JASB, LXVII. 99. 

Assam CP. of Vallabhadeva. El, V. 181. 

Rdshtrakutas of Kanauj 

Budaun SI. of Lakhanapala. El, I. 61. 

805 


282 . 




miST/fy 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



ihagLavdlas of Kanauj and Banaras 
Chandravati CP. of Chandradeva, 

Basahi CP. of the reign of Madanapala, 

Rahan CP. of the reign of Madanapala, 

Sarnath SI. of the reign of Govindachancti 
Benares College CP. of Jayachandra, V.S. 
Machhlisahr CP. of Harischandra, V.S. 1253. El, X. 


101 . 
XVIII. 14. 

319 

XVlil. 129. 


Kachchhapaghatas 

Sasbahu temple inscription of Mahipala, V.S. 1150. IA , XV. 33. 
Dubkund Inscription of Vikramasimha, V.S. 1145. El, II. 232. 
Narwar CP. of Virasimha, V.S. 1177. JAOS, VI. 542. 


Chandellas 

A fragmentary SI. of Harsha (?). El, I. 121. 

Khajuraho SI. of Dhanga, V.S. 1011. El, I. 122. 

Nanyaura CP. of Dhanga, V.S. 1055, IA, XVL 201. 

Deogarh Rock Inscription of Klrttivarman, V.S. 1154. IA, XVIII. 
237. 

Augasi CP. of Madanavarman, V.S. 1190. IA, XVI. 202. 

Mau SI. of Madanavarman. El, I. 195. 

Sernra CP. of Paramardl, V.S. 1223. El, IV. 153. 

Baghari SI. of Paramardl, V.S. 1252. El, I. 207 (Ba^esvara). 
Kalanjar SI. of Paramardl, V.S. 1258. JASB, 1848, XVII. 313. 
Garra CP. of Trailokyavarman, V.S. 1261. El, XVL 272. 

Rewah CP. of Trailokyavarman, V.S. 1297. IA, XVII. 231. 
Rewah CP. of Trailokyavarman, V.S. 1298. IA, XVII. 235. 
Aiaigarh Rock Inscription of Viravarman, V.S. 1337. El, I. 325. 
Dahi CP. of Viravarman, V.S. 1337. ASCI, XXL 74. 

Ajaigarh Rock Inscription of Bhojavarman. El, I. 330. 
Charkhari State CP. of Hammlravarman, V.S. 1346. El, XX. 137. 


Kalachuris 

[A large collection of inscriptions will be found in Inscriptions 
of the Kalachuri-Chedi Era by V. V. Mirashi.] 

Kahla CP. of Sho^hadeva of Sarayupara, V.S. 1135. El, VII. 85. 
Kasia SI. of Bhimata II (?) of the Kasia branch. El, XVIII. 121. 
Bilhari SI. of Yuvaraja II of Dahala. El, I. 251. 

Benares CP. of Karna, K.E. 793. El, II. 297. 

Goharwa CP. of Karna. El, XI. 139. 

Rewah SI. of Kan>a, K.E. 812. MASI, No. 23. 130. 

Khairha CP. of Yasahkarna, K.E. 823. El, XII. 205. 

Bheraghat SI. of Alhanadevi, K.E. 907. El, II. 7. 

Rewah CP. of Jayasiiiiha, K.E. 926. IA, XVII. 224. 

Karanbel SI. of Jayasimha. IA, XVIII. 214. 

Rewah CP. of Vi jayasimha, V.S. 1253. IA, XVII. 227. 

Amoda CP. of Prithvideva of Tummana. K.E. 831. El, XIX. 75. 
Ratnapur SI. of Jajalladeva, K.E. 866. El, I. 32. 

Raiim SI. of Prithvideva II, K.E. 896. IA, XVII. 135. 

Koni Inscription of Prithvideva II, K.E. 900. El, XXVII, 276. 
Kharod SI. of Ratnadeva III, K.E. 993. IA, XXII. 82. 


Pararndras 

Harsola CP. of Siyaka II. V.S. 1005. El, XIX. 236. 
Banswara CP. of Bhoja, V.S. 1076. El, XI. 181. 

806 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


<SL 


Tilakwada CP. of Bhoja, V.S. 1103. PAIOC, I. 319. 

Panhera SI. of Jayasimha, V.S. 1116. ASI, 1916-17. 19. 

Udepur SI. of Udayaditya. El, I. 222. _ r ___ rT 

Dongargaon SI. of Jagaddeva, V.S. 1034. El, XXVI. 

Jainad SI. of Jagaddeva. El, XXII. 54. 

Nagpur SI. of Naravarman, V.S. 1161. Eli, II. 180. 

Piplianagar CP. of Arjunavarman, V.S. 1267. JASB, 1836, V. 
377. 

Dhar Prasasti of Arjunavarman. El, VIII. 96. 

Mandhata CP. of Devapala, V.S. 1282. El , IX. 103. 

Mandhata CP. of Jayavarman II, V.S. 1317. El, IX. 117. 
Vasantgadh SI. of Purnapala of Mt. Abu, V.S. 1099. El, IX. 10. 
Ajahari SI. of Yaiodhavala, V.S. 1202. IA , LVI. 12. 

Abu SI. of Dharavarsha, V.S. 1220. IA, LVI. 50. 

Abu SI. of Somasimha, V.S. 1287. El, VIII. 204. 

Patanarayana SI. of Pratapasimha, V.S. 1344 IA 1916. 77. 
Arthuna SI. of Chamuijdaraja of Vagatfa, V.S. 1136. hi, Xiv. 
295 

Jalor SI. of Visala of Javalipura, V.S. 1174. PR, ASI, WC, 1909. 
54 

Kiradu SI. of Somesvara of Bhinmal, V.S. 1218. Nahar, Jaina 
Ins*, Pt. I, p. 251. 


Chaulukyas 

Balera CP. of Mularaja, V. S. 1051. El, X. 76 
Radhanpur CP. of Bhima I, V.S. 1086. 1A, VI. 193. 

Sunak CP. of Karna, V.S. 1148. El, I. 316. 

Navsari inscription of Karna, {§. 996. Bh. List, 1098; JBBhAS, 
XXVI. 255. 

Ujjain SI. of Jayasimha, V.S. 1195. IA, lOJtl. 258. 

Dohad SI. of Jayasimha, V.S. 1196. IA, XX. 158. 

Talwara SI. of Jayasimha. An. Rep. Raj. M. 1915. 2. 

Chitorgadh SI. of Kumarapala, V.S 1207. El, II. 421. 

Vadnagar Prasasti of Kumarapala, V.S. 1208. El, I. 293. 

Veraval Prasasti of Bhava Bpihaspati, Valabhi Sam. 850. WZKJV1, 

Udayapur SI. of Ajayapala, V.S. 1229 IA, XVin. 344 
Bombay Secretariat CP. of Ajayapala, V.S. 1231. I A, XVIII. 80. 
Brahmanwada CP. of Mularaja II, V.S. 1232. Important Inscrip¬ 
tions from the Baroda State, I. 71. _ T .. 

Veraval SI. of Bhava Brihaspati of the time of Bhima II. Prakrit 
and, Sanskrit Inscriptions of Kattyawar, 208. 

Kadi CP. of Bhima II, V.S. 1263, 1283,1287, 1288, 1295, 1296. IA, 
VI. 194 f. 

Abu SI. of Bhima II, V.S. 1287. El, VIII. 200. 

Kadi CP. of Jayantasimha, V.S. 1280. IA, VI. 196. 

Dabhoi SI. of Visaladeva, V.S. 1311. El, I. 20 
Veraval CP. of Arjuna, V.S. 1320. IA, XI. 241. 

Cintra SI. of Sarangadeva, V.S. 1343. El, I. 271. 

Inscription of Karna, V.S. 1354 ASI, 1935-36, pJ8. 

Surat grant of Trilochanapala, S. 972. IA, XII. 201. 


807 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 

^Mdhamanas 

Dholapur SI. of Chandamahasena, V.S. 898. ZDMG, XL. 39. 
Partabgarh SI. of Mahendrapala II, V.S. 1003. El, XIV. 160. 

Haras SI. of Vigraharaja II, V.S. 1030. El, II. 119; IA, XLII. 60. 
Ajmer SI. (LalitaVigrahardja-na^aka) of the reign of Vigraha¬ 
raja IV. IA, XX. 201 ff; Gottinger Festschrift, 1901, pp. 1-15. 
Ajmer SI. ( Harakeli-ndfaka) of Vigraharaja IV. IA, XX. 201 ff; 

Gottinger Festschrift, 1901, pp. 16-30. 

Delhi Siwalik Pillar inscriptions of Vigraharaja IV, V.S. 1220. 

IA XIX 215 

Hansi SI. of Prithviraja II, V.S. 1234. IA, 1912. 17. 

Bijolia Rock-Inscription of Somesvara, V.S. 1226. El, XXVI. 91. 
Madanpur SI. of Prithviraja III. V.S. 1239. ASI, XXI. 173. 
Manglana SI. of Bslhana, V.S. 1272. I A, 1912. 85. 

Balvan SI. of Hammira, V.S. 1345. El, XIX. 45. 

Sumdha Hill SI. of Chachigadeva, V.S. 1319. El, IX. 70. 

Guhilas 

Samoli inscription of Siladitya, V.S. 703. EL, XX. 97. 

Atpur inscription of Saktikumara, V.S. 1034. IA, XXXIX. 191. 
Ghaghsa SI. of Tejasimha, V.S. 1322. Annual Report of the Raj- 
putana Museum, 1927. p. 3. 

Chitor SI. of Tejasimha, V.S. 1324. JASB, LV. Part I, 46. 

Chirwa SI. of Samarasiriiha, V.S. 1330. El, XXII. 285. 

Abu SI. of Samarasiriiha, V.S. 1342. IA, XVI. 345. 

Kumbhalgarh SI. of Rsna Kumbha, V.S. 1517. PRASI, WC, 1905- 
06, p. 62, No. 2223. 

Sadadi SI. of Rapa Kumbha, V.S. 1496. ASI, 1907-08, p. 214. 

Chatsu SI. of Baladitya. El, XII. 10. 

Mushanas of Chamba 

Kulait CP. inscription of Somavarman. ASI, 1902-03, 184. 

Chamba State Museum CP. of Somavarman and Asata. IA, XVII. 

11 . 


CHAPTER III 

THE AGE OF PRITHVIRAJA III 
Original Sources: Literary Works 


Chand Bardai 
Chandrasekhara 

Firishta 

Hasan-un-Nizaml 

Jayanaka 

Lakshmidhara 

Meruturiga 

Acharya 


Prithviraja-Rdso. Ed. by Mohanlal Vishanlal 
Pandia and Sham Sundar Das. Benares, 1913. 
Surjana-charita. Ed. with intr., indices, etc. 

by J. B. Chaudhury. Calcutta, 1951. 
Ta’rikh-i-Firishta. Eng. Trans, by Briggs. Vol. 

I (See above under “General Bibliography”). 
Tdj-ul-Ma’asir. Extracts trans. HIED, II. 204. 
Prithviraja-vijaya. Ed. by G. H. Ojha and C. 

S. Guleri. Ajmer, 1941. 
Viruddha-vidhi-vidhvamsa. Extract Cat. Ind* 
Office Library, Pt. Ill, p. 490. 
Prabandha-chintamani. Eng. trans. by C. H. 
Tawney. Calcutta, 1901. Text. ed. by 
Ramachandra Dinanatha. Bombay, 1888 
(See above under “General Bibliography”). 


SOS 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Minhaj-ud-din 

Muni Jinavijaya 
(Ed.) 


Nayachandra Suri 


Nizam-ud-din 

Ahmad 

Prahladana 


Ganguly, D. C. 
Halbab, R. R. 
Ray, H. C. 

P» PP 

Sard a, H. B. 
Sarma, Dasarat?ha 
Syamal Das 


Tod, J. 


<SL 

Tabaqat-i-Nasiri. Eng. trans. by H. G. Raver 
ty. BI. Calcutta, 1880 (See above under 
“General Bibliography”). 

Prithvirajaprabandha. Published in the Pura- 
tanq-Prabandha-Samgraha, Singhi Jaina 
Granthamala. 

Hammlra-MahdMvya. Ed. by N. J. Kirtane. 
Bombay, 1879. Eng. trans. Extract, IA, 
VIII. 55. 

Tabaqdt-i-AJcbari. Eng. trans. by B. De (See 
above under “General Bibliography”). 

Pdrtha-Pamkrama-V yayoga. Ed. by C. D. 
Dalai. GOS, No. IV. Baroda, 1917. 

Modern Works 

“A New Light on the History of the Chaha- 
manas”. 1HQ, XVI. 567-73. 

“Some Reflections on Prithviraja Rasa”. 

J BBRAS, III, 1927, pp. 203 ff. 

Dynastic History of Northern India., II. 1083 ff: 

“The Age of Chahamana Prithviraja III”. 1C, 
VIII. 323-8. 

Prithvimja-Vijaya. Extract trans. JRAS, 1913, 
pp. 259 ff. 

“Prithviraja III: The last Hindu Emperor of 
Delhi”. 1C, XI. 51-73. 

“The Antiquity, Authenticity and Genuine¬ 
ness of the Epic called the Prithvi Raja Rasa, 
and commonly ascribed to Chand Bardai”. 
JASB, 1887, LV. 5-65. 

Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan. Ed. by 
W. Crooke. Oxford, 1920. 


LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 


Lohari (Udaipur State, Rajputana) Sati SI. of the reign of 
Prithviraja (III), dated V.S. 1236. Annual Report of the 
Rajputana Museum, 1922-23, p. 2. 

Madanpur (Jhansi Dist., U.P.) SI. of the time of Prithviraja III, 
dated V.S. 1239. ASC, X. 98; XXI. 178, 174. 

Victoria Museum, Udaipur, memorial SI. of the time of Prithvi¬ 
raja III. PRAS, WC, 1905-06, p. 62, No. 2224. 


CHAPTER IV 

THE TURKISH CONQUEST OF NORTHERN INDIA 
Original Sources 

BudaunI, ‘Abd-ul-Qadir 

Muntakhab-ut-Twivarikh. Ed. by W. N. Lees, 
Kabir-ud-din Ahmad and Ahmad ‘Ali. BI. 
Calcutta, 1868. Eng. Trans. Vol. I by Lt. Col. 
G. S. A. Ranking. BI. Calcutta, 1898. 


809 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


Lithographed at Bombay, 


rishta, Muhammad Qasim 

Gulshan-i-Ibrdhlmi. 

1832. 

Ghulam Husain Salim 

Riy&z us-Salatin. Ed. by ‘Abdu’l-Haqq Abid. 
BI. Calcutta, 1890-98. Eng. trans. by ‘Abdu’s 
Salam. BI. Calcutta, 1902-04. 

Hamd-Ullah Mustaufi Qazvlnl 

Ta’rikh~i-Guzida. Text and abridged trans. 
E. J .W. Gibb Mem. Series. No. XIV, Vols. 
1 and 2. London, 1911, 1914. 

Taj-ul-Ma’asir. Extracts trans. HIED, II. 
Hablb-us-Siyar. Extracts trans. HIED, IV. 
Khulasat-ul-Akhbar. 

Tabaqat-i-Ndsin. Text. BI. Calcutta, 1864. 

Trans, by Maj. H. G. Raverty. BI. Calcutta, 
1880. 

Rauzat-us-Safa. Text. Tehran, 1274 Hijri. 
Tabaqdt-i-Akbari. Text and trans. BI. (See 
above under “General Bibliography”). 
Asdr-us-Sanadld. Cawnpore, 1904. 


Hasan-un-N izami 
Khvfind Mir 

Minhaj-ud-din b. 
Siraj-ud-din 


Mir Khvand 

Nizam-ud-din 

Ahmad 

Sayyid Ahmad 
Khan, Dr. Sir 


Elliot and Dowson 
Lane-Poole, Stan¬ 
ley 

Majumoah, R. C. 

Tate. G. R. 

Thomas, Edward 


Modern Works 

See above under “General Bibliography”. 
The Mohammadan Dynasties. London, 1894. 
Medieval India under Mohammadan Rule. 
London, 1903. 

“Hindu Reaction to Muslim Invasions”. M. M. 

Potdar Comm. Vol., pp. 341-341. 

Seistan. Calcutta, 1910. 

The Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of Delhi. 
London, 1871. 


CHAPTER V 

MAMLOK SULTANS OF DELHI 
Original Sources 

Futuh-us-Salatin By Isarni (Pen-name). Edited by A. M. Husain. 

Agra, 1938. 

Hammira-maha-kavya 

By Nayachandra Suri, an abridged English 
translation in 1879. Also see above, under 
“General Bibliography”. 

Pri thvirdja-vijaya-kavya 

By Jayanaka, an English abstract in JRAS, 
1913. Also see above, under “General 
Bibliography”. 

By Amir Khusrau, Lithographed. Lucknow, 
1845; an English abstract by Cowell in 
JASB, 1866. 

810 


Qiranus-Sadain 


MiN/sr/jy 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


-Jalaluddin 
Mangbarnl 


Tabaqdt-i-Ndsiri 


Tdj-ul-Ma’asir 


Ta’nkh-i-Fakhr-ud- 
din Mubarakshah 


Ta’rikh-i-Firuzshdhi 


By Nuruddin Muhammad Zaidarl al-NessawI. 
Edited with a French translation by C. 
Scheffer. Paris, 1890. 

By Abu Umar Minhaj-ud-din Usman bin Siraj- 
ud-dln-al-Juzjani, known as Minhaj-i-Siraj. 
Text edited by W. Nassau Lees. Calcutta, 
1864. English translation by Major H. G. 
Raverty. Calcutta, 1897. 

By Hasan Nizami. India Office MSS. Nos. 1468 
and 209; British Museum MSS. Add. 7623 
and Add. 7624. 

By Fakhr-ud-din Mubarakshah, known as 
Fakhre Mudabbir. Edited by E. Denison 
Ross. London, 1927. 

By Zia-ud-din Baranl. Edited by W. N. Lees, 
Syed Ahmad Khan and Kabir-ud-din. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1860-62. 

By Hamd-Ullah Mustaufi QazvinT. Facsimile 
edition in Gibb Memorial Series. London, 
1913. British Museum MSS. Add 22692. 

Ta’rikh-i-Jahan-Gusha 

By Ala-ud-din Ata Malik b. Baha-ud-din 
Muhammad al-JuwainJ. Edited by Mirza 
Muhammad bin Abdul Wahhab Qazwini, in 
two parts. London, 1912-16. A fascimile 
edition published in London, 1931. 

Ta'rikh-i-Mubarakshdhl 

By Yahya bin Ahmad bin Abdullah Sirhindi. 
Edited by M. Hidayat Husain. Calcutta, 
1931. 

By Haji-ud-dablr. 

,Arbic History 
London, 1921. 


<SL 


Ta’rikh-i- Guzida 


Zafar-ul-Udih 


Edited under the title of An 
oj Gujarat by E. D. Ross. 


Habib ullah, A. B. M. 


Modern Works 

Foundation of Muslim Rule in India. Lahore, 


Ishwari Prasad 
Lane-Poole, Stan¬ 
ley 


1945. 


History of Medieval India. Allahabad, 1950. 
The Mohammadan Dynasties. London, 1894. 


Srivastava, A. L. 


Mediaeval India under Mohammadan Rule. 
London, 1903. 

The Sultanate of Delhi. 2nd Ed. Agra, 1953. 


CHAPTER VI 

LATER CHALUKYAS AND KALACHURIS OF KALYANA 


Original Sources: Literary and Inscriptions 

Basavapuraiia JBBRAS., VIII. 

Epigraphia Carnatica Lewis Rice, B. 

Epigraphia Indica Vol. V (Ablur Inscriptions). 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India Sewell, R. Ed. 
Krishnaswami Aiyangar. Madras, 1932. 


by S. 


811 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


w 

Hyderabad Archaeological Series, Nos. 8, 13. 

Inscriptions of the Madras Presidency, VoIs. I, II, III. Raneacharva V 
Madras, 1919. 

Mysore and Coorg from the Inscriptions. Lewis Rice, B. London* 
1909. 

South Indian Epigraphy, Annual Report on 

Vikramwnkadeva-charita By Bilhana. Ed. by G. Biihler (See above 
under “General Bibliography”). 



Altekah, A. S. 
Bhandabkar, R. G. 

Fleet, J. F. 

Ganguly, D. C, 

»» M 

Katare, S. L. 

Ray. H. C. 

Sastri, K. A. Nila- 

KAOT*A 

Venkatasubbxah, A. 

Venkataraman 
Ayyar, A. V. 


Modern Works 


“The Silah&ras of Western India”. 1C, II. 
Early History of the Deccan. 3rd Ed. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1928. 

Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts. BG, Vol. 
1, Part II. 

Eastern Chalukyas. Benares, 1937. 

History of the Paramara Dynasty. Dacca, 1933. 
“The Chalukyas of Kalyanx (up to Ayyana II)”. 

IHQ, XIII. 244-54; XVil. 11-34. 

Dynastic History of Northern India. Vols. I, II. 
Calcutta, 1931, 1936. 

The Colas. Vols. I, II. Madras, 1937: 2nd Ed. 
Madras, 1955. 


“The Chronology of the Western Chalukyas of 
Kalyani”. 1A, XLVII, XLVIII. 

“The Life and Times of Chalukya Vikrama- 
ditya”. 1A, XLVIII. 112 ff, 133 ff. 


LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 

Two Chalukya Inscriptions, S. 879, 886. ASI, 1929-30, p. 170; 
1930-34, p. 241. 

Sogal Inscription of Taila II, &. 902. BG, I, ii. 428 
Saundatti Inscription of Taila II. JBBRAS, X. 204. 

Nilgund Inscription of Taila II, S. 904. Canarese Desa Inscriptions, 1. 
85. 

Sogal Inscription of Taila II. El, XVI. 1; XVII. 

An Inscription of Taila II, S. 915. ASI, 1930-34, p. 241. 

Hottur Inscription of Satyasraya, S. 929. El, XVI 73 
Kharepatan grant of Satyasraya, £. 930. El, III. 269. 

Kauthem grant of Vikramaditya V, £. 932. I A, XVI. 19 
Miraj Plates of Jayasimha II (A.D. 1024). IA, VIII. 10. 

Inscriptions of the reign of Somesvara I. El, XVI. 

Sudi Inscriptions of Somesvara. El, XV. 104. 

Gawarwad Inscriptions of Somesvara II, S. 993 and 994. El, XV. 337 
Gadag Inscription of Vikramaditya VI. El, XV. 349. 

Nilgund Inscription of Vikramaditya VI. El, XII. 144. 

Sorab Taluk Inscription of Vikramaditya VI. EC, VIII, Sb. 325. 

Sudi Inscriptions of Vikramaditya VI. El, XV. 100, 103. 

Arsikere Taluk (Hassan Dist.) Inscription of Vikramaditya VI. EC V 
No. 102a. 

Sikarpur Taluk Inscription of Vikramaditya VI. EC, VII. Sk 137 
An Inscription of Vikramaditya VI. ASI, 1936-37, p. 109. 


812 


WNlSTQy 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Sikarpur Taluk Inscription of Somesvara III. EC, VII, Sk. 100. 
An Inscription of Somesvara III. ASI, 1929-30, p. 174. 

Kurgod Inscription of Somesvara IV. El, XIV. 266. 

An Inscription of Somesvara IV. ASI, 1926-27, p. 192. 

Minajgi Stone Inscription of Somesvara IV. ASI, 1929-30, p. 171. 

CHAPTER VII 

THE YADAVAS OF DEVAGIR1 


Amir Khusrau 
Barani, Ziya-ud-din 


Dalai, C. D. and 
Shrigondekar, 
G. K. (Ed.) 
Firishta, 
Muhammad 
Qasim 
Hemadri 
Jalhana 

Jayasimha 

Sarhgadhara 


Somesvara 


Original Sources 

Ta’nkh-i-Alai. Extracts Trans. HIED, III. 67 
(See also under “General Bibliography”). 
Ta'rikh-i-Firuz Shahi. BI. Extracts trans. 
HIED, III. 93 (See above under “General 


Bibliography”). 

Lekha-paddhati. GOS, No. XIX. Baroda, 1925. 


Gulshan-i-lbrahimi. Eng. trans. by Briggs. 
Vol. I (See above under “General Bibliogra- 
phy”). 

Vratakhanda, BG, I, ii. 268. 

Suktimuktavali (See above under “General 
Bibliography”). 

Hammira-mada-mardana. GOS, No. X. Baroda, 
1920. 

Sahgitaratndkara (No. 979, Collection of 1887- 
91). See above under “General Bibliogra- 


\r Ll J * 

Kirttikaumudi. Ed. by Kathvate. BSS, No. 
XXV. Bombay, 1883 (See above, under 
“General Bibliography”). 


Modern Works 


Bhandarkab, R. G. 



Fleet, J. F. 


Ganguly - , D. C. 
Jackson, A. M. T. 

Ray, H. C. 

Sewell, R. 

Sreenivasaciiar, P. 


Early History of the Deccan. BG, Vol. I. Pt. 
II.' 3rd Edition. Ed. by D. R. Bhandarkar. 
Calcutta, 1928. 

Report on the Search for Sanskrit MSS. in 
the Bombay Presidency during the year 
1882-83. Bombay, 1884. 

Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts. BG, Vol. 

I, pt. II. Bombay, 1896. 

History of the Paramara Dynasty. Dacca, 1933. 
History of Gujarat. BG, Vol. I, Pt. I. Bombay, 
1896. 

Dynastic History of Northern India. Vol. II. 
Calcutta, 1936. 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 
Ed. by S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar. Madras, 
1932. 

“The Yadavas of Devagiri—Chronology”. 
JOR, XII. 46-60. 


818 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 


<SL 


Sangamner Inscription of Bhillama II, S. 922. EL , II. 217. 
Kalas-Budruk Inscription of Bhillama II, £. 948. IA, XVII. 120. 
Bassein Inscription of Seunachandra II, 6. 991. I A, XII. 119. 

Gadag Inscription of Bhillama IV, 6. 1113. El, III. 219. 

Managoli Inscription of Jaitugi. El, V. 29. 

Patan Inscription of Sihghana, 6. 1128. El, I. 341. 

Sikarpur Taluk Inscription of Sihghana (A.D. 1215). EC, VII, 
Pt. I. SK. 95. 

Bahai Inscription of Sihghana, 6. 1144. El, III. 112. 

Kadakol Inscription of Sihghana. IA, XII. 100. 

Chikka-Bagewadi Inscription of Krishna. £. 1171. I A,, VII. 304. 
Arjunavada Inscription of Krishna, 6. 1182. El, XXI, 9. 

Mamdapur Inscription of Krishna, £. 1172. El, XIX. 19. 

Channagiri Taluk Inscription of Mahadeva (A.D. 1268). EC, VII, 
Pt. I. Cl. 21. 

Paithan Inscription of Ramachandra, £. 1193. IA, XIV. 315. 

Thana Inscription of Ramachandra, £. 1194. El, XII. 198. 
Davanagere Taluk Inscription of Ramachandra (A.D. 1280). EC, 
XI, Dg. 70. 

Davanagere Taluk Inscription of Ramachandra (A.D. 1280). EC, 
XI, Dg. 59. 

CHAPTER VIII 

DYNASTIES OF EASTERN DECCAN 
(i) KAKATIYAS OF ANMAKONDA 
Original Sources 

*Afif, Shams-i-Siraj Ta’rikh-i-Firuz Shahi. Extracts trans. HIED, 

III (See above under “General Bibliogra- 


Amlr Khusrau 
BaranI, Ziya-ud-dln 


Lakshmanaraya 

Parisodhaka 

Mandali, 

Hyderabad 

(Pub.) 

Sreenivasachar, 

B. P. 


Das Gupta» N. N. 
Desikar, Somasun- 
dar 

Iyer, K. V. S. 


phy 5, )i 

Ta’rikh-i-Alm. Extracts trans. HIED , III (See 
above under “General Bibliography n ). 

Ta'rikh-i-Flruz Shahi . Extracts trans. HIED, 
III (See above under “General Biblio¬ 
graphy* 5 ). 


Telengana Inscriptions . 

A Corpus of Inscriptions of the Telingana Dis¬ 
tricts of H. E. H. Nizam's Dominions. HAS, 
No. 13. Hyderabad, 1940. 

Modern Works 

“Kakatlya Rudradeva”. IC. VIII. 

“Kakatiyas in Tamil Literature”. JAHRS, 
VIII. 

Historical Sketches of Ancient Deccan . Mad¬ 
ras, 1917. 


814 


MINIS 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Rao M Rama “Political History of the Kakatlyas”. JAHRS, 

V ff. 

Yule and Cordier Travels of Marco Polo. Vol. II. London, 1921. 

(ii) EASTERN CHALUKYAS 
Original Sources 

Extracts trans. IA, XIX. 333. 

By Bilhana. Ed. by Btihler (See above under 
“General Bibliography”). 


Kalingattupparani 

Vikramdnkadeva- 

charita 


Fleet, J. F. 
Ganguly, D. C. 

m if 

Krishnarao, B. V 
Rangacharya, V. 
Sewell, R. 


Modern Works 

“Chronology of the Eastern Chalukyas”. IA. 
XX. * 

The Eastern Chalukyas. Benares, 1937. 
History of the Paramdra Dynasty. Dacca, 1933. 
“History of Rajahmundry”. JAHRS, IV and 
V. 

Inscriptions of the Madras Presidency. Vols. 

I, II, III. . „ 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 
Ed. by S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar. Madras, 
1932 

List of Antiquarian Remains in the Presidency 
of Madras. Madras, 1882. 

VenkataramanayyA, The Eastern Chalukyas of Vehgi. Madras, 
N. 1950. 

(iii) GAN GAS OF ORISSA 
Original Sources 

‘Afif, Shams-i-Siraj SMhi B I. Calcutta, 1887 

(See above under “General Bibliography ). 

Firishta. Muhammad Qasun m — . T 

Gulshan-i-lbrahimi. Eng. Tr. Briggs, I (See 

above under “General Bibliography’’ ). 
Minhaj-ud-dm b. SirdJ T ^ a ^_ i _ NAsirJ _ Ed by H. G. Raverty (See 

above under “General Bibliography”). 

Modern Works 

History of Orissa . Vol. I. Calcutta, 1930. 
Orissa, 2 vols. London, 1872. 

History of Orissa. Lucknow, 1949. 

Antiquities of Orissa. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1875, 
18 80. , _ 
Dynastic History of Northern India, vol. 1. 
Calcutta, 1931. 

“History of the Eastern Gangas of Kalinga. 
JAHRS, VI ff. 

815 


Banerji, R. D. 
Hunter, W. W. 
MahTab , H. 
Mitra , R. L. 

Ray, H. C. 

Subba Rao, R. 



MINISr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 




(iv). SOMAVAMSIS, NAGAS, RASHTRAKUTAS, ETC. 


Achauya , P. 

»» >» 

Banerji, R. D. 
Hiralal 

MaZumdar, B. C. 
Misra, B. 

Ray, H. C. 

Sircar, 1). C. 

»>. »* 


>» »» 

tr »» 


“Identification of Indraratha of Adinagara”. 

P1EC, Lahore, 1940, pp. 66-67. 

“The Somakuli Kings”, ibid, Madras, 1944, 
pp. 180-95. 

History of Orissa. Vol. I. Calcutta, 1930. 

List of Inscriptions in the Central Provinces 
and Berar. 2nd Ed. Nagpur, 1932. 

Orissa in the^-Making. Calcutta, 1925. 
Dynasties of Mediaeval Orissa. Calcutta, 1933. 
Dynastic History of Northern India. Vol. I. 
Calcutta, 1931. 

“The Madala Panji and the pre-Suryavamii 
History of Orissa”. JIH, XXXI. 233 ff. 
“The Later Somavaihiis.” OHRJ,, I, 4, pp. 289 
ff. 

“Some Minor Dynasties of Orissa”. OHRJ, II, 
2, pp. 13 ff. 

“Some Southern Dynasties of Madhya Pradesh 
and Orissa”. QJMS, XLIV. 1 ff. 

“Some Karasasanas of Ancient Orissa”. JR AS, 
1952, pp. 4-10. 

“A Rashtrakufa Ruling Family of Orissa”. 
JAHRS, XIX. 131 ff. 

“Genealogy of the Somavamsls”. IHQ, XX. 
76-82. 

“A Note on the Later Somavariosis”. Ibid, 
XXII. 300-07. 


LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 
(i) K&katiyas 

Kazipet plates of Betarasa, S. 1012. HAS, No. 13—“A Corpus of 
Inscriptions in the Telingana Districts of H. E. H. Nizam’s 
Dominions”, by B. P. Sreenivasachar, Pt. II, p. 22. 
Hanamakonda Plates of Rudradeva, 6. 1084. Ibid, p. 8. 
Burugugadda Inscription of Rudradeva, £. 1090. Ibid, p. 69. 
Karimnagar Plates of Rudra, 6. 1092. Ibid, p. 169. 

Warangal Plates of Mahadeva(?). Ibid, p. 62. 

Pillalamerri Plates of Ganapati, 6. 1124. Ibid, p. 114, 
Kondiparti Plates of Ganapati, S. 1125. Ibid, p. 31. 

Mattewada Plates of Ganapati, S. 1162. Ibid, p. 42. 

Mattewada Plates of Gapapati. Ibid, p. 50. 

Warangal Plates of Ganapati, Ibid, p. 57. 

Panugal Plates of Manuma Rudra, 5§ 1189. Ibid, p. 98. 
Nagalapadu Plates of Prataparudra, £. 1225. Ibid, p. 94. 
Mellacheruvu Plates of Prataparudra, S. 1233. Ibid, p. 88. 
Manur Plates of Prataparudra, £. 1236. Ibid, p. 162. 
Venkatesagudi Plates of Prataparudra. Ibid, p. 65. 

Kulpak Plates of Rudradevi, A.D. 1279. Ibid, p. 82. 


816 



MINISr^ 



(ii) Eastern Chalukyas 

Ranastipundi grant of Vimaladitya. El, VI. 351. 

Rayali Plates of Vijayaditya VII. JAHRS, V. 41. 

Teki Plates of Rajaraja, §. 1006. El, VI. 338. 

(iii) Gahgas of Orissa 

Dirghasi Stone Inscription of the reign of Rajaraja I Devendra- 
varman. El, IV. 314. 

Vizagapatam grant of Anantavarman Chodagahga, 6. 1040. 1A, 
XVIII. 165. 

Chatesvara Stone Inscriptiorwbf Anangabhima III. JASB, LVII, 
1898, p. 317. 

Bhuvanesvara Inscription of Narasimha II. El, XIII. 150. 
Kendupatna grant of Narasirhha II. JASB, LXV. 229. 

(iv) Somavamsts, Nagas, Rashtrakutas, etc. 

Brahmesvara Temple Inscription. JRASB, L, XIII. 122-125; 

OHRJ, I, 4, PP ; 301-05; 1HQ, XXXI. 81-84. 

Balangir Museum plates of Mahasivagupta Yayati I. JAS, L, 
XIX. 117 if. 

Two plates from Kelga. El, XXVIII. 321 ff. 

Mahada plates of Somesvaradevavarman. Ibid, pp. 283 ff. 

Two Grants from Dasapalla. Ibid, XXIX, 183 ff. 

Banda plates of Parachakrasalya. Ibid, XXX. 136 ff. 

Patna Museum plates of Somesvara II. Ibid, XIX. 97 ff. 
Inscriptions from the Bastar State. Ibid, IX. 160 ff; 174 ff; 311 ff; 
X. 25-43. 

Kumarisimha plates of Somesvara II. JKHRS, I. 229 ff. 
Upalada nlates of Ramadeva. El, XXIII. 141 ff. 

Kalibhana plates of Mahabhavagupta Janamejaya. IRQ, XX. 
237-50. 

Sonepur plates of Mahabhavagupta. El, XXIII. 250 ff. 
Kesarkella Grant of Mahabhavagupta (Uddyotakesari). El, 
XXII. 138 ff. 

For some inscriptions of the Chhindaka Nagas, see South Indian 
Inscriptions, Vol. X, Nos. 643-50 (the transcripts published 
here are in many cases faulty). 

For some Somavamsi inscriptions published earlier, see JPASB, 
1905, pp. 5 ff; 12 ff; 16ff; El, III. 341 ff; 347ff; 351 ff; IV. 
258 ff; VIII. 141 ff; XI. 96 ff; JBORS, II. 52 ff. 

CHAPTER IX 
HOYSALAS 
Original Sources 

Annual Reports on South Indian Epigraphy 

Epigraphia Carnatica 

Epigraphia Indica 

Mysore Archaeological Reports 

Pudukkoftai State Inscriptions 

South Indian Inscriptions 

Modern Works 

Bhandarkar, R. G. Early History of the Deccan. 3rd Ed. Calcutta, 

1928. 

817 

8.E.—52 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Coelho, William 
Derrett, J. D. M. 
Fleet, J. F. 


Joshi, B. R. 

Krishna, M. II. 

Rice, Lewis 
Sastri, IL Krishna 
Sastri, K. A. N. 
Sastri, S. Srikantha 

V ENK AT ARAM AN , K. 

R. 

Venkatas u bbiah , A. 


CHOLA 


Rao, G. V. Srinivasa 
Sewell, R. 


SUBRAMANIAM, T. N. 


Aiyangar, S. Kristi¬ 
nas W AMI 

AiYER, K. V. Su BRAH¬ 
MAN Y A 

ArokiaswaMi, M. 

Coelho, William 
Mahalingam, T. V. 

Pandarathar, T. V. 

SadasiVa 
Rao, N. L, 

Sastri, K. A. Nila- 

KANTA 

»* *» 

»/ »» 

t9 •* 



The Hoysala Vaihsa. Bombay, 1950. 

The Hoysalas. Oxford, 1956. 

“The Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts of 
the Bombay Presidency”. BG, I, ii. Bom¬ 
bay, 1896. 

“A study of the Dynastic name ‘Hoysala’ 
IHQ, XXII. 172-9. 

“Vishnuvardhana Hoysala as a Prince”. 
P1HC, VII. 177-9. 

Mysore and Coorg from Inscriptions. London, 
1909. 

“The Hoysalas in the Chola country”. ASI, 
1909-10. 

“Vikramaditva VI and Hoysala Vishnuvar¬ 


dhana”. 16, X. 35 f. 

“Viraballala II”. NIA, II. 409-27. 

Hoysalas in the Tamil Country. Annamalaina- 
gar, 1950. 

“The regnal period of Hoysala Somesvara”. 
IC, IV. 233-40. 


CHAPTER X 

HISTORY AND ORGANISATION 


Original Sources 
SU, XIII. Madras, 1953. 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. 
Ed. by S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar. Madras, 
1932. 

South Indian Temple Inscriptions. Vols. I, II, 
III. Madras, 1953, 54, 55. 


Modern Works 

Evolution of Hindu Administrative Institu¬ 
tions in South India. Madras, 1931. 

Historical Sketches of Ancient Deccan. Mad- 
T3S 191*7. 

The Early History of the Vejlar Basin. 
Madras, 1954. 

The Hoysala Vaihsa. Bombay, 1950. 

The Bdiias in South Indian History. Madras, 
1952. 

South Indian Polity. Madras, 1955. 

Pirkdlachcholar Charittiram. Part I and II (in 
Tamil). Annamalainagar, 1949, 1951. 

“Some New Facts about Chola History”. JOR, 
XIX, Part II, pp. 148 ff. 

The Colas. Madras, 1955 (2nd Ed.). 


Studies in Cola History and Administration . 
Madras, 1932. 

Foreign Notices of South India. Madras, 1939. 
Sri Vijaya. Madras, 1949. 


818 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


SAtkl K. A.NilakAnta History of South India. Madras, 1955. 
Sathxanathaiek, R. Studies in the Ancient History of Ton4arnan$a- 

lam. Madras, 1944. 

Venkataraman, K. Hoysalas in the Tamil Country . Annamalaina- 
R. gar, 1950. 

Venk at* aram an a a , The Eastern Colukyas of Vengi. Madras, 1950. 
N. 

LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 

Larger Leiden Grant of Rajaraja I. K. V. S. Iyer, El, XXII, No. 34. 
Tiruvenkadu Inscription of Rajaraja I. SII, V, No. 929. 
Madurantakam Inscription of Ko Rajakesari Varman. Ins. No. 395 
of 1922. 

Tiruvedigudi Inscription of Rajaraja I. SII, V, No. 625. 
Tirukkovalur Inscription of Rajaraja I. SII i, VIII, No. 863. 

Tanjore Inscription of Rajaraja I. SII, II, No. 59. 

Matottam Inscription of Rajaraja I, SII, IV, No. 1412. 

Tiruvalanjuli Inscriptions of Rajaraja I. SII, VIII, Nos. 222, 223, and 
237. 

Tiruvaiyaru Inscription of UlagamadevI, Queen of Rajaraja I. SII, 
V, No. 521. 

Udaiyarkudi Inscription of Rajakesari Varman, A.D. 988. K. A. N. 
Sastri, El, XXI, No. 27. 

Tiruvalangadu Plates of Rajendra Chola I. SII, III, No. 205. 
Tiruvorriyur Inscriptions of Rajendra I. SII, V, Nos. 982 and 1354. 
Kilur inscription of Rajendra I. SII, No. 860. 

Konerirajapuram Inscription of Rajendra Chola I. Ins. No. 642 of 
1909. 

Sembiyan Madevi Inscription of Rajendra Chola I. Ins. No. 482 of 
1925. 

Epnayiram Inscription of Rajendra Chola I. Ins. No. 333 of 1917. 
Vriddhachalam Inscription of Rajendra Chola I. Ins. No. 54 of 1918. 
Brahmadesam Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. Ins. No. 260 of 1915. 
Mindigal Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. H. Krishna Sastri, El, V, No. 
23. 

Tirukkalar Plates of Rajadhiraja I. SII, III. No. 208. 

Tiruppangili Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. SII t IV, Nos. 537 and 539. 
Tiruvehkadu Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. SII, V, No. 978. 
Tiruvaiyaru Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. SII , V, No. 520. 
Gandaraditta C. T. M. Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. SII , V, No. 641. 
Tiruvadandai Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. Ins. No. 258 of 1910. 
Tirukkalukkunram Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. SII , V, No. 465. 
Tribhuvani Inscription of Rajadhiraja I. Ins. No. 176 of 1919. 
Tirumalapadi Inscriptions of Rajendra II. SII, V, Nos. 644 and 647. 
Kanadara Koyale (Ceylon) Inscription of Rajendra II. SII, IV, No. 
1408. 

Eriyana (Ceylon) Inscription of Rajendra II. SII, IV, No. 1415. 
Tiruppadirippuliyar Inscription of Rajamahendra. SII , VII, No. 743. 
Tiruvenkadu Inscription of Vlra Rajendra Chola. SII, V, No. 976. 
Tirukkalukkunram Inscription of Vira Rajendra Chola. SII , V. No. 
468. 

Tirumukkudal Inscription of Vira Rajendra Chola. K. V. S. Iyer, El, 
XXI, No. 38. 


819 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Kanya Kumari Inscription of Vira Rajendra Chola. T. A. Gopinatha 
Rao, El, XVIII, No. 4. 

Charala Plates of Vira Rajendra Chola. A. S. Ramanatha Iyer and 
V. Venkatasubba Iyer, El, XXV, No. 25. 

Polonnaruva Inscription of Adhi Rajendra Chola. Sll, IV, Nos. 1388 
and 1392. 

Smaller Leiden Plates of Kulottunga Chola I. K. V. S. Iyer, El, 
XXII, No. 35. 

Bhimavaram Inscription of Kulottunga Chola I. E. Hultzsch, El, VI, 
No. 20. 

Draksharama Inscription of Kulottunga Chola I. K. V. S. Iyer, El, 
XXII, No. 23. 

Nidur Inscription of Kulottunga Chola I. K. V. S. Iyer, El, XVIII, 
No. 8. 

Pour Inscriptions of Kulottunga Chola. E. Hultzsch, El, V, No. 13. 

Cape Comorin Inscription of Kulottunga I. R. Vasudeva Poduval, 
El, XXVI. 274-75. 

Pithapuram Plates of Vira Chola. H. Krishna Sastri, El, V, No. 10. 

Bapatla Inscription of Kulottunga Chola. Sll, VII, No. 763. 

Pennagadam Inscription of Kulottunga Chola. Sll, VI, No. 167. 

Chellur Plates of Vira Chola. Sll, 1, No. 39. 

Tirukkoyilur Inscription of Kulottunga Chola. Sll, VI, No. 137. 

Alangu^i Inscription of Kulottunga Chola. Sll, IV, No. 445. 

Tiruvorriyur Inscription of Kulottunga Cho]a. Sll, V, No. 1356. 

Srinivasa Nallur Inscription of Kulottunga Chola I. Ins. No. 608 of 
1904. 

Tiruvidaimarudur Inscription of Kulottunga Chola I. Ins. No. 304 of 
1907. 

Shiyali Inscription of Kulottunga Chola I. Sll, V, No. 990. 

Tirisulam Inscription of Kulottunga Chola I. Sll , VII, No. 538. 

Two Inscriptions of Vikrama Chola. E. Hultzsch, El, VI, No. 21. 

Tiruvavaduturai Inscription of Vikrama Choja. Ins. No. 159 of 1925. 

Dindivanam Inscription of Vikrama Chola. Sll, VII, No. 832. 

Tiruvarur Inscription of Vikrama Chola. Sll, V, No. 456. 

Alangudi Inscription of Vikrama Chola. Sll, V, No. 458. 

Tirumanikuli Inscription of Kulottunga Chola II. Sll , VII, No. 780. 

Kanchipuram Inscription of Kulottunga Chola II. Sll, IV, No. 818. 

Tiruvarur Inscription of Kulottunga Chola II. Sll, IV, No. 397, VII, 
No. 485. 

Tirumalavadi Inscription of Kulottunga Chola II. Sll, V, No. 645. 

Tittagudi Inscription of Rajaraja Chola II. Sll, VIII, No. 285. 

Magaral Inscription of Rajaraja Chola II. SII, VII, No. 432. 

Pallavarayan Pettai Inscription of Rajadhiraja Chola II. V. Ven¬ 
katasubba Iyer, El, XXI, No. 21. 

Tiruvalahgadu Inscription of Rajadhiraja II. V. Venkatasubba Iyer, 
El, XXII, No. 14. 

Tirukadavur Mayanam Inscription of Rajadhiraja II. Ins. No. 261 
of 1925. 

Arappakkam Inscription of Rajadhiraja II. Sll, V, No. 456. 

Tiruvottur Inscriptions of Kulottunga III. Sll , VII, Nos. 87 and 88. 

Tirumanikuli Inscription of Kulottunga III. Sll, VII, No. 797. 

Nellore Inscription of Kulottunga III. Sll, V, No. 492. 

820 




GENERAL bibliography 


<SL 


Tiruvakkarai Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Ins. No. 190 gf 1904. 
Karur Inscription of Kulottuhga III. SII, III, No. 23. 

£rl Rangam Inscription of Kulottuhga III. SII, III, No. 88. 

Nellore Inscription of Kulottuhga III. SII, V, No. 496. 

Kudumiyan Malai Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Pud. Ins., No. 166. 
Seranur Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Pud. Ins., No. 163. 
Tiruvarur Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Ins. No. 554 of 1904^ 
Tiruvarangulam Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Pud. Ins., No. i/6. 
Vayalogam Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Pud. Ins., No. 178. ^ 
Tirukkadavur Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Ins. No. 255 of 1925. 
Tiruvalahgadu Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Ins. No. 482 of 1905. 
Somangalam Inscription of Kulottuhga III. SII, VII, No. 393; 
Tiruvannamalai Inscription of Kulottuhga III. SII, VIII, No. 151. 
Tiruppamburam Inscription of Kulottuhga III. Ins. No. 86 of 1911. 
Tiruvendipuram Inscription of Rajaraja III. E. Hultzsch, El, VII, 
No. 23. 

Shiyali Inscription of Rajaraja III. Ins. No. 393 of 1918. 
Tiruvehkatfu Inscription of RitjaDaja III. Ins. No. 506 of 1918. 
Sivapuram Inscription of Rajaraja III. Ins. No. 297 of 1927. 
Tirupurantakam Inscription of Rajendra III. Ins. No. 201 of 1905. 
Sivayam Inscription of Rajendra III. Ins. No. 4fl> of J91 3 - 
Mahadanapuram Inscription of Rajendra III. SII, VIII, No - 703 - 
Tiruvanaikka Inscription of Rajendra III. Ins. No. / 3 of 1937/38. 
Tiruvannamalai Inscription of Rajendra III. SII, VIII, No. 88. 
Tirukkoyilur Inscription of Rajendra III. Ins. No. 188 of 1908. 

Sri Rangam Inscription of Rajendra III. SII, IV, Nos. 511 and 512. 

CHAPTER XI 
LATER PANDYAS 
Original Sources 
Historical Inscriptions 


Sewell, R. 


Subram aniam, T. N. 


Aiyangar, S. Krish- 

NASWAMI 

AlYER, K. V. SUBRAH- 
MANYA 

Elliot and Dowson 

Mahalingam, T. V. 

Pandaratiiar, T. V* 
Sad asiya 

Sastri, K. A. Nila- 

KANTA 


of Southern India. 
Ed. by S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar. Madras, 
1932. 

South Indian Temple Inscriptions. Vols. I, II, 
III. .Madras, 1953, 1954, 1055. 

Modern Works 

South India and Her Muhammadan Invaders. 
Madras, 1921. 

Historical Sketches of Ancient Deccan. 
Madras, 1917. 

The History of India as told by its own Histo¬ 
rians. Vol. III. London, 1871. 

The Banas in South Indian History. Madras, 
1952.' 

Pandiyar Varalaru. Madras, 1950. 

The Pamdyan Kingdom. London, 1929. ^ 

Foreign Notices of South India. Madras, 1939. 
History of South India. Madras, 1955. 


821 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


le and Cor pier The Travels of Marco Polo. Vol. II. London, 
1921. 

LIST OF IMPORTANT INSCRIPTIONS 
Tiruppuvanam Plates of Jata Kulasekhara I. K. V. S. Iyer, El, XXV, 
No. 11. 

Tiruppuvanam Supplementary Plates. K. V. S. Iyer, El, XXV, No. 12. 
Tirunelveli Inscription of Maravarman Sundara Panel y a I. K. V. S. 
Iyer, El, XXII, No. 10. 

Tirunelveli Inscription of Maravarman Sundara Parajya II. K. V. S. 
Iyer. El, XXIV, No. 22." 

Ranganatha Inscription of Sundara Paijdya. E. Hultzsch, El, III, 
No. 2. 

Serammadevi Inscription of Maravarman Kulasekhara I. Ins. No. 
698 of 1916. 

CHAPTER XII 
CEYLON 
Original Sources 
ti) PALI 

Ed. and trans. by James d’Alwis. Colombo, 
1887. 

See above under “General Bibliography”. 

Ed. and trans. by B. C. Law. Lahore, 1925. 


Attanagaluvihara- 

vaihsa 

Chula-varhsa 

DafhcLvamsa 


Attanagalu-vamsa 

Daladapuj&valiya 
Daladdtirita 
Nikaya Sahgraha 


Pujavaliya, Ch. 34. 


Rdjaratnakaraya 

Rajavaliya 


Muller. E. 
Sewell, R. 


Coprington, H. W. 

COOMARASWAMY, A. 

K. 

Geiger, W. 


(ii) SIMHALESE 

Ed. by M. Kumaranatunga. Colombo, B.E. 
2466. 

Ed. by K. M. Perera. Colombo, 1893. 

Ed. by E. S. Rajasekhara. Colombo, 1920. 

Ed. by D. M. de Z. Wickramasinghe. Colombo, 
1890. Trans, by C. M. Fernando, with an 
intr. by W. F. Gunawardhana. Colombo, 
1908. 

Ed. by M. Medhankara Thera. Eng. trans. by 
Gunasekara (A Contribution to the History 
of Ceylon). Colombo, 1895, 

Ed. by Simon de Silva. Colombo, 1907. 

Ed. by B. Gunasekhara. Colombo, 1911. Eng. 
trans. by the same. Colombo, 1900. 

(iii) INSCRIPTIONS 

Ancient Inscriptions in Ceylon. London, 1883. 

Historical Inscriptions of Southern India. Ed. 
by S. Krishnaswami Aiyangar. Madras, 
1932. 

Modem Works 

History of Ceylon. London, 1926. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. London, 
1927. 

Ceylon. Wiesbaden, 1898. 

822 


misr/f 



Gopalan, R. 
Hujltzsch, E. 

Mend is, G. C. 

Paranavitana , S. 

Parker, H. 
Saparamadu, S. D. 
(Ed.) 

Sastri. K. A. N. 
Smith, V. A. 


Tubnour, G. 
Wickremasinghe 
W lJESIMHA, L. C. 


BIBUOGRAPHY 

The Pallavas of Kdhchi. Madras, 1928. 

^Cohtributions to Singhalese Chronology 
JRAS 1913. 517 ff. 

Early History of Ceylon. 9th Ed. Calcutta, 
1948. 

Art and Architecture of Ceylon. 1954. 

Ancient Ceylon. London, 1909. ’j . 

“The Polonnaruva Period” (Special Issue of 
the Ceylon Historical Journal, IV, 1954-55). 

Colas. 2nd Ed. Madras, 1955. 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. 2nd 
Ed. Revised by K. de B. Codrington. Ox¬ 
ford, 1930. “ , 

An Epitome oj the History of Ceylon . 1836. 

Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Vol. I. 

Mahavamsa. Part I (to which is prefixed 
the trans. of the first part, pub. in 1837, by 
G. Tumour). Colombo, 1909. 



CHAPTER XIII 

POLITICAL THEORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
ORGANISATION 

r 

Original Sources 


Laghv-Arhanniti 

Mitdkshard 


Rdjadharma-kanif.a 

Rdjanitiratndkara 

Sukranitisara 


(i) LITERARY 

By Hemachandra. Ed. with a comm, in Guja¬ 
rati. Ahmedabad, 1906. 

Ydjnavalkya-smriti with thfe comm. Mit&k- 
shara. Ed. by V. L. Pansikar. 2nd Ed. Bom¬ 
bay, 1918. 

Ydjnavalkya-smriti with the comms: u) 
Mitakshard by Vijnanesvara Bhikshu, _(ii) 
Viramitrodaya by Mitramisra, and (iii) Dipa- 
kalika by Sulapani. Trans, by J. R. Ghar- 
pure. 6 vols. 2nd Ed. Bombay, 1936-44. 

Vol. XI of Kritya-kalpataru by Bhatta 

Lakshmidhara. Ed. by K. V. Rangaswami 

Aiyangar. GOS, No. 100. Baroda, 1943. 

By Chandesvara. Ed. by K. P. Jayaswal. 
Patna, 1924 (for quotations from Gopala’s 
Kamadhenu). 

Ed. by Gustav Oppert. Vol. I. Text, Madras, 
1882. Eng. Trans, by B. K. Sarkar. SB1I. 
2nd. edn. Allahabad, 1923. 


Ydjnavalkyiya-Dharmanibandha 

By Apararka (otherwise called Aparaditya). 
Ed. by H. N. Apte. 2 vols. ASS. Poona, 


1903-04. 

(ii) EPIGRAPHIC 


Annual Report of the Mysore Archaeological Survey 
Epigraphia Indica 
Indian Antiquary 


823 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Aiyangar, S. Krish- 

NASWAMI 

Altekar, A. S. 


Beni Prasad 


DlJKSHItfAR, V. R. R. 
Ghoshal, U. N. 


Mahajlingam, T. V. 
Sastri, K. A. N. 


Sen, B. C. 


Modern Works 

Hindu Administrative Institutions in South 
India. Madras, 1931. 

State and Government in Ancient India 2nd 
Ed. Banaras, 1955. 

State in Ancient India. Allahabad, 1928. 

Iheory of Government in Ancient India 
Allahabad, 1927. 

Hindu Administrative Institutions. Madras, 
lUZD. 

History of Hindu Political Theories. 2nd Ed 
Calcutta, 1927. 

Contributions to the History of the Hindu Re- 
venue System. Calcutta, 1920. 

South Indian Polity . Madras, 1955, 

Paiidyan Kingdom . London, 1929 

Colas . 2nd Ed. Madras, 1955. 

Th 1912 ^ Pre ' Muslim Indian Polity . Madras, 

Some Historical Aspects of the Inscriptions of 
Bengal Calcutta, 1942 (Part III, Admini¬ 
stration). 


Dayahhaga 


Mitakshara 

Srwfiti-chandrikd 


Kane, P. V. 
Mayne, John D. 
Sen, Priyanath 


CHAPTER XIV 

LAW AND LEGAL INSTITUTIONS 
Original Sources 
LITERARY 

By Jimutavahana. See above under “General 
Bibliography”, 

By Vijnanesvara. See above, Ch. XIII. 

See above, under “General 

Bibliography”. 

Modern Works 

History of Dharmasastra. Vols. II-IV. Poona, 
1941-1953. 

Hi ?938 L<1W an<1 VSa9e ' 10th Ed ' Madras > 
General Principles of Hindu Jurisprudence. 
Tagore Law Lectures. Calcutta, 1918. 


CHAPTER XV 

LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 
(A) SANSKRIT, PALI, PRAKRIT AND APABHRAMSA 

(N ° ,e : A n ihh p r°,“ a - nt r b i‘ shed wOTks in samkrit ' m 

£raKnt and Apabhramsa has been given above in “General 

’ F V rth ? r P artj culars about individual" texts 

Mts f tdnt 0 i ra a ,Cal ^ t ! rial ab ° ut P ublish ^ d works and 
MSS. will be found in Histones of Literature” mentioned 

824 




GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


in “General Bibliography” and also in Aufrecht, Gode, 
Peterson, Raghavan and Velankar, given below). 


Adsdorf, L. 
Aufrecht, Th. 

Ayyangar, P. T. S. 
Bagchi, P. C. (Ed.) 
Belvalkar, S. K. 

BuHLER, G. 


Chitrav, S. V. 


De, S. K. 


Denecke, VV. 

Dikshit, S. B. 

Dikshitar, V. R. R. 
Butt, B. B. and 


Apabhravisa Studien. Leipzig, 1937. 

Catalogus Catalogorum. 3 vols. Leipzig, 1891- 
1903. 

Bhoja Raja. Annamalainagar, 1.931. ■—~ 

Dohakosa. Calcutta, 1938 ( JDL , XXVIII). 

An Account of the different existing Systems 
of Sanskrit Grammar. Poona, 1915. 

Das Sukritasamkirtana des Arisirhha. Wien 
1889. 

The Life of Hemachandracharya. Eng. trans. 
from the original German by M. Patel. SJS. 
Santiniketan, 1936. 

Madhyayugina-charitra-kosa (Dictionary of 
Biography in Mediaeval India) (in Marathi). 
Poona, 1937. 

History of Sanskrit Poetics. 2 vols. London 
1923, 1925. 

“Sanskrit Literature under the Sena Kings of 
Bengal”. Thomas Comm. Vol., pp. 50-70. 

“Mitteilungen iiber Digambara-Texte”. Fest- 
gabe Jacobi, pp. 160-168. 

History of Hindu Astronomy (in Marathi). 2nd 
Ed. Poona, 1931. 

Purana Index. 3 vols. Madras, 1951, 52, 55. 


Singh, A. N. 
Filliozat, J. 


Franke, R. P. 
Geiger, W. 


Ghatage. A.M. 


History of Hindu Mathematics. Lahore, 1935. 

La Doctrine Classique de la Medicine In- 
dienne—Ses Origines et ses Paralliles 
Grecs. Paris, 1949. 

Pali und Sanskrit. Strassburg, 1902. 

Pali Literatur und Sprache. Strassburg, 1916 
(Eng. trans. by B. K. Ghosh, Pali Literature 
and Language, Calcutta, 1943). 

“Didactic Works in Prakrit”. JUB, VI. 3, pp. 
21 ff. ’ 


>» 

** a 


Gode, P. K. 


» ft 

Haas, G. 

Hazra , R, C. 

Hobrnle, A. F. R. 


“Hymns in Prakrit”. JUB, III. 3, pp. 45 ff. 

“Narrative Literature in Jain Mahiarashtri” 
ABORI, XVI. 26 ff. 

“A Brief Note on the History and Progress of 
Cataloguing of Sanskrit and other MSS in 
India and outside (between A.D. 1800 and 
1941) ’ being App. II to Introduction to 
Indian Textual Criticism, by S. M Katre 
2nd Ed. Poona, 1954. 

Studies in Indian Literary History. 3 vols 
Bombay, 1953, 1954; Poona, 1956. 

Dasarupa. New York, 1912. 

Studies in the Puranic Records on Hindu Rites 
and Customs. Decca, 1940. 

Studies in the Medicine of Ancient India. 
Oxford, 1907. 


82 5 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Jain, H. L. 

99 #* 


*> >* 
Jolly, J. 


,» y> 


Kane, P. V, 


, Kaye, G. R. 

/ »» > * 

Keith, A. B. 

»* »» 

Ke6ava 

Kielhorn, F. 

Konow, Sten 

KiIISHNAMACH ARIAR, 

M. 

Laodu, T. Iv. 

Levi, S. 
Mayrhofer, M. 
Meronov, N. 
NiTti-Dolchi. L. 
Peterson, P. 


Pischel, B . 

»» a 

»» » 

Rage avan, V. 

R ay, P. C. 

Sarma, Ramavatara 


“Apabhramsa Literature”. AUS t> I. 157-185. 
“Apabhramsa Bhasha aur Sahitya” (in Hindi) 
(Apabhramsa Language and Literature), 
NPP , 50, pp. 1-8; 100-121. 

‘‘Some recent finds of Apabhramsa Literature' . 

NVJ, No. 8, Dec. 1942, pp. 81-92. 

Medicin. Strassburg, 1901 (Eng. trans. 
Indian Medicine by C. G. Kashikar. Poona, 
i951). 

Recht und Sitte. Strassburg, 1896. (Eng. 

trans. by B. K. Ghosh, Hindu Law and Cus¬ 
tom. Calcutta, 1928). 

History of Alahkara Literature (Intr. to 
Sahityadarpana, 2nd Ed.). Bombay,^ 1923; 
History of Sanskrit Poetics (Intr. to Sahitya - 
darpana , 3rd Ed.). Bombay, 1951. 

Histcny of Dharmasastra. Vol. I. Poona, 1930. 
Hindu Astronomy . Calcutta, 1924. 

Hindu Mathematics. Lahore, 1889. 

History of Sanskrit Literature. Oxford, 1928; 

Reprint, 1941, 1948, 1953. 

Sanskrit Drama. Oxford, 1924. Reprint, 1954. 
Kalpadrukosa. Ed. by Ramavatara Sarma. 

Vol. I. GOS. Baroda, 1928. 

Bruchstiicke indische Schauspiele in Inschrif- 
ten zu Ajmere. Berlin, 1901. 

Das indische Drama. Berlin, 1920. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature. 
Madras, 1937. 

Prolegomena zu Trivikrama's Prakrit-Gram- 
maiik. Halle, 1912, 

Le theatre indien . Paris, 1890. 

Handbuch des Pali. 2 vols. Heidelberg, 1951. 
Die Dharmapafikshd des Amitagati. 1903. 

Les Grammairiens Prakrits. Paris, 1938. 

The Auchityalamkdra of Kshemendra. Bom¬ 
bay, 1885. ^ . 

Report of Operations in Search of Sanskrit 
MSS . in the Bombay Circle , 1882-98. 6 vols. 
Bombay. 1883-99 (issued as Extra Nos. of 
JBBRAS). " . 

Die Hofdichter des Lakshmanasena . Gottingen, 
1893. 

Grammatik dev Prakrit-Sprachen. Strassburg, 
1900. 

Materialien zur Kenntnis des Apabhramsa. 
Berlin, 1902. 

New Catalogus Catalogorum. Vol. I. Madras, 
1949. 

History of Hindu Chemistry , etc. Calcutta, 
1887. 

Kalpadmikosa. Intr. GOS. Baroda, 1928. 


826 



mi$r#y 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



<8L 


ScHUBRING, W. 

Schuyler, M. 

Shahidullah, M. 
Speyer, J. S. 

Subya Kant a 
Tagare, G. V. 

Thibaut, G* 

Velankar, H. D. 

WlNTERNITZ, M. 

•f Pf 

Zachariae, Th. 


Die Lehre der Jainas. Berlin und Leipzig, 
1935. 

Bibliography of the Sanskrit Drama. New 
York, 1906. 

“Buddhist Mystic Songs”. DUS, IV. 1 ff. 
Studies about Kathasaritsaqara. Amsterdam, 
1908. 

Kshemendra Studies. Poona, 1954. 

Historical Grammar of Apabhramsa. Poona, 
1948. 

Astronomie, Astrologie und Mathematic. 
Strassburg, 1889. 

Jinaratnakosa (An Alphabetical Register of 
Jain Works and Authors). Vol. I: Works. 
Poona, 1944. 

Geschichte der indischen Literatur. Band III. 
Leipzig, 1920. 

History of Indian Literature. (Eng. trans. by 
Mrs. S. Ketkar). 2 vols. Calcutta, 1927, 1933. 
Citate in Kramadisvara’s Samkshiptasdra. 
Gottingen, 1882. 


(B) MARATHI 

(a) Reference Books 
Maharashtra Santa-Kavi-Kavya-Suchi 

By G. K. Chandorkar. Dhulia, 1915 (for pub¬ 
lished and unpublished works of authors 
,, . , „ , ranging from Saka 1100 to Saka 1740). 

Marathi-GranthaSiichi 

By S. G. Date. Poona, 1943 (for printed 
Marathi works). 

(b) Maha.rashfra and Marathi 

“Ancient Civilization and Geography of Maharashtra” 

r, , , , b Y p - V. Kane. JBBRAS ,, OS, XXIV. 613-657. 

formation ae la langue marathe 

By Jules Bloch. Paris, 1919. 

Introduction to Jn&nesvari 

r , , A . , T . ^ v - K Raj wade. Dhulia, Saka 1831 (1909). 

Introduction of Jnanadevi (Adhyaya I) 

By R. G. Harshe. Poona, 1947. 

Introduction to Marathi Bhdshecha Vyutpattikosa 
r . By K. P. Kulkarni. Bombay, 1946. 

Linguistic Survey of India, Vol. VII: Indo-Aryan Languages, South- 
em Group (Marathi) by Sten Konow. Calcutta, 1905. 
Maharashtra Bhashabhyasa 

. By Y. R. Date. Poona, 1939. 

Maharashtracha Vasahatakala” 

By V. K. Raj wade. Itihasa dni Aitihasika, 
Vol. I. 

“Marathi Bhashecha Kalanirnaya” 

By C. V. Vaidya and P. D. Gune. VJV, 1922. 
827 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Prachina Maharashtra 

By S. V. Ketkar. Poona, 1935. 

(c) History oj Literature 
Mahdnubhdviya Marathi Vdnmaya 

By Y. K. Deshpande. Yeotmal, Saka 1847 
(1925). 

Maharashtra-Kavi-Charitra , 

By J. R. Ajgaonkar. Vois. I-VI. Bombay, 

1907-24. 

Maharashtra Sarasvata 

By V. L. Bhave. 4th Ed. Supplement by S. G. 
Tulpule. Poona, 1951. 

Marathi Bhdshechd va Vdhmayachd Itihdsa (Mdnbhdva akher) 

By B. A. Bhide. Poona, 1933. 

Marathi Vdnmayachd Itihdsa , 

By L. R. Pangarkar. Vols. I II. Bombay, 1932; 

Poona, 1935. 

A Short History of Marathi Literature 

By M. K y Nadkarni. Baroda, 1921. 

For short biographical notices of the poet-saints, cf. the works 
of Mahlpati; Bhaktavijaya, Bhaktalilamrita , SantaliUmrita , Santa- 
vijaya, etc. 

(d) Texts and Editions 

1. Mukundaraja: „ _ 

(i) Vivekasindhu —R. B. Godbole. Poona, 1875; G. R. Gogate. 
Dhulia, 1953. _ ^ ^ 

(ii) Paramdmrita —(s&rtha). N. H. Bhagvat. 5th Ed. Bombay, 

1923; J. R. Ajgaonkar. Bombay, 193L 

(iii) Pavanavijaya* —Publisher B. L. Pathak. Bombay, 1910. 

(iv) Mulastambha —Purandare & Co. Bombay, 1904; B. L. 

Pathak. Bombay, 1924. 

2. Natha-sampradaya: , , 

(i) Navandthabhaktisdra —By Narahari Malu. NSP. Bom¬ 

bay, 1934. 

(ii) “Jnanesvarahcha Natha-pantha” by N. Y. Mirikar in 

Jndnesvaradarsana, Vol. I, pp. 40-92. Ahmednagar, 

1934. . , A __ 

(iii) For songs, Abhahgas and minor works see Sn-RamacLdsi- 
Sarhsodhana , Vols. I and II, Index. Dhulia, Saka 1855 
(1933), 1938. 

3 Jnanesvara: ^ , __ Tr 

(i) Jhdnesvarl —Edns. Rajwade, V. K,; Madgaonkar, R. V. 

(Bombay), 1907; Dandekar, S. V. (Poona, 1953). 

(ii) Amritanubhava —Edns. with the commentaries of Siva- 

kalyana. Niranjana-Raghunatha, Hahsarajasvami. Sar- 
tha—Sakhare. Poona, Saka 1827 (1905). 

(iii) Gdthct —Ed. R. B. Godbole; T. H. Avate; V, N. Sakhare 

(iv) Chdhgadeva-pasashti —V. N. Sakhare. Poona, Saka 1837 

(1915) 

(v) Yogavdsishtha —G. K. Chandorkar. Dhulia, Saka 1836 
(1914). 


828 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


(vi) Life and Works : Sri Jhdnadeva —S. V. Dandekar (Poona, 
1932); L. R. Pangarkar (Poona, 1912); S. R. Bhingar- 
kar (Poona, 1886); Bharadvaja (Poona, 1931). 

4. Mahanubhava-sampradaya: 

(i) LMlacharitra —H. N. Nene. Parts 1-4. Nagpur, 1936, 37. 

(ii) Chakradharokta Sutrapafha —H. N. Nene. Nagpur, 1936. 

(iii) Drishtanta-patha —H. N. Nene. Nagpur, 1937." 

(iv) Mahanubhdvdnchen Tattvajhdna —V. B. Kolte. 

(v) Mahanubhdvanche Achdradharma —V. B. Kolte. 

(vi) Mahanubhava Pantha —Balkrishnasastri. 

(vii) Vachchaharana —by Damodara—Edns. V. L. Bhave 

(Thana, Saka 1846—A.D. 1924) and D. S. Pangu (Poona, 
1927). 

(viii) Narendrakrita Rukminisvayamvara —Ed. V. B. Kolte. 

(ix) Sisupalavadha —V. L. Bhave. Thana, Saka 1848 (1926). 

(x) Govindaprabhu-charitra —V. B. Kolte. 

(xi) Adya Mardfht Kavayitri —V. N. Deshpande. 

(xii) Bhdskarabhat-ta Borikar —V. B. Kolte. Amraoti, 1935. 
(xiii) Smyitisthala —V. N. Deshpande. 

5. Namadeva and Contemporary Poets: 

(i) G&thd (inclusive of the poems of the members of his 
family and contemporaries) Edn. Tukarama Tatya. 
Bombay, 1894. T. H. Avate. Poona, Saka 1830 (1908)' 
(ii) Srisanta-gathd —T. H. Avate. 2nd Ed. Poona, Saka 1845 
(1923). 

(C) BENGALI 
General Reference 

“Dohakosa”. JDL, XXVIII. Calcutta, 1935. 
“Bengali Charyapadas” (A comparative study 
of the text and Tibetan translation) Part I. 
JDL, XXX. Calcutta, 1938. 

Charyapada. Calcutta, 1943. 

Origin and Development of the Bengali 
Language. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1926. 
“Jayadeva”. Dhruva Comm. Vol., III. 183-196. 
“Jayadeva Kavi”. Bharatavarsha. 
“Saduktikarnamrita” Visvabharati Patrika. 


History of Bengal. Vol. I. Chs. XI-XIII. 
Prakrita-Paingala. BI. Calcutta, 1900-02. 
Saduktikarnamrita. Lahore, 1933. 

Hdjar Bachharer Parana Bdngala Bhdshay 
Bauddha Gan O Doha. Calcutta, B.S. 1323 
(A.D. 1916); 2nd Ed. 1358. 

Bdngala Sahityer Itihasa. Vol. I. 2nd Ed. 
Calcutta, 1948. 

Charydgiti Paddvali. Burdwan, 1956. 

“Index Verborum of the Old Bengali Charya 
Songs and Fragments”. Indian Linguistics, 
IX. Calcutta, 1947. 


Bagchi, P. C. 
„ f„ 


Basu, M. M. 
Chatterji, S. K. 


Chatter, n, S. K.. De, 
S. K. and Bag¬ 
chi, P. C. 

Ghosh, C. M. (Ed.) 
Sarma, R. (Ed.) 
Sastri, H. P. 


Sen,Sukumar 


829 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Sen, Su kumar 

ShAHIDULLAH, M. 

tt *> 

Thomas, F. W. (Eh.) 

Asiga 

t 

Palhana 

Salibhadra 

Alsdorf, L. 
Bhayani, II. C. 

tt tt 

ft tt 

ft tt 

tt tt 

tt ft 

» » 

Bloch, J. 
ChaTterji, S, K, 

Dalai, , C. D. (Ed.) 
Dave, T. N. 



“Old Bengali Texts of the Charya-giti-Kosha”. 

Indian Linguistics, X. Calcutta 1948. 
Buddhist Mystic Songs. DUS, IV. 1 ff. ^ 

Les Chant ‘ Mystique de Saraha et Kanha. 
Paris, 1928. 

Kavindra-vachana-samuchchaya. Calcutta, 
1912. 

(D) GUJARATI 
Original Texts 

Chandanabala-rasa. Ed. by A. Nahta. Raja- 
sthan-Bhdrati, HI. iii-iv, July 1953, pp. 106- 
112 . 

Jivadaya-rasa. Ed. by Jina Vijaya Muni. BV 
(Hindi‘Gujarati), III. i, July 1944, pp. 201- 
209. 

Abu-rasa. Rajasthani, III. 1. 
Bharata-Bahubali-rasa (in Gujarati). Ed. by 
L. B. Gandhi. Sri Jain Dharmabhyudaya 
Grantha-mala, No. 5. Baroda, 1940. 
Bharatesvara-Bahubali Rasa and Buddhi Rasa. 
Ed. by Jina Vijaya Muni. Bharatiya Vidya 
Research Series, No. 2. Bombay, 1940. 

Modern Works 


Apabhrahisa-Studien. Leipzig, 1937. 

“Prachin Gujarati Rasa-Kavyonun Mu].” (in 
Gujarati). GSPP., III. 1, October 1945, pp. 


3-4. _ . 

“Prachin Rasa-Kavyo” (in Gujarati). GSPP, 
IV. iii, February-March 1947, pp. 6-8. 

“Language of Gujarat (from earliest times to 
c. 1300 A.C.)”. BV, VIII. 1947, pp. 289-318. 

Vagvydpar (in Gujarati). Bharatiya Vidya Re¬ 
search Series, No. 17. Bombay, 1954. 

Ter-md Chaud ma Satak-ndn tran Prachin 
Gujarati Kavyo (in Gujarati). Sri Forbes 
Guiaratl Sabha Granthavali, No. 61. Bom¬ 


bay, 1955. 

“Jain Parampara-nun Apabhrarhs Sahitya-man 
Pradan” (in Gujarati). Acharya Sri Vijay- 
vallabh-siiri Smdrak Granth. Bombay, 
1956, pp. 31-40 (Gujarati Section). 

L'indo-aryan du Veda aux temps moderns. 
Paris, 1.934. 

Indo-Aryan and Hindi. Gujarat Vernacular 
Society Research Series, No. 20. Ahmeda- 


bad, 1942. 

Prachina Gurjara-Kdvyasahgraha. 

GOS, No. 13. Baroda, 1920. 
“The Language of Maha-Gujarat”. 
ii, April 1948, pp. 80-134. 


Part I. 
JGRS, X. 


830 


mtsrfy 



Debhai, M. D. 
Gandhi, L. B. 


Kayre, S. M. 
Majmudar, M. R. 
Muni, Jinayijaya 

AND BlIAYANr, H. 

C. (Eds.) 
Munshi, K. M. 

Nahta, A. and 
Nahta, B. (Eds.) 
Nahta, A. 


PaYHAK, R. V. AND 
Panchal, G. 
Raval, A. M. 


Sandesara, B. J. 
Siiastri, K. Iv. 



TessiYori, L. P. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Jain Gurjar Kavio (Jain Gurjara Poets) (in 
Gujarati). Yols. I-HI. Bombay, 1926-1944. 

Apabhramsa-Kavyatrayi (or Three Apabhrarh- 
sa Works of Jinadattasuri). GOS, No. 37. 
Baroda, 1927. 

Some Problems of Historical Linguistics in 
Indo-Axyan. Bombay, 1944. 

Gujarati Sahitya-nan Svarupo (in Gujarati). 
Vol. I. Baroda, 1955. 

Samdesa Rdsaka of Abdala Rahamana. SJS, 
No. 22. Bombay, 1945. 

Gujarat and its Literature (from early times 
to 1852). 2nd Ed. Bombay, 1954. 

Aitihdsik Jain Kavya-Samgrah. Sri Abhay 
Jain Granthmala, No. 8. Calcutta, 1937. 

“Prachln Bhasha-Kavyo-ki Vividh Samgyaen” 
(in Hindi). NPP, LVIII. iv, 1953, pp 417- 
436. 

Rds ane Garbd in Gujarati). Bombay, 1954. 

Gujarati Sahitya (Madhyakalln). Bombay 
1954. 

Itihas-ni Ke(li (in Gujarati). Bombay, 1945. 

Apna. Kavio (in Gujarati). Vol. I. Sheth Hari- 
vallabhdas Balgovinddas Granthmala, No. 
56. Ahmedabad, 1912. 

Gujarati Sahityanuh Rekhadarsan (in Guja¬ 
rati). Vol. I. Ahmedabad, 1951. 

“Notes on the Grammar of the Old Western 
Rajasthani with Special Reference to Apa- 
bhrariiia and to Gujarati and Marwari.” IA. 
XLIII-XLV, 1914-1916. 



(E) DRAVIDIAN LITERATURE 
(Tamil, Kannada and Telugu) 
Aiyar, C. P. Venxa- 

Yarama Kamban and His Art. 

BaSAWANAL, S. S. AND 
Iyengar. K. R. Sri¬ 


nivasa 

Chenchiah, P. and 
Raja M. Bhujanga 

Rao 

Kavitva Vedhi 

Nandimath, S. C. 
Narasimhacharya, 
R. 


M-usings of Basava, A Free Rendering. 1940. 



A History of Telugu Literature. Oxford, 1928. ./ 

Andhra Vahmaya Charitra Samqraham 
(Telugu). 

A Handbook of Virasaivism. Dharwar, 1942. "'V 
History of Kannada Literature. Mysore, 1940. * 


* * t * 

PlLLAI, K. SlTBBA- 
mania 


Karnataka Kavi Charite (Kannada). 

The Metaphysics of Saiva Siddhania System . 



831 




MIN/Sr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Pill ax, M. S. Pobna- 
L INGAM 

RajagoEalaciiam, C. 

Raju, I». T. 

Rao, C. Narayana 


Tamil Literature. Tinnevelly, 1929. 


X 


Rao, T. RajagopaiA 
Rao, Vanguiu Subba 
Rice, E. P. 
Shivapadasundaram, 

S. 

Sastri, K. A. N. 


Bharat Milap. Delhi, 1955. 

Telugu Literature . Bombay, 1944. 

Andhra Bhasha Charitram (Telugu). 2 vols. 
Waltair, 1937. 

A Historical Sketch of Telugu Literature . 
Andhra Vanmaya Charitram (Telugu). 
Kanarese Literature. 2nd Ed. London, 1921. 


SlTARAMAlYA, K. 

Somayaji, €r. J. 


The Saiva School of Hinduism. London, 1934. 
A History of South India. (Ch. XIV). Madras, 
1955. 

A. Handbook of Telugu Literature. 

Andhra Bhasha Vikasam (Telugu). 


Bankkjba, J. N. 


CHAPTER XVI 

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 
Original Sources 

(See Epics, Puranas, Philosophy, Dharmasastra, Buddhist, Jain undei 
“Original Sources”, and Religion and Philosophy under Modern 
Works”, in General Bibliography above) 

(A) GENERAL 
Modern Works 

Development of Hindu Iconography. Calcutta, 
1942. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1956. 

Hindu Gods and Heroes. London, 1923. 

The Religions of India (Eng. trans. by J. Wood. 

5th Ed. London, 1921). 

Vaishnavism, Saivism, and Minor Religious 
Systems. Strassburg, 1913; Indian Edition, 
Poona, 1928. 

Cultural Heritage of India. , . 

Published by the Ramakrishna Mission Insti¬ 
tute of Culture, Calcutta, 1937, 1953, 1956. 
Hinduism and Buddhism. 3 vols. London, 
1921; New Edition, 1953. 

Outline of the Religious Literature of India. 
Oxford, 1920. 

The Religions of India. Boston, 1895. 


Barnett, L. I). 
Barth, A. 


BltANJMRKAtt, R. G. 


Eliot, Sir Ciiam.es 
Farqlhah, J. N. 


X 


Hopkins, E. W. 
Konoav, Sten ami 
Tuxen • Paul 

KXTM.ARASWAMI.TI, SlIRI 
Monieh-Williams , M. 


Religions of India. Copenhagen, 1949. 

Buddha and Basava. Dharwar, 1956. 
Religious Thought and Life in India. 4th Edi¬ 
tion. London, 1891. 


(B) BUDDHISM 
Original Sources 

(See “Buddhist” under “Original Sources”, and “Religion and 
Philosophy” under “Modern Works” in “General Bibliography .) 

832 



Bose, P. N. 
Cordiee, P. 


Das, S. C. (Ed.) 

Das Gui>ta, N. N. 

Das Gupta, S. B. 

>• ,> 

Ok'^ty , Alice 

Sastbi, K. A. N. 

Vasu,N. 

Vasu, N. and 
Sastri, H. P. 
Vll> YA BHUSHANA, S. 

c. 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Modern Works 
2,500 Years of Buddhism. Delhi, 1956. 

Gaya and Buddha-Gayd. 2 vols. Calcutta 
1934. 

An Introduction to Buddhist Esoterism. Bom¬ 
bay, 1932. 

Sddhanamdld. Vol. II. GOS, XLI (Intr.). 
Baroda, 1928. 

“Tantic Culture among the Buddhists”. Cult. 
Her., II. 208-221. 

Indian Teachers of Buddhist Universities. 
Madras, 1923. 

Catalogue Du fonds Tibetain de la Biblio- 
theque Nationale. 2 vols. Parts I-III. Paris. 
1909-15. 

Pag-Sam-Jon-Zang by Sampa Mkhan Po. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1908. 

Bdngldya Bauddhadharma (in Bengali) Cal¬ 
cutta, B.E. 1354. 

An Introduction to Tantric Buddhism Cal¬ 
cutta, 1950. 

Obscure Religious Cults as Background of 
Bengali Literature. Calcutta, 1946. 

Gods of Northern Buddhism. 2nd Ed. Oxford 
1928. 

“Buddhism in South India”. Maliabodhi, 1942. 
pp. 157-67. 

Archaeological Survey of Mayurbhanja. 
Vol. I. Calcutta, 1911. 

Modern Buddhism and Its Followers in Orissa. 
Calcutta, 1901. 

History of Medieval School of Indian Logic. 
Calcutta, 1909. 



(C) JAINISM 


Original Sources 

(See “Jain” under “Original Sources” and “Religion and Philosophy” 
under Modern Works” in “General Bibliography”.) 


Ayvangar, M. S. 
Rama sway i and 
Rao. B. Sesiigiri 
Barodia, U. D. 

Buiiler, G. 


ft 

*’ 99 


Modern Works 

^ South Indian Jainism. Madras, 

History and Literature of Jainism. Bombay, 
1909. 

The Life of Hemachandracharya (Trans from 
the original German by M. Patel/ SJS. 
Calcutta, 3 936). 

Vher die indische Sekte der Jainas. Vienna, 
1887 (Eng. trails. The Indian Sect of the 
Jainas by J. Burgess. London, 1903). 


833 


S.E.—5Q 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Deshai, M. D. 


Farquhar, J. N. 

Glasenapp, H. 
Guebinot, A. 

» » 

>» 

>» »» 

HaYAV AD AN A RAO, C. 
Jain, H. L. 

'' y . Muni D arshana 
Vijaya 

Mijnshi, K. M. 

Nahar» P. C. 

✓ pf ••, 

Nar asimhac a a r , R. 

Rarikh, R. C. 

Rick, B. 

Saletoee, B. A. 
Shark a, S. R. 

^ Stevenson, Mbs. S. 
Winternitz, M. 


Jaina Sahityano Samkshipta Itihasa (In Guja¬ 
rati) (Short History of Jain Literature). 
Bombay, 1933. 

Outline of the Religious Literature of India . 
Oxford, 1920. 

Der Jainismus. Berlin, 1926. 

Essai de Bibliographie Jaina. Paris, 1908. 
“Notes de Bibliographie Jaina”. JA, XLV. 48- 
148. 

Repertoire d’Epigraphie Jaina. Paris, 1908. 
La Religion Djaina. Paris, 1926. 

Mysore Gazetteer. Vol. II. 
Jaina-Silalekha-Samgraha. Bombay, 1928. 
Paftavali-Samuchchaya. Part I. Viramgam, 
1933. 

Giijarat and its Literature. Bombay, 1935; 

2nd Ed. Bombay, 1954. 
Jaina-lekha-sarhgraha. 3 vols. Calcutta, 1918- 
29. 

“Inscriptions at Sravana Belgoia”. (EC, II). 

2nd Ed. Bangalore. 1923. 

Kdvydnusasana by Acharya Hemachandra. 

Yol. II. Part I. Introduction. Bombay, 1938. 
Mysore and Coorg frojn the Inscriptions . 
London, 1909. 

Mediaeval Jainism. Bombay, 1938. 

Jainism and Karnataka Culture . Dharwar, 
1940. 

The Heart of Jainism. Oxford, 1915. 

History of Indian Literature. Vol. II. (Eng. 

trans. by Mrs. S. Ketkar). Calcutta, 1933. 
“The Jainas in the History of Indian Litera¬ 
ture”. IC, I. 143 ff. 


A 

\ 


(D) VAISHNAVISM 
Original Sources 

(See “Epics” and “Pura^as” under “Original Sources” and “Religion 
and Philosophy” under “Modern Works” in “General Bibliography”.) 

Modern Works 


Aiyanoar, S. Krish- 
tfASWAMI 
>» »> 

Bhandarkar, R. G. 

Farquhar, J. N. 

Govindacharyasya- 
MIN, A. 
Macnicql, N. 


Early History of Vaishnavas in South India . 
London, 1920. 

Sri Ramdnujachdrya (Natesan). Madras. 
Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Religious 
Sysiems. Strassburg, 1913; Indian Edition. 
Poona, 1928. 

Outline of the Religious Literature of India. 
Oxford, 1920. 

Life of Ramanuja. Madras, 1906. 

Indian Theism. London, 1915, v ^ 


834 



Majumdab, A. K. 

Rao, T. A. G. 
Raychaudiiuri, H. C, 


Arulnandi 
Sivacharya 
Kaslnatha Sastri 
Meykantfa 

Umapati 


Mahadevan, T. M. P. 

Pabanjoti, V. 

Rice, E. P. 

Sastri, S. S. Subya- 
nakayana 

»> tt 


M Id h a vIcii ab y a 


Jf 5, 


Sankara, Ramanuja, 


Bhandarkar, R. G. 


Dasgupta, S. N. 

Ghate, V. S. 
GARRATf, G. T. 
Huuyanna, M. 
Ingali.s, Daniel H, 

H. 

Jha, Ganganatha 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 

“A Note on the Development of the Radha 
Cult”. ABORI, XXXVI. 231-57. ' 

History of Sri Vaishnavas. Madras, 1923. 
Materials for the Study of the Early History of 
the Vaishnava Sect. 2nd Ed. Calcutta, 1936. 

(E) SAIVISM 
Original Sources 

Siva-jhana-siddhiyar. Eng. trans. by J. M. 

Nallasvami Pillai. Madras, 1913. 
Sakti-Visishtadvaita. 

Siva-jnana-bodham. Eng. trans. by J. M. 

Nallasvami Pillai. Madras, 1895. 
Siva-prakasam. Eng. trans. by Hoisington. 
JAOS, 1854. 

Modern Works 

The Idea of God in Saiva-Siddhanta. Anna- ' 
malainagar, 1955. 

Saiva Siddhanta in the Meykanda Sastra. 
London, 1938. 

A History of Kanarese Literature. 2nd Ed. 
London, 1921. 

“The Philosophy of Saivism”. Cult. Her., II, 
The Sivddvaita of Srikantha. Madras, 1930. 

(F) PHILOSOPHY 
Original Sources 

Sankara-digvijaya. Ed. by B. N. Phadke. ASS. 
2nd Ed. Poona, 1891. 

Sarva-darsana-sariigraha. Ed. by H. N. Apte. 
ASS. Poona, 1906. Ed. with a Sanskrit 
comm, by V. Sh. Abhyankar. 2nd Ed. revi¬ 
sed by K. V. Abhyankar. Poona, 1950. 
Nimbarka, Madhva, etc. 

Vedanta-sutra-bhashya (See above, under 
“General Bibliography”). 

Modern Works 

Vaishnavism, Saivism, and Minor Religious 
Systems. Strassburg, 1913; Indian Edition, 
Poona, 1928. 

History of Indian Philosophy. 5 vols. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1932 ff. 

The Vedxmta. Poona, 1926. 

Legacy of India. Oxford, 1937. 

Outlines of Indian Philosophy. London, 1932. 
Materials for the study of Navya-Nyaya Logic. 
Cambridge-Mass, 1951. 

Purva Mimamsa in its sources. Benares, 1942. 

835 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<§L 


Rajdhakrishnan, S. 

Rap son » E. J. (Ed.) 


Raychaudiiubi, H. C. 


Sastiu, S. Kuppu- 

SWAMI 

SHINIVAS ACH A HI, p. 

N. 

Stevenson, Mrs. S. 
Vid'y auhush ana, S. 
C. 

Weber, A. and 
Perry, R. B. 
Winterniiz, M. 


Buddhist Philosophy in India and Ceylon. 
Oxford, 1923. 

Indian Logic and Atomism. Oxford, 1921. 
Karma Mlmamsa. London, 1921. 

Samkhya System. 2nd Ed. London, 1924. 
Indian Philosophy. 2 vols. London, 1923, 1927. 
Cambridge History of India. Vol. I. Indian 
Edition. Delhi, 1955. 

Political History of Ancient India. 6th Edi¬ 
tion. Calcutta, 1955. 

A Primer of Indian Logic. Madras, 1932. 


Philosophy of Bhedabheda 
1950. 

Heart of Jainism. Oxford, 1915. 
Indian Logic. Calcutta, 1921. 


2nd Ed. Madras, 


History of Philosophy. London, 1945. 


History of Indian Literature. Eng. trans. by 
Mrs. S. Ketkar. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1927, 19o3. 


G ISLAM 


Abdul Haqq, 
Shaikh, Dihlawi 
Abdul Hayy, M. 
Abu’l Fazl 


‘Afif, Shams-i-Siraj 
Azad, Mir Ghulam 
‘Ali 

»> » 

Badauni 

BaranI 
Dara Shikuh 
Firishta, Abul 
Qasim 

Gulbadan Begum 

Ikram, Shaikh 
Mohd. 

Khusrav, Amir 

»> » 

>> >» 

» 9 >' 

Tylohd. Ma sum 


Original Sources 
Akhbdr al-Akhyar. Delhi, 1889. 

Nuzhat at-Khawdtir. 

Akbar Nama. 3 vols. Newal Kishore Ed. 
Cawnpore, 1881-83. 3 vols. BI. Calcutta, 
1873-86 

Ta’rikh~i-Firuz Shdhi. BI. Calcutta, 1888-91. 
Ma’asir al-Kiram. 

Subhat al-Mirjan. 

Muntakhab-ut-Tawankh. 3 vols. BI. Calcutta, 

Ta’rikh-i-Firuz Shahu BI. Calcutta, 1860-62. 
Safinat alAuliya. 

Gulshan-irlbrdhimi . Newal Kishore. 

Humdyun Ndma. Trans, by Mrs. A. S. Beve¬ 
ridge, London, 1902. 

Chashma-i Kauthar. Lahore. 

Ashiqa. Aligarh, 1917. 

Matla al-Anwar. Aligarh, 1926. 

Nuh Sipihr . Calcutta, 1948. 

Qirdn al-Sa‘dain. Aligarh, 1918. 

Tughluq Ndma . Hyderabad, 1933. 

Khaza’in aUFutuh. BI. Calcutta, 1953. 
Ta’rikh-i-Sindh. 

836 


MINlSr/j^ 


GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Modern works 

India’s Contribution to Arabic Literature. 

Life and Conditions of the Peoples of Hindustan 
1200-1550 A.D. 

Islam in India. 

History of India as told by its own historians. 
Vols. II, III. 

A History of Persian Literature. 

Cambridge History of India. Vol. III. Cam¬ 
bridge, 1928. 

Indian Architecture. 2nd Ed. London, 1927. 1 
The Life and Works of Amir Khusrau. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1935. 

History of Medieval India. Allahabad. 
Influence of Islam on Indian Culture. 

The Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of Delhi. 
London, 1871. 

Mutual Influence of Muhammadans and Hindus 
in India. Cambridge, 1892. 

Indian Islam. Madras, 1938. 

Hindustan ke Mu’dsharati Haldt. Allahabad 
1928. 

CHAPTERS XVII-XIX 

SOCIAL CONDITION, EDUCATION, AND 
ECONOMIC CONDITION 

Original Sources 

I. LITERARY 

1. Smriti commentaries and Digests 

Commentary on YdjhavaXkya-smriti called Mitdkshard by Vijhanes- 
vara. Pub. NSP. Bombay, i909. 

Commentary on Ydjhavalkya-smriti by Apararka (otherwise called 
Aparaditya). Pub. ASS. 2 vols. Poona, 1903-04. 
Prdyaschitta-Prakaranam by Bhatta Bhavadeva. Ed. by Girish 
Chandra Vedantatirtha. 

Rajshahi, 1927. 

Smnti-chandrika by Devannabhatta: (1) Samskara-kanda, (2) Ah- 
nika-kanda (3) Vyavahara-kapda (4) Asaucha-kanda and (5) 
Sraddha kanda. Ed. by L. Srinivasacharya. Mysore, 1914. 
Smntyarthasara by Sridhara 

Pub. ASS. Poona, 1912. 

Ydjhavalkya-smriti with the comms. of Vijnanesvara and Mitramisrii 

Eng. Trans, by J. R. Gharpure. Bombay, 1936 ff. 

2. Lexicons 

Abhidhdna chintdmani by Hemachandra. Ed. by O. Bohtlingk and 
Ch. Rieu. St. Petersburg, 1847. 

Vaijayanti by Yadavaprakasa. Ed. by Gustav Oppert. Madras, 1893. 

837 




Ahmad, M. G. Z. 
Ashbaf, K. M. 

Cbooke, W. 

Elliot and Dowson 

Ghani, M. A. 

Haig, W. (Ed.) 

Havell, E.B. 

Mirza, M. W. 

Prasad, Ishwari 
Tara Chand 
Thomas, E. 

Thomas, F. W. 

Titus, M. T. 

Yusuf Ali, Abdullah 


misr/fy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


3. Miscellaneous Works 
Brihaddharma Pumna 

Ed. by H. P. Sastri. BI. Calcutta, 1887-97. 
Desopadesa by Kshemendra (and Narmamala) 

Ed. with intr. by M. Kaul Sastri. Poona, 1923. 
Hammim-Mahakavya by Nayachandra Suri 

Ed. by N. J. Kirtane. BSS. Bombay, 1879. 

Kathdsaritsagara by Somadeva 

Ed. by Durgaprasad and K. P. Parab. NSP. 
Bombay, 1915. 

Mdnasalldsa by King Somesvara 

Ed. by G. K. Shrigondekar. 2 vols. GOS. 
Baroda, 1925,1939. 

Prithvir&ja-vijaya 

Ed. with the comm, of Jonaraja, by G. H. Ojha 
and C. S. Guleri. Ajmer, 1941. 
Vikramankadeva-charita by Bilhajpa 

Ed. by G. BUhler. BSS. Bombay, 1875. 


II. ARCHAEOLOGICAL 

Annual Reports on South Indian Epigraphy (upto 1944-45) 

Annual Reports on Indian Epigraphy (1945-46 onwards) 

Annual Reports of the Mysore Archaeological Department 
Antiquities oj Orissa by R. L. Mitra. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1875, 1880. 
Epigraphia Carnatica 
Epigraphia Indica 

III. FOREIGN TRAVELLERS AND HISTORIANS 


Alber uni's India 
' . Chau Ju-Kua 

/ Elliot and Dowson 
fM, Hodivala, S. H. 

Ferrand, Gabriel 

Nainar, S. M. H. 

Sastri, K. A. N. 
Yule, Sir Henry 


Eng. trans. by E. Sachau. 2 vols. London, 1910. 

His work on the Chinese and Arab trade in 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, en¬ 
titled Chii-fan-chi. Trans, from the Chinese 
and annotated by Fredrich Hirth and W. W. 
Rockhill. St. Petersburg, 1912. 

History of India as told by its own historians. 
Vols. I and II. London. 

Studies in Indo-Muslim History. A critical 
commentary on Elliot and Dowson's History 
of India. Bombay, 1939. 

Relations de Voyages et Textes Geographiques 
Arabes , Persons et Turks—Relatifs a VEx - 
treme-Orient du VIIl e au XVII e siecles. 
2 vols. Paris, 1913-14. 

Arab Geographers' Knowledge of Southern 
India. Madras, 1942. 

Foreign Notices of South India. Madras, 1939. 

The Book of Ser Marco Polo . Trans, and ed. 
by Sir Henry Yule. 2 vols. London, 1903. 
3rd Ed. Revised by Henry Cordier with 
Notes and Addenda. 2 vols. London, 1920. 


838 


t 

GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Modern Works 

Aspects of Ancient Indian Economic Thought. 
Benares, 1934. 

Education in Ancient India. 4th Ed. Banaras, ~ 
1951. 

Position of Women in Hindu Civilisation. 

Benares, 1938; 2nd Ed. Banaras, 1956. 
Contributions to the History of the Hindu 
Revenue System. Calcutta, 1929. 

The Agrarian System in Ancient India. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1930. 

The Land System in South India between c. 

800 A.D. and 1200 A.D. Lahore, 1933. 

History of Dharmasastra. Vols. II-IV. Poona, 
1941, 1946, 1953. 

Hindu Ethics. London, 1922. 

Colas. 2nd Ed. Madras, 1955. 

Indian Culture through the Ages. 2 vols. 
Mysore, 1928-1932. 


Hobson-Jobson. New Ed. by W. Crooke. 
London, 1903. 

CHAPTER XX 
ART 

Original Sources 

Aparajitaprichchha of Bhuvanadeva 

Ed. by P. A. Mankad. GOS. Baroda, 1950. 
Isana-Mva-guru-deva-paddhati of Isanasivagurudeva Misra 

Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. 4 vols. TSS. Tri¬ 
vandrum, 1920-25. 

Mayamata of Mayamuni 

Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. TSS. Trivandrum, 
1919. 

Samardhgana Sutradhara of Bhoja 

Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. GOS. 2 vols. 
Baroda, 1924, 1925. 

Silparatna of Kumara 

Ed. by T. Ganapati Sastri. TSS. 2 vols. Tri¬ 
vandrum, 1922, 1929. 

Vishnudharmottara, part III 

Ed. by Stella Kramsrisch. Calcutta, 1924. 

Modern Works 

(A) ARCHITECTURE 

Bankr.it. R. D. History of Orissa. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1930-31. v 

„ „ The Haihayas of Tripuri and their Monuments 

(MASI , No. 23). Calcutta, 1931. 




Aiyangar, K. V. 

Ranoaswami 
Altekab, A. S. 

*» )9 

Ghosh al, U. N. 

is » 

Gupta, K. M. 

Kane, P. V. 

Mackenzie, J. 

Sastri, K. A. Nila- 

KANTA 

Venkateswara, S. V. 
Yule, Col. Henry 

AND 

Burnell, A. C. 


830 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Bameiui, R. D. 
Bose, N. K. 
Brown, Percy 
Burgess, James 


a 


Codrington, K. de B. 

COOMARASWAMY, A. 

K, 

Cousens, Henry 


Cunningham, A. 
Dikshit, K. N. 
Fergusson, James 


Fergusson, James 
ani> Burgess, 
James 

Ganguly, M. 


Eastern Indian School of Mediaeval Sculpture. 
Delhi, 1933. 

Canons of Orissan Architecture. Calcutta, 
1932 

Indian Architecture (Buddhist and Hindu). 

2nd Ed. Bombay, 1949. 3rd Ed. 1956. 
Ancient Monuments , Temples and Sculptures 
of India. 2 vols. London, 1897. 
Architectural Antiquities of Northern Gujarat. 
London, 1903. 

Report on the Antiquities of Kathiawar and 
Kach. London, 1876. 

Ancient India . London, 1926. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. London, 
1927. 

Architectural Antiquities of Western India. 
London, 1926. 

Chalukyan Architecture of the Kanatese Dis¬ 
tricts. Calcutta, 1926. 

Mediaeval Temples of the Dakhan. Calcutta, 
1931. 

Somnath and other Mediaeval Temples in Ka- 
thiawad. Calcutta, 1931. 

Mahahodhi or the Great Buddhist Temple at 
Buddhagaya. London, 1892. 

Excavations at Paharpur. ( MASI , No. 55). 
Delhi, 1938. 

History of Indian and Eastern Architecture . 
2nd Ed. Revised and Edited by J. Burgess 
and R. P. Spiers. 2 vols. London, 1910. 

Cave Temples of India. London, 1880. 


Orissa and her remains, ancient and mediaeval. 
Calcutta, 1912. 

Havell, E. B. Indian Architecture: its psychology , structure 

and history . London, 1913. 

Ancient and Mediaeval Architecture of India. 
London, 1915. 

India, Archaeological Survey . TT 

Reports by Alexander Cunningham. Vols. 11, 
VII, VIII, IX, XIII, XVII. 

Annual Reports started by John Marshall, 
'* ” 1904-05, 1905-06, 1906-07, 1908-09, 1909-10, 

1912-13, 1913-14, 1915-16, 1921-22, 1922-23, 
1924-25, 1925-26, 1926-27, 1927-28, 1928-29, 
1930-34, 1934-35, 1935-36. 

India Archaeological Survey, Western Circle, Annual Report , 
1903-04. , , „ 

Jouveau-Dubreuil, Archeologie du Sud de V Inde. 2 vols. Pans, 
G. 1914. 

Kak, R. C. Ancient Monuments of Kashmir. London, 

1933. 


840 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Kramrisck. Stella 
>> ** 

LoNOHUHsas A. H. 

Majumdar, R. C. 
(Ei>.) 

Mitra, R. L. 
Mukherji. P. C. 

Ram Raj 
Rea, A. 

Rowland, Benjamin 
Sankalia, H. D. 

Saraswati, S» K. 

ft ft 

II tf 

II ft 


ft 


ft 


ft 


Pt 


Sastri, K. A. N. 
Smith, V. A. 


S warup, B. 

Vogel, J. Ph. 

Yazdani, G. 

Zimmer, Heinrich 


Baxerji, R. D. 
Chanda, R. P. 


Codrington, K. de B. 
Cohn, W. 

Coomaraswamy, A. 

K. 


Hindu Temple. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1946. 

Art of India. London, 1954. 

Pallava Architecture (MASI, Nos. 17 and 33). 

Calcutta, 1924, 1928. 

History of Bengal. Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 


Antiquities of Orissa. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1875, 
1880. 

Report on the antiquities of Lalitpur, N.W.P. 
Roorkee, 1899. 

Essay on the Architecture of the Hindus. 

London, 1834. \ 

Pallava Architecture. Madras, 1909. — : — V 
Art and Architecture of India. London, 1953.' 
Archaeology of Gujarat (including Kathia¬ 
war). Bombay, 1941. 

Begunia Group of Temples ( JISOA, Vol. I). 
Calcutta, 1933. 

Temples of Bengal (JISOA, Vol. II). Calcutta, 
1934. 

Date of the Paharpur Temple ( IC, Vol. VII). 
Calcutta, 1940. 

Origins of the Mediaeval Indian Temple Styles 
(IC, Vol. VII). Calcutta, 1941. 

Temples at Pagan ( JGIS, Vol. IX). Calcutta, 
1941. 


Abeyadana and Patothamya (JGIS, Vol. XI). 
Calcutta, 1943. 

Temples of Orissa (OHRJ, Vol. I). Bhuvanes- 
war, 1953. 

Colas. 2nd Ed. Madras, 1955. 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. 2nd 
Ed. revised by K. de B. Codrington. Oxford, 
1930. 

Koizarka, the Black Pagoda. Cuttack, 1910. ~ 
Antiquities of the Chamba State. Calcutta/ 
1911. 


History of the Deccan. Vol. I, Part VIII. 
London, 1952. 

Art of Indian Asia: Its mythology and trans¬ 
formations. Completed and edited by 
Joseph Campbell. 2 vols. New York, 1955. 


(B) SCULPTURE 

Eastern Indian School of Mediaeval Sculpture. 
Delhi, 1933. 

Mediaeval Indian Sculpture in the British 
Museum. London, 1936. 

Ancient India. London, 1926. 

Indische Plastik. Berlin, 1921. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. London, 
1927. 


841 


mtSTffy 



COOMARASWAMY, A.K. 


Diez, E. 
Diksii.it » K. N. 


X 


Fischer, O. 
Gangoly, O. C. 


Ganguly , M. 

Garde, M. B. 
Goloubew, V. AND 

OTHERS 

Guousset, R. 
Hackin, J. 

IIavell, E. B. 


Kak, R. C. 


*> 9* 

Kramrisch, Stella 
>* *, 

/» tt 

*i tt 

t * »» 

Rowland, Benjamin 
Sahni, D. R. and 
Vogel, J. Ph. 
Saraswati, S. K. 

tt tt 

Sank alia, H. D. 

Sastri, K. A. N. 
Smith, V. A. 

Vogel, J. Ph. 

M tt 


THE STRUGGLE FOE EMPIRE 

Visvakarma. London, 1914. 

Catalogue of Indian Collections in the Museum 
of Fine Arts. Part II. Boston,, 1923. 

Dance of Siva . New York, 1918. 

Transformation of Nature in Art. Cambridge 
(Mass), 1934. ( ' 

Die Kunst Indiens. Potsdam, 1925. 

Excavations at Paharpur ( MASl, No. 55). 
Delhi, 1938. 

Die Kunst Indiens, Chinas und Japans. Berlin, 
1928. 

South Indian Bronzes . London, 1915. 

Orissa and her Remains, ancient and mediae¬ 
val. Calcutta, 1912. 

Archaeology in Gwalior. Gwalior, 1934. 
Sculptures Qivaites (Ars Asiatica, Vol. II). 
Paris, 1921. 

Civilisations of the East. Vol. 2: India. London, 

1932. 

La Sculpture Indienne et Tibetaine au Musee 
Guimet. Paris, 1931. 

Indian Sculpture and Painting. London, 1908. 
Ideals of Indian Art. London, 191L 
Handbook of Indian Art. London, 1920. 
Handbook of the archaeological and numisma¬ 
tic sections of the Sri Pratap Singh Museum , 
Srinagar. London, 1923. 

Ancient Monuments of Kashmir. London, 

1933. 

Indian Sculpture. Calcutta, 1933. 

Grundzuge der Indischen Kunst. Hellerau, 
1924. 

Pala and Sena Sculpture. Calcutta, 1929. 
Hindu Temple. 2 vols. Calcutta, 1946. 

Art of India. London, 1954. 

Art and Architecture of India. London, 1953. 
Catalogue oj the Museum of Archaeology at 
Sarnath. Calcutta, 1914. 

Early Sculpture of Bengal . Calcutta, 1937. 
Survey of Indian Sculpture. Calcutta (in 
press). 

Archaeology of Gujarat (including Kathia¬ 
war). Bombay, 1941. 

Colas. 2nd Ed. Madras, 1955. 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. 2nd 
Ed. revised by K. de B. Codrington. Oxford, 
1930. 

Catalogue of the Bhuri Singh Museum at 
Chamba. Calcutta, 1909. 

Catalogue of the Archaeological Museum at 
Mathura. Allahabad, 1910. 

History of the Deccan. Vol. I, Part VIII. Lon¬ 
don, 1952. 



842 


Yazdani, G. 



GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY 


w 

Zimmer, Heinrich 


Brown, Pf.rcv 
Coomaraswamy, A. 
K. 

,» 99 

»* ft 

99 99 

t* $9 

KbaMRISCH, SrELLA 

*t 99 

»» 9* 

9* 9) 

Majumdar, R. C. 
(Ed.) 

Mon Chandra 

Nawab, Sarabhai 
Ramachanpran, T. 
N. 

Sivaramamurti, C. 
Smith, V. A. 


Vogel, J. Pn. 
Zimmer, Heinrich 


Art of Indian Asia: Its psychology and trans¬ 
formations. Completed and edited by Joseph 
Campbell. 2 vols. New York, 1955. 

(C) PAINTING 

Indian Painting. 4th Ed. Calcutta, 1932. 

History of Indian and Indonesian Art. London, 
1927. 

Chitralakshana ( Asutosh Memorial Volume), 
Patna, 1924. 

An early passage on Indian Painting ( Eastern 
Art, Vol. III). 

Abhasa ( JAOS , Vol. 52). 

Theory and Technique of Indian Painting 
(Technical Studies). 

Vishnudharmottaram, pt. Ill (a treatise on 
Indian painting). Calcutta, 1924. 

Survey of Painting in the Deccan. London, 
1937. 

Nepalese Painting (J1SOA, Vol. I). Calcutta, 
1933. 

A,rt of India. London, 1954. 

History of Bengal. Vol. I. Dacca, 1943. 

Jaina Miniature Paintings from Western India. 
Ahmedabad, 1949. 

Jaina Chitra Kalpadruma. Ahmedabad, 1936. 

Cave Temples near Tirumalaipuram and their 
Paintings (JISOA, Vol. IV). Calcutta, 1936. 

Notes on paintings at Tirumalaipuram 
(JISOA, Vol. IV). Calcutta, 1936. 

History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon. 2nd 
Ed. revised by K. de B. Codrington. Oxford, 
1930. 

Discovery of Frescoes in South Indian Temples 
(ABM, 1931). Leiden, 1933. 

Art of Indian Asia: Its psychology and trans¬ 
formations. Completed and edited by Joseph 
Campbell. New York, 1955. 


CHAPTER XXI 


COLONIAL AND CULTURAL EXPANSION 


Bagchi, P. C. 

99 99 

9) 9i 

Bose, P. 

99 93 


Modern Works 

India and China. Calcutta, 1944; 2nd Ed. Bom¬ 
bay, 1950. 

Le Canon Bouddhique en China. 2 vols. Paris, 
1927 1938 

“Sino-Indian Relations”. SIS , I. 65-84; 161- 
166. 

The Hindu Colony of Cambodia. Adyar, 1927. 
The Hindu Colony of Champa. Adyar, 1926. 


843 


WNisr/t), 



^CUATTERJI, B. R. 

tt >t 

/■ COEDES, G. 

Das.S. C. 

99 *9 


De Boer. T. J. 

Francke, A. H. 
GoLDZIHER, I. 
Grousset, R. 

99 1* 

Hipti, P. K. 
Hourani, G. F. 


Majumdar, II. C. 


a ** 

»• >» 

99 *9 

Mukuerji, P. K. 

Oakesuott, W. F. 
O’Leary de Lacy 
PeTECH, L. 

99 9t 

Ray, N. R. 

’> 99 

Sarkar. H. B. 
Sastri, K. A. N. 

9 9 99 

Titus. M. T. 
Wales. H. G. Q. 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Indian Cultural Inf luence in Cambodia. Cal¬ 
cutta, 1928. 

India and Java. Calcutta, 1933. 

Lea J ttats Hindonises D’Indochine et DTndo- 
nesie. Paris, 1948. 

Inscriptions du Cambodge . Vols. I-VI. Paris. 

Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow . Ed. by 
S, C. Das. Calcutta, 1893. 

“Contributions on the Religion, History, etc. 
of Tibet”. JASB, 1881, 187 ff; 1882, 1 ff; 
87 ff. 

History of the Philosophy of Islam. London, 
1903. 

Antiquities of Indian Tibet. Calcutta, 1914-26. 

Vorlesungen iiber den Islam. Heidelberg. 1910. 

The Civilisations of the East-lndia (Eng. 
trans.). London, 1932. 

The Civilisations of the East-China (Eng. 
trans.). London, 1934. 

History of the Arabs. 1937. 

Arab Seafaring in the Indian Ocean in ancient 
and early Mediaeval Times. Princeton Uni. 
Press. 1951. 

Ancient Indian Colonies in the Far East. Vol. 
I. Champa: Lahore, 1927. Vol. II. Suvarna- 
dvlpa. Parts 1 and 2. Dacca 1937, 38. 

Kambujadesa. Madras, 1944. 

Hindu Colonies in the Far East. Calcutta, 1944. 

Inscriptions of Kambuja. Asiatic Society Mo¬ 
nograph. Calcutta, 1953. 

Indian Literature in China and the Far East . 
Calcutta, 1931. 

Commerce and Society . Oxford, 1936. 

Arabia before Muhammad. 

A Study of the Chronicles of Ladakh (Suppl. 
to IHQ, XIII-XIV). Calcutta, 1939. 

Northern India according to the Shui-Ching- 
Chu. Rome, 1950. 

Brahmanical Gods in Burma. Calcutta, 1932. 

Theravada Buddhism in Burma. Calcutta, 
1946. 

Indian Influence on the Literature of Java and 
Bali. Calcutta, 1934. 

Foreign Notices of South India. Madras, 1939. 

South Indian Influence in the Far East. Bom¬ 
bay, 1949. 

History of jSrivijaya. Madras, 1949. 

Indian Islam. London, 1930. 

The Making of Greater India. London, 1951. 



844 


NllNISr^ 



<SL 


GENEALOGY 

Note: The names in italics did not reign. 

1. The Yaminis of the Punjab or the Ghaznavids 

1. Sabuktigln 


3. Malimud 


2. Isma‘11 


4. Muhammad 


5. Mas‘ud I 


9. ‘Abd-ur-Rashid 


6. Maudud 

l 

7. Mas'ud II 


8. ‘AH 


10. Farrukhzad 


11. Ibrahim 

12. Mas'tid III 


13. Shirzad 


14. Arsalan 15. Bahram Shah 

16. Khusrav Shah 

17. Khusrav Malik 

2. The Palas of Bengal (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, pp. 520-21). 

1. Mahipala I 

2. Nayapala 


3. Vigrahapala III 


4. Mahipala II 


5. iurapala II 


6. Ramapala 


1 


Rajyapdla 7. Kumarapala 9. Madanapala 

8. Gopala III Govindapala (?) 

3. The Yadavas of East Bengal 

Vajravarman 

l 

Jatavarman 


Harivarman 


Samalavarman 

I 

Bhojavarman 


845 



















VIQNV 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

4. The Senas of Bengal 

Samantasena 

Hemantasena 

I 

Vijayasena 

Vallalasena 

I 

Lakshmanasena 



Visvarupasena 


Kesavasena 


Kumarasena 


Purushottamasena 


5. The Deva Dynasty of East Bengal 

Purushottama 

Madhusudana alias 
Madhumathana 

l 

Vasudeva 

I 

Damodara 

Dasaratha 


6. The Palas of Assam 

Brahmapala 

Ratnapala 

Purandarapala 

Indrapala 

Gopala 

I 

Harshapala 

Dharmapala 

7. Dynasty of Bhaskara (Kamarupa) 

Bhaskara 

I . 

Rayarideva 

I 

Udayakarna 

I 

Vallabhadeva 

846 





[^Dynasty of Kharavaija (Srihatta) 


Kharavana 

i 

Gokuladeva 

i 

Narayana 

Kesavadeva 

i 

isanadeva 

9. Dynasty of Gunakama (Nepal) 

Gunakamadeva I 

* Udayadeva 

Nirbhaya ) 

(Joint rule 
Rudradeva J 

Bhoja 

Lakshmikamadeva 
Jayakamadeva alias Vijaya 

10. The Thakuris of Nayakot in Nepal 

Bhaskaradeva 

Baladeva alias Balavantadeva 

Pradyumnakamadeva alias Padmadeva 

Nagarjunadeva 

&ahkaradeva l 

Sivadeva 

Indra alias Mahendra 
Manadeva 

l 

Narendradeva 

Anandadeva 

Rudradeva 

Amritadeva 

Ratnadeva 

Somesvaradeva (son of Mahendra) 
Gunakamadeva II 
Lakshmikamadeva 
Vijayakamadeva 


847 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


< 5 ® 

1. The Thakuris of Patan in Nepal 

Vamadeva 

Harshadeva 

12. The Mallas of Nepal 

Arimalladeva 

Ranasura 

Abhayamalla 

Jayadevamalla 
Jayabhima 
Jayasihamalla 
Anantamalla 
Jayanandadeva 
Jayarudramalla 
Jayarimalla 
Jayarajadeva 
Jayarjunamalla 

13. The Karnataka Dynasty of Mithila 

Nanyadeva 

' I 

Gangadeva 
Nrisimha 
Ramasimha 
Saktisiihha 
Bhupalasimha 
Harisiriiha 

14. The Gupta Dynasty of Bihar 

Yajnesagupta 
Damodaragupta 

l 

Devagupta 

Rajadityagupta 

Krishnagupta 

\ 

Samgramagupta 

848 


Anandamalla 


■joint rule 





GENEALOGY 


15. Khayaravala Dynasty of Bihar 

Khadirapala 

Sddhava 

I 

Ranadhavala 

Prata^adhavala 

Sahasa 


<SL 


Vikrama 


Indradhavala 
Pratapa (?) 


16. The Rashtraku*a Dynasty of Kanauj and Budaun 

Chandra 

l 

Vigrahapala 

Bhuvanapala 

Gopala 


Tribhuvanapala 


Madanapala 


Devapala 

Bhlmapala 

Surapala 


Amritapala 


Lakhanapala 

Bharahadeva 


17. The Gahadavala Dynasty of Kanauj and Varanasi 

Yasovigraha 

Mahlchandra 

Chandradeva 

Madanachandra 

Govindachandra 


Asphotachandra 


l 

Rdjyapala 


Vijayachandra 

Jayachandra 

Harischandra 

Adakkamalla 


849 


S.E.—54 







THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

18. The Yaduvam£l Kings of Bayana-Sripatha 

Jaitapala 

Vijayapala 

Tahanapala 

Dharmapala 

Kunwarpala 

Ajayapala 

Haripala 

Sohapala or Sahanapala 51 

Anangapala 

Ppthvlpala 

Rajapala 

Trilokapala 

19. The Kachchhapaghata Dynasty of Gwalior 

Lakshmana 

l 

Vajradaman 

MaAgalaraja 

Kirttiraja 

Muladeva 

i 

Devapala 

I 

Padmapala 

Mahlpala 

I 

Ratnapala 

20. The Pratlhara Dynasty of Gwalior 

Vigraha 



Malayavarman 

Dewbul 


850 


Nrivarman 

Hariraja 




MIN/Sty, 


GENEALOGY 



<SL 


21. The Kachchhapaghata Dynasty of Dubkund 

Yuvard ja 

Arjuna 

Abhimanyu 

Vijayapala 

Vikramasimha 

22. The Kachchhapaghata Dynasty of Narwar 

Gangasimha 

Saradasimha 

I 

Virasimha 

23. The Yajvapala or Jajapella Dynasty of Narwar 

Yajvapala 

Ya (Pa) rama^iraja 

H’* 

Nfivannan 

Asalladeva 

Gopala 

Ganapati 

24. The Chandellas of Bundelkhand (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, 

p. 522). 

1. Dhanga 

2. Gan<jla 

3. Vidyadhara 

4. Vijayapala 


5. Devendravarman 


6. KIrttivarman 

I 


7. Sallakshanavarman 

I 

8. Jayavarman 


9. Prithvivarman 

10. Madanavarman 
Yasovarman II 

I 

11. ParamardI 

12. Trailokyavarman 

13. Viravarman 


14. Bhojavarman 


15. Hammiravarman 

16. Viravarman II 


851 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

25. The Kalachuris of Tripuri (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, p. 522). 

1. Kokalla II 

I 

2. Gangeyadeva 

I 

3. Kama 

I 

4. Yasatycarna 

l 

5. Gayakama 



6. Narasimha 


26. The Kalachuris of Ratanpur 


7. Jayasimha 

l 

8. Vijayasimha 

l 

Ajayasirhha 


Kokaila I 
(a younger son) 

, “t* 

2. Kamalaraja 

3. Ratnaraja I 

4. Pfithvideva I 

, „ ia l.. 

6. Ratnadeva II 

7. Prithvideva II 

, ■—i—, 

8. Jajalladeva II 9. Jagaddeva 

10. Ratnadeva III 

l 

l ; ' “I „ 

11. Prithvideva IH 12. Pratapamalla 


852 













misr/fy 



Genealogy 


<SL 


The Paramaras of Malava (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, p. 523). 

Sindhuraja 


1. Bhoja 


2. Jayasimha 


3, Udayaditya 


4. Lakshmadeva alias (?) Jagaddeva 5. Naravarman 


6. Yasovarman 


7. Jayavarman alias 

Ajayavarman 

8. Vindhyavarman 

9. Subhatavarman 

10. Arjunavarman 

11. Devapala Udayavannan 

12. Jaitugideva 13. Jayavarman II 

14. Jayasimha II 

15. Arjunavarman II 

16. Bhoja II 

17. Mahlakadeva 

$53 


Lakshmivarman 


Iiarischandra 






















VICIN' 4° 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



28. Paramaras of Mt. Abu 


<3L 

1. Aranyaraja (son of Vakpati-Muiija) 

2. Krishnaraja 

3. Dharanlvaraha 

4. Mahipala alias Dhruvabhata 

5. Dhandhuka 


6. Pfcrpapala 7. Dantivarman 8. Krishna II 

9. Yogaraja 11. Kakaladeva 

i i 

10. Ramadeva 12. Vikramasimha 

13. Yasodhavala 

1 

14. Dharavarsha 15. Prahladana 

16. Somasimha 

17. Krishnaraja 

18. Pratapasimha 

19. Arjuna 


29. The Paramaras of Vagatfa 

Jpambarasimha 

Dhanika 

Chachcha 

Chan<japa 

Satyaraja 

Limbaraja 

Mandalika 

Chamupdaraja 

Vijayaraja 

854 






GENEALOGY 


e Paramlaras of Jalor 


<SL 


31. 


Chandana (son of Vakpati-Munja) 

Devaraja 

Aparajita 

Vijjala 

Dharavarsha 

Visaia 

Kuihtapala 

The Paramaras of Bhinmal 

Dusala (son of Sindhuraja) (Vol. IV, p. 523). 

Devaraja 

X 

I 

Krishnaraja 

Sochharaja 

Udajjaraja 

Somesvara 


Jayatasllia 


Salakha 

32. The Chaulukyas of Anahillapataka 

1. Mularaja I 


2. Chamuntfaraja 


3. Vallabharaja 

4. Durlabharaja 

Nagadeva 

5. Bhuna I 

l 

Mularaja 

l 

Kshemardja 

Deva^as&da 

Tribhuvanapala 

6. Karnadeva 

7. Jayasimha 

1 l 

Mahnpdla Kirtipala 

l 

8. Kumarapala 

Premaladevi Devaladevx 

9. Aja^apala 



Mularaja II 

11. 

! 

Bhima II 


12. 

Tribhuvanapala 


$ 55 








VIQM i°' 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

33. The Vaghelas of Gujarat 

Dhavala 

Arnordja 

Lavaimprasada 

! 

Viradhavala 


1. Vlrama Pra^amaJla 

3. Arjuna 


Rdma 4. Sarangadeva 

5. Kamadeva 

i 

Devaladevi 

34. The Chahamanas of Sakambhari (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, 
p. 525). 

1. DurJabharaja II 

2. Govindaraja II 


i 

3. Vakpatiraja II 4. Viryarama 

I 

5. Chamundaraja 

r fc ~ i ■■ i 

6, Simghafa 7. Durlabharaja III 8. VIrasimha 

9. Vigraharaja III 

alias Dusala 

alias Visala 

1 


10. Prithvlraja I 

1 


11. Ajayaraja 
l 


1 

12. Amoraja 


13. Jugadeva (?) 14. Vigraharaja IV X 17. Somesvara 

alias Visala 

16. Ppthvibhata | | "j 

alias Prithvlraja II 15. Apara-Gahgeya 18 p ! . ithvir|lja m H arir 5 ja 


2. Visala 



856 














MIN/Sr^ 



GENEALOGY 


35. The Chahamanas of Ranastambhapura 


<SL 


1. Govindaraja (a descendant of Prithviraja III) 

l 

2. Balhana 


3. Prahlada 

I 

4. Vnanarayana 

I. 

7. Hammlra 


5. Vagbhata 

I 

6. (Jaitrasimha 


Surattrdna 


Virama 


36. The Chahamanas of Natfol (See Vol. IV, p. 526). 

Lakshmaga 


&obhita 

l 

Baliraja 


V igrahapdla 

I 

Mahendra 

I 


1. Asvapala alias Asala 

I 

2. Ahila 


.I 

3. Anahilla 


4. Balaprasada 


5. Jinduraja 


l 

6. Prithvlpala 

9. Ratnajpala 

10. Rayajpala 


7. Jojalla 


8. Asaraja alias 
Asvaraja 


Rudrapdla 


Amritapdla 


Sahajapdla 


Punapakshadeva 


11. Katudeva alias 
Katukaraja 

I Jayatasimha 


12. Alhanadeva 


Manikyaraya 


elha 


13. Kelhana 

I ‘ 

14. Jayataslha 

15. Samantasimha 


Gajasirhha 


Kirttipala 


Vijayasimha 


857 
















MiNisr^ 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

37. The Chahamanas of Jalor (Sonigara) 

Klrttipala (son of Alhana) 


<SL 


1. Samarasirhha 


Rudaladevi 


Lakhanapala 


Abhayapala 


Mdnavasimha 

l 

Pratdpa 

Devurdja~ 

Vijatfa 


2. Udayasimha 


Liladevi 


3. Chachiga C hdviunqicLraja V&ha$asirh 


mha 


4. Samantasiihha 

I 

5. Kanhatfa 

l 

Virama 


Ruptidevi 


38. The Chahamanas of Satyapura (S&nchor) 

Vijayasimha (son of Alhana) 

Padmasimha 

Sobhita 

Salha 

Vikramasimha 


Bhima 


Saiii^amasiriiha 

Pratapasimha 


39. The Chahamanas of Mt. Abu (Deva<Ja Branch) 

1. Devaraja-Vijada 


2. Luniga 3. Luntiga RakshmancL Lunav (ittyiqu 

l . 

4. Tejasirhha 

I 

5. Kanha^adeva 


858 












MiN/sr^ 


GENEALOGY 



<§L 


'he Guhilas of Medapata (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, p. 527). 

1. Saktikumara 


2, Ambaprasada 3. &uchivarman 4. Naravarman 5. Ananta- 6. Kirttivarmaii 

varmaii (Yasovarman) 


7. Yogaraja 

8. Vairata 

9. Hamsapala 

10. Vairisimha 

11. Vijayasimha 

12. Amiihha 

13. Chodasirixha 

14. Vikramasimha 


15. Ranasimha alias Kama 


Mahana 


16. Kshemasimha 


Rdhapa 


17. Samantasimha 


18. Kumarasimha 

19. Mathajiasimha 

20. Padmasimha 

21. Jaitrasirhha 

l 

22. Tejasimha 

l 

23. Samarasiihha 

l 

24. Ratnasimha 


859 










THE STRUGGIE FOR EMPIRE 

41. The Guhilas of Sisodiya 

Rahapa (son of Karna) 

Narapati 
Dinakara 
Jasakarna 
Nagapala 
Karnapala 
Bhuvanasimha 
Bhimasimha 
Jayasimha 
Lakhanasirnha 
ArasI (Arisimha) 

Hammira 

42. Kashmir: First Lohara Dynasty 

i ~ “Ti. .. 

Vigraharaja, 1. Sarhgramaraja 

2. Hiriraja 3. Ananta 

4. Kalasa 

I 

5. Utkarsha 6. Harsha Vijayamalla 

Bhoja 

Bhiksh&chara 



43. Kashmir: Second Lohara Dynasty 

i i , 

1. Uchchala 2. Sussala 

Salhana Lothana 

1 ' 

1 

1 . 

Bhoja 

3. Jayasimha Mall&rjuna 

Vigraharaja 

Gw liana 4 . Paramanuka 



5. Vantideva 
860 













mtSTfiy 


GENEALOGY 



44. Line of Vuppadeva 


Vuppadeva 


Jassaka 

Jagadeva 

Rajadeva 

Samgramadeva 

Ramadeva 

I 

Lakshmadeva 


<SL 


45. Line of Simhadeva 

^ r 

Simhadeva 


Suhadeva 


46. Mamliik Sultans of Delhi 

1. Qutb-ud-dln Aibak 


2. Aram Shah 3. Iltutmish = (Daughter) 


i 

Nasir-ud~d%n 

4. 

I ‘ 

Firuz 

I 

5. Raziyya 

I 

6. Mu'izz-ud-dln 

l 

8. Nasir-ud-din 

Mahmud 

7. 

l 

‘Ala-ud-din 

Mas‘ud 

Bahram 

Mahmud 






9. Balban 


Muhammad Bughrd Khan 

Kaikhusrav 10. Kaiqubad 

11. Shams-ud-dln Kayumars 


861 

















misr/fy 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

47. Chalukyas of Kalyarja 

X. Taila H 

I 


<8L 


2. Satyasraya 
Kunda 


Ddsavarman 


Satydsraya 


3. Vikramaditya V 4. Ayyarta II Akkddevi 5. Jayasimha II 


l 

6. Somesvara I 


Jayasimha 


7. Some&vara II 8. Vikramaditya VI Jayasimha 


V ishnuvardhana- 
Vij aydditya 


9. Somesvara III Jayakarna 


T 


1 


Mallikdrjuna Maildladevi 


10. Jagadekamalla II 


11. Taila in 

I 

12. Somesvara IV 


48. Kalachuris of Kalyana 

[Kannama 


Raja 


Ammugi Sankama I 


Jogama 

Permadi (or Hemmadi)] 
1. Bijjala 


2. Somesvara 3. Saiikama II 4. Ahavamalla 5. Sirighana §iriyadevi 


49. Silaharas of the South Mara^ha country 

Gandaraditya 

Vijayaditya 

Bhoja n 
862 













miSTfty 


GENEALOGY 



Jaitugi II 

4. Krishna 

7. Hamachandra (or Ramadeva) 


Seunachandra 

Karna 

1. Bhillama V 

I 

2. Jaitugi I 

3. Sjrighana 

Sa( ih)rnapdrii 

5. Mahadeva 

6. Amana 



51. The Kakatiyas 

1. Beta I 

2. Prola I 

3. Tribhuvanamalla Beta II 

l 

4. Prola II 

_ ! _ 

i . I 

5. Kudra I 6. Mahadeva 

l 

7. Ganapati 

I. | 

8. Rudramba Ganapdmbd 

(m. Chalukya Virabhadresvara) 

Mummadamba 
(m. Mahadeva) 

9. Prataparudra 


52. The Eastern Chalukyas (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, p. 531). 

1. Danarnava 


2. 6aktivarman I 3. Vimaladitya 


4. Rajaraja I 5. Vijayaditya VII 

7. Kulottuhga Choja I 6. 6aktivarman II 


868 


i 









WON' 4 ° 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


53. Later Garigas of Kalinga (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, pp. 142, 
532). 

1. Vajrahasta IV 


2. Kamarnava VI 

5. Vajrahasta V 

6. Rajaraja I 

7. Anantavarman Chotfagariga 


3. Guntfama II 


4. Madhukamarnava V 


8. Kamarnava VII 9. Raghava 10. Rajaraja II 11. Aniyanka Bhlma II 

or Anangabhlma 

12. Rajaraja III 

13. Aniyahkabhima III 

14. Narasirhha I 

15. Bhanudeva I 

16. Narasimha II 

54. Somavaihils (For earlier kings see Vol. IV, p. 533). 

1. Yayati Mahasivagupta I 

2. Bhimaratha Mahabhavagupta II 


f&r, I 

3. Dharmaratha (Mahasivagupta II) 


55. Chhindaka-Nagas of Bastar 

1. Nripati-bhushana (?Kshiti-) 

2. Dharavarsha Jagadekabhushana 

3. Madhurantaka 

4. Somesvara I (Son of 2) 

l 

5. Kanhara 

Rajabhushana Somesvara II 
Jagadekabhushana Narasimha 
Jayasirhha 
Harischandra 


4. Nahusha (Mahabhavagupta III) 

(?Indraratha) 

5. Chandihara-Yayati Mahasivagupta III 

6. Uddyotakesari (Mahabhavagupta IV) 
7 Karnakesari 


864 










57. Hoysalas 


4. Ballala I 


GENEALOGY 

Challama 
Yasoraja I 

Chandraditya 
Yasoraja II 

Somes vara II 

l 

Dharalladevavarman 

i 

Somesvara(devavarman) III 

1. Nripakama 

l 

2. Vinayaditya 

3. Ereyanga 

J f 

5. Vishnuvardhana (or Biftiga) 

6. Vijaya Narasimha I 

7. Ballala II 



8. Narasimha II 

9. Somesvara 


10. Narasimha III 

l 

11. Ballala III 


Ramandtha 

I 

Visvanatha 


S. E,—55 


865 









MIN/Sr^ 



> 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



58. Cholas (For earlier kings, see Vol. IV, p. 534). 


1. Rajaraja I 


2. Rajendra I 


Kundava = Vimaladitya 

(E. Chalukya) 


3. Rajadhiraja I 4. Rajendra II 5. VIrarajendra I Ammahgadevi — Rajaraja 

Rdjamahendra 6. Adhirajendra 7. Kulottunga I 

(Rajendra Chalukya) 


(Other sons and daughtersj 


8. Vikrama Chola 


9. Kulottunga II 

10. Rajaraja II 

11. Rajadhiraja II (grandson of 8) 

12. Kulottunga III 

13. Rajaraja III 

14. Rajendra III 


59. Later Parnjyas 


1. Jatavarman Kulasekhara Parujya I 

2. Maravarman Sundara Pantfya I 

3. Maravarman Sundara Pan^ya II 


4. Jatavarman Sundara Parujya I 


5 Maravarman Kulasekhara Pandya I 
866 














MINIS 


GENEALOGY 



<SL 


60. Ceylon 

1. Vijayabahu I Srisanghabodhi 

2. Jayabahu (brother of 1) 

3. Vikramabahu II (son of 1) 

4. Gajabahu (son of 3) 

5. Parakramabahu I 

6. Vijayabahu II (sister's son of 5) 

7. Mahendra VI (of the Kalihga clan) 

8. Nihsankamalla or Klrtinihsanka (son of Jayagopa of Kalinga) 

9. Virabahu II (son of 8) 

10. Vikramabahu III (or II) (brother of 8) 

11. Chotfagahga (sister's son of 8) 

12. Lilavati (first mahishi of 5) 

13. Sahasamalla (step-brother of 8) 

14. Kalyanavatl (first mahishi of 8) 

15. Dharmasoka 

16. Anikahga (father of 15) 

17. Ulavati (again) (No. 12) 

18. Lokesvara (of South India) 

19. Lilavati (again) (Nos. 12, 17) 

20. Parakrama Pan$ya 

21. Magha (from Kerala) 

(End of Polonnaruva period) 


1. Thakuris of Patan overthrew the Thakuris of Nayakot in the latter part of the 
eleventh centurv A.D. 

2. According to another account, Sohapala’s successor was Kunwarpala who was 
the predecessor of Ajayapala. Anangapala may be the successor of Kunwarpala 
(p. 56 above). 


867 






VIQNO 0 ' 


CHRONOLOGY 



c. 695-c.722 
696 733 
c. 724 760 
c. 733-746 
749 

c. 758-773 
813-833 
820 
849 

872 

903 

907-953 
913-943 
c. 963 


973-997 

977 

980-1003 

9854014 

9874036 

988 

990 

996 

997 

997-C4008 

998 

999 

1000 

c. 1000 
1000 

c. 10004015 

1000-1055 

1001 

1003 

1004 

1005-1006 

1006 


1007 


Narasimhavarman II Rajasimha, Pallava (p. 612). 
Vijayaditya Chalukya (p. 615). 

Lalitaditya Muktapida, Kashmir (p. 634). 
Vikramaditya II, Chalukya (p. 615). 

Foundation of ‘Abbasid Caliphate (p. 1). 

Krishna I M Rashtrakufca (p. 616). 

Al-Ma‘mun (p. 1). 

Tahir made governor of Khurasan (p. 1). 
Foundation of Pagan by king Pyahpya, acc. to 
some Burmese Chronicles (p. 755). 

Tahirids superseded by Saffarids (p. 1). 

Samanids wrest Khurasan from Saffarids (p. 1). 
Parantaka I, Chola (p. 618). 

Nasr II, Samanid (p. 1). 

Alptigm establishes independent kingdom after 
conquering Ghazni from Abu Bakr Lawik 
(p. 2). 

Taila II, Chalukya (p. 161). 

Accession of Sabuktigm (p. 3). 

Didda, of Kashmir (p. 666). 

Rajaraja the Great, Chola (pp. 234, 281, 618). 
Bhaskara Ravivarman of Kerala (p. 234). 
Accession of Mahipala I (p. 24). 
ilak Khans of Turkistan capture Bukhara (p. 2). 
Last known date of Taila II (p. 164). 

Death of Sabuktigm (p. 5). 

Satyasraya, Chalukya (p. 164). 

Accession of Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni (p. 5). 
Accession of Saktivarman I, son of Dananiava, 
E. Chalukya (p. 203). 

Chola Rajaraja starts a great land survey 
(p. 235). 

Accession of Paramara Bhoja (p, 66). 

Mahmud leads first expedition against India 
(p. 6). 

Bhlmaratha Mahabhavagupta II, Somavamsi 
(p. 209). 

Bhoja Paramara, of Dhara (pp. 331, 658). 

Death of Jaya-varman V of Kambuja (p. 736). 
Sri Chudamanivarmadeva of the Sailendras 
sends two envoys to China (p. 730). 

Mahmud’s invasion of Bhatiya (p. 7). 

Mahmud’s expedition against Multan (p. 8). 
Mara-Vijayottuhga-varman, Sailendra ruler, 
founds a Buddhist monastery at Negapatam 
(p. 239). 

Mahmud captures Nawasa Shah and his trea¬ 
sures (p. 8). 


868 



1008 

c. 1008-1014 

1009 

1009-1010 

1010 

1010 

1011 

1011-1018 

1012 

c. 1012 
1012-1044 

1013 

1014 

1015 

c. 1015-1020 

1015- 1043 

1016- 1017 
1018 
1018 

1018 

1018 

1018-1052 

1019 

1019; 1022 

1020 
1020-21 

c. 1020-1025 

1021 

1021 
c. 1021 
1021-22 

1022 
c. 1022 

1025 
c. 1025 

c. 1025-1055 

1027 

1028 
1030 

1030 


<SL 

CHRONOLOGY 

King Nirbhaya rules jointly with Rudra in 
Nepal (p. 45). 

Mahmud’s war with Anandapala (p. 8). 

Vikramaditya V, Chalukya (p. 166). 

Mahmud’s expedition against Narayan (p. 10). 
Accession of Chaulukya Durlabharaja (p. 74). 
Completion of the Rajarajesvara temple at 
Tanjore (pp. 236, 618). 

Mahmud’s expedition against Multan (p. 10). 

Mahmud leads an expedition against Thaneswar 
(pp. 10, 23n 7). 

Vimaladitya, E. Chalukya (p. 235). 

Chola Rajaraja associates his son Rajendra in 
the government of the empire (pp. 235-6). 

Death of Anandapala (p. 11). 

Rajendra I, Chola (pp. 236, 618). 

Mahmud advances with his army to Nandana, 
capital of Trilochanapala (p. 11). 

Death of Chola Rajaraja (p. 239). 

Mahmud attacks Kashmir valley (p. 12). 

Dharmaratha, Somavamsi (p. 209). 

Jayasimha II, Chalukya (pp. 166, 237). 

Birth of Ramanuja (p. 437). 

Rajaraja, E. Chalukya (p. 204). 

Rajendra Chola makes his son Rajadhiraja heir 
apparent (pp. 236, 240). 

Mahmud marches to attack Kanauj (p. 13). 

Chola Rajendra conquers Ceylon (p. 238). 

Rajadhiraja I, Chola (p. 240). 

Consecration of Airlangga of Java (p. 749). 

Mahmud of Ghazni invades Kalanjara (p. 58). 
Paramara Bhoja conquers Konkan (p. 66). 

Mahmud advances to India to chastise the Chan- 
della Vidyadhara (p. 16). 

Nahusha, SomavamsI (p. 209). 

Chola Rajendra defeats Chalukya Jayasimha 
(p. 238). 

Mahmud leads an army against Lohkot (p. 18). 

Chola invasion of Bengal (p. 25). 

Mahmud’s second expedition against Chandella 
Vidyadhara (p. 18). 

Coronation of Rajaraja, E. Chalukya (p. 204). 
Chaulukya Durlabha abdicates in favour of his 
nephew Bhlmadeva I (p. 74). 

Mahmud plunders Somanatha (pp. 20, 74). 

Rajendra Chola’s expedition to Kadaram (pp. 

239. 493). 

Chapdihara, Somavamsi (p. 209). 

Mahmud marches to punish the Jats (p. 21). 

Hariraja of Kashmir (p. 97). 

Vijayaditya performs his coronation ceremony 
(p. 204). 

Death of Mahmud (pp. 22, 92). 

869 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


1031 
1031 

1034 

1034 

1035 

1036 

1038 
c. 1038 

1038-70 
c. 1039 
1040 

1040 

1041 

1042 

1043 

1043-44; 

1051- 52 

1043- 68 

1044 

1044- 77 
1047-1101 
1049 
1052 

1052- 1064 
c. 1055 

c. 1055 

c. 1055 
1055 1080 
1058-59; 1063-64 

1059 

1060 
1060 
1061 

1062 

1063 

1063-1064 

1063-1070 


<SL 


Accession of Mas'ud (p. 92). 

Completion of the Adinatha temple at Abu 
(p. 428). 

Ahmad Niyaltigin invades Banaras (pp. 25, 61). 

Kalachuri Gangeyadeva bears the brunt of an 
attack of the Muslims (p. 61). 

Airlangga establishes his authority over the 
whole of Java (p. 749). 

Mas'ud sends his second son Majdud as the 
governor of the Punjab (p. 93). 

Coronation of Vajrahasta V, E. Gahga (p. 205). 

Death of Mahipala I, and accession of his son 
Nayapala (p. 27). 

Anantavarman Vajrahasta III, Ganga (p. 212). 

Dipankara AtLsa visits Nepal (p. 45). 

Mas'ud proceeds towards Hindustan (p. 93). 

Assassination of Mas'ud (p. 93). 

Accession of Jaya Simha-varman II (p. 743). 

Airlangga of Java abdicates and takes to religi¬ 
ous life (p. 750). 

Indian chiefs form a confederacy under the 
Raja of Delhi (p. 94). 

Chola invasions against Chalukyas (pp. 167, 168). 

Somesvara I, Chalukya (p. 167). 

Chola Rajadhiraja performs a horse sacrifice 
(p. 241). 

Aniruddha of Burma (p. 756). 

Hoysala Vinayaditya (p. 175). 

Death of Maudud (p. 94). 

Battle of Koppam (p. 241). 

Rajendra Cho)a II (pp. 240, 241). 

Death of Paramara Bhoja (p. 67). 

Malava falls into the hands of the Kalachuris 
and Chaulukyas (pp. 67, 172). 

Vigraliapala III succeeds his father Nayapala 
(p. 27). 

Uddyotakesarl Mahabhavagupta, Somavamsi 

(_p. 211). 

Chalukya Somesvara leads expeditions against 
the Chojas (pp. 169, 170). 

Ibrahim ascends the throne of Ghazni (p. 94). 

Vijaydditya usurps the Vengi throne (p. 204). 

Death of RajarSja I, E. Chalukya (p. 242). 

Coronation of Saktivarman II, E. Chalukya 
Jp. 204). J 

Rajendra Chola II defeats Chalukya Somesvara 
(p. 241). 

Ananta of Kashmir abdicates in favour of his 
son Kalaia (p. 98). 

Chalukya Somesvara I leads an expedition 
against the Cholas (p. 170). 

Virarajendra, Choja (p. 241). 

870 


CHRONOLOGY 



C. 1064 


1067 

1067- 1068 

1068- 1069 

1068-1070 

1068-1076 

1070 

c. 1070 

c. 1070 
1070-1078 
1070-1120 
c. 1072 
1072 

1075 

c. 1075 

1076 

1076- 1126 
1Q77 

1077- 1120 

1078- 1150 
1079 

1081 

1084 


1084-1088 
c. 1085 

1086 

1088-1094 

1088- 1172 

1089- 1101 
c. 1090 

1090- 1110 
1094 

c. 1094 
c. 1095 
1096; 1110 
c, 1097 

1098 


Chaulukya Bhima hands over Sovereignty to 
Kanja (p. 75). 

Vxrarajendra erects a pillar of victory on the 
banks of the Timgabhadra (p. 241). 

Chalukya Vikramaditva marches against Gari- 
gaikonda and plunders it (p. 171). 

Virarajendra leads an expedition against Chalu¬ 
kya Somesvara II (p. 173). 

Adhirajendra, Choja (p. 241). 

Somesvara II, Chalukya (p. 173). 

Coronation of Rajaraja I Devendravarman, E. 
Gahga (p. 205). 

Death of Vigrahapala III, and accession of his 
son Mahipala II (p. 28). 

Accession of Kulottunga Choja I (p. 204), 

Rajaraja I, E. Gahga (p. 212). 

Kulottunga I, Choja (p. 242). 

Death of Kalachuri Karna (p. 51). 

Death of ‘All bin ‘Usman al-Hujwairi, founder 
of the Sufi cult in India (p. 467). 

Ibrahim appoints his son Mahmud governor of 
the Punjab (p. 94). 

Divya ascends the throne of Varendri (p. 29). 

Kulottunga Chola I annexes the Andhra country 
(p. 204). 

Vikramaditya VI, Chalukya (p. 174). 

Death of Aniruddha of Burma (p. 757). 

Ramapala (p. 415). 

Anantavarman Chodaganga, E. Gahga (p. 205). 

Ananta of Kashmir settles at the Tirtha of 
Vijayesvara (p. 98). 

Ananta of Kashmir commits suicide (p. 98). 

Accession of Kyanzittha of Burma under the 
title of Sri Tribhuvanaditya-dharmaraja 
(p. 757). 

Rajaraja Chodaganga, viceroy of Vengi (p. 205). 

Vijayabahu of Ceylon declares war against the 
Cholas (p. 262). 

Chola Kulottunga orders a land survey (p. 244). 

Paramara Lakshmadeva (p. 206). 

Hemachandra (pp. 345, 428, 433). 

Harsha of Kashmir (p. 99). 

Kulottunga Chola receives an embassy from 
K a da ram (p. 243). 

Somesvara, Chhindaka Naga fp. 214). 

Composition of Old-Javanese Ramayana by Yogis- 
vara (p. 767). 

Accession of Chaulukya Jayasimha fp. 75). 

Accession of Vijayasena (p. 36). 

Kalinga expeditions of Chola Kulottunga fp. 243). 

Nanyadeva of the Karnataka dynasty establishes 
his supremacy over Mithilh (p. 47). 

Death of Harshadeva of Nepal (p. 46). 

871 


tftlE STRUGGLE FOR EMPlfefe 



1135 


c. 1137 
1138-1151 
1142 

c. 1143 

c. 1143 
1144 


<3L 


Kulottunga reconquers Vengl from the Chalukyas 
(p. 174). 

Mas‘ud III succeeds his father Ibrahim (p. 95). 

‘Ala-ud-Daulah Mas‘ud III (p. 52). 

Death of Harsha of Kashmir (p. 99). 

Death of Hoysala Vinayaditya and accession of 
his son Ballala I (p. 228). 

Hoysala Bitfiga succeeds Ballala I (p. 228). 

Kulottunga makes another land survey (p. 244). 

Death of Vijayabahu of Ceylon (p. 262). 

Death of Uchchala of Kashmir (p. 100). 

Accession of Surya-varman V of Kambuja (p. 737) 

Earliest known date of Kakatlya Prola II (p. 198). 

Kamal-ud-Daulah Shirzad succeeds his father 
Mas‘ud III (p. 95). 

Vikramabahu II of Ceylon (p. 262). 

Bahram captures Ghazni (p. 95). 

Vengi comes under the control of Vikramaditya 
VI (p. 244). 

Vikrama Chola (p. 245). 

Bhikshachara, king of Kashmir (p. 100). 

Ramapala commits suicide (p. 31). 

Kalachuri Ratnadeva II (p. 206). 

Sussala recovers the throne of Kashmir after 
defeating Bhikshachara (p. 100). 

Birth of Lakshmanasena, acc. to Minhaj (p. 40). 

Sussala of Kashmir abdicates in favour of his 
son Jayasimha (p. 100). 

Birth of Basava (p. 367). 

Death of Kumarapala, Bengal (p. 32). 

Death of Chalukya Vikramaditya VI (p, 177). 

Somesvara III, Chalukya (p. 177). 

Death of Sussala of Kashmir (p. 100). 

Jayasimha of Kashmir (pp. 100-1). 

Chandella Madanavarman (p. 53). 

Manasolldsa of Chalukya Somesvara III (p. 352). 

Kulottunga II, Chola (p. 245). 

Death of Vikrama Chola (p. 245). 

Hoysala Vishnuvardhana performs the Tulapuru- 
sha (p. 230). 

Death of Ramanuja (p. 438). 

Jagadekamalla, Chalukya (p. 178). 

Anantavarman, E. Gaxiga, crowns his son Kamar- 
nava VII (p. 207). 

Chalukya Jagadekamalla together with Hoysala 
Narasiriiha invades Malava, dethrones Para- 
mara Jayavarman and places Ballala on the 
throne (p. 178). 

Close of the reign of Chaulukya Jayasiriiha- 
Siddharaja (pp. 53, 76). 

Madanapala, son of Ramapala, succeeds Gopaki 
HI (p. 32). 


872 



1147 

1148-1155 

1149 

1150 


1151 

1151-1156 

1152 

c. 1153-1186 

1155- 1165 

1156- 1168 

1156- 1181 
1157 

1157- 1170 
c. 1158 

1160 

1161- 1167 

1162- 1185 
1163 
1163 

1163- 1179 
c. 1163-1203 

1165-1172 
c. 1167-1171 
1168 

1168-1169 
c. 1169 

1169 

1170 
1170 

c. 1171-1172 
1171-1192 
1173 


1173-1220 

1175 

c.1176 
1177 


£hronologV 

Surya-varman II of Kambuja invades Champa 
(p. 745). 

Rajaraja II, Chola (p. 245). 

Foundation of the Kharataragachchha (p. 432). 

Kamanjava VII, E. Ganga (p. 207). 

Bahrain reconquers Ghazni (p. 96). 

Chaulukya Kumarapala leads an expedition 
against Chahamana Arrioraja of Sakambhari 
(p. 77). 

Last known date of Chalukya Jagadekamalla II 
(p. 178). 

Taila III, Chalukya (p. 178). 

Death of Bahram and accession of his son Khusrav 
Shah (p. 96). 

Parakramabahu I of Ceylon (p. 263). 

Paramapuka of Kashmir (p. 101). 

Bijjala, Kalachuri (p. 180). 

Kalachuri usurpation of the Deccan (p. 179). 

Composition of Bhdrata-yuddha by Mpu Sedah 
(p. 768). 

Raghava, E. Ganga (p. 207). 

Accession of Vallalasena (p. 37). 

Khusrav Malik succeeds his father Khusra v Shah 
(p- 96). 

Kalachuri Jajalla II of Ratanpur (p. 65). 

Prataparudra I of Warangal (p. 444). 

Accession of Ghiyas-ud-dln Muhammad (p. 117). 

Death of Chalukya Taila III (p. 179). 

Rajadhiraja II, Chola (p. 245). 

Paramardi, Chandeila (p. 122). 

Vantideva of Kashmir (p. 101). 

Kulasekhara, Pandya (p. 264). 

Bijjala abdicates the throne in favour of his son 
Somesvara (p. 181). 

Chahamana Somesvara (p. 104). 

Civil war between Parakrama Pandya and Kula¬ 
sekhara Pandya (p. 245). 

Vallalasena completes Danasigara (p. 37). 

Assassination of Narathu of Burma (p. 757). 

Jayachandra succeeds his father Vijayachandra 
(p. 54). 

Death of Chaulukya Kumarapala (p. 78). 

Rajaraja II, E. Ganga (p. 207). 

Ghiyas-ud-din wrests Ghazni from the Ghuzz 
(p. 97), and makes his brother Shihab-ud-dln 
(Mu‘izz-ud-dln) the governor of that provincf 
(p. 117). 

Hoysala Ballala II fp. 247). 

Mu‘izz-ud-dln wrests Multan and Uch from the 
Qaramitah chiefs (p. 117). 

Accession of Chaulukya Mularaja II (p. 78). 

The Cham king sends a naval expedition against 
Kambuja (p. 738). 



873 


MIN/Sr^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



c. 1177 

1177 

1178 
1178 

1178 


1178 

1178 

1178 

1178-1216 

1180 

1181-c. 1189 
1181 

1181 

1181; 1184; 1186 

1182 


c. 1182 
c. 1182 

1183-1184 

1185 

1185- 1193 

1186 

1186- 1187 

1187- 1196 

1188- 1189 
1189 


c. 1189 

1190-1191 

1190- 1216 

1191- 1192 
1192 

1192 

1192 


<3L 


Last known date of (Kalachuri) Somesvara and 
the earliest known date of his successor San- 
kama (p. 181). 

Death of Chahamana Somesvara (p. 104). 

Chahamana Prithvlraja III succeeds Somesvara 
(p. 83). 

Accession of Lakshmanasena (p. 38). 

Mu‘izz-ud-dln Muhammad Ghurl attacks Gujarat 
(pp. 78, 105). 

Mu 4 izz-ud-din Muhammad reaches Kiraglu and 
takes possession of Na$ol (p. 105) and plunders 
it (p. 87). 

Mu'izz-ud-din repulsed by Mularaja II (p. 109). 

Mu'izz-ud-din takes Peshawar (p. 118). 

Accession of Chaululcya Bhlma II (p. 78). 

Kulottunga III, Chola (p. 246). 

Accession of (Kalachuri) Ahavamalla (p. 182). 

Somesvara IV, Chalukya (p. 182). 

Death of Muslim saint Sayyid Ahmad Sultan 
Sakhi Sarwar (p. 467). 

Accession of Jaya-varman VII of Kambuja 
(p. 738). 

Mu‘izz-ud-dln Muhammad invades Lahore (p. 97). 

Chahamana Prithvlraja goes out for digvijaya 
(p. 107), defeats Paramardi and devastates the 
Chandella kingdom (p. 108). 

Kulottunga III dethrones Vira Panijlya (p. 246). 

Sumra chief acknowledges Mu‘izz-ud-dln , s suze¬ 
rainty (p. 117). 

Sihghana (Kalachuri) acknowledges the supre¬ 
macy of Chalukya Somesvara IV (p. 182). 

Sialkot falls to Mu‘izz-ud-din (p. 118). 

Yadava Bhillama (p. 282). 

Mu'izz-ud-din overthrows Khusrav Malik (p. 118) 

Vijayabahu II of Ceylon (p. 265). 

Klrtinihsanka or Nihsahkamalla of Ceylon 
(p. 265). 

Hoysala Ballala II inflicts a severe defeat upon 
Bhillama V (p. 186). 

Last known date of Chalukya Somesvara IV’s 
supremacy over Bellary and Shimoga Districts 
(p. 183). 

Kulottunga III defeats Vira P&n<Jya who takes 
refuge in Quilon (p. 246). 

First Battle of Tarain (p. 110). 

Jatavarman Kulasekhara (p. 256). 

Conquests of Hoysala Ballala II (p. 187). 

Second battle of Tarain and defeat and death of 
Prithvlraja (p. 112). 

Khusrav Malik and his son Bahram were put to 
death (p. 97). 

Introduction of Ceylonese Buddhism in Burma 
(p. 757). 


874 


Chronology 


1192 

1193 

1193 

1193 

1193 

1193 

1193 

1193-1194 

1195 

1195 

1196 

1196 
c. 1196 

1197 

1197 

1198 

1199-1220 
c. 1200 
c. 1200 

1201 


1202 

1202 

c. 1202 

1202-1203 

1205 

1205 

1205 

c. 1205 

1205-1206 

1206 
c. 1206 

1207 
c. 1208 

1210 


Anangabhima, E. Ganga (p. 207). 

Hoysala Ballala II declares himself independent 
ruler of his territories (p. 231). 

Last known date of Yadava Bhillama (p. 187) 
Mu‘izz-ud-din Muhammad Ghurl defeats Jaya- 
chandra near Chandawar (p. 54). 

Conquest of Ajmer by Qutb-ud-dln (p. 114). 
Qutb-ud-din makes Delhi his capital (p 119) 
Ikhtiyar-ud-din Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji takes 
up a soldier’s job (p. 122). 

Qutb-ud-din occupies Ajmer (p. 79). 

Chaulukya Bhlma sends an army to help the 
Mhers against the Muslims (p. 79). 
Mu‘izz-ud-dln returns to annex Bayana and 
Gwalior (p. 120). 

Muslims conquer Gwalior (p. 56). 

Mu‘izz-ud-din defeats Kunwarpala (p. 56). 
Kulottuhga III recovers Kanchi from his Telugu- 
Choda feudatories (p. 246). 

Dharavarsha suffers defeat at the hands of Qutb- 
ud-din’s general Khusrav (p. 73). 

Qutb-ud-din invades Gujarat (p. 79) and Yadava 
Jaitugi comes into conflict with him (p 188). 
Accession of Kakatiya Ganapati (p. 200). 
‘Ala-ud-dln Khvarazm Shah (p. 117). 

Accession of Yadava Sirighana (p. 188). 
Ikhtiyar-ud-din commences raids on the Maga- 
^ dha territory (pp. 122-3). 

Ghurids occupy Khurasan and conquer Nishapur, 
but ‘Ala-ud-din Khvarazm recovers Nishapur 
and other Ghurid conquests (p. 124). 
Qutb-ud-din invests Kalanjara (pp. 59, 122). 
Death of Ghiyas-ud-din and accession of his 
younger brother Mu‘izz-ud-dln (p. 124). 
Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji conquers Nadiya 
(p. 40). 

Harikaladeva Ranavankamalla ascends the throne 
of Patffkera (p. 41). 

Khvarazmians defeat Mu‘izz-ud-din at Andkhui 
(p. 124). 

Last known date of Lakshmaijasena (p. 40). 
Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji advances for the 
^ conquest of Tibet (p. 43). 

Kulottuhga III sends the third expedition against 
Jatavarman Kulasekhara Pandya (p. 246) 
Rajaraja III, E. Ganga (p. 207). 

Assassination of Mu‘izz-ud-din (p. 124). 
Assassination of Muhammad Bakhtyar Khalji 
(p. 124). 

War of Champa with the Annamites (p. 739). 
Kulottuhga III despatches an expedition to 
Andhra-desa (p. 246). 

Death of Qutb-ud-din Aibak (p. 131). 

875 



MiN/$r^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



1210-11 

1211 


1214 

1215 

c.1215 
1216-1235 
1216-1238 
1216-1246 
1217 

1220 

c. 1220 
c. 1220-1234 
1222 

1223-1252 

1226 

1226 

1226 


1227 

1228 
1229 

1229 

1229-1278 

1230 

1231 


c. 1231 

1233 

1233- 1234 

1234 

1234- 1263 
ltJ36 
1236 

1236-1240 
c. 1236-1271 
1238-1264 


<SL 


Accession of Aram Shah (p. 56). 

Yadava Sihghaii^a launches an expedition against 
Hoysala Ballala II (p. 188). 

‘Ala-ud-din Khvarazm Shah drives out Ghurids 
(p. 117). 

The Ahoms start from Maulung under their 
leader Sukapha (p. 44). 

End of the Ghuri empire in Ghazni (p. 125). 

Anahgabhima III, E. Gahga (p. 207). 

Maravarman Sundara Pan<Jya (p. 256). 

Rajaraja III, Chola (pp. 200, 247). 

Hoysala Ballala II compels Sundara Papaya to 
restore the Chola country to its rulers (p. 231). 

Forces of Kambuja withdraw from Champa (pp. 
739, 747). 

Death of Hoysala Ballala II (p. 231). 

Hoysala Narasimha II (pp. 231, 247). 

Angrok defeats Kritajaya and annexes Kadiri 
(p. 751). 

Abhayamalla of Nepal (p. 46). 

Malik Nasir-ud-din Muhammad Shah overthrows 
and kills Bartu of Awadh (p. 55). 

Iltutmish conquers Ranthambhor (p. 84). 

Ghiyas-ud-din Twaz, Sultan of Lakhnawatl, 
makes an abortive attempt to conquer Vang a 
(p. 40). 

Ghiyas-ud-din Twaz makes an abortive attempt 
to conquer Kamarupa (p. 44). 

Foundation of Tapagachchha (p. 433). 

Accession of Uktai to the Supremt Mongol Khan¬ 
ate (p. 142). 

Iltutmish receives investiture from the Caliph 
(p. 136). 

Kop-Perunjihga or Maharajasirhha (p. 248). 

Completion of the Neminatha temple at Abu 
(p. 428). 

Hoysala Narasimha II defeats Sundara Pan^ya 
and releases and restores to throne Rajaraja III 
(p. 231). 

Kop-Perunjihga defeats Rajaraja at Tellaru and 
imprisons him at Sendamahgalam (p. 248). 

Iltutmish conquers Bhilsa and plunders Ujjain 
(p. 71). 

Iltutmish plunders Malava (p. 191). 

Yajvapala Chahadadeva defeats Malik Nusrat- 
ud-dln Tayasai (p. 57). 

Hoysala Somesvara (p. 231). 

Death of Iltutmish (p. 135). 

Samgramadeva succeeds his father Rajadeva of 
Kashmir (p. 101). 

Raziyya (p. 139). 

Parakramabahu II of Ceylon (p. 267), 

Narasimha I. E. Ganga (p. 551). 


876 




1243 


1243 

1246-1265 

1246-1279 

1247 

1248; 1253 

1250 
c. 1250 

1251 

1251- 1268 

1252 

1252- 1253 

1253 

1253 

1253- 1275 

1254 

1254 

1254- 1279 

1255 

1257 

1257 

1258 

1258-1259 

1260 

1261 

1261-1270 

1262 

1263 

1264-1279 

1265 

1267 

1268 

1268-1310 

1271 

c. 1271-1273 


CHRONOLOGY 

Mu'izz-ud-din Bahram (p. 138). 

‘Ala-ud-din Mas'iid (p. 139). 

Accession of Vlsala (p. 80). 

Kop-Perunjinga assumes titles indicative of in¬ 
dependent status (p. 248). 

Narasirivha I, E. Gafiga, attacks the Lakhnawatl 
frontier (pp. 144, 208). 

Death of Indra-varman II of Kambuja (p. 741). 

Sultan Nasir-ud-din Mahmud (p. 140). 

Rajendra Chola III (p. 247). 

Accession of Yadava Krishna (p. 192). 

Ulugh Khan invests Ranthambhor (p. 85). 

Balban invades Malava (p. 71). 

Kakatlya Ganapati occupies Kahchi (p. 248). 

Balban defeats Yajvapala Chahadadeva (p. 57). 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I (p. 257). 

Ramadeva succeeds his father Sarhgramadeva 
of Kashmir (p. 102). 

Kop-Perunjinga defeats the Hoysalas at Peram- 
balur (p. 248). 

The A horns settle at Charaideo (p. 44). 

Mongol Emperor Kublai Khan conquers the Thai 
kingdom of Gandhara (p. 759). 

Jatavarman Vira Pandya (p. 258). 

Balban’s expedition against the Katehriyas 
(p. 147). 

Accession of Narasimhapati of Burma (p. 757). 

Yajvapala Asalladeva (p. 57). 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya reduces Kop- 
Perunjinga to vassalage (p. 249). 

Ikhtiyar-ud-dln Yuzbak Tughril Khan invades 
Kamarupa (p. 44). 

Suktimuktiivali of Jahlana (p. 306). 

Balban conquers Gwalior (p. 57). 

Rudramba associated with the government of 
the Kakatiyas (p. 202). 

Kop-Perunjinga takes possession of Kahchi 
(p. 202). 

Rudramba succeeds Kakatlya Ganapati (p. 202). 

Yadava Mahadeva (p. 202). 

Pandya Jatavarman kills the Hoysala Somesvara 
near Srlrangam (p. 258). 

Foundation of the Mahanubhava sect by 
Chakradhara (p. 353). 

Bhanudeva I, E. Ganga (p. 209). 

Accession of Balban (p. 140). 

Yadava Sa(m)rnapani rules Panungala under 
Kakatlya Rudramba (p. 192). 

Death of Vishnuvardhana of Java (p. 751). 

Maravarman Kulasekhara, Pandya (p. 259). 

Kublai Khan sends envoys asking Burma to 
accept his suzerainty (p. 757). 

Vijayabahu IV of Ceylon (p. 267). 

877 



miSTQy. 



1286 

1287 

1287-1289 

1289-1290 

1289 

1290 

1290 

1291 

1291-1298 

1291-1342 

1292 

1293 

1293 
c. 1293 

1294 

1295-1296 


1296 

1296 

1296-1316 

1299 

1301 

c, 1302-1310 


<SL 

THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 

Brahmana Lakshmadeva, adopted son of Rama- 
deva of Kashmir, succeeds the latter (p. 102). 

Chaulukya Sarangadeva succeeds Arjuna (p. 81). 

Panova Maravarman Kulasekhara defeats Hoy¬ 
sala Ramanatha and Choja Rajendra III 
(p 232). 

Narasimha II, E. Gahga (p. 209). 

Anantamalla of Nepal (p 47). 

Death of Suteupha of the Ahonis and accession 
of his son Subinpha (p. 45). 

Mongol Emperor Kublai Khan invites the king 
of Java to pay homage (p. 752). 

HammTra of Ranthambhor succeeds his father 
Jayasiihha (p. 85). 

Sultan Balban comes to Sonargaon and enters 
into an agreement with Danuj Rai (p. 42). 

Kritanagara of Java establishes supremacy over 
Bali (p. 751). 

Death of Muhammad, Balban’s eldest son (p. 
155). 

Kajjala, a Muslim, kills Lakshmadeva of Kash¬ 
mir (p. 102). 

Death of Balban (p. 155). 

Sultan Kaiqubad (p. 156). 

Sultan Kayumars (p. 158). 

Hammiravarman succeeds Bhojavarman (p. 60). 

Kakatiya Rudramba associates Prataparudra 

with the government (p. 202). 

Ffruz proclaims his accession as Sultan Jalal-ud- 
din Firuz (p. 158). 

Death of Hoysala Narasimha III (p. 232). 

Yajvapala Gapapati (p. 58). 

Hoysala Ballala III (pp. 232, 260). 

Kublai Khan sends a military expedition to 
Java (p. 752). 

Establishment of the kingdom of Majapahit 
(p. 753). , ... 

Accession of Sukhanghpha of the Ahoms (p. 45). 

Venetian traveller Marco Polo visits Motupalli 

(p. 202). 

‘Ala-ud-din Khalji invades Devagiri (p. 195). 

Jaya-varman VIII of Kambuja abdicates in 
favour of his son-in-law Srlndra-varman 
(P 741). 

Kublai Khan sends an ambassador to Kam¬ 
buja (p. 741). 

Karna succeeds Sarangadeva (p. 81). 

SultSn ‘Ala-ud-din Khalji. 

Ulugh Khan and Nusrat Khan defeat Karna and 
capture his queen Kamaladevi (p. 81). 

‘Ala-ud-din Khalji captures Ranthambhnr after 
defeating and killing Hammira (p. 86). 

Parakramabahu III of Ceylon (p. 267). 

S78 


CHRONOLOGY 



1303 

1303 

1305 

1305 

1307 

1307 

1308 

1309 

1309- 1310 

1310- 1311 


1313 

1314 

1324 

1327 

1332 

1337 

1343 

1347-1355 

1350 

1350 

1363 

1363-1376 

1471 


<SL 


Sikandar Khan Ghazi conquers Sylhet (p. 44). 

‘Ala-ud-din marches into the fort of Chitor (p. 91). 

‘Ala-ud-din Khalji invades Malava (p. 72). 

Hoysala Ballala leads an army against the Yada- 
vas (p. 195). 

Death of Jaya Simha-varman of Champa, 
(p. 748). 

‘Ala-ud-din Khalji sends Malik-Naib Kafur 
against Yadava Ramachandra (p. 196). 

Abdication of Srindra-varman of Kambuja and 
accession of Srlndra-Jaya-varman (p. 741). 

'Ala-ud-din Khalji wrests Damoh District from 
Hammiravarman or his successor (p. 60). 

Malik Kafur invades Warangal (p. 203). 

‘Ala-ud-din defeats and kills Kanhada and his son 
Virama and captures Jalor and Sanchor 

(p. 88). 

Malik-Naib Kafur invades Devagiri and kills 
Sankaradeva (p. 196). 

Chandesvara conquers Nepal for his master 
Harisiriiha and performs Tulapurusha (p. 48). 

Traditional date of the conquest of Nepal by 
Harisimha (p. 48). 

Accession of Jayavarman Paramesvara of Kam¬ 
buja (p. 741). 

Death of Sukhanghpha of the Ahoms (p. 45). 

Kanhadadeva of the Devada branch of Chaha- 
manas succeeds his father Tejasimha (p. 89). 

Javanese forces rout the king of Bali (p. 754). 

Jayarajadeva of Nepal (p. 47). 

Death of Namadeva, the poet-saint of Maha¬ 
rashtra (p. 365). 

The ruler of the Thai principality of Uton pro¬ 
claims himself as independent king (p. 761). 

Date of composition of Sarngadharapaddhati 
(p. 85). 

Jayarjunamalla of Nepal (p. 47). 

Annamite Emperor conquers Champa (p. 749). 




879 



INDEX 


A 

Abbasids (Caliphs), 1. 

Abdala Rahainana, 298. 

‘Abdullah Ta% 9. 

‘Abd~ul-Malik, 6 . 

Abdul Bahaman, 350. 

Abd-ur-Hashid, 92, 

Abdur Hahman, 260. 

Abhaya, 98. 

Abhayadeva, 434. 

Abhahga, 353, 355, 387. 

Abhayachandra, 301. 

Abhayatfa, 108. 

Abhayadeva, 60. 

Abhayadeva (poet), 301. 
Abhayakaragupta, 418. 

Abhayamalla, 46. 

Abhayanandi, 319. 
Abhidhammattha~samgaha , 342. 
Abhiddmchintdmani, 318, 397. 

A hhidh&nappadipika, 343. 
Abhilashitartha-chintarnani—See Maria • 
sollasa. 

Abhimanottunga Samanta, 733. 
Abhimanyu (Kachchhapaghata), 57, 66 . 
Ahimanyu (SomavamsI), 209, 213, 214. 
Abhinavabhvratachampii, 313. 
AbhJnavagupta, 323, 384. 
Abhinavakalidasa, 313. 

Abhinaya, 325. 

Abhira(s), 75, 78, 172, 177, 189, 192, 393, 
678. 

Abhisheka , 406. 

Abkl Ali, 159. 

Ablur, 181. 

Aboriginal Purana, 380. 

Abors, 755. 

Abraiman, 493. 

Abraiman of Lar, 497. 

Abu, Mt., 67, 69, 72-73, 74, 77, 78. 79, 81. 
85, 89, 90, 105 108, 109, 118. 121, 428, 
433, 580, 660, 661, 662, 687. 

Abu Dulaf, 520. 

Abu I Fida. 528. 

Abu 'Abdulla Muhammad, 11, 12, 17. 
Abu-‘All, 10. 

Abu ‘All Lawlk, 3. 

Abu ‘Ali-i-Sunjur, 5, 6 . 

(Amir) Abu Bakr Lawlk, 2, 3. 

Abu-9**Path Daud, 8 , 10. 

Abu’l Faraj RuyanI, 503. 

Abu’l Fath Ruku-ud-dm, 468. 
Abu-’l-Hasan, 92. 

Abu-rasa . 394. 

Abul Fazl, 426. 

Abu Zaid, 494. 

Abyssinia (ns), 137. 

Aeha II, 175. 176, 178. 

Achalaraja, 104. 


Achalgadh, 687. 

Achanna, 373. 

Ach&radarsa , 335. 

Achdrasagara, 334, 338. 

Achdrrfd, 482. 

Acharya Chandraklrti, 764. 

Acharya Jinesvara Suri, 396. 

Achit, 336. 

Achugi II, 229. 

Achyuta-Nayaka, 194. 
Achyutaprekshacharya, 441. 

Adab, 504. 

Adab-al-Harb, 504. 

Adakkamalla, 51, 55 . 

Adam, 468. 

Adbhutasdgara, 38, 40, 330, 334, 338. 
Aden, 259. 

Adhai-din-ka-Jhorhpda, 120. 
Adi-Buddha, 411. 

Adhikaripurushas, 276. 
Adkikritamahattamas , 275. 
Adhirajendra, 173, 241, 243, 256. 
Adhishthdna , 566, 603. 
Adhislmakrishna, 768. 

Adhyagni, 294. 

Adhyaksha , 275. 

Adhydtmasataka, 435. 

Adidamma, 202. 

Adideva, 34, 329. 

Adigamans, 247. 

Adilabad, 69. 

Adilahchana, 754. 

Adinagara—See Mukhalingam. 
Adinatha, 580. 

Adinatha-charitra, 344. 

Adinatha temple, 74. 

Adi Purana , 508. 

Aditva (General), 264. 

Aditya II, 234. 

Adityavarman, 164. 

Adiyarkanallur, 362. 

Administrative Organisation, 274-286. 
Northern India, 274-277. 

Kalaehuris, 274-275. 

Chandellas, 275, 

Paramaras, 275-276. 

Gahadavalas, 276. 

Senas, 276-277. 

Chahamanas, 277. 

South India 278-286. 

Chalukvas, 278-281. 

Cholas, 281-282. 

Yadavas, 282-283. 

Hoysalas, 283-284. 

Adoni, 187. 

Aduturai, 244, 245. 

Advaita, 312, 336, 352, 366, 403. 
Advaya , 408. 

Advayagupta, 417. 

Advayavajra, 417. 


880 





INDEX 




Adya Marathi Kavayitri t 387, 89(n). 
Afghanistan, 4, 22, 116, 117, 132, 678. 
Afghans, 12, 117, *150. 

Afrasiyab, 149. 

Agama, 326. 

Agamaprdmanya, 437. 

Agamiyaka-mata, 432. 

Agastimata, 330. 

Agastya, 352. 

Agastya Myth, 373. 

Age-cycle, 272. 

Age of Kamban, 364. 

Aggavarnsa, 343- 
Agha Khan, 468. 

Aghapur, 55. 

AghSta —See Ahar. 

Aghora, 445. 

Aghoraghanla, 459. 

Agnimitra, 373. 

Agni Purnrui, 321, 322. 

Agra, 94, 350. 

Agrah&ra, 252, 510. 

Agriculture, 516. 

A Handbook of Vt rasaivism, 388, 106(n). 
Ahar, 89. 90, 91. 

Ahavamalla (Chauhan), 349. 
Ahavamalla (Kalachuri), 181, 182. 
Ahavamalla (Chalukya .)—See Somes- 
vara I. 

Ahichchhatra, 215. 

Ahichchhatrapura—See N&gaur. 

Ahila (Chahamana), 75, 86. 

Ahimsd, 312, 402. 

A History of South India, 469, 8(n), 

A History of Telugu Literature , 388, 
VI2 (n). 

Ahiadana (Chahamana), 77. 

Ahmadabad, 75. 

Ahmad Chap, 158. 

Ahmad-i-Sheran, 207. 

Ahmadnagar, 176, 185. 

Ahmad Niyaltigin, 25, 51, 61, 92; 
Ahmud Khan, 48. 

Ahnika, 332. 334, 486. 

AhobaUi Mdhdtmya, 375. 

Ahoms, 44, 45, 38i. 

Ahom Buranjis, 382. 

Aihatr 

A i hole, V>33. 534, 554, 615, 623. 
Atn~\-Akbari, 102. 

‘Ain-ul-Mulk (general), 72. 
Airavatesvara, 622. 

Airlangga, 749, 750. 

Ai&oarikas, 427. 

Aiyangar, 672. 

Aiyangar, Prof. Rangaswami, 333, 334. 
Aithihdsika Vividha Vishaya , 387 79(n). 
Ajaigarh, 59, 60. 

Ajaipal. 118. 

Ajantii, 676. 678. 680, 681, 682, 683, 690. 
Ajayadeva (Chahamana), 69. 

Ajayadeva (Ag Deo), 59, 122. 
Ajayagarh, 122. 

Aiayameru—•See Ajmer. 

Ajayapala, 665. 

Ajayapala (Chaulukva), 70, 72, 78. 89 
Ajayapala (Poet), 318. 


Ajayapala (Yaduvamsl), 55, 56. 
Ajayaraja, 82. 

Aghorasiva, 365. 

Ajayasimha, 91. 

Ajita, 346. 

Ajitadeva, 433. 

Ajitadeva Suri, 433. 

Ajitasantistava, 327. 

Ajiva, 346. 

Ajiyasanti-thaya , 346. 

Ajjavasa (Yadava), 171. 

Ajmer, 4, 23, 54, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85, 87, 
105, 106, 107, 109, 111, 112, 113, 114, 
118, 119, 120, 134, 147, 277, 310. 

Ajre (Ajurika), 319. 

Ajudhan —See Pak Pattan. 

Akhyanas, 357. 

AkkadevI, 165, 166, 167, 279, 280. 
Akshapatalika , 274, 276, 277. 

Akshepa, 322. 

Akshobhya, 411. 

Akshobhyatirtha 440. 

Alaf Khan, 81. 

Alaka, 322. 

Alamkara, 299, 321 322, 323, 324, 434. 
Alamkarachakra, 101. 
Alamkarachuddmarii, 323. 
Alaihkdraratnakara , 324. 
Alam1cdrasarvasva y 321, 323, 384. 
Alampur, 597. 

Aland!, 355. 

Alafa, 385. 

Ala-ud-Daulah Mas’ud III, 52. 
‘Ala-ud-dln Husain, 96, 97. 

‘Ala-ud-dln Khalji, 60. 72. 81, 86, 88, 90, 
91, 103, 195. 196, 203, 232, 260. 
‘Ala-ud-dln Khvarazm Shah. 117. 124. 


‘Ala-ud-dln Mas‘ud, 139. 

Al-'Aufi, 504. 

Alaungsithu, 757. 

Alavandar, 437. 

Al-Blriini, 17, 50, 127, 480, 500, 513, 519. 
Alberuni f s India, 507, 180(n). 

Algebra, 329. 

Alha, 107. 

Alhanadeva (Chahamana), 87 , 88. 
Alhanadevi, 511. 

‘All, 468. 

‘All Abu-’l-Hasan, 94. 

Alibag, 192. 

‘All bin Rubia, 94. 

‘AH bin ‘Usman al-Hujwairi, 467. 
Aligarh, 23, 119. 120, 144, 147. 

‘All Mardan, 124, 131, 133. 

Allahabad, 656, 659. 

Allama Prabhu, 367, 370. 

Alii Arasdni, 364. 

Aliya, 279. 

AUaraja, 324. 

Ai-Ma'mun, 1. 

Almora, 578. 

Alms-bowl, 263. 

Alptigin, 2, 3. 

Al-Qadir Billah, 6. 

Altekar, 183, 286. 

Abuniya. 138. 

Altunfeh, 9, 11. 


S.E.—56 


881 






MINIS ^ 


THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Alupa dynasty, 484. 

Alupas, 172. 

Aiur, 164. 

Al-’Utbl, 499. 

Aluvakhe^a, 227. 

Alvars, 361, 672, 673. 

Alwar, 10, 107, 134, 148. 

Am&laka, 486, 532, 540, 554, 558, 561, 562, 
563, 577. 

Amalaka-sild, 536, 539, 544, 545, 549, 553, 
557, 558, 559. 

Amalananda, 336. 

Amama ~ charita, 302. 

Amamasvami, 302. 

Amana, 193, 184. 

Amarabhujahga Pandya, 234. 
Amarachandra, 301. 

Amaraklrtigani, 349. 

Amarakosa , 317, 318, 319, 343, 767. 
Amarakosafikdsarvasva, 319. 
Amarakosodgkatana, 318,319. 
Amaramdld, 767. 

Amarapura—See Amber. 

Amaravatl, 200, 656, 746. 

Amaravatl stupa., 424. 

Amarkantak, 562, 563, 564, 695. 

Amaru, 302. 

Amdtyamukhya—See Mantripradh&na. 
Amatyas, 277, 281. 

Ambatfa, 77, 78, 397. 

Ambadapura —See Amrapur. 

Ambadeva-maharaja, 202. 

Ambala, 94. 

Ambam, 577. 

Ambaprasada (Guhila), 81, 89. 
Ambaranatha, 602, 603. 

Ambarnath temple, 183. 

Amber, 84, 

Ambika. 162. 

Amin Khan, 154. 

Amir ‘All, 18. 

Amir Fakhr-ud-dln 'Amid Sunnami, 
504. 

Amir Khusrav, 103, 157, 197, 501. 

Amir ‘Uzd-ud-Daulah, 95. 

Amitagati (Amiyagai), 305, 349, 435. 
Amid, 536, 537. 

Ammagrama, 216, 217, 219. 

Amman, 671. 

AmmangadevI, 204, 240, 242. 
Amoghasiddhi, 411. 

Ammugi, 179. 

Amndyanusdrini, 418. 

Amndyas, 354. 

Amoda, 213. 

Amoghavfitti, 320. 

Amrapur, 191, 

Amritadeva, 46. 

Amritdnubhava, 353. 

Amritapala, 50. 

Amritelvara, 603. 

Amroha, 147, 150. 

Amsunagara, 164. 

Amsuvarman, 45. 

Andgara-Dharmdmrita , 434. 
An&gatavauisa, 341. 

Ananilapattana, 432. 


<SL 


Anahilapura, 434. 

I Anahilavada, 427. 

Anahilla (Chahamana), 67, 75, 81, 86, 94. 
Anahillapataka (Anahilwad), 20, 23, 53, 
67, 70, 75, 76, 79, 80, 81, 86, 121, 308, 
i 310, 427, 587. 

Anaimarigalam 236, 239. 

Anaka —See Arnoraja. 

Anakula, 335. 

Anamalais, 228, 229. 

Ananda, 60. 

Anandadeva, 46. 

Anandagiri, 459. 

Anandajnana (Anandagiri), 336. 
Anandamalla, 46. 

Anandapala (Shahi), 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,11, 67. 
Ananda temple, 757. 

Anandatirtha, 441, 442. 

See also Madhva. 

Anandavardhana, 321. 

Anangabhlma (Aniyahkabhima) II, 187, 
207. 

Ananga-Bhlma III, 66, 200, 207. 
Anahgapala, 56. 

Ananta (Lohara), 97, 98, 299, 314, 483. 
Ananta (Poet), 315. 

Anantadeva, 191. 

Anantaklrtti, 45. 

Anantamalla, 47. 

Anarxtapala, 171. 

Anantapur, 167, 172, 173, 178, 180, 183, 
189, 191, 201, 220. 

Anantavarman (Guhila), 89. 
Anantavarman Chodaganga, 30, 31, 32, 
36, 37, 53, 65, 68, 178, 205, 206, 207, 
212, 213, 244, 266. 

Anantavarman Vajrahasta III, 212. 
Ananta-Vasudeva, 35, 550. 

An Arabic History of Gujrat, 160, 23(n). 
Anava, 454. 

Anavild, 335. 

Anawratha, 756. 

Anchalaka-mata, 432. 

“Ancient Civilization and Geography of 
Maharashtra”, 386, 67(n). 

Ancient India , 223, 6a(n). 

Ancient Monuments of Kashmir , 699, 
214(n). 

Andhra(-desa), 63, 65, 68, 75, 169, 170, 
171, 174, 175, 177, 180, 181, 182, 198, 
199, 200. 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 
220. 223. 235, 246, 372. 

Andkhui, 124, 130, 159, 2(n). 

Anegundi, 684. 

Anekdrthakosa , 317. 
i Anekdrthasabdakosa, 318. 
Anekdrthatilaka, 318. 

i Ahga(s), 25, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 61, 68, 
145, 180. 186 197. 

Angkor Thom 769, 770. 

Angkor (Vat), 761, 769, 770, 737. 

Angrok, 750. 

Anandadhvaja gribhadra, 427. 
Anekdnta-Jaya-Patdka-Panjika , 432. 
Anga-Mkharafs), 543, 549, 571, 578. 
Angle- amalakas, 559. 

Anhilwara — See Anahillapataka. 

882 








MIN isr#, 


INDEX 



Anicufs, 516. 

Anikahga (Aniyanka), 266. 

Animal sculptures (of Orissa), 655. 
Aniruddha, 37, 332, 334, 756, 757. 
Anjand-Pavananjaya, 435. 

An jar, 20. 

Anjuvannam, 525. 

Anka, 194. 

Anmakopdaf-vtskaya.), 172, 198, 199, 

200 , 201 . 

Annalan, 170. 

Annam. 737, 740, 741, 744, 745, 747, 749. 
Annambhatia, 464. 

Annigere, 182. 

Anoratha, 41. 

Ahgada, 312. 

Angling, 492. 

An tala, 186. 

Antara, 72. 

Antardla (ante-chamber), 557, 560, 

563, 564, 566, 572, 574, 613. 
Antarahga , 277. 

Antarvedi, 58. 

Antaryamin, 438. 

Anthologies, 305-306. 

Antiquities of Orissa, 506, 98 (n), 695, 
33(n), 

Antya&tis, 476. 

Antyas, 476. 

Anubhava Mantapa , 367. 

Anubhava Sdra , 376. 
Anubhutisvarupacharya, 320. 

Anuloma (proper order), 475, 476. 
Anumana, 321, 447. 

Anumeya, 321. 

Anupamapura, 419. 

Anupama-vihdra. 420. 

Anuradhapura, 235, 263. 

Aiiumha-pagas, 539, 544. 

Anuruddha, 342. 

Anushtegin, 117. 

Anushtubh, 324. 

Anuvaya-rayana-paiu, 349. 
Anmyyakkyana, 337. 

Anvddheya. 294. 

Anwarl, 507, 185(n). 
Anyoktimuktdlat&sataka , 304. 

Aonla, 135, 147. 

Apabhramsa, 298, 326, 327, 344, 345, 346, 
347, 348-351, 352, 358, 360, 361, 390, 
391, 392, 393. 434. 

Apabhramsa Kdvyatrayi, 396, l(n). 
Aparaditya (Silah^ra), 101. 

Aparaditya II, 181, 182. 

Apara-Gahgeya Prithvihha£a —See Pri- 
thvlraja II. 

Aparaiita (Paramara). 73, 510- 
Aparajita Mrigahka (&ilahara), 162, 164, 
171. 

Apararka. 269, 287. 294, 295, 298, 333, 
334 . 338. 505. 509. 510. 
Anara-Mandara. 29. 36. 

Apas+amba Dh anna-sutra, 335. 
Apastamba Grihya-sutra, 335. 

Apavara, 224. 

Appanna. 247. 

Appar, 366, 672. 


Appayanadakuppa, 176, 

Appilar, 439. 

Arab, 467, 503, 524. 

Arabia, 250, 251, 259, 504, 520, 521, 522, 
Arabian Sea, 237, 352. 

Arab Geographers' Knowledge of 
Southern India, 507, I45(n). 

Arabs, 1, 128, 260. 

Aradhand, 435. 

Araiyam, 226. 

Araiyan, 169 
Arakan, 756. 

Arambagh (Aramya), 206. 

Aram Shah, 56, 131. 

Aram shah r, 52. 

Arang, 574, 604. 

Aranya Parva , 374. 

Aranyaraja of Abu, 72. 

Arasi —See Arisirhha. 

Archaeology of Gujarat, 471, 90(n). 
Architecture of Dharwar and Maisur, 
699, 200 (n). 

Arch. Sur. Reports, 159. 

Archer, W. W„ 380. 

Arcot, 231, 240, 245, 246, 247, 249, 257. 
Ardha-MagadhI, 358. 

Ardha-rnandapa (smaller hall), 560, 571, 
684. 

Arhathood, 405. 

Arhadbali, 431. 

Arichit, 256. 

Arigon, 419. 

Arike&arin, 171. 

Arimalladeva, 46. 

Arlmardanapura, 264, 265, 756. 
Arisirhha (poet), 302, 309. 

Arisimha (Guhila), 89, 91. 
Arivrishabha-Sahkara, 443, 

Ariyaruq, 92. 

Arjuna (of Gujarat), 80, 81. 

Arjuna (of SarasapuraV 85. 

Arjuna (Kachchhapaghata), 57, 58. 
Arjuna (Pandava), 302, 310, 311. 
Arjuna (Paramara), 73, 86. 
Arjunavarman (Paramara), 70, 71, 79, 
86 , 310, 435. 

Arjunavarman II (Paramara), 71, 72, 81, 
190. 

Arjuna-vivaha, 768. 

Arkalgud Taluk , 431. 

Arka temple, 654. 

Arnoraia (Chahamana), 75, 77, 82, 83. 
Arnoraja (Chaulukya), 79. 

Arpakkam, 264. 

Arsalan ‘Abd-ul-Malik, 95. 

Arsalan Jazib, 9, 11. 

Arsalan Khan, 142, 154. 

Art and Architecture of Ceylon, 267. 
Artha. 322, 

Arthasdstra, 327. 

Arthuna, 73, 90. 

Artihara. 319. 

Arujnandi-Sivacharya, 365, 366. 
Arunachaiam. 672. 

Aruna pillar. 552. 

Aruna stambha, 550. 

Arunthamilmdlai, 364. 


883 







THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Arya, 303, 305, 346. 

Arya Chakravarti, 259. 

Aryadesa, 262. 

Aryasaptasati, 303. 

Arya Srutakirti, 320. 

Aryavarman (Kadamba), 164. 
Aryavarta, 502. 

Aryavarta style, 534. 

Arzbadan, 160. 

Asa (Bhilla), 75. 

Asadhara (Poet), 71, 109, 113, 434. 
Asala, 87. 

Asalladeva, 57. 

Asapalll (Asaval), 75. 

Asaraja (Chahamana), 69, 76, 77, 86, 87. 
Asata, 98. 

Asaucha, 334. 

Asktadhydyi, 319, 320. 

Ashta-dhatu , 646, 647. 
A8htama}idsthana-chaity(i'«v<indan &- 
stava, 419. 

Ashtdhgahridaya Samhita, 245, 335. 
Ashfasahasrika Prajndpdramita, 418. 

Asi —See Asm. 

Asiga, 394, 395. 

Asightigln, 9. 

Asika —See Hansl. 

Asni, 15, 54, 119, 122. 

As6da, 593. 

Asokaiyan, 169. 

Asokavalla (or Asokachalla), 426. 
Asphotachandra, 54. 

Asramas, 525. 

Asras, 531. 

Asrava, 346. 

Assam 31, 42-45, 123, 130, 206, 358. 

See also Kamarupa. 

Assassins, 468. 

Ashfavarana, 368. 

Assam tribes, 380. 

Astronomy, 328-329. 511. 

Asutosb Museum, 675. 

Asvachikitsa, 330. 

Asvaghosha, 312. 

Asvaldyana Grihya-sutra, 335. 

Asvapala (ChShamana), 86. 

Asvapati, 274, 276. 

Asvamdhanika, 274. 

A&vas&stra, 329. 

Asvavaidyaka, 330. 

Asvayurveda, 330. 

Asvimkumara, 328. 

Atharvana, 377. 

Atlsa Dipankara, 417. 

Atithis , 355. 

Atmasiddhi, 437. 

Atreya Ramanuja, 439. 

Atru, 103. 

Atsiz, 117, 

Atula, 308. 

Attanagalla, 340. 

Attanagaluvihdravamsa , 340. 

Atulyavajra. 417. 

Auchitya, 322. 

Auchityavicharacharchd , 322. 
Audumbara coins, 533. 

Amirdhas, 549. 


<SL 


| Aufi, 159. 

Aurangabad, 162, 185, 668. 

Aurangzeb, 655. 

Austrics, 357, 381. 

Austro-Asiatics, 357, 378. 

, Avadhuta, 357. 

Avadhutapada, 417. 

AvalladevI, 63, 481. 

Avalokitesvara, 424, 647, 759. 
Avantesvara, 635. 

Avanti, 76, 524. 

Avantika, 322. 

Avantipura, 635, 666. 

Avantisvami, 635. 

Avarodha-vadhu, 479. 

Avasara III (Silfthara), 162. 
Avatamsaka-siitra, 471. 

| Avatara, 421. 

Avatara of Vishnu, 425. 

Avichi, 82. 

Avidya , 448. 

Avvai I, 364. 

Awai II. 362, 365. 

Awadh, 55, 122, 134, 135, 136, 141, 142, 
144, 146, 150, 154, 157, 208. 
Ayat&sra, 531. 

Ayodhya —See Kosala. 

Ayudha , 537. 

Ayurvedadipikd , 328. 

Ayurvedarasdyana , 335, 

Ayushmat, 266. 

Ayuthia (Ayodhya), 761. 

Ayyalarya 1 , 377. 

Ayyana I, 161. 

Ayyana II (Chalukya), 165, 166. 
Ayyavole, 525. 

Ayyubides, 159, l(n). 


Baba Fakhr-ud-din, 469. 

Bachcharasa —See Vichchaya. 

Bdda , 536, 537, 545, 554, 557, 559, 561, 609. 
Badami. 161, 668, 672, 683. 

Badarayana, 437. 
i Badarikasrama, 441. 

Badayun —See Budaun. 

Baddhapura, 98. 

Badr-ud-din Sunqar, 138, 139. 
Bagalkot, 167, 215. 

Bagar, 118. 

Bagchi, P. C., 470, 19(n), 359, 360. 
Bagdi, 37. 

Bagevadi, 446. 

Bagewadi, 161, 165, 185. 

Bagh, 676, 683. 690. 

Baghdad, 1, 2, 116, 124. 

Baghelkhand, 59, 61, 64. 

Baglan, 81. 

Bahama, 76, 77. 

Bahar-deo (Chahamana )—See Vag- 

bhata. 

i Baha-ud-din Sam, 96, 97. 

Baha-ud-din Tughril, 56, 120. 
Baha-ud-din UshI, 504. 

Raha-ud-din Zakariy&, 468. 

I Bahikas, 42. 


i 


884 







feahraich, 142. 

Bahram, 95, 96, 97. 

Bahubali, 394. 

Bahulara (Bankura District), 608, 609. 
Baihaqi, 25, 62. 

Baijnath (Kangra District), 554, 558, 
559, 605. 

Bairat, 576. 

Baisas, 164. 

Bajaur, 18. 

Bajaura, 606. 

Baji Ray, 7. 

Baka, 310. 

Bakhtyar Khaljl, 504. 

Bakulapura (S. W. Borneo), 751. 
Balabhdrata, 301. 

Balachandra Suri, 309. 

Baladeva, 462. 

Baladeva (Balavantadeva), 45. 
BaladhyachaJidra, 101. 

Balagami, 669. 

Balaghat, 65, 194, 218, 

Balaka, 287, 296, 331. 

Balakrishnasastri, 387, 78(n). 
Balaprasada (ChAhamana), 74, 75, 86. 
Balaputra, 730. 

Balatkara, 261. 

Bdlardmdyana, 321. 

Bdldmbodha , 319. 

Balban (Sultan), 42, 57, 71, 81, 85, 90, 
139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 146, 147, 
159, 160, 192. 

Balban restores Sultanate, 148-155. 
Balhan’s Dynasty, End of, 156-158. 
Bal Chanar, 749. 

Baleyavattana —See Beliapatam. 
Balhanadeva —See Ga<Jhapati Valana- 
deva. 

Bali, 75, 86, 750, 751. 

Balijhari, 209, 210, 211. 

Balinese Theology, 402. 

Balipura, 167. 

Balka, 134. 

Balkatigin, 3. 

Balkh, 1, 5, 6, 93. 

Ballakunde, 167, 182. 

Balia la '(Hoysala), 70, 72, 77, 175, 228. 
233. 

Ballala II (Hoysala), 70, 181, 182, 183, 
186. 187, 188, 189, 230-231, 233, 247, 
283. 

(Vira) Ballala IH (Hoysala), 195, 196, 
232, 233, 260. 

Ballala (Malava), 178, 348. 

Ballala (6ilahara), 176. 

Bailalasena —-See Vallalasena. 
Ballamahadevi, 484. 

Balligave, 180. 

Balligrama—See Belgami. 

Balasane, 602. 

Baluchistan, 7. 

Balvan inscription, 85. 

Bamanwad, 386, 58(n). 

Bambhanvada, 348. 

BamhT, 13. 

Bamboo, 517. 

Bamiyan, 3, 665. 


Bammidevarasa—See Barma. 
Bamra(garh), 209. 

Bana, 299, 306. 313, 344. 

Banafars, 107. 

Banapur, 46. 

Banaras, 25, 26, 38, 39, 52, 53, 54, 61, 62, 
63, 64, 67, 75, 92, 99, 119, 132, 135, 
194, 197, 301, 318, 335, 513. 

Banas, 247. 

Banavasi 12000, 163. 164, 165, 166, 167, 

168, 170, 171, 172, 174, 175, 177, 178, 

179, 180, 191, 192, 183, 188, 189, 191, 

192, 195, 226, 227, 229, 231, 237. 

Banda Nawaz Gisu Daraz, 469. 
Bandanike (Bandalike), 188, 189. 
Bandha, 346. 

Bandhana, 543, 545. 

Bandhus, 290. 

Bandon, Bay of, 239. 

Banerji, R. D., 160, 27 (n), 538, 558. 638, 
695. 

Bangalore, 232. 

Bangarh Grant, 24. 

Bahglya Sahitya Parishad, 358. 
Bdngldya Bauddhadharma, 470, 39(n). 
Baniyan, 144. 

Bankapura, 173, 178, 230. 

Bankura District, 609. 

Banswara, 66, 73. 

Bapatla, 165. 

Bappa, 230. 

Bapuhon, 771. 

Barabudur, 772. 

Barahaindsd, 393, 395. 

Barahdari inscription, 160. 

Barakanur, 229. 

Barakar (Burdwan District), 606. 
Baramba (Cuttack District), 540. 
Baranda, 536, 557. 

Barappa (Chaulukya), 74, 162, 163. 
Barbara (Chief), 75. 

Barbara (Barbarika) (Country), 177, 
197. 

Barda hills, 583. 

Bardhankot, 43. 

Bareilly, 135. 

Bargaon, 559. 

Bargarh, 221, 222. 

Bari, 14, 17, 50. 

Barma, 178, 180. 

Banner, 76, 77, 79, 88, 106. 

Bamadi, 44. 

Barnett, 278. 

Baroda, 103. 

Baroli, 559. 

Barons, 494. 

Barrackpore inscription, 37. 

Barsur (Barasuru), 214, 215, 216, 218, 
219, 220. 

Barthwal, 361. 

Bartu —See Bharahadeva. 

Barua, B. M., 159, 160, 471, 69(n). 
Barwara, 526. 

Basava, 180, 368. 

Basavannana Pancha Gadya, 370 
1 Basavapurdna, 180. 

1 Basavura, 191. 

885 




ftffi STRUGGLE FOR EMPlRjfc 


<SL 


Sasawanal, S. S., 388, 104(n). 

Basse in, 196. 

Bastar, 31, 65, 68 , 172, 210 , 214, 215, 216, 
219, 220, 237, 238, 242. 

Basu, M, 359. 

Batanghari, 752. 

Ratiniya, 469. 

Bauddha-Dkarma-o-Scihitya, 470, 19(n). 
Baudh, 556, 651. 

Baudh State, 540. 

Baul, 359, 426. 

Bayalike Kesimayya, 181, 182. 
Bayal-mtfu, 227. 

Bayalu nirbayalu, 368. 

Bayana(~ 6 rfpatha), 55-56, 109, 119, 120, , 

134, 148. 

Bay of Randon, 737. 

Bayon, 770, 771. 

Beas, 13, 132, 143, 144, 151, 153. 

Beddanna, 377. 

Bedwara, 59. 

Begmatl —See Karatoya. 

Bekal, 518. 

Beki (zzkanfha), 537, 549, 558. 

Belagufti* 215. 

Belahan, 750. 

Belava copper plate, 33. 

Belava<Ji, 194. 

Belgami, 167, 188, 189. 

Belgaum, 164, 177, 189, 191, 192, 515. 
Beliapatam, 166. 

Bell, H. C. P., 268, 3(n). 

Bellary, 162, 163, 164, 167, 170. 173, 182, I 
183, 187, 192, 201, 215, 238, 628. 

Belle, 441. 

Belles—Lettres, 298-316. 

Belupura, 178. 

Belur, 228, 632, 668 . 

Belvalkar, 384, 20(n). 

Belvola 300 161, 165, 166, 167, 172, 175, 

178, 182, 185, 186, 187, 388, 191, 192. 
Benares —See Banaras. 

Bendall, Cecil, 46, 48, 472, 114fn). 

Bengal, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31. 32, 33. 

34, 35-41, 43, 54, 62. 123. 128. 145, 

153, 202, 206, 207, 208, 212, 222, 238. 

277, 295, 298, 300, 302, 303, 304. 308, 

316, 319, 322, 328, 330, 331, 332, 333, 

334, 335, 351, 401. 403, 413, 414, 415, 

517, 643, 646, 647, 649, 650, 651. 655, 

656, 675, 676, 679, 690. 

Bengal, Bay of, 251. 

Bengali, 357-361. 

Bengali-Assamese, 357. 

Bengali Payar, 359. 

Bengal terracottas, 642. 

Beniamin of Tudela. 521, 523. 

Berar, 69, 189, 191, 320, 352. 

Beta I, 198. 

Beta II, 198. 1999, 223. 

Bethamangalam, 228. 

Rhadanakas, 107. 

Bhadra, 170. 640. 

Bhodra (pidhd deul), 536, 537. 

Bhadrabhat, 75. 

Bhadranga Kadoarti, 172, 198. 
Bhadrapattana, 217. 


Bhadresvara, 80. 

Bhagalpur, 30, 415. 

Bhagalpur—See Anga. 

Bhagavadgltd, 337, 353, 356, 388. 
Bhagavata, 311, 354, 355, 356, 357. 
Bhagavata champu, 313. 

Bhagavata Purdna , 337, 354, 356, 403, 
436. 

Bhagavatl, 525, 550. 

Bhagirathi, 145. 

Bhairamgarh, 218. 

Bhakta-sir omaiix Ndmadeva ki n«i 
jivani, nai Padavali, 388, 96(n). 
Bhaktavijaya, 387, 94(n). 

Bhakti, 304, 337, 353, 354, 646, 674, 675. 
Bhakti-vdda, 403. 

Bhakar, 133. 

Bhaktapura, 46, 48. 

Bhaktisataka, 304, 385. 

Bhama, 755. 

Bhamaha, 323. 

Bhamar (Bhambhagiri), 189. 

Bhdmati, 336. 

Bhammaha, 164. 

Bhana, 105. 

Bhana, 311. 

Bhanara, 65. 

Bhandak —See Bhadrapattana. 
Bhdndagdrika (Bh&ndarika ), 274, 275, 
276. 

Bhandara (Bhandagara), 194. 

Bhand Dewal, 574. 

Bhandarkar, D. R., 62, 87, 103, 22 (n). 
Bhandarkar, R. G., 183, 2 (n), 197, l(n), 
223, 4(n), 472, 140(n). 

Bhahga, 299. 

Bhanja, 651. 

Bhanudeva I, 209. 

Bhdnumatl , 328. 

Bharadvaja, 333, 387. 

Bharahadeva, 50, 55, 135. 

Bharata (King), 394. 

Bharata fPoet), 88 , 322, 325. 
Bhdratachamputilaka, 313. 
Bkdrata-manjari , 299. 

Bharatapala, 349. 

Bhdratatdtparyanimaya, 442. 

Bharata-yuddha, 768. 

Bharatesvara, 430. 
Bharatesvara-Bahubali-ghora , 393 . 
Bharatesvara-Bahuhali-rdsa, 393, 396. 
Bharatiya-Ndtya-sastra, 88 . 

Bharatji, 567. 

Bharatpur, 55, 56. 

Bharavi, 299, 310. 

Bhargava —See Sukracharya. 

Bharhut, 555, 665. 

Bhars, 477. 

Bhartrihari, 302. 

Bhartula, 98. 

Bhasa, 314, 434. 

Bbasha, 347. 

Bhaskara —See Mavagalasirhha. 
Bhaskarabhatta, 354. 

Bhaskaracharya, 328, 329, 511 
Bhaskaradeva. 45. 

Bhaskara-Rdmayanam, 377. 


886 





WHISTS 







Rkaskara Ravivarman, 234. 
BhaskareSvara, 573. 

Bhdsvati, 207 , 329. 

Bhatara Paramesvara, 754. 

Bto{as, 277. 

Bhatgaon —See Bhaktapura. 

Bha Linda, 7. 115, 131, 132, 137, 143, 144, 
153. 

Bhatiya, 7. 

Bhafta, 167, 512. 

Bhatta—Bhavadeva, 34. 

Bhatjaputras, 277. 

Bhatpivritti, 511. 

Bhava. 304, 323, 324, 325. 

Bhavabhavana, 346. 

Bhavabhuti, 459. 

Bhavadeva, 434. 484. 

Bhavadevabhatta, 331. 

Bhavalkar, N. B., 387, 82(n). 
Bhavaprakasana, 323, 325, 397. 
Bhdvasataka, 304. 

Bhavavairdgya-sataka, 346. 

Bhavaviveka, 415. 

Bhave, V. L. 387, 85, 87, 90(n). 
Bhavnagar Inscriptions, 160, 42(n). 
Bhavyaraja, 419. 

Bhawal, 38, 39, 40. 
Bhayabhanjanasarman, 330. 

Bheddbheda, 448. 

Bhera, 7. 

Bheraghat, 575, 576. 

Bhikshachara, 69, 100, 101. 

Bhikshdtana , 303. 

RhiL 378. 

Bhillama II (Yadava), 197. 

Bhillama V (Yadava), 70, 79, 87, 162, 
163, 167, 183, 185-187, 189, 197 , 282. 
Bhillas, 60, 75. „ 

Bhilsa, 59, 66, 68, 69, 70, 71, 75, 76, 77, 
78. 

Bhima (Chalukya), 161. 

Bhlma II (Chalukya), 161. 

Bhima I (Chaulukya>, 20, 21, 23, 42, 4,>, 
63, 67, 68, 72, 74, 75, 76, 88, 171, 172, 
428, 581. 

Bhima II (Chauiukya), 70, 73, 78, 79, 80, 
86 , 88, 108,109, 114,121, 181, 186, 188, 
190 

Bhima (River), 161. 168. 

Bhima (of Varendrl), 29, 30, 47. 
Bhlmadeva I (Chauiukya), 74. 
Bhiraadeva—Rane, 194. 

Bhlmapala, 328. 

Bhimap&la (Rashtrakufa), 50. 
Bhlmapala (Shahi), 11, 12, 16, 17. 
BhlmapalH, 79. 

Bhimaraja, 261. 

Bhtmarasa, 165. 

Bhima ratha (of Mahabalipuram), 554. 
Bhlmaratha MahSbhavagupta II (Soma- 
vamsl), 166. 209, 210, 224. 
Bhlmarathl, 176. 

Bhimasirhha (Sisodiya), 91. 
Bhlmasimha (of Bhadresvara), 80. 
Bhimnagar —See Kot Kangra. 
Bhtmayasas. 29, 52. 

Bhinmal, 73-74, 75, 77, 86, 88. 


Bhishma, 271, 273. 

Bhltargaon, 532, 557. 

Bhiwani, 107, 

Bhoga—See vi shay a. 

Bhoga-man4apa, 548, 549. 

Bhogapati, 276. 

Bhoja (Lohara), 99, 100, 101. 

Bhoja (of Nepal), 45. 

Bhoja (Paramara), 16, 51, 56, 57, 58, 61, 
63, 66, 67, 68, 73, 75, 81, 86, 94, 166, 
172, 173, 210, 295, 298, 313, 315, 317, 
321, 322, 323, 328, 329, 331, 332, 335, 
336, 338, 435, 510, 658. 

Bhoja II (Paramara), 72, 85, 86, 189. 
Bhoja (&ilahara), 176. 

Bhoja II (Silahara), 184, 189, 319. 
Bhojadeva, 434. 

Bhojapura, 67. 

Bhojaraja, 365. 

Bhojavarman (Chandella), 60. 
Bhojavarman (Varman), 33, 34, 35, 37. 
Bhojpuri, 357, 358. 

Bhojuka, 60. 

Bhomakdvya , 768. 

Bhopal, 70. 

Bhota, 53. 

Bhramarakofta (kotya )-mandala i 216. 
Bhramaravadra-deso, 65. 
Bhrigukachchha, 163, 189, 190, 345. 
Bhriti, 273. 

Bhujabala(-malla), 213. 

Bhujabala Santara, 430. 

Bhujavala, 65. 

Bhujanga Rao, 388, 117(n). 

Bhukti, 277. 

Bhulokamalla, 183. 

536, 539, 543. 

Bhumij, 378. 

Bhumis , 536, 539, 543. 

Bhupalasimha, 48. 

Bhutavali, 431. 

Bhutigadeva, 162. 

Bhutiyas, 755. 

Bhuvandbhyudaya, 307. 

Bhuvanaditya, 264. 

Bhuvanaikabahu I, 267, 341. 
Bhuvanaikamalla, 104, 105, 106. 
Rhuvanapala, 50. 

Bhuvana-pur&na, 768. 

Bhuvanaraja (Lohara), 98. 
Bhuvanasirhha (Guhila), 91. 
Bhuvanesvara, 35, 535, 536, 538, 540, 541, 
544, 546, 547, 548, 551, 554, 555, 556, 
559, 561, 573, 651, 653, 654, 695. 
Bhuvanesvara-Puri-Konarak, 651. 
Bhuvaneswar, 209, 211, 224, 519. 
BIchana, 188. 

Bidar, 167. 

Bihar, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 37, 39, 40, 
47-49, 52, 63, 123, 123, 133, 134, 141, 

142, 146, 154, 160, 238, 357, 358, 401, 

403, 413, 414, 415, 504, 643, 646, 647, 

619, 650, 651, 655, 656, 668, 676, 679, 

690. 

Bihar Hill, 32. 

Bihari speeches, 357. 

BIjaganita, 328, 329. 


887 








THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<Sl 


5 


ftijapur, 161, 165, 167, 179, 182, 185, 215, 
367, 534. 

Bijavotfi, 167. 

Bijjala, 64. 176, 179, 180, 183, 184, 367. 
Bijjalardya-charita, 180. 

Bijjarasa, 167, 

Bijnaur, 147. 

Bijoli, 83. 

Bikaner, 108, 660, 687. 

Bilaspur, 65, 192, 201, 213. 

Bilhana, 169, 172, 173, 177, 302, 304, 307, 

3io. 

Bilhari Inscription, 558. 

Binh Thuan, 749, 

Birat (Rangpur District, Bengal), 639. 
Bir Singh Deo Bundela, 662. 

BUama, 544, 545, 598. 

Bithandah, 115. 

Bithaur, 52. 

Bitfciga (Bittideva )—See Vishnuvar- 
ohana. 

Black Chlorite, 646. 

Biochmann, 43. 

Bo Chanh, 743. 

Bodding, P. O., 380. 

Bodh-Gaya, 26, 38, 146, 650. 

Bodhi, 405. 

Bodhi-chitta, 405, 407, 410, 411, 412. 
odhisattva, 405, 665. 
odhisattv-avaddnakalpalatd , 420. 
Bodhivamsa, 340. 

Bodo, 357, 380. 

Bombay, 71, 75, 161, 162, 164, 185, 189, 
518, 623. 

Bombay Gazetteer, 183, 2(n), 187, l(n), 
224, 30(n), 225, 55(n). 

BonthadevI, 161. 

Bopadeva, 320, 335. 

Boppa, 430. 

Bor&m, 606. 

Borneo, 750. 

Bose, N. K., 694, 18(n), 695. 26, 31(n), 
696, 72(n). 

Bose. P. N., 470, 24, 39, 41 (n). 

Brahma (pantheon) 270, 273. 

Brahma (Bomma, Bammayya), 182, 185. 
Brahmachari-kanda, 332. 
Brahma-gdyatri, 449. 

Brahmagupta, 329. 

Brahman, 336, 337, 355, 356. 

Brahmapas (Brahmanism), 273, 277, 

278, 284, 290. 291, 305, 307, 315, 
316, 330, 331, 334, 335, 337, 341, 355, 
509, 512. 

Brdkmanasarvasva , 40, 334, 385. 
Brahm&rufn-purdna, 768. 

Brahmanical temples, 579. 

Brahmanical Tantras , 414. , 

Brahmanical Tantrism, 407. 

Brahmapala, 8, 42, 43. 

Brahma Purdiia . 330. 

Brahmaputra, 41, 42, 45, 123, 141, 145, 
755. 

Brahrnarasa, 163. 

Brahma- sdkshdtkdr a, 457. 

Brahmasiltra , 337. 

Brahmavddini, 481. 


Brahmavaivarta Pur ana, 330, 379, 436. 

! Brahmesvara, 545, 546, 547, 550 , 654, 655. 
Brahmor, 663. 

Brahui, 378. 

Brazil wood (sappan), 517. 

Brick temple, 607. 

Briggs, 23, 2(n), 103, 20, 28(n). 
Brihaddhanna Parana, 476. 
Brihadlsvara temple, 489, 618, 678, 684, 
685, 686. 

Brihaduparika , 277. 

Brihatkathd, 313-314, 316. 
Brihatkathd-manjari, 314, 316. 
Brihatkatha-slokasamgraha , 314. 
Brihat-samhitd, 699, 226(n). 

Brijnagar, 660. 

Broach (Barn?), 71, 312, 521. 

Brown, P., 584, 620, 621, 634, 695, 33(n), 
696, 68(n), 697, 108, 112, 127(n), 698, 
156, 157, 158(n), 699, 196, 197, 

199 (n). 

Buchkala, 577. 

Budaun, 50, 121, 122, 123, 135, 136, 147, 
150, 151. 

Budauni, 115. 

Buddharaju, 377. 

Buddha(s), 184, 259, 263, 299, 339, 340, 
341, 353, 384, 402, 406, 408, 412, 643, 
657, 660, 665, 673. 

Buddha Bhatta, 330. 
Buddha-Bodhisattva, 666. 
Buddhaghosha, 384. 

Buddhagupta Tathairatanatha, 426. 
Buddhapriya, 341, 343. 

Buddharakkita, 341. 

Buddhasena, 49. 

Buddhasrijnana, 420. 

Buddhatva, 408. 

Buddhavamsa, 341. 

Buddhi-rasa, 394. 

Buddhism, 5, 34, 35, 236, 239, 243, 262, 
263, 267, 304, 341, 342, 400, 401, 402, 
403, 404, 405, 406. 

Buddhism, Lamaistic, 667. 

Buddhism of Tibet, 472, llQ(n), 
Buddhists, 25, 26, 27, 34. 123, 317, 318, 
319, 336, 339, 340, 354 399, 404, 510, 
650, 651, 656, 667. 690. 

Buddhist chaitya halls, 610. 

Buddhist Charydpadas, 359. 

Buddhist Dohd-koshas, 361. 

Buddhist logic, 418. 

Buddhist Vajrayana, 360. 

Budhadeva, 43. 

Budhasvamin, 314. 

Bughra Khan, 153, 155, 156, 157. 

Biihler, 289, 384, 5(n). 

Bukhara, 2, 3, 116, 117. 

Bulandshahr, 13, 52, 118, 131, 499. 
Buldana, 191. 

Bullln, 521. 

Bundelkhand, 59, 60. 61, 63, 66, 107, 108, 
122, 275. 489, 657, 658. 

Bundi, 69. 121, 134, 147, 148. 

Buniar, 635. 

Buranjis, 382. 

Bur cl wan, 25, 607. 


888 




INDEX 



Buria—See Burya. 

Burma, 41, 262, 264, 265, 339, 342, 343, 
521, 526, 640, 650, 678, 679, 737, 739, 
742, 755, 756, 757, 760 762, 764, 772. 
Burmese chronicles, 41. 

Burmese painting, 642. 

Burulas, 476. 

Burya, 94. 

Bust, 3, 6, 96. 

Byzantine, 116. 


Cail (Kayal), 480, 495, 520. 

Calatu, 521. 

Calico prints, 675. 

Caliphs (Caliphate), 1, 2, 21, 116, 124, 
135. 

Cambay, 70, 71, 79, 80, 350, 517, 522, 523. 

Cambodia —See Kambuja. 

Canons of Orissan Architecture t 694, 
18(n). 

Canton, 260. 

Cape Comorin, 533. 

Cape Varella, 749. 

Cardamum, 517. 

Carmathians (Qaramita), 46$. 

Caspian, 116. 

Caste and Race in India. 505, 26(n). 

Catalogue Du jonds Tibetain de la Bib- 
liothique Nationale, 470, 26(n). 

Catalogue of Coins in the Indian 
Museum , 160, 36(n), 

'Celestial Bride’, 16. 

Central Asia, 116, 117, 125, 130, 132, 135, 
520, 667, 677. 

Central India, 135, 212, 352, 557. 

Central Magadhan (speech), 358. 

Ceylon, 10. 33, 68, 172, 177, 234, 235, 237, 
238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 
246, 248, 251, 256, 257, 258, 259, 261- 
268, 304, 309, 319, 339, 340, 341, 342, 
518, 650, 672. 

Ceylon Historical Journal, 267. 

Ceylonese. 522. 

Chacheha (Paramara), 73. 

Chachiga (Chahamana), 80, 82, 88. 

Chadobha —See Dubkund. 

Chaha<Jadeva, 57, 135, 146, 159. 

Chahamanas, 4, 54, 56, 59, 66, 67, 68, 
69, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 79, 80, 
81-89, 90, 91, 94, 104, 105, 106, 107, 

108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 

118, 119, 121, 134, 147, 148, 163, 173, 

186, 309, 310, 324, 349, 350, 477, 492, 

502, 687. 

of 6akambharl, 81-83. 
of Ranastambhapura, 83-86. 
of Nadol, 86-87. 
of Jabalipura (Jalor), 87-88. 
of Satyapura (Sanchor) and Devada, 
88-89. 

Administrative Organisation of, 277. 

Chahdr Maqdla, 507, 187(n). 

Chahri Beg, 116. 


<5L 

Chaitanya, 337, 403, 675. 

Chaitya arches, 583, 585, 586. 

Chaitya window, 558, 610, 654. 

Chaiya, 734. 

Chdjja, 591. 

Chakradeo, 118. 

Chakradhara, 353, 387. 
Chakradhara-Siddhanta-Sutre , 354. 
Chakradurga, 68. 

Chakrakota (kofta, kuta), 31, 65, 172. 

198, 214, 216, 217, 218, 220, 237. 
Chakrapanidatta, 328. 

Chakravarti, M. M., 224, 12(n). 

Chaliama, 219, 220. 

Chalukyas, 36, 38, 43, 47 , 50, 53, 61, 63, 

64, 66, 68, 69, 70, 76, 107, 185, 186, 

197, 198, 199, 202, 203-204, 206, 211, 

215, 216, 217, 219, 220, 221, 223, 226, 

227, 228, 231, 235, 237, 240, 241. 242, 

243, 244, 262, 282, 283 , 301, 307, 352, 

530, 662, 663, 687, 688. 

of Kalyana, 161-184. 

The Eastern, 203-204. 

Administrative Organisation of, 278- 
281. 

Chalukya Kesava temple, 576. 

Chalukyan monuments, 557. 

Chaiya, 429. 

“Chalukyan” style, 530. 

Chamara-deer, 517. 

Chamaravigraha, 221, 222. 

Chamba, 605, 663, 664. 

Chambal, 134. 

Champa, 98, 650, 736, 737, 738, 739, 740, 

741, 742, 744, 758, 772. 

Champaran(-a, ya), 47, 53, 63. 

Champus, 312-313, 375. 

Chamunda (of Seuna-desa), 192. 

Chamunda (of Vamanasthali), 80. 

Chamundaraja (Chahamana), 82. 

Chamundaraja (Chaulukya), 67, 74, 163, 

164. 

Chamundaraja (General), 168, 170, 171, 

172, 352. 

Chamundaraja (Gupta)—See Damo- 
daragupta. 

Chamundaraja (Paramara), 73 
Chamundi hill, 229. 

Chanagiri, 193. 

Chan Chub, 417. 

Chanda (Chahanda), 65, 69, 189, 216, 

217. 

Chandala(s), 476, 480. 

Chandana (Paramara), 73. 

Chandanabald-rasa, 394, 396. 

Chandapa (Paramara), 73. 

Chandarjuna, 29. 
i Chandawar, 54, 55, 119, 121, 
j Chand Bardai, 105. 
i Chandel(las), 4, 16, 18. 53, 55, 56, 57, 

58-60, 61, 63, 64, 65, 66, 69, 76, 95, 

107, 108, 121-22. 130, 134, 135, 146, 

443, 477, 500, 564, 565, 656, 657, 658. 
Administrative Organisation of, 275. 

Chanderi, 57, 146. 

Cfiandesvara, 48, 284, 328, 331, 335, 336. 

I Chantli, 304. 


889 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPlRf 


<SL 


Charnilhara (Yayati), 209, 210, 211, 
Chantfi Jago, 772. 

Chand i Kidal, 772. 

Chandi Loro Jonggrang, 640. 

Chandika, 458. 

Chandi-kucha-pancliasikd, 304. 

Chandi Sewn, 640. 

Chandi Singhasari, 772. 

Chandor (Chandradityapura), 185. 
Chandorkar, G. K., 387, 76, 79 (n). 
Chand pur, 42, 658. 

Chandra, 319. 

Chandra (Gahadavala), 53. 

Chandra (Kashtrakuta), 50. 
Chandrabhanu, 267. 

Chandrabhanu (£aileridra), 734, 735. 
Chanclra-bhayasihgha-varma-deva, 753. 
Chandrachuddinani-Sataka, 367. 
Chandradeva (of Kanauj), 51, 52, 64, 95. 
Chandradeva (of Ahga), 32. 
Chandradevi, 40. 

Charidraditya, 216, 217, 219, 220. 
Chandragachchha, 345. 

Chandragupta Maurya, 315, 493. 

Chand Rai, 15, 16. 
Chandrakulmagachcha, 344. 
Chandralekha, 174, 176. 

Chandrdloka, 324. 

Chandrapal Bhur, 15. 

Chandra Panditadeva, 429. 
Chandraprabha-charita, 345. 
Chandraprabhamaha ttara, 344. 
Chandraraja, 109, 367. 

Chandras (vamsa), 24, 33, 43. 
Chandrasekhara, 664. 

Chandravatl, 72, 79, 119, 344, 660. 
Chandrehe, 573. 

Chandugideva, 182. 

Chandwar, 135. 

Chand war, 350. 

Changadeva, 191. 

Chahgalvas, 181, 228. 

Changanad, 431. 

Chankot, 46. 

Channabasava, 367, 368, 446. 
Channabasavapurdna , 180. 

Channagiri, 169. 

Chapas, 477. 

Chapotkatas, 309. 

Charaideo, 44. 

Charaka, 245, 328. 

Charkh, 3. 

Chdrucharyd, 305. 

Charairongbn, 383. 

Charchari, 396. 

Charyd t 454. 

Charydpadas . 358. 359, 360, 361. 
Chashma-i-Kauthar , 473, 147(n), 507, 
189(n). 

Chatila, 388, 102(n). 

Chatta H, 178. 

Chattarpur, 59. 

Chatterjee, C. D., 469, ll(n). 

Chatter ii, S. K. 358, 359, 360, 397, 11 (n). 
Chatrarhi, 663. 

Chaltuga, 167. 


Chatuhsala-griha, 639. 

Chaturbhuja (Temple), 566, 573, 
Chaturamarakuli , 546. 

Chaturasra, 531. 

Chaturasrayatasra, 531. 

Chaturbhani, 311. 

Chaturmukha , 637. 

Chaturvargachintdmani, 298, 335, 338. 
Chaturvimsati Jinastuti (Chaturvim- 
sikd), 304. 

Chaubari, 593. 

Chaucer, 376. 

Chauddadampur, 625. 

Chauduar, 651, 652. 

Chauhans— See Chahamanas. 

Chau Ju-Kua, 485, 494, 507, 517, 518, 
519, 520, 524, 528, 529, 732, 735, 750, 

Chaulukyas, 20, 42, 50, 53, 59, 63, 64, 
66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74-81, 
82, 83, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 106, 108, 109, 
118, 120, 134, 162, 164, 171, 172, 173, 
176, 179, 180, 181. 186, 188, 189, 190, 
309, 310, 320, 345. 

Chaumukha, 637, 638. 

Chaundisetti, 192. 

Chaunshat Yoginls, 575. 

Chaunshat YoginI temple at Khajuraho, 
575. 

Chaunshat Yogini temple at Mitauli, 
575. 

Chaurapanchasilid , 302. 
Chauroddharanika , 277. 

Chavanarasa, i66. 

Chavannes, M., 470, 48 (n). 

Chavunda II, 180, 181, 182. 
Chavundarasa, 194. 

Chedi(s), 58, 59, 61, 64, 180, 274. 

I Chenab, 13, 124, 133, 137, 141. 

Cheitharol Kumpaba, 383. 

Chenchiah, P., 373, 388, 117(n). 

; Chenna Kesava, 632. 

Chennamallikarjuna, 369. 

! Chen-tamizh, 378. 

Chera (s)(m), 166, 180, 181, 197, 228, 229, 
234, 235, 236, 238, 239, 243, 257, 525. 
Cheu Ta-Kuan, 742, 761, 770. 
Chhakkammovaesa, 349. 

Chhandavada, 349, 350. 

Chhandogdhnika, 336. 

Chhandonusdsana , 326, 327, 397. 
Chhandovichiti , 343. 

Chhapada, 342, 343. 

Chhatarpur, 59. 

Chhaya-nataka, 312. 

Chhindaka-Chola, 213. 

Chhindaka-Nagas, 210, 214-218, 219, 220, 
222 . 

Chidambaram, 238, 245, 249, 256, 258, 
444, 670. 

Chidambaranatha Mudaliar, T. K., 363. 
Chikitsdmrita , 328. 

Chikitsdsarasamgraha, 328. 

Chikkadeva, 194, 

Chiklodarmata, 19. 

Chikudar —See Chiklodarmata. 


i 


890 












China Sea, 739. 

Chin dialects, 381. 

Chindwin, 755. 

Chinese pilgrims, 421. 

Chingiz Khan, 132, 135, 159, 503. 
Chingleput, 201, 203, 242, 243, 249, 614. 
Chin-kiang fu, 522. 

Chintamani Bhafta, 315. 

Chintamani Parsvanatha, 429. 

Ghirakkal, 166. 

Chishtls, 468. 

Chishtiya, 469. 

Chit, 336. 

Chita ldroog, 163, 172, 173, 182, 183, 192, 
194, 195, 228. 

Chitapur, 168. 

Chitor, 66, 76, 90, 91, 92, 103, 641, 660, 
661, 662, 687. 

See also Chitrakuta. 

Chitrabhdrata, 309. 

Chitragupta (temple), 567. 

Chrrakara, 656. 

Chitrakuta, 85, 90. 

• See also Chitor. 

Chitral, 473. 

Chitrotpala—See Mahanadl. 

Chittagong, 417. 

Chittarfcja, 171, 313. 

Chittnr, 201. 

Choda, 422. 

Chodaganga, 244, 

Chodaganga (Ceylon), 262, 266. 
Chodaraja, 199. 

Chodasirhha (Guhila), 89. 

Chododaya, 199. 

Chokha, 355. 

Cho}amandalam, 252, 259. 

Chola(s), 24, 25, 36, 50, 53, 54, 63, 66, 68, 
70, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 
170, 173, 174, 175, 177, 178, 179, 180, 

181, 186, 188, 197, 198, 200, 201, 204, 

205, 206, 210, 211, 214, 215, 216, 217, 

219-221, 224, 226, 227, 229, 230, 231, 
232, 234-255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 261, 
262, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 280, 284, 

318, 364, 404, 518, 525, 615, 617, 618, 

621, 622, 669. 670, 672, 684. 

Political History. 234-249. 

Political Organisation, 249-254. 

Central Government , 249-251. 

Local Self-Government, 252-253. 
Functions of the Mahdsabhd, 253- 
254. 

Administrative Organisation, 281-282. 
Chola (Rajaraja), 730. 

Cholesvara, 617. 

Chotanagpur, 605, 606. 

Chou-k’u-fei. 493, 520. 

Chronicles (Pali). 340. 

Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of 
Delhi, 160, 18(n). 
Chudamani-varmadeva, 730. 
Chudamani-varman, 733. 

Chudamani Vihara, 236. 


Chudda, 100. 

Chii- fan-chl, 506. 

Chulavariisa, 267, 268, 340, 734. 
Chulikapaisachl, 347. 

Chunar, 146. 

Circular shrine, 618. 

Circular Yogini temple, 575. 

Cloves, 522. 

Codrington, H. W., 268, 12 (n). 

Coelho, W., 233, 4(n). 

Coimbatore, 63, 229. 

Coins and Metrology of the Sultans of 
Delhi , 159, 12(n). 

Colas, 255, 5a(n), 286, 100(n), 471, 
100(n). 

Coleroon, 231. 

Colgong inscription, 37. 

Combatants’ duels, 491. 

Comedies, Court, 310-311. 
Commentaries, 342. 

Comilla District, 383. 

Comparative Tables of Muhammadan 
and Christian dates , 160, 44(n). 
Concepts of Buddhism , 469, 13 (n). 
Conjeeveram—See Kanchi. 
Cooch-Behar, 44. 

Coomaraswamy (A. K.), 576, 584, 609, 
641, 661, 672, 673, 692, 698, 151, 152 
(n) etc. 

Coorg, 181, 234. 

Cordier, P., 470 26(n), 36 etc., 471, 100 
(n), 472, 115(n). 

Coromandel (coast), 251, 519. 

Cotton, 517. 

Cousens, H., 583, 584, 585, 696, 68. 69(n), 
etc.; 697, 107, 109(n) etc.; 698, 167, 
168(n) etc.; 699, 196, 197(n), etc. 
Cranganore, 526. 

Crusaders, 116. 

Cuddalore, 231, 249. 

Cuddapah, 167, 177, 179, 201, 202, 203, 
220, 223, 258. 

Cultural Heritage of India, 472, 138(n). 
Cunningham, A., 10, 15, 55, 57, 62, 159, 
7(n), 160, 40(n). 

Cuttack, 212, 650, 651. 

D 

Dabhoi, 70, 662. 

Dabhyuhadavarman, 60. 

Dacca, 40, 42, 650. 

Dadapuram, 445. 

Daddarnava, 205. 

Dadu, 675. 

Dahala (maTidala), 52, 60, 61, 63, 64, 76, 
177, 179, 194, 211, 213. 

Dailamites 12. 

Pak, 388, 102a(n). 

Dakhan, 600, 602. 

Dakhanese (temple), 605. 

Pakinis, 413, 

pakra Bhimesvara, 695, 24a(n) 
Dakshina-desa, 261. 

Dakshinapatha, 35. 

Dakshinatya, 42. 

Dalju—See Dulucha. 


801 





fHE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


Jpamaras, 97, 99, 100. 

DamayantI, 299. 

Dambadeniya, 267, 

Pambal, 624. 

Pambarasimha (Paramara), 73. 
Damila —See Tamil. 

Damodara (Chief), 201. 

Damodara (Deva), 42. 

Damodaragupta, 49, 305. 

Damodara (Poet), 354, 387. 

Damoh, 60. 

Damyak, 124, 130. 

Dana, 249, 332. 

Danarnava, 203. 

Danasdgara, 37, 334, 338. 

Danaslla, 416. 

Dana-srijnana, 423. 

Danda , 269. 

Dandabhukti, 25, 29, 30, 31,141, 145, 212, 
'237. 

Dandadhisa, 275. 

Dan<Jaka(pura), 65, 185. 

Dandanayaka, 277, 278, 279, 283. 
Dandanlii, 272. 

Dandapdsxka, 277. 

Dandekar, S. V., 387, 92(n). 

Dandin, 313, 324, 377. 

Dantadhatuvamsa, 340. 

Dantakumara, 340. 

Dantapura, 340. 

Dantewara, 216, 218. 

Dantidurga (Rashtrakuta), 161, 616. 
Dantivarman (Paramara), 72. 

Dantura, 311. 

Danujamadhava Dasarathadeva, 41, 42, 
154. 

Danuj Rai —See Danujamadhava Dasa¬ 
rathadeva, 

Darad(s), 97, 99, 101. 

Darah, 94. 

Darasuram, 240, 622. 

Darjeeling, 44, 381. 

Darpadalana , 305. 

Daruka, 445. 

Darvabhisara, 98. 

Dasakarmapaddhati (Dasakarmadlpikd) 
—See Karmdnushthanapaddhati. 
Dasakumdra-charita, 311. 
Dasakumdra~charita (in Telugu), 377. 
Dasamiilika, 274. 

Dasapanman, 169. 

Dasarna—See Malava. 

Dadasiokt, 441. 

Dasavarman (Chalukya), 164, 165. 
Dasdvatdra-charita, 299. 

Dasavatara temple, 532, 538. 680. 

Das Gupta, N. N., 470. 39(n). 
Dasgupta, S. B., 469, 17(n), 470, 19(n>. 
Ddsyatvi i, 272, 

Date, S. G., 386, 65(n). 

Date, Y. R., 386, 67(n). 

D&thdvamsa, 340. 

Datia, 60, 662. 

Dattatreya, 354. 

Dauhsad hani ka, 277. 
Uanhs&dhasddhanika , 274. 

Daulatabad, 162, 185. 


See also Devagiri. 

Dauvdrikas, 277. 

Davanagere, 163, 183, 192. 

Da war, 3. 

Daya , 289, 293, 

Ddyabhdga, 287, 288, 293, 295, 296, 333, 
338. 

Dayapala, 320, 

De, S. K., 300, 310, 321, 384, 4(n). 

Debal, 133. 

Deccan, 27, 35, 36, 42, 50, 53, 61, 63, 64, 
66, 68, 70, 107, 161, 165, 166, 168, 173, 
174, 179, 180, 182, 183, 185, 188, 189, 
195, 196, 198-225, 278, 282, 316, 402, 
404. 

Dynasties of Eastern, 198-225. 

See also Dakshinapatha. 

Deccani miniatures, 642. 

Deccan College Postgraduate and Re¬ 
search Institute, Poona, MSS. Cata¬ 
logues of, 386, 66(n). 

Dehar, 609. 

Delhana, 394. 

Delhi, 4, 11, 14, 52, 54, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 
86, 91, 94, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 
115, 118, 119 120 121, 122, 130-160, 
195, 196, 203, 208, 232, 309. 
Delvada, 20. 

Delmal, 593. 

Dennayaka, 191. 

Deodhais, 382. 

Deogarh, 532, 538. 

Deoguna (Jaso State), 563. 

Dera, 11. 

Deopara inscription, 37. 

Dera Ismail Khan, 117. 

Desaladevi, 310. 

Desas, 279, 283. 

Desa-salattu-9 antfar, 525. 

Deshpande, V. N. 387, 89(n). 
Deshpande, Y. K., 387, 81 (n), 

Desi, 344, 373. 

Desl-gana, 432. 

Deslndmamdld, 318, 347. 

Desopadesa, 305, 514. 

Deal , 548, 652. 

DeuUChdranis , 544. 

Deva, 332. 

Devabhadra, 345. 

Devabhata, 106. 

Devachandra, 345. 

Devacharya, 441. 

Devada. 88-89. 

Deva-dasis, 401, 495. 

Devadatta, 211. 

1 Devaditya, 48. 

i Devagiri. 81, . 105, 185-197, 200, 201, 202, 
282, 329, 335. 

Devagrama, 29. 

Devagupta, 49. 

Deva Kavi, 370. 

1 Devakot, 124. 

Devakota. 207. 

Devdktuikd, 580. 

DevaladevI, 81, 195. 

Devala-Vada, 429. 

< Devdlaya-chakravarfi, 627. 


892 



INDEX 



Devala Raya, 373. 

Devananda, 301, 424. 

Devanathan, 171. 

Devangana, 660. 

Devaniiabhatta (Devana, Devananda, 
Devagana), 287, 295, 334, 338. 
Devapala (Kachchhapaghata), 56. 
Devapala (Pala), 26, 35, 415, 435, 730. 
Devapala (Paramara), 71, 80, 190. 
Devapala (Rashtrakula), 50. 
Devarddiydr , 495. 

Devaraja (Chahamana )—See Vijada. 
Devaraja (Paramara), 73, 74. 
Devarakshita, 54. 

Devas, 41, 42, 154. 

Devasvamin, 483. 

Devasuri, 311, 336, 433, 434. 
Devavavarma 57. 

Devendra Ganin, 386, 434. 

Devendra Sun, 346, 433. 
Devendravarman, 58. 

Devi, 324, 330. 

Devi Jagadamba, 567. 

Devlkota, 417. 

Devisataka, 324. 

Devotional Poems, 304. 

Dewas, 69. 

Dewbul —See Devavarma. 
Dhamdhaladeva, 79, 87. 

Dhamma, 341. 

Dhammachariya-tippana, 349. 
Dhammakitti, 340. 

Dhammasiri, 342. 

Dhammavildsa-Dhammasattha, 343. 
Dhammovaesachu&amani, 349. 
Dhamsaka, 221. 

Dana-kanda, 385. 

Dhamek stupa, 641. 

Dhananjaya (grutaklrti), 300, 318, 325, 
334, 385. 

Dhanapala (Poet), 67. 

Dhanapatigrama, 739. 

Dhandhuka (Paramara), 67, 72, 74. 
Dhandhuka. 345. 

Dhanesa, 320. 

Dhanesvara, 344. 

Dhanga, 56, 58, 61. 

Dhangan, 94. 

Dhanika (Paramara), 73. 

Dhankhel, 46. 

Dhansiri, 45. 

Dhanushtra. 526. 

Dhar, 85. 171, 656. 

Dhara, 59. 66, 71, 85, 171, 172, 315, 317, 
322, 331, 434, 658. 

Dhdragriha (bathing chambers), 490. 
Dhara Hade va-varman, 220, 221. 
Dharanamahadevi, 216. 

Dharanlndra, 215. 

Dharanxs , 406. 

Dharanlvaraha (Paramara), 72. 
Dharavarsha (Chhindaka Naga), 215, 
216, 218, 2)3, 220. 

Dharavarsha (Paramara), 72, 73, 77, 78, 
79, 105, 108, 121. 

Dharesvara, 287, 290, 295, 331. 
Dhari-Srijnana, 423. 


Dharma, 269, 270, 331, 394. 
Dharmabhyudaya, 302. 
Dharmadhikwrana, 275. 

Dhannadhikdrin, 278. 

Dharmadhyaksha , 276, 279, 334, 385. 
Dharmaghosha Suri, 433, 434. 
Dharmakara, 416. 

Dharmakarmadhikdri. 274. 
Dharmakumara, 302. 

Dharmamegha, 405. 

Dharmaklrti, 420. 

Dharmdmrita, 371. 

Dharmanatha, 384. * 

Dharmapala (Pala), 25, 33, 43, 415, 638. 
Dharmapala (Yadu), 55. 
Dhamiaparikshd, 305, 349. 
Dharmapradhana , 274. 

Dharmaraja, 610, 611, 612. 
Dharmarajika stupa , 422. 
Dhartnasarmdbhyudaya, 384. 
Dharmasdstra, 288, 330-336, 338. 
Dharmasoka, 266. 

Dharma-Thakur, 402. 

Dharmavarhsa, 749. 

Dharmavardhana, 346. 

Dharmavariyam, 254. 
Dharmodayana-varma-deva, 154. 
Dharmottara, 419. 

Dharwar, 35, 161, 162, 165, 168, 173, 178, 
182, 185, 187, 188, 192, 215, 625, 668. 
Dharyagrama, 38. 

Dhatupatha, 320. 

Dhdtuvritti , 319. 

Dhavala (Chaulukya), 79, 396. 

Dhavale, 354. 
phekkari, 28. 44. 

Phekkarlya, 29. 

Dhillika —See Delhi. 

Dhlratara, 224. 

Dhlru, 65. 

Dholka, 79, 80. 

Dhondo Raghunatha, 442. 

Dhor, 118, 120. 

Dhoti 486. 

Dhoyt, 40, 303. 

Dhruvabhata (Paramara), 72. 
Dhruvananda, 424. 

Dhruvesvara, 200. 

Dhumar, 680. 

Dhvaja-stambha, 616. 

Dhvani, 321, 323, 324. 

Dhvanikara, 321, 323. 

Dhvanydloka , 325. 

Dhyanabhadra, 471. 

Dhydnas, 411. 

Dhyanl-Buddhas. 411, 412. 

Didactic and Satiric Poems, 304-305. 
Didactic Works, 346. 

Didda (Queen), 666. 

Digambara(s), 301, 311, 313, 318, 327, 
349. 

Digvijaya-Rama, 441. 

Dikhu. 44, 45. 

Dihpalas, 644. 

DIksha-bodhe. 370. 

Dikshit, K. N. 609, 636, 637, 640, 699 
221(n). 


893 





the struggle for empire 



Dilwara, 597, 660. 

Dima, 311, 385. 

Dimaskl, 734. 

Dinajpur, 650. 

Dinakara (Guhila), 91. 

Dinapore, 32. 

Dinapur, 52. 

Dinarkotah, 93. 

Dipakalika, 296. 

Dipaladin, 424. 

Dipal Har, 93. 

Dipalpur, 153, 155, 

Dipankara, 330. 

Dlpaokara grljnana, 27, 45, 417. 
Dipavaihsa , 340. 

Dipt&rasa , 311. 

Dirgharava, 224. 

Disorder, Internal, 140-142. 

Divakara Bhatta, 335. 

Divakara Pandita, 737, 763. 

Divya, 28, 29, 34. 

Doab, 54, 118, 119, 120, 121, 130, 135, 137 
141, 142, 146, 150. 

Dodda Basappa, 624, 628, 629, 630. 
Dodda Vasavanna, 628. 

Doh<d, 349, 350. 

Dohusara —See Yogasdra , 

Domesday Survey, 244. 

Domma, 199. 

Dommanapala, 39. 

Donur, 165. 

Dopichhd sirixha , 539, 549. 

Dorasamudra, 68, 166, 175, 177, 178, 183, 
186, 189, 194, 196, 228, 229, 230, 
244, 247, 283. 

Doravadh 194. 

Dosha, 323. 

Double dmalaka , 561, 562. 

Draksharama, 207, 373, 

Drama, 309-312, 325. 

Dramas, Allegorical, 312. 

Dramas, Irregular, 312. 

Dramaturgy, 325. 

Dramila, 177. 

Dramila-gana, 432. 

DraupadI, 310, 375, 610. 
Draujxidimayamvara , 310. 

Dravida, 530, 531, 533, 556, 610, 611, 612, 
613, 614, 615, 616, 617 , 621, 623, 624. 
Dravida Sangha, 429. 

Dravida Vimana, 610. 

Dravidian dialects. 357. 

Dravyctqun asamgra ha, 328. 
Dranydtankara, 435. 

Dridhaprahara, 185. 196, 197. 
Drislitdnta-pdtha , 354, 

Drishtdntasataka, 304. 

*Dualism~monism\ 461. 

Dubkund. 56, 57, 66. 

Dudahi, 575, 659. 

Dudakhut—See Dugdhaghata. 

Duel. 491. 

Dugdhaghata. 99. 

Duggn (Tribhuvanamalla), 198. 223. 
Dulmi. 606. 

Dulucha, 102, 

Dumme, 194, 228. 



Dungarpur, 66, 73, 79, 687. 

Durga, 598, 606. 

Durgapura, 191. 

Durgasirnha, 320. 

Durghatavritti, 319. 

Durjaya(s), 198. 

Durlabha (Chahamana), 82. 
Durlabharaja (Author), 330. 
i Durlabharaja (Chahamana), 74, 81. 

I Durlabharaja (Chaulukya), 67 , 74. 
Durlabharaja III—Sec Dusala (Chaha¬ 
mana). 

Duroiselle, 773. 

Dusala (Chahamana), 82, 

Dusala (Paramara), 73. 

DushtcLPddhya, 274. 

Duta, 276. 

Duta-Kavyas, 303. 

Dutwhgada, 312. 

Dvddasakosasamgraha, 318. 

Dvaitadvaita, 337. 

Dvarasamudra, 439, 623, 629. 
Dvirupakosa, 317. 

Dvisandhana , 300, 318. 

Dvitiya Rajatarangini , 103, 30(n). 
Dvyasraya, 75, 308, 309. 
Dvorapavardhana, 29, 36. 

Dwaraka (DvSravatlpura), 184, 196, 
354. 

£ 


Early History of Kdmarupa , 159, 12(n). 
East India, 215, 223, 238. 

Eastern Chalukyas, 375. 

Edevatte, 182, 188, 

Edgerton, 385, 28(n). 

Edrlsx, 734. 

Egypt, 159. 

Ekaksharakosa , 317. 

Ekalingajl inscription, 91. 

Ekamra —See Bhuvaneswar. 

Ekanta, 445. 

Eastern Gangas, 444. 

Ekantada Ramayya, 181, 183. 
Ekasilanagarl —See Warangal. 

Ekavali , 325. 

Ekibh&vstotra, 435. 

Ekorama, 367. 

Elephant sports and the Indian polo. 
490. 


Elephanta cave, 586. 

Elephant’s tusks (or ivory), 517 
Eli, 521. 

Elimalai, 529. 

Eliot. Charles, 471, 110(n). 

EJlichpur, 195. 

Elliot, H. M. 18, 23. 8(n), 159, 15(n). 

653 ' G68 ' 670 ’ 676 ' 678 ’ 


Eluganti Peddanna, 376. 
Elwin. V.. 380. 

Em bar. 440. 

Endle, 380. 

Engal Alvar, 439. 
England, 244. 

Ennayiram, 240. 


894 









mtsfy 


INDEX 



Epics, 356, 508. 

Epigraphia Indo-Moslemica , 160, 28(n). 
Era, 198. 

Erambarage, 175, 176, 177, 178, 180, 181, 
182, 185, 187, 188, 191, 215. 

Ereyanga (Hoysala), 68, 174, 175, 227, 
233. 

Erivdriyam, 252. 

Errakot, 215. 

Erelupathu, 363. 

Etawah, 15, 52, 54, 119. 

Errana, 374. 

Europe, 260, 520, 690. 

Exotic Type temples, 634. 

F 

Fables, 316. 

Fakhr-i-Mudabbir, 504. 

Fakhr-ud-din Mubarak Shah, 504. 
Fandarina, 517, 520. 

Far East, 239. 

Farrukh^bad, 135, 150. 

Farrukhzad, 94. 

Fatehpur, 15, 52, 54, 574. 

Fatehpur Sikri, 426. 

Fatimid (branch), 468. 

Feni, 154, 

Fergusson, J., 534, 535, 541, 640, 694, 
17(n), 697, 117(n), 698, 157, 159(n) 
etc.; 699, 196, 197(n) etc. 

Ferrand, 528. 

Fights of birds and beasts and pigeon- 
flights, 491. 

Fiqh, 504. 

Fire, 271, 272. 

Firishta, 2. 4, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16, 23, 7(n), 48, 
97, 115, 121. 

FMshta, 103, 20(n), 28. 

Firozabad, 350. 

Flruz, 136. 

Firuzkuh, 97, 130. 

Firuz Shah (Sultan), 44, 195. 

Fishermen, 476. 

Fleet, J. F. 170, 183, 2(n), 197, l(n). 
Flywhisks, 517. 

Foliated star-shaped plan, 603. 
Formation de la langue marathe , 386, 
67(n). 

‘Forty’, 137, 138, 139. 

Foundation of Muslim Rule in India , 
159, 10(n). 

Friar John of Monte Corvino, 487. 
Fufal, 518. 

Futuhus-SatiUin , 160, 21(n). 

G 

Gachchhas, 431. 

Gadaba, 380. 

Gadaba-Savara, 378. 

Gadadhara, 320. 

Gadag, 185, 186, 625, 628, 668. 
Gadaraghatta, 78. 

Gadhamandala, 85. 

Gadhapati Valanadeva, 84, 85. 
Gadhinagara— See Kanauj. 


Gadhipura— See Kanauj. 

Gadia, 217, 218. 

Gadyachintdmani, 313. 
Gadyakarndmrita, 247 , 313. 

Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, 331. 
Gaganaghosha, 417. 

Gaganasiva, 424. 

Gahatjavalas, 30, 32, 37, 38, 49, 50, 51-55, 
58, 59, 62, 64, 65, 67, 83, 95, 101, 105, 
109, 118, 119, 122, 130, 135, 150, 244, 
333, 477. 

Administrative Organisation of, 276. 
Gahininatha, 353, 386. 

Gait, 159, 12 (n). 

Gajabahu, 262,^ 263. 

Gajabandh desa, 75. 

Gajapati, 274, 276. 

Gajapati, 51. 

Gajasimha (Chahamana), 87, 544, 549. 
Gakkhars, 9, 118, 124, 125, 139. 
Galaganatha, 598. 

Gallesvara temple, 602. 
Gallitipyaka-inshaii/a, 44. 

Gambhlrasiha, 98. 

Gampola, 267. 

Gana, 330. 

Ganapamba, 202. 

Ganapatha, 319. 

Ganapati (General), 168, 515, 589, 597. 
Ganapati (Kachchhapaghata), 58. 
Gapapati (Kakatlya), 187, 188, 189, 192, 
193, 200, 201, 202, 207, 223, 248 258. 
Ganapatyas, 357. 

Ganaratnavmhodadhi, 318, 319. 
Ganastha, 276. 

Gapda, 58. 

Gan^agopala, 257. 

Gandak, 47 
Gapdappaya, 168. 

Gandaraditya, 236. 

Gandaraditya (&ilahara), 176, 180, 184. 
Gandar—Dinakara, 168. 

Garrdharan monastery shrine, 576. 
Gandharavadi (Gandhatap&ti, Gandha- 
radhi), 224, 540. 

Gandharva, 303. 

Gandhi, L. B., 396, l(n). 

Gandi, 538, 554, 555, 556, 557, 559, 560, 
562, 563, 578. 

Gandu—See Govindaraja II. 

Ganesa, 549, 606, 611, 652. 

Ganesa (temples), 680, 682. 

Ganesa rathas at Mahabaiipuram, 555. 

iJanDctynrn /IQ 

Gangs, 14,’ 25,* 30, 31, 32, 36, 37, 47, 53, 
58, 66, 92, 95, 121, 123, 135. 142, 147, 
151, 206, 208, 212, 238, 239, 276, 295, 
331, 334. 

Gahgadeva (of Karad), 176. 

Gahgadeva (of Mithila), 48. 
Gangadhara, 168. 

Gahgaikondachola-puram, 53, 171, 238, 
241, 244, 245; 246, 248, 249, 618, 620. 
621. 

Gahgaikondapuram, 669. 

Ganga—Mahadevi, 218. 

Gangamandalam, 174. 


895 



THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Gangaraja, 175, 230. 

Garigas, 30, 31, 32, 53, 161, 162, 180, 181, 
188, 200, 204, 212, 213, 226, 230, 235, 
261, 263, 265, 266, 267, 325. 

The Eastern, 205-209. 

Ganga Sahani, 223. 

Gangasirhha, 57. 

Gahg&tataka, 263. 

Gahgavatfi (pad*), 166, 169, 170, 172, 175, 
i7S, 183, 226, 227, 228, 229, 234, 235, 
244, 245. 

Gahgavatarana relief, 682. 
Ganga-Yamuna, 604, 

Gahgesa, 336, 464. 

Gahgeya, 428. 

Gahgeyadeva (Kalachuri), 25, 26, 27, 
58, 61, 62, 65, 66, 67, 92, 166, 213. 
Gahgeyadeva (Somavamsi), 48. 
Gahgeya Sahani, 195, 201. 

Ganguly, M., 538, 694, 19(n). 

Ganjam, 65, 66, 181, 207, 211, 223. 

“ Garbhu-Chaiti/a”, 638. 

Garbhagriha, 539, 540, 545, 566, 569, 572, 
642, 652. 

Gardizi, 13, 23. 

Gargachandra, 100. 

Garga-Yavanas, 159. 

Garh Mandaran, 145, 212. 

Garhwa, 656, 657. 

Garo, 380. 

Garo-Jaintia, 145. 

Garuda, 184, 197, 221, 511, 750. 

Garuda Purana, 330. 

Gdthdkosa, 346. 

Gathds, 344, 345, 346, 353, 387. 
Gauda(s), 27, 28, 32, 33, 37 , 38, 42. 43, 
44, 47, 52, 53, 61, 62, 68, 74, 106, 172, 
181, 186, 211, 317, 417. 

Gaudapura, 37. 

Gaudlya, 322. 

Gaudiya Vaishnavas, 383. 

Gauhati, 42, 43, 44, 145. 

Gaul la, 526. 

Gaulmika, 277. 

Gaur, 123. 

Gaur and Panduah, 159, 12(n). 

Gauri, 316, 329, 464. 

Gauri temple, 555. 

Gautama, 505. 

Gautama-Dharma-adstra , 474. 

Gautama Dharma-sutra , 335. 

Gdvun^a, 280, 281, 283. 

Gaya and Buddha Gaya , 471, 69(n). 
Gayakarna, 59, 64, 76. 89. 
Gaya-nmndaia, 27, 28. 31, 33, 49, 54. 
Gayasukumdla-msa, 394, 396. 

Geiger, 267, l(n), 268, ll(n). 

General Principles of Hindu Jurispru- 
deuce, 296, 4(n). 

Geschichte des Buddhismus, 470, 24 (n). 
Ghantakarna, 445. 

Gharpure, J, R., 296, 9(n), 

Ghataika, 111. 

GhantSi temple, 572. 

Ghatika-sthanas, 526. 

Ghatfyala Inscription, 396, 3(n). 


<§L 


Ghaznavids, 1-23, 26, 58, 61, 95, 116, 
117, 118, 503. 

i Ghazni, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 

16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 50, 51, 56, 58, 

67, 74, 79, 81, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 

102, 109, 111, 113, 117, 118, 119, 121, 
122, 124, 125, 130, 131, 132, 513. 
Ghatage, A. M., 386, 56(n). 
Ghiyas-ud-din—-See Shams-ud-dm 
Muhammad. 

Ghiyas-ud-din Twaz, 40, 44, 207. 
Ghiyas-ud-din Tughluq, 48, 92, 203. 
Ghor, 139. 

Ghoshal, U. N., 284, 8(n), 285, 8(n), 286, 
55 (n). 

Ghughula, 80. 

Ghur (ids), 3, 10, 95, 96, 109, 113, 116, 
117-118, 119, 120, 124-125, 130, 159. 
Ghumli, 587, 588, 595. 

Ghuri, 504. 

Ghurye, G. S., 505, 26(n). 

Gidrisihgi, 205. 

Ginger, 517. 

Girl, 93. 

Girija-Kalyana, 370. 

Giritala—See Gahgatataka. 

Gimar, 394, 576, 662. 

Gitaxjotnnda , 40. 302, 309, 337, 360, 436, 
648. 

Gita, 437. 

Gitdrthasamgraha , 437. 

Giyaspur, 158. 

Glan-dar-ma, 419. 

The Glory that was Gurjaradesa , 396, 
3(n). 

j Goa, 75, 78, 162, 167, 175, 177, 178, 181, 
182, 183, 185, 186, 189, 191, 192. 
Godavari, 66, 163, 170, 177, 173, 200, 
201, 203, 206, 207, 238 249. 

Gode, P. K., 300, 323, 385, 32(n). 
Godraha, 80. 

Godhra (Godahaya), 349. 

Godwar, 79, 86. 87, 88. 

Gokarna (-choda), 65, 199. 

Gokuladeva, 44. 

Gola, 329. 

Gomal, 117. 

Gondesvara. 602. 

Gonanda, 349. 

Gonda, 50, 52. 

Gondi, 378, 380. 

Gonds, 477. 

Gohgiraja (Chaulukya), 74. 

Gonka I, 174. 

„ in, 182. 

Gonna, 172, 198. 

Gooty, 180, 186. 

Gop, 583. 

Gopadri—See Gwalior. 

Gopaka-pattana —See Goa. 

Gopal, 146. 

Gopala (of Assam), 43. 

Gopala (Kachchhapaghata), 57, 58, 60. 
Gopala (Pala), 33. 

Gopala (Rashtrakuta). 50, 51. 

Gopala (Vassal), 58, 63. 

Gopala (writer), 270, 284, 295. 




INDEX 



Gopala H3L 32. 

Gopala (III?), 692. 

Gopala-Krishna, 442. 

Gopalpur, 424. 

Gop class, 588. 

Gopis, 403, 435, 436. 

Gop type, 586. 

Gopuram , 533, 610, 611, 614, 616, 617, 
619, 622, 670. 

Gora, 355. 

Gorad, 593. 

Goraksha-gita, 386, 73(n). 

Gorkhali, 381. 

Garakh-Bodh , 361. 

Gorakh-nath, 352, 353, 361. 

Gorakhpur, 52, 66. 

Goraksha-Amarandtka-Samvdda , 353. 

Goraksha-natha (Gorakh-nath), 359. 

Goravadevarasa, 178. 

Govardhana (poet), 303. 

Govardhana, 32, 34, 331, 436. 

Gove —See Goa. 

Govindachandra (of Kanauj), 30, 37, 

49, 52, 53, 54. 59, 62, 65, 95, 101, 
276, 311, 332, 333, 348. 

Govindachandra (of Van gala), 25, 32, 

33, 328. 

Govindachandra (Gahadavala), 443. 

Govindachandra-tnhdra, 427. 

Govindapala, 33, 37, 54. 

Govindapur, 212. 

Govindaraja (Chahamana), 84, 114, 134, 
159. 

Govindaraja II (Chahamana), 81. 

Govindaraja (commentator), 287 , 295, 
331, 332, 334, 335, 338. 

Govindaraja (Governor), 109, 110, 111, 
112, 113, 199. 

Govindarasa, 174. 

Govindavada (-vadi). 173, 183. 

Grags-pa-mtha-yas — See Anantakirtti. 

Grahaganita, 329, 

Grammar, 319-320, 332, 342,-343, 345, 
346-347, 511, 512. 

Granth&sdheb, 355. 

Greek, 316. 

Grihastha, 332. 

Grousset, R., 670. 

Gudapura, 106, 107. 

Gudha~indn<Japa, 580, 590. 

Gudixnallam, 614. 

Gugga, 664. 

Guhesvara, 370. 

Guhiias (lots), 72. 73. 78, 81, 83, 85, 87, 
89-92. 103, 109. 134. 

Guhilaputras (Guhilots), 477. 

Guhram, 112, 114. 118, 132. 

Guild (of horse-dealers), 525. 

Gujarat (Guijaravishaya), 20, 59. 63. 64, 

66, 67, 68. 69. 70. 71, 72. 73. 74-81. 83. 

85. 86. 88. 90. 104, 106, 108. 114, 118, 
119, 121, 184, 162. 171, 173. 188. 189, 

190, 191. 192, 193. 194. 195. 284. 298. 1 

301. 309. 312, 318. 320. 326. 3*9. 353. i 

398. 402 435. 517. 518 521. 524. 579. 

583. 642 643, 656, 662, 663, 666, 687. 

Gujarata, 389. • 


Gujarati, 315, 675. 

Gujarati, book and textile illustrations, 
642. 

Gujarati language, 389. 
Gujarati-Marwari-Malwi, 389. 

Gujarati miniatures, 671, 679. 
“Gujjaratta”, 389. 

Gulbarga, 167. 

Gulf of Cambay, 517. 

Gulhana (Lohara), 101. 

Gumani, 304. 

Guna, 322, 323, 324. 

Gunachandra, 344, 397, 435. 

Gunadhya, 313, 314. 

Gunakama, 45. 

Gunakamadeva II, 46. 
Gunapriyadharmapatni, 754. 

Gunda, 199. 

Gunda-MahadevI, 218. 

Gundamaya, 171. 

Guntur, 165, 200, 201, 203, 611. 

Guptas, 274, 276, 285, 330, 554, 642, 646, 
663, 664, 665. 

Guptas of Jayapura, 48-49. 

Gupta temples, 533, 611. 

Gurdon, 380. 

Gurjara(s), 42, 64, 69, 86, 89, 106, 162, 
163, 164, 176, 177. 178, 180, 181, 186, 
190, 211, 389, 524, 678. 

“Gurjaratra”, 389. 

Gurjara Pratlhara, 577. 

Gurgi Masaun, 573, 574. 

Guru Gambhlramati, 472. 

Gurun (Gorang), 751. 

Gur Khan, 117. 

Guruparampara , 440. 

Guttal, 188, 191. 

Gut* as, 188, 191. 

Gutti —See Gooty. 

Guvala II, 176. 

Guvaladeva II, 175. 

Gridhrakuta, 759. 

Gwalior, 18, 56, 57. 60, 66, 85, 109, 119, 
120, 131, 134, 135, 144, 146, 147, 159, 
555, 656. 

Gwalior Namah, 159, 16(n). 

H 

Habib, M m 103, 27 (n). 

Haidara, 102. 

Habibullah, A. B. M., 159, 10(n), 160, 
50(n). 

Hadagalli, 162, 192. 

Hadda, 665. 

Hadharamaut, 522. 

Hadlth, 504. 

Haidarabad, 21. 

Haig, W., 23, 7(n), 160. 44(n). 

Haihayas, 104, 167, 169, 171, 205. 656, 
659. 

Haikku , 368. 

Haimavy&karana, 350. 

“Hfr&r Bachharer Pvrdna Banna 1 a 
Rb&zhay Bauddha Gan O Doha " 
358. 

Hajib Tughatigin, 95. 


S. E.—37 


897 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Haji Dabir, 160, 23(n). 

Hajner, 133. 

Hala, 303. 

Hala^id, 627, 634. 

HaldWge 12000, 176. 

Halayudha, 40, 331, 334, 335, 336, 385. 
Haider, R. R., 103, 27(n). 

Halebid, 631, 632, 633, 668, 669. 
Halebidu, 633. 

Halgasige 12000, 165. 

Hamirpur, 146. 

Hammira (Ch§hamana), 71, 72, 85, 86, 
324. 

Hammira (Guhila), 91, 92. 

Hammira (Mlechchha), 312. 
Hammiramadamardana, 311. 
Hamrnira-Mahdkavya , 84, 85, 110, 111, 
113, 115, 159, 7(n), 492. 
Hammiravarman, 60. 

Hammuka, 75. 

Harhsapala (Guhila), 89. 

Hamsavati, 760. 

Hanatnkonda, 179, 198. 

Hana&oge, 431. 

Hangal, 597. 

Hfinsl, 67, 82, 83, 93, 94, 112, 118, 136, 
148. 

Hansur Taluk, 431. 

Hanuman, 197, 363. 

Hanungal (Hangal), 175, 180, 181, 183, 
186, 188, 192, 229, 281. 

Hapta-Hindu (Sapta.Sindhu), 469. 

Kara (pantheon), 320, 464. 
Haracharitachintamani , 300. 

Haradatta —See Hardat. 

Haradatta, 474, 499, 505. 

Haradatta (Poet), 319, 335. 
Harakeli-nataka, 83, 310. 

Hdralatd, 332, 334. 

Haralhalli, 626. 

Harapaladeva, 196. 

Haraprasad Sastri, M. M. 358, 361. 
Hdrdvali , 317. 

Hardat, 13, 23. 

Hardy, 373. 

Hari, 30. 

Hari (pantheon), 320, 355. 

Harianah, 148. 

Haribhadra Sftri. 309, 345, 349. 
Harichandra, 384. 

Harideva, 746. 

Harihara, 302, 336, 367, 576. 

HarhHara image, 763. 

Harihara-mahatva, 370. 

Harikaladeva Ranavaftkamalla, 41, 42. 
Harijit, 748. 

HariiHdvivarana, 320. 

Harinatha, 33i. 

Haripala (of Bayana), 55. 

Harip&la (General), 194, 197. 

Hariraja (Chahamana), 83, 84, 104, 113, 
114, 119. 120. 

Hariraja (Kachchhapaghata). 57, 60. 
Hariraja (Kaurava), 60. 

Hariraja (Lohara), 97. 

Harischandra (Chhmdaka), 218. 
Harisdhandra (Gaha<Jav41a), 55, 135. 


<SL 


Harischandra (Paramara), 71. 
Harischandra-Kavya, 370. 

Hari(a)simha, 47, 48. 

Harisimhadeva, 385. 

Hari Singh, 382. 

Harlta, 481. 

Harivamsa, 375. 

Haris vara, 444. 

Harivarman, 30, 34, 35, 47. 

Hari-varman II, 742. 

Hari-varman IV, 744, 745. 

Harivilasa, 300. 

Harivyasadeva, 441. 

Harsar 664 

Harsha (Lohara), 98, 99, 100, 308, 665. 
Harsha-charita, 306, 307. 

Harshadatta, 210, 211. 

Harshadeva, 46. 

Harshadmata, 585. 

Harshagiri, 660. 

Harshapala, 34, 43. 

Harsha-vardhana, 414. 

Harsha-varman, 736. 

Harsha-varman III, 763. 

Harshe, R. G. 386, 67(n). 

Harwan, 665, 666. 

Hasan Arnal, 122. 

Hasan Nizami, 50, 113, 114, 159. 

Hasan Qarlugh, 133, 137, 142, 143. 
Hassan, 175, 177, 194, 633. 

Hastimalla, 435. 

Hastydyurveda, 329. 

Hasyachudamani, 311. 

Hatha-Yoga, 463. 

Haveri, 188, 626. 

Hawking, 492. 

Hazabbar-ud-dln Hasan Arnal, 59, 
Hazara Rama Temple, 671. 

Hazra, R. C. 330. 

Hellenistic Gandhara influence, 664, 
665, 667, , _ 

Hemachandra, 76, 77, 269, 270, 284, 298, 
301, 302, 308, 309, 315, 317, 318, 320, 
322, 323, 325, 326, 327, 338, 345, 346, 
347, 348, 349, 350, 391, 392, 434, 435. 
Hemachandra Suri, 433. 

HemadpantI, 193, 335, 603. 

Hemadri, 187, 189, 193, 195, 196, 223, 334, 
335, 338. 

Hemantasena, 36. 

Hemmadi —See Perma<Ji. 

Hendari—Raya, 192. 

Herat, 6, 10, 117, 12*4. 

Hertel, 315, 385, 27(n). 

Hijabr-ud-dln Hasan Adlb, 122. 
Himagiri, 664. 

Himalayan Art, 642, 649, 666. 

Himalayas, 47, 142, 300, 534, 606, 663. 
Hirrtsa, 288. 

Hindi Chaup&i, 359. 

Hinduism and Buddhism, 471, 10(n). 
Hindu Kush, 3, 130, 503. 

Hindu Law, 296, 8(n). 

Hindu Power, Revival of, 144-148. 
Hindu Revenue System, 286, 55(n). 
Hindu Rule, Causes of the Collapse of, 
125-128, 


898 






INDEX 



Hinayana, 405, 413. 

Hingloji Mata, 593. 

Hiraj —See Hariraja (Chahamana). 
Hiralal, 218, 224, 31(n), 33; 225, 36(n), 
44 etc. 

Hiraman Munshi, 159, 16(n). 

Hirehalla, 169. 

Hirth and Rockhill, 506, 87(n). 
Hisam-ud-dfci Twaz Khaljl, 133, 134, 
159. 

Hissar, 82, 93, 109. 

Historical Kavya, 300, 306, 307. 

Historical Poems, 306-309. 

History oj Assam, 159, 12(n). 

History of Buddhism in Bengal (in 
Bengali), 469, 17(n). 

(A Short) History of Ceylon, 268, 12(n). 
(The Early) History of Ceylon, 268, 
12(n). 

(A) History of Hindu Political Theories , 

284, 8(n). 

(A) History of Indian Political Ideas, 

285, 9(n). 

History of Kanau ), 285, 37 (n). 

History of the Mediaeval School of 
Indian Logic, 470, 22(n). 

History of Orissa , 160, 27(n), 695, 33(n). 
History of the Mongols, 159, 10(n). 
History of the Paramdra Dynasty, 102, 
ll(n), 103, 28(n). 

History of Rajputana , 103, 27 (n). 

(A) History of South India, 233, 4(n), 
255, 5a (n). 

Hitavddins , 524. 

Hitopadesa, 316. 

Hiuen Tsang, 33. 

Hivale, S., 380. 

Ho, 378. 

Hodivata, S. H. 23, 5(n). 

Hoffmann, J. 380. 

Hoisington, H. R. 367. 

Ho-kien fu, 522. 

Hollavur, 215. 

Hooghly, 32, 33, 36, 145, 206, 207, 208, 
212, 268. 

Hormuz, 521, 524. 

Hosagunda, 188. 

HoshangabSd, 70, 71. 

Hospet, 167. 

Howroth, 159, 10(n). 

Hoysala(s) [Poysala(s)], 68, 70, 174, 
175, 177. 178, 180, 181, 182, 183, 186, 

187, 188, 189, 192, 193, 194, 195, 200, 

201, 203, 226-233, 244, 246, 247, 248, 
249, 257, 258, 259, 260, 313, 402, 429, 

623, 624, 628, 629. 630, 631, 632, 668. 

Origin of the, 226-227. 

Early Kings, 227-232. 

Administrative Organisation. 283. 
(The) Hoysala Vamsa , 233, 4(n). 
Hoysalesvara Temple, 631, 633, 669. 
Hormos, 259. 

Hridayadhara, 332. 

Hridayasira, 558. 

Hu-ch'a-Ia (Gujarat), 486. 
Huchchimailigudi, 598. 

HuJagu Khan, 143, 144. 


: Hulakki Bhaskara, 377. 
i Huligere, 187, 188, 191. 

Hu 11a, 430. 

Hulluri, 177. 

Humcha, 177, 178, 180, 199. 

Huna (-Man<fala), 63, 74. 

Hunas, 678. 

Hunting, 492. 

Husain, 97. 

Hussain Ambar, 388, 

Hutton, 380, 

Hyderabad, 69, 162, 164, 165, 167, 168, 
172, 173, 177, 185, 191, 195, 198, 199, 
201, 203, 237, 352, 354, 372, 624, 668. 
Hyderabad Archaeological Series, 197, 
3(n), 223, 5(n). 

I 

Ibadatkhana, 426. 

Ibn Batuta, 160, 21 (n). 

Ibn Said, 519, 734. 

Ibnu’l-Athlr, 23, 7(n). 

Ibrahim (Sultan), 50, 94, 95. 

Ibrahim Alvi, 96. 

IchchhanidevI, 105. 

Ichchha-sakti, 456. 

Idahgai (left hand), 477. 

Idar, 687. 

Iditurai-tiadu, 165. 

Idrlsi, 493, 497, 517, 520, 521, 529. 
idu, 440. 
ihdmriga, 310. 

Ikhtiyar-ud-din, Aitigin, 137, 138, 139. 
Ikhtiyar-ud-din Muhammad Bakhtyar 
Khaljl, 122-124, 126, 128, 130, 131, 
133, 382. 

Ikhtiyar-ud-din Yuzbak Tughril Khan, 
42 44 

Ikram! ML, 473, 147(n), 507, 189(n). 

Ikshvakus, 266. 

flak Khans, 2, 8, 116. 

Ilamandalam —See Ceylon. 
liamurideSam, 731. 

Ilahgasoka, 239, 731. 

Ilbaris, 149. 

Iltutmish, 50, 55, 57, 60, 71, 73, 80, 84, 
88, 90, 130-136, 137, 139, 140. 141, 
144, 146, 147, 148, 149, 152, 155, 159, 
160, 191, 503, 504. 

‘Imad-ud-din Raihan, 140, 142, 143, 160. 
Indarpat, 118, 119. 

India and China, 470, 48(n). 

India in the Fifteenth Century, 529, 71 
(n). 

Indian Architecture, 695, 33(n). 

Indian Influences on the Literature of 
Java and Bali, 472, 110(n). 

Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow, 
470, 39(n). 

Indian Philosophy , 473, 144 (n). 

Indian Teachers of Buddhist Univer¬ 
sities, 470, 24(n). 

India*s Contribution to Arabic Litera¬ 
ture, 507, 186(n). 

Indo-Aryan and Hindi, 397, ll(n). 
Indo-China, 739, 







THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Indo-Javanese literature, 767. 
Indo-Mongoloids, 378. 

Indore, 656, 658. 

Indra (pantheon), 271, 300, 309, 315. 

^ Indra (Thakuri), 46. 

Indradhavala, 49. 

Tndramala, 434. 

Indrapala, 43. 

Indraratha, 66, 210, 211, 237. 

Indrasabha (temples), 680, 682. 
Indrasthana, 52, 310. 

Indra-varman, XI, 747. 

Indumatl, 768. 

Indus, 130, 132. 

Influence of Islam on Indian Culture , 
472, 143(n). 

Ingalaguppe (-kupe), 186. 
Ingaleshwar-Bagevadi, 367. 
Ihgulesvara-bali, 432. 

Inscriptions of Bengal, 469, 4(n). 
Inscriptions at Sr a v ana, Betgola, 472, 
135(n). 

Inshd , 504. 

Introduction to Tantric Buddhism , 469, 
12$n). 

Iramadeva, 176. 

Iran, 143, 678. 

Iranians, 469. 

‘Iraq, 15, 92, 143, 260, 520. 

Irattapatfi, 234, 235, 237. 238, 251. 
Irawadi, 772. 

Ireehchayan, 170. 

Iron, 522. 

Iron-beams, 519. 

Iron in Ancient India, 528. 49(n). 
Iron-pillar at Dhar, 519. 

Jrugaiyan. 169, 170. 

Irungo VeJ, 226. 

Iruhgulachola, 178. 

Irungula—Chola II, 194. 

Irupavirupadu, 450. 

Isami, 160. 

Isana, 445. 

Is§nad«va, 44. 

Is-haq, 3. 

Jshta-linga, 449. 

Islam, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 12, 13, 17. 18 22, 
111, 112, 116, 149, 399, 498, 520, 645. 
Islamic Culture , 102, 12(n). 

Isma'ilG), 5. 8, 10, 125. 

Isma‘iliya, 468. 

Ifvara, 336, 337. 

I&varabhatta, 437. 

Isvara-bhupa, 182. 

Isvaraghosha, 28, 44. 

Isvarasiddhi, 437. 

Itihdsa dni Aitihasifca, 386, 67(n). 

Ittagi, 627, 668. 

‘Izz-ud-daulah 'Abd-ur-Rashld, 94. 

J 

Jabalipura —See Jalor. 

Jabalpur, 60, 61, 63. 194, 575, 659. 
Jadonbhattis —See Yaduvamsls. 

Jaffna, 267. 

Jagaddfcla Soma Nayaka, 191. 


<SL 


Jagaddala, 416, 417, 511. 

Jagaddeva (Kalachuri), 65. 

Jagaddeva (Minister), 108. 

Jagaddeva (Paramara), 68, 69, 75, 175, 
228, 330. 

Jagaddeva (Santara), 178, 179, 180, 183, 
199. 

Jagadekabhushana —See Dharavarsha. 
Jagadekabhushana Narasimha, 218. 
Jagadekamalla (Chalukya), 70, 167, 183, 
237 238 

Jagadekamalla II, 178,179. 
Jagadekamalla Jayasimha III, 424. 
Jagadekamalla Pratapachakravartin, 
329. 

Jagadeva, 101. 

Jaga<Ju, 395. 

Jagadvijaya (Jagattraya), 264. 

Jagama Rahuta, 192. 

Jagamohana , 536, 537, 539, 540, 545, 
546, 547, 548, 549, 550, 552, 553, 554, 
555. 

Jagannatha, 440, 551, 654. 
Jagannatha-kshetra, 441. 

Jagannatha temple, 207. 

Jagapala, 65. 

Jagat , 337. 

Jagatchandra Suri, 433. 

Jagatlpala, 261. 

Jagdalpur, 214, 215, 216. 

Jaideva, 194. 

Jaimini, 322, 460. 

Jain Ardhamagadhi, 434. 

Jain Aitihasik Gurjar Kdvya Samchay, 
397, 23(n). 

Jainendra, 319, 320. 

Jain(s) (Jainism), 76, 77, 78, 80, 88, 109, 
113, i20, 168, 180, 181, 226, 229, 230, 

270, 298, 301, 302, 304, 305, 308, 311, 

312, 313, 315, 316, 318, 324, 325, 
326, 327, 329, 336, 344, 345, 346, 348, 

349, 354, 361, 399, 402, 404, 576, 676, 

686 , 688 . 

Jain Maharashtri and other Prakrits, 
344-347. 

Jain Mahavlra temple, 577. 

Jain temple-complexes at Dilwara, 580. 
Jain temple at Gimar, 581. 

Jain temple at Lakkundi, 625. 

Jain temple of Meguti, 554. 

Jain temples of Mount Abu, 579. 
Jaintias, 383. 

Jain Writers, 370. 

Jaipal, 95, 115. 

Jaipur, 75, 83, 84, 85, 576, 651, 652, 660. 
Jaipuri, 389. 

Jaisaimer, 19. 326, 327, 350. 

Jaisalnatha Mahadeva, 593. 

Jaita (Paramara), 105. 

| Jaita, 349. 

Jaitapala, 55. 

i Jaitramalla —See Jaitugideva. 

Jaitrapala —See Jaitugi. 

Jaitrasagara, 85. 

Jaitrasirhha, 492. 

Jaitrasirhha (Chahamana). 71, 85. 
Jaitrasirhha (Guhila), 81, 89, 90. 


900 





fry 


indM 


jaitrosimha (General), 185, 186. 

Jaitra Singh, 159. 

Jaitugi (Governor), 193. 

Jaitugi (Yadava), 70, 79, 81, 187-188, 200, 
223. 

Jaitugi II, 191, 202. 

Jaitugldeva (Faramara), 71, 90, 435. 
Jaiyata, 319. 

Jajalla, 197, 3(n), 213, 218. 

Jajalla II, 65. 

Jajalladeva (of Raiiga), 189. 

Jajalladeva I (of Ratanpur), 53, 65, 176, 
177. 

Jajapellas—See Yajvapalas. 

Jajnagar, 141. 

Jaipur, 83, 212. 

Jakabba, 164. 

Jalal-ud-dln Firuz, 158. 

Jalal-ud-din Khalji, 72, 84, 86. 
Jalal-ud-din Mahmud, 97. 

Jalal-ud-din MangbarnI, 132, 133, 159. 
Jalal-ud-din Mas‘ud. 143. 

Jalal-ud-din Yaqut, 137, 138. 
Jalandhar(a), 94, 97, 467. 

Jalhana, 192, 305, 306, 308. 

Jalhana, 82. 

Jalor, 73, 80, 82, 83, 87-88, 89, 90, 103, 
134, 147. 

Jalpaiguri 44. 

Jamalgarhi, 576. 

Jambh&iadatta, 315. 

Jambi, 732. 

Jambuljhga, 598. 

Jambusvdmi-chariya, 394. 

J ambus vam in, 394. 

J&miu~l Hikdydt, 115, l(n). 

Jami Mosque, 15, 21. 

Jammu, 118. 

Jammu MS (Stein). 385, 38(n). 

Janabai, 355. 

Janamejaya Mahabhavagupta I, 209. 
Jananatha, 171. 

Janasadhu-varma-deva, 753- 
Janasthana, 352. 

Jangala-desa, 108 
Jangamas, 357, 

Jaiigha, 538, 557. 

Janki, 13. 

Janmadi~sutra, 457. 

Japila, 49. 

Janna, 371. 

Jarasandha, 768. 

Jarrett, 472, lll(n). 

Jasaharaichariu, 349. 

Jasakama, 91. 

Jasaraja, 107. 

Jassaka, 101. 

J a taka stories, 773. 

Jatanpal, 218. 

Jatar deal, 609. 

Jatavarman (Yadava), 29, 34, 43. 62. 
Jatavarman Kulasekhara, 246, 256, 264, 
265. 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I, 201, 232, 
' 248, 249. 257-259, 284. 

Jatavarman Sundara Pandya IX, 259, 
260. 


Jatavarman Sundara Papdya III, 250. 
Jatavarman Vira Pandya I, 258, 259. 
Jatavarman Vira Pandya! II, 259, 260. 
Jatavarman Vira Pandya, 735. 
Jatesvara, 65. 

Jath, 186. 

Jatiga, 184. 

Jatiga II, 167. 

Jdtis, 475, 476. 

Jatoda, 44. 

Jats, 21, 22, 93. 

Jaumara, 320. 

Jaunpur, 55. 

Java, 236, 250, 267, 402, 522, 640, 650, 
678, 734, 748, 749, 753, 754, 762, 763, 
768, 772. 

Javaka, 734. 

Javalilu (Love songs), 373. 

Javanese sculpture, 679. 

Jayabahu, 261, 262. 

Jayabhaya, 750. 

Jayabhlma, 47. 

Jayachandra (Gahadavala), 38, 53, 54, 
55, 105, 107, 119, 298. 

Jayadaman> 385, 40a (n). 

Jayadatta, 330. 

Jayadeva, 40, 302, 303, 309, 324, 337, 436, 
648. 

Jayadevamalla, 46. 

Jayaditya, 335. 

Jayadratha, 300, 384. 

Jayadurga —See Ajaigarh. 

Jayagopa, 265. 

Jaya-Hari-varman, 737. 

Jaya Hari-varman VI, 746, 747. 

Jaya Indra-varman V, 744. 

Jaya Indra-varman VI, 745. 

Jaya Indra-varman VII, 738, 746, 747. 
Jaya Indra-varman VIII, 738, 747. 

Jaya Indra-varman X, 747. 

Jayakama (of Nepal), 45. 

Jayakarna, 177. 

Jayakatvang, 752, 753. 

Jayakesin (Kadamba), 75, 172, 175. 
Jayakesin II, 176, 178, 229. 

Jayakesin III, 183, 185, 189. 

Jayakirti, 326, 327, 346. 

Jayamangala, 330. 

Jayanaka, 109, 309, 384. 

Jayananda, 420. 

Jayahgondar, 243, 244. 

Jayanta, 301. 

Jayantasimha, 312. 

Jayantavijaya, 301. 

Jayapala, 3, 4, 5, 6. 

Jaya Parame&vara-varma-deva fsvara- 
murti, 743. 744. 

Jaya Paramesvara-varman IV, 747. 
Jayaplda, 419. 

Jayapura, 48-49, 84. 

Jayarajadeva, 47. 

Jayaratha, 324, 384. 

Jayarimalla, 47. 

Jayarjunamalla, 47. 

Jayarudramalla, 47. 

Jayasaha (siha) malladeva 47. 

Jayasena, 49. 


901 








misT^ 


fnk STRUGGLE FOR J^MPIRt 



jayasimha (Chhindaka), 218. 
Jayasimha (of Dantjabhukti), 29, 31, 212. 
Jayasimha (Guhila )—See Jaitrasiihha. 
Jayasimha (Kalachuri of Chedi), 180, 
274. 

Jayasirhha (of Karnata), 36. 

Jayasimha (of Kashmir), 53, 100, 101, 
318. 

Jayasirhha (of Malava), 67, 68, 85, 172, 
' 204. 

Jayasimha (Sisodiya), 91. 

Jayasimha (of Tripurl), 64. 

Jayasimha (Usurper), 79. 

Jayasimha, 435. 

Jayasimha II, 429. 

Jayasimha II (Chalukya), 61, 63, 66, 82, 
86, 165, 166-167, 169, 170, 172, 173, 
174, 176. 

Jayasimha II (Paramara), 71, 75, 103, 
173, 193. 

Jayasiihha-Siddharaja, 53, 59. 63, 69, 70, 
74, 75, 77, 83, 107, 176, 320, 345 , 443. 
Jayasimha Suri, 311. 

Jayasimbadeva Chaulukya, 434. 

Jaya Simha-varman II, 743. 

Jay a Simha-varman IV, 748. 

Jayatala —See Jaitrasiihha (Guhila). 
Jayaswai family, 349. 

Jayatari, 47. 

Jayatasiha (Chahamana), 87. 
Jayatasimha (Paramara), 74. 

Jayalirtha, 442. 

Jayavarman (Chandella), 58, 59. 
Jayavarman (Paramara), 70, 71, 76, 178. 
Jayavarman II (Paramara), 71, 103. 
Jaya-varman V, 736. 

Jaya-varman VI, 736, 737, 763. 
Jaya-varman VII, 738, 739, 740, 741, 762, 
763, 764. 

Jaya-varman VIII, 741. 

Jay avarma-Parames vara, 741. 

Jayendra, 419. 

Jayendra-vihdra, 419. 

Jaynagar —See Jayapura. 

Jej abhukti (-man^ala), 59. 

Jejakabhukti, 564. 

Jerusalem, 468. 

Jesala —See Jaitrasiihha (Guhila). 

Jeso, 92, 

Jetakarna, 417. 

Jetari, 417. 

Jetavana, 422. 

Jewels, 520. 

Jeweller, 520. 

Jews, 496. 

Jeyideva, 194. 

Jh&lawar, 68. 

Jhalrapatan, 577. 

Jhampaithaghatta, 71, 85. 
Jhampa-simha, 545. 

Jhdnapaiu, 349. 

Jhahjhanadeva, 434. 

Jhansi, 58, 59, 134, 135, 146, 159, 658. 
Jharikhapda (Orissa), 418. 

Jhat Rai, 120. 

Jlielum, 13, 93, 124, 133. 

Jhinjuved, 662, 


<SL 


Jhogda, 603. 

Jiddulige, 188. 

Jimutaketu, 184. 

Jimutavahana, 184. 

Jimutavahana (commentator), 287, 288, 
289, 290, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 331, 
333, 334, 338. 

Jimutavahana-Avadana, 421. 

Jina(s), 184, 302, 304, 344, 345. 
Jinachandra Ganin, 346. 

Jinacharita, 341, 343. 

Jinadatta, 301, 348. 
Jinadharmasuri-baraha-ndvau , 395. 
Jindlwrnkdra, 341. 

Jinamitra, 420. 

Jinapala, 109. 

Jinaprabha Suri, 309, 311, 327. 
Jinavallabha, 346. 

Jinduraja (Chahamana), 86. 

Jinesvara, 434. 

Jinesvara-suri-samyamasri-Vivdha-var- 
nana-rasa, 396. 

Jitendra, 767. 

Jitendriya, 287, 296, 331. 

Jiva, 337, 346, 355. 

Jivadayd-rusa, 395. 

Jiva GosvamI, 462. 

Jivakachintdmani, 301. 

JIvandhara, 301, 313. 

Jivaviydra, 346. 

Jizya , 499. 

Jndna, 454. 

Jnanandeva, 353, 354, 355, 356, 387, 
76(n), 

Jiidnadcva va Jndnesvara , 387, 75(n). 
Jndnadem , 386, 67 (n). 

Jndna-mdrga, 455. 

Jnanasrimitra, 417. 

Jndnesvara-darsana, 387, 76(n). 
Jhdnesvari, 353, 386, 67 (n). 

Jodhpur, 75, 76, 79, 82, 86, 88, 89, 108, 
386. 576fl 
Joga, 355. 

Jogama, 179. 

Jogin Dinakara, 472. 

Jojalla (Chahamana), 76, 86. 

Jomarasa, 171. 

Jonaraja, 103. 

Joshi, S. P., 388, 96(n). 

Jugadeva (Chahamana), 82. 
Jumaranandl, 320. 

Junaidl, 136. 

Jurbatan, 521. 

Jurjan, 1. 

Juwaini, 159. 

Jwamiul Hikay&t , 159, 11 (n). 
Jyeshfhakalasa, 307. 

Jyotirlsvara (Kavisekharacharya), 330. 
385. 

K 

Kabir, 337, 356. 615. 

Kablr Khan, 142. 

Kabul, 1, 2, 3. 

Kachar, 45. 

Kachara, 477. 


902 




INDfiii 



Kachan (Dimasa), 380. 

Kacharis, 44, 45. 

Kachchayana, 342, 343. 
Kachchhapaghatas, 18, 56-58, 109, 477. 
Kachchhavahas, 84. 

Kachwaha, 56. 

Kadamba~kula f 471, 96(n). 

Kadambalige 1000, 163, 165, 167, 195. 

Kadambari, 313. 

Kadambas, 75, 78, 163, 164, 167, 171, 172, 
175, 176, 177, 178, 180, 181, 182, 183, 
185, 186, 189, 191, 192, 229, 231, 281, 
301. 

Kadainbavasa, 104, 105, 106, 108. 
Kadaram, 239, 242, 243, 730, 732, 733. 
Kadavas, 231, 247, 248, 257. 

Kadiri, 750, 752, 753, 754. 

Kad parti, 198. 

Kackiddhesvara, 598. 

Kadur, 174, 183, 226. 

Kadvar, 586. 

Kafiristan, 18. 

Kahnaradeva, 29. 

Kaikhusrav, 155, 156. 

Kaikkolas, 251. 

Kailasa mountain, 570. 

Kailiiuanatha (temple), 612, 613, 614, 
615. 616, 676. 

Kailasa temple, 681, 682, 683. 

Kaiqubad, 156, 157, 158. 

Kaira, 79, 81. 

Kaithal, 139. 

Kaivalyadipikd, 335. 

Kaivartas, 28, 29, 30, 34, 47, 68, 476. 
Kaiyata, 319. 

Kajangala —See Kayangala. 

Kajjala, 102. 

Kak, R. C. t 699, 214(n). 

KakadadaKa (Kakadwa), 59. 
Kakaladeva (Paramara), 72. 

Kakaredlka (Kakeri), 60, 64, 146. 

See also Rewah. 

Kakatipura (Kakati-khandi* Kakati- 
pallika, Kakatiyapuram), 198, 223. 
Kakawin, 767-68. 

Kakatlya(s), 53, 65, 171, 172, 177, 179, 
187, 189, 192, 193, 195, 198-203, 207, 
223, 247, 248, 249, 258, 376, 444, 511. 
Kakayara-deaa, 65. 

Kakkalia, 189. 

Kakshdsanas , 561, 577. 

Kala, 412. 

Kalachakracharyas, 420. 
Kalachakra-yana, 412. 

Kalachuri(s), 25, 27 , 28, 32, 34. 36, 48, 
51, 52, 53, 58, 59, 60. 61-66, 67, 68, 
75, 83, 89, 92, 94, 102, 104, 161-184, 
185, 200, 204, 205, 206. 207 . 210, 212, 
213, 217, 218, 230, 231, 243 . 276, 402, 
421. 565. 

of Tripurl, 61-64, 443. 
of Ratanpur, 64-66. 
of Kalyana, 161-184. 

Usurpation, 179-182. 

Administrative Organisation of, 274- 
275. 

Kaladgi, 177. 


Calagam, 731. 


kalabha, 247. 

Kalambakam, 364. 

Kaliimukha(s), 403, 444. 

Kalanjara, 4, 18, 51, 58, 59, 60, 76, 95, 
107, 108, 122, 130, 147, 179, 310, 423, 
500, 565. 

Kalasa, 545, 549, 559, 571, 592. 

Kala&a (Lohara), 98, 299, 537, 549, 571. 
Kalasvarupakulakam, 348. 

Kalavatl, 305. 

Kaldvilasa, 305. 

Kalaviveka, 333. 

Kalegaon, 197. 

Kalesvara, 373. 

Kalhana, 16, 17, 101, 306, 307, 308, 337, 
384, 516, 517, 665. 

Kali, 664, 672. 

Kali Age, 474, 508. 

Kalidasa (general), 167, 168. 

Kalidasa (poet), 299, 303, 344, 396, 434. 
Kali-Kalidasa, 435. 

Kalikdla-Sarvajiia, 345, 435. 
Kalikala-Valmlki, 308. 

Kalikd Purdna, 44, 379. 

Kalindl, 32, 33, 37. 

Kalinga(s) (nagara) (Kalingam), 32, 33, 
36, 37, 38, 53, 63, 66, 68, 172, 178, 
180, 183, 186, 188, 197, 200, 204, 205, 
211, 212, 234, 235, 243, 244, 261, 262, 
263, 265, 266, 267, 268, 340, 516, 518. 
Kalingaraja, 64, 213. 

Kalingattupparani, 243. 

Kalin jar —See Kalanjara. 

Kaliya-naga, 436. 

Kali Yuga, 373. 

Kallang, 45. 

Kallesvara, 624, 625. 

Kallinatha, 324. 

Kalpadrukosa , 385, 31 (n). 

Kalpasutras, 512. 

Kalpataru, 333, 334, 336. 

Kalpi, 122. 

Kalsar, 586. 

Kalviolukkam , 364. 

Kalyana(i), 66, 70, 76, 161-184, 185, 197, 
198, 200, 215, 216, 219, 220, 240, 243, 
278, 281, 283, 307, 333, 510. 
Kalyanadevi, 40. 

Kalyanavati, 266. 

Kama (Kumayun), 426. 

Kamadeva, 172, 176, 301, 335, 348. 
Kamadevarasa, 182. 

Kamadhenu, 270, 284, 295, 319. 
Kamalabhava, 372. 

Kamaladevi (Kowladevi), 81. 
Kamalaraja, 61, 65, 213. 
Kamal-ul-Daulah Shlrzad, 95. 
Kamandaka, 271, 272. 

Kdmanfaki, 434. 

KdmandakZya-Nltisara , 316. 

Kamapala, 192. 

Kamamava VII. 207. 

Kamarupa. 30, 32. 34, 37, 38, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 123, 145 159 172. 

See also Assam. 

K&masdstra 479, 653. 


903 







The struggle for EMPtftfc 



Ramasutra, 330. 

Kamata, 45. 

Kamban, 245 , 362, 363. 

Kamba Ramdyana, 362, 363. 

Kambhoja, 526. 

Kambojas, 24. 

Karnbuja, 264, 266, 736, 743, 745, 746, 747, 
758, 761, 762, 764, 765. 

Karnes vara, 750. 

Kampaharesvara, 622. 

Kamikagania, 694 (n), 1, 3, 5, etc. 
Kampanas, 279 . 

Kampil, 150. 

Kamp(i)li, 167, 168, 169, 173. 
Kampilya-Mahavihara, 424. 

Kamrud— See Kamarupa. 

Karhsa, 300. 

Kanaibarshi, 44. 

Kanakanandideva, 430. 

Kanakasena Vadiraja, 301. 

Kanama, 176. 

Kanara, 229. 

Kanarese Literature, 388 (n), 108. 
Kanas, 222. 

Kanauj, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 30, 37, 50-55, 
56, 57, 62, 66, 83, 95, 105, 107, 109, 
119, 121, 135 147, 172, 194, 244, 298, 
311, 332, 333. 

KafichanadevI, 82, 83. 

Kanchl(puram), 63, 169, 174, 182, 200, 
201, 202, 203, 231, 232, 243, 244. 246, 

247, 248, 249, 252, 257, 317, 336, 612, 

613, 614, 615, 616, 617, 670, 676, 684. 

Kanda, 98. 

Kanda, 332, 334. 

Kandahar, 102. 

Kandahat —See Kanthakot. 

Kandai, 171. 

Kandalur-Salai —See Trivandrum. 
Kandarpa, 99. 

Kandarya Mahadeo, 489, 561, 564, 566, 
568, 569, 570. 572. 

Kandase(hva)ra, 65. 

Kandh, 378. 

Kane, P. V., 284, l(n), 295, l(n), 296, 
6(n), 333, 334, 384, 4(n), 385, 37, 38, 
40(n) etc., 386, 67(n). 

Kangalvas, 431. 

Kangra, 61, 62, 68, 102, 533, 663, 664. 
Kanha, 349, 361. 

Kanhadadeva (Chahamana), 88, 89, 91. 
Kanhara, 215, 217, 218. 

Kanhara II (Kannara), 218. 

Kanho Pathak, 387, 91 (n). 

Kanhargarh, 60. 

Kankagratoa, 38. 

Kannada (Karnafa), 35, 36. 74, 215. 219, 
220, 222, 223 , 278, 279, 280, 283, 318, 
327. 623. 

Kannada (Poetry), 362. 

Kannada language, 367. 

Kannada literature, 367. 

Kannama, 179. 

Kannanur, 231, 232, 233, 248, 257. 
Kannaradeva, 194. 

Kannegal 175. 

Kanoda, 593. 


<SL 


| Kanpur, 15, 52. 

Karhsa, 436. 

! Kantaiai, 263. 

Kantara, 65. 

Kanthakot, 20, 21, 23, 74. 

Kantipura, 46, 47. 

Kantiraja (Lohara), 99. 

Kanura-gana, 432. 

Kanva &akha, 334. 

Kanyakumari, 530. 

Kanyakubja —See Kanauj. 
Kapalakundala, 459. 

Kapalikas, 403. 

Kapardikadvipa, 172. 

Kapilar, 226. 

Kapilavastu, 421. 

Kappadi, 446. 

Karad (Karahataka), 176, 180. 
Karadi(kal), 173. 

Karala-ChdmundS, 459. 
Kara-Manikpur, 141, 142, 147, 195, 208. 
Kararuikutuhala, 329. 

Karanas , 279. 

Karan Dahariya, 562. 

Karas, 210. 

Karatoya, 43, 145. 

Karhad, 184. 

Karika, 322, 324, 325. 

Karkala, 430. 

Karikalachola, 198, 219, 220. 
KarUnnagar, 199. 

Karkaralagiri, 85. 

Karlcka II (Rashtrakuta), 161, 162. 
Karkota, 308. 

Karma , 271, 307. 

Karmagranthais), 346, 433. 

Karman f 346. 

Karman, 1. 

Karmanasa, 123. 

Karmanushpia napadd hati, 331. 
Karmasena, 102. 

Karmikas , 427. 

Karmopadesinipaddhati — See Pitri- 
dayita. 

Kama (Chaulukya), 68, 69, 75, 81, 82 
86, 173, 176, 310 , 320. 

Karna (Guhiia), 89, 91. 

Kama (Kaiachuri), 27, 34, 36, 51, 58, 62, 
63, 64. 67, 75, 94, 102, 172, 205, 274. 
Karna (Sevuna), 185, 197. 

Kama (Vaghela), 195. 

Kamaha, 101. 

Karoakesari, 31, 205, 206, 212. 

Karnapala (Guhiia), 91. 

Karnaparya, 372, 

Kamasundari ; 310. 

Kama takas (tas), 29. 35, 47-48, 53, 75 
163, 166, 177, 201, 211, 222, 238, 262 
670. 

Karnataka Bhdshd Bhushana, 371. 
Kttrpura-chart ta, 311. 

KarpuradevI, 104. 

Karra, 421. 

Karttavlrya I, 164. 

Karttavirya III, 180. 

Karttavlrya IV, 189. 

Karttikeya, 549, 652. 


P04 





tttaBt 




Karugodu (Kurugcxju), 194. 

Karuna, 405, 406, 407 L 408, 411. 
Karunakara (Tondaiman), 205, 243. 

Karwar, 521. 

Kdryachtntaka, 524. 

Kasahrada, 87, 106. 

Kashf al-Mahjub, 467. 

K&shll Khan, 140. 

Kashmir, 8, 12,13, 18, 53, 69, 97-103, 109, 
177, 298, 299, 300, 304, 305, 307, 309, 
313, 314, 315, 318, 319, 322, 323, 324, 
325, 351, 416, 511, 517, 649, 665, 666, 
667, 

Kashmir Saivism, 442. 

Kashmiri shrines, 576. 

Kashmirian temples, 584, 585, 63a. 
Kashthavata, 98. 

Kashii-pathar, 646. 

KasI— See Banaras. 

Kasia, 66. 

Kdsikd, 319, 335, 483. 

Kasili, 134, 148. 

Kasivisvanatha, 598. 

Kasivisvesvara (at Lakkundi), 626, 627. 
Kdswilv(i~nydya~chu$,driiani, 420, 

Kassapa, 341. 

Kasyapa, 319, 477. 

Kdsyapa-silpa, 694, 1, 3* 5(n) etc. 

Ka{aha, 731. 

Kdtantra , 320. 

Katantravistara, 320. 

Kdtantravrittipanjtkd, 320. 

Katasingh, 141, 160, 208. 

Katehr(iyas), 121, 135, 147, 150, 151. 
KathakaU dance, 671. 

Kathdkosa, 248, 486. 434. 

Kathdsarit&igara , 314, 316, 478. 

Kathiawar, 19. 21, 75, 76, 79, 81, 85, 185, 
581, 583, 587, 588, 589, 590, 593, 687. 
Katmandu, 46. 

Katudeva (Chahamana), 86. 

Katyayana, 291, 335. 

Kaumudi-Mitrdnanda, 311, 435. 
KaunqUnya, 309. 

Kauravas, 60, 64. 

Kausala. 526. 

Kausambi, 29, 36, 421. 

Kausuli, 556. 

Kauthuma, 331. 

Kautilya, 327. 

Kavadi-dvlpa, 176. 

Kavana, 181. 

Kaverl, 189. 219, 220, 231, 250, 257, 258, 
516. 731. 

Kavibrahma (poet-creator), 375. 
Kavidarpana , 327. 

Kavikalpadruma, 320, 

Kavir&}a, 300. 

Knvitdrkika$imh.a , 439. 

Kavya, 298-309, 337, 339, 341. 

KSvyannsamna, 323, 397. 

Kdvvaprakdsa, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 
332, 338. 

Kdtntdvalokana, 371. 

Kawlam (Quilon), 520. 

KayaL 487, 520, 

Kayangalaf-mandala), 29, 30. 

Kayasthas, 320, 477. 

Kay umars, 158. 

Kazipet, 198, 223. 

Kazwlnl, 734. 

Kedara, 326. 

Kedaranatha, 606. 

Kedaresvara, 545, 654. 

Keddah, 731, 732. 

Keith, A. B., 285, l,(n), 300, 384, 5, 6, 
7(n), etc. 

Kekind, 579. 

Kelga, 213. 

Kelhana (Chahamana), 56, 87, 89, 186. 
Kendra par a, 650. 

Kerala, 42, 172, 234, 238, 240, 246, 251, 
259, 263, 266, 310. 

Kereya Padmarasa, 370. 

Kerman, 133. 

Kern, H., 471, 110(n). 

Kesapay y a - Nayaka, 180. 

Kesarkeila, 211. 

Kesava, 166, 170, 320, 632. 

Kesavabhatta, 334. 

Kesavadeva, 44. 

Kesavagovinda, 178. 

Kesava Kasmirin, 441. 

Kesavamisra, 336. 

Kesavasena, 40, 41, 102. 

Kesavasvamin, 318. 

Kesa(va)jiya (General), 162, 163, 166. 
Kesava (Temple), 489. 

Kesi, 171. 

Kesideva, 66. 

Kesobasa, 354. 

Keta II, 424. 

Ketana, 377. 

Kettarasan, 170. 

Keyurabdhu-charita, 377. 
Kh^di-mandala, 37, 39. 

Khadpu, 46. 

Khafif, 21. 

Khaj(u)raho, 59, 122, 489, 550, 565, 566, 
653, 656, 657, 658, 60. 

Khajur Sagar 573. 

Khdkhard temple, 556. 

Khakhari, 555. 

Khaljis, 110, 123, 131, 133, 134, 152, 158, 
232, 260, 687. 

Khamba, 383. 

Khambayat, 468. 

Khammamett, 177, 

Kkampanakas , 283. 

Khana, 388, 102a (n). 
Khandana-khanfjiakhddya, 299, 336. 
Khandali, 525. 

Khandesh, 66, 70, 185, 189, 191, 195, 563, 
589. 

Khandeya Raya Raneya, 194. 
Khandoma, 593. 

Khan Hoa, 749. 

Khapuri, 537, 549. 

Kharatara-gachchha, 396, 432. 
Kharataragachchha-patpdvali, 109. 
Kharavana, 44. 

Kharia, 380. 

Khar-mil, 97. 

Kharod, 558, 574. 


906 







THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Khasa, 172, 181. 

Khasas, 47. 

Khasi, 357, 377. 

Khayaravalas, 49, 54. 

Khetfa, 88. 

Khem Chronicles, 741. 

Kherwari, 378. 

Kheta, 194. 

Khetaka— See Kaira. 

Khicbing, 651, 652. 

Khidrapur—See Koppam. 
Khijjihgesvari, 651. 

Khimi^I (Khimidi), 65. 

Khiva—See Khvarazm. 

Khizr Khan, 91. 

Khmers, 381. 

Khmer script, 761. 

Khojas, 473. 

Khokars— See Gakkhars. 

Kholesvara, 190, 191. 

Khottiga (Rashtratkuta), 73, 162. 
Khuddakasikkha, 342. 
Khul&sat-ul-Tavmrikh, 115, 2<n). 
Khurasan, 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 13, 15, 92, 95, 
97, 116, 117, 124, 125, 132, 260, 503, 
504 520 

Khusrav Khan, 196, 197. 

Khusrav Malik, 54, 64, 73, 83, 96, 97, 
109, 118. 

Khusrav Shall, 96. 

Khvaja Khizr, 473, 149(n). 

Khvaja MuTn-ud-dln, 467. 

Khvaja ‘Usm&n Harwani (of Christ), 
467. 

Khvarazm (Shah), 13, 97, 116, 117, 119, 
124, 125, 130, 131 132, 133, 137, 142, 
159. 

Khwaja Khaiir, 156. 

Khwaza Ayaz, 93. 

Khvber, 117. 

KIchaka, 375. 

K%chq,k.a-vadha, 300. 

Kidan, 96. 

Kielhom, F., 60, 62, 183, 4(n). 

Kilhapa (Guhila), 83. 

Ki-lo Ta-nung, 520. 

Kimmira (Kimida, Kimide, Kimide). 

181, 197, 205. 

Kihchakesvarx, 651. 

Kihga, 232. 

Kingdom of Vijaya, 737. 

Kira —See Kangra. 

Kiradu, 77, 87, 106, 108. 

Kirata (Indo-Mongoloid), 377. 

‘Kiratas*, 746. 

Kirafcikiipa, 77, 87. 

Kimt&rjuniya, 310. 

Kirghiz, 116. 

Kirtanakara, 356. 

Kirtanas , 355, 357. 

Kir tana-samproddya, 356. 

KIrti, 266. 

Kirtikaumudi, 309. 

Kirtinihsafika— See Nihsahkamalla. 
Kirtisrimegha, 262, 263. 

Kirtivarman, 443. 

Kirtti, 98. 


<SL 


KIrttidurga, 58. 

Kirttimukha, 541. 

Klrttipala (Chahamana), 73, 87, 89. 
KTrttipura, 46. 

KirttirSja (Chaulukya), 66, 74. 
Kirttiraja (Kachchhapaghata), 18, 56, 
66 . 

Kirttivarman II (Chalukya), 161. 
Kirttivarman III (Chalukya), 161. 
Kirttivarman (Chandella), 58, 63, 95. 
Kirttivarman (Guhila), 89. 

Kish, 521, 523. 

Kishkindha, 371. 

Kishkindhakanda, 313. 

Kishlu Khan, 143, 144. 

Kisukad, 70, 164, 166, 169, 173, 185, 187, 
188 194 

Kitabur Rihla, 160, 21 (n). 

Kitu—See Klrttipala (Chahamana). 
Kittura-sahgha, 432. 

Kiyamba, 383. 

Koch, 123, 380. 

Koches, 382. 

Kodagu, 378. 

Kodikkavi, 450. 

Kogali 500, 162, 164, 165, 167, 192, 195. 
Kohala, 325. 

Kokadeva (General), 72. 

Kokalla I, 64. 

Kokalla II, 58, 61, 164, 274. 

Kokkoka, 330. 

Kol, 357, 377, 378. 

Kol (Aligarh), 119. 

Kolami, 378. 

Kolar, 174, 228, 229, 245. 

Kolavatl, 211, 546. 

Kolhapur, 167, 168, 176, 184, 189, 241, 
319. 

Kollam— See Quilon. 

Kollapuram, 168. 

Kollatura-sahgha, 432. 

Kolfe, V. B., 387, 77(n), 78, 86 etc. 
Kollipakkai —See Kulpak. 

Ivoluru, 168. 

Kommayya, 168. 

Konaka-pagas , 539, 606. 

Konakas, 567. 

Konarak, 209, 519, 540, 553, 646, 652, 
654, 655. 

Kondapalli, 199. 

Kondraivendan, 364. 

Koiigoda, 211. 

Kongu (-de&a), 228, 229, 246, 258, 259. 
Konkan (Kohkana), 66. 67, 72, 77, 83, 
101, 162, 163, 164, 166, 171, 172, 176, 

177, 181, 182. 184, 186, 189, 191, 192, 

193, 194, 198, 227, 281, 295, 313, 521. 

Kont Gudi, 533. 

Kopal— See Koppam. 

Kopana— See Koppam. 

Koppam, 168. 169, 170, 241, 251. 
Kop-Peruhjihga, 202, 231, 247, 248-249. 
257, 258. 

Kop-Peruhjingaraja HI, 444. 

Koravi, 198. 

Korku, 378, 380. 

Komi, 212. 


906 





INDEX 


), 170, 237. 

27, 52, 53, 61, 64, 65, 75, 166, 
176, 192, 205 , 206, 209, 210, 211, 
212, 213, 214, 217, 218, 219, 220, 224. 
Kpsali, 556. 

Kosamba-mandala, 421. 

Koshthasara, 263. 

Kosi, 47. 

Kota, 378. 

Kota family, 424. 

Kotah, 85, 103, 121, 147. 

Kotatavl, 29, 36. 

Koti-homa, 738. 

Kot Kangra, 9, 10, 67, 94, 102. 

Kotlatfaka, 90. 

Koptams —See Kurrarris. 

Kottapdla , 275. 

Kra, 239. 

Kramadlsvara, 320, 347. 

Kramrisch, S., 577, 580, 652, 665, 672, 
695, 45(n), 697, 131, 141(n). 

Krishna (District), 181, 199, 200, 201, 
203. 

Krishna (River), 98, 99, 161, 165, 168, 
170, 171, 174, 175, 187, 229, 230, 240. 
Krishna Avadhuta, 384. 

Krishna (Bhagavan), 33, 299, 300, 301, 

H 302, 303, 309, 310, 348, 354, 355, 356, 

768. 

Krishnadas Kaviraja!, 675. 

Krishna (Governor), 194. 

Krishna (Gujarat), 76, 77. 

Krishna (Kalachuri), 179. 

Krishna II (Paramara), 72. 

Krishna-Vasudeva, 394, 402. 

Krishna (Yadava), 71, 191, 192-193, 196, 
202, 232, 306. 

Krishna II (Rashtrakuta), 161. 

Krishna III (Rashtraku^a), 161, 197. 
Krishna gupta, 49. 

Krishnamachariar, M., 300, 384, 7 r 8, 
10(n). 

Krishnamisra, 312, 384, 443. 
Krishnantaka, 768. 

Krishnapada, 440. 

Krishnaraja (Paramara), 72, 73, 74, 75, 
86, 90. 

Krishna-Tuhgabhadra, 597. 
Krishiiamjaya, 385, 24(n). 

Krishndxjana, 768. 

^ Kritajaya, 750. 

Kritanagara, 751. 

Krityakalpataru , 269, 284, 295, 298, 331, 
332, 333, 338, 385. 

Krita Yuga, 373, 525. 

Kriya, 454. 

Kriya-sakti, 456. 

Kshatrachiidarnam f 301. 

Kshatra-uama, 477. 

Kshatriyas, 269, 270, 273, 284, 509. 
Kshema (Officer). 90. 

Kshemaraja (author), 443. 

Kshemaraja (Chaulukya), 75, 76. 
Kshemasiihha (Guhila), 89. 
Kshemendra, 298, 299, 305, 309, 314, 315, 
322, 325, 326, 384, 420, 511. 
Kshlrasvaimn, 319. 



Kshitibhushanar —See Nripatibhush 
Kshitiraja (Lohara), 98. 

Kubera, 271, 272, 377. 512. 

Kublai Khan, 741, 748, 752, 754, 757, 
759, 760. 

Kudal (-sahgamam), 170, 171, 241, 
Kudamalai-nadu —See Coorg. 
Kudavolai, 252. 

Kudumbus , 252. 

Kudus, 610. 

Kuhram —See Guhram. 

Kujavatl, 29. 

Kuki, 357, 755. 

Kuki-Chin Meitheis, 383. 

Kuki dialects, 381. 

Kukkanur 30, 165, 624, 625. 
Kukkuta, 65. 

Kula, 291. 

Kulachand, 13, 14, 23. 

Kulachandra (General), 75. 

Kulaka, 396. 

Kula-Kundalini sakti, 414. 

Kulam (Quilon), 517. 

Kulancha, 478. 

Kulapanjis, 35. 

Kulasekhara, 310. 

Kulasekharaiikar 178. 

Kulasekhara Pan<Jy&> 245, 246. 
Kull, 517. 

Ku-lin (Malabar), 486. 

Ktdinisni (Kullnas), 38, 328. 
Kulluka, 269, 287, 295, 335, 338. 
Kulottuftga Chola I, 65, 68, 173, 174, 
204, 205, 206, 216, 217, 224, 240- 
242-244. 245, 246, 250, 256, 318. 
Kulottunga Choja II, 177, 178, 179, 
245. 

Kulottunga Chola III, 182, 186, 188, 
231, 246-347, 255, 256, 257, 265, 
516. 



198, 

241, 

206, 

200 , 

362, 


Kulpak, 165, 167, 168, 237. 

Kulu 606, 663, 664. 

Kumaon, 663. 

Kumara, 300. 

KumaradevI, 54, 422. 

Kumarapala (Pala), 31, 32, 47, 206, 433. 
Kumarapala {Chaulukya) (of Gujarat), 
64, 70, 72, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 82, 83, 
86. 87, 89, 178, 179, 180, 181, 284, 
308, 312, 345, 348, 349. 

Kumarapala (Kaurava), 60. 
Kum&rapdla-charita, 308, 345. 
Kumdrapdla-pratibodha, 345, 384. 
Kum&rasambnavam, 376. 

Kumarasena, 41. 

Kumarasimha (Guhila), 87, 89. 
Kumarasvamin, 324. 

Knmari]<d-kha.rida , 225. 

Kumarila, 291, 331. 

Kumarisimha, 219, 220, 221. 

Kumayun, 146. 

Kumbhakarna (Guhila), 91. 
Kumbhakonam, 255, 9(n), 670. 
Kumbharia, 579, 580, 582. 

Kumtapala (Paramara), 73, 83. 
Kumudachandra, 311, 432. 

Kundakunda, 348. 


907 







tHE STRUGGLE FOE EMPffife 


<SL 


undamarasa, 165, 166, 167. 
Kundamayan, 169. 

Kun Bang Klang, 760. 

Kundani, 232. 

Kundava, 204, 235, 236, 242, 445. 
Kiindi, 164, 189, 192. 

Kundur 500, 165. 

Kungas, 63. 

Kuntala, 63, 64, 163, 164, 166, 171, 172, 
173, 174; 179, 180, 181. 

Kuntala (Poet) 321. 

Kunu, 57. 

Kunwarpala, 55, 56, 120. 

Kupanapura —See Koppam. 

Kurari, 574. 

Kurchapuragachchha Chaityavasin, 432. 
Kui'god (Kurvgodu), 182. 

Kurkihar, 647. 

Kurmas, 85. 

Kurmavatara, 387, 76(n). 

Kurnool, 165, 173, 179, 187, 200, 201, 202, 
203, 220, 249. 

Kuftrams 251. 

Kuru, 172. 

Kurukesa, 430. 

Kurumbha, 526. 

Kurunegala, 267. 

Kurus, 310. 

Kuruspal, 216, 217, 218. 

Kunivatti, 628. 

Kushanas, 667, 677. 

Kusttvarapa, 82. 

Kusinara, 421. 

Kusuma-bhoga, 65. 

Kusumadeva, 304. 

Kutcjh, 20, 21, 74, 75, 81, 687. 
Kuvalayarruild, 389. 

KuvtvJayavatl, 303. 

Kuvi, 378. 

Kyanzittha, 757, 772. 


95, 206. 

Lakshmanaraja, 558. 

Lakshmana —See Lakkhana. 

Lakshmana (General), 182. ^ 
Lakshmana (Kachchhapaghata), 56. 
Lakshmana (Kaiachuri), 161. 
Lakshmana Acharya, 304. 
Lakshmanadeva (Lakhamadeva), 349. 
Lakshmanagani, 345. 

Lakshmana Kavi, 313. 

Lakshmanasena, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 49 
54, 126, 302, 303, 305, 317, 330, 334 
385, 436, 443. 

Lakshmanasimha (Guhila), 91. 
Lakshmanavati —See Lakhnawati. 
Lakshmeswax, 187. 

Lakshml, 300, 401, 672. 

Lakshmldeva, 189. 

Lakshmldevl, 230. 

Lakshrnldliara, 269, 270, 287, 295, 306, 
331, 332, 333, 338, 347, 350. 
Lakshmlkama (deva), 45. 
Lakshmikamadeva! (Thakuri), 46. 
Lakshmlkarna, 481. 

Lakshmimatl, 430. 

Lakshml-Naray ana, 593. 

Lakshmisura, 29, 36. 

Lakshmlsvara mandapa, 686. 
Lakshmivarman (Paramara), 71. 
Lakshya , 321. 

Lakulagama-Samaya, 444. 

Lakullsa, 444. 

Lala, 526. 

Lala Jas Raj, 473, 149(n). 

Lali Patalu (Songs of the Cradle), 373. 
Lalitadityal Muktaplda, 419, 634, 635. 
665. 

Lalitagiri, 650, 651. 

Lalitapattana, 46, 427. 

L alitaratnamald, 384, 21 (n). 
Lalita-Vigrahardja-ndtaka,, 83, 310. 


Lad Khan, 533. 

Laghubhdrata, 40. 

Laghukaumudi, 320. 

Laghu-kalika, 433. 

Laghv-Arhanniti~sastra, 269, 270, 327. 
Lahore, 53, 67, 92, 94, 95, 96, 97, 109, 
111, 118, 124, 130, 131, 132, 133, 136, 
138, 139, 140, 142, 144, 152, 153, 15o. 
Lake Ta-li, 759. 

Laknanapala, 50, 51. 

Lakhanasimha (Guhila), 91. 

Lakhanor, 141, 145, 207, 208. 

Lakhi Data, 467. 

Lakhisarai, 48. 

Lakhnawati, 40. 44, 123, 131, 133, 134, 
141, 142, 144, 145, 146, 153, 154, 155, 
•156, 157, 208. 

Lakhkhana 185. 

Lakkhana (author), 349. 

Lakkundi, 424, 

Lakshana, 325, 642. 

Lakshma, 175. 

Lakshmadeva (of Kashmir), 102. 
Lakshmadeva (Paramara), 29, 64, 68, 69, 


Lalitarnstara , 395. 

Lalitpur, 59, 108, 559, 575, 679. 

L amaism, 470, 39(n). 

Lamghan, 3, 4, 5. 

Lamri (Ilamuride£am), 239. 

Lanchhanas, 642. 

Language, 339, 347, 350-351, 357^358. 
Language and Literature, 297-397. 
Lanjika (Lanji, Lanji), 65, 194, 218. 
Lanka—See Ceylon. 

Laiikapura, 245, 264, 265. 

Lankesvara, 347. 

Lankesvara temples, 680, 682. 
Lankesvari (Lankavarttaka), 220. 
Lapha, 65. 

Lar. 493. 

Larger and Smaller Leiden plates, 424. 
Lassen, 360. 

Lasura, 195. 

Lata, 50, 66. 70. 71, 74, 77, 79. 80, 88, 162, 
171, 176, 178, 180, 181, 183, 189, 190, 
211, 389, 515. 

Latahrada, 87. 

Latakamelaka , 311. 

Later Chalukyas, 402, 623. 

Latiya, 322, 


908 




INDEX 



Lattalura (Lattalur, Lattanur, Lata- 
naura, Llatalora), 221, 222. 

Laukika, 291. 

Lauriya Nandangarh, 636, 637. 

Lavana (Lemna), 218. 

Lavanaprasada (Chaulukva), 79. 80. 
Lavanaprasada (Minister), 70, 190, 191. 
Lavanyakarna —See Luniga. 

Law (Pali works), 343. 

Law, B. C., 341. 

Lawah, 134, 148. 

Law and Legal Institutions, 287-296. 
North India, 287-290. 

South India, 290-295. 

Lead, 522. 

Leather-workers, 476. 

Leiden Grant, 730. 

Lenka Keta, 165. 

Leogryph, 644. 

Lepcha (of Sikkim), 381. 

Lepchas, 755. 

Levant, 521. 

Levi, S., 47. 

Lexicography, 317-319, 343. 

Life and Times of Sultan Mahmud of 
Ghazna , 23, 3(n). 

Ligor, 2239. 

Li ldcharitra y 354. 

UladeVi, 88. 

Lilavati, 261, 266. 

Lilavatl (Mathematics), 328, 336, 371. 
Limbaraja (Paramara), 73. 

Limboji Mata, 593. 

LinattnapakdsanA, 342. 
Linganga-sdmarasya , 448. 

Ungaraja, 540, 550, 551, 652, 654, 655. 
Lingayats, 180, 357, 367. 

Lingsugur—See Kisukad- 
Literary exercises, 490. 

Literary Pieces, 341. 
literature, 348-350. 

Lobu Tuwa, 526. 

Lochayui, 321. 

Lochavas, 416, 

Lodhravali. 328. 

Lodorva. 19. 

Logic, 513. 

Lohapaddhati (Lohasarvasva ), 328. 
Loharas, 12, 53, 97-101, 419. 

Loharin, 12, 18. 

Lohavara —See Lahore. 

Lohgar, 3. 

Lohkot —See Loharin. 

Loka Mahadevi, 236, 615. 

Lokdyatika (materialists), 476. 
Lokesvar, 266. 

Lo-hu, 760. 

Lokkundi (Lokkigundi), 186, 187, 625, 
626, 627. 

Lolimbaraja, 300. 

Longhurst, A. H., 698, 156(n). 

Loo collection, 670. 

Lopburi, 760. 

Lord’s Song, 356. 

Lothana (Lohara), 101. 

Loyamba, 383. 

Lubdb aUAlbab, 504. 


Lubb-ut-Tawarikh-i-Hind, 115, 2(n). 
Lubdhaka, 768. 

Ludrava —See Lodorva. 

Luna Vasahi, 580, 581, 582. 

Lundha —See Luitfiga. 

Luniga (Chahamana), 89. 

Luntiga (Chahamana), 73, 89. 

Lvo, 760. 

Lyail, 380. 

Lyrics, 302-304. 

M 

Ma‘bar, 259, 260, 480, 485, 497, 519, 520, 
521, 523, 527. 

Macauliff, 388, 96 (n)., 
Machchhendranatha, 564. 

Mackenzie collection, 227, 633. 
Madagascar, 493. 

Madagihal, 186. 

M§dalambike, 446. 

Mddalapdnjt, 212. 

Madamalingam, 239, 731. 

Madana (Officer), 90. 

Madana (Rastyrakuta, U.P.), 422. 
Madana Balasarasvati, 71, 310. 
Madanachandra (-pala) (Gahada- 
vala), 52, 62, 95. 

Madanadeva, 303. 

Madanamala, 487. 

Madanamanchuka, 313. 

Madanamanjari, 311. 

Madanapala (Lohara), 98. 

Madanapala (Pala), 32, 33, 37, 38, 52, 
308. 

Madanapala (Rashtrakuta), 50, 52. 
Madana-Tilaka, 367. 

Madanavarman (Chandella), 53, 59, 64, 
69, 76. 

Madanavatara, 394. 

Madnnpur, 108, 679. 
j Madaran. 208. 

Maddur, 230. 

Madhainagar Grant, 38, 39. 
Madhavabhatta, 300, 328, 331. 
Madhavatlrtha, 441. 

Madhuka(ma)rnava, 261. 

Madhura, 751. 

Madhurantaka, 216, 217. 

Madhurantakl, 241, 244. 

Madhusena, 41, 426. 

Madhusudana (Madhumathana) (Deva), 
42. 

Madhusudana (Madhuva) (General), 
168, 171. 

! Madhusudana Sarasvatl, 465. 

| Madhva, 337, 403, 441. 

Madhvavijaya , 441. 

Madhya Bharat, 171. 

Madhyaddsa, 389, 421. 

Madhyageha, 441. 
Madhyamaka-ratna-pradipa, 415. 
Madhyamandara, 441. 

Madhya Pradesh, 61. 64, 69, 189, 192, 194, 
201, 214, 352, 511. 

) Madiraja, 180, 446. 


909 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Madras, 63, 162, 189, 201, 203, 247, 251, 
252, 610, 675. 

Madura, 63, 201, 233, 234, 238, 245, 246, 
256, 259, 260, 264, 265, 266, 267, 517, 
669, 670, 671. 

Maduvanan, 170. 

Magadha, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 38, 
47, 49, 52, 53, 54, 61, 123, 172, 177, 
180, 181, 197, 313, 357, 413, 516, 526. 
Magadhi, 322, 345, 346, 347. 
MagadhI-Apabhrarhsa, 357. 
Magadhlbhasa, 340. 

M&gadhl Prakrit, 357. 

Magana, 47. 

Magahi, 357, 358. 

Maggar Fir, 468. 

Magha (Magha), 266, 267. 

M§gha (poet), 299. 

MahTibala, 346, 

MahSban, 13, 14, 55. 

Mahdbhdrata, 226, 271, 272, 273, 299. 
301, 307, 310, 316, 337, 356. 364, 371, 
435, 512. 

Mahdbhdrata (in Tamil), 362. 
MaMbharata (in Telugu), 374. 
Mahdbhdshya , 319. 332. 513. 
Mahabhavagupta I, 214. 
Mahabhavagupta III, 209, 210, 211. 
MaMbodhi, 469, 10(n). 

Mahabodhivamsa—See Bodhivamsa. 
Mahabodhi monastery, 27. 
Mahdchinabhava, 522. 

Mahada, 220, 221. 

Mahadai’sa, 354. 

Mahadandanayaka, 251. 

Mahadeva (KL&katiya), 181, 187, 200. 
Mahadeva (Poet), 309, 320, 324, 
Mahadeva (Yadava), 191, 193-194, 197, 
202, 223, 232, 335. 

Mahadeva temple, 532, 557, 658. 
Mahadevi Akka, 368. 

Mahd\ana&, 280, 283, 420, 511. 

Mahakala, 658, 684. 

Mahakassapa, 342. 

Mahakavya, 298-302, 307, 322, 337. 
Mahakosala, 656. 

Mahakumara Ajayasimha, 64. 
Mahakutesvara, 597. 

Mahalakshmi, 184. 

Mahamandadeva, 55. 

Mahdmakham, 494. 

Mahdmdtya, 274, 275. 

Mahana (Guhila), 89. 

Mahanadi, 220, 237, 562. 

Mahanama, 340. 

Mahanasimha —See Manavasimha. 
Mahdndtaka , 312, 

Mahanubhava 353. 354, 387. 
Mahdnubhdi>ahchd dchdradharma, 387, 
78 (n). 

Mahdnubhdvdiichem tattvajndna, 387, 
77(n). 

Mahdnubhdva-Pantha, 387. 78(n). 
Mahdnubhdviya Mardtht Vdhmaya, 387, 
81 (n). 

Mahapancharatras, 512. 

Makdpishta, 578, 


Mahdpurdna , 434. 

Mahapurushanirnaya , 437, 
Mahdrajaputra, 274, 276. 

Maharajasimha —See Kop-Perunjihga. 
Maharashtra, 53, 295, 333, 335, 351. 352, 
353, 354, 355, 356, 357. 
Maha-Rash^rakuta, 221. 

Maharashtri, 347. 

Mahdrasktriya Santa-Kavi-Kavya - 
suchi, 286, 66(n), 

Maharashtra Sdrasvata , 386, 69(n). 
Maharashtracha vasShatakala, 386, 
67(n). 

Mahasabhct, 252, 253, 254, 282, 283, 444. 
Mahasami, 342. 

Mahasena, 340, 435. 

Mahasivagupta (Yayati) I, 27, 61, 210, 
224. 

Mahasivagupta II, 209, 210, 224. 
Mahasivagupta III—See Chai^dlliara. 
Mahatmya(s), 300, 379. 

Mahasumati, 420. 

Mahattaka, 275. 

Mahattarddhikdrins , 275. 

Mahavamsa, 33, 268, 2(n), 286, 106(n), 
340, 342. 

Maha-Viharas (or Universities), 416. 
Mahavlra, 344, 294, 

Mahdvira-charita (-chariu), 344, 349. 
Mahdvira-stava, 346. 

Mah&yana, 304, 400, 402, 405-6, 407, 413. 
Mahayana Buddhism, 358. 

Mahayana Buddhists, 359. 
Mahbubnagar, 201. 

Mahdi Husain, 160, 21 (n). 

Mahendra (Chahamana), 74, 86. 
Mahendra V (Ceylon), 235. 

Mahendra VI (of Kalihga), 265. 
Mahendra (Thakuri )—See Indra. 
Mahendradatta, 754. 
Mahendramahgalam, 231. 

Mahendra mountains, 205. 
Mahendravarman (Vichitrachitta). 610, 
611. 

Mahendra-varman, 748. 

Mahesamurti of Elephants, 673. 
Mahesara Suri, 350. 

Mahesvara, 317, 602. 

Mahl, 80, 190. 

Mahlchandra (-tala, -yala). 51. 
Mahikantha Agency (Mahiyadadesa), 
349. 

Mahima. 194. 

Mahimabhatta, 321. 

Mahipa, 318. 

Mahlpaia, 691. 

Mahlpaia (Chaulukya), 78. 

Mahlpaia (Kachchhapaghata), 56. 
Mahlpaia (Paramara ) — See Dhruva- 

hhata. 

MahTpala I, 24-26, 27, 31, 61, 238, 415, 
416. 

Mahlpaia II, 28, 308. 

Mahlpati, 387, 94(n). 
j Mahishasuramardini, 652. 

Mahlak Deo (Paramara), 72, 
f Mah Malik, 504. 


910 







INDEX 



Mahmud, 495, 499, 513, 520, 565, 655. 
Mahmud (Governor), 51, 58, 68, 94, 95. 
Mahmud (Ghuri), 125. 

Mahmud (Sultan), 3, 5-23, 50, 56, 58, 
67, 74, 81, 92, 94, 97, 116, 117, 118, 
128. 

Mahmudis, 96. 

Mahmud Shah, 44. 

Mahoba, 59, 76, 107, 108, 122, 146, 443, 
575, 657. 

Mahotsavanagara, 656-57. 

Mahur, 354. 

MailaladevI, 176. 

Mailigideva, 199. 

Mainamati Hills, 41. 

Maisur, 576, 627. 

Maithili, 357, 358. 

Maitkili-Kalyana , 435. 

Maitrapada, 417. 

Maitreya, 341. 

Majapahit, 752, 753. * 

Majdud, 93. 

Major, K. H., 529, 71(n). 

Majumdar, B., 471, 77(n). 

Majumdar, N. G., 469, 4(n). 

Majumdar, B. C., 48, 129, 8(n), 255, 
3(n), 507, 149(n). 

Makara, 540. 

Makaranda, 336. 

Makhdum-i-Jahaniyan Jahan Gasht, 
468. 

Makhdum Lai Shahbaz Qalandar. 
468. 

Malabar, 63, 166, 172, 180, 251, 518, 520, 
521, 522, 748. 

Malacca, Strait of, 734. 

Maladeva (Chahamana), 91, 92. 
Maladharigachchha, 345. 

Maladhari Hemachandra Suri, 346, 
434. 

Maladharin Devaprabhasuri, 301, 434. 
Malahara, 68. 

Malaiyan\ans, 236, 247. 

Malaiyur, 239, 731, 732. 

Malaprabha, 446. 

Malas . 453. 

M&latfmadhava, 311, 459. 

Malava, 13, 16, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 63, 
66-72. 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 
82, 84, 85, 86, 90, 100, 113, 134, 146, 

163. 171, 172, 173, 175, 178, 180, 182, 

186, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 198, 206, 

295, 307 , 348, 349, 389, 658, 674, 687. 

MalavyadevT, 35. 

Malaya, 262. 

Malaya hills, 303, 517. 

Malayalam, 512, 515. 

Malay Peninsula, 236, 239. 493, 731, 
732, 733, 734, 735, 737, 739. 
Malayasiihha, 423. 

Malayasundarl, 346. 
Malayasxindari-kathtL, 346. 
Malayavarmadeva. 159. 

Malayavarman, 56, 57. 

Malayu (Jambi), 732, 751, 752. 

Malda, 32, 123. 

Maldives, 235. 237. 


<SL 


Malepas, 166. 

Maleya, 526. 

Malhi— See Madanachandra. 

Malik Altuniya, 138. 

Malik Hisam-ud-dln Aghul Bak, 122. 
Malik ‘Izz-ud-dln Hussain, 95. 

Malik Kachhan, 157, 158. 

Malik-Naib Kafur, 196, 203, 232, 260. 
Malik Nasir-ud-dm Muhammad Shah, 
55. 

Malik Nusrat-ud-din, 57. 

Malik Nusrat-ud-din Tayasal, 57, 60, 
135. 

Malik Saif-ud-dln, 41. 

Malik Shah, 97. 

Malik Shah (Saljuq), 116, 117. 

Malik Surkha, 157, 158. 

Malik Tuzaki. 157. 

Malik Yaghrash Firuz— See Jalal-ud- 
din Firuz. 

Malik Ziya-ud-dln, 109, 110. 

Malkhed— See Manyakheta. 

Malla, 192. 

Mallani, 19, 76, 87, 88. 

Mallarjuna (Lohara), 101. 

Mallas, 46. 

Malla Setti, 192. 

Mallaya, 60. 

Malleya—Nayaka, 189. 

Mallideva, 188, 191. 

Mallideva Choja-Maharaja, 183. 
Mallikamakaranda , 435. 

Mallikarjuna (author), 372. 
Mallikarjuna (of Kalyana), 177. 
Mallikarjuna (of Konkana), 72, 77, 83, 
177. 

Mallikarjuna temple, 615, 628. 
Mallikarjunabhatt&, 377. 

Mallindtha-charita, 345, 349. 

MaUinatha Purdna, 370. 

Mallugi, 197. 

Malto, 378. 

Malwa, 433, 434, 510, 518, 519. 

also see Malava. 

Mamakham, 494. 

MamalladevI, 298. 

Mamallapuram, 612, 670, 682. 

Mamluk Sultans, 130-160, 503, 504. 
Mam aka, 422. 

Mamma, 307. 

Mammata, 299, 321, 322, 323, 324, 332, 
338, 385. 

Mamvani, 602. 

Manabharana, 261, 262, 263. 

Manadeva, 46. 

Manakkavaram, 731. 

also see Nicobars. 

Mdnasdra, 329. 

Mdnasolldsa, 178, 183, 298, 329, 338, 352, 
360, 479, 507, 510, 516, 518, 528, 529. 
Manavachakam-kadandar, 451. 
Manavasimha (Chahamana), 88, 89. 
Manavira', 203. 

Mdnbhdva kxm Bauddka , 387, 76(n), 
Manbhum, 606. 

Mancharma, 377. 

Mantfa II, 206. 


911 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Maiidalafs), 275, 400, 406. 

Manijialams , 251. 

Manljtalesvara , 278, 280, 281, 283. 
Mandali, 172. 

Mandalika, 275. 

Mantfalika (Paramara), 73. 

Mandapa, 433, 557, 571, 575, 613, 614, 
616, 618, 619, 620, 621, 622, 623, 624. 
Mantfapachaia, 434. 

Mandara, 206, 212. 

Mandasor, 656. 

Mantfavyapura— See Mandor. 
Mandawar, 134. 

Mandor, 87, 88, 656, 660, 662. 
Mandovara, 591. 

Manditala-gachchha, 432. 

Mandu (Mantfapa), 66, 72, 85, 171, 658. 
Mahgalaraja, 56. 

Mangaliveda (Mangalvedha, Mangala- 
veshataka). 179, 186, 442. 
Mangalore, 518. 

Mdne(p)verggade, 278, 279. 

Manglina, 84, 159. 

Mangu, 143. 

Manipura Pur&na, 383. 

Manipuri, 381. 

Manikkavachakar, 245, 450, 452, 672. 
Manikyachandra, 322, 434. 
Manikyanandi, 348. 

Manikya Suid, 301. 

Maniratna Suri, 433. 

Manlyane, 430. 

Manjarabad, 194. 

Manjhawan, 15. 

Mankesvara temple, 603. 

Mankha(-ka), 299, 317, 323. 
Manmathonmathana , 385, 24(n). 
Mannandlppai, 168. 

Mannargudi, 437, 

Manneyas , 281, 283. 

Manual of Indian Buddhism , 471, 

110(n). 

Manoramd-charita, 345. 

Manoratha, 420. 

Mansur, 5. 

Mansurah, 21. 

Manfapam , 613. 

Mantena (Manthanya, Mantrakuta), 
199, 200. 

Mantra(8), 400, 406. 

Mantra-nayd , 406. 

Mantra-ydna, 406. 

Mantrichud&mani, 281. 

Mantripradhdna, 274. 

Manu (Manu-smriti), 269 . 270, 271, 
272. 287 . 289, 328, 331, 335. 
Manuals, Pali, 342. 

Manuma Gandagopala, 200, 202. 

M anusdstra , 512. 

Mdnushi Buddha, 411. 

Manufikd, 295. 

Manvarthamuktcvalx , 295. 335. 
Manyakhefa, 161, 163, 167, 185, 237. 
Mappapoalam, 239, 731. 
Marai-in&na-sambandhar, 366. 450. 
Marakata' - nangakaja - Sthanottung- 
gadeva, 754. 


<SL 


Marana, 377. 

Maranjamura, 210, 211. 

Marasimha (Silahara), 176. 

Marasimha II (Ganga), 161, 162. 
Maratha, 184, 278, 283, 352. 

Marathi, 351-356. 

Marathi bhashechd kalanimaya , 386, 
67(n). 

Marathi bhashd, udgama v a vikdsa , 
386, 67(n). 

Marathi Catalogue (Tanjore Library), 
386, 66 (n). 

Mardthi-Grantha-suchi, 386, 65(n). 
Mardjht Vdnmayacha Itihdsa, 387, 
94(n). 

Maravatfas, SO, 190. 

Maravarman Kulasekhara Pandya, 
‘232, 259-260, 267. 

Maravarman Sundara Pandya I, 231, 
246, 256-257. 

Maravarman Sundara Pandya II, 248, 
257. 

Maravarman Vikrama Pandya, 259. 
Maravijayottuhga-varman, 236, 239, 

730. 

Marayan, 170. 

Marbalatlrtha, 229. 

Marco Polo, 202, 258, 259, 260 , 286, 470, 
497, 509, 517, 518, 519, 521, 522, 523, 
527, 528, 529, 751. 

Margi, 373, 374. 

Maribagh (old Rewa State), 561, 564, 
565. 

Marigala, 93. 

Markandeya, 347. 

Mdrkanijleya-Purdna (in Telugu), 377 
Markapur, 165. 

Markuta, 664. 

Maroth, 84, 85. 

Marshall, J., 638. 

Martanda, 584, 635. 

Maru, 389. 

Manila, 367. 

Marulasiddha, 445. 

Maru(-sthall) man<]iala f 73, 82, 89, 177. 
Marv. 2. 

Marwar, 66, 73, 74, 75, 78, 106, 108, 277, 
687. 

Masavadi. 165, 188. 

Maski, 166. 237, 238. 

Masrur (Kangra), 605, 663 , 664. 
Mastaka, 536. 

Mastiial , 495. 

Mas'ud I, 92, 93, 94. 

Mas*ud II, 94. 

Mas‘ud III, 50, 95, 141, 142. 

Mas‘ud bin Sa*d bin Salman 503. 
Masunjdesam— See Bastar. 

Mdtanqalila, , 329. 

Matangas, 82. 83, 101, 102, 312. 
Matangesvara temple, 614. 

Matar5m, 751. 

Mathanadeva (Rashtrakuta), 28, 29, 31, 
32, 34, 54, 68. 

Mathanasimha (Guhila), 89. 

Matharas. 209. 

Mathematics, 328-329, 511. 


912 



INDEX 



Mathura, 13, 14, 55, 60, 74, 146, 196, 197, 
W, 653, 655, 658. 

Mathurasahgha, 349. 

Matisagara, 320. 

Matrigupta, 325. 

Matrika, 393, 395* 

Matnkd-chaupai, 395. 

Matsya Purtina, 330. 

Matsyendranatha, 352. 

Mattamayura Sect, 573. 

Mau, 59. 

Maudud, 93, 94. 


Maulung, 44. 

Maurya period, 357. 

Mavakasina(va), 65. 

Mawarau-n nahr, 13, 15. 
Mayagalasimha, 29, 43. 

Mayamata, 329, 694, 1, 7, 8(n) etc. 
Mayanalladevi, 75. 

Mayideva, 185- 
Mayirudi^^hi, 239, 731. 

T Vffly itt?. 296, 8(n). 

Mayukha, 333. 

Majrurbhanja, 425, 646, 649. 650, 651. 
Mayuravarman, 167. 

Mazhar Wali (of Trichinopoli), 469. 
Mech, 380. 

Meda(s), 199, 476. 

Medak, 195, 203. 

Medap&ta, 72, 78, 79, 85, 58. 

See also Mewar. 

Medhatithi, 269, 332, 335, 484. 
Medicine, 328, 512. 

Medinlkara, 318, 319. 

Mediterranean, 116. 

Meerut, 118, 147. 

Megasthenes, 493. 

Megha, 320. 

Meghachandra Traividyadeva, 430. 
Meghaduta , 303, 434. 

Meguti temple, 533, 615. 

Mehara, 42. 

Meithai, 381. 

Mekong, 760. 

Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey 
of India , 160, 40(n). 

Menakfi, 768. 

Mendis, G. C. t 268, 12(n). 

Mers, 584. 

Meru. 78. 

Merukandara, 261. 

Merutuhga, 64, 75, 107, 275. 

Merv, 116, 124. 

Mesopotamia, 523. 

Metrics, 325-327, 343. 

Mevilimbangam, 731. 

Mewar, 78, 81, 87, 89-92, 109, 147. 

See also Medapata. 

Mewat(is), 148, 150. 

M«ykanda-deva, 450. 

‘Mhaimbhat. 354. 

Mhers, 79, 120. 

Miani, 589. 

Miapur, 147. 

Middle Indo-Aryan. 378, 390. 

Middle-Ja vanese, 767. 

Midnapore, 25. 


Mikir Speeches, 381. 

Milhana, 328. 

Military exercises, 490. 

Mills, 380. 

Ml rnamsd, 240, 291, 331, 332, 333, 335, 
460, 511, 512, 513. 

Mimdmsd Prahdsa, 385, 52(n). 
Minhaj-ud-dln, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 85, 
141, 208, 503. 

Miraj, 184. 

Mirand, 6. 

Mirasena, 350. 

Mir’at-i-Jahan-Numd, 115, 2(n). 

Mir Khvand, 159, 5(n), 

Mirzapur, 55, 655. 

Mishmis, 755. 

Misra, B., 224, 24(n). 

Misra, Parthasarathi, 291. 

Mit&kshard, 177, 293, 295, 296, 331, 332, 
333, 334, 335. 

Mithila, 29, 32, 35, 37, 40, 47-48, 53, 61, 
222, 238, 332, 335. 

Mitliuna, 653. 

Mithuna couples, 644. 

Mitra, 261, 262. 

Mitra, R. L., 469, 5(n), 695, 33(n). 
Mitradeva, 46, 

Mitramisra, 291, 331. 

Mitrananda, 311. 

Mlechchha, 399. 

M. M. Potdar Commemoration 
Volume , 129, 8(n). 

Modem Indo-Aryan, 360. 

Modhera, 593, 594, 662. 

Modi, 335. 

Moggallana, 342, 343. 
Moqgalldyanapanckikd, 343, 

Moliansingh, 388, 96(n). 
Mohardjaparajaya , 31?, 487, 489, 506. 
Mokalji’s temple, 661. 

Moksha , 346. 

Mokshakaragupta, 416, 518. 

Monaragala, 263. 

Monghvr, 31, 32, 49, 52, 146. 

Mongols, 117, 132, 133, 136, 137, 139, 
141, 142-144, 150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 
156, 157, 503, 677, 748. 

Mongoloids, 357. 

Mon-Khmer, 357. 

Monolithic ratlins, 610. 

Mon(s), 755, 756, 757, 758. 

Moon, 271, 272. 

Mopur, 374. 

Moraes, G. M., 471, 96<n). 

Moropant, 388, 98 (n). 

Morphology, 339. 

Mottaiyan, 169. 

Motupalli, 201, 202, 516. 

Mount Kavi, 751. 

Mpu Sedah, 768. 

Mramma, 755. r 

Mrichchhakatika. 311, 487. 
Mrigankadatta, 307. 

Mrigavati-charitra, 434. 

Mrinalavafci, 163. 

Mritahg Mahadeo. 573. 

Mrityunjaya Mahadeva, 573. 


S. 


018 









THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


MSS. Catalogue of the Bharat Itihasa 
Samsodhak Manual, 386, 66 (n). 
MSS.-illustrations, 676, 679. 
MSS.-paintings, 688. 

Mubarak, 196. 

Mudgere, 226. 

Mudikond&n (Mudikond-Cholapuram), 
249, 255. 

Mududdhikrita, 276. 

Mudr&rdkshasa, 311. 

Mudms , 406. 

MwLritokumiidachandra, 311. 

Mudugur, 201. 

Mudukakere (Mu^akaru) (Mudakkaru), 
169, 170. 

Mugadai, 232. 

Mugali, R. S., 388, 107(n). 
Mugdhabodha, 320, 335. 

Mugdhopadesa * 305. 

Mughis-ud-dln —See Tughril. 
Muhammad al-Husaini, 469. 

Muhammad (of Delhi), 153, 155, 156. 
Muhammad (of Ghazni), 92, 93. 
Muhammadan (s), 232, 233. 

See also Muslims. 

Muhammad Bahllm, 95. 

Muhammad Bakhtyar Khaljl, 39, 40, 43, 
44, 49, 207. 

Muhammad bin Sun, 10. 
Muhammad-ibn-Qasim, 424. 
Muhammad-i-Sheran, 207. 

Muhammad Tughluq, 48, 233. 
Mu‘izziya, 504. 

Mu‘izz-ud-din Ball ram, 138, 139, 141. 
Mu‘izz-ud-dln Muhammad Ghurl, 54, 
56, 78, 87, 97, .106, 108, 109, 110, 111, 
112, 113, 115, 117, 118, 119, 120, 122, 
124, 125, 128, 130, 148, 309. 
MukhaUngam, 66, 205, 224, 267. 

Mukha-mandapa, 536. 

Mukherji, P.C., 695, 57(n). 

Muktabai, 353, 387. 

Muktdphala, 320, 335. 

Muktesvara, 540, 541, 542, 545, 546, 556, 
614, 655. 

Mukundaraja, 352, 386. 

Mukundasena, 47. 

Mukhya, 525. 

Mulabastikd, 427, 

Mulabhadra, 525. 

Muladeva, 56. 

Mulagabhdro, 580. 

Mulaparishat , 282. 

Mula-prakriti , 448. 

Mularaja, 427. 

Mularaja I (Chaulukya), 67, 162, 163, 
164 443 

Mularaja II (Chaulukya), 70, 75, 78, 89, 
106, 109, 118. 

Mula-sahgha! Kundakundanvaya, 431. 
Mulasikkha , 342. 

Mulastambha , 352. 

Mulasthana (Multan), 518. 

Mulay, M. A., 387, 94(n). 

Mulgund (Mulgunda 12), 161. 


Multan, 7, 8, 10, 19, 21, 93, 94, 95, 106, 
110, 111, 117, 124, 131, 133, 136, 140, 
.142, 143, 144, 153, 156, 350, 467. 

Mulugunda Sinda Jatarasa, 163. 

Mummadamba, 202. 

Mummadi-Choda(la), 205, 244. 

Mummuni (Mamvaniraja), 171, 183, 313, 
602. 

Munda, 357. 

Mundari, 378, 380. 

Mundher, 20. 

Muni Bhava, 589. 

Munichandra, 301, 346. 

Muniratna, 302. 

Munisuvrata-charita, 302. 

Munisuvrata$iwmi-ch(irita, 345. 

Munja (Paramara), 66, 163, 164, 197, 
275, 435. 

MunjunidevI, 664. 

Munrukai-mahasenai, 251. 

Munshi, K. M. f 23,11 (n), 396, 3<n). 

Mupparasan, 171. 

Muralas, 63. 

Murari Kesava, 188. 

Murshidabad Baluchar Sadis, 675. 

Musangi (Muyahgi)— See Maski. 

Mushika kingdom—Sep Travancore. 

Mushikavmhsa, 308, 529. 

Music, 329. 

Musings of Basava, 388, 104(n). 

Musk, 517. 

Musk-deer, 517. 

Muslim(s), 2, 3, 5, 6. 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 
15, 17 18. 21, 22, 23 . 26, 39, 40, 41, 42, 
43, 44, 48, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 59, 
61, 62, 64, 67, 71, 72, 74, 78, 79, 80, 81, 
82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 90, 91, 94, 95, 
101-102, 106, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 
113, 114, 115, 117, 121, 124, 125, 132, 

135, 145, 146, 152, 159, 190, 191, 192, 

194, 195, 196, 203, 207, 208, 212, 258, 

259, 260, 284, 297, 298, 312, 320, 333, 

350, 356, 398, 403, 404, 513, 665, 666, 

674. 

States in the East, 116-117. 

See also Muhammadan (s). 

“Mutfili”, 485, 519, 520. 

Mutgi, 185, 186. 

Mutnurai , 364. 

Muvar-Ula, 364. 

Myamma, 755. 

Mysore, 162, 166, 1&9, 175, 181, 186, 188, 

189. 192, 194, 215, 226, 228, 229, 240, 

258. 283, 372, 404, 525, 624, 629, 631, 

632, 668. 

N 

Nachna Kuthara, 533, 557. 

Nadndur Animal, 439. 

Nadapada, 417. 

Ndda-perggade, 279. 

Nadduia—See Nadol. 

Nadi(y)a, 37, 39. 40, 123, 145, 207 

Nadol, 57. 66, 69, 73. 74, 75, 76, 7<, 81, 
82, 86-87, 88, 89, 90, 106, 108, 109, 
121, 186, 277. 


914 




misr/?y 


iNt>toc 




Nodus. 251, 252, 279, 283, 516. 
Nagabhartri VishnubhaUa, 334. 
Nagabhata II, 577. 

Nagachandra, 370, 371. 

Nagadeva (Chaulukya), 74. 

Nagadeva (General), 162, 171, 172. 
Nagadevacharya, 353, 354. 

Nagadevi, 307. 

Nagaditya, 167. 

Nagahrada, 90, 91. 

Nagapala (Guhila), 91. 

Nagapala (Lohara), 100. 

Nagapaftana (Negapatam), 730. 
Nagapura —See Nagaur. 

Nagar, 163, 177, 516. _ 

Nagara (Style), 530, 531, 532, 534, 53o, 

536, 542, 547, 555, 556, 562, 563, 567, 

578, 588, 590, 591, 592, 598, 600, 601, 

603, 604, 606, 607, 608, 609, 623, 624. 

Ndgara sikhara, 586. 

Nagaraja, 304. 

Nagari, 641. 

Nagarjuna, 417. 

Nagar(a)khand, 180, 188. 

Nagarams, 252. 

Nagarjuna (Chaharriana), 106, 107. 
Nagarjuna (8§il&hara), 171, 313. 
Nagarjunadeva, 45. 

Nagarkot —See Kot Kangra. 
Nagara-Kritagama, 751. 

Nagas (Ndgavarhsls), 31, 65, 104, 172, 
198, 215, 237, 307, 313. 

Nagas, 755. 

Naga speech, 380. 

NagavarmacMrya, 367. 

Nagaur, 95, 108. 

Nagda, 134. 

Na(g)husha —See Mahabhavagupta III. 
Nagod, 55. 

Nagpur, 69, 186, 194. 

Nahada Ranas, 433. 

Nahara, 88. 

Nahrwala —See A^ahillapataka. 
Naigamas , 524. 

NalkidevI, 78. 

Nainar, S. M. H., 494, 507, 145(n), 152, 
161, etc., 528, 15(n), 17, 19 etc., 529, 
69 (n). 

Naishadha~charita f 54, 298, 299. 
Naishadhlya , 323, 337. 

Najm-ud-dln Abu Bakr, 139. 

Nakas, 31. 

Nakhistan, 2. 

Nakhon Sri Thaittmarat, 760. 

Nakula, 330. 

Nakula and Sahadeva rathas , 610. 

Nala, 299, 309. 

Nala (town), 46. 

Nalanda, 26, 34, 647, 650, 730. 

Nala Venbd, 363. 

Nalapura —See Narwar. 

NaUvildsa. 309, 435. 

N&ldyira Prabandham, 361. 
NaUg&vundas, 279. 

Nallura. 177. 

Nalgonda. 198, 199, 201, 202, 203. 

Nalvali , 364. 


I Nalanda-mahdinJmra, 421. 

Namadeva, 354, 355, 356, 387, 76(n). 

1 Namamala, 318. 

Ndmamalikd , 317. 

| Name. Patfiak, 387, 91 (n). 
Namilura-sangha, 432. 

Nampillai, 440. 

Namarupaparichchheda , 342. 
Nambi-Andar-Nambi, 365. 

Nairn, 93. 

Ndnddesa-Tisaiydyirattu Annnurruvar, 
525. 

Nanadesis, 521, 526. 

Nanak, 337, 355, 675. 

Nanaka, 302. 

! Ndiiarthariuiv<i$(L'thkshepa f 318, 338. 
Ndnarthasamgraha, 318. 

Non-Chao, 759, 760. 

Nanda, 436. 

Nandana, 11, 12, 23, 133, 335. 

Nanda vail, 65. 

Nandi, 616, 619, 624. 

Nandi, 310. 

Nandimath, S. C., 367, 388, 106(n). 
Nandipuram, 255. 

Nandi-sahgha, 432. 

Nandisena, 327. 

Nandurbar, 195. 

Nahgili, 174, 228, 229. 

Nangrahar, 93. 

Nanjiyar, 440. 

Nannechoda, 376. 

Nanni-No}amba, 168. 

also see Nulumba. 

Nanniah, 376. 

Nanimrkovai , 364. 

Nan-p’i, 486, 520. 

Nanyadeva, 32, 35, 37, 47, 48, 53. 
Narada, 270, 271, 329. 

Narahari, 330. 

Narahari, 355. 

Narahari TIrtha, 209, 441. 

Naraka, 768. 

Naralokavira, 243. 

Narandrdyandnanda ; 302. 

Narapati , 274, 276. 

Narapati, 51. 

Narapati (Guhila), 91. 

Narapatijayacharyd Svarodaya, 330. 
Narapatisithu, 757. 

Narasirhha I (Ganga), 207, 208, 209, 325, 
551. 

Narasimha II (Ganga), 209, 325, 441. 
Narasirhha I (Hoysala), 70, 144, 178, 180, 
183 233 430 

Narasirhha \l° (Hoysala), 231-232, 233, 
247 248. 313. 

Narasimha III (Hoysala), 193, 194, 195, 
232, 233, 430. 

Narasimha (Kalachuri), 64. 

Narasimha —See Narendradeva. 
Narasimhachaturvedimangalam —See 
Maddur. 

Narasimha-tnnrffi, 763. 

! Narasirhhapati, 757. 

Narasimharjuna, 29. 

Narasimhavarman II, 612. 


915 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Narasirhhavarman Mahamalla, 610. 
Narathu, 757. 

Naravahanadatta, 313. 

Naravarman (Guhila), 89. 

Naravarman (Kachclihapaghata)—See 

Nrivarman. 

Naravarman (Paramara), 58, 68, 69, 76, 
82, 86, 100, 175. 

Narayan/pur, 10. 

Narayana (Bhagavan), 42. 

Narayana (General), 168. 

Narayana (Poet), 316, 328, 329, 330. 
Narayana (of Srlhatta), 44. 

Narayana Bhat, 375, 

Narayanganj, 42. 

Narayanpal, 218. 

Narendra, 354, 387. 

Narendradeva, 46. 

Narendraprabha, 302. 

Narmada, 163, 176, 177, 188,191, 562, 600. 
Narmam&la, 305. 

Narrative, 344-346. 

Narsinghpur, 209. 

Narttamalai, 617, 684, 685, 686. 

Narwar, 56. 57, 60, 134, 135, 146, 159. 
Nasik, 81, 185, 603. 

Nasiriya 504. 

Nasir-ud-dm (Sultan), 57, 85. 
Nasir-ud-dm Mahmud, 134, 135, 136, 
140, 142, 143, 146, 148, 149, 152, 153, 
160. 

Nasir-ud-dm Qabacha 130, 131, 132, 133, 
159. 503. 

Nasr, 2, 5, 11. 

Nasr II, 1. 

Ndstika (atheists), 476. 

Nataka (Natika )—See Drama. 
Ndtakanimiayaviveka, 325. 
Nuta-man^apa, 548, 550, 551, 552. 
Nataraja/ 672, 673, 685. 

Nataraja temple, 245, 249. 

Nathamuni, 436. 

Natha-samprad&ya, 352. 

N&thavadi, 200. 

Nathism, 353. 

Ndtyadarpana , 311, 325, 435. 
Naiyarambha 1 , 115. 

Navadurga temple, 555, 578. 

NavadvTpa, 464. 

Navaghana (Abhira), 75. 

NavaSikha temple, 588, 595. 

Navapaya , 346. 

Navaratha , 537. 

Navamtnaparikshd , 330. 
Navas&hasayika-charita, 307. 
Navatattva—Prakamna, 346. 

Navsari, 75. 

Navya-nyaya> 464. 

Nawasa Shah —See Sukhapala. 
Nayachandra (Sun), 53, 84, 492. 
Nayagarh, 212. 

Nayaka(s), 194, 669. 670. 

Nayaka (designation), 251. 

Nayaklrti, 230. 

Nayakot, 45, 46. 

Nayanandi, 348. 

Nayanars, 361. 


<SL 


I Nayapala, 27, 43, 62, 415. 

Nazim, M., 2, 23, 3(n), 4, 6 etc, 
Negapatam (Nagapattana), 236, 239, 243, 
518. 

Nellore (Nellurapura), 200, 201. 202, 
203, 246, 248, 258, 259. 

Nemi, 394. 

Nemichandra, 371. 

Nemidiita , 434. 

Neminatha, 301, 372. 

Neminatha-charita (-chariu), 345, 349, 
434. 

Neminatha-Chatushpadika , 395, 396. 
Neminatha Purdna, 372. 

Neminatha Temple, 661. 

I Neminirvdna, 301. 

Neminirvawi- kavya, 434. 
Nemi-Rajula-barahamasa, 395, 396. 
Nene, H. N., 387, 82(n), 83, 

N enjumdu-tiidu, 450. 

Nepal (a), 45-47, 48, 53, 172, 177, 180, 
186, 197, 313, 314, 351, 358, 526, 649, 
666, 667, 676, 690, 693. 

Nepal dialects, 381. 

Nepalese Buddhism, 427. 

Nessawi, 159, 10(n). 

Newdh , 381. 

New Indo-Aryan, 360, 378, 392. 

New-Javanese literature, 767. 

New Light on Buddhism in Mediaeval 
India, 471, 99(n). 

Ngan-king, 522. 

Nibandhas, 330, 335. 

Nicobars, 239. 

Nidana-kathd, 341. 

Nidar Bhim, 500. 

Nidravall, 29. 

Nighantusesha, 318. 

Nihsahkamalla, 246, 265, 266. 
Nihsahkesvara temple, 265. 

Nikumbhas, 191. 

Nilakantha, 658. 

Nilakantha Bhafta, 296. 

Nilakanthesvara, 68, 443, 575, 579. 

Nimar, 68, 70, 71. 

Nimba (Nimb&pura), 440, 

Nimbarka, 337, 403. 

Nine Thousand , 440. 

Nirabhoga-inJidra, 427. 

Niragunda, 194. 

Niraigi, 626. 

Nirandhdra prasada, 568. 

Nirbhaya, 45. 

Nirbhaya-Bhima-Vyayoga , 309, 435. 
Nirjam, 346. 

Nirjarapura, 38. 

Nirmdna-chakra , 414. 

Nirvana, 388, 406, 469. 

Nirvana pada, 736. 

Niah&da fAustric), 377. 

Nishapur, 5, 116, 124. 

Nlti, 304. 

Nitiratn&kara, 328. 

Nitisara , 200 
Nitisastra, 269, 270, 271. 

Nityanatha —See Asvinlkumara. 


916 








INDEX 


IP 

WMV a**kavacha, 768. 

Nivrit^natha, 353, 387. 

Njrfm-ud-din, 156, 157. 

Nizam-ud-dia Ahmaa, 13, lb, 23. _ 
Nizam-ud-dln Hasan Nizami Nishapun, 
503. 

Nolambava^°(padi)> 63, 172, 175, 177, 
1787179? 18 oT 183, 187, 192, 226, 227, 
228, 229, 234, 235, 244. 

Norman invasion, 398. 

North Arcot, 684. 

North Assam Speeches, 381. 

North Bengal, 635. 

»5?S£\ASMa 119 - 129 ’ 

Organisation,* 274-277. 
Law and Legal Institutions, 287-290. 
North-West Frontier, 26, 316. 

Nottrott, A., 380. 

Nriaigi ins., 173. 

Nripa, 269. 

Nnpakama, 175, 227, 233. 
Nripatibhushana, 215. 

Nrisirhha, 48. 

Nfuirhha Parana, 375. 

Nritya, 325. 

Nrivarman, 57. 
mh H, 3, 5. 

Nuh Sipihr , 197, 9(n). 

Nulumba, 168, 169. 

Nur, 18. 

Nurpur fort, 556. 

Nusntigln Hajib, 94. 

Nusrat Khan, 81. 

Nuzvid, 199. 

Nydsa, 320, 343, 511. 

Nydya, 269, 335, 336. 
NyayanibandhaprdkMa, 336. 

N ydyai&tparyaparihuLdhi, 336. 

Nyay attar, 254. 

Nyaya-Vaiseshika, 460. 

Nydya Vinischayavwarana, 435, 

O 

Octo-alloy, 646. 

Obscure Religious Cults as Background 
of Bengali Literature , 469, 17 (n). 
Odantapurl, 415. 

Odeyadeva Vadibhasimha, 301, 313. 
Odra (desa), 53, 63, 210, 211, 212, 224. 
Ojha, G. H.. 103, 159, 505, 27(a). 

Old Bengali, 358, 359, 360, 361. 

‘Old Bhil\ 380. 

Old Rodo, 381. 

Old Gujarati, 389. 390. 391, 392, 

36i, 

Old Indo-Aryan, 390. 

Old-Javanese literature, 767. 

‘Old Khyan*, 381. 

‘Old Kof (Old Kherwari), 380. 

Old Naga. 381. 

‘Old Savara\ 380. 

Old Shan, 381. 

Old Siamese, 381. 


<§L 


Old Thai, 381. 

“Old Western Rajasthani”, 389. 

Omgodu, 224. 

Oragudam, 614. 

Oraon, 378. 

Oriental Conference, Proceedings of the 
7th , 103, 21(n), 

Origin (of Telugu), 372. 

Origin and Development of Bengali 
Language and Literature, 358, 360. 

Origin of the Andhras, 372. 

Orissa, 32, 35, 53, 65, 66, 141, 144, 145, 

159, 160, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 211, 

212, 218, 221, 223, 237, 238, 325, 357, 

536, 538, 541, 645, 646, 650, 652, 653, 

655, 657, 658, 660. 

Orissa and her Remains—Ancient and 
Mediaeval 694, 19(n). 

Orissan miniatures, 642. 

Orissan (movement), 609. 

Orissan style, 605. 

Orissan temples, 560. 

Oriy§, 357, 358. 

Oruhgallu— See Warangal. 

Osia (Rajputana), 541, 555, 576, 577, 578, 
660, 687. 

Ottakkuttan, 245, 362, 363-65. 

Ottomans, 159, l(n), 

Oudh— See Awadh. 

Oxus, 2, 116. 


Pabhaga, 538, 543, 557, 558. 

Pachchur, 247. 

Pada, 320. 

Pada-bhdga, 538. 

Paddkulaka, 359. 

Padamanjari, 319, 335, 

Padang Roco, 752. 
Paddrthadharmasarhgraha, 336. 
Paddrthas , 366. 

Padarupasiddhi—See Rupasiddhi. 
Padasadhana, 343. 

Paddhati „ 85, 305. 

Padhauli, 575. 

Padma, 302. 

Padmachandra, 311. 

Padma-charita, 434. 

Padmadeva— See Pradyumnakamadeva. 
Padmagupta, 307. 

Fadmakirti, 348, 

Padmakumara, 319. 

PadmanabhabhaJta, 333. 
Padmanabhatirtha, 441. 

Padmananda Mahakavya , 302. 
Padmapada, 336. 

Padmapala, 56 
Padmapani, 666. 

Padmapani Lokesvara, 657. 

Padma Parana , 217, 330, 387. 

Padma rasa. 367. 

Padmasimha (Chahamana), 88, 

Padma vail, 434. 

Padmasimha (Guhila), 89. 

Padmini, 91, 103. 


917 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


<SL 


aduka Maharaja Haji Jay a Fangus, 
754. 

Paduvamva, 29. 

Padyachuddmani , 384. 
Padya-Kddambari, 299. 

Paga(s), 539, 545, 549, 652, 654. 

Pagan, 526, 679, 739, 

Pagan temples (in Burma), 637, 63B. 
Pag-Sam-Jon-Zang, 470, 35(n), 471, 
103 (n). 

Pahang, (Malay Peninsula), 751. 

Pahari miniatures, 675, 679. 

P&harpur, 34, 415, 416, 635, 637, 638, 639, 
640 

Pahlavi, 385. 

Pahuj, 107. 

Paikore inscription, 37. 

Paisachl, 313, 345, 346, 347. 

Pajjamadhu , 341, 343. 

Paijunna~kaha, 348. 

Paithfil, 199, 223. 

Pak Pattan, 94. 

Pakhangba, 383. 

Pakshika-Saptati , 432. 

Pajaiyarai, 255. 

Palakapya, 329. 

Palampet, 201, 668. 

Falandvipa, 262. 

Palanpur, 20. 

Palar river, 610. 

Palas, 24-33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 44, 47, 49, 
52, 53, 61, 62, 206, 212, 238, 274, 276, 
277, 666, 667, 690, 691, 693. 
Palembang, 528, 61 (n). 

Palghat, 229. 

Palhana, 394, 395. 

Pali, 339-343, 347. 

Pali (Pallika), 76. 82. 

Palkurike Soma, 370. 

Pallava Architecture, 698. 

Pallava (s), 63, 69, 183, 198, 202, 224, 243, 
249, 313, 610, 612, 614, 615, 617, 618, 
669, 670, 683. 

Pallavarayanpettai, 265. 

Pallava rock-cut rathaa , 611. 

Pallava rock reliefs, 682. 

Palli, 194. 

Palsule, G. R., 385, 34a (n). 

Palta, 660. 

Pampa II (“Abhinava Pampa”), 370. 
Pampa-Ponna-Ranna, 367. 

Pampa Ramdyana , 371. 

Panamalai, 614. 

Patiasoge, 431. 

Panasoge-bali, 432. 

Panataran temples, 679. 

Panavati, 46. 

Pahchacharyas, 445. 

Pahchagahga, 170. 

Panchakhyayika , 316. 

Paiichakula, 275. 

Panchala(s), 50, 51, 52, 172, 186. 
Panchaladeva (Gahga), 161, 162. 
Panchall, 322. 

Panchdnga , 569. 

Panchdnga bdda. 589. 

Panchapddikd, 336. 


Panchapddikavivarana, 336. 

Panchapura (Panchapattana), 83. 
Panchararns , 610, 611. 

Pahcharatha, 537, 557. 

Pancharatra, 437. 

Panchasdyaka , 330. 

Panchasamgraha, 435. 

Paiichatantra, 314, 316, 679. 
Panchavdra-vdriyam, 252. 

Panchavastu , 319. 

Panchdyatana , 546, 577. 

PanchAkararia, 352. 

Panchobh, 102. 

Pandalayani (in Malabar), 517. 
Pandalayani-Kollam, 529, 66(n). 
Pandarathar, 255, l(n). 

Pdnqlava-charita, 301. 

P5$davas, 300, 301. 

Pandharpur, 354, 355. 

Pandita, 367. 

Panditaradhya, 445, 

Papdita-viMra, 417. 

Pandrethan, 635, 666. 
Pandubhumi-vihdra, 426, 427, 472. 
Pandurahga, 744, 745, 746. 

Pandya, S., 285, l(n). 

Pandya(s), 63, 68, 172, 174, 176, 177, 
180, 187, 192, 200, 201, 202, 203, 228, 

229, 231, 232, 234, 235, 238, 239, 240, 

243, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 256-260, 

261, 262, 264, 265, 266, 267, 282, 313, 

402, 509, 517, 518, 523, 525, 622, 669. 

The Later, 256-260. 

Interval between the first and second 
empire, 256. 

Administrative Organisation, 284. 
Pandyadeva, 177. 

Pandyamandalam, 251. 

(The) Pdndyan Kingdom , 286, 108(n), 
469, 7(n). 

Pangarkar, L. R., 387, 94(n). 

Pangu, D. S. 387, 85(n). 

Panhala (Pannala, Pranala, Parpala), 
166, 176, 189. 

Panini, 319, 320, 

Panjabatila Namadeva, 388, 96(n). 
Panna, 59, 60, 64. 

Pannai, 239, 731. 

Panungala 500 (Portugal), 165, 177, 192, 
197, 199, 202. 

Pao-ying-Hien, 522. 

Papa, 346. 

Papanatha temple, 598, 599. 
Papanchasudani , 342. 

Para, 77, 606. 

Parabala, 281, 

Parachakrasalya, 221, 222. 

Parakkamo, 340. 

Farakrama, 266. 

Parakramabahu (Arirajavesyabhujanga) 
the Great, 245, 246, 261, 262, 263, 264, 
265, 266, 342. 

Parakramabahu II, 267. 304. 
Parakramabahu III, 259, 267. 
Farakrama Pandya, 245, 264, 266. 
Paralokasiddhi, 419. 

Paramadeva, 21. 


918 




INDEX 



Parama^Ouru - Dharmardja-Maiidhvaja 
^rlbhadra, 427. 
jftaramal —See Paramardi. 

Paramdmrita, 352. 

Parama^iuka (Lohara), 101. 

Paramaras, 13, 16, 29, 51, 56, 57, 58, 59, 
63, 63, 64, 66-74, 75, 7S, 77, 78, 79, 81, 
82, 83, 85, 86 , 87, 89, 90, 94, 95, 100, 
105, 108, 121 134 163, 164, 166, 172, 

173, 175, 178, 182, 186, 188, 189, 190, 

192, 198, 204, 206, 210, 213, 228, 295, 

310, 519, 656, 658, 687. 

of Rajputana, 72-74, 
of Malava, 66-72, 
of Mt. Abu, 72-73. 
of Vagada, 72. 
of Jilor (J&balipura), 73. 
of Bhimn&l, 73-74. 

Administrative Organisation of, 275- 
276. 

Paramardi, 59, 60, 107, 108, 122, 207, 310. 
Paramardideva, 423. 

Paramardin (Kadamba), 78. 
Paramatthaxrinichchhaya, 342. 
Paramitd-naya, 406. 

Pdramitdydna, 406. 

Paranavitana, S., 267. 

Paranis, 364. 

Parantaka I, 238, 245, 252, 256. 
Pararaton, 750, 751, 752. 

Par asa, 526. 

Parasarabhatta, 440. 

ParasarambaLsai, 387, 80(n). 
Parasuramesvara-Muktesvara group, 
547. 

Farasuramesvara temple, 536, 54Q, 545, 
554, 555, 559, 614, 652, 654. 

Parauli, 574. 

Parbadi, 593. 

Pari, 226. 

ParibhashS, 317. 

Parichchheda, 322, 344. 

Pariharas —See Pratiharas. 

Parihars, 120. 

Pari jdtahar ana, 300, 309. 

Parihasapura, 419. 

Pdrijdtamanjari, 71, 310. 
Pdriidtasaurabha , 337. 

Parikaraslokas, 324. 

Parimaia —See Padmagupta. 
Parinirvdna, 421. 

Paris (Loo Collection), 670. 
Paritishtaparmn, 315. 

Pariyatra, 523. 

Parlii, 72. 

Parlakimedi, 223. 

Parnrkheta. 189. 

Parnotsa, 98. 

Parsva, 348. 

PSrsvadeva, 329. 

Parsva-devatas, 644. 

Parsvanatha, 433, 567. 580 
Parsvanatha-charita, 345 , 434 , 
Parsvaptirdna, 348. 

Pdrtha-pardkrama, 73, 311. 

Parvati (pantheon). 301, 549 , 653, 672. 
Parvati (queen), 265. 


<SL 


Pdrvati-Rukminxya, 301. 

Parvati temple, 533. 

Pdsa, 455. 

Pdsa-jnana , 455. 

Paschima-Lanka, 213, 214, 217. 
Pa-sseu-wei, 764. 

Pasthar, 586, 607. 

Pasu-jnana, 455. 

Pasupatas, 445, 764. 

Pasupatinatha, 46, 

Pasuruhan, 749. 

Pafa (scroll), 679. 

Paid (wooden book-covers), 679. 
Patahakota, 167. 

PataleSvara, 562, 564. 

Patan, 45, 47, 468, 635. 

Patajia, 394. 

Pdtanjalabhdshya , 322. 

Patanjali, 319, 332, 512. 

Pathak, S. f 387, 76(n). 

Pathakas—See vishayas . 
Patha7nasdrattham(inju8d, 342. 

Pathari (Gwalior), 557. 

Pathindah— See Sirhind. 

Patiala, 109, 115, 507. 

Patiali, 150. 

Pati^jndna, 455. 

Pati-pasu-pdsa, 366. 

Patita, 289. 

Patkai, 44. 

Patna/27, 52> 54, 146, 219, 220, 221 , 602. 
Patan State (old), 556. 

Pattadakal, 585, 597, 598, 599, 623, 682. 
Pattakila (Patel), 275, 276. 

Pattalds, 276. 

Pattanas , 276. 

Pattanastha - Prachina-Jairia-BhATidd- 
gariya-Granthasuchi, 397, 21 (n). 
Pattarali, 167. 

Paftikera (PatikerS, Pai^kera), 41-42, 
383, 426, 756. 

Patuka, 88 . 

Paumaeva, 348. 

Pavalakkodi, 364. 

Pavanaduta ., 40, 303, 469, 3(n). 
Pavaiwvijaya , 352. 

Pavuluru Mallanna, 376. 

Pavusa, 189. 

Pawagadh, 687. 

Payar, 635. 

PayogaMdhi f 343. 

Payve, 176. 

Pazhaganrut&a, 378. 

Pedimental arches, 584. 

Pegu, 757, 760. 

Penang, 239. 

Pepper, 517. 

Perak, 520. 

Perambalur, 242, 248. 

Perggafe, 279, 280. 

Periapurunam , 365. 

Periya Achchan Pillai, 440. 

Per(ma)la Madarasa, 169. 

Permadi, 179. 

Permadideva— See Vikramaditya VI. 
Permadideva (Sinda), 178. 

Persia, 1 , 92, 116, 117, 149, 523, 690. 


919 





THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Perundaram , 250. 

Perundevanar, 262. 

Perunguri, 253. 

Peruvalis, 250. 

Peshawar, 5, 6, 8, 93, 94, 111, 118. 
Peterson, P., 305. 

Petha<Jadevai, 433. 

Pethaijia-rasa, 394, 396. 

Peyiya Sahapi, 185. 

PhdgUj 396. 

Phalgugrama, 40, 41. 

Phat Ma, 743. 

Philosophy, 336-337. 

Philosophical Literature, 330-337. 
Phimeanakas, 771. 

Piawan inscription, 62. 

Pidha, 540, 541. 

Pidhd deul, 546. 

Pillai, V. K., 170. 

Pillamari, 200, 201. 

Piljai Lokachhrya, 440. 

Piiupati, 276. 

- Pimpalner, 189. 

Pinbalagiya Perumaljlyar, 440. 

Pindara, 585. 

Fipl& Devi, 579. 

Pippala, 759. 

JPlrai, 3. 

Piri/tigin, 23, 4(n). 

Pirkdlach~Cholar-Charittiram, 255, 1 

* (n). 

Fir Pantsal, 13. 

Pishta, 532. 

Pita (saila), 58. 

Fitambara Simha, 383. 

Pithi, 29, 49, 54, 146, 160. 

Pitri, 332. 

Pitribhakti, 336. 

Pitfidayita , 334. 

P4ta, 176. 

Piyadassin, 343. 

Piyolia-niantfala, 44. 

P^rQshavai's'ha —See Jayadeva. 
Playfair, 380. 

Plays, Erotic and Farcical, 311. 

Plays, Legendary, 309-310. 

Plays, Semi-historical, 311-312. 

Podur Dravitfas, 372. 

Poems, Shorter, 302-306. 

Poetics, 321-325, 332, 343. 

Polas (Polavasa-deia), 199. 

Politics, 327-328. 

Political Theory, 269-274. 

Polo, 490. 

Polonnaruva, 235, 243, 261, 262, 263, 265. 

266, 267, 672. 

Pomburcha, 430. 

See also Humcha. 

Po Nagara, 744. 

Pondicherry, 241. 

Ponni —See Kaveri. 

Pon~v&riyam, 252. 

Pdrrippahrodai, 450. 


<SL 

Portuguese, 267. 

Potalas , 549. 

Potinar, 219. 

Pottarayan, 170. 

Prabandhas, 438. 

Prabandha-chintdmani, 69, 107, 112, 115, 

275. 

Prabandha-Paramesvara, 375. 

Prabasi, 103, 27(n). 

Prabhachandra, 315, 320. 

Prabhachandra Siddhantadeva, 430. 
Prabhakara, 240, 291, 336, 511, 512, 513. 
Prabhavaka-charita, 315. 

PrabhavatidevI, 54. 

Prabhudeva, 370. 

Prabhus, 279, 283. 

Prabodhachandrodaya, 312, 443. 
Prabuddharauhineya, 311. 
Prachandadandan$andyaka, 279, 283. 
Prdchlna - GdXrjara - Kavya-sarhgraha, 

397, 15(n). 

Prdchtna Maharashtra. 386, 67 (n). 

Practical Life, 327-328. 

Pradakshina { Circumambulatory pas¬ 
sage), 533, 583. 

Pradh&na , 278, 279, 281, 283. 

Pradhdndmdtya — See mantripradhdna . 
Pradlpa, 319. 

Pradyumndbhyu4aya, 310. 
Pradyumna-charita, 435. 
Pradyumnakamadeva, 45. 

Pradyumna Kumara, 348. 

Pradyumna Suri, 315. 

Pradyumnesvara Siva, 37. 

Pragjyotisha— See Kamarupa. 

Pragva$as, 72, 74, 79. 

Prahasana, 311. 

Prahiada (Chahamana), 84, 492. 

Prahladana (Paramara), 72, 73, 78, 89, 

298, 311. 

Prahladapura, 433. 

Prah-Pahlay, 771. 

Prah-Pithu, 771. 

Prajiid , 400, 407, 408, 409, 410. 

Prajhabhadra, 417. 

Prajndpdramitd, 739. 
Prakaranadyekadasarupanimaya- 
viveka, 325. 

Prakaranas, 311-312, 338. 

Prakarani, 325. 
j Prakasa. 322. 

Prakasatma, 336. 

Prakasendra, 299. 

Prakrama, 350. 

Prakrit, 303, 308, 314, 318, 320, 326, 327, 
344-347, 350. 351. 360, 372. 
Prdkritakalpataru, 347. 

Prakritdnus&sana . 347, 

Prakrita-paingalam, 53, 86, 172, 360. 

Prtikf itarup&vatdra. 347. 
PrdkHta-Sabddnidasaiia, 347. 
Prdkritasarvasva, 347. 
i Prakriti , 438. 

Pralambhas—See Salambhas^ 

Pramdnanayatattvdlokdlarhkdra, 336. 
Pramanas. 322. 

Pramana-Nirnaya, 435. 


920 




INDEX 


Pranuina~vhmchaya, 420. 

Pramata, 275, 

Pramattavara, 274. 

Prameya, 336. 

Prameya kama lamdrtan^a, 336. 
Pranakara, 318. 

Pranavakalpa, 335. 

Prang, 773. 

Prapatti, 439. 

Prasannaraghava, 309, 324. 

Prasantasiva, 573. 

Prasastapada, 336. 

Prasthaiiabheda, 465. 

Praia pa, 49. 

Pratapadhavala, 49, 54. 

Pratapamalla (Kalachuri), 65, 66. 
Pratapamalla (Gujarat), 78, 80, 81. 
Prataparudra, 195, 202, 203, 223, 376. 
Prataparudra I, 444. 
Prat&parudra-kalyana, 310. 
PmtapartLdra-yaAohhushana, 203. 
Prataparudnyam , 223. 

Pratapasimha (Chahamana), 88. 
Pratapasimha (of phekkariya), 29. 
Pratapasimha (Paramara), 73, 81, 85, 90. 
Pratihara , 274, 276, 277. 

Pratlharas (Imperial), 14, 15, 16, 17, 50, 
56, 57, 58, 61, 62, 78, 131, 134, 135, 
159, 276, 477. 

Pratlharas (Ministers), 108. 

Pratiloma (inverse order), 475. 
Pratijdgaranaka, 275. 

Pratimd. 438. 

Pratishtha, 332. 

Pratishthana, 313, 487. 

Pratishthd&agara, 334. 
PratyabhijM-hridaya, 443. 

Pmtyabhijnd System, 443. 

Pratyaksha, 447. 

Pravdhas , 305. 

Pravarasena II, 419. 

Pravartim, 394. 

Prayaga, 61. 

PrayaSchitta, 331, 334. 
Prdyaschittanirupana. 331. 
Prayaschittaprakarana, 505, 506, 507. 
Preparation of silk, 517. 

Prince Pan, 745. 

Prithu, 34. 

Prithvibhata, 109. 
Pnthmchandra-charita, 345. 
Prithvideva, 65, 213. 

Prithvideva II, 65. 

Prithvideva III, 65. 

Prithvipala (Chahamana), 75, 86. 
Prithvlpala (YaduvamsI), 56. 

Pnthvlraja I (Chahamana), 82, 104. 
Prithvlraja II (Chahamana), 83, 104. 
PrithvMja III, 54, 59, 73. 83, 84, 104- 
115, 118, 119, 120, 128 131, 309, 500. 
Pnthmraja-vijaya, 104, 106, 108, 109, 
309. 

Prithmrdj Paso, 105. 

Prithvlvarman, 58, 59. 

Pritidatta, 294. 

Prola, 171, 172, 179, 198. 

Prophet of Islam, 468. 


Prosody, 511. 

Proto-Bodo, 381. 

Pudgala, 469. 

Pudukkottai, 257, 259. 

Piiga, 291. 

Pugalendi, 362. 

Puja, 332. 

Pujaripali (Sambalpur District), 558. 
Pulatthinagara— See Polonnaruva. 
Pulikesin, 169, 171. 

Pulindas, 60. 

Puliyur— See Chidambaram. 

Punamiya sect, 432. 

Punapakshadeva, 87. 

Pundarlkaksha, 436. 

Pun$i, 167, 240. 

Pundra, 75. 

Pundravardhana, 30. 

Pundur, 168. 

Punedahaili, 188. 

Punisa, 430. 

Puhja, 209. 

Punjab, 7, 9, 12, 13, 16, 22, 23, 26, 33, 51, 
61, 68, 75, 82„ 86, 92-97, 109, 110, 111, 
113, 118, 131, 132, 144, 151, 351. 
Punjab Hill States, 663, 665, 666. 

Punya , 346. 

Punyadharodaya-vihara, 427. 

Purakuta, 172, 198. 

Puranadhishthana, 635. 

Purana Mahadeva, 660. 

Purana/s, 301, 304, 306, 309, 330, 332, 335, 
356, 508, 511. 

Puranasara, 434. 

Purandarapala. 43. 

Purl, 39, 207, 519, 551, 552, 651, 652, 653, 
654. 

Purigere 300, 165, 166, 167,172. 

Purna, 162. 

Purnabhadra. 316. 

Purnapala (Paramara), 72, 74. 

Purna (-Path aka), 78. 

Purnaprajna— See Madhva. 
Purnatallagachchha, 345, 433. 
Pumavajra. 424. 

Purohita , 174, 277. 

Purushottama, 42. 

Purushottama (Grammarian), 347. 
Purushottama (Minister), 195. 
Purushottamadeva, 317. 
Purushottamasena, 41. 
Purushottamasimha, 426. 

Purushottamatlrtha, 441. 

Purva MImamsa, 335, 460, 465. 
Pushkara, 82, 85. 

Pushpabhadra, 43. 

Pushpadanta, 326, 391, 434. 

Pushpadanta Purana, 372. 

Pushpasena, 301. 

Pushyananada, 100. 

Pustaka, 432. 

Putana. 436. 

Putrikd, 483. 

Pyahpya, 755. 

Pyrenees, 1. 

Pyus, 755. 


921 




The struggle foe empire 



Q 

Qabacha, 504. 

Qara Khitai, 117. 

Qazwlnl, 517, 528, 31 (n). 

Qaraqorarn, 143. 

Qirat, 18. 

‘Qualified monism’, 461. 

Quang Binh, 744. 

Quang Tri, 744. 

Quanungo, K. R. f 103, 27(n). 

Quarters, Regents of the, 271 
Quilon, 234, 246, 259, 485, 517, 521. 
Quran, 504. 

Qusdar, 3. 

Qutb-ud-dln Aibak, 56, 59, 73, 79, 87, 
114, 118-122, 124, 130-136, 148, 159, 
188, 687. 

Qutb-ud-dln Rajchtyar, Kaki, 467. 
Qutb-ud-dln Hasan Ghuri, 84. 
Qutb-ud-dln Husain, 139. 

Qutb-ud-dln Muhammad, 96. 

Qutlugh Khan, 142, 143. 
Quwwat-ul-Islam, 120. 

R 

Rabha, 380. 

Kacha, 180. 

Fachamalla (Gahga), 162, 352. 
Rachamalla (Sinda), 182. 

Radtfa, 100. 

Raddhuda—See Ratahrada. 

Radha, 25, 27, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 
47, 62, 145, 206, 207, 208, 211, 238, 
267, 268, 303, 331, 403, 436. 
Radhakrishnan, S., 473, 144(n), 

Raghava (Bhagavan), 301. 

Raghava (Courtier), 85. 

Raghava (Ganga), 207. 

Raghava (of Kalinga), 37, 180. 

Raghava (Raghu) (Deputy King), 195, 
196, 197. 

] RdghavdbhyudayA , 435. 

Raghava-Pdndavtya, 300. 

Raghavahka, 367. 

Raghunandana, 296, 331. 

Raghuvilasa, 435. 

Rahapa (Guhita), 89, 91. 

Rdhd-paga , 539, 544, 547, 549, 561. 
Rahib, 16. 

Rahiiya, 575, 604. 

Raibha —See Rayavaddiya. 

Raichur, 165, 166, 173, 195, 203, 237. 238. 
Rai Karan, 79, 121. 

Raipur, 192, 574. 

Raja, 179. 

Raja Bharatri, 468. 

Raja Brujanga Rao, 373, 388, 117(n). 
Rajabhusnana Somesvara II, 218. 
Rajacharya, 417. 

Rajadeva, 101. 

Rdjadharma, 269, 332. 

Rajadhiraja I (Chola), 167, 168, 169. 236, 
239, 240 241, 251, 255. 512. 
Rajadhiraja IT, 245-246, 265. 

Rajaditya, 251. 


<5L 


Rajadityagupta, 49. 

Raja-Gandagopala —See Vijaya-Ganda- 
gopala. 

Rajagriha, 650. 

Rajahmundry, 372. 

Raja Kama of Dahala, 562. 

Rajakula —See Ravals. 
j Rajamahendra, 169, 241. 

RdjamartaTida, 336. 

I Rdjamdtya, 276, 277. 

Rajamayan, 171. 

Rajamrigdnka, 329. 

Rajan , 269. 

Rajani, 45. 

Rdjaniti, 270. 

Rdjanxtiratndkara, 284, 335. 

Rajapala, 56. 

i Rajapura, 216, 217, 738. 

Rajapurl, 98, 99, 100, 308. 

Rajaputras, 36. 

Rajaraja I (Eastern Chalukya), 170, 204, 
212, 240, 242, 511. 

Rajaraja the Great (Choja), 164, 204, 
226, 234-236, 239, 240, 242, 248, 250. 
251, 255, 256, 281, 282, 618, 672. 685. 
Rajaraja II (Chola), 180, 181, 245-246, 
282, 318. 

Rajaraja III (Chola), 200, 231, 247-248, 
257. 

Rajaraja I (Devendravarman) (Gaftga), 
204, 205, 261. 

Rajaraja n (Ganga). 181, 207. 

Rajaraja III (Ganga), 207. 

Rajaraja Chodaganga, 205. 

Rajaraja Narendra, 375. 

Rajarajesvara temple, 236, 618. 

Rajaranl temple, 544, 652, 654. 
Rajarashtra, 262. 

Rdjasa, 273. 

Rajasa, 751. 

Raja Sarbhojl, 376. 

Rajasimha II, 256. 

Rajasimha Pallava, 612, 614. 

Rajasiihhesvara temple, 613. 

Rajasthan, 679. 

Rajasthani miniatures, 675. 

Rajasundari, 205, 244. 

Rajatapltha, 441., 

Rfijatarangini, 17, 103, 30(n), 307, 308, 
337, 470,' 49(n). 

Rdjatrayadhipati, 274, 276. 
Rajavidyadhara Samanta, 733. 

Raj endra - Choda, 206, 618, 620, 621, 730. 
731, 733. 

Rajendra-Choda II, 180, 181. 

Rajendra Chola I, 25. 33. 36. 61, 63, 66, 
165, 166, 168, 169, 172, 198, 204, 215, 
226, 236-240. 242, 248, 256, 493, 512. 
Rajendra Chola H, 173, 512. 

See also Kulottuhga Chola I. 

Rajendra Chola HI, 200, 232, 247-248, 
257. 259. 

Rdjendrakarnapurtt, 308. 

Rajimatl, 395. 

Rajmahal. 30, 208. 

Rajput, 605, 662. 


922 


INDEX 


Rajputs 10, 55, 72, 118, 120, 121, 134, 
}4T, 148, 266, 402, 576, 583, 642, 
643, 656, 660, 662, 666, 674, 675, 687, 
693. 

Rajputane-ka-Whasa, 159, 7(n), 505, 


27(n). 

Rajput miniatures, 642. 

Rajputs, 56, 110, 120, 121, 127, 134, 135, 
146, 147, 148, 150, 159, 267, 275, 277. 
Rajput sculptures, 641. 

Rdjrdmd, 547. 

Rajshahi, 34, 37, 635, 650. 

Raj wade, V. K., 386, 67 (n). 

Raju, P. T., 388, 119fn). 

Raj wade Samsodhana Mandal, Dhulia, 
MSS catalogue of, 386, 66(n). 
Rajyapala (Chahamana), 77, 86. 
Rajyapala (Gahadavala), 54. 

Rajyapala (Pala), 31. 

Rajyapala (Pratihara), 14, 16, 17, 50, 57, 
58. 

Rakkasa-Gangarasa, 201. 

Raksha 264 

Rama (Bhagavan), 300, 308. 309, 313, 
320, 355, 672, 767. 

Rama (of Dera), 11, 23, 7(n). 

Kama (General), 191. 

Rama (of Gujarat), 81. 

Ramabhadra, 311. 

Ramachandra (of Gujarat), 435. 
Ramachandra (of Kashmir), 102. 
Ramachandra (Scholar), 78. 298, 309, 
311, 325. 

Ramachandra Kavibharati, 304, 385. 
Ramachandra (Yadava), 71, 81, 193, 
194-196, 197, 232. 

R&maAshaiiaTa-chaHta-purdna, 370. 
Ramachandra (temple), 566, 573. 
Rdma-charita , 28. 31, 32, 47, 212, 300, 


308. 


Rama-charita-nmnasa , 675. 

Ramadeva (of Kashmir), 102. 
Ramadeva (Paramara), 72. 

Ramadeva (TaiiapavamsI), 223. 
RamadevI, 38. 

Ramadhipati, 761. 

Kamakrishna Kavi, M., 376. 
Ramalarahasya. 330. 

Ramamisra, 437. 

Ramananda, 337. 

Ramanatha, 232, 259. 

Ramanuja, 229, 242, 317, 336, 337, 368, 
403, 404. 


Ramanva (Ramahnadesa), 262, 264. 
R»«*apaia, 28, 29-31, 32, 35, 36, 40, 43, 
47. 52, 54. 206, 212, 300, 308, 328, 415. 
Ramappjf, 201. 

Ramasainya, 88. 

Ramasarrnan, 347, 349, 

Ramasiruha, 48. 

Ramavati, 30. 

Ramdyana , 356. 435, 512, 669. 

Ramayana (Old-Javanese), 767. 
Rdmdyana (in Tamil), 362, 363. 
Ramdyanachampu, 313. 

Rdmdt/ana-manjari, 299. 

Ramayya 445. 


R am b kamanjari, 53. 

Rambhapurl, 445. 

Ramchandrapur, 170, 207. 

Ramdas. G., 224, 12(n). 

Ramesvara(m), 244, 246, 247, 264, 265. 
Ramganga, 147. 

Ram Kamheng, 742, 760, 761. 

Ramnad, 256, 259. 

Ram Rai, 93. 

Ramsen —See Ramasainya. 

Ramtek, 194, 197. 

Ranadhavala, 49. 

Ranakesari, 212. 

Ranarangabhima —See Tailapa. 

Ranas, 89, 151. 

Ranasimha (Guhila), 89. 

Ranasimha (Paramara), 72. 
Ranastambha, 162. 

Ranastambhapura, 71. 492. 

See also Ranthambhor. 

Ranasura (of Nepal), 46. 

Ranasura (of Radha), 25, 62. 

Hander, 468. 

Ranga —See Seringapatarn. 

Rangacharya, V., 224, 10(n). 
Rariganatha, 371. 

Rangpur, 639. 

Rangpura, 504. 

Ranik Devi, 589. 

Ranipur, 659. 

Ranlpur Jharial (Patna State), 555, 556, 
575. 

Ranna (Kannada poet), 429. 
Ranthambhor, 71, 83-86, 90, 114, 119, 
131, 134. 147, 148, 159. 

Rao, Subba, 224, 12(n), 388, 116(n). 
Rapson, E. J., 285, 37(n). 

Rasa, 321, 322, 323. 324, 325, 391. 

Rasa/s, 350, 393, 394. 

Rasd-bandha, 391, 393. 

Rdsaka , 393. 

Rasa-lila relief, 662. 

Rasaratnapradipikd, 324. 
Rasaratnasamuchchaya, 328. 

Rasdmava, 328. 

Rasdrnavamdhdkara, 325. 

Rasaixihim, 341. 

Rasavatl , 320. 

Rashtrakutas, 28. 32, 34, 50-51, 52, 54, 55, 
62, 66, 68, 73, 95, 135. 161, 162, 163, 
184, 185, 197, 215, 220, 221-222, 223, 
226, 278. 

Rdshtrakulas, 183. 2(n). 

Rasid-ud-dln, 759. 

Rasupati, 738. 

Rafahrada, 88. 

Ratanpur, 64-66, 87, 88. 176, 177, 213, 218, 
274. 

Ratanwadi, 603. 

Rathakas, 531, 537. 

Ratha-paqciy 539, 541, 543. 

Rathas . 531, 537, 542, 543, 552, 553, 557, 
610, 611. 612. 613, 624. 

Rathas of Mahabalipuram, 554. 

Rathors —See Rashtrakutas. 

Ratirahasya . 330. 

Ratnadeva (Rayana), 349. 


928 





THE STRUGGLE FOE EMPIRE 



Ratnadeva (Thakuri), 46. 

Ratnadeva II (Kalachuri), 32, 65, 206, 
213. 

Ratnadeva III (Kalachuri), 65. 

Ratnagiri, 650, 651. 

Ratnagiri, 192, 517. 

Ratnakara Santi, 417. 

Ratnapala (Chahamana), 86. 

Ratnapala (Kachchhapaghata), 56. 
Ratnapala (Pala of Assam), 42, 43, 44, 
443 

Ratnaparikshd, 330, 520. 

Ratnapura —See Ratanpur. 

Ratnaraja, 65. 

Ratnasimha (Guhila), 91. 

Ratnarnsmi- vihdra, 419, 420. 

Ratnavall, 261. 

Ratndvalt, 310. 

—See Kuntala. 

Rattapalli, 186. 

Raitaraja (Silahara), 162. 

Rattas, 164, 180, 186, 189, 191, 192. 
Raithapala, 341. 

Rauhineya, 311. 

Rauta-Abhi, 60. 

Rauravagama, 366. 

Rauzat- 1 us-Safa, 159, 5(n). 

Ravals, 89. 

Ravapa 312. 

Raverty, 115, 2(n). 

Ravi, 13. 

Ravishepa, 434. 

Ravivarman Kerala, 203, 298, 310. 

Ray, H. C. 159, 17(n), 160, 40(n), 505, 
27<n). 

Rayadrug, 167, 170, 173. 

Rayamukuta, 318, 319. 

Rayarideva (Trailokyamalla), 37, 43. 
Rayava<Miya, 349, 350. 

Raziyya, 84, 85, 136, 137, 138, 139, 141, 
146, 147, 160, 23 (n). 

Rekha(s), 536, 652, 654. 

Rekha deal, 536, 

Rekha gaudi, 546. 

Rekha sikhara, 531, 544. 

Relations de voyages et texts gcogra- 
phiques, 528, 20(n). 

Religious Literature, 330-337, 

Renuka, 445. 

Report on the antiquarian remains in 
the Lalitpur District , 695, 57 (n). 
Report on the Kegalla District, 268, 
3<n). 

Reva, 64, 423. 

Revapa, 367. 

Revanasiddha, 445. 

Rcvantagiri-rmci, 394, 396. 

Revarasa, 167, 169, 171. 

Rewa, 558, 561, 573, 659. 

Rewah, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 146. 

Rewari, 107. 

Rhoda (Gujarat), 588. 

Rice, 170, 233. 3(n). 

Rigveda, 511, 512. 

Rina, 332. 

Rinehana, 102. 

Rishabha, 270, 302, 344, 394. 


Rishabhadeva, 428. 

Rishabhanatha, 580. 

Ritusamhdra, 395. 

Rishi, 332. 

Riti , 322, 323, 324. 

RIza, 504. 

Rohana, 261, 263, 264. 

Rohhni-mrigdnka, 435. 

Rohtasgarh, 146. 

Romahar&hana, 768. 

Romances, Later, 313. 

Romances, Prose, 312-313. 

Romapada, 329. 

Rotating squares, 624. 

Roy, S. C., 380. 

Royal marriages, 479. 

Ruchidatta, 336. 

Rudoka, 29. 

R(a)udra I, 199, 200, 223. 

Rudradatta, 210, 211. 

Rudra (deva), 45, 377. 

Rudradeva (Kakatlya), 179, 200. 
Rudradeva (Thakuri), 46. 

Rudra-Mahakala temple, 76. 

Rudra Mahalaya!, 596. 

Rudra Mala, 595, 596. 

Rudramana, 31. 

Rudramba, 192, 193, 202, 223, 511. 
Rudrasikhara, 29. 

Rudra-Siva, 402. 

Rudrata, 323, 324. 

Rudra-varman, 744. 

Rukmini, 301, 768. 

Rukminlbai, 387, 76(n). 

Rukminiharana, 310. 
Rukmintsvayaihvara , 354. 

Rukn-ud-din, 57. 

Rukn-ud-dln Hamzah, 111, 114. 

Rum, 520. 

Rupaka, 325, 393. 

Rupal, 94. 

Rupasiddhi , 320, 343. 

Rupdvatdra, 512. 

Rupavati, 263. 

Rurki, 147. 

Ruyan, 503. 

Ruyyaka (Ruchaka), 323, 324, 325, 384. 
S 

| 6abaras, 60. 
j Sabarmati, 162. 

Sabbisayira 1000 (Sabbinantfu), 198, 
199 

Sabda* 321, 322. 

Sahdachandrika , 328. 

£abdamanidarpaiui. 371. 

Sabddnusasana . 320, 326. 
tfabdapradtpa, 328. 
§abddrnavachandrika, 319. 

Sabdasiddhi, .320. 

Sabka, 252, 253. 

Sabhd-mandapa, 580. 

Sabhyas, 288, 291. 

Sabuktigin, 2-5, 8. 

Sachau, 507, 180(n), 514, 29(n). 

Sachiya Mata, 579. 









INDEX 


<SL 



Sacfayappa, 362, 366. 

Sadasivagad, 521. 

Sadakopar-anthdthi, 363. 
Saddalakkhana, 343. 

Saddaniti, 342, 343. 

Saddhamm&payana, 341. 

Sadguru Ragale, 370. 

Sad*i&, 07, 86. 

Sadhand, 404, 407. 

Sadhava, 49. 

Sa&s> 486. 

Saduktikarndmrita, 40, 305. 

Sadyojata, 445. 

Sadyojyotis, 365. 

Sadyovadhu , 482. 

5affar/§affarids, 1. 

See also Ya'qub ibn-Layth al-$iffar. 
Saffron, 517. 

Sahajapala (Chahamana), 87. 

Sagar, 137, 183. 

Sdgdrar-Dharmamrita , 434. 

Sagatu, 748. 

Saogi, 523. 

Sahadeva, 188. 

Sahadeva ratha, 614. 
j Sahaja-yana, 413. 

Sahajiya Buddhists. 413. 

Sahajiya songs, 359. 

Sahamera, 102. 

Sahanapaladeva, 55, 56. 

Saharanpur, 15, 83. 

Sahasa, 49. 

Sahasamalla, 266. 

Sahasraklrti, 428. 

Sahasranama-blidskya, 440. 

Sahavahana, $7. 

Sahet Mahet, 50 
Sahityadarpana, 388. 

Saho, 664, 

Sahu, 664. 

Sahula, 349. 

Sahyadri, 386. 

Sai Churah, 665. 

Saif-ud-dm (Sultan), 96, 97. 
Saif-ud-din Aibak (Governor), 141. 
&ail«nclra(s), 236, 239, 493, 732. 
5§ailendra-Chudamani-vai*ma-vihara, 
733. 

6ai!endra Empire, 730. 

Saiva/s. 359, 403, 404, 405, 511, 646. 
6aiva Agamas, 447. 

Sa ivs-Brahmanas, 512. 

6aiva lings yat. 402. 

J§aiva saints, 672. 

Saiva Samayacharyas, 367. 

&siva Siddhanta Literature, 365. 
Saivism, 209, 221, 229, 230, 236, 238, 245, 
300, 364, 356, 361. 

Sajjana, 76, 83. 

Sakalendu, 754. 

Sakambhari, 23. 66, 68, 69, 74, 75, 76, 77, 
78, 81-83, 85, 86, 89, 90, 108, 113, 134, 
147, 163, 277, 310. 

Sakas, 667, 677. 

&5katayana, 320. 

Vakhas, 431. 

Sakkarakoftam—See Chakrakofta. 


Saktas, 403, 404, 405. 

&akta hymns, 359. 

Sakti, 400, 407. 

Saktikumara (Guhila), 89. 
gaktisimha, 48. 

6aktism, 316. 
gaktivarman I, 203, 235. 

6aktivarman II, 204, 

SaktiviMshpidvaita, 447. 

Sakulya, 289. 

6akyabhadra, 427. 

Sakyabhikshu, 422. 

Sakyamuni, 759. 
gakyasrlbhadra, 416. 

Sala, 97. 

Sa|a —See Nripakama. 

Sdlabhanjikd , 644. 
galagrama. 330. 

Salakha (Paramara), 74. 

Salambhas, 42. 

Salar Husain, 96. 

Salats, 583. 

Salav&hana !—See Sala. 

Salem, 63, 229. 

Salha (Chahamana), 88. 

Salhana, 100, 101. 

Sali Bahadur, 143. 
fcalibhadra, 302, 393, 394. 
Sdlibhadra-ctorita, 302. 

Sdlihotra, 328, 329. 

Salivahana, 315. 

Sdlivdhanakathd, 315. 

Saljuq(s), 93, 94, 95, 116, 117. 
Sallakshana, 120. 

Sallakshanavarman (Chandella), 58, 64, 
65, 69'. 

Sallakshanavarman (Kaurava), 60. 
Sallekhand, 430. 

Salokpa, 455. 

Salt Range, 7, 11, 33, 132, 1,13. 
Saluva-Tikkama, 194. 

{§alya, 88. 

Samalavarman, 34, 35. 

Samana, 112, 114, 140, 143, 153. 
Saman/Samanids, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 116. 
Samanta, 281. 

Samanta-Bhoja, 201. 

Samantddhipati, 278. 

Samantapds&dikd, 342. 

Samatitasena, 36. 

Samantasimha (Chahamana), 88, 
Samantasimha (Guhila), 72, 78, 79, 87, 
89. 

Samanya-Misra, 447. 
Samarangana-sutradhdra , 488, 490, 694, 

Kn). 

Samarasimha (Chahamana), 87, 88, 89. 
Samarasimha (Guhila), 73, 81, 85, 90, 91. 
Samarqand, 2, 117. 

Samasokti, 322. 

Samasta senadhipati , 283. 

Samasydpurti Kdvya, 434. 

Samatata, 42. 

Samavakira, 311. 

Sama-Vama, 325. 

Samaveda, 331, 334, 336, 511, 512. 
Samaya , 524. 

925 


E. S.—M 







rHE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Samayacharyas, 450. 

Samayamdtrikd, 305. 

Samayaprddipa , 336. 
Samiayasymapdkarrna, 524. 
Sdmayikapdtha, 435. 

Sambalpur, 211, 221, 222, 659. 

Sambalpur designs, 675. 

Sambamurty, D., 388, 115(n). 
Sambandhachintd, 343. 

Sambandhar, 366, 450. 

Sambhal, 147. 

Sambhar —See Sakambhari. 

6ambhu, 304, 308. 

Sambhupura, 743. 

Sambuvarayas, 231, 247. 

Samgamesvara Temple, 170. 
Snrhgharakkhita, 343. 

Samgramadeva, 101. 

Samgrarnagupta, 49. 

Samgvamapala (Lohara), 98, 99. 
Samgramaraja, 12, 97, 99. 
Sarhgramasimha (Chahamana), 88. 
Samgramaanhha (Paramara), 71, 80, 190, 
341. 

Samgrimta, 317. 

Sarhhita, 245, 328. 

$amidhdnya, 516. 

Samipya, 455. 

Samkshiptasdra , 320, 347. 

Samny&sin, 289. 

Sa(m)rnapani, 191, 192, 202. 

Sarhskara, 334. 

Samsokgnatnba, 383. 

Samudra Goppayya, 247. 

Samudragupta, 302. 

Samudramanthana , 311. 

Samudratilaka, 330. 

Samuhas , 524, 525. 

Samvara, 346. 

Samvarana, 310. 

Samvata, 355. 

Samvatsara-iwriyam, 252. 
Samvega-matrikd , 395. 
Samvidvyatikrama, 524. 

Samvit-siddhi, 437. 

Samyak-sambuddha, 406. 

Sam yaktvamdUchaupal , 395. 

Sdmayika pdtha, 435. 

Sarhyogita, 54, 105. 

Sa n a k a - mm prada ya . 440. 

Sandan, 517, 521, 528. 

Sana tana, 417. 

Sanatkumara, 345. 

Sanatkumdra-charita, 345. 
SanatkumaraiHistusdstra, 329, 

Sanchi, 555, 653, 661 
Sanchor— See Satyapurn. 

Sandera (Gujarat), 588, 589. 

Sandera(o), 86. 

Sandesa-kavya, 298. 

Sandesa-rasaka, 298, 350, 386. 

Sand M m, 569. 

Sdndhdra prdsdda, 568, 588. 
Sandhi-bandha, 391. 

Sandhis, 348. 

Sandhimgra hcidh ikdra , 279. 
Sdndhiviyrahika, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278. 


Sandhyakaranandl, 28, 29, 31, 300, 308. 
Sandimattlvu, 237. 

San-fo-tsi, 520, 734, 735. 

Sanga (country), 194. 

Sanga (Prince), 88. 

Sanga (Town), 46. 

Sangam Age, 364. 

Sangamaya, 168. 

Sangamesvara, 446, 599, 615. 

Sangana, 80, 434. 

Sangata, 98. 

Sanghadhipati-charitra , 302. 

Sahghas, 431. 

Sangltachudamani, 329. 
Saiigitamakaranda , 329. 
SahgUa-mandapa, 684. 

Sahgitaratnakara, 191, 329. 
Saiigitasamatjasdra, 329. 

Sangli, 179, 186. 

Sangoka, 331. 

Sa ngra ma- V i jay ottuhga - varman, 239, 

731. 

Sahgu, 238. 

Sahjamamahjari, 350. 

Saniar Saljuq, 95, 96, 117. 

Sankalia, H. D., 471, 90(n>, 586, 696,(n) 
78, 83, 84, etc. 

Sankalpa-nirdkaranarn , 367, 450, 451. 
Sankama I, 179. 

Sankama IX, 181. 

{Sankara (Acharyd), 299, jll, i&L 
Sankara 1Aambdja general), 746. 
Sankara (Yadava), 81. 

Sankara-Advaitin, 451. 

Sdnkarabhdshya , 322. 

Sankaradeva (Thakuri), 45, 46. 
Sankaradeva (Yadava), 195, 196. 
Sankaradhara, 40. 

Sankarananda, 420. 

Sankara Pan^ita, 763. 

Sankarshapa, 438. 

Sankatagrama, 29. 

Sankha—See Sarhgramasimha (Para¬ 
mara). 

Sahkhadhara Kaviraja, 311. 

S5hkhyas, 442, 460. 

Sankuka, 307. 

San-v'iarga, 455. 

Sannagara, 427. 

Sannjjdsa , 354. 

Sanskrit, 297-339, 34.1, 343, 344, 345, 346, 
348, 350, 351, 352, 354. 

Sanskrit Grammar, 306. 

Sanskritic Languages and Literature, 
339-361. 

Santagrama. 229. 

Santali, 357, 378. 

Santalige 1000, 163, 165, 166, 167, 172, 

174, 182, 183, 188, 189, 195. 
SantaladevI, 229, 230, 430. 
Santanacharyas, 366, 450. 

| San tar as, 177,178, 179, 180, 183, 194, 199. 
Santi. 332, 346. 

Gantlndtha-charitii, 345, 434. 

Santi-pada, 417. 

.idntisataka, 304. 


926 











Santi Suri, 345, 346, 434. 

Santis vara, 371. 

Santivarman (Baisa), 164. 

Santra (Sa van tar), 208. 

Santurgarh, 142. 

Sapadalaksha, 77, 78, 82, 83, 104, 107. 

108, 109. 113, 146. 

Sapinda, 289, 290. 
l Sapta-Jnanakoea, 433. 

Sapta ksh etri-rdsa , 395. 

Saptdnga btida, 589. 

Saptapad&rthii 336. 

Saptaratha, 537. 

Saptasandhdna, 301. 

Saradasimha, 57. 

^aradatanaya, 322, 323* 324, 325, 397. 
Saraha, 361. 

f Saraharagadh, 65. 

Saraju, 157. 

&aranadeva, 319. 

Sarana Kavi, 370. 

Sarahgadeva (VSghela), 71, 73, 81, 85, 
90 194. 

Sarasvata, 320. 

Sarasvataprakriya, 320. 

Sarasvatl, 112, 118, 131, 132, 658. 
Sarasvati-gachchha, 432. 
Sarasvatikanthdbhnrana, 322. 

Sarasvati Mahal Library, Catalogue or 
MSS. in, 386. 

Sarasvati temple at Gadag, 698. 
Sdr&rtka-ehatiishtaya, 439. 
Sdratthadtpam , 342. 
Sardha-Paumamiyaka-mata, 432. 
^ardulavikridita, 305. 

Sariputta, 341, 342, 343. 

Sarkar H. B, 472, 110(n). 
garma, ft. 385, 31 (n). 

&aran-agati f 439. 

Samal (Kaira District), 602. 

Samath, 25, 26, 655, 673. 

6amgadevo, 329, 338. 

Samgadhara, 85, 191, 328. 

Sarupya, 455. 

SarngadharcL-paddhcti, 108. 

Sarugh, 12. 

Sarva, 457. 

Sarvadeva Suri, 432. 

Sartmdhik&ns, 281, 283. 

Sarvajayadeva Suri, 432. 
Sarvajhasrlrakshita, 420. 

Sarvarakshita, 319. 

Sarvatantrasvatantra, 439. 

Sarvatobhadra , 639. 

Sarva vinodan&jaka , 384, 23(n). 
&asakapura —See Sosavir. 

Sas Bahu temple, 595. 

£asiprabha, 307. 

Sasivrata, 105. 

Sassanians, 149. 
ddstraikasamadhigamya, 291. 

Sdstras. 288, 290, 291, 293, 295. 332. 
Sastri, H. P„ 401, 471. 110(n). 

Sastri. K. A. N.. 25, 233, 3(n), 4, 255. 
5a(n), 286, 100(n), 108, 469, 7(n). 
8. 529, 105(n), 620, 698, 172(n), 173, 
177 etc. 


j tidsvatakosa, 318. 

Sataka, 304, 341. 

&atananda, 207, 329. 

Satara. 176. 

Satartha-kavya, 301. 

Sataslokt, 320. 

Sat Deuliya, 607. 

Sati, 260, 495. 

Satikal, 495. 

Sat-k&rya-t&da, 456. 

Satna, 659. 

Satrunjaya, 394, 433, 434, 662. 

Sattasai , 303. 

Sattiga(ma )—See Satyasraya. 

S&ttvika , 273. 

Satyadhara, 313. 

Satya-Harischandra, 435. 

Satyapura, 88-89. 

Satyaraja (Paramara), 73. 

Satyasraya, 167. 

Satyasraya (Chalukya), 164-165, 235. 
Saunaka, 335. 

Saundatti, 164, 180, 186. 
gauraseni, 345, 346, 347, 351, 358, 
Saurashtra’, 53, 76, 77, 87, 180, 181, 394, 
523, 526, 687. 

Savaka King, 735. 

6avara, 480. 

&avari-Narayana, 574, 604. 

Savarna, 331. 

Savimalai. 227, 229. 

Saymur, 517, 521, 528. 

S&rjujya, 455. 

Sayyid Ahmad Sultan Snkhi Sarwar, 
467. 

Sayyid Ibrahim Shahid, 469. 

Sayyid Jalal Bukhari, 468. 

Sayyid Jalal-ud-dtn Surkhposh. 473. 
Sayyid Muhammad Barahman, 468. 
Scniefner, 470, 24(h). 

Schmidt, 315. 

Sciences, Ancillary, 329-330. 

Scientific Literature, 317-330, 342-343. 
Sculpture, 640 ff. 

Sea-voyage, 493. 

Sehwan. 133. 

Sekkilar, 245, 362, 365. 

Sejakpur, 595. 

&eliyas, 234. 

Sembiyan Mah&devi, 236. 

Sen. B. C., 286, 55(n). 

Sen, D. C., 388, 102a(n). 

Sen, P., 296, 21 (n). 

Sen. S., 359, 360. 

Sena, 355, 510. 

Senapati (senapfiM), 251, 276, 277, 283. 
Senas. 32, 33, 35-41, 42, 47. 53, 54, 62, 
123. 128, 145, 159, 207, 222. 238, 276, 
286, 648, 649. 691. 

—of Pithi 49. 146. 

—, Administrative Organisation of, 
276-277. 

“Sendsls”, 522. 

Sendamahgalam, 202, 247, 248, 249, 257. 
Sehgundar, 251. 

Senniyanvidudi. 672. 

Seondha —See Kanhargarh- 


927 






Seori-narayapa, 574. 

Seringapatam, 186, 189. 

Seffhis , 280. 

Setu* 441. 

Seunachandra I, 176, 185. 

Seupa-desa, 65, 162, 163, 167, 172, 176, 
177, 185. 

Seunapura, 185. 

Se(v)una(s), 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 
192,' 193, 194, 195, 196. 
Sevyasevakopadeaa 305. 

Sewell, R., 224, 30(n), 225, 35(n), 268, 
47(n). 

Shafibhashdchandrilca, 347. 
SIw&bhMjhA-nwrmita-Partoaiiiwstavana, 
346. 

Shahabad, 49, 146. 

Shahdda, 504. 

Shahamuni, 388, 97(n). 

Shahl, 13. 

Shahiduilah, M., 359, 360, 361. 

Shahis, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 
17, 22, 26, 67, 97. 

Shahkot, 467. 

Shah of Qirat, 500. 

Shah Sultan, 504. 

Shah Turkan, 136. 

Shaikh Hamid Lodi, 8. 

Shaikh Hasan Saghani, 503. 

Shaikh Isma‘il (of Lahore), 467. 

Shaikh Jaiai-ud-din Tabriz!, 469. 
Shaikh Muntakhab-ud-dln, 469. 

Shaikh Mohammad, 388. 

Shaikh Qutb-ud~din Bakhtyar KakI, 
469. 

Shaikh Sadr-ud-dln, 468. 

Shams-i Siraj’ Afif, 203. 

Shams-ud-dln (of Delhi )—See Kayu- 
mars. 

Shams-ud-dln (of Kashmir), 102, 
Shams-ud-din Dabir, 594. 

Shams-ud-din Muhammad, 97, 117, 124, 
130. 

Shan, 381, 756. 

Shans, 44. 

Shansabanls, 95, 96, 116. 

Sharma, S. B., 507, 173(n). 

Sharva—See Sirsawa. 

Shashthadeva, 167, 172, 175. 
Shashthadeva II, 192. 
Shafkarmopadesa-See Chhakakkam - 
movaesa. 

Shatpadt, 370. 

Skatsrthala 368. 

Sher Khan, 140, 143, 144, 153. 

Shihab- i - Muhmira, 504. 

Shihab-ud-din Muhammad—See 

Mu‘izz-ud-din Muhammad Ghuri. 
Shihab-ud-dm Suhrawardl, 468. 
Shikarpur, 163, 167, 177, 188. 189. 
Shimoga, 163, 167, 169, 170, 172, 177, 179, 
180, 181, 182, 183, 188, 191, 192, 193, 
194, 195, 228, 229. 

Shirur, 521. 

Sho-po, 750. 

Shorapur, 168, 


<SL 

“Shore” temple, 612, 613. 

Shrine of Durga at Batfesvara (Cut¬ 
tack), 555. 

Shyam, 760. 

Sialkot, 97, 118, 133. 

Siam, 339, 650, 678, 679, 735, 739, 741, 

742, 748, 758, 760, 762, 764, 773. 

Sibi, 7, 

Siddha, 348. 

Siddhachala, 433. 

Siddho,hema, 391, 392, 396. 
Siddhahemachandra, 347. 

Siddhalagrama, 331. 

Siddhantabodha , 388. 

Siddhantagama, 448. 

Siddhdntajdhnam. 44 1 . 

Siddhdntaratna , 441. 

Siddhantasiromani, 328, 329. 

Siddhantins, 366. 

Siddhapala, 310. 

Siddhapura, 75, 76, 595, 596, 662. 
Siddharabasti pillar inscription, 431. 
Siddharaja Jayasimha, 596. 

Siddharama, 367. 

Siddhararaesvara 626. 

Siddharanya, 540, 545, 547. 

Siddhas, '359, 361. 

Siddha Santagupta, 472. 

Siddhesvara, 545, 609. 

Siddhesvara-Kedaresvara group, 546. 
Siddhesvara Vanaratna, 427. 

Siddhitraya, 437. 

Si~en, 760. 

Sihadeva— See Narendradeva. 

Sijistan, 1.* 

Sikandar Khan Ghnzl, 4.4. 

Sikkara, 531, 532, 539, 553, 557, 558, 560, 

562, 563, 564, 566, 567, 568, 570, 571, 

573, 576, 580, 589, 590, 592, 397, 598, 

599, 600, 601, 603, 607, 609. 613. 623, 

626, 629. 

Sikhism, 351. 

Sikh Religion, 388. 

Sikkim dialects, 381. 

gilaharas, 66, 101, 162, 164, 167, 171, 174, 

176, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 

189, 192, 193, 197, 198, 281, 319, 333, 

622. 

Sila Sampadarie, 370. 

&ilhana— See Bill)ana. 

Silk, '322. 

Stlovaeseitidld , 346. 

Silparatna, 329. 

Silpasastras, 530, 556. 

Silpa texts, 622. 

Silsilat-ul-Ansdb , 504. 

Simaramapura— See Simraon. 

Sirhghafa (Chahamana), 82. 

Sirhha (feudatory of Lata), 70, 71. 

Siriiha (Writer), 348. 

Sirhhadatta, 209, 210, 211. 

Simhadeva, 102. 

Simhala, 180, 181, 184, 522. 

Simhalese works, 340, 341. 

SirhhanSda Lokesvara, 657. 

Simhapura, 33. 34, 261, 265, 267, 268. 
Simharaja, 347, 350. 


m 








ipmg, 


j, 763. 

Simraon, 47, 48. 

Simhdsa nadndtrimSikd, 315. 

Sind. 107, 260. 

Sindavadi— See Sundavatti. 

Sindas, 167, 175, 176, 177, 178, 180, 181, 
182, 188, 191, 214, 215, 229, 281. 
Sindh, 1, 21, 57, 60, 75. 94, 117, 128, 
131, 133, 137, 143, 144, 197, 351, 520, 
521 584. 

Sindhu (poet), 299. 

Sindhu, 1, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 21, 75, 93, 94, 
101, 124, 130, 132, 133, 141, 142, 143, 
144, 153, 177, as, 399. 
Smdhudurga, 517, 5a. 

Sindabur, 521. 

Sindhukas, 90. 

Sindhula, 82, 434. 

Sindhuraja, 435. 

Sindhuraja (Chahamana), 88. 
Sindhuraja (of Lata), 71. 

Sindhuraja (Paramara), 66, 73, 164, 190, 
307. 

Sindhuraja (Chief), 190. 

Sihgabhupala, 324, 325. 

Singalas, 234. 

Sihgan, 170. 

Sihganam, 174. 

Siangan fu, 522. 

Singepalle, 170. 

Sihgeya—Nay aka, 194. 

Sihghana (Kalachuri), 181, 182, 184. 
Sihghana (Yadava), 71, 80, 81, 188-192, 
197; 201, 202, 329, 511. 

Singhasari, 751. 

Singupuram, 268, 2(n). 

Singur, 33, 268, 2(n). 

Sinhalese, 238, 243, 245, 246, 257, 258, 
263, 282, 286. 

Sinnar, 602. 

Sino-Tibetan, 377. 

Sino-Tibetan languages, 357. 

Sin-to (Supd^). 750. 

Siraguppa, 187. 

Sirahsil5, 101. 

Sirat-i-Jatdl-ud-din Mangbarru , 109, 

10(n). 

Sircar, D. C. 102, 6b(n). 

Sirhind, 12, 15, 94, 109, 110, 111, 113, 
115, 118. 

Sirihara, 348. 

Sirimeghavanna, 340. 

Siri-Saihghabodhi, 340. 
Sirivikkamarajaslha, 340. 

SiriyadevI, 181. 

Sirise, 195. 

Sirmur, 137, 143. 

Sirohi, 72, 87, 121, 186, 386, 660. 

Sirpur (Madhya Pradesh), 532? 

Sirsawa (Sharva), 15, 16, 17. * 

Sirswa, 107. 

Sirur, 517. 

Sirutaram, 250. 

Sisoda, 89, 91, 92. 

Sihipalavadha, 354. 

Sistan, 7. 

SIta, 312, 363, 767. 


Sittarma vasal, 676, 679, 

Sitti, 171. 

Siva, 87. 

Siva (Pantheon), 184, 299, 301, 307, 308, 
653, 664, 672, 673, 685. 

Siva-Buddha cult, 763. 

Sivadasa, 315. 

Sivadeva, 46, 47. 

Sivaditya, 336. 

Siva-gayatri. 449. 

Siva-jhana-bodham, 365, 366, 450. 
Siva-jnana-siddhiyar, 365, 366, 450. 

Siva Nataraja, 684. 

Sivamara, 230. 

£ivaprak&sam t 365, 366, 450. 

Sivapuri, 199. 

Sivarajadeva, 29, 30. 

Sivaratri festival, 768. 

Sivaharana Ragalegalu, 370. 

Siva temple, 586. 

£ivatva, 455. 

SiwaUk, 83, 148. 

Six Thousand , 439. 

Slyaka II, 73. 

Skanda, 106, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114. 
Skanda Purana, 330. 

Skandavarman I, 224. 

Skrefsrud, L. O., 380. 

Slave Dynasty— See Mamluk Sultans. 
SJesha, 300, 305. 

Sloka, 301, 305. 

Smaradahana, 768. 

Smith, 380. 

Smith, V. A., 472. 

Smriti-chandrika, 295, l(n), 296, 31 (n), 
‘334, 338, 474, 478, 508, 509, 524, 526. 
Smritimafijan 331. 

Smriti(s), 269, 270, 273, 284, 288, 290, 
295, 298, 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 335, 
508. 

Smritisdgara, 335. 

Smrityarthasara, 334, 505, 506, 508, 514. 
Sobhakara, 324. 

Sobhanarasa, 165. 

Sobhita (ChMiamana), 88. 

Sochharaja (Paramara), 74. 

Sotfdhala, 313, 329. 

Soclha, 105. 

Sohagpur (old Rewa State), 563. 
Sohaphla, 55, 56. 

Solahkls—See Vaghelas. 

Soma, 29. 

Somadeva (Kadamba), 180. 

Somadeva (Poet), 83, 310, 314, 315, 319. 
SomaladevI, 82. 

Somamurti, 396. 

Somanatha, 19,20, 21, 23, 70, 74. 
Scmandtha Charite, 370. 
Somanatha-pattana, 596. 

Somanatha, the Shrine Eternal, 23, 

110a). 

Somapala (Lohara), 100. 
Somapdlavilasa, 308. 

Somaprabha, 345, 348. 
Somaprabhacharya, 301, 305. 
Somaprabha Suri, 433. 

I Somapura, 511. 


929 






THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRfe 



Somapura— See Paharpur. 

Somapura Mahdvikdra, 635. 

Somapun, 415, 417. 

Somaraja, 370, 444. 

Somasimha (Paramara), 73. 
Somavamsxs, 27, 31, 48, 61, 166, 205. 209- 

214, 217, 218, 219, 224, 237. 

Somayaji 334. 

Some Historical Aspects of the Inscrip¬ 
tions of Bengal, 286, 55(n). 
Somendra, 420. 

Somesvara (author), 370. 

Somesvara, (Chahamana), 77, 78, 82, 
83, 104, 106, 108. 

Somesvara I (Chalukya), 27, 43, 50, 63, 
66, 167-173, 175, 198, 215, 220, 240, 
241 242 429 443 

Somesvara II (Chalukya), 68, 170, 172, 
173-174 242 420 443 
Somesvara HI (Chalukya), 53, 177-178, 
179, 230, 301, 338, 352, 510. 
Somesvara IV (Chalukya), 179, 182-183, 
185. 

Somesvara I (Chhindaka-Naga), 214, 

215, 216, 217, 218. 

Somesvara' (Choda/Chola), 214, 215, 212, 
220 . 

'Somesvara II, (Choda, Cho]a), 219, 220, 

221 . 

Somesvara III (Choda, Chola), 221. 
Somesvara (Hoysala), 192, 231, 232, 233, 
248, 258. 

Somesvara (Somadeva, Sovideva) (Ka- 

lachuri), 181. 

Somesvara (Naga), 65. 

Somesvara (Officer), 106. Ill, 112. 
Somesvara (Paraynara), 74, 77. 
Somesvara (Silahara), 192, 193. 
Somesvara (SomavamsI), 213, 214, 217, 
218 219 

Somesvara (Silahara), 192, 193. 
Somesvara (poet), 300, 302, 329. 
Somesvaradatta, 309. 

Somesvaradeva, 46. 
Somesvaradeva-varman, 220, 221. 
Somesvara pataka, 370. 

Somesvara temple, 10, 579. 

Somnathpur, 632, 668. 

Son, 562. 

Sonargaon, 42, 154. 

Sondhi-“ See Kanhargarh, 

Son pat, 93. 

Sonigaras, 87. 

Sonpur. 65, 213, 214, 217, 219. 220, 221. 
Sopanadeva, 353, 387. 

Sora, 380. 

Sorab, 163, 188, 189. 

Soratur, 186. 

Sosavlr, 227, 228. 

South Arcot, 445. 

South-East Asia, 640. 

South India, 50, 63, 233, 235 . 238, 248, 
251, 259, 261, 265, 266, 284, 287, 298, 
304, 313, 327, 335, 402 
I^aw and Legal Institutions, 290-295. 
Sovideva, 181, 200. 

Spanda , 421. 


<3L 


Spices, 517. 

Spikenard, 517, 522. 

Sraddha, 332, 334, 335, 336. 
Sraddhakalpa , 335, 336. 
Sraddhadina-kritya-vi'itti, 433. 

6ravana Belgola, 175, 352, 576. 

SravastI, 422, 
tirenij 291. 

6renika, 309. 

Sreiiis, 524. 

§reshtlu, 275. 

Sri Abhayadeva Suri, 432. 

Srx Bhashya y 439. 

Sribrahma, 317. 

§richandra, 345, 348, 349, 434. 
6rI-Dasavala-garbha, 416. 

Srldatta Upadhyaya, 335, 336. 

SridevI, 300. 

&rldhairya, 321. 

&ridhara (Governor of Somanatha), 70. 
Sridhara (Mathematician), 328, 329, 334. 
§ridhara (Minister), 195. 
gridhara (of Tardavadi), 180. 
6ridharadasa, 40, 305. 

Sriharsha, 54, 298, 299, 323, 336. 
6riha$ta, 44. 

6rihira, 298. 

§rl Jayasakti, 754. 

Srikakulam, 212, 267, 268. 
^ri-Kaiachakra, 412. 

Srikalasa, 434. 

Srikandapuram, 521. 

Srikantha-charita, 299, 318, 323. 
Srikara, 270, 287. 

&rf Kesari-varman, 753, 

Srikumara, 329. 

6rimala—See Bhinmal. 

Srlmitra, 423. 

£rinagara, 98, 99, 101. 
$ri-Ndmadeva~Charitra t 387, 94(n). 

Sri Nandana-varma-deva, 744. 
grlnandi, 434. 

&ri Nafaraja, 444. 

£rmdra-Jaya-varman, 741. 
6rindra-varman 741. 

6ringara, 299, 304, 322. 

SrihgaraprakcLsa, 298, 322, 324, 338. 
Srihgaravairdgyatarahgini, 305. 
{§rinivasanalur, 669. 

6ri Pala, 229. 

6ripala Traividyadeva, 429. 

$riparvata (-sailam), 165. 
Sriperumbudur, 337. 

£rlpurambiyam, 256. 

Sri Rdmdasi Samsodhana . 386, 72(n). 
Srlrahgam, 231, 247, 258, 404, 436, 516, 
669. 

Srisaila(m), 373, 445. 

Sristambha Tirtha, 433. 

6ri Satana, 656. 

6rl Suradhipa, 754. 

£rivaishnavas, 436. 

£nvallabha, 262, 263, 265. 

SrTvardhana. 186. 

Srlvatsa, 336. 

Srlvijaya, 239, 731. 
Sri-Vijaya-MahadevI, 753. 


980 




£ri-Vishaya, 731. 

SriyadevI, 40. 

^rotriya Brahmanas, 476. 

Srutakirti 428. 

Srutaprakasika, 439. 

grutiman Nakkan Chandiran, 165. 

Stack, 380. 

Stambha —See Cambay. 

Star-shaped plan, 602, 624. 

Stein, M. A., 385, 38(n). 
Sthala-purapas, 379. 

Sthirapala, 422. 

Stone-cutting, 519. 

Stone-polishing, 519. 

Story Literature, 313-316. 

Stotraratna, 437. 

Stotras, 304, 346. 

Stridhana, 290, 294, 481. 

Strzygowski, 677. 

Studies in Indo-Muslim History , 23, 
5(n). 

Studies in, Medieval Indian History , 507, 
173(n). 

Studies in the Puranic Records on 
Hindu, Rites and Customs , 385, 
42ta). 

Stupi, 533, 610, 694. 

Stupikd f 533, 610, 611, 612, 614, 618, 619, 
620. 


Subahu, 185, 196. 

Subandhu, 312. 

Subara (Suparem or Supara), 518, 521. 
Subhadra, 302, 310, 435. 
SubhadrU-Dhananjaya, 310. 
^ubhakaragupta, 416. 
Subhashitaratnasandoha , 305, 349. 
Subhashitdimli, 305, 306. 

Subhata, 312. 

Subhatavarma(n), (Paramara), 70, 79, 


188, 435. 

Subhuti (-chandra), 319. 
Subinpha, 45. 
Suboahdlamkdra, 343. 
Su-chau, 522. 

6uchivarman (Guhila), 89. 
Sudarsana (author), 439. 
Sudarsana-charita , 348. 
$uddha~6aivas, 447. 
Suddhi, 332. 

Sudkdkalasa , 435. 

Sudhava, 82, 83. 

Sudra. 475, 476, 509. 


Sudraka, 27, 28 
Sufi, 468. 

Sufi saints 467. 

Sugala, 262, 263. 

Sugar, 517. 

Sugatas, 412. 

Suhadeva, 102. 

Suhala, 53, 101. 
Suhdsiyarayananihi , 349. 
Suhrawardis, 468. 
£ukadhdnya r 516. 
Sukapha, 44. 

£ukasaptati . 315. 
Sukhanchpha, 45. 
Sukhapala, 8. 


Sukhodaya, 760, 761. 

Sukla Yajurveda, 334, 336. 

Sukotai, 760. 

Sukracharya, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273. 
Sukra ki Rajamti, 285, l(n). 
Sukranitisdra , 269, 270, 271, 284, 285, 328. 
Sukritakirtikallolini , 309. 
Sulcritasamkirtana, 309. 

Suktimuhtdvali, 192, 306. 
Sukti-Sudhdrnava, 372. 
Sukumdla-chariu, 348. 

Sukumara, 348. 

Sulapani, 331. 

Sulhana, 69, 82. 

£ulka, 294. 

Sultana Raziah, 160, 23(n). 

Sultanls, 467. 

Sultankot, 120. 

Suluhgal, 172. 

SumanahsrI ,420. 

SuynancLsdntaka, 768. 

Sumangalavildsini, 342. 
Sumatindtha-charita , 345, 346. 

Sumatra, 236, 239, 250, 521, 522, 526, 6$Q, 
732. 

Sumitra, 309, 324. 

Sumra, 117. 

Sumvara (Chief), 77. 

Sun, 271, 272. 

Sunak, 580, 592, 593. 

Sunam, 153. 

Sunarpal, 218. 

Sunda (W. Java), 751. 

Sundara, 685. 

Sundarabhatta, 441. 

Sundara Chola, 234, 236. 

Sundara Panijya, 231. 

Sundarar, 366, 450, 672. 

Sundari. 261. 

Sundarisataka , 303. 

Sundavatti, 164. 178. 180, 181, 187, 191, 
192, 194, 215, 281. 

Sunderbuns, 609. 

Sundha Hill. 80. 

Sunnam, 507. 

Sun temple, 209, 540, 543, 551, 586, 635. 
&unya Purdna (of Bengal), 380. 
Sunyatd, 405, 406, 407, 408, 411, 412. 
Supasandha-chariya, 345. 

Suprabha, 768. 

Suprabhacharva, 349, 
Suprabhdta-prabhdta-stotra , 418. 
Suprabhedaqama, 694, l(n). 

Surabaya, 749. 

Surachanda (Surachand), 88. 
Suraeharya, 434. 

Suraditya, 67. 

£urapala (of Kanauj), 50. 

Surapala (of Kuiavati), 29. 

Surapaia II, 28, 36. 

£uras, 36. 

Surasundart-chariya , 344. 

Surat 162, 192. 

Suratha, 300. 

Surathotsava , 300. 

Suraitrana (Chahamann). 85 
Suresvara (Surapala), 328. 


931 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


55 


Suris, 302. 

SursutI —See Sarasvati. 

Surya, 373, 577, 643, 653. 

Surya Jaya-varma-deva, 738. 
Suryagupta, 420. 

Suryamati, 97 , 98, 314, 483. 

Suryapala, 56. 

Suryasena, 102. 

Suryavarhsa Rama Mahadharmaraja- 
dhiraja, 761. 

Surya-varma-deva, 738, 739. 
Suryavarman I, 736, 762, 765. 
Suryavarman II, 737, 738, 745. 

Su&ruta, 328. 

Sussala (Lohara), 99, 100. 

Suteupha, 44, 45. 

Sutlej, 11, 13, 83, 132, 143. 

Sfttra, 320, 322, 323, 324, 326. 

Sutra (Mdo-Hgrel), 418. 

Sutradh&ra, 310, 

Sutrapada, 586, 588. 

Suttaividdesa, 343. 

Suvarnadeva, 29, 32. 

Suvaniadvipa, 255, 3(n), 507, 149(n). 
Suvarpadvipa, 522, 764. 

Suvarnagiri, 87. 

Suvarpagrama, 37. 

Suvarpakesari, 212. 

.Suvarpapura —See Sonpur. 
Suvrittatilaka , 325, 

Svdbhdvikas, 427. 

Svaim, 664. 

Svapnachintdmani, 330. 

Svatva, 288, 289.* 

Svayambhu, 326, 393. 

Svaywmbhuva Agama, 445. 
Svayambhuchchhandas , 397. 
Svayavwara (self-choice), 480. 
&vet5mbara/s, 301, 311, 315. 

£vet&mbara! Pa^tavalis, 432. 
Svetdsvatara, 457. 

Swat, 18. 

SySmala, 321. 

Sylhet, 383, 650. 

See also Srlhafta. 

Syntax, 342. 

Synteng, 381. 

Syrian Christians, 496. 

T 

Tabanendra-varma-deva, 753. 
Tabaqdt-i-Akbari , 115, 2(n). 
Tabaqat-i-msiri, 39, 84, 115, 2(n), 503. 
Tabarhind (ah) —See Sirhind. 

Tabaristan, 1. 

Taddewadi, 161. 

Tadigaipadi(vadi), 234, 235. 

Tagara, 184. 

T&garate, 180. 

Tagarila-gachchha, 432. 

Tahanapala, 55. 

Tahangarh, 55, 56, 120, 134, 148. 

Tahir/ids, 1. 

Taikas, 42. 

Taila I (Chalukya), 161. 

Taila(pa) H, 161-164, 223, 515. 


<SL 


Taila(pa) in (Nurmadi), 178-179, 180, 
182, 197, 199. 

Taila (Kadamba), 178. 

Tailap(p)a(yya), 161. 

Tailakampa, 29. 

Tailapavamsls, 223. 

Taittiriya Samhita, 506, 64(n). 

Tajikas, 102. 

Taj-ud-din, 504. 

Taj-ud-din Yildiz, 125, 130, 131, 132, 
159, 

Tdj-ul-Ma’dsir , 56, 115, l(n), 503, 504. 
Takas, 304. 

Takash, 124. 

Takhelgnamba , 383. 

Takht-i-Bahi, 576. 

Takka, 389. 

Takka-Y&gapparani, 364. 

Takkola (Talaittakkolam), 239. 
Takkolam, 251, 256. 

Talahara- bhumi, 65. 

Talahari, 65. 

Talaittakkolam, 731. 

Tala-jangha , 543. 

Talakad, 227, 228, 230, 244. 

Tales, Didactic, 315. 

Tales, Romantic, 314-315. 

Tamar Khan, 141. 

Tamasa, 273. 

Tamil, 301. 

Tamil Nad, 372. 

Tamil Poetry, 361. 

Tamil/s (country) 226, 232, 234, 236, 238, 
244, 248, 262, 264, 266, 267. 

Tamil Puranas, 404. 

Tamil Vedai 438. 

Tamil Vyasa, 365. 

Tamralinga, 267. 

Tamraparni, 259, 520. 

Tang, 759. 

Tangyur, 419. 

Tanjore. 66, 165, 198, 231, 234, 236, 240, 

243, 245, 247, 249, 256, 318, 376, 516, 

618, 619, 621, 622, 672, 676, 684, 685, 

686 . 

Tanjuhgpura (S. W. Borneo), 754. 
Tantra(s), 304, 404, 405, 649, 653. 
Tantrukhyayika, 316. 

Tantrdloka , 384. 

Tantrapalas, 279. 

Tantra-samuchchaya ,, 694, 1, 6. 13(n), 
Tantrayana (of Buddhism), 751. 

Tantrik, 400, 401, 403, 404, 436. 

Tantrik Buddhism, 404, 406, 407, 412, 

Tantrik cult, 737. 

Tantrism, 404, 405, 407. 

Taoists, 764. 

Tapa-gachchha, 433. 

Tapas, 271. 

Tapasi, 748. 

Tapati, 310. 

Tapati-Samvarana , 310. 

Tapi, 352. 

Ta Prohm Inscription, 739. 

Tapti, 190. 

Tarn, 657. 


932 






Tara Chand, 472, 143(n). 

Taraga, 662. 

Tarain, 105, 110, 111, 112, 115, 118, 128, 
132. 

Taranatha, 415. 

Tardavadi 1000, 161, 177, 170, 180, 181, 
185, 186, 192. 

Tariiindah —-See Sirhind. 

Tarikadu, 179. 

Ta'rikh-e-Wassdf, 160, 30(n). 
Ta’rikh-i-Alfi, 115, 2(n), 160, 44(n). 
Ta'rikh-t-Jahan Kusha, 159, 10(n). 
Ta J rikh-i~ Mubarak Shahi, 42. 

Tarings, 597. 

Tarkabhasha, 336. 

Tarkaxamgraha, 336. 

T&rkika Chakravarti, 370. 
TdrhikarakshA, 336, 

Tametar, 589, 590. 

Tartary, 132. 

Tatar Khan, 142, 154. 

Tathagatas, 411. 

Tatkratu~nyaya, 457. 

Tatpurusha, 445. 

Tattvachintdmani, 336. 

Tativaprakdia , 443. 

Tattvmdra, 439. 

Taui&titamatatilaka, 331. 

Taylor, M., 627. 

'Kivumanavar, 451. 

Tejahptla (Minister), 79, 312, 394, 433, 
581, 661. 

Tejakantha, 101. 

Tejasimha (Chahamana), 89. 

Tejasimha (Guhila), 90. 

Tel, 219. 

Telakatdhagdthd , 341. 

Telanga (Teluhga, Tillanga), 53, 193, 
198, 199, 200, 202, 220, 223 319, 337. 
Teli-ka-mandir, 555. 

Telkupi, 606. 

TeMgapa, 53, 177, 179, 192, 196,199, 203, 
223. 

Te]laru, 248, 256. 

Telugu-Choda(s), 74, 200, 205, 214, 216, 
217, 218, 219-221, 222, 246, 247, 248, 
257. 

Telugu language, 372. 

Telugu Literature (of P. T. Raju), 388, 
114, 119 (h). 

Temara, 218. 

Temples at Amarkantak and Sohag- 
pur, 565. 

Temple of Bodha-Gaya, 757. 

Temple of Jagannatha (at Purl), 550, 
552. 

Temple at Kasara, 593. 

Temple of Kesavanarayana, 502, 564. 
Temple of Lakshmana (brick), 532. 
Temple of Lakshmana (at Sirpur), 557. 
Temple of Machchhendranatha, 562. 
Temple of Neminatha, 579, 580, 581 
Temple of Sarasvatl, 628. 

Temple of Subrahmanya, 620. 

Temple of Virafesvara Siva, 563. 
Tenasserim, 756. 

Tene, 373. 


Tenkalai, 438. 

Tessitori, L. P., 389, 396, 4(n). 
Tevaram, 361, 365, 368. 

Thai(s), 735,741, 74 2, 755, 758, 760. 

Tai script, 761. 

Thakuris, 45, 46, 92. 

Than, 585, 589. 

Thana (Tana), 162, 192, 517, 521, 602. 
Thaneswar, 10, 11, 23, 67, 94, 110. 
Thangir, 134. 

Thanton, 756. 

Theory of gunas, 464. 

Thera, 342, 343. 

Theravada, 756. 

Thirapadra-gachchha, 432. 

Thirty-six Thousand, 440. 

Thoibi, 383. 

Thomas, 159, 12(n), 160, 18(n). 
Thupavarhsa , 340. 

Tibet, 43, 44, 45, 53, 102, 123, 319, 359, 
416, 649, 665, 666, 667, 676, 755. 
Tibetan Buddhist literature, 416. 
Tibeto-Burman, 377. 

Tibetan Chronicles, 27, 45, 146. 

Tlkas, 342. 

Tikkaima, 374. 

Tilak, 92, 93. 

Tilaka, 323. 

Tilaka-kalasa, 420. 

Tilopa (Tilopada), 417. 

Tilottama, 768. 

Timgyadeva, 30, 32, 43. 

Timmarasa, 195. 

Tin, 522. 

Tinduli, 574. 

Tinnevelly, 256, 259. 

Tippera, 24, 41. 42, 154, 417, 650, 756. 
Tipra (Mrung), 380. 

TipraS, 382. 

Tfrabhukti —See Mithila. 

Tirhut —See Mithila. 

Tirtha. 332. 

Tirthahalli, 163, 430. 

Tirthakaras, 345, 346, 348. 

I Tirukkalirrup-padiyar, 450. 

Tirumalai, 236, 238, 684, 686. 
Tirumalaipuram, 676, 679. 

Tirum aru ttikunram, 679. 

Tirumukkudal, 242. 

Tirumular, 365. 

Tiruviurais, 365. 

Tiruvdchakam , 361, 365, 368. 
Tiruvalahgadu, 236, 265. 

Tiruvallar, 436. 

Tiruvajluvar, 364. 

Tiruvandiydr, 450. 

Tiruvannamaiai, 232, 247, 670. 
Tiruvarutpayan, 450. 

Tiruvendipuram, 247. 

Tiruvoimoli , 440. 

Tiruvorriyur, 247. 

Toda, 378. 

Tomaras, 4, 52, 82, 94. 

Tondainad, 232. 

Tondamandalam, 252, 259. 

Tonkin, 736, 744. 

Tons, 146. 


988 




tfHE STRUGGLE FOR feMPlfefc 



Tooth Relic, 259, 263, 340. 

Tor(a)ga}(e), 162, 167,178. 

Torana , 540, 579. 

Tosall —See Orissa. 

Tottavdriyam, 252. 

Trailokyamahadevi, 615. 
Trailokyaraja-mauli-bhushana-varma- 
deva, 734. 

Trailokyavarraan(-malla), 55, 59, 60, 64, 
183. 

Trailokyesvara, 615. 

Transoxiana, 1, 2, 19, 503. 

Travancore, 256, 257, 308. 

Travels of Marco Polo , 286, 106(n). 
Trefoil arches, 584. 

Tribhuvana, 50. 

Tribhuvanadi ty a - dharmara j a, 757. 
Tribhuvanam, 247, 622. 
Tribhuvanamalla, 183, 189. 
Tribhuvanesvara, 548, 622. 

Tribhuvani, 241. 

Trichinopoly, 203, 220, 232, 233, 238, 242, 
244, 248, 257, 618. 

Trigarta, 98, 523. 

Trikalihga, 210, 224. 

Tri kdndasesha, 317. 

‘Trilinga’, 373. 

Tfilochanadasa, 320. 

Trilochanapala (Chaulukya), 74, 76, 80, 
81, 90, 171. 

Trilochanapala (Shahi), 11, 12, 13,16,17, 
67, 97. 

Trilokapala, 56. 

Trilokasundari, 261, 263, 267. 
Trinetresvara, 589. 

Tiruparuttikunram, 684. 

Tripathi, R. S., 285, 37<n). 

Tripitaka, 419. 

Triple-shrined temple, 597. 

Tripura, 299. 

Tripuraddha, 311. 

Tripurantaka, 684, 685. 

Tripurl, 27, 48, 58, 61-64, 65, 67, 104, 161, 
164, 204, 213, 274, 423. 

Trisankupati 51. 

Triratha, 537, 538, 558, 

Trisati, 328. , . 

Trishashti-saldkdpurusha-cha'nta, 301, 

315. 

Trivandrum, 234. 

Triveni, 38, 39, 52. 54, 61, 62, 63, 64, 388. 
Trivikrama, 347, 350. 

Trivikramasena, 314, 315. 

Tucci, 667, 668. 

Tukharistan, 2, 3. 

Tughan KhSn, 141, 144, 180. 

Tughluqs, 233. 

Tughril, 154. 

Tughril Beg. 116. 

Tughril tfaiib, 94. 

Tughril-i-Tughan Khan. 208. 

Tuk5rama. 355. 

Tulsidas, 675. 

Tulu, 378. 

Tuluvas. 669, 670. 

Tuman— See TurhmSna. 

Tumapel, 751. 


<SL 


Tumkur, 167, 175, 177, 183. 

Tummana, 32, 61, 64, 201, 207, 213. 
Tunga (Minister), 12, 97. 

Tuhga (River), 169, 170, 189, 193. 
Tuhgabhadra, 165, 169, 170, 171, 174, 180, 
187, 230, 235, 238, 241, 244, 352. 
Tun-huang 693. 

Turagapati, 197. 

Turkey, 260. 

Turkistan, 2, 10, 13, 18, 116, 158. 
Turkomans, 92. 

Turks, 1, 2, 3 , 8, 18, 39, 96, 97, 116-129, 
130, 137, 140, 145, 146, 149, 150, 151, 
152, 156, 159, 160, 382, 497, 677. 
Turushkadarujia 51. 

Turushka(s), 44, 64, 82, 86, 90, 102, 112, 
147, 177, 180, 181, 191, 522. 

Tus 124. 

Tuttan, 169. 

Twelve Thousand , 440. 

Twenty-four Pargaftas, 37. 

Twenty-four Thousand, 440. 

2500 years of Buddhism, 471, 99(n). 
Tyagasimha, 42. 

Tyagavaili, 244. 

U 

Uch, 7, 106, 117, 132, 133, 142, 143, 144, 
468. 

Uehchhala, 29, 99, 100. 

Udabhanda, 3, 6, 8, 10. 

Udagai, 234. 

Udaharana, 322, 323. 

Udaipur, 76, 83, 89, 90. 

Udaiyarpalayam, 238. 
tJdal, 107. 

Udan-kuttam, 281, 282. 

Udasxna , 253. 

Udaya —See Chododaya. 

Udayaditya (Hoysala), 175, 228, 229. 
Udayaditya (Paramara), 68, 69, 75, 82, 

89, 173, 198, 443, 603, 658. 
Udayaditya-varman, 736. 

Udayagiri, 650, 651, 

Udayakarna Nihsankasimha, 43. 
Udayamartanda, 257. 

Udayana (Minister), 76, 77, 434, 754. 
Udayana (Writer), 336. 

Udayanadeva, 102. 

Udavaprabba Suri, 302, 309. 

Udayapura. 210, 443, 575, 602, 658. 
Udayaraja (Officer), 106, 111, 115. 
Udayaraja (Paramara), 74. 

Udayasimha (Chahamana), 80, 87, 88. 

90. 

Udayasundarikathd, 313. 

Udayaesvara temple, 658. 

Udbhata, 323. 

Uddandapura, 27, 415, 425, 511. 

Uddare (Udri), 188, 189. 

Uddhanadvara. 263. 

Uddhavagita , 354. 

Uddyotakesarl Mahabhavagupta IV, 205, 
209, 211, 212, 213, 214, 218, 546. 
ITdepur. 68. 


034 




Udipi, 337. 

Udra —See Orissa. 

Udupu PaLalu (Harvest songs), 61 o. 
Udyana, 419. 

Jjdyoga Parva, 375. 

Udyotana, 389. 

Ugra, 457. 

Ugrasena, 753. 

Ujjarn (UjjayinI), 51, 66, 68, 71, 77, 82, 
95, 172, 340, 656, 658. 

Ujjvala, 335. 
l Ukba Ghuzak, 3. 

Uktai, 142. 

Vlas, 364. 

Ulavi, 446. 

UUasikkama-thaya , 346. 

Ulugh Khan, 81. 85, 86, 90, 203. 

Uma, 448. 

Uma-Mahesvara, 575, 643. 

TJman, 520. 

Umapati, 365. 

Umapatidhara, 37, 309. 
Umapati-sivacharya, 365. 

Undavalli, 611. 

Ungoda, 224. 

University of Nalanda, 510. 

Uhkallu (Unkal), 165. 
Unmai-nerivilahkam , 450. 
Unmai-viiakkam, 451. 
IJpadesapada-irritti, 432. 

Upadesasataka, 304. 

Upddhydyd , 482. 

Upadhyayi, 482. 

Upalada (Upalavada), 223. 

Upama, 322. 

Upanishads, 337, 353. 

Upapatakgs, 509. 

Upa-puranas, 379. 

Upara-jdngha , 543. 

Updsa kc chdra, 435. 

Upatissa. 340. 

Up&yti, 400, 407, 408, 409, 410. 

Upendra (Paramara), 73 
Cr 252. 

Uraiyur (Orayuru), 220, 231, 256. 
Urasa, 98. 

*Urfi, 507, 185. (n). 

Urjayanta, 434. 

Vr-o$eya , 280, 281. 

Ush, *167. 

‘Usman (Caliph), 2. 

JSSSfjJfsfSft 205, 206, 209, 210, 
211, 212, 213. _ 

Utkarsha (Lohara), 98, 99. 

Uton, 761. 

Utpala, 307. 

Utpala —See Munja. 

Utprekshavallabha, 303. 

Uttama, 333. 

Uttama Chola. 162, 164, 165, 234. 
Uttamaraia, 98. 

Uttara-Kdnda, 362, 377. 

Uttarakula, 42. 

Uttar Pradesh, 13, 51, 62, 66, 83, 147. 
Uttarddhyayana, 434. 

Uttaramerur, 252, 253, 254. 


Vttaranmshadhiya , 384. 
Uttarapurana , 301. 
IJtthunaka—See Arthuna. 
Uvata (Poet), 67. 
Uyyakondar, 436. 
Uyyavanda-deva, 450. 
XJzbek Pai, 133. 


Vachana stistra, 368. 

Vachchhaharana, 354. 

Vachissara, 340. 

Vdchya, 321. 

Vadakalai, 438. 

Vadakkutiruvldi (Pillai), 440. 
Vadamalllsvara, 614. 

Vadarinatha, 606. 

Vaddiga, 197. 

Vadehathera, 341. 

Vadiraja, 434, 435. 

Vddi-Vetala, 432. 

Vadnagar, 596. 

Vagatfa, 73, 76, 90. 

Vdganusasana, 375. 

Vagbhala (Acharya), 245, 301, 321, 324, 
328. 335. 

Vagbhata (Chahamana), 84, 85, 147, 434. 
VagbhataUimkdra, 324, 384. 
Vagbhaiamero —See Barmer. 
Vagharakotta, 220, 222. 

Vaghelas, 71, 73, 79, 85, 88, 89, 90, 146, 
160, 190, 192, 193, 194, 195, 309, 496, 
687. 

Vagisvara Janardana, 109. 
Vagisvararakshita, 422. 

Vahadi, 178. 

Vaidarbhi, 322. 

Vaidika Brahmarias, 35. 

Vaidumbas, 205. 

Vaidyadeva, 32, 43, 206. 

Vaidyanatha Mahadeva, 558. 

Vaijalladeva (Minister), 77, 87. 
Vaijayanti, 317, 338, 475, 476, 522. 
Vaikhdnasa-sdstra, 512. 

Vaikuntha Perumah 614. 

Vairagara (Vayiragaram), 65, 216, 217. 
Vairagya, 304. 

Vairagyasdra, 349. 

Vairata (Guhila), 89. 

Vairlsimha (Guhila), 89. 

Vairochana, 411. 

Vairochanavajra, 423. 

Vaisall, 422. 

Vaiseshika, 336, 464. 

Vaishnava, 361, 403, 404, 646. 

Vaishnava padas. 359. _ 

Vaishnavism, 209, 221, 229, 236, 238, 240, 
242, 245, 304, 317, 337, 356, 361. 402, 
435. . _ r 

Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor Reli¬ 
gious Sects , 472, 140(n). 

Vaisyas, 509. 

Vaital deuly 486, 554, 555, 578, 654. 
Vajjada II, 171. 

Vajra, 217, 411. 


935 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 


Vajracharyas, 420. 

Vajradaman, 56. 

Vajradhara, 411. 

Vajrahasta (Anantavarman) V, 63, 172, 
205. 

Vajrasana, 27, 417. 

Vajrasattva, 411, 412 
Vajra-sattvatmika, 411. 

Vajrasena, 393, 394. 

Vajravarman, 33, 34, 62. 

Vajrayana, 358, 411, 690. 

Vakatakas, 54, 

Vakpati-Munja of Malava, 72, 73. 
Vakpatiraja II, 81, 89. 

Vakra-gachchha, 432. 

Vakroktijxvita, 321, 323. 

Valada, 348. 

Valadeva, 169. 

Valanaftua, 251. 

Valahgai (right hand), 477. 
Vajaippanduru, 731. 

ValaSrlbhadra, 420. 

Valipalana, 162. 

Vallabha, 337. 

Vallabhadasa, 315. 

V'allabhadeva, 43, 44. 

Vallabhadeva (author), 305, 306. 
Vallabharaja (Chaulukya), 67, 74. 
Vallabharaja (feudatory), 32. 
Vallalasena, 36, 37, 38, 40, 298, 330, 334, 
338, 443, 510. 

Vallapura, 98, 101. 

Valluri-pattana, 202. 

VUmlki, 362, 363, 767. 

V aImlkisutras, 347, 

Vamacleva, 45, 46. 

Vamana (Poet), 323, 335. 

Vamana, 106, 567. 

Vamanasthali, 80. 

Vfimandap&ti— See Bamra (garh). 
Vaihsatthapalcdsinx , 342. 

VaritMvalx, 46, 48. 

Vanadevarasa, 194. 

Vanainald-ncitikd, 435. 

Vanapati, 205. 

Vanaratna, 472. 

Vanaratna Medharhkara, 341, 343. 
Vanavan Mahadevl, 236. 

Vanayu, 523. 

Vandaru Bhatta, 384, 2(n). 
Vopduvafljeri (Vandalur), 243. 
Vandyaghatlya Sarvananda, 305, 317, 
318 319 

Vahg2lla(s) (Vanga/s), 25, 33-35, 37, 38, 
39, 41, 42, 43, 47, 53, 62, 172, 177, 
180, 186. 197, 238, 416, 518. 
Vahgasena, 328. 

Vangath, 635, 

Vaiicfiya Mah&kosha, 470, 39(n). 
Vcdgiya Sahitya Parishat Patrika, 160, 
27(n). 

Vankuva Ravuta, 191. 

Vanniya-Revan —See Revarasa. 
Vansaraja, 746. 

Vantideva, 101. 

Vapullaka, 58. 

Varadachaxya, 439. 


Varadaraja, 334, 336, 338. 

Varaguna Pantfya, 363. 

Varaha temple (at Kadvar), 586. 
Varakarl-sampradaj/a, 353, 355. 
Vararuchi, 347, 350. 

Vardhamana, 319, 320, 336, 344, 434. 
Vardhamana-Bhukti, 38. 
Vardhamanadeva, 429. 

Vardhamanapura (Deccan), 199. 
Vardhamanapura (Malava), 70. 
Vardhamanapurl (Kathiawar)— See 
Wadhwan. 

Varendra, 208, 335, 417. 

Varendrf, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 36, 37, 40, 
145. 

V&riyams, 252. 

Vdriyapperumakkal , 253. 

Varmans^—See Yadavas. 

VarnadesanA , 317. 

Varnamana, 31. 

Vamasrama, 353. 

Varuna, 271, 272, 377. 

VasantadevI, 423. 

Vasantasena, 487. 

Vasantasena, 313. 

Vasantaxnldsa , 309. 

Vasantgarh, 660. 

Vasantika (temple), 226. 

Vasava, 311. 

Vasavadatta, 434. 

Vaseka, 60. 

Vasishtha, 477. 

Vastupala (Governor), 71, 79, 80, 190, 
300, 302, 309, 312, 433, 581. 

Vasu, N., 160, 27(n). 

Vasudeva (commoner), 300, 335, 525. 
Vasudeva (king), 42. 

Vasudeva-Nayaka, 194. 

Vasudhara, 422. 

Vafakupa, 80. 

Vatapi, 529. 

Vatsa, 334, 335. 

Vatsaraja (Chaulukya), 74, 171. 
Vatsaraja (Minister), 58, 310, 311. 
Vatsaraja (Pratihara), 577. 

Vatsyayana, 330. 

Vatudasa, 40, 305. 

Vayajaladeva (Pratihara), 78. 

Vdyu Pur&iia. , 330. 

Vedanta, 304 , 322, 337, 353, 355, 512. 
Vedantadesika, 439. 

Ved&ntadxpa, 337. 

Veddntasara , 337. 
Vedantaparijdtasaurabha, 441. 
Vedanta-sutras, 466. 

Veddrthasamgraha , 337. 

Vedas, 332, 334, 352, 510, 511. 
Vedavyasa, 441. 

Vedt, 539. 

Vedikd, 540. 

Velaikkaras. 251, 262, 494. 

Velanantf(s), 174, 180, 181, 182, 199, 200, 
206, 207. 

Volapura. 526. See also Belur. 

Vcllala, 366. 

Vellur, 670. 

Venatf, 243. 

939 




INDEX 


Vcnas, 476. 

Venbu metre, 363. 

Vehgl (Vengai-nadu), 68, 168, 170, 171, 
174, 200, 204, 205, 207, 217, 234, 235, 
240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 251, 375, 
658. 

Venkafanatha, 439. 

Verikatavarada, 385. 

Vennai, 450. 

Venugrama —See Belgaum. 

Vesara, 530, 531, 622. 
Vetalapanchammsatilcd , 314. 

VibUga, 289. 

Vibhasha, 347. 

Vibhava , 438. 

Vibhutichandra, 416. 

Viehchaya, 167. 

Vtchis, 305. 

Vichitravxra, 209, 214. 

Vidarbha, 177. 

Viddasiha, joi. 

Viddliasalabhanjikii, 310. 

Videha-rajya, 759. 

Vidushaka, 312. 

Vidy5bhushana, S. C., 470, 32(n), 34. 
Vidyachakravartin. 313. 

Vidyadhara (Chandella), 16, 17, 18, 57, 

58, 66. 

Vidyadhara, 325. 

Vidyadharas, 344. 

Vidyamadhava, 301. 

Vidyananda Sun, 433. 

Vidyanatha, 203, 223, 310. 

Vidyapati Gauda, 109. 

Vidyaranya, 440. 

Vidyutpura, 80. 

Vienna Oriental Journal, 160, 42(n). 
Vigraha, 56. 

Vigrahapala, 50. 

Vigrahapala II, 24. 

Vigrahapala III, 27. 28, 62. 

Vigraharaja I (Chahamana), 163. 
Vigraharaja III (Chahamana), 68, 82. 
Vigraharaja IV (Chahamana), 82, 83, 87, 

104, 106, 120, 298, 310. 

Vigraharaja (Lohara), 97, 98, 101. 

Vihara, 123. 

Viharapafaka. 334. 

Vijada (Chahamana), 88. 89. 

Vijaya (City), 738, 744, 746, 749, 752. 

Vijaya (of Gujarat), 77. 

Vijaya (of Nepal)—See Jayakama. 
Vijayabahu I Srisahghabodhi, 177, 243, 

261, 262, 263. 267. 

Vijayabahu H, 265. 

Vijayabahu IV, 267. 

Vijayabahu VI (VIra Alakesvara), 267. 
Vijayachandra (Gahadavala), 49, 54, 64, 

83, 298, 502. 

Vijayachandra Suri, 433. 
Vijaya-Chandrakevalin, 344. 

Vijayaditya, (Chalukya), 615. 

Vijayaditya (Kadamba), 175, 176, 181. 

182. 

Vijayaditya (Silahara), 179, 180. 184. 
Vijayaditya VII (Eastern Chalukya), 

64, 68, 168, 170, 171, 204, 205, 243. 

987 ^ 


Vijaya-Gandagopala, 202, 203. 
Vijayakamadeva, 46. 

Vijayalaya Chollsvara temple, 684. 
Vijayalayas, 242, 617. 

Vijayamalla, 99. 

Vijayanagara, 233, 267, 350, 495, 611, 
622, 669, 670, 671. 

Vijaya Narasirhha I, 230, 429. 
Vijayapala, 69. 

Vijayapala (Chandella), 58, 61. 
Vijayapala (Kachchhapaghata), 57. 
Vijayapala (Poet), 310. 

Vijayapala (Pratlhara), 56. 

Vijaya (-pala), (Yadu), 55. 

Vijaya Pandya, 180, 183. 

Vijaya! Parsvanatha, 230. 

Vijayapura —See Nadiya. 

Vijayaraja (of Nidravall), 29. 
Vijayaraja (of Vagada), 73. 
Vijayarajapura —See Poloimaruva. 
Vijayasena, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 43, 47, 
53, 206, 207, 276 394. 

Vijayasimha (Chahamana) 87, 88. 
Vijayasimha (Guhila), 89. 

Vijayasimha (Kalachuri), 60, 64. 

Vijaya Sirhha Suri, 433. 

Vijayasn—See Parijatamanjari. 
Vijayawada, 171, 241. 

Vijayesvara, 98, 615. 

Vijjala (Paramara), 73, 402. 
Vijnanabhikshu, 463, 466. 

Vijnanesvara, 177, 269, 287, 290, 291, 292, 
293, 294, 295, 296, 331, 332. 333, 334, 
338, 474, 475, 509. 

Vijrasana (Bodh-Gaya), 764. 

Vikkayya, 182. 

Vikrama. 49, 434. 

Vikramahahu, 261, 262. 

Vikramabahu II (III), 262, 266. 

Vikrama Chola, 69, 174, 244, 245, 246, 
512. 

Vikramaditya (earlier), 280, 315. 
Vikramaditya II (Chalukya), 615. 
Vikramaditya III (Chalukya), 161. 
Vikramaditya IV, (Chalukya), 161. 
Vikramaditya V, (Chalukya), 165, 166, 
167. 

Vikramaditya VI (Chalukya), 27, 38, 53, 
47, 63, 64. 68, 69. 76, 107, 168, 169, 
1.70, 171, 172, 173, 174-177, 198, 199, 
204, 206, 211, 215, 220, 221, 222, 223, 
227, 229, 242, 243, 244, 245, 307, 333, 
429, 511. 

Vikramaditya (Lohara), 101. 
Vikramaditya (Sinda), 188. 
Vikram&nkadeva-charita, 174, 177, 307, 
323, 505, 506. 

Vikramapala, 189. 

Vikrama Pandya, 246, 265. 

Vikramapura, 34, 35, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 
177, 231, 263, 350. 

Vikramaraja, 29. 

Vikramasila monastery, 27, 415, 417, 511. 
Vikramasimha (Chahamana), 88. 
Vikramasimha (Guhila). 89. 
Vikramasimha (Kachchhapaghata), 57. 
Vikramasimha (Paramara), 72, 73, 77. 




THE STRUGGLE FOR EMPIRE 



Vikramodaya , 315. 

Vihramorvusiya, 396, 6(n). 
Vikrantabahu, 262. 

Vikrantachamunakra, 266. 
Vikranta-Kaurava , 435. 
Vikranta-varman IV, 743* 

Vilasadevi, 36, 37. 

Vilinam, 234. 

Villa vara ja, 168. 

Villesvara, 585, 586. 

Vimala (Pragvata, Governor), 72, 74, 
580, 581. 

Vimalabuddhi, 343. 

Vimaladitya, 203, 204, 235, 242. 
Vimalasribhadra, 427. 

Vimala Vasahi, 580, 581, 582. 

Vim&na, 522, 572, 610, 611, 613, 614, 616, 
618, 619, 620, 621, 622. 623, 624, 670, 
685. 

VitnarOnl, 324. 

Virui-Venba, 450. 

Vinayachandra, 395. 

Vinayaditya, 175 , 227 , 228, 233. 
Vinayakapala, 56. 

Vinayaptfaka, 342. 

Vinayasaihgaha , 342. 

Vinayasrlmitra, 417. 

Vindhyas, 530, 622. 

Vindhyavarma(n) (Paramara), 70, 78, 
182, 186, 435. 

Vindusarovara tank, 538, 554. 
Vipulasrlmitra, 416. 

Virabahu, 261 
Virabahu II, 266. 

Vira Balia la II, 430. 

Vtrabhaclresvara, 202. 

Virachandra, 348. 

Vtracharita, 315. 

VTra-Choda, 174, 217, 244. 

Vtradeva, 262. 

VIradhavala, 71, 73, 79, 80, 88, 90, 190, 
191, 300, 312. 

Vlraganin, 346. 

Viraguna, 29, 36. 

Virah&nka, 326, 393. 

Virahinl, 350. 

Viraja, 457. 

Virama (of Gujarat), 80, 81, 88. 
Virama (of Jalor), 88. 

Virama (of Ranthambhor), 85. 
Vlra-M&rtanda —See Somesvara I 
(ChSlukya). 

Viramitrodaya , 296, 332. 

Viranarayapa (Chahamana \ 84, 85. 
Vlranarayaiiapura, 437. 

Vira Pandya, 178, 245, 246, 264, 265. 
Virarajendra I (Chola), 50, 68. 169, 1.0, 
171, 172, ITS, 204, 240. 241-242, 213, 
255, 282, 512, 732, 733, 

VTrasaiva Literature, 367. 

Virasaivism, 444. 

Vlrasasanas, 526, 

Vlrasena, 35. 

VIrasimha (Chahamana), 82. 

VTrasimha (Rachchhapaghata), 57. 
Vlrairl, 34, 62. 

Virata, 189, 311. 


Virata Parva, 374, 

Viratesvara, 564. 

Vlra-Vananjus, 525. 

VIravarman (Ceylon), 261. 

Viravarman (Chandetla), 57, 58, 60. 
VIravarman II (Chandella), 60. 
Vlravijaya, 384. 

Vira-Vikramaditya II, 188. 

Viresvara, 48. 

X'iruddha-vidhi-vidhvamsa, 112, 113, 

115, l(n). 

Virupaksha temple, 598, 615, 616, 682. 
Viryarama (Chahamana), 66, 81, 86. 
VIsadhavaladeva (Chahamana)* 87. 
Visaiyavadi—See Vijayawada. 
Visakhapatnam (Visakhapattana, Viza- 
gapatam), 204, 205, 206, 207, 223, 224. 
Visala (Paramara), 73. 

VIsaladeva (Chahamana), 502. 

See also Vigraharaja IV. 

VIsaladeva (Vaghela), 71, 80, 81, 90, 191, 
193, 300, 301. 

Vishayapati , 277. 

Vishayas , 275, 276, 277, 284. 

VishnU (Hoysala), 228. 

Vishnu (Minister), 66. 

Vishnu (pantheon), 272, 299, 337, 357, 
402, 512, 526, 606, 612, 655, 664, 672, 
676, 679, 750. 

Vishjpu (smritikdra ), 294. 

Vishnu of Belahan, 763. 
Vishnuckittiyam, 439. 

Vishnuchittlyam , 439. 

Vishnudasa Nama, 387, 91 (n). 
Vishnuism, 312. 

Vishnu-loka, 457. 

Vishnusarman, 316. 

Vishnuvardhana, 175, 177, 178, 227, 228- 
230, 233, 244, 751. 

Vishnuvardhana-Vijayaditya, 172, 173. 
Vislshtadvaita, 368. 

Visishtadvaita-ixida. 403. 

Visvn-Brahma temple, 599. 

Visvaditya, 28, 31. 

Visvakarpa, 445. 

Visvamalla ( Visala), 80. 

Visvamitra, 334. 

Visvanatha temple, 561, 564, 565. 
Visvaprakasa . 317, 318, 338. 

Visvakarna, 445. 

Visva&ipasena, 40, 41, 102. 

Visvavada, 585. 

Visvavarta, 299. 

Visve£vara, 367. 

Visvesvara 6ambhu. 202. 

Vitthala. 354, 355. 356, 357. 

Vtithalpant, 387, 76(n). 

Vivdhala , 393. 395. 

Viveka. 323, 325. 

Vfyekasindhli, 352, 

Vividhajnanavist&ra. 386, 67(n). 
Vodamayuta —See Budaun. 

Vogel 699. 232(n). 

Vrah Guhya 737. 

Vrata. 332. 

Vratakhanda , 196. 197, 223. 

Vratasdgara, 334, 385, l(n). 


ms 




INDEX 



Vriddhachalam, 249. 

Vpiddha-Salika, 433, 

Vrikshaytirveda, 328. 

Vrinda, 328. 

Vrindavana, 403. 

Vritta, 325. 

Vritta jdtisamuchchaya, 326, 397, 14(n). 
Vrittaratn&kara , 326. 

Vritti, 320, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326. 
Vuppadeva, 101. 

Vuttodaya , 343. 

VyagKrapaltf, 79. 

Vyakarana, 343, 512. 

Vyakttviveka, 321, 323. 

Vyangya, 321. 

Yyasad5sa--See Kshemendra. 
Vyavahara, 331, 332, 334, 335. 

V yavaharudhyaya, 296. 
Vyavajhara-kanda, 506. 
Vyavahdramatrikd, 287, 295, 296, 333. 
Vyavahdramayukha, 296. 

Vyavahdranirnaya (Varadardjlya), 334 
335, 338, 385. 

Vyavahdratattva, 296. 

Vyavahdratilaka , 331. 

Vyavasthui , 253. 

Vyayoga, 309, 310, 311. 

Vyuha, 438, 442. 

Vyuhapati , 276. 

W 

Waddell, L. A., 470, 39(n), 472. 110(n). 
Waihind, 6. See also Udabhanda. 
Wairagarh —See Vairagara. 

Wadhwan, 589. 

Waley, A.. 471, 99(n). 

Walishtan— See Sibi. 

Wandiwash, 248. 

Warangal, 172, 179, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 
203, 310, 516. 

Washermen, 476. 

Wassaf, 258, 259 260, 286, 520, 523. 
Wayang Beber, 679. 

Western Apabhramsa, 358, 360. 

Western Asia, 520. 

West Bengal, 605, 606, 607, 609. 
Western Chatukyas, 435, 510, 515, 529, 
668 . 

Western Ghats, 162. 227, 229, 517. 
Western India, 69, 302, 332. 

West Indian miniatures, 689. 
West-Indian sculptures, 641. 

Western Magadhan, 358. 

Whitney, 306. 

William, the Duke of Normandy, 398. 
Wind, 271. 

Wintemitz. M„ 384, 7(n), 386, 54(n). 
Women Poets, 305-306. 

Women’s rights to property, 483. 

Wool, 517. 

Wooln^er Commemoration Volume , 285, 
37 (n). 

Working metals, 519. 

Wrestling, 491. 

Wright, 46, 159, 12(n), 160, 18(n). 




Y 

Y&davabhyudaya, 435. 

Yadavaprakasa, 317, 336, 337. 
Yadavapura, 229. 

Yadavas, 30, 33-35, 41, 43, 47, 70, 71, 79, 
80, 81, 87, 105, 162, 163, 167, 171, 172, 
176, 177, 183, 184, 200, 201, 202, 203, 
223, 226, 231, 232, 306, 329, 335, 511, 
669, 670. 

—of Devagiri, 185-197. 

—, Administrative Organisation of, 
282-283 

Yadus (vamsls), 14, 55-56, 109, 134, 148. 
Yaduvildsa , 435. 

Yagesvara (Almora District), 555. 
Yahya. 142. 

Yajnavalkva (Yajriavalkya-smriti), 269, 
287, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 331, 333, 
475. 

Yajnavalkyadharmasastranibnndha , 295. 
Yajnesagupta, 49. 

Yajurveda, 511, 512. 

Yajvapalas, 57, 135, 146, 160. 
Yakshapala, 31. 

Yama, 271, 272, 377. 

Yamlnls, 2, 83. 92-97, 102, 109. 

Yamuna, 13, 14, 15, 16, 58, 94, 119, 122, 
135, 146, 208, 349. 

Yamunacharya, 436. 

Yamunamuni, 437. 

Yantri desa, 75. 

Ya'qub ibn-Layth al-Saffar, 1. 
Ya(Pa)ramadiraja. 57. 

Yaqut, 517, 518, 520, 528. 

Yasahkama, 52, 58, 63, 64, 65, 68, 204, 
243, 274, 481. 

Yasahpala, 61, 62, 298, 312. 
Yasaschandra, 311. 

Yasaskara, 324. 

Yasobhadra, 417. 

Yasobhadra Suri, 432. 

Yasoda, 436. 

Yasodeva, 46. 

Yasodhara, 101. 

Yasodhara (Writer), 330. 

Yasodhara-chart ta , 301, 371. 

Yasodhavala (Paramara), 72, 77, 348. 
Yasoraia, 82. 

Yasoraja (Chola). 210. 214, 217, 219. # 
Yasovarman (Chalukya )—See Dasa- 
varman. 

Yasovarman (Chandella), 59. 
Yasovarman (Guhila)— See Klrttivar- 
man. 

Yasovarman (Paramara), 59, 69, 70, 76. 
Yasovigraha. 51, 53. 

Ybtnikas. 427. 

Yauvanasri, 27, 62. 

Yava, 750. 

Yavanas—See Muslims. 

Yavaneshta, 522. 

Yavishtha, 383. 

Yayati Mahasivagupta I. 209. 224. 

Yayati Mahasivagupta III, 212. 
Yayatinagara (pura), 210, 211, 212. 
Yazdijurd-i-Shahryar, 2. 


939 





Yedatore Taluk , 431. 
Yelavare, 189. 

Yelburga —See Erambarage. 
Yelgandal, 199* 201. 

Yemen, 468, 523. 

Yeotmal, 69. 

Ye-ses-hod, 417. 

Yoga, 353, 405, 407. 
Yogachara school, 427. 
Yoga-pHhas, 525. 

Yogaraja (Guhila), 89. 
Yogaraja (Paramara), 72. 
Yogasdra , 349. 

Yogasdstra , 80, 336. 
Yogichandra Muni, 349. 
Yogini~tantra, 379. 
Yogisvara, 767. 

Yogloka, 287, 296. 
Yuddha-Malla, 374. 
Yueh-chia, 667, 677. 
Yuganaddha, 411. 
Yuktikalpataru, 328. 


Yule, H., 470, 47(n), 529, 91(n), 
Yunnan, 759. 

Yusuf, 5. 

Yuvaraja, 57. 

Yuvaraja Mahasenapati, 743, 745. 
Yuzbak, 141, 145, 208. 

Z 

Zabag, 734, 735. 

Zabul, 1. 

Zabulistan, 2. 

‘Zainteng’ (Old Jaintia), 381. 

Zanzibar, 522. 

Zari-Zarbakhsh, 469. 

Zayton (Chwan~Chau or Chinchew in 
Fu-Kien), 522. 

Zinda Fir, 473, 149(n). 

Ziya-ud-dln Baram, 48, 157. 
Zoroastrian/s, 1, 496. 

Zubaid Ahmad, 507, 186(n). 
Zubdat-ut-Taivdrikh, 115, 2(n). 


\ 



940 



map n 








































Fig. 1. Bhuvanesvara. Satruyhnesvara Temple: 
View from front 









• viam i° 



Fig. 3. Bhuvanesvara, Parasuramesvara Temple: General View 


Fig. 4. Bhuvanesvara, Muktesvara Temple: General View 


PLATE II 









• misTfy 



Fig. 5. Bhv.vaneh.mra, Muktesvara Temple: Torana. 



PLATE 

















MiNisr^ 


PLATE IV 





Fig. 7. Bhuvanesvara, Siddhesvara Temple: General View 



Fig. 8. Bhuvanesvara, Brahmesvara Temple: General View 




of'NOIA . 



Fig. 9. Bhuvanesvara , Rajarani Temple: General View 



Fig. 10. Bhuvanesvara. Rajarani Temple: Detail oj Sikhara 


~Q 


PLATE 













PLATE VI 










MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 14. Kondrak , Sun Temple: View from front 









MINlSr^ 





Fig. 15. Konarak, Sun Temple: Side View 











MINISr^ 




Fig. 22. Amarkantak , Pdtdlesvara Temple 

















MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 23. Khajurdho, Vdmana Temple 






Fig. 24. Khajnraho, Adindtha Temple 


PLATE 










MIN/Sr^ 


PLATE XII 








Fig. 25. Khajuraho, Kunwar Math Temple 









Fig. 28. Khajuraho, Visvanatha Temple 











• MIN/Sr/jy 



Fig. 29. Khajuraho, Parsvanatha Temple 



Fig. 30. Khajuraho, Kandarya Mahadeo Temple 


PLATE 











MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 31. Kh-ajurdhc. Kandarya Mahadeo Temple 
Detail of Sikhara 



. Chandrehe, Circular Temple 

jC 

IS* 


PLATE XV 







MIN/Sr^ 


PLATE XVI 





Fig. 33. Khajuraho, Ghantai Temple 



Fig. 34. Osia , Temple No. 1 








Fig. 35. Osia, Temple No. 7 



3 


Fig. 36. Kumbharia. Nemindtha Temple 


PLATE XVII 











rnisTq,, 



Fig, 38. Dilwara, Tejahpala’s Temple: Interior 










• MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 39. Diliodrn, Vimala’s Temple: Cloister Fig. 40. DU ward, Tejahpdla’s Temple: Side Chapel 


-£> 

V/l 







MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 41. Dilwara. Tejahpala’s Temple: Ceiling 



Fig. 42. Pindara, Temple of Gop Type 


PLATE XX 



PLATE XXI 





Fig. 43. Gop, Old Temple 



Fig. 44. Kalsar, Temple of Gop Type 








MIN/Sr/jy 




Fig. 46. Rhoda , Sikhara Temple 


PLATE 



MIN/Sr^ 







NIIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 50. Sunak, NUakanfha Mahddeva Temple Fig. 51. Vadnayar, Kirti-torana 


PLATE <XXIV 







PLATE 








• miST/ty, 




Fig. 54. Modhera, Sun Temple: General View 


PLATE XXVI 



Fig. 55. Mother a, Sun Temple: Detail of side view 



MINISr^ 



Fig. 58. MocLhera, Sun Temple : Ceiling of Mandapa 




PLATE XXIX 




Fig. 59. Mahdkutesvara , Sahgamesvara Temple 



Fig. 60. Pattadakal, Papanatha Temple 











MIN/Sr/J.y. 





<SL 




Fig. 61. Alampur , Visva-Brahma Temple 



Fig. 62. Balsane, Temple No. 1 










MIN/Sr/^ 



Fig. 63. Udayapura, Nllakanthesvara Temple : Detail of wall 



Fig. 64. Sinnar , Gondesvara Temple : General view 










MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 65. Sanial, Galtesvara Temple 





Fig. 66. Hatanwadi, Amritesvara Temple 












Fig. 67. Udayapura, NUakanthesvara Temple 


















Fig. 71. Sat Deuliyd . Sikhara Temple 


t 



Fig. 72. Bahulard, Siddhesvara Temple Fig. 73. Sunderbuns, Jatar deul 



S) 

VJ? 


PLATE XXXV 










Fig. 74. Mamallapuram, Shore Temple 



Fig. 75. Kdhchipuram, Kaildsandtha Temple 









MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 76. Pattadakal, Mallikdrjuna Temple 



Fig. 77. Ellora, Kailasa Temple : Elephants 





Fig. 78. Ellora, Kailasa Temple : General View 


Fig. 79. Ellora, Kaildsa Temple : Vimana 


MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 80. Tanjore , Brihadisvara Temple 



Fig. 81. Ittagi, Mahddem Temple : General View 















Fig. 82. Ittagi , Mahadeva Temple : Detail 



Fig. 83. Lakkundi, Kasivisvesvara Temple : Door jamb 


PLATE 















MINIS/*,, 



Fig. 85. Q&mbkl, Dodda Basappa Temple 
















Fig. 86. Halebid, Hoysalesvara Temple : Plinth details Fig. 87. Halebid, Hoysalesvara Temple : Plinth deU 










MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 88. Somnathpur„ Kesava Temple 



Fig. 89. Halebid, Hoysalesvara Temple 












MIN/Sr/fy 


PLATE XLIV 



Fig. 90. Pahdrpur, Great Temple 



Fig. 91. Prambanan (Java), Chandi Loro Jonggrang 













MIN ISr/f 



Fig. 92. Ujani, Buddha (Dacca Museum, 
East Pakistan) 


Fig. 93. Nalandd , 
Avalokitesvara 




Fig. 94. Kurkihdr, Tara, (Patna Museum) 



JZ 


PLATE XLV 




MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 95. Kantdbenia 
Parsvanatha 


Fig. 96. North Bengal, 
Kartikeya, 

(Indian Museum, Calcutta) 



Fig. 97. Sahkarbandha 
Dancing Siva 
(Da^ca Museum, 
East Pakistan) 



Fig. 98. Chapra, Surya 
(Rajshaki Museum, 
East Pakistan) 











Fig. 101. Bhuvane&vara, Para&urdmesvara Temple: 
Stone grille 









• VICIN' 4° 



Fig. 103. Bhuvanesvara, Rajdmni Temple: Varum 



PLATE XLVIII 









MiN/sr^ 



Fig. 105. Kondrak, Sun Temple: Ndyika 


KMfMK* * 



minis 





Fig. 107. Uttar Pradesh, Navagraha slab (Worcester Art Mmeum, U.S.A.) 



Fig. 108. Uttar Pradesh, Twelve-armed goddess 
(British Museum, London) 


Fig. 109. Nokhas, Rukmini 







MIN/Sr^ 



Fig. 110. Uttar Pradesh , Head of a female figure 
(Museum of Fine Arts , Boston , 17.5. A.) 



PLATE 














i Via MV i° 



PLATE LII 


Fig. 112. Harshagiri, Dancers and Musicians (Shikar Museum, Rajasthan) 


Fig. 113. Central India , A Chedi head 




Fig. 114. Khajuraho , Kandarya Mahddeo Temple ; Jahgha sculptures 





• V1QNV 







Fig. 119. Mahobd, Simhandda Lokesvara Fig. 120. Harshagiri , Lingodbhava 

(Lucknow Museum) Murti (Rajputana Museum. Ajmer ) 














• VIQN' *° 


PLATE LV 




Fig. 121. Dilwara , Tejahpala’s Temple: Part of a ceiling 




Fig. 122. Halebid, Hoysalesvara Temple: Lakshmi-N dray ana 








MIN/Sr^ 


PLATE LV1 





*4 



Fig. 123 Modhera. Sun Temple: 
Pillar Sculpture 




Fig. 124 Temple Sculpture 









Fig. 127. South India , Siva Nataraja (Museum 
van Asiatische Kunst Amsterdam) 


Fig. 128. South India, Devi (Museum of 
Fine Arts , Boston, U.S.A.) 



Fiff. 129. South India, Siva Nataraja 




• VIQMV 4° 



Fig. 130. South India , Saiua Fig. 131. South India , Parvati 
devotee (C.W.E . Cotton (Cleveland Museum of Art, 

collection , U.K.) U.S.A.) 


Fig. 132. South India . 
SiiMaaramurtisvami 
(Colombo Museum) 


Fig. 133. South India, 
£iva Vhiddkara 
(Museum Guimet , Paris) 


PLATE LVIII 



MINISr^ 





VIQNV i° 


PLATE LX 




Fig. 136. Painting in a Ms. of Gandavyuhya. c. 11th century A.D. 



Fig. 137. Vasudhdra: Panning in Vredenburg MS. of Ashtasdhasrika 
Prajndparamitd 







PLATE LXI 



Fig. 138. Tara: Painting in a MS. of Ashtasdhasnkd 
Prajndpdramitd copied in year 4 of Rdmapala (Collection: 
Bharat Kald Bhavan, Hindu University , Banaras) 



Fig. 139. Mahdsri Tara: Painting in a MS. of Ashtasahasrikd 
Prajndpdramitd copied in N.S. 191/A.D. 1071 (Collection Asiatic 
Society , Calcutta, No. A. 15) 









Fig. 140.^ Buddha ; Painting in a MS. of Ashtasahasrikd 
rrajnaparamiid copied at Ndlandd in year 6 of Mahi- 
pdla I. (Collecticm: Asiatic Society , Calcutta. 

No. G. 4713). 




Fig 142. 
F 


T'ard: Painting in a MS. of AshtcLsdhasrika 
'i^pdramird; c. 11th ce^ury A.r 




PLATE LXI1 












